OUR SAVIOVRS IOVRNEY TO the Gadarens: OR The love of Christ unto Man.

Written by I. JONES Bachelour in Divinity, and Parson of S. Nicholas Acons,
London.

PSALM. 8.4. Lord what is man, that thou art so mindful of him or the son of
man that thou so visitest him.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his
Shop hard without Bishops-gate. 1615.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL THE TWO EQVALL SISTERS, Mris R. Io. and Mris I. Vass. John
Jones their son, wishes increase of grace in this world and eternal
salvation in the world to come.
MOST dear and loving Mothers, the Preachers note in the 12 of his
Ecclesiastes, and the 12 verse, against the scribbling Age wherein we live, That
there is no end of making of Books, had once made me vow my life to
obscurity: yet such you see, has been the efficacy of your entreaties, that
(for your sakes) that which I meant most private unto my self, I have now
communicated to the world. Your entreaties have prevailed with me, and at the
last you have what long you have desired. It is part of my prayers, that now
you have it, it may satisfy the least part of your expectations. The
abundance of your loves (I confess) at the first made you both to wish well
unto me; and the desire of seeing somewhat for your money, has made you more
importunate upon me: but thus far I have been wary to my self, though that
imitating of the prodigal Gallants of these our times, I have taken up of you
good large sums, and do pay you here again with ink and paper: this is the
only coin you are like to receive of me for your manifold charges bestowed
upon me. Accept it then (I beseech you) kindly, and cast a look upon it now and
then: so perhaps you may think at the last, that though your son has
misspent much, yet he has not utterly lost all his time. It is yours now: for
I have sealed and delivered it up for your uses; and sooner you should have had
it, but that some men's fingers, who have delighted in theft, by chance, have
stolen Divinity from the Printer to make them good. If they make that use of
it, I am glad they have it: if to make use of other men's labors they stole it
from him, this Copy will witness the work is none of theirs: and I would have
them know, He seldom proves good that is grown old in theft and wickedness.
But you to whom it does belong, take it, and use it as your own, and command
me, who does desire to be employed by you, in all offices of love and duty. The
God of love, who gives to all abundantly, and vpbraideth none, fill you both
full of all spiritual blessings; that as lovingly you have lived here, and
have been beloved, so above, when this life shall leave you both, you may live
with the fountain of love. Amen. London this 9th of March. 1615.

Your very loving and obedient son, J. Jones.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL THE PARISHIONERS OF S. Nicholas Acons, I. Jones wishes all
happiness in this life, and in the life to come.
Worshipful and beloved my parishioners, having found out Godmothers for this
infant of mine, it remains now, that I entreat you all at once to play the
Godfathers part for the naming of it. And so much the rather I entreat you,
and hope you will be willing, above others, to perform this duty, because you,
best of all others, know the birth of it, being conceived and brought forth
especially for your sakes: the original being Sermons which I preached here
amongst you; and you I hope somewhat have profited by them. The law prouides,
that where the child is borne, there (be it never so base) it should be kept,
and you must foster what is hatched amongst you. Accept then kindly what is
kindly meant toward you, and continue to love him whose prayer is for you all
to love one another. Almighty God increase his love toward you, and cause
you, that as you are joined together in friendly neighborhood, so you may be
joined in hearty affection one unto the other: so that when this life shall
have end, as you have lived and loved together here, so you may all join with
the rest of the heavenly quire in singing lovely hymns unto the God of love.
And in that confidence I take my leave, and commit you all to his protection,
who for his power is able, and for his exceeding love, will keep you all in the
bond of love. Farewell. From my house in S. Nicholas lane, this ninth of March.
1615.

Your very loving and kind Friend: I. Jones.

CHRIST'S LOVE TO MAN.
LVKE. 8.22.23.24. 22. Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went
into a ship, with his Disciples: and he said unto them, Let us go over unto the
other side of the Lake, and they lanched forth.

23. But as they sailed, he fell asleep, and there came down a storm of
wind on the lake, and they were filled with water, and were in ieopardy.

24. And they came to him, and awoke him, saying; Master, Master, we perish.
Then he arose and rebuked the wind, and the raging of the water: and they
ceased, and there was a calm.


THese words (beloved) of the Evangelist, now read unto you, contain in them,
the journey of our Savior unto the Gadarens, and in the journey a mighty
miracle; he went unto the Gadarens, an ignorant people, the Epitome and
Compendium of all mankind; men, that were more inly touched with the loss of
their hogs, then with the sins of their souls, the true picture of
covetous man, who so conformes himself unto his wealth, as that he accounts
his life, his soul, his bliss, his good: tell him of his soul, and the
torments of hell, he stands and stares you in the face, and knows not what
your speech does mean; touch but his hog, and the whole Country of the
Gadarens will suddenly be up in Arms together against you: yet thither he
goes, that so they themselves, might be witnesses against themselves, of their
own deserved and wilful destruction.

But in this journey there falls out a miracle; a miracle, I say, both to the
astonishment and the confirmation of his Disciples: to the astonishment; for
they mutter amongst themselves, what manner of man is this, for he commands
both the winds and the water, and they obey him: to their confirmation also,
that by confirming all his several doctrines with sundry miracles, they might
believe that he was the true and only Messiah, that was sent into the world,
to be the salvation and rdemption of it.

So then in these words, we have three parts to be inquired into, according
unto the three several verses here, every verse has his particular part. The
preparation for the journey, the manner of the journey, the miracle in the
journey.

1 The preparation in the first verse. 2 The manner in the next verse. 3 The
miracle in the last verse.
And every part has his particular branches: there are four in the first
verse.

1 The time. 2 The means. 3 His exhortation. 4 Their obedience.
The time; Now it came to pass on a certain day:

The means; That he went into a ship with his Disciples.

His exhortation; And he said unto them, Let us go over unto the other side of
the lake.

Their obedience: And they lunched forth.

In the second verse there are four things also.

The manner of their travel, and the accidents that fell out in their journey,
which be in number three.

The manner of their travel, they sailed: But as they sailed.

The accidents they be three.

1 He fell asleep. 2 And there came down a storm of wind on the lake. 3 And
they were filled with water, and were in ieopardy.
In the third verse there are two things; the fear of the Disciples, the power
and authority of the Master.

The fear of the Disciples.

1 And they came to him and awaked him, saying, Master, master, we perish.
The power and authority of the Master:

2 Then he arose, and rebuked the winds, and the raging of the waters: and they
ceased, and there was a calm.

Now it came to pass on a certain day, etc.

This word here, Now, it does not point us out unto any certain time, as in
many other places of the Scripture it does, as in Exodus 6. Nunc videbis, quae
facturus sum. The Lord intending for to work his wonders in the land of Egypt,
he says to Moses, Exodus 6.1
Now thou shall see what I will do to Pharaoh. So Balac the King of Moab,
desirous for to rid himself of his dangerous neighbors the Israelites, in
Numb. 22. he sends for Balaam the Southsayer, to come in all haste unto him,
Nunc igitur veni and maledic, Number. 22.6
Come now therefore, I pray thee, come, and curse me this people, for they are
too mighty and too strong for me. So old Simeon desirous to be dissolved, and
to be with the Lord, he joyfully sings his Nunc dimittis unto the world: Luke
2.29.
Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, etc. So our Savior feeling
of his death approaching, he cries unto his Father, Nunc ad to vento, now I come
unto thee: But here this word Now it is not, as in those places, an Aduerbe of
time, but a Conjunction copulative, and signifies as much as Et, or autem, and
so the Latin Translation reads it: Factum est autem, in vna dierum, Now it
came to pass on a certain day, that is, and it came to pass on a certain
day.

The time is set down in the following words; Now it came to pass on a
certain day, there is the time set down; but what day that day was of the
week, perhaps might be thought to be, both curious to enquire, and
ouer-difficult also to be found out: he was sent forth into the world to do
his fathers business, and so earnest was he, in this Calling of his, that as
the Tragedian speaks in another sense; Finis vnius gradus est futurs, the end
of one business, was but the beginning of another; and as the Mathematitian
said, of the practice of that Art, Nulla dies sine linea, no day should pass
over his head, without the drawing of a line more: so we may safely say of our
Savior, that no day passed over his head, in which he did not make profession
of the Gospel unto the people: for he professes this of himself, that in
it, he took his sole delight, Ioh. 4. My meat (says he) is to do the will
of him that sent me, John 4.34.
and to finish his work. And so having finished what business was convenient,
amongst his own people, the next day after peradventure, set forward for this
intended journey of his, without so much as mentioning of the day at all, and
so It came to pass on a certain day.

To keep a Diarie of every days work of his, it had bin a labor infinite, so
many, so diverse were the miracles, that were wrought by him daily, that Saint
John testifies of him in his 21 chapter, it had been endless: For (says he)
there are many other things, which Jesus did, Ioh. 21.25.
the which if they should be written, every one, I suppose that even the world
it self could not contain the books that should be written; and therefore no
Register being kept of them, they are poasted over unto certain days. Now it
came to pass on a certain day.

Yet some probable conjecture might be given of the day, though no definitive
sentence, to conclude it absolute: The Latin and the Greek translations they
give us a little glimmering light of this same day, for they both read it the
self same way, (...) says the Greek text; and the Latin text, Factum est
autem in vna dierum, and it came to pass in one of the days: Now both the
Greek and the Latin tongue, do often reckon One for First, as likewise many
times does our English Dialect, one, two, three, that is, first, second, third,
etc. And the Hebrews, they have no other word, to express their meaning in:
and therefore whereas we read it in our English Translation, in Genesis 1. and the
evening and the morning were the first day, Genesis 1.5.
the Hebrew Translation reads it; Haggi. 1.1
the evening and the morning were one day. So likewise in Haggai 1. where we
read it, in the first day of the month, came the word of the Lord: they say,
in the one day of the month, came the word of the Lord, having no other word
to express their meaning. And the Latin, and the Greek, following of the
Hebrew phrase, for the First say one, as in Mark. 16. (...), Mark. 16.2
Vna Sabbathorum, where our Translation reads it, and very early in the
morning, the first day of the week, they came unto the Sepulcher, etc. So here
it is set down, (...), one day, which day, may very well signify, the first
day, and that is this day.

But if it were this day, how comes it then to pass (it may well be demanded)
that our Savior is guilty of the breach of that commandment, Remember that
thou keep holy the Sabbath day, etc. And in it, thou shall do no manner of
work, etc. which was so strictly observed amongst the Jews, as that in the
12. of Matthew the Disciples are reprehended by the Pharisees, for but plucking
of the ears of Corn on the Sabbath day; Math. 12.2
Behold thy Disciples, they do that which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath
day. If it were not lawful for them to pluck a few ears of Corn on the
Sabbath day, then surely, much less was it lawful for them to take their
journey on the Sabbath day.

Yes verily, even on the Sabbath day, it was lawful for them to travel,
though not to make any long journey on the Sabbath day, and therefore in the
Acts. 1, Acts. 1.12.
Mount Oliuet is said to be from Jerusalem a Sabbath days journey: which
Sabbath days journey contained in it, as the writers do agree upon it, two
miles in distance, the which it was lawful for them to walk on the Sabbath
day; and therefore in the place before cited, in the 12. of Matthew, Mat. 12.1.
the Disciples were not found fault with, by the Pharisees, for that they
traveled on the Sabbath day, but for that they plucked the ears of corn on
the Sabbath day. But yet it may be demanded further (for we are fallen into a
labyrinth of questions) how comes this permission of a Sabbath days journey,
seeing all iourneying, in the law, is expressly forbidden. See, Exo. 16.29
says Moses in Exodus 16. See, says he, for that the Lord has given you the
Sabbath, therefore he gives you on the sixth day, the bread of two days, abide
ye therefore every man in his place, let no no man go out of his place on the
seventh day. If every man were commanded to abide in his place, on the seventh
day, how then comes in this Sabbath days journey?

Why certainly, I can give no other reason for it, but what Oecumenius and
Lorinus do give, and that is, that in the time of Joshua, he commanded it to
be proclaimed, that the Arc going before, there should be a distance left
between it and the camp, of two thousand cubits, by measure, as as it is Ios.
3. Josh. 3.3.
which was the just distance of two miles, whither it was lawful for the
people for to go, to visit the Arc, even on the Sabbath day, and so may come
in our Sabbath days journey.

But yet we are not thus quite of our question though, for still it may be
urged further, that this was more then a Sabbath days journey, for it was
above two miles that he was to travel: Mat. 4.18. Luke 5.1. Josh. 6.1.
Saint Matthew calls it in his 4 chap. the sea of Galilee: S. Luke in his 5.
chapt. the lake of Genesareth: S. John in his 6. chapt. the sea of Tiberias: a
broad and large place, so that howsoever, he was still without the compass of
two thousand cubits, his Sabbath days journey: how may this be?

For this we say, that our Savior Christ he did not journey on the Sabbath
day, for the Jews Sabbath, it was our Satterday, and that was the seventh day:
but this was the first day, afterward changed by the Apostles, in memory of
our Saviors most glorious resurrection, who dyed upon the Friday, and rose
again the third day, which was Sunday, and therefore by Saint John in his
first of his Apoc. is called Dies Dominicus, Apoc. 1.10.
the Lords day: I was (says he) in the spirit on the Lords day; that part then
of the Commandment the Sabbath day, it was but Ceremonial, not Moral; for
had it been Moral, it had bound us, perpetually, to the observation of it;
but we see it was altered, and continues altered unto this day; and so we
have a guess of the time, which is here set down indefinitely, a certain day,
though no definitue sentence to conclude it peremptory: Now it came to pass on
a certain day.

It came to pass; Here have our licentious Epicures, and our vpstart
Atheists, a ground and foundation (as they think) to build up their
Chance-medly doctrine in the world; that things they come by chance and
fortune, not by the determinate, and deliberate providence and disposing of the
Almighty, For what greater argument of chance, can there be, say they, then
that Christ himself, should in his own business, admit of a casualty, for
the Text is plain: Now it came to pass, or it chanced, on a certain day.

But their foundation, it is laid but on a sandy ground, for Aristotle, long
since, though but a Heathen Philosopher, yet he could say, by the twy-light of
nature, that ignorantia causarum, the ignorance of man was that, that made
blind fortune a goddess amongst men: for when they saw no reason for many
things that came to pass amongst them, they did not conceive, that there might
be a reason which they themselves did not see, but straight way they deified
Fortune, and made her the author and bestower of the^ all upon the world, her
that is so brittle a goddess, quae cum spe^det frangitur, which is dashed in
pieces by the least accident; whereas our Savior Christ's rule is quite
contrary, for he teaches us another doctrine in the tenth of Saint Mathewes
Gospel, Mat. 10.29
for he makes Providence reach unto the smallest matters, even unto the
falling of a Sparrow upon the ground: Are there not (says he) two Sparrowes
sold for a farthing, and yet one of them shall not fall on the ground, without
the will of your heavenly Father: Then much more the weightiest matters, such
as the Preaching of the Gospel is, which is the salvation of the soul of man,
that shall not be done, but by a particular providence indeed, and that journey
resolved on with mature deliberation.

Fortune (as the world esteems it) it is but an Idol, made for foolish man to
worship and adore, and he that will worship any thing, even the meanest of
creatures, will not neglect it, wherein he thinks he sees some show, but as
it is indeed in it own nature, it is Ordinaria potestas Dei, the ordinary
providence, and direction of Almighty God himself, by which he brings to
pass, what himself intends.

This journey here of our Saviors, it is undertaken with a singular resolution
to do good unto all, even those that were most wicked and profane: So is it
Gods goodness for to super-abound, where the sin of man seems for to
abound. The heart of man for his wickedness it is termed in Scripture Abyssus,
a bottomless pit, according to that of Ezechiel in the 17. of his Prophecy.
Eze. 17.9.
Prauum est cor hominis and inscrutabile, and quis cognoscet: The heart of man
it is unsearchable, and who shall know it? yet the mercy and goodness of God,
it is far deeper then that, that is so deep, as that Saint Paul in the 11.
to the Romans is feign to cry out: O altitudo diuitiarum; Romans 11.33
Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: And in
regard of his mercies, he is termed by the Apostle 1. Cor. 3. Pater misericor
diarum, 1. Cor. 3.2
the Father, not of one or two, but of many mercies, and the God of all
consolation; he is called the Father of mercies, to pardon all the sins that
man shall commit against him, and the Apostle in the Ephesians tells us, Ephe.
2.7.
that when we shall need them, he has, abundantet diuitia: gratia, exceeding
riches of his grace, in store for us, if we our selves will but willingly
accept, what he shall kindly offer unto us.

He does not take this journey here upon him, upon a giddy humor, but a
discreet deliberation, to go unto them; and because he did go, therefore here
it is said; it came to pass: Factum est, says the Latin Text, it was done,
so it came to pass. Now it came to pass on a certain day.

The second thing follows, the means, he went into a Ship with his Disciples:
Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he entered into a Ship with his
Disciples.

1. Mac. 4.9.
It is the speech of Judas Maeccabaeus, 1. Mac. 4. that when he was to encourage
his Army against Gorgias his soldiers, he wills them not to fear their
multitude, nor to be afraid of their assault: mementate, says he, qualiter
facti sunt salui patres nostri, Remember says he, how our fathers were saved
in the red Sea, when Pharaoh pursued them with an Army; if ever we should be
mindful of any thing, then this particular we should not forget.

Here we have an example in this same Story of our forefathers, the
Apostles, how they, and we in them, were saved, from the danger of a tempest.
After that our Evangelist had showed what miracles our Savior had acted on the
the Land, he sets down now, as great a miracle as any of the rest, that he
did upon the Sea, that so both earth and Sea might witness with him, the power
and truth of the doctrine that he Preached to the people.

Now it came to pass, on a certain day, that he went into a Ship, with his
Disciples. He went into a Ship: Why what need now had he more of a Ship, then
at any time else we read he had? Was not he the Lord and God of the water, as
well as of the Land, and could he not command the one as well as the other?
Was not this he, that for his peoples sake, dried up the red sea, and made
them to go through as upon dry land? Exodus 14, Ex. 14.22.
Is not this the same, that when it pleased him, walked upon the water as upon
firm ground, Mat. 14.29.
and made his Disciple Peter tread there also? Mat. 14. Why then but for the
passage over of a little Lake, would he have a Ship for to ferry him over?
could he go upon the Sea when it was boisterous and rough, and must he be
passed over a Lake, when it is calm and quiet? what means this passage of his
that he went into a Ship?

Yes (Beloved) he could have done it as well without a Ship as within the Ship,
had it pleased him, but he saw it more convenient for him for to do it
otherwise: He could have either dried the Lake with his word, as he did the
red Sea, or have walked upon it at pleasure, as at other times he did, but
here he would neither of these, he would choose rather, to go as a
passenger, then as a Lord and Commander of what was his own.

To dry the Sea with his word, or walk upon it at his pleasure, were arguments
and tokens of his Divinity, but here he would be known to be a natural man,
he came into the world to take upon him our infirmities, and to cure us by
those, who long before were wounded unto death, be was our Physician and we
all his Patients; now a Physician that cannot skill of his Patients
infirmities, shall hardly be able to cure those diseases, and how shall he be
better skilled in our wants, then by feeling of them himself? he would feel
our wants in this, as well as bear our infirmities in other matters: the
Prophet Esaias tells us what he has done for us in other matters, in the 53 of
his Prophecy, where he says: Esaias 53.4.
Surely he has borne of our griefs, and carried our sorrows; he was wounded
for our transgressions, and by his stripes, were we healed: So here he would
know our wantes, in being passenger in a Fishers Ketch.

Had our Savior remained God alone, as he was at the first, what comfort on
benefit had that been unto (...) and or if he had taken humane flesh upon him,
and not taken our infirmities withal, he could not have been seen so well in
man's miseries as he was; but therefore he took them that he might be well
skilled in them, and being skilled in them, he might compassionate them, and
compassionating of them he might thoroughly cure and heal them all.

In this one journey then of our Saviors, he did such things as might truly
show he was truly man, and withal he might demonstrate himself to be the
Son of the everliving God. He went into a ship and slept, that by both he might
instruct us of the want of necessaries, that be in our nature, he rebuked the
wind and appeased the Sea, that so he might show us the power of his Divinity.
He went into a Ship: but not into the warspite, no man of war to do mischief
withal, for though himself were come as himself professes, Luke 12.49.
in Luke 12. I am come to send fire upon the earth, and what is my desire but
that it were already kindled; yet he would not, as our Pirates now adays do,
fetch his fire from hell to blow men quick up into heaven, that he has left for
those devilish helhounds, without their greater repentance, that as they have
served others, so they themselves at the last should be served, blown up with
fire here, and perpetually afterward be burnt in everlasting fire: But he went
into a poor Fishers ship, a ship of trade and labor, that so all things might
answer in proportion both his birth, life, and death, all should be
proportionable one unto the other.

His birth it was poor and needy, a Village for the place, an Inn for his
house, a Stable for his chamber, a cratch for his bed: what poor beggar
amongst men, more miserably borne? Jerusalem in Scripture is proclaimed to be
the City of the great King, and what King greater the^ this King of ours, who
has both on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, Rex regum and Dominus
dominantium, King of Kings and Lord of Lords: yet this great Lord will choose
rather to honor with his birth, little Bethlem the least amongst the thousands
of Judah, then famous Jerusalem the Metropolis of the world, little Bethle^ I
say, shall be honored by his birth, when famous Jerusalem shall dishonor her
self, by his death and passion.

In this small village of Bethlem, he neither commands Princely Palaces, nor
great man's house, but contents himself to be borne, (...) as Greg. Naz.
speaks, in a base, and a common Inn, a place made for the receipt of the
meanest company, and in that Inn he takes up a Stable for his Nursery, and a
Cratch for his chair of Estate, a poor Carpenter and his wife for his privy
Counselors, an Ox and an Ass for his common Courtiers, thus the mighty God,
whose Seat is in heaven, and the earth is his Footestoole, must be contented
with the vilest place that vain man can find out for him, (...), says Na^.
Thus he that makes all other men rich, himself must be borne like a beggar in
some out room; and he that is full of all spiritual blessings, must be as one
who were void of all.

His life is proportionable unto his birth, he is driven into banishment so
soon as he is borne, and afterward, above the course of nature, he is forced
to fast forty days and forty nights, heb is scoffed at by his kindred, reviled
by the Governors, cursed by the Doctors; called Coniurer by the Commons,
betrayed by his servants, scorned by the Courtiers, mocked by the Soldiers,
rayled at by the Malefactors, his whole life was nothing else but a map of
miseries; wandering up and down he goes, not having where to repose his wearied
limbs. Math. 8. The Foxes have holes, Mat. 8.20.
and the Birds have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to rest his
head: The wilderness is feign to be his Couch, and a few poor Fishermen his
guard to attend upon him; his provision is five barley loaves, and two small
fishes, and what are they amongst so many? Ferried over here, he is, in a poor
fishermans boat, the vilest and most contemptible of all other Trades. But his
coming it was in humility, and therefore he contents himself with the basest
things; he, Whose the sea is, Psalm. 95.5.
and whose hands prepared the dry lands, Psalm. 95. He (I say) is mad passenger
in a Ketch, in a poor Fisher-boate, ferried over to the other side.

He went into a ship, but he went not alone, he was accompanied with his
Disciples, He went into a ship (says my Text) with his Disciples, he went
with his Disciples, that so he might prove their faith upon the sea, as well as
upon the solid and dry land, every way he would try them, that so he might
harden them against the time of affliction. Almighty God, though he knew
Abraham thoroughly, yet he would try him in the weightiest matter, to see
whether he would remain constant unto the end; Genesis 22.2.
as you may read at large in the twenty two Chapter of Genesis: Go offer up
thy son Isaac upon one of the Mountains that I shall tell thee of, who
holding of Gods promise unto him, certain and sure, that in his seed all the
Nations of the earth should be blessed, would rather trust in what he hoped
for, then in what he saw before his eyes; before his eyes he saw nothing but
certain death, and yet above hope, he hoped for nothing but everlasting life.
Non haesitabat (says Saint Augustine) quod sibi reddi poterat immolatus, qui
dari poterat non speratus, he no more doubted that his son should be
restored unto him, after he was sacrificed, then he doubted he should have
him before he had him.

So our Savior here, he would thoroughly try his Apostles in their constancy,
in the nearest matters, not in the death of their children and sons, but in the
death of their own selves, he exposes all their lives at once to a manifest
danger, he carries them to sea: he goes into a ship, and his Disciples with
him.

Wherein they show themselves true friends indeed, and faithful servants unto
their Master, who will not only accompany him in his labors, but even in
imminent and manifest dangers, will not forsake him: so that our Savior might
well give that testimony of them, Luke 22.28
that he does in the 22. of Luke, vos estis, ye are they which have continued
with me in my temptations.

And to digress a little from them, and turn the dyall unto our selves, we
all know that Christ our Lord is much sooner found in affliction and
tribulation, then he is in mirth and iollity: Christ, he is the Lilly; but as
it is said of the Lilly in the Canticles: He is growing amongst the thorns,
Cant. 2.2. Mat. 27.29
nay he is crowned with a crown of thorns, Math. 27. sooner found in the house
of mourning, then in the courts of joy and gladness. Moses in the 3. Exodus 3.2.
of Exodus found him in the bramblebush, 1. King. 19.4.
when all the Egyptians missed him in their court. Elias in 1. King. enjoyed
him under the Juniper tree, a tree full of pricks, when Ahab could not
entreat him in his seeled palaces.

But yet the world is in a contrary vein, quite from this, they will follow
Christ, in prosperity, but in adversity they will give him leave to be alone:
upon the land he shall have followers enough, why he has whole multitudes
attending on him, Ecce totus mundus, says S. John, Ioh. 12.19.
Behold the whole world runs after him, but upon the sea, his train has left
him, only his Apostles they keep him company; He went into a ship with his
Disciples.

Whilst God rewards men with his gifts, for the service they have done him, so
long he shall have followers enough, but if once their profession begin to
draw blood, then Demas will revolt, and make shipwreck of all that before he
has professed: there are but a few that can endure this Baptismus sanguinis,
to dye their colors in grain, that so they may be known to be his Disciples.

These kind of men I cannot more fitly resemble, then unto the usurers of these
our days, who will willingly lend their money unto our merchants, but upon
this condition, that howsoever the world go with the poor merchant-aduenturer,
the usurer still will be sure to be a gainer by him; so these they will follow
Christ in his glory, where they may reap their private advantage, but by any
means they will not endure to hear of him in his cross and passion:
otherwise, far otherwise was it with his Disciples here, both in prosperity
and or adversity, they will be sure to be partakers with him, if their Lord
will to (...), then they will along with him; He went into a ship with his
Disciples.

I might here enter into a large discourse of our humane baseness, and our
degenerate nature, how ready all of us are to deny our Lord and Master; but I
list not show that in words, which every one of us do daily act in our doings:
we follow Christ unto the wedding, we acknowledge him our Master in the
breaking of bread, and we honor him highly in the acting of miracles; but in
perils, and in dangers, in losses, and in death, we do detest him: In every one
of these, we set up this for our Mott, Vos autem non sic; far, oh as far
as may be, let the least of all these be from us, let them not once approach
the place, where we shall dwell. For we are like unto the Israelites in the 15
of Exodus, Exodus 15.1
who when they saw their cruel enemies, the Egyptians, drowned before their
faces, and they themselves masters of the field, without so much as striking
of one stroke for it, they burst out presently into cheerful songs, Cantemus
Domino, let us sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, the Horse
and his Rider has he thrown into the Sea: but presently after their
provision failing them, in the very next chapter, Exodus 16.3
Exodus 16. they murmr against Moses, and mutter against the Lord, and feign
they would return, to their Bricke-making in Egypt: so we, whilst he
bestows wealth, and riches, and glory, and honor, and the like upon us, all
that while, we think we have gotten all with a song, we cease not to say
with David in the 81 Psalm, Cantemus Domino, Psalm. 81.^
sing we merrily unto God our strength, make a cheerful noise unto the God of
Jacob, all is well, and as we would have it; but if he once try us with the
touchstone of adversity, if he make us to go through fire and water, we
suddenly change the copy of our countenance, and in stead of giving thanks,
we say with Job in the third of that Book, Job. 3.3.
Pereat dies in quae natus sum, and nox in quae dictum est, conceptus est homo,
Let the day perish wherein I was borne, and the night when it was said, a Man
child is conceived, let them follow that list, for we for our own parts have
enough of the service of the Lord.

Christ our Savior, he has far more followers of his resurrection, then of
his passion, of his glory then of his troubles; but his Disciples yet above all
his followers, they remained firm with him, and would not forsake him: He
went into a ship with his Disciples. And so S. Paul tells them what they are to
look for in recompense again, 2. Cor. 1.7.
in 2. Cor. If they shall be partakers of his sufferings, they shall be
partakers also of the consolation.

Our Savior here, he carries his disciples unto the sea, that so he might
try them, in all kinds, before he sent them forth, to harden them against all
storms of affliction that should blow, and to teach them to contemn the
vanities of this world. In the world there are sudden alterations, and he would
have them altered with none, he would have them to be men of courage, and bear
adversity as well as prosperity.

Will you see the changes of the world? I will only give you one instance Act.
14. Paul and (...), Acts 14.11
at their first en^^^^e into Listra, they have much a do to contain the
people from doing sacrifice unto them, as Gods; ^he Gods, say they, are come
down to us in the likeness of men: whereas at the 19 verse again of the same
chapter, for the good that Paul did amongst them, verse. 19.
they stone him with stones, and throw him out of their City, a sudden
alteration: As great an alteration is this here, with the Disciples; Our
Savior he honors them with his company, he gives them power over unclean
spirits; but here he tries them with the peril of their lives. He went into
a ship with his Disciples.

He went first, his Disciples followed after: the Master he must be the
first, that must show example unto the Scholar, and what he would have his
Scholar learn, that he must teach him by example, as well as by precept. It is
reported of Abimelech, a Prince and leader of Israel in Judge. 9. Judge. 9.48.
that intending to burn Sichem, he took an Axe in his hand, and cut down a
bough from a tree, and laid it upon his own shoulders, saying unto his
soldiers, Quod me vidistis fucere, (...) facite, what you have seen me do,
make haste and do the like, teaching them by example to do what he would have
done; and certainly the disciple will do it much more willingly, when he sees
his Master do the same before his face: and if there be a master in
mischief, he shall be able to do more hurt by his only example, then a number
of others by all the wholesome precepts that they can read: therefore if we be
wise, let us with Mary choose the better part, and so we shall be sure to be
profitable indeed.

The third thing follows: his exhortation; Let us go over to the other side
of the lake.

The power of our Savior, as he was the Creator unto his disciples, and they
his creatures, it was very great, what might he not have commanded them to do?
he created them by his word, and therefore might have commanded them by his
word also, to hime executed and fulfilled the utmost of his will: the Potter he
may do as he list with his clay, and no man to control him, and God dispose as
it pleases him of man, and none to ask the question, why he does so* he
might have said unto his Disciples, get you over unto the other side of the
lake, or follow me unto the otherside of the lake, and they were to obey: for
he was their Lord, and they his servants, he to command, and they to do him
service; and in equity and justice this he might have done, without any
prejudice at all unto any one of them at all, even the chiefest and best
beloved.

But yet such is the love of God unto those that be his, and appertain unto
him, as that he will do, he will evermore do in love and amity: he will not
stiffely command, but kindly entreat at their hands; Let us go over unto the
other side of the lake.

Ecclesia Dei, vinea Dei, grandis nimis, says Saint Bernard, the Church of God
says he, it is Gods vineyard, great and high in the account of the Lord; and
great reason indeed, is it (if we consider it thoroughly as we ought) that so
it should be; great, yea very great in his estimate, who has bestowed such
cost and care continually about it, his own right hand has planted it, his
dear heart blood has redeemed it, he has watered it with his word, he has
caused it to shoot forth by his grace, he has made it plentiful and abundant
by his spirit, and can we think that all this cost of his, will not make him
to have a regard unto it?

Yes surely he has both had, and at this day has, so great a care over it, as
that in the abundance of his love, he has married himself unto his Church,
he now is our husband, and the Church is his spouse, and thinking with
himself, that, that unity is too little for it, he has molded us all into
his own body, so that now as S. Paul speaks, Ephesians. 5.30.
Ephesians. 5. we are the members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones, and
therefore must needs love us with an exceeding love: for it is the same S. Paul's
note, in the same chapter, verse. 29. that yet it was never heard, that ever any
man hated his own body, but nourished and cherished it, and therefore can do no
less then speak kind unto it. Let us go over, etc.

Hence forward then, when we hear of Gods presence, let us not like our
Grandfather Adam in Paradise, fly from the sight of him, for it is his love
which makes him draw near to us, Noli fugero Adam, says S. Cyprian, do not
says he, oh man, fly from thy maker, he is nothing else but God with us, be
not afraid or terrified at the news of him: for he is with us in the flesh,
he is with us also in the unity of the spirit, so that he cannot choose but
love us eternally.

Let not the sight of our sins so utterly dismay us, as that we shall think
there is no more place left for grace to remain: for as S. Paul tells us, that
where sin aboundes, Romans 5.20
there grace aboundes much more, Romans 5. and Saint Barnard shows us the
means, how Christ and the sinner do meet in one; Cor, says he, est in
peccatore, anima in cord, men's in anima, fi (...) in monte, Christus in fide.
In every sinner there is a heart, in the heart there is a soul, in the soul
there is a mind, in the mind there is faith, in faith there is Christ; and this
is that, says he, that the Apostle shows, when he says, that Christ dwells in
your hearts by faith. Ephesians. 3.17.
Ephesians. 3.

When our Saviors to furious Disciples, James and John would have had fire from
heaven to consume the company, Luke 9. Lord, will thou that we command fire
from heaven to consume them there, Luke 9.54.
as Elias did? What was his answer? Ye know not of what spirit ye be; they
cost him more then so, to confound them all in an instant, and he had much
rather bring them home unto him in love, then destroy them in his anger: our
Savior is of a more mild and quiet spirit then his Disciples are of: for they
sought the destruction of their neighbors, but God he seeks the conversion of
sinners.

When God showed himself unto Elias in the mount, there passed before him
thunder and lightning, and storm and wind, but God was in none of them all,
but in the still voice, he delights to be merciful, and is loath to take
revenge, even of those that are his enemies: he is slow to take his bow in
hand, more loath to bend it, loather yet to draw it, loather of all to let fly
at his enemies: Esaias 1. Ah, Esaias 1.24.
I will ease me of mine enemies, and avenge me of mine adversaries, as though
he were so loath to do it, as that it should not be done, if the controversy
by any other means could be decided. If he be then so kind unto his enemies,
no marvel at all if he speak friendly unto such as are his friends: Let us
go over to the other side of the lake.

But yet he is not more ready to ask, then they are ready for to obey, which
is our fourth part, their Obedience, they lanched forth; Let us go over unto
the other side of the lake, and they lanched forth.

In the 11. of Saint John's Gospel, Ioh. 11.11.
when our Savior puts up his request unto his Disciples, to go and raise his
friend Lazarus from the dead, they refuse to go with him, Lord if he sleep
he shall do well, say they; but then they had not learned their obedience
fully: but now they were like unto the Centurions servant, in the 8. of Matthew,
he can no sooner say go, Math. 8.9.
but they go; come, but they come; do this, but they do it: no sooner in the
ship, and says unto them, let us go over to the other side, but presently in
all obedience, they lanch forth the vessel; And they lanched forth.

This obedience of theirs is a triple twisted cord made of these three strands,
humility in the heart, patience in the mouth, and perseverance in all good
actions, and of such a cord the wise man says, Funiculus triplex, etc. a
threefold cord is hardly broken: and every particular of these they learned of
their Lord and master: for, for the first, humility in the heart, Mat. 11.29
it is his own speech, in Math. 11. Discite a me quia mitis sum, learn, says
he, of me, because I am meek and humble in heart, and ye shall find rest
unto your souls; for the second, patience in the mouth, it is the Prophet
Esayes speech of him in his 53 Chapter: Esaias 53.7.
Sicut ouis ad occisionem, he was brought as a Lamb unto the slaughter, and
as a sheep before his shearer, so he opened not his mouth; and for the third,
perseverance in goodness, Phil. 2.8.
it is the Apostles speech, Phil. 2. Obediens fuit vsque ad morte^, he became
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross: who could desire more then
he has performed?

And this obedience, as he had it here of his Apostles, so does he expect it
also at the hands of every one of us that do profess our selves retainers
unto him, Humility, Patience, Perseverance, this is the best sacrifice, and the
most acceptable, which we can perform unto him; let us all then study and
endeavor ourselves in the fear of the Lord, to learn this one lesson, and so,
if not in this world, yet in the world to come, we are sure we shall have our
reward, a reward I say, which shall continue with us unto all eternity; the
which God grant us all, Amen. And so we have finished the first verse here, the
second follows. But as they sailed, etc.

In which, as I told you, there is set down the manner of the journey, and the
accidents that befell them: the manner of the journey, they sailed, But as they
sailed, etc.

The manner of the Journey, I shall not need to stand long upon it, it is
known unto all, they sailed, and besides their sailing, they have little other
help to drive forward their moveable houses.

The profane Historians, in their Histories, do ascribe both the invention of
shipping, and the Art of Navigations, unto one of themselves, to Atlas Maurus,
and make him both the inuenter, and part perfecter of that secret Art; but we
which are Christians, we rather depend upon the Scripture, and say, that the
use of shipping, and the Art of Navigations, they came both immediately from God
himself, and was first revealed unto Noe, in the form of the Arc, Genesis 6. as
likewise the use of the Lodestone, Genesis 6.13.
in these our later times, has bin by Gods especial providence, revealed
amongst us, without which the whole Ocean, as daily now it is, could not be
made nauigable either unto us, or any other people.

The benefit of it is great, as we see daily, by daily experience the
transportati-of goods, the commutation of merchandise, with other nations, the
which is so necessary amongst men, that Baldus the great Lawyer, did not stick
to affirm, the world would quickly be at an end, if Marchandizing once should
decay amongst us, and in Marchandizing, the chiefest Trade we know is by
shipping, and in shipping, says Seneca, this one thing is none of the smallest
matters in the Divine Providence; Quod natura dederit ventos, incitatores
nauigationit, vt commoda cuiusque regionis, fierent communia: This is worthy of
admiration indeed, that God should cause the winds to be furtherers of
navigations, by which the commodities of all nations, are made known and common
unto one.

This same sailing in ships, it is called by the Psalmist in the 107. Psalm,
Ps. 107.23.
Descensus in mare, a going down into the Sea, for so he says, those that go
down into the Sea in ships, they see the great wonders of the Lord; but this
descent it is termed fo in respect of the shore only, where the Banks seem
higher then the waters do, which are set as bars for it by Almighty God
himself, which they shall not pass, as that holy man Job speaks, in the 38
chap. of that book; Job. 38.11.
where he says; Hitherto has he said shall thou come but no further, and here
shall thy proud waves be stayed: which bar is set for the safety of man, for
else naturally the height of the water is higher then the highest hill, as may
plainly appear in the seventh of Genesis, Genesis 7.20.
when the fountains of the great deep were broken up, then 15 cubits upwards
did the waters prevail, and the Mountains were covered, so that the natural
place of the water, is fifteen cubits at the least higher the^ the earth: and
the heathen Philosopher, by the twylight of nature, he could see so much, that
Vicit (...), that it was Gods goodness only that caused the water to
restrain it self, or else not on jot of the earth should be seen above.

The earth it is the heauiest element, and therefore must needs sink down
the lowest, and those that be lighter must floate aloft naturally, but God for
the good of man, has altered the course of nature, and of the water and the
earth has made one globe, and has caused that globe by man to be compassed
about; and so much of the manner of their journey, they sailed, But as they
sailed. I come unto the Accidents, the first whereof is, our Saviors sleep,
He fell asleep: The security of the just and righteous is very much: The
righteous, says Solomon, is bold as a Lion, and what ever befall his body
here, yet his soul is like unto the heavens, above the Moon, that is always
clear and quiet: so that as Liuie speaks of Scipio, we may safely say of him,
Is est cuius animum, nec prospera fortuna; flatu suo efferret, nec aduersa
infringet; He is the man whom neither prosperity can puff up, nor yet
adversity can any whit deiect: An example hereof, we have in our Savior
Christ here, who both upon the Land, and upon the waters, is Semper idem, one
and the selfsame party still; upon the Land he fears not the threats of the
envious Scribes and Pharisees, upon the Seas he contemnes the rage and fury of
the violent tempest, no sooner is he in the ship, but presently he betakes
himself unto his rest, he falls a sleep, But as they sailed he fell asleep.

But then this place, gives leave to move a question of import; Was it I pray
you (may some men say) with our Savior here in this place, as it was with
Jonas in his tempest there, Iona. 1.5.
Ion. 1. no sooner afloate, but presently in his Cabin, and scarce in his
Cabin before he was fast? How comes this to pass? and how shall we be able
to reconcile the Psalmist and our Evangelist together? the Evangelist here
says, But as they sailed he fell asleep; the Psalmist again, Psalm. 121.4.
in the 121 Psalm, speaking of the same party to, says: Non dormitabat, neque
dormiet; He that keeps Israel, says he, shall neither slumber nor sleep:
How may those two agree in one, or what is the matter that now he is said to
be so heavy as to fall asleep? does he sleep in the Evangelist, and watch
for ever in the Psalmist over his?

Indeed if a man do well observe the course of the world, the felicity and
happiness of the ungodly, the miseries and afflictions that the righteous are
put unto, he may happily think, that our Savior does not only slumber, as
in this place, but indeed does nothing else but sleep out right, nay he does
altum dormire, nothing else but mind his rest; to see weary Sampson grinding
all day in the Mill, while the Philistimes are mocking him in their drunken
sacrifices* Judge. 16.25
Iud. 16. To see the weakened Israelites, mourning by the waters of Babylon,
whilst their faithless enemies, are bitterly scoffing and insulting over their
miseries: Sing us now one of your merry songs of Syon; Psa. 137.3.
Psalm 137. To see the pampered Glutton, faring deliciously every day, and the
righteous Lazarus starued with hunger at his very gate, Luke 16. This would
make a man think our Savior not in a deep, Luke 16.21
but a dead sleep indeed, so that he might either say with David's fool,
Psalm. 14.1.
in the 14. Psalm, Non est Deus; that there is no God at all, to control
them in their doings; or if there be a God, yet as Eliphaz says unto Job, in
the 22 of that book, Nubes latibulum eius, Job. 22.14.
and circa cardines coeli perambulat, neque nostra co^siderat; That he has
enough to do to look to that which is above, and never consider what is done
upon the face of the earth, al things go so preposterously, and out of order.

For our Savior to take a nap and away, had not been so much, but to be
drowned in so deep a sleep, as with our Grandfather Adam to have a rib taken
out of his side, and never to feel it; to have John the Baptist, the voice of
a Crier, beheaded at the request, and entreaty of a whore, and yet to be silent
for all that to; to be in a storm, and the ship ready to founder with water
under him, and yet securely sleeping upon his pillow, might argue at the first
sight, that he was overcome with sleep: He fell asleep.

In many things, I say, we may think our Savior is a sleep; for as he that
is a sleep is still the same man, whether you commend any virtue in him, or
discommend any vicious quality he is tainted with all, he is no more moved
with your extraordinary praises, then he is abashed at your bitter inuectiues.
So God oftentimes, he lets the wicked to shoot up and prosper, to flourish
like unto a green Bay tree, and enjoy the world, according unto his own will
and pleasure, and the righteous again like a poor Palm tree, he is
ouerladen and pressed down with the insolency of others, and yet God seems to
be affected neither with the one, nor the others doings, he is fast a sleep
and will not be awaked; in which regard the Prophet David, as weary of his
long sufferings, and willing to be releiued in his distress, he is feign to
cry aloude, and earnestly, as it were, to wake him out of the sleep that he is
in, to come unto his succor. Psalm. 44.23.
For thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are counted at sheep for the
slaughter, therefore awake, why sleep thou o Lord? Arise, etc. An earnest
admonisher we see, and one that will not be silent, he doubles, and trebles
his speech, Awake, sleeepe not, arise; that if he were fast indeed, yet his
earnestness at the last would cause him to awake: and to speak truth, God for
the most part seems for to sleep, that so he might be awaked by our earnest
entreaties; for God, as Saint Augustine notes, amet nimium vehementes, is so
delighted with our prayers, as that many times he does deny us our suites,
that he might hear us continue earnest in our prayers. And again, if he
should upon every motion that we make unto him grant us our requests, his
benefits at the last would come to be contemned of us; we know it here an
ordinary practice among men, cito data cito vilescunt, we account it scarce
worth the taking, that is not twice worth the asking; therefore before he grant
us, he would have us be earnest with him in deed to awake him with our
prayers, if perchance he should seem to be a sleep. But when we have awaked
him what then, is there any redress to be had at his hand? Why yes furely,
even the same party that we mentioned even now, he found it at his hands, he
was delivered out of his distress: Saul the persecutor, falls deadly upon his
own sword, both to the destruction of soul and body, and David the distressed
inioyes the Kingdom: Daniel is made protector of the Kingdom, and his
accusers and enemies thrown into the Lions den: though he sleep here for a
time amongst us, yet one day he will awake again; and whereas all the time of
his sleep he has played the Lamb, and been patient in his revenge, yet when
he shall awake, he shall rouse himself like a Lion for to right himself of al
his enemies, which if it be not in this world yet in the world to come we know
it shall be to their greater condemnation.

Noah we know, he slept a while, and suffered the scoffs and abuses of his
wicked son Cham, but when he awaked, what then? then Maledictus Canaan, then
he pronounces a fearful curse upon him for his lewdness: Genesis 9.25.
Cursed be Canaan, servant of servants shall he be: so, I say, if not in this
world, yet at the end of the world, our Savior he shall curse his enemies with
a terrible curse, a curse of curses: Ite mal dicti, Mat. 25.41
Go ye cursed of my Father, into everlasting fire, a terrible and a fearful
curse, from which God keep us all. But yet so he slept not here, in this
place, his sleep now it was a voluntary natural sleep: But as they sailed
he fell a sleep. The reason of sleep in natural men it is yielded by the
Heathen Philosophers, and chiefly by Aristotle, the eldest son of nature;
there are two causes, says he, of sleep in man, Fumus ascendens in
cerebellum, the ascending of the fumes and vapors up out of our stomach into
our head, and so surprising of the brain, or else Corporalis, naturae
fatigatio, the ouerwearying of our body with labor and travel, both which
were truly in our Savior, and yet neither the cause of this sleep of his, he
had them both truly in him, because in deed he was truly man; but here in
this place, as the Divines teach, he slept voluntary, as being Lord and
Commander of his Humane Nature: As he is then the Keeper of Israel, the
Creator, and Preserver of mankind, he cannot sleep, but as he is a Man, and
himself made a creature, sleep was requisite, and necessary for him.

But yet here, I say, he slept voluntary, he slept because he would sleep,
he was Lord of his Nature, and might command it, which is not in us; for many
of us, oftentimes would sleep, but cannot, and sometimes again, when we
would willingly watch, our eyes are most heavy and ouercharged with sleep:
Illam noctem, rex duxit in somnem, says the Text, Ester. 6. Ester 6.1.
That night the King would feign have slept, but could not; And again, the
Disciples in the 26 of Matthew, Mat. 26.43
they could not refrain from sleeping, when they would have watched; and he
came and found them asleep again, for their eyes were heavy; But in Christ
our Savior, there was no such natural imperfection; in the Wilderness, as
long as he fasted, so long it may be credibily thought, that he watched
also, both which we know, to be above the course of ordinary nature, and in
the sixth of Luke, Luke 6.12.
he continued a whole night in prayer unto his Father, and yet we do not
read, that he was ouercharged with heaviness in the morning; he could
sleep when he list, and he could watch as long as he list, and yet no
impediment unto his body, but here he sleeps voluntary, that so he might
give way unto a miracle: But as they sailed he fell a sleep.

Mark. 4.38
Saint Mark recording of this same Story, tells us that he did sleep, In puppi,
super ceruicale, He was, says he, in the hinder part of the Ship, a sleep
upon a pillow: after his pains taking of Preaching the Gospel upon the Land,
he takes his reasonable rest in the ship upon the water; he rested his head
upon a pillow, not stretched himself out at length upon the Epicures bed of
ease, but only laid himself down, that so he might be up again upon all
occasions; he was like in this business unto himself, poor and wanting, not
having so much as a boulster of his own to lay under his head, but is feign to
borrow the Mariners pillow, so are his birth, his life, and death, the one
proportionable unto the other, and so much for this first Accident here in the
journey, He fell a sleep.

The second follows, And there came down a storm of wind on the Lake. What?
a storm of wind come down on the Lake, and Christ our Savior in the midst of
it? Credendumne est, ea, ventos fuisse audacia? and is it possible, that the
wind should be so audicious as to disturb, either the Sea, or the Ship, in
which the Lord, both of heaven and earth, was carried in? that they should come
violently rushing on, and ask no leave of their Lord and Master.

Oh no, but rather as it was in the tempest that Jonas was tossed in: Iona 1.4.
The Lord (says the Text there) sent out a great wind into the Sea, and there
was a mighty tempest in the Sea, so that the Ship was like to be broken: So in
this tempest here, though perhaps it was not sent of the Lord, yet by the
permission of the Lord we know it came, that so he might show his power and
authority unto his Disciples: There came down a storm.

Where first we observe an alteration, and surely it is worthy our observation
to, to mark that where our Savior comes, what alterations he always makes
amongst men; no sooner is he come into the world, but Herod, and his bloody
Council, lay trains to entrap his life, and cast about with themselves, for
the compassing of their devilish plot, Math. 2.3.
Math. 2. a sudden and unexpected alteration amongst the Courtiers: No sooner
is he entered into Jerusalem, but the whole City is straight in an uproar about
him, saying, Mat. 21.10.
Who is this? as sudden and unexpected an alteration amongst the Citizens; no
sooner is he come into the heart of Mary Magdalen, Luke 8.2.
but presently she is quit of seven devils at once, as strange an alteration as
any of the former: No sooner is he come into Saul, Acts 9.4.
who breathed out threatenings and slaughters against the Disciples, but of a
violent persecutor, he is become as vehement a Preacher, the greatest
alteration amongst the rest; no sooner here upon the Sea, which before was
calm and quiet, but suddenly a storm and gust of wind; And there came down a
storm of wind upon the Lake, etc. A storm of wind upon the Sea, and in the
presence of the Lord to? Why, how every place is subject unto danger, there is
no security any where left for man, no not the presence and company of the
Almighty: Nusquam est securitas, neque in coelo, neque in Paradiso, multo minus
in hoc mundo, There is no place left for security (says S. Ber.) neither
heaven above, nor blisseful Paradise, much less this troublesome and
tempestuous Sea of this present world wherein we live: Lucifer one of the
greatest Angels fell in heaven, in the presence of the Divinity; Adam in
Paradise, a place of pleasure; Judas in the world in the school of our
Savior; let no man then presume, for that is a rock that will dash us into
pieces; neither yet again let any man despair, for that is a whirle-pit, that
will swallow us up quick, both are high ways to eternal perdition both of
body and of soul. We must not despair, for therefore God took upon him our
own nature; we must not presume, for therefore is that Man Jesus Christ, become
God to punish our offenses: we must not despair, For as I live, Eze. 18.32.
Rom 6.23. 1. Tim. 1.15
I will not the death of a sinner: we must not presume, for the wages of sin
is death, says S. Paul; we must not despair, for Christ came into the world
is save sinners: We must not presume, for he came not to call the righteous but
sinners to repe^ta^ce; we must not despair, Eze. 18.21
for at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from the
bottom of his heart, I will blot out his iniquity out of my remembrance, says
the Lord: We must not presume, for what art thou o man, that boasts thy self
against thy Maker? And what have thou that thou have not received? 1. Cor. 4.7.
we must not despair, for where sin abounds, Romans 5.20
there grace abounds much more: We must not presume, for shall we sin that
grace may abound? God forbid: but as near as we can, keep an even path,
between despair of Gods mercies, Mat. 23.12
and the pride of our own merits; For he that exalts himself shall be
brought low, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted. Let us strive
then with the Apostle to make our calling and election sure, for he that does
these things shall never fall, but let us still withal, work as the same
Apostle does advise us; Cum timore and tremore, 2. Cor. 7.15
with fear and trembling; and as often as desperation shall offer for to fear
any of us, let us in the fear of God, with holy Bernard, Recolligera summum
Dei misericordiam, call into our remembrances, and apprehend it withal, the
infinite mercies of Almighty God, such as he has in store, for all those that
call upon his name; and when presumption again shall be at our elbowes, ready
for to puff us up, let us also with the same S. Bernard, Recolligere
i^stitia^, domini exercituum, think upon his justice, who spared not his
highest Angels.

There came down a storm of wind upon the lake. etc. The world is the lake,
upon which the Apostles, and all we that do now live, do every hour float;
afflictions and troubles they are the storms that are sent down upon us, to
the trial of our faith, and the perfecting of our obedience, and at the first
they are bitter unto us, and we our selves are faint-hearted in them: when the
least storm of affliction does but approach us, then suddenly, with the
children of the Prophets, in 2. King. 4. we cry unto the man of God, O vir dei
mors in olla, 2. King. 4.40.
we are undone, for there is nothing but death and despair before our eyes,
but our deliverance again from our troubles, that is like the Prophets meal,
in the same place to sweeten the pot again, and to restore our selves unto our
selves.

And if he be faint-hearted in his troubles, he need not much for to wonder at
it neither, for he knows well, both what he is, and whereof he was made: our
Savior in the second of Canticles likens him unto a Lilly, Cant. 2.2.
a tender flower; As the Lilly amongst the thorns, so is my love amongst the
daughters: the Lilly, says S. Bernard, nec vel le^issimam, spinae, sustinet
punctionem, floris teneritudo, sed mox vt modice premitur, perforatur, it will
not endure the least touch of a thorn, but so soon as it is pricked, so soon
it is run through withal: so is it with man, the least affliction is ready to
make him to sink under the burden of it.

And yet very necessary it is for him, that some persecution he should endure,
that so he may be known unto whom he does belong: Non dedignandum in seruo,
quod praecessit in domino, says S. Augustine: let not the servant, says he,
think scorn to suffer that which he sees his master has suffered before his
face: for the servant is not greater then his master, if the head were crowned
with a crown of thorns for the safeguard of the body, why then let not the
foot think much to catch a thorn in defense of the head again, it is his
duty for to hazard all.

And necessary also it is for him, to be kept under in a second regard: for
man, as Clem. Alex. speaks, is like unto a vine: now a vine, as he there
speaks, and we all know, (...), unless it be pruned, it will straight way
grow wild; so man, if he have not some affliction laid upon him, to keep him
under, he will forget himself, and be ready to spurn against his maker, which
makes S. Augustine so violently to cry out, Hic ure domine, hic seca, punish me
here O Lord in this life, and so in the life to come I shall be sure thou will
forgive me.

Be it then a loss of our goods which we suffer here, why says Saint Ambrose,
Deus nos dispensatores, reliquit, non haredes: God, says he, he makes us his
stewards here, not his heirs, he may call for an account particularly of
every one of us, whenever it pleases him, either now at this instant, or
else at any other time when it shall seem better unto his majesty; and God
grant that we may all be ready to give up a just and a true account unto him.

This same dropsy and thirst after riches which the world has gotten, is not
natural, but a corruption of our nature, Nescit natura diuites, quae omnes, ex
aequo pauperes generat, says S. Ambrose: Nature says he, does acknowledge no
rich man, who of equal condition has made all poor: for naturally, one is
provided of no more, then is another, but all of us as we came into the world,
so we shall go again, and how we came and must go, holy Job does declare, Job.
1.21. Naked came we out of our mothers womb, Job. 1.21.
and naked must we return again, the Lord gives, and the Lord takes away,
and blessed for all be the Name of the Lord.

Man, for a time, may have the use of Gods good creatures here, some more,
some less, as it pleases him; but none, not the least of them, shall he be
able to carry away with him, when he shall depart this present life. It is
re-ported of the mighty Saradine, the Prince and governor of eleven Nations,
that when he felt death begin to approach, he commanded his winding sheet to
be spread in his Camp, with this Proclamation, Here is all, of all the
riches, that great Saradine shall carry away with him: And yet, if he had cast
his cards right, he should have found he should not have had that: for that
should carry him away, not he that, and therefore in vain was that
Proclamation.

But yet in this affliction of goods, it is not the usual wont of Almighty
God, when he calls men to account, to bereave them of all that they have, and
leave them just nothing, and so depart from them: he will leave them his grace
at the least, to appease and quiet their souls within them; but yet he will
restore them temporal goods to, when he shall see good, as we may read in the
story of Job, he took much from that holy man, hundreds of Oxen, Job. 1.3.
thousands of Camels, Job. 1. but yet he took not so much from him though,
but that he returned him twice as much again, Job. 42.10.
Job. 42. Whereupon says Saint Origin, Vide quid est amittere aliquid pro Deo,
hoc est, multiplicata recipere tibi. See, says he, what it is to loose any
thing for the Lords sake: it is to receive it augmented, and multiplied again
into our bosoms: and we know all, what our Saviors promise in this kind is,
in the tenth of Mark, There is none, says he, that has left house, or
brethren, Mark. 10.30.
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife or children, or lands, for my name
sake, and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this time,
houses, and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands: I but
how shall he receive all this, the next words following shall make all plain,
cum persecutione, with persecution and trouble he shall receive them all, to
teach him not to set his mind too much upon them, but to expect his reward
indeed in a better life, the iife come.

Be it again a sickness of the body, or a grief and sorrow of the mind,
which we do sustain, Certamen est non faenitia, says Seneca the Philosopher,
it is but a trial of our patience, no outrageous tyranny; and the more we
shall be exercised in this kind, the more able we shall be to endure the
misery of it, and withal it is an argument of his love, and kindness unto us,
so the Apostle tells us, Heb. 12. Heb. 12.7.
Whom the Lord loves he chastises, says he, and scourges every son that
he receives: we are not without fault, we know, that we should deserve no
correction, and he again when he strikes us, he does it not out of any
hatred unto us: for as S. Cyprian speaks, he does it for no other end and
purpose, but only to amend us, and what is his intent in amending us, but
eternally to save us? and then what great hurt is there in whatsoever he does
unto us?

Should he intend our destruction, why he might, if it pleased him, once for
all, take revenge upon us for all our offenses, with the breath of his
nostrilles he might consume us quite (for what are we but Crickets and
Grasse-hoppers in comparison of him?) and so might quickly confound all the
strength we have: but God he delights more in mercy, to be pitiful, then
in justice to take revenge upon mankind, Misericordia, supra omnia opera
mannum ipsius, his mercy is over all his works, and God in his fury does not
forget his mercy, but in it remembers to be pitiful, even unto his enemies.

He meant to plague the Egyptians, when he showed his power so strange amongst
them, yet the very choice of his weapons did show his love and kindness unto
them, he might have brought upon them, an Army of Bears, Wolves, Tigers, or
Lions, Beasts that know no mercy, but live altogether upon the spoil; but he
refused them all, and a more mild revenge he would make to serve his turn, a
poor Caterpiller, and a weak Grasse-hopper, shall be the scourge of his
mighty power.

And if he then deal so kindly with his enemies, yea, even with those, where
yet he purposes to get himself a name, as he himself professes unto Moses:
Exodus 14. then surely, Exodus 14.4
he will be much more kind and merciful unto his own children, such as he
professes himself to have a care over. A mild rod indeed shall serve his
turn amongst them, the rod of the root of Iesse, Number. 17.10.
which flowred amongst the other rods: that so the sweetness of the flower might
mitigate the severity and sharpness of the rod; a lingering ague, or a pining
consumption shall bring us home gently unto our father.

Be it persecution unto death, why unto Salomons throne, there is purpureus
ascensus, Cant. 3. there is a purple ascent, Cant. 3.10
and all is still unto the beauty and perfection of the Church. The perfectest
beauty, we all know, it is the perfectest mixture of red and white; in the
former part, the sickness of the body, there was whiteness, as the lilley;
and here in martyrdom, there is redness, as the rose: the Church it has both
her lillies, and her roses to adorn her beauty.

Martyrdom, it is termed by the ancient Fathers, a fire, which God suffers to
be kindled here upon the earth, to the trial of man, and so S. Aug. calls it:
where speaking of Martyrdom, he says, Inventus est ignis, qui vnum ditet,
alterum damnificet, ambos probet: behold, says he, here is a fire found out,
which shall enrich the one, and damnifie the other, but yet prove both: the
godly and the righteous it shall enrich, with eternal happiness, but the
wicked and the reprobate, it shall consume to dust and ashes; it shall try both
thoroughly, what metal they be made of. But in the trial, this shall be the
comfort of the godly man, that he shall not be left desolate in this furious
flame: visitat deus and in carcere suos, and ibi plus est auxilij, vbi semper
plui est periculi, says S. Amb. God he will not forsake, but come to visit
his, when they lie in the dungeon, as he did his servant Joseph, and still,
where there is most danger, there still he will be sure to afford most aid
and comfort: and the reason of it we need not much wonder at, Mat. 25.43
when as in the 25. of Math. he does profess it himself, that he himself it
is, that is so handled in his members: in carcere eram and visitastis me, I was
in prison, says he, and ye came unto me: if then he will be with them in their
torments in prison, then surely at the stake he will not be absent, but there
he will assist with all means needful: I, there he has been known to
have been present indeed, with many of our land, and many yet at this day are
left alive, which can testify, the sweetness that the Martyrs felt, in the
midest of these flames, how joyfully they embraced that death of theirs.

And no marvel neither, though they died with undaunted courage, when the
sense of pain was taken quite from them, Nil crus sentit in neruo, cum manus
est in coelo, says Tertull. the sinews, says he, of the hand can feel but
little pain, I trow, in the flame, when the whole hand, before, is in the
bosom of the Lord: then so many wounds, they are but so many open mouths, to
caroll out the praises of a merciful God: and so much for this second
Accident, there came down a storm of wind upon the lake, etc.

The 3d. and last Accident follows, and they were filled with water and were
in ieopardy. Hitherto we have heard, as our Savior Christ speaks himself, in
the 13. of Mar. a rumor of war, Mar. 13.7.
but thanks be to God, we have felt no war: we have heard a noise of the
wind, but now we are come to the trouble of the water. The Apostles here,
they were not, as sometimes their forefathers were, Exodus 14.
in the 14. of Exodus in the red sea, but now they are come in marimortuo, they
are overwhelmed in the dead sea: their lives are called in question. They were
filled with water, says the text, and they were in ieopardie.

To be in a storm, and gust of wind, there is no great matter of moment in
that: many a poor soul amongst us, has endured many of them, and done well
after them all too; and many daily, we hear, do endure their rigor: but
when their ship is foundred with water under them, when life and soul are
ready to shake hands, and depart this present world, then it is high time, to
cry out for help unto the Lord: Serua nos domine, perimus: help master or else
we all perish. They were here in a great extremity, they were filled with
water and they were in ieopardy.

Saint Peter, in the 12. of the Acts, Acts 12.4.
he heard a loud storm, and a terrible blustering wind, when in prison he
was clapped up by Herod, at the request of the Jews, and his life was threatened
too: but Saint Stephen in the 7. of the Acts, Acts 7 58.
he was in the shower, when such a shower of stones were rained upon him, that
even in the first moment he gave up the ghost. The noise then here of the
water, it is the tumult of the people: for (beloved) there is a great affinity
between these two, the water, and the people: and to show how near the one
comes unto the other, the Psalmist, Psalm. 65.7.
in the Psalm. 65. in one verse there, he ioynes them both together, which
stillest, says he, the raging of the sea, and the noise of his waves, and the
madness of the people. Their tumult, it is so great, as that he can liken
them, to nothing else but to the sea, in his rage, which bears down all that
does withstand it.

Acts 14.5.
Paul and Barnabas, they were in a tempest, in the 14. of the Acts, when they
were so despightfully used by the Jews at Iconium, as that they looked every
minute to have their lives taken away from them: but Saint James, he was wet
with the shower, when his head was taken off by Herod, and his body wallowed in
his own bloody gore, Acts 12. Acts 12.2.


The Devil he is the author of these gustes and storms, for he sends them
down from his ayrie mansion, where he rules and domineeres, Ephesians. 2 2
Ephesians. 2. and by his boistrous blasts still seeks to cross the proceedings
of the Lord: we may even see it in Christ our Savior, how he seeks to thwart
and hinder his courses. Has God, says he, anointed him with the oil of
gladness above his fellows? I will see if I can anoint him again with the oil
of sadness above his fellows; has he been baptized with water and the holy
Ghost? I will provide for him another baptism, namely of fire; has God sent
down the holy ghost, in likeness of a Dove, and caused it to light upon his
head? then I will cause tribulation, and a crown of thorns, to crown his
temples as well as it; has there a voice come from heaven, saying, this is my
beloved son in whom I am well pleased? then I likewise will provide a voice
for him, from the foot of the ladder, which shall say, if thou be the son of
God, come down from the cross, and save thy self. Thus still he is contrary
unto God, in his courses, and raises his storms to the hinderance of the
Gospel: and if he have done thus in Christ our Savior, then what may we
expect, which be his members? surely the utmost of perils that his wit can
invent.

Yet this may be our comfort, in our troubles, that howsoever our afflictions
be, yet the Devil has not the rod, in his own hands: but the holy ghost, to
order and direct them still, as may best serve both for his glory, and our
good. And as for the Devil, he has bound him fast, so that would he never so
feign, he can stir but to the length of the chain he is linked in.

Yet if our danger be such, as that he seeks to stop our breathes, and sink
us right down with the multitude of his waves, then let this teach us this
lesson with the Apostles here in this place, to stick close unto our Savior,
and not forsake him, the rock of our defense: and then we shall not need to
fear, though the winds blow, and the seas beat, and the waves rage, yet we
shall be secure, and at the last arrive where we all hope for to come one day at
our wished-for haue^ in heaven; which God grant. And so much for this 3d
accident, and this 2d verse.

The 3d verse follows, in which is contained the miracle in the journey, his
calming of the wind, and appeasing of the waters, the which of it self,
without any other help, will win our attentions to the hearing of it: for no man
is so serious, but that he will be at leisure for the acting of a miracle, how
ever busied in other affairs. In which there are 2 points to be considered of
us; the fear of the Apostles, the power and authority of our Savior: the
fear of the Apostles, then they came to him, and awaked him, saying, Master,
master, we perish: Of that first.

Man, he is not a mere block, or stone, without sense or apprehension, so that
he cannot be moved, either with his passion, or with his affection, (for that
conceit of the Stoickes was hissed out of the schools many a day since) he has
them both truly and naturally within himself: he has, I say, both his
affections, and his passions, ingrafted into his nature, and every one of them,
they have their several voices, per quas etiam cum nolunt, se produnt, says
Saint Ber. through which either willingly, or many times against their wills,
they betray themselves to the standers by. Joy, it has a cheerful voice;
grief, it has a doleful voice; and fear, it has a timorous voice; which
passion of fear is none of the least, but does possess man as much as any
other, and makes him to utter such an uncouth noise, as is heard here amongst
the Disciples, Master, Master, we perish. The inward fear wherewith the
Apostles were possessed in this place, was that which made them make this
lamentable cry unto our Savior for help and protection in their greatest
extremity.

They came unto him quia timuerunt, says Saint Aug. because they were afraid;
and great reason had they, (if we shall consider it well) to fear indeed: a
loud storm of wind, whistling over their heads above, a raging and grown
sea beneath under feet, nothing but death before their eyes: and death will
make the stoutest courage for to quail.

Death, says Aristotle, it is (...), the most terrible of all things, that
seem terrible unto us: it will make us set our throats upon the
taynter-hookes, and lift up our voices like trumpets, and therefore, well said
the Devil in the second of Job, Job 2.4.
pellempro pelle, skin, for skin, says he, and all that ever a man has will he
give for his life, so that he may enjoy that, if it be but even for a moment
longer; and therefore they had great reason to be affraide, when both the
elements, the air and water, the wind and seas, had conspired against them.

They had reason to fear, as all men have: they knew what they were, or if
they were to learn, Saint Gregory could instruct them that they are fragili
corpore, mente sterili, of a weak and frail body, of a barren and foolish
understanding: and both these the Scriptures teach them, for the first homo
vanitati similis factus est, Psalm. 144.4
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 144. man is like a thing of naught, there is for the
perverseness and barrenness of his soul; and for the second, inhabitat domos
luteas, Job. 4.19.
says that holy man Job. in the fourth of that book, he dwells in a house of
clay, there is for the weakness, and frailetie of his body also: so that he
may justly fear, in regard of either.

And yet besides both these, there is a worse matter too, he is not of
himself; for he is, as Saint Amb. speaks, ciuitas obsessa, a besieged City;
besieged, and that by diverse enemies; besieged by himself; besieged by the
world; besieged by the Devil, the common adversary unto mankind. Besieged by
himself, he is not at peace within himself, but his own flesh it is a
continual adversary against him, Gestamus laqueum nostrum, says Saint
Bernard, inimicum, carnem, we carry about us, says he, our own flesh, a
sworn enemy unto us all, borne of sin, nourished in iniquity, corrupted in our
first beginning, but much more depraved by our wicked and ungodly custom of
sinning here. A great peril, and a dangerous combatto fight against a
homebred enemy, especially if we shall consider, that we our selves, we are
but strangers here, and that It is in his native Country, and therefore has
many advantages which we cannot get.

And that which is worst of all, this dangerous enemy we must not destroy
neither, so S. Amb, tells us, Hunc inimicum sustentare cogimur, non perimere: we
are, says he, bound to maintain, forbidden for to kill* our souls and bodies
they are married together by God himself, and those that God has joined
together, let no man be so bold as once to dare to separate asunder; Cogimur
diligere vt sponsus sponsam, Adam Euam, says S. Ber. we must be so far from
hating of our flesh, as that we are commanded for to cherish it and love it
entirely, to love it as the husband ought to love his wife, Adam his Eve. Hinc
illae lachrymae, hence grows that fearful danger, a life of danger, a world
of danger, it is like the remnant of the Iebusites, in the City of Jerusalem,
2. Sam. 5. we may employ it in labor but we must not slay it, 2. Sam. 5.
and the more we shall employ it, the less dangerous or hurtful it will prove
unto us: but yet it is fearful though, to have so treacherous a companion
about us, an enemy that shall continually sleep in our bosoms. The company of
such an one, for the most part, is contagious.

He is besieged again by the world, a subtle enemy, and one that makes a show
of a faithful friend, such an one as cunning Iael was unto fearful Sisera,
in the fourth of Judges, Judge. 4.18.
who perceiving of him flying, cries from her Tent door, turn in my Lord,
turn in to me and fear not: and when she has him within, she begins to make
much of him, she gives him milk to lull him asleep, and she couers him that
he take no cold, but no sooner is he fast, but that she puts her hand unto
the nail, and her right hand to the work-mans hammer, so the world it begins
with milk, but it ends with a hammer, they all shall find it that list to
prove it.

The best way that I know to be rid of this enemy, is not to have at all to do
with it, to sequester our selves, as much as we can, from the affairs of this
world, and to place our hearts there, where one day we may safely enjoy them
again: let our souls like Eagles mount aloft, fly above the Clouds, and
seat themselves in the highest heavens, and there we are sure they shall be
most safe. To meddle with this worldly mucke, it is but to ensnare our selves
with foolish vanities: The bird that often stoupes in her flight, at one time
or other she is intrapped, before she be aware of it; either she is caught
with a lime-twig, by the wing at unawares, or else she is fast by the feet in
the net, or one way or other, she is betrayed to her overthrow; so the soul
that looks downward upon every bait, at the length it is ensnared, before it
is aware, and subjected unto the vanities of this world. The best way therefore
to rid us of it, is not to have to do with it, but keep our selves aloft,
whither it cannot ascend: Sursum cor, qui sursum habes caput, says Saint Aug.
As our eyes were frame at the first to look up into heaven, so let our hearts
learn to seat themselves there, and then we shall be sure to be quite of this
enemy.

He is a third way besieged by the devil, a sworn enemy unto all Mankind,
and he is the most dangerous of all other enemies. For where as all other
enemies have but one only way to entrap us in, viz. craft and subtlety, this
adversary he has many, he is both Callidus and Potens, both a subtle and a
sly insinuator of himself in into us, and withal he is a mighty and a
potent adversary against us.

For the first, his craft and subtlety, it is Greg. Naz. his note of him, that
he is (...), an admirable Counselor, deep and pollitique in his devises, and
every course that he shall persuade us to, it shall seem like unto Achitophels
counsel, 2. Sam. 16.23.
2. Sam. 16. as if a man had enquited at the Oracle of God: and to further his
devises that they may not seem to be without success, he will, as in ancient
time unto King Saul, appear unto us under Samuels Mantell, 1. Sam. 28.14.
that we shall not think it to be he, but rather God himself that speaks
unto us.

But we must learn to beware of his close treacheries: and that we may be the
more sure of him, and not lull our selves asleep in careless security, but be
as vigilant to prevent, as he is diligent to overthrow: Naz. tells us in another
place, that we must be sure to keep a privy watch about us continually, for
that he is, (...), a night-thiefe, as well as (...), a noonday devil, and
will come craftily stealing on upon us, before we be aware of him; nay, when as
we are most secure, then is he most busily casting about, and plotting against
us: so that day and night, both in our labor, and in our quiet, we must be
sure to have a vigilant eye to him wards.

And for the second, his Might and Power, it is very great: we must fight,
says Saint Paul, Ephesians. 2. Ephesians. 2.12.
aduersus principatus and potestates, against Principalities and Powers; nay,
against the Prince and God of this world: Ioh. 12.31.
for so Saint John styles him in his 12 Chapter and 31 verse, where he says,
Now is the Prince of this world cast out: he has whole Nations his attendants
and followers, as we may see, Job. 1. Job. 1.17.
the Sabaeans and Chaldaeans, and to speak truth, what nation is there upon
the earth, wherein his power and might is not acknowledged? So that we may
safely say, that which the Jews in the 12. Ioh. 12.19.
of S. John's Gospel said of our Savior, Ecce totus mundus, behold the world
indeed does nothing else but run after him: so that worthily he may be
feared, for his puissant Army, besides his own invincible courage, Psalm. 22.14
which the Psalmist in the 22 Psalm. likens unto a ramping and roaring Lion,
terrible and fearful, for the assault it self.

So that there must be great heed and diligence used against this enemy indeed,
he being in the first, as Nazian. teaches, (...) a crafty Sophister, and
teaches men what himself never learned. And in the second, says S. Basil, he
is (...), an over powerful adversary: in both kinds fearful, in the one for
his slights, in the other for his force.

And as he is both thus subtle and strong, so is he also of a working
temper; his nature it is proportionable unto his name. Beelzebub, Muscarum
Deus, is his name in Scripture, the God of Flies; who, though you flap him away
never so often, yet he will fly to the same place again: he will never leave
us so long as we be here, if his storm will not quell us, yet he will try
what the raging of the water may effect upon us: he is restless in his plots,
and if one temptation will not hurt us, yet another shall be sure to assail
us; Esa. 42.3.
and the quenching of the smoking Flax, and the breaking of the bruised Reed,
is still the mark that he leuels at, Esa. 42. Si auaritia prostrata est
exurgit libido, says S. Bernard, if greedy covetousness will not seize us,
yet he will try what itching lust may effect upon us: is lust repelled? yet
ambition may chance to strike a great stroke with us: is ambition quenched?
yet anger (perhaps) may put us out of our Bias: is wrath appeased? yet envy
shall trouble us: is envy forgotten? yet jealousy shall affright us. And thus
restless, he follows us with all his inventions, so that no marvel, if the
Disciples were so fearful, when such traitors were within them, such enemies
without them, such weakness on all sides, for to hold out long; such storms
of wind above, such raging seas beneath, that then they came unto him.

They came unto him, even at the last gasp, when the winds blew, and the seas
beat, when their ship was ready to founder under them, and they as ready to
take their oaths all, to be deaths true servants, then they came unto him,
says my Text.

The Heathen, they were somewhat strange in their resolutions, and when hope
seemed desperate, then scorned they any longer to hope for it; and it was one
of their chief wishes, and a great ease (as rhey thought) unto their miseries,
to be swallowed up quick, and devoured of death, as the Apostles here were
like to be: from which kind of death we do in our Lyturgie, earnestly pray to
be delivered; that as God would deliver us all from unprepared death, so he
would deliver us likewise from sudden and unexpected death, because that
commonly sudden death, and unprepared death, they go both together: we cannot
live so warily here, not the best of us all, but if God should take us upon the
present, we might have many things objected against us, which we would be all
willing should be concealed in that great and general day of Judgment. God
grant us all time of repentance here, and he grant us also, that we do not
misspend that time that he gives us, but in it heartily repent us of our sins,
that so in the last and final day of judgment, we may all have that blessing
pronounced upon us, that the Prophet David pronounces upon all the righteous,
Psalm. 32. Beatiquorum remissae sunt iniquitates, Psalm. 32.1.
blessed is the man whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered. Then blessed shall they be unto whom the Lord will impute no sin. And
as for those who, think they live so warily, as that they are always prepared
for death, let them stand upon their own innocence, and have no part in this
prayer of ours.

The heathen (I say) they thought it a happiness to have a sudden death to
light upon them: and so Pliny in his seventh Book, and 53. Cpapter wishes,
that that might be his lot; and the Poet is not far behind him when he
says: Mitius ille perit, subita qui mergitur vnda:
Quam sua qui liquidis brachia lassat aquis.


He dies easier (says he) who at the first dop does lose his life, then he
that in swimming does struggle to draw breath. But we that are Christians.
we must resolve our selves on the contrary opinion, their ignorance it was
that caused them to wish for it: but we, we know besides the manner of death,
we know (I say) of a great account, which every one of us is to make, when this
life shall be ended; a matter that the Heathen scarce ever dreamed of, where
we must make answer, not only for those sins of old age, which the Prophet
in the 38 of Esaias, Esa. 38.15.
calls annos, sins of years, sins of great standing; but as the Psalmist
speaks in the 25 Psalm. Delicta inventutis, Psalm. 25 7.
sins of wanton and recklesse youth; and not only those neither, but in the 19
Psalm, Psalm. 19.12
for secret sins, that is (says S. Augustine in his Confessions) for the
sins we have committed in our nonage, before we knew either good or evil:
that we may have the fewer inditements preferred against us, in that great and
general day of judgment: therefore we desire respite for repentance here in
this world, which God grant us all. Amen.

They came unto him: but how? Non passibus, sed precibus, says S. Augustine,
not so much by their earthly paces, (though we must conceive, that even in
those they hasted unto him) as by their winged prayers they poasted toward
him, they prayed unto him: for had they not humbly supplicated, as well as run
unto him, they might all very well have perished in the furious tempest.

To pray, it is natural for Man: and so much Aristotle, by the purblinde eye
of nature could see; Natura, sairh he, inseruit homini vt sacrificet, Man by
nature, says he, is made a continual Beades-man unto his maker, always to
have recourse unto him; and this property of nature, grace has confirmed from
time to time in the righteous man, to have recourse unto his Maker: so David in
his distress, in the 68 Psalm, Psalm. 68.16
when he is in-girt, and compassed in about with his many enemies, he turns
himself unto the Lord, Exaudi me Domiue, hear me, O Lord, says he, for thy
loving kindness is good, turn unto me, according unto the multitude of thy
tender mercies, and hide not thy face from thy servant: for I am in trouble:
hear me speedily, and draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it, deliver me
because of mine enemies, etc. So good Iehosophat in 2. 2. Chron. 20.13.
Chron. 20. he says, cum ignoremus quid agere debeamus, when we know not, O
Lord, says he, what to do, then our eyes they are upon thee. And so S. Peter
wishes that they always should be, 1. Pet. 5. Cast all your care upon him, for
he cares for you: and if at any time they should have recourse unto God, then
most especially in their troubles and adversities: when men's souls are brought
low unto hell, then they should call upon his name heartily indeed, and then
above other times, he expects to be called upon, Psalm. 50. Psa. 50.15.
Call upon me, says God, in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me: whereupon Saint Augustine notes, that it is Gods
Memorandum unto men to call upon him, Voce te, says he, vt inuoces me:
behold, O man, says he, I put thee in mind of it, if thou have forgotten,
that then above all other times, thou have recourse unto me. Nay many times
Almighty God does lay afflictions and troubles here upon men, that they might
bethink themselves of their Prayers, and fly unto him in their sore
distress. We may easily see the course of it: By adversity God brings men
first into a doubt and fear, and then by fear into an acknowledgement of
their own necessity and weakness; and so consequently into a despair of
succor in themselves, and by despairing in their own means, to think of
means that may be profitable unto them, and so at the last, to the
consideration of Gods unspeakable love and kindness to them-wards.

And out of this again, considering that his mercy is great, and his
goodness from everlasting, he raises us up again to an assured trust and
confidence in his mercies, and out of this confidence, we are bold to make our
Prayers and Petitions unto our Father. And therefore if either voluptuousness,
or anger, or pride, or any other sin shall be ready to attempt us, our refuge
only must be to pray against them with David in the 44 Psalm, Psalm. 44.23
Exurge Domine, awake, why sleep thou, O Lord, arise, and cast us not off
for ever; wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and our
trouble? And in our prayers I make no question, but we shall find comfort, if
not deliverance speedily. If then any perish, it is as God himself speaks in
the 13 of Ose. Perditio tua ex te o Israel, Ose. 13.14
his destruction it is from himself, because he has neglected his duty unto
the Lord, in calling upon him to be merciful unto him.

They came unto him, and good reason too: for if we would any thing with the
Lord, it is all the reason that may be, that we come unto him, we have need of
him, not he of us; then we must call, nay we must cry unto the Lord: Psalm. 3.4.
Clamaui ad Dominum, says the Prophet David. I cried unto the Lord with my
whole voice, and he heard me out of his holy Hill: we must come and pray unto
him, Then they came unto him. etc. What the Apostles here did in their persons,
that we must do if we want any thing, in our own; nay, whether we want any
thing, or no, it is our duty for to do it; and the prayers of the righteous,
they are of no small force or efficacy with God, to obtain a blessing from
him; every one of them is as a forcible Engine to open Heaven gates, and to
draw down a blessing upon the head of him that sent it up. So S. Bernard
tells us out of that place of the Gospel. Luke 18. concerning the poor
Publican. Dum non auderet oculos ad Coelos eleuare, Luke 18.10.
ipsum Coelum potuit ad se inclinare, says he: Whilst the Publican durst not
lift up his eyes in his prayers, unto heaven, such was the force of his prayers
with God above, as that he bowed the heavens, and made them descend down unto
his prayers. But yet by the way it were not amiss for to ask the question,
What prayers are these, that are of such power and efficacy with the Lord? it
is not every one that is forged in his name, Math. 7.21
so our Savior Christ himself tells us, Math. 7. Non omnis qui dicit,
Domine, Domine, not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, much less every time that he says it, shall have his
request. But before our prayers we must prepare our selves to pray by serious
meditation, Meditatio docet quid desit, oration ne desit obtinet, says Saint
Bernard: by meditation we learn to know what is wanting unto us, and by prayer
we obtain that it shall not be wanting. That shows which is the right way
that we must walk, this teaches us how to walk when we have found the path.
By meditation we know the dangers and the perils that hang over our heads, and
by prayer we avoid them all, and escape away scot-free.

And yet before we can come to meditate aright, our heart it must be framed
aright for it, and that must be by an earnest and hearty repentance for our
sins, which is Magna spongia, as Saint Augustine calls it, the great Sponge
that wipes them all away out of the fight of the Lord. And herein lies an
especial duty of the Priest, if he shall be required thereunto, to know how
dangerous the sin is that a man is tainted withal; not to flatter his
patient in his sin, but to let him know the true weight and danger of it,
that so he may thoroughly repent him of his sin, and learn to return to God
again. For as S. Cyprian speaks, Imperitus est medicus, etc. he is an
unskillful Physician, says he, and a worse Surgeon a great deal, who seeing
of a putrified sore will handle it gently, and suffer the corruption to remain
in it still; and so by his foolish pity overthrows his patient, whilst he is
afraid to apply either his cauteries, or his searing medicines. Aperiendum est
vulnus and secandum, says he, the wound must be searched and launced, and the
bottom of it felt: let the patient in the mean time rage and rosre; yet when
he is recovered, he will give him thanks for his cruel love.

Those that sow pillowes under men's elbowes, and take away repentance for their
sins, make men believe their sins are but motes; when the weight is so great,
that God himself is forced to groan under the burden of them, Amos 2. they
do as much as in them lies, shut up the gate of all true repentance: so that
whilst with the false Prophets, they cry, Pax, pax, and non est pax, peace,
peace, when there is nothing less then peace to be expected: whilst they
promise a false peace unto the sinner, the hope of eternal peace is utterly
lost from them.

But in this case there are many unskillful, even of the great ones amongst us,
who know not what to answer to a distressed wight, that shall crave their
advise and help: but the fault, for the most part, it lies in themselves. Nemo
nos interrogat, so few there are that crave the advice of their Teacher, as
that the case of Conscience lies quite neglected: some one or two (perhaps)
when they lie in a cold sweat, they send for a Preacher, and then he must
give them a little Opiate Divinity, that may skin, but not heal or help
the fore a whit.

Let us repent our selves whilst we are lusty and strong, and then we shall
feeele the fruit of it when we lie sick and weak upon our beds. And for
this same late repentance, is S. Augustines note, Poenitentiaquae a moriente
tantum petitur, timeo ne ipsa moriatur: he is afraid it will be dead as soon,
if not sooner, then the party that lies sick.

But true repentance it is the means to right meditation, and right meditation
to hearty prayer; and without hearty prayer it is but in vain to come unto the
Lord: and yet again it is but in vain for us to repent, unless withal we
proceed to feruency of prayer. Caine sorrowed for his sins, when he
confessed his sins were so great, as God could not forgive them. And Judas,
when he cried out, I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood; but yet they
had neither of them grace to ask forgiveness for their sins; which had they
done heartily, and as they ought, I am fully persuaded they should have found
pardon for their great offenses.

Repentance it is the Supersedeas that discharges all bonds of sin; and
Prayer, it is the bucket by which we draw grace from the everlasting
fountain. Let us continue drawing then, till we may assure our selves we have
a good measure of grace within us, and never leave him, who is able to add
more to him, that has the greatest abundance of it in him. Let us fly unto
the Lord by prayer: and since our many sins, like so many fierce Samsons,
have not sticked to murder the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; let our repentant
tears, and humble prayers, like so many Bees, come and suck the honey at the
flowers of his passion: let them ascend up early in the morning, like incense
into his nostrils, and close the afternoon again like an evening sacrifice:
then shall we truly come unto the Lord, and as we ought to do; then shall they
awaken him, though he be fast asleep, and obtain a blessing for us that
offered them up. Then they came unto him and awaked him, saying, Master, Master,

This Title of Master, here, will deserve a little pause: you call me Lord and
Master, says our Savior in the thirteenth of Saint John's Gospel; Ioh. 13.13.
and you do well, for so I am. Is not he Master of them, who is Lord and
Master of Nature it self? unto whom all things both in heaven above, and in
earth beneath, do willingly obey? He is Master of them, for he made them all,
Dixit and facta sunt, says the Psalmist, he spoke but the word, and all things
were made, he commanded and they stood all fast: he did but speak the word,
let the earth bring forth her increase, and also the waters, and presently both
earth and sea, they were replenished with all manner of variety. Brevis sermo,
sed valde vehement, says Saint Ambrose: a short speech it was indeed, says
he, that God spoke; but yet withal it was a speech, that was full of power,
the efficacy of that speech, it brought forth the greatest as well as the
least creatures, and in the same time too: for in the same time the whole was
made, that he was making of a Frogge; Non laborat in maximis Deus, non
fastidit in minimis, says Saint Ambrose, God (says he) did not labor in the
making of the greatest things, nor yet contemn the making of the meanest: he
made all things by his power, and therefore worthily is Master of all.

Was he not worthy to be Master of Man, as well as of other Creatures, when
he made such diverse and contrary Elements for to meet together in one and
the self same body, and accord in one, Fire and Water, Air and Earth, Heat
and Cold, and all in one and the self same place, and yet has so tempered
them together, as that one is the defense and maintenance of the other? Nay
more then this, says Saint Bernard, Mirabilis societas: In man he has made a
wonderful society: for in him Heaven and Earth, Majesty and Baseness,
Excellency and Poverty, he has matched together. What is higher then the
spirit of life? What is baser then the slime of the earth? his soul it was
infused into him, the spirit of life: his body it was made of the dust of the
earth. This was that that made Gregory Nazianzen to break into that same
exclamation of himself, what great and wonderful miracle was within himself,
(...), etc. I am little, and yet I am great; I am humbled, and yet I am exalted;
I am mortal, and yet I am immortal; I am earthly, and yet I am heavenly:
little in body, but great in soul; humble, as being earth, but yet exalted
above the earth; mortal, as he that must dye; immortal, as he that shall rise
again; earthly, as whose body was taken from the earth; heavenly, as whose
soul was breathed feom above. And will not all this then make him well deserve
the Name and Title of Master amongst us?

Yes: But here he has a double Title, Master, Master. What of that? Why he
has a double Mastership: he was their Master, Iure creationis, by the right of
their creation, but much more Master, Iure redemptionis, by right and title of
their redemption: when man had lost himself, and defaced that glorious image
that God at the first had left within him, then came our Savior Christ Jesus
in, a merciful Redeemer, and reconciled his Father and Man together again.
Henceforth let us not repine at the fall of our Grandfather: for Christ our
Savior has made satisfaction for it. Was he cast away for the price of an
Apple? Why yet he is redeemed for a great deal less, he was redeemed in mere
love and pity.

The sixth day of the week, as it is thought, Adam fell (for it is thought
that he fell the same day that he was made) the sixth day of the week again
Adam and his posterity were redeemed from death. The same day that he fell he
was redeemed. And as God in the beginning rested on the seventh day, so Christ
our Savior, says Saint Augustine, sabbatizanit in monumento, kept holy the
Sabbath even in the grave, to teach us to make more account of that day, then
the world usually does in these our times. For, for all that belonged unto the
salvation of man, he finished that upon the cross, before his departure hence,
when he cried, Consummatum est, all is finished. Ioh. 19.30.
John. 19. Then all was performed that was requisite for us; and having
finished his work, he rested as securely in his grave, as the most secure man
of us all does rest in his bed.

And in this redemption which he so kindly performed for us, there are two
things especially to be considered of us, Modus and Fructus, the manner and
the fruit of our redemption.

The Manner, it was wonderful, Exinanitio Dei, says the Apostle, the emptying
of God, the fullness of all things. The emptying of him (I say) and that in
three regards: First, into the flesh. Secondly, unto the death. Thirdly and
lastly, unto the death of the cross. O who can worthily esteem these three as
he ought to do, his worth, his humility, his love unto mankind? That the God
of all Majesty should be clothed with the garment of humane flesh. That he
should consent to dye, and that he should dye so miserable and cursed a death.
Here speech must fail us, and our safest eloquence must be admiration.

Let us sometimes in the fear of God call our selves to account for these
things, and think what great things the Lord has done for every one of our
souls: and then let us be ashamed at our own unthankfulness again, that he
being Lord of all, became obedient and servant for the very worst of us; Of
being rich in all things, became poor and miserable in most that were
necessary; That of the word he became flesh; Of the son of God that he should
become the son of base and mortal man. Let us remember, that though at the
first we were made of nothing, yet that afterward we were not redeemed of
nothing. In six days at the first, God made heaven and earth, and all things
that in them were contained: but in the redemption of Man, our Savior was
three and thirty years and upwards, a working of it upon the earth.

O how much in that time, did he suffer for our sakes? The necessities of the
flesh, the contempt and scorn of the world, the temptations both of the Devil
and of mankind. Can we think that poverty in all that time did not oppress
him? nor shame did not touch him? nor yet the wrath and anger of his Father any
whit amaze him? Certainly, certainly (beloved) the least of all these did touch
him near; and the greatest (that was the fury of his Father) did make him make
that lamentable cry upon the Cross, the like whereof was never heard in Ages
before, nor ever shall be heard again, unto the ending of the world, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Yet thus, O Lord, did thou work the
salvation of Man, and wonderfully toward him has been thy love. Let us
think of these things seriously, let us think of them often; and then I make
no question but we shall think we have great reason to think him a double
Master unto us. And they came unto him and awaked him, saying, Master, Master.

But yet the cause of his double Appellation here in this place, it was the
fear of the Apostles that infused it self into them, and the earnest desire
that they had to be delivered from their imminent danger, was that that made
them double their speeches unto him, Master, Master. What we heartily wish
for, we often repeat. Help, Help, we cry in time of danger, Rescue, Rescue,
in time of distress. So is it here with our Apostles in this place, in this
time of fear, when the storm raged, and the seas went high. Volvuntur vt
aequora montes, as the Poet speaks: one billow tossed them up as high as
heaven, and another suddenly drenched them in the botome of the deep. When life
almost had quite forsaken them, and death was ready to seize upon them, then
they cry unto him, Master, Master.

Qui nescit orare, discat nauigare, says the Latin Proverb: if there be any
so pampred here upon the land, as I am afraid many thousands there are, that
have forgot their duties unto the Lord, never think of him, but when they
borrow his name to swear by: let them go to sea, and if they be not past
grace quite, so that they have not, as the Apostle speaks, Cauteriatam
conscientiam, a seared conscience, that can feel no touch of remorse, he
shall be taught once a day at the least, to call upon the name of the Lord.
And they came unto him, and awaked him, saying, Master, Master, we perish.

Our life, though it be in a dangerous place, as Saint Ambrose tells, Quam diu
in salo isto, tam diu inter naufragia: so long as we live in the sea of this
world, so long also we are in continual danger of shipwreck, to be spoiled,
and we our selves do continually so ouercharge our souls and bodies both,
with sin, as that every day we press deeper and deeper toward the
bottomless pit of hell. Yet such is the friendship that is contracted between
the body and the soul, by the long familiarity and acquaintance each of other,
as that they are loath to part and leave each others company: They desire to
continue longer together, if longer it might be, and they care not what shifts
they use for the enjoying their desire. That made Saint Peter to deny his
Master, because he thought it would call his life in question: And all the
Disciples, for fear of death, withdrew themselves from our Saviors company,
because they saw those friends must part, that had lived so long combined
together. Terrible and fearful it is unto man, to think of the dissolution
of soul and body, Anima absoluitur, corpus resoluitur, as Saint Ambrose
speaks; where the soul is freed, and set at liberty, the body again
resolved into the first principles. This is that which the natural man cannot
endure to hear of; and therefore upon the very thought of it, he is ready
with the Apostles to cry out for help, Master, Master, we perish indeed.

But yet this was not the only cause though of their crying out in this place,
though that might help to set an accent upon it: for they knew that there was
a necessity by nature laid upon the^, once for to dye. Intrasti vt cocires was
a condition annexed to our creation. We must make room for others, as well as
others before have done for us. And so much the Heathen Poet could say, Omnes
vna manet nox, and calcanda semel via lethi: they must not think much to
undergo that which all are enjoined necessarily unto. Equality is the chief
groundwork of equity; and who can complain to be comprehended where all are
contained? especially when they shall consider the extraordinary benefit that
death shall bring with it, viz. the taking away of sinning any further.

Death, it was once laid upon man, as a punishment for sinning, quo die
comederis, etc. what day soever thou shall eat of the forbidden fruit, thou
shall certainly dye. Death there is appointed as the punishment to sin, but
now it is given as a benefit and remedy unto man, to keep him from sinning
any further. Morere ne pecces, dye soon that thou may not sin more against
thy maker. Quod tunc timendum fuit, vt non peccaretur, nunc suscipiendum est,
ne peccetur, says S. Aug. what was once feared, is now a benefit unto
mankind.

But the fear of eternal death was that that did amaze them more then any of
the other particulars spoken of before. To perish both in body and in soul,
and that eternally too; this is that that would make the^ awake him quickly. To
perish when they were but Semi-christiani, half Christians, like Agrippa in
the 26 of the Acts: Act. 26.28
thou perswadest me almost (says he to Paul) to be a Christian: to perish
when they were but newly initiated into the School of Christ, before they knew
the mysteries belonging to their salvation necessarily, was that that made them
cry out aloud. They were ignorant in the fundamental points: for the Holy
Ghost does testify of them in diverse places, That they knew not the
Scriptures, that they understood not that saying of his, that they knew him not
yet to be the Messiah, and then how fearful a matter it was for them to dye
unresolved, you your selves by your selves, may easily judge. This fear here
of eternal perishing, made them cry so earnestly to be delivered from the
fear of death: Master, Master, we perish: in our bodies; but which is
fearful to be thought upon also, we perish everlastingly in our souls in
hell.

In our bodily conflicts here upon the earth, either the sense of pain is
quite taken away by death; or else if our nature be strong and lusty, it soon
in wrestling ouercomes the pains of death; but in this second death the death
of the soul, the grief remains for evermore, that so our nature might be
afflicted without any end, and our nature indures also, that for ever it might
be punished in the endless flames, for transgressing against so infinite a
God: neither shall fail, neither nature nor pain, that so both may be
eternal unto the wicked. The first death does separate the unwilling soul
from the body; but the second death keeps the soul, though much unwillingly,
for ever in pain together with the body; from which pain God for his Christ
Jesus sake, keep us all, Amen. And so we are come to the final conclusion of
these same words. Then he arose and rebuked the wind, and the raging of the
water, and they ceased, and there was a calm.

Hitherto our Savior has been patient in these troubles, and rested himself
quietly in these stormy gusts both of wind and water: but now he begins to be
a Master indeed, and takes upon him both the bridling of the one, and of the
other: he rebukes the wind, and appeases the raging of the troubled water; and
at his rebuke they both cease, and there is a calm.

But before we come to the appeasing of this raging storm, this first word
Then will make us stay a while by the way. Then he arose, etc.

Then. When was that, may some man say? Why when, but when the rage was
greatest, in the midst of the gust, when the winds whistled loud, and the sea
went high: when their ship was full of water, and Mariners and passengers were
all at their wits end: Then he arose and rebuked the wind, and the raging of
the water, etc.

A dangerous time (beloved) when cunning had left them, and the merciless
waves must have mercy upon them: then it was high time for him to awake out of
sleep. The loudness of the winds, and the raging of the waters, they might
both togethet seem to be S. Ieromas bell, that always he thought he heard
ringing in his ears, Surgite mortui, and venite ad iudicium: arise, and come
forth straight way unto Judgment.

A terrible and fearful sound for us, whose lives are nothing else, but as S.
Aug. speaks, splendida peccata, glorious sins, sins all over, whose whole
lives have been subject to the law of sinning: and so S. Paul calls it in the
seventh to the Romans: (...), Romans 7.23
because we have so inured our selves to sinning, even from our cradles, and
do so continually endeavor our selves for to commit sin, as though we were
bound by law to the performance of it. We have been past shame in sinning. And
as Absalom in 2. Sam. 16. committed his folly in the sight of Israel: 2. Sam.
16.22.
so we have not sticked to commit our abominations, at high noone, in the
marketplaces of our streets, as though we did desire to make God a liar, who
calls all sins in general, opera tenebrarum, deeds of darkness, because they
spring and come from the Prince of darkness, and are rewarded in hell, a place
of utter darkness. We (I say) by committing of them in the fight of the Sun,
do as much as in us lies, make them Opera lucis, daily sins; and therefore
unto us, this account were very fearful.

Man (says S. Cyprian) is grown audacious in his sinning, and has steeled
his forehead in committing of them, so that he knows not how to blush when
he is reproved for them. Nullus delinquendi pudor, says he, and sic peccatur,
quafi magis per ipsa peccata placeatur: we are past all shame, says he, in
our finning, and so we do strive with our selves for the committing of them
daily, as though Almighty God were not offended with us for them, but rather
highly pleased and delighted with them.

But from this kind of sin good Lord for his mercy sake deliver us all, to
sin so greedily, as that forthwith we should take a delight and pleasure in
our sinning: for commonly these kind of sins, they have annexed unto them,
duritiem cordis, a hardness of heart: so that if God will reclaim such a
kind of sinner, he must, as it is said in the Gospel, Math. 3.9.
work it out of the very Flint, Math. 3. Ex lapidibus suscitare filios
Abrahae, out of stones he must raise up children unto Abraham: and this
condition there is none but will grant is very dangerous.

To dye in this case will draw a severe judgment indeed upon man: for they
shall be judged with a fearful judgment, whose lives have been free from a
judgment here. Those, I say, that have lived here ill upon the earth, and not
made their peace with their heavenly father before they have gone hence, all
those shall the great judgment oppress, and cast out into utter darkness,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

But this, though it might affright us, as who are guilty of many
transgressions, yet it could no way daunt our Savior at all: for he was not
guilty of the least thought of sin; neither original sin, nor actual
sin could once fasten upon him, his conception and birth being without all
stain, as being conceived by the Holy Ghost: his whole life it was a
satisfaction for actual transgressions, and therefore though both wind and
seas should rage never so terribly, yet he might sleep as secure in the
midst of the storm, as any one of us in the greatest calm and quiet that
may be.

Neither yet were the raging of the winds, or the roaring of the waters, of
sufficient authority to have awaked him, had it not been the cry of the
Disciples that had moved him to pity. Master, Master, we perish, was the
Trumpet that moved him to rouse himself, and take compassion of his forlorn
company.

Their imminent danger made them pray heartily unto their Savior, and their
fear of perishing made them not wax weary in their prayers, but pray until
they awaked him to their rescue. God he loves an earnest admonisher, and is
delighted especially with an importunate suitor; and therefore many times does
deny men their requests at the first, that he might hear them more constant
and fervent unto him in their prayers afterward: constant, as the Apostles
here, who continue their entreaty even unto death, Master, Master, we perish.

And this same duty of prayer it is so natural, as that even the vn-reasonable
creatures do not omit it, but pray in their kinds, Psa. 104. Psa. 104.21.
The Lions suffering hunger, says the Psalmist, they pray unto the Lord, they
seek their meat at God. And so the young Ravens, in the 147. Psalm, the Lord
indeed, says the Prophet feeds them, but first they call upon his name: for so
he says, Psa. 147.9.
Who feedest the young Ravens that call upon thee. And that all excuse may be
taken away from man in this kind, so that ignorance might not be pretended by
him, it is S. Cyprians note, that qui fecit te, docait te etiam and orare: that
he that at the first made man, and fashioned him in his mothers womb, he has
taught him also to call upon his name: he has framed a prayer for him
himself, if perhaps he should be so dull of understanding, as not to be able
to conceive prayer of himself, and commanded him to use it also. When you pray
(says he) say, Our Father, etc.

I marvel what some hot spirits in the world will say to this same speech of
our Saviors here, who would not have his prayer used amongst men, but that
they should pray altogether as the spirit gives them utterance. Here I am sure
we have Christ's Dicite, for their ne dicite, his command against their
prohibition. But I follow my Text.

Math. 7.7.
Our Savior in the seventh Chapter of Saint Matthewes Gospel, in three words,
sets down the whole duty of man in this kind, Pet^, Quare, Pulsa: Ask,
says he, seek, knock. First we must humbly ask those things that are
necessary for us, and yet are wanting unto us: for he withholds them to make
us more earnest in the desiring of them. Deus non dat, nisi petenti, ne dee non
cupienti, says Saint Augustine, God (says he) will not give us any thing,
unless at the first we heartily beg them at our fathers hands, lest he
should seem to give such things as we do not esteem and care for, and those
that we shall ask of him, he will give us in the greatest abundance. Let us
ask of him therefore, and be not tongue-tyed; and ask confidently also, as
those that are sure to receive at his hands. And in this kind it was a good
speech of Seneca the Philosopher, who wills us in our prayers to be confident
and assured. Audacter, says he, Deum roga nil illum de alieno rogaturus: Ask
boldly, says he, of God what thou stand in need of, and would have
granted from his Majesty, assuring thy self of this, that whatsoever thou
want, he has of his own, and shall be beholding unto no other for the
gratifying of thee in thy request. So then let us ask of him.

But yet that is not all: for if he do not grant us at the first moving of our
suite, yet we must not wax weary, but continue on in our course of prayer. And
besides our asking, a further pains is required at our hands, we must be
contented to seek a blessing for our selves. We must not only pray, but we
must labor also, and so Saint Augustine teaches us when he says, Pro quibus
orandum, proijs etiam and laborandum est: For those things that we would pray
unto God for, for the same things we must earnestly labor: For God will not
take all the pains himself, and leave us idle in the mean time, to depend on
him: and therefore it is the Apostles counsel in the twelfth of the Hebrews,
Heb. 12.12
to pull up our weak hands, that hang heavy down, and to bow our feeble
knees, which are not accustomed to bear our bodies weight in the service and
worship of the Lord our Maker.

Nor yet are we at an end so, but having taken pains for to seek, and by our
search having found out the right way, there remains a door whereby we must
enter, and that door stands not open to all comers, come they that come
will; but there we must bestow our third pains, which is to knock, that so
we may get entrance at the last. We may see what pains our Savior CHRIST
JESUS does take for us here: First, he intreates, and begges of us that we
would be good unto our selves. Secondly, when we list not to hearken unto his
voice, but continuing in our old course of sinning, we have quite lost both
the right way, and our selves also, he seeks up, and brings us out of that
Labyrinth, which we of our selves were never able to get out of: and when he
has found us, he stands and knockes at the door of every one of our hearts,
and does desire to be let in by us.

Considering then what our Savior does unto us for our behoof, let us
bethink what he again requires at our hands: to ask fervently, to seek
earnestly, to knock forcibly at the door of his mercy, that so we may be let
in to his everlasting kingdom.

If God then hears us not, at the first knock, we must not presently be like
unto King Saul, who because God answered him not either by Vrim or Thummin, 1.
Sam. 28.7.
went straightwaies from him, and asked counsel of a Witch: We must not
limite God his time to come and help us, but that must make us knock more
violently. Importunity is a chief means to obtain our desires: and an
example of it, our Savior has left us in the Gospel, of the unjust Judge,
who though he neither feared God, Luke 18.5.
nor reverenced Man, yet because he was importuned, he would do Justice.

Nay, since we are entered in thus far, we will go a little further with
holy Augustine, for (says he) Deus non permittit solum, vt potas, sed minatur
etiam, si non petas: God he does not only permit us for to beg those things
that are necessary for us, but he does severely threaten us also, if we shall
not ask of his Majesty. Nay, ask of him, and ask of him only, or else he
will be angry with whosoever shall not ask of him; as he was with the King
of Israel, who left him, and went to inquire of Beel-zebub, for the recovery of
his health again. 2. King. 1.3
Is it not because there is not a God in Israel that ye go to inquire of
Beel-zebub the God of Eckron, now therefore, thus says the Lord, thou shall
not come down from that bed on which thou art gone up, but shall surely die.

And our Savior in the 16 of Saint John's Gospel, Ioh. 16.24.
he was offended with his Disciples for not asking of him: Hitherto, says our
Savior, ye have asked me nothing: It seems therefore that he would have us
ask, and when we do ask we must not cease our suites, but say with Jacob,
Non dimittamte, Genesis 32.26
I will not let thee go, before thou have bestowed a blessing upon me: We
must be instant upon him as the Ca^anitish woman was for the recovery of her
beloved daughter, Mat. 15.28.
who would not be put off, by any answer our Savior could give, until she
had gotten a release for her child: We must be earnest with him, as he to
borrow bread at midnight of his friend, Luke 11.8.
who would take no nay. We must be importunate, as the Widow with the unjust
Judge, that we may seem to weary him with our importunity, Luke 18.5.
Luke 18. And then we shall be sure to receive a good blessing from him. A good
measure well shaked and heaped, and thrust together, which God grant. Amen.

He arose, But when? Why when the Disciples had done their uttermost, when they
had showed their humility in asking, perseverance in seeking, importunity in
knocking. Humility in Master, they were his servants, and he their liege, Lord
and Master: Perseverance in coming unto him, They came unto him: Importunity,
we perish: And they came unto him saying, Master Master we perish, and by
this importunity of theirs, they obtained their request, Then he arose, etc.

We do not read in this same Story, nor in any other of the Evangelists that
do record it, that either the Apostles, or Disciples of our Savior, took any
other course, for the safe-gard of themselves and of their lives (though most
of them were Fishermen, and therefore knew better how to bestirre themselves in
a storm then Land men do) but only prayer; no labor is mentioned, save only
their pains of coming unto him, and the reason of it is plain: Art is past,
when Nature is let loose, when both winds and seas have broken their bounds,
then they knew their best recourse was to their prayers for humane labor was
all but vain.

And hearty prayer, we know, was always reckoned the first and the last help
of the godly man: Psalm. 33.21
so David in their persons, says, In nomine sancto eius, speranimus, we have
trusted in his holy name, and God has been their great deliverer.

But yet so far forth we must rely upon the Lord, as we our selves withal
be not wanting unto our selves, while hope remains. For, for to set our selves
down, and lay all upon the Divine Providence, is just the lazy knave in
Isidor, who when his Cart was overthrown, would needs have his God Hercules to
come down from heaven, and raise it up again, whilst he himself would be a
spectator of it, and sit by and give aim. Whilst there is means left we must
be content, together with our prayers, for to use them lawfully, and when all
earthly lawful means fail, and forsake us, then we must fly wholly unto
Gods protection.

Reason teaches us thus much, that when we may hope to find a spring then we
must also bestow our pains in digging for it: And when the soil will bear
corn, then we must use our skill and labor in tilling of it. When Elisha was
in a little Village, not able to defend him from the Assirians power, he had
horses and Chariots of fire round about him, to defend him from their force, 2.
Kings 6. but when he was in Samaria a Town of Garrison, 2. King. 6.17.
then when the King of Israel sent to fetch his head, he said to those that
were with him, shut the door, as it is in the same chapter, 32. verse. So our
Savior Christ in the wilderness miraculously fed whole multitudes, that came
unto him: But when he was in the City again, he sent his Disciples forth for
to buy their necessary provision. John 4.8.
So we must all labor whilst there is any hope, and when humane help fails,
then fly unto the protection of the Almighty: So we see prayer it is the first
and the last help of the righteous man, to begin with God and to end in him.

The wicked sinner, he would gladly be the righteous man's Ape, and imitate him
in this duty of his, but that shall not be at the first entrance into his
business, but at the last gasp of his life, when they lie howling upon their
beds, says the Prophet Hos. in his 7. chapter, Hos. 7.14.
and yet all is but in apish imitation neither, for their heart, even then, is
far from the Lord, as it is in the same Verse of the same Chapter: They have
not cried unto me, says the Lord, with their hearts, when they howled upon
their beds, and therefore as their hearts in their extremities, were far from
God, so was he far also from their deliverance. These here with the Prophet
David they cried, De profundis, out of the deep unto him, out of the deep of
the waters, but more especially* out of the deep and bottom of their hearts,
and therefore obtained pardon for all their lives.

The mouth, here perhaps amongst men, may make a show of Religion, and the hand
glory in ostentation of the gifts that it has given, but yet the heart is the
jewel which the Lord looks after. There may be hypocrisy in the mouth that
speaks, and vainglory in the hand that gives, but if the heart be upright
and entire, that is an acceptable sacrifice unto the Lord: And therefore the
Lord, by Solomon, asks neither the mouth nor the hand, but the heart; Pro.
23.26.
Fili da mihi cor: My son give me thy heart. As thou give as much as the
Lord requires, if thou give him thy heart; so if thou give all that thou
have, and keep thy heart back from him, thou give nothing at all, that he
desires, or will vouchsafe to accept from thee. The Apostles cry here, it came
from the heart, from the bottom of the heart, Master, Master we perish, and
by that they obtained pardon for their company: then he arose, etc.

Then he arose: He could have risen sooner; had it pleased him, but he would
not, he would first have them to supplicate unto him, and then he would
arise. Diogenes Laertius tells us of some mighty men, that are much in this
vain, they have aures in pedibus, their ears in the soles of their feet; can
hear none speak but such as he suppliant at their foot for mercy; but that
is out of their pride and arrogance, who will be known to be in place and
authority over their brethren. Those they are of Caines generation, who built
him a City, Vt Dominaretur in ea; that he might dominere in it, so these they
get them aloft that the Golden Calfe may be adored: But this of our Saviors
here, it was far otherwise, it was their duties all to fall prostrate, before
his Majesty, and then he knew, it was his part to help them Then he arose, etc.

His sleep as it was voluntary unto him, in this place, as heretofore I have
told you, he could sleep when he list, and watch as long as he list, and yet
no prejudice unto his nature: So he could rise also when himself pleased from
sleep again. As his death was voluntary, and from himself, oblatus est quia
voluit, he was offered up unto death, because himself would dye; and so much
he professes of himself in the tenth of John, Ioh. 10.18.
No man (says he) takes my life from me, but I lay it down of my self: So
here, dorminit quia voluit: he slept because he would sleep, and when it
pleased him he could awake again.

This then it may be a lesson for headstrong man, not to be his own caruer in
his business, and appoint God his time, when to rouse himself: for he knows
his time better then man can appoint it to him; but with patience he must
possess his soul, and when he sees what is convenient for him, then he will
rouse himself to his delivery. Indeed the ship in the mean time may labor
and roll, the wind storm and blow, the seas rage and swell; yet without Gods
good will and pleasure, not any one hair of their heads shall perish. Noah's
Arc, we make no question, was tumbled and tossed in those mighty waters, but
we do not read that either it was sunk or overthrown. Genesis 25.22.
Rebecca she was pulled and pained, and even rent in sunder, by the contention
of her babes within her womb, but yet she suffered no abortion. Mat. 7.24.
The house founded upon a Rock it suffered both the violence of the storm,
and the rage of the waters, and yet it was not overthrown. The Woman in Apoc.
12. Apoc. 1.22
she was persecuted by the red Dragon, and followed by him from place to place,
but she was not devoured of her fearful adversary. So we, if we shall rest
our selves in patience, and refer all to the government of God, He in His good
time will deliver us out of all our troubles, he will as he did here unto the
Apostles, raise himself up to our defense, Then he arose, etc.

And rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they ceased, and there
was a calm. Now are we come to the evident demonstration of our Saviors
Divinity.

In the former parts of the Text, we saw him as a mere natural Man, meek
and gentle, not striving for superiority, or desirous to command: He enters
into a Ship with his Disciples, and being entered lays himself down, for his
rest and quiet; He opens not his mouth, either to control his own company,
or any other that were in the ship.

So was His whole life, meek and gentle; in his birth, says S. Ber. Parua
lans, quia parui laus, there was but little praise, because it was but the
praise of a little One, Esaias 9.6.
Unto us a child is born; there his Majesty is not extolled, but yet his
humility is above all we are able to speak, to be commended.

Exceedingly to be commended indeed of us, especially if we shall consider
Him as he has deserved of every one of us. For Him that S. Paul saw in his
own nature, the knowledge and wisdom of God himself: Him for our sakes, the
Prophet David saw lessened below the Angels: Him that Daniel saw sitting on the
Throne, and thousand thousands ministering before Him: Him the Prophet Jeremy
saw again conuersing upon earth with wretched man: Him that Ezekiel saw the
Lord of Hosts: Him the Prophet Esaias saw in shape like a Leaper, meek and
humble, and all for our benefit, and therefore above all to be commended of
us.

And in this gentle fashion, not being provoked by us, who has deserved so
much good at our hands, He comes nearest unto his own Divine Nature and
Essence; For God in his own Nature and Essence is mild and gentle, and if he
be not overmuch provoked, will not break forth into rage and fury. The
Disciples that were of a fiery Spirit, they were most unlike, and contrary to
their Master, for he does not delight in sending down hurtful fires: He is
called the Day Star, to inlighten, 2. Pet. 1.19. G^n. 3.8.
not the Dogstar to scorch and burn. And God is said for to have walked in the
Cool of the day, not in the Heat of the day; and as it were also, to have
fetched many turns, thereby to cool himself, before he would call his
adversary to account: And when he would speak unto Eliah, He showed himself
neither in the strong wind, 2. Kings 19.12.
nor in the earthquake, nor yet in the fire, but in a small still voice: And
all this to teach me^ what their duty is to do, to be kind and merciful as
their heavenly Father of Himself is merciful; and so the Saints in former
times have professed of themselves. David says of himself that he was like
unto a weaned child: Jacob compares himself unto a worm: Our Savior, his
Disciples unto little Children: Saint Paul would have his Corinthians meek and
gentle, forgiving each other, as God for Christ's sake had forgiven them. In a
word, as God himself forgiving our iniquities, and pardoning all our sins;
He hitherto was meek and gentle, but now Increpauit ventis, He rebuked the
wind and the raging of the waters, etc.

He rebuked the wind: Why the wind we all know is a lawless creature, and
will not be kept under, and so our Savior Christ speaks of it, where he
says, spiritus spirat vbi vult, Ioh. 3.8.
The wind blows where it lists, and who is he that shall control it?
True indeed, who is he that can control it, if he be but only man: but if
the wind shall be ouer-bold and saucy with his Lord and Maker, and exceed the
bounds and limits that he has appointed it, it shall have his due check as
well as any other of his creatures, He rebuked the winds.

But how did he rebuke them, may some man ask? What, did he send his letters
of defiance unto the winds, as Xerxes did when they crossed his intendments?
Or did he cause fetters and shackles to be cast into the water, as the same
Xerxes did, and make it take the Bastinado, when the angry Hellespont would not
grant him passage for himself and Soldiers? How did he rebuke them? Why, how
should he rebuke them but by his Word? For He that made the winds, and sent
them out by his Word, by his Word also was able to countermand them, when it
pleased him.

The Heathen Poets fancied to themselves a God of the winds, Aeolus, who in a
Cave kept them all together, and as he was either pleased, or displeased with
Mankind, so he let them out and called them in again, either for their
profit, or to wreake his anger and displeasure on them: But Christ the only
true Aeolus, does not let them out to range at their own pleasure, but when
they are forth he rules them as he lists: so the Prophet David tells us Ps. 104.
Who lays the beams of his Chambers in the waters, Psalm. 104.3.
and makes the Clouds his Chariot, and walks upon the wings of the wind:
Both winds and waters then, are at his command, and as it pleases him he
forces them forwards or keeps them back, for the benefit of his.

The company of the righteous, they are Gods especial care that he looks
after, and so much the Poet does reveal: Cura Deum di sunt and qui coluere,
colantur, and therefore rather then they shall take any harm, he will be
present to work a miracle for their relief: he will rebuke both the winds and
the waters, and make them calm, and al for their sakes. To work miracles, now
adays amongst us, though it may seem strange unto us, because it is a
commanding of the creatures against the course of nature, as to cause the wind
to cease with a word, and to quiet the Seas only with a beck, be beyond
humane conceit, yet with God for his Elect sake, they are as Philo Iud^
speaks, but Iudicra, mere toys, and trifles; nay, he will do greater matters
then these for such as be his: he will divide the Sea for his servants to go
through, and drown his enemies that follow after: He will rain down bread
and flesh from heaven for them, in a time of dearth, when the earth will not
afford it them: He will bring water out of the hard Rock, when they shall be
in a barren and dry ground, where no water is; Out of very stones, to raise up
children unto Abraham, is easy and at hand with him to do.

And if any man shall ask me the reason of these so great and miraculous
works of his, I answer suddenly again with S. August. Bonitas and gratia
Dei, the mercy and love of God, wherewith from all eternity he has loved his
Elect, has provoked him to do them all.

Let us then all, as many as profess our selves to belong to him, magnify
this great God for this extraordinary goodness of his: and as we wear the
badges of Christ Jesus on our foreheads, so let us faithfully adore him in our
hearts; and then though dangers threaten, and storms arise, yet there shall
appear at the last a quiet calm, a calm and quietness of conscience here,
and an eternal calm in the world to come. The which quietness both here and
there, that we all may be partakers of, He grant us that here caused this
calm to his Apostles, Christ Jesus the righteous, to whom with the Father and
the holy Spirit, three Persons, and one Eternal, Almighty, and Everliving God,
be all Praise, Honor, and Glory, this day and for ever. Amen.

Errata.
Page 2. line 9. for good, read God, p. 16 l. 24. mementate r. mementote: p.
22. l. 15. (...). p. 29. l. 20. quae r. qua: l. ead. quae r. qua. p. 35. l. 3.
fugero r. fugere: p. ead. l. 27. to r. two: p. 36. l. 24. loather r. loathest:
p. 57. s. 2. summum r. summam: p. 59. l. 14. (...) r. (...). p. 63. l. 2. iife
r. life to. p. 97. l. 26. whole r. whale.

FINIS.

