THE TRADES Increase*

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold by Walter ^^rre. 16^^.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I commend unto you a Polidorus his Treasure; yet without either
murder or theft, but else as rich. So I confess without leave, neither may
the Author be offended, if what I have borrowed for my private use, I have
paid to the service of the Commonwealth, in that what he intended at the
instance of one, being written, is behouefull o every one.

One Pithius, a crafty Sicilian, finding an honest Roman Gentleman, called
Canius, Desirous of a pleasant Garden in the Island, he invited him to his; and
conducted diverse poor Fishermen to attend that day his Banks, with Boats and
Nets; and to bring in plenty of fish, and to lay them at his feet. The Guest
asking what that meant, was answered by the Huxter, That it was the Royalty of
that place, there was more fish thereabouts, then in any other stream of
Syracuse. And as often as he repaired thither, that service was due, and done
unto him. The poor Gentleman was taken with the Nets, and presently deals
with the owner for the Garden, who suffering himself to be much improtuned, at
the length was entreated to sell it full dearly: The day following, the buyer,
disposed to show the magnificence of his purchase, inuiteth diverse friends to
accompany him thither, and missing the concourse and confluence of his expected
homagers, the Fishermen (For there was neither Boat, Oar, Net, or Fin of fish
to be seen) asks his new neighbors whether it were a holiday for Fishermen?
The plain folk answered, None they knew of; and further wondered at the former
resort, for they never saw before Boats or Fishermen there. In a word, he was
cosened. But it is not so in this fishing Project, to the which you are now
invited frankely and plainly: Nullae hic piscatorum ferae; we may always fish
here without fear of any Sicilian purchase, or scarcity of the Roman
Macrobius his Table, where there was Piscis, but paucoru^ hominum. Here is
fish, the King of fish, the meat and Merchandise of both remote and neighbor
Nations. To persuade hereto, the Author has dealt by way of comparison, not
thereby to derogate from other Trades, but to advance this Mystery, and
indeed, to show that they may all receive true nourishment from this nursery.
Let therefore no man take that with the left hand which is offered with the
right. And though, by the opinion of some of understanding in those faculties,
there is a reasonable survey given of our Sea-trades, State, and Breeding; and
out of others judgments, there is even Candor animi in all particulars,
without either suspicion of any personal taxation offered, or any States blot
sus-spected: Yet I desire also to profess the Authors true and fair meaning
herein, and to make good the ouersights that may be committed in the
particular trauerse, with that of the Poet, Vbi plurima nitent, Non ego paucis
offender maculis. Of the subject it self I will only say thus much, That if
Aurum portans has been always welcome, hence you may receive gold, pay the
Kings duties, and do your Country service; and so I leave these businesses to
their own abilities, and take my leave of you with this conclusion of them.

Nisi peracta luduntur. I. R.

The Trades Increase.
SEEING by chance a late Treatise entitled, Englands way to win wealth, etc.
and being easily invited to read the same, even for the Titles sake; I must
confess my self so affected with the project, that I presently resolved to
go a fishing, withal concluding with my self, that as there is no fishing to
the sea: so there was no fish in the sea like to the Herring: and for that my
estate is but mean, and my self a fresh water Soldier, it requires cost,
and I would have company: the sea is large enough, and has room enough for us
all, and there are Herrings enough to make us all rich: for that I say a man
may run a course this way to enrich himself, to strengthen his country, to
enable his Prince more honestly then many late sea-courses can warrant us in,
more easily, more safely, more certainly then any other sea-course can persuade
us to whatsoever; I could not choose, out of my allegiance to my Prince, out of
my duty to my Country, out of my love to my neighbor, but commend these
motives concerning the same to a further consideration, consisting, In the
Necessity, Facility, Profit, and Use of fishing.


The necessity out of want of Shipping. Mariners. Imploiment of me^.



As concerning ships, it is that which every one knows, and can say, they are
our weapons, they are our ornaments, they are our strength, they are our
pleasures, they are our defense, they are our profit; the subject by them is
made rich, the kingdom through them strong, the Prince in them mighty; in a
word, by them in a manner we live, the kingdom is, the king reigns. If the
sea fail, the Venetians they fall; and if we want ships, we are dissolved.
Esops Shepherd kept his flock well so long as he nourished his dog; but
when the Wolf had persuaded him that he was superfluous, he cosened him
easily of all his sheep. It is the kingdoms case in shipping, which made that
heroical King of Denmark at his view of the Kings majesty's Navy at Chattam,
confess he then saw the strength of England, the greatness of our King, In
sola tanta est fiducia Naue.

Want of shipping.
Concerning the want of shipping, though to press the consideration thereof be
very material, yet the point it self is to be handled very tenderly: for that
as I have no pleasure to touch our own wounds, so I am loath in this case to
discover our own wants; for that I fear the enemy will sooner take the
advantage of them, then we will be stirred up thereby to make supply. To give
therefore the true and faithful subject a dark Lantern whereby he may
only see himself, and he not be seen, setting the contemplation of the Kings
royal Navy aside, so mighty, so well conditioned, which has so many good
Officers, and such worthy Ouer-seers, which is so chargeable to his Majesty to
maintain, as I hope it will never be safe for the enemy to meddle withal:
setting, I say, this aside, our Merchants Navy consists in the Ships For
The Straights. Spain. France. Hambrough and Middlebrough. The Sound.
Newcastle. Island. New found Land. The East Indies.



I have not named Moscouie, because we have in a manner lost that Trade, the
troubles of that kingdom, and our desire of security having deprived us
thereof, which we may the more lament, because I have heard Merchants affirm,
that in these uncomfortable days of aduenturing, it was one of their best
Trades, and with no small marvel yet vpheld, and most prouidently followed by
the Hollanders, The Country being afflicted with war, and the Hollanders will,
petere cibum e flamma.
we being scarred away from so good and profitable a trade, as birds from
Cherrietrees, with the show of dead carcasses, or shout of boys, whilst other
lusty and plumpe laddes have wililie beat away the children, beat down the
scarre crows, and stolen the fruit away, to their great gain, and our
disgrace, there repairing not thither above two Ships English in stead of
seventeen of great burden for the company formerly, besides Enterlopers, to
the great decay of our Merchants and shipping: whereas the Hollander (according
to a credible report made) between the Ward-house and the Eastward, at
Tippenie, Kilden, Olena, and the River Cole at Colmograue, and at Saint
Nicholas in Russia, had above thirty five sails of their Ships the last
year. Happily some will say, that they made so poor a voyage that they had
been better kept themselves at home; and it is very likely, yet the year
before, they had some thirty sail, and now this year they have again
repaired their Navy, renewed their adventure, and sent near as many, as
neither dismayed with troubles, nor yet discouraged with loss; and to make it
the more strange that they should thus prevent our trade, and increase their
own: as it was after us that they came thither even by leave, as it were, to
gleane with our Reapers, (for the fields were ours) the discovery of the Land,
and Trade wholly ours, found out by Chanceler and Willoughby, Primo Edw. 6.
and ever since continued by our Merchants) so again their best Trade thither,
is maintained even by our own commodities, as Tin, Lead, Course-clothes and
Kerseis: the inconvenience whereof, together with the prevention, I leave to
the sensible consideration, to the sufficient ability of the Moscouie Merchant,
who I fear can scarce hear me, being (as I said) gone so far as the
East Indies; and if I should send to him, I fear I should not find him at
leisure, having thither transported much of the Moscouie Staple. For the
Merchants that formerly used the Moscouie Trade are now there seated; and
because as we know it is warmer there, and as they find it, it is very
profitable, we will also by Compass travel thither our selves; that as
Valeria a fair Lady, answering to Scilla in the Theater, being demanded, Why
she pressed so near, said; That thereby she might have so me of his
felicity; so by being in their company, we may communicate with them of their
good fortunes, or commune with them of our wants.

The Straights. So then, to begin our journey at the noblest place for worth,
and one of the newest in knowledge, the worthiest in former remembrance, the
worst in present reputation, for the bottom of the Straights, the first in
name, and whilome a very material business of Merchandise: I do find this Trade
but easy, and the difficulties many and new, the Trade it self being lessened
by the circumuention of the East-Indie navigations, which fetches the Spices
from the well head; and I find the rest of the benefits alayed, by charges, by
insultation of Pirates, and infidelity of servants. These make presents and
profit of their Masters goods abroad, so far, that some of the owners become
lame at home: Pirates meet with that whereby others are extremely hindered, and
by the charges the rest are exceedingly discouraged, so that the Merchants
return is but poor, and the navigations much lessened, the employment
thitherward failing in near thirty ships, and those of such burden, that
they were of defense and renown to the kingdom. I heard a worthy Merchant in
his time Thomas Cordell of London say, that on the first beginning of the
Turkey Trade, his self with other Merchants, having occasion to attend the
late Queens Majesty's Privy Council about that business, they had great
thanks and commendations for the ships they then builded of so great a burden
for those parts, by the Earls of Bedford and Leicester, and other honorable
Personages, with many encouragements to go forward (even to use their own
words) for the Kingdoms sake, notwithstanding it was then to their great
benefit likewise, whose ordinary returns at the first were three for one,
which I speak not out of envy. For as all callings are, and ought to be
maintained through the profit that arises thereby, labors rewarded, dangers
recompensed by the sweat and sweet of gain; nay, in our most Liberal
Professions, the Divine for his spiritual nourishment has temporal food;
the Physician for the care of the body asks the comfort of the purse; and the
Lawyer must be paid for his Plea: so Merchants of all Companies the most
liberal, are likewise of all sorts the most worthy to gain, Vt qui per
vniuersum orbem discurrunt, mare circumlustrantes and aridam; to use that
hopeful Prince in his time King Edward the sixth his words in a Letter to
foreign Princes, in Sir Hugh Willoughbie his behalf. Being bound for
discoueries Prim. Ed. 6.
But to end my long Parenthesis, I speak it I say out of pity, to see now the
return so mean, the Merchant so discouraged, the shipping so diminished: and
to conclude this point without love or anger, but with admiration of our
neighbors the now Sea-herrs, See-herren.
the Nation that get health out of their own sickness, whose troubles begot
their liberty, brought forth their wealth, and brought up their strength, that
have out of our leauings gotten themselves a living, out of our wants make
their own supply of Trade and shipping there; they coming in long after us,
equal us in those parts in all respects of privilege and port; that have
deuanced us so far in shipping, that the Hollanders have more then one
hundred sail of ships that use those parts, continually going and returning,
and the chiefest matters they do lade outward, be English Commodities, as
Tin, Lead, and Bailes of such like stuff as are made at Norwich.

For the rest of the Straights, one side, as the coast of Barbary, serves only
for places and Cities of refuge, not after the Divine Leuiticall law, when one
has killed a man by chance there to be succored: but after that diabolical
Alcoran, when any have robbed and murdered abroad, thither they may repair, be
in safety, and enjoy.

The other side, as Naples, Genoa, Ligorne, and Marseilles, employ some twenty
sail, and they most with Herring. For the Ports near to the Straights mouth,
as Malega, etc. we have some store of shipping, as about thirty sail, that
begin in June to set forth some for Ireland, to lade Pipestaues in their way to
Malega, they returning Malega wines. But the Hollanders likewise have found out
that Trade, and be as busy amongst the Irish as our selves for Pipe-staues:
nay, by your leave, they have been too busy there of late with some of our
poor Country-mens wind-pipes; but that is besides the matter here. But for
Maleg a it self, the Inhabitants there have through our plentiful resort
thither, planted more store of Vines, so that on our recourse thither, our
merchants have withdrawn themselves much from Cherris.

Spain. For Andalusia, Quantado, Lisborne, Pertugall, it is easily known what
shipping we have there by our Trade, which is but mean, consisting in Sack,
Sugar, Fruit, and west-Indie Drugs, which may employ some twenty ships. Amongst
these Cherris Sackes are likewise brought into England, especially in Flemish
Bottomes.

For the bringing in from thence any store of salt by us, it is excepted
against, we being by report furnished principally by the Hollanders of most of
the salt that our Fisher Towns do use for the salting of Island fish, and all
other Fish for Herring and Staple-fish, as the Ports of London, Colchester,
Ipswich, Yarmouth, Linne, Hull, Scarbrough, can testify. Albrough men were
wont to bring it in, especially employing some thirty or forty Sail belonging
to it, of some seven or eight score, or two hundred Tun; which for the most
part, were set on work all the year long, with transporting of coals from
Newcastle to France, and fetching salt from thence; which Trade is now much
decayed with France, by the double diligence of the Hollanders, who serve us
principally from Spain.

France. For our Trade to Bordeaux, it is lightly as great as ever it was: For
I do not think there was ever more Wine drunk in the Land. Yet that voyage
appears not to be so beneficial in regard of the small rate that the Owners
and Seamen have thither-ward. France may every way employ, and those most
small vessels, some threescore ships and barks.

Hambrough and Middlebrough. To Hambrough and Middlebrough there are belonging
six or seven ships to each place, and they lade for the Company (and are called
Appointed Ships) every three months in all the year, there may be laden some
thirty odd Ships, and they but 14 or 15 bodily. But as they make, as is
said, two voyages the Ship, how it stands with them, or how they will stand,
it is uncertain in regard of the manner of the altering of Trading with their
cloth. Once for certain the Merchant adventurers ships have been always
formerly the sure stay of Merchants services both for their readiness,
goodness, and number of shipping touching the commonwealths affairs.

The Sound. For Danske, Melvin and Quinsbrough, there are not above five or
six ships of London, that use those places, as many mote of Ipswich, and so
likewise from Hull, Linne, and Newcastle, the like proportion resorteth thither
for Trade. These make some two returns in the year: but in all those places
the Hollanders do abound, and bring in more commodities by five times to us,
then our own shipping. And for Liefland, the Narue, Rye, and Revel, the
Hollanders have all the Trade in a manner; the commodities from these former
places being Corn, Flax, Sope-ashes, Hemp, Iron, Wax, and all sorts of
Deal.

For Norway we have not above five; and they above forty sail, and those
double or treble our burden even for the City.

Newcastle. The next is Newcastle Trade, and for certain the chiefest now in
esse, for maintenance of shipping, for setting Sea-fearing men on work, and
for breeding daily more, there may be about some two hundred sail of Caruiles,
that only use to serve the City of London, besides some two hundred more that
serve the seacoast towns throughout England, small and great, as Barques and
other shipping of smaller burden, and more might easily be: for hither even to
the Mines mouth, come all our Neighbor Country Nations with their Ships
continually, employing their own shipping and Mariners. I doubt me whether if
they had such a treasure, they would not employ their own shipping. The French
sail hither in whole Fleetes, some forty or fifty sail together, especially
in Summer, serving all their Ports of Picardie, Normandy, and Britain, even
as far as Rochel and Bourdeaux, with their own ships and sailers from
Newcastle. So they of Breame, Embden, Holland and Zealand do serve all
Flaunders, and the Archdukes Countries, whose shipping is not great: These
paying no more then his Majesty's own natural subjects, if they transport any
coals. Which imposition, say our men, made our Country men forbear their
carrying any more Coals abroad, because the Frenchmen would not give above
their old rate: and which was worse, thereby they sold away their ships, some
to France, some to Spain, some to other Countries. Whereby sure their faults
are more apparent then their ill fortune, in that though their gain was less
at the instant, by the imposition then formerly; yet to leave the Trade, argued
neither good spirits, nor great understanding, nor any especial good mind to
their Country. For whence I pray you came such a necessity to leave the Trade
and to give over shipping, as if they could not live thereby; when presently
foreign Nations fell to the Trade themselves, as is formerly set down, and
fetch away our coals on the same terms which we do refuse? And by report,
notwithstanding the five shillings imposed, the French do sell in France one
Chauldron of coals for as much money as will buy three or four of Newcastle.
Had they held to with patience, either they might have brought the stranger to
their price, or else by due order and discreet fashion opened the inconueniency
to the state, of the strangers stomach in refusing their Coal, and fetching
them their selves: so as they might easily have wearied them, and won their
Trade and gain again; whereas now they are beggard, our Country disfurnisht
of shipping. The stranger keeping his coin at home, brings hither bare and
base commodities, their shipping and Mariners are employed and increased; and
notwithstanding the Argus eyes of the Searcher, carry gold away with them,
always bringing more in stock with them, then they carry away in commodities.

For to make a motion to have this five shillings excused in our own Nation,
is rather profitable then necessary, in regard we see the stranger thriueth
notwithstanding it, and it being done out of his Majesty's royal prerogative,
and ex causa lucratiua, as is apparent by what the stranger gains; and the
like is willingly embraced here in other transportations, as Beer, etc. were,
me thinks, undutiful likewise. But to mention a motion very lately made, and
generally amongst his Majesty's loyal subjects embraced; Might it please his
Majesty to make and ordain a Staple Town in England for Sea-coale, and we
have many fit places, and Harbors more near and proper then that of Tinmouth,
at Newcastle (and herein as I am bound in affection to wish well to London, so
I must, out of many men's judgments, commend Harewich, statio been fida
Carinis, and then lying fit for the Low Countries, and indeed open to all
Nations by the benefit of the large sea which washes it) whereby strangers
shall be restrained from further Trade to Newcastle, and shall all repair to
the said Staple Town to fetch their Coals: Besides that it would be an
exceeding benefit to his Majesty, it would likewise help us in this our
complaint of want of shipping. For by this means our English bottomes bringing
all the Coals to the Staple Town, shall not only be set on work, but
increase will follow in Shipping. The Venetians sometime passed being out-gone
by those of Zant in their custom, drew the Trade from the Grecians, and
planted as it were, a Colonie of Curranes at Venice. If for a little custom,
and to pull down their suspected subjects swelling minds, they did so, why
should not his Majesty for the increase of his Shipping, and the releiuing of
the prostrate estate of his faithful and humble subjects, take this
warrantable course?

Island. Island voyage entertaineth 120 ships and barks.

New found land New found Land employeth some 150 sail, from all parts, of
small ships, but with great hazard; and therefore that voyage, feared to be
spoiled by heathen and savage, as also by Pirates.

East Indies. Now follows the consideration of the East Indie Trade, into
whose seas, not only the River of Volga, as before you heard, disemboqueth it
self, but even the bottom of the Straights is emptied to fill up those gulfes,
and not so only, but besides that many of our best Merchants have transported
their Staples thither; it has also begot out of all Callings, Professions, and
Trades, many more new Merchants. Then where there is increase of Merchants,
there is increase of Trade; where Trade increases, there is increase of
Shipping; where increase of Shipping, there increase of Mariners likewise: so
then rich and large East Indies. The report that went of the pleasing notes of
the Swannes in Meander flood, far surpassing the records of any other birds
in any other places whatsoever, drew thither all sorts of people in great
confluence, and with great expectation to hear, and enjoy their sweet
singing. When they came thither, they found in stead of fair white Swans,
greedy Ravens, and devouring Crows; and heard, in stead of melodious harmony,
untuneable and loathsome croaking. In indignation that they were so received
and deceived, in stead of applauding, they hissed; and of staying, fled away.
You are now brave East Indies, Meander flood, your Trade is the singing of
Swannes, which so many journey so far to enjoy. God forbid you should be
found so discolored, and we so ill satisfied. And howsoever that I may be sure
to avoid any detraction, whereby my nature might have any imputation, or by
calling up more spirits into the circle then I can put down again, I might
incur some danger, and be taxed likewise of indiscretion, for that we only
hitherto have complained of the want of Shipping; we desire now but herein to
survey the store, and see how you help the increase. You have built more Ships
in your time, and greater far then any other Merchants Ships; besides what
you have bought out of other Trades, and all those wholly belonging to you;
there has been entertained by you since you first adventured, one and twenty
Ships, besides the now intended voyage of one new Ship of seven hundred Tun;
and happily some two more of increase. The least of all your Shipping is of
four score Tun: all the rest are goodly Ships, of such burden as never
were formerly used in Merchandise; the least and meanest of these last is of
some hundred and twenty Tun, and so go upward even to eleven hundred Tun.
You have set forth some thirteen voyages, in which time you have built of
these, eight new Ships, and almost as good as built the most of the residue,
as the Dragon, the Hector, etc. so that at the first appearance you have added
both strength and glory to the King dome by this your accession to the Navy.
But where I pray you are all these Ships? four of these are cast away, of the
which one was of three hundred Tun, another of four hundred, the third of
three hundred, and the fourth of eleven hundred; two more are docked up there
as Pinaces to Trade up and down: the rest are either employed in the Trade in
the Indies, or at home out of reparations; which if true, if the Kingdom
should have need of them on any occasion, it shall surely want their service;
and so then there is not only no supply to the Navy this way, but hurt even to
the whole kingdom, the woods being cut down, and the Ships either lost, or
not serviceable. Surely stories can show us, which we may read in the courses
of Commonweals, how tolerable, nay how laudable it is in all States, to
enlarge Commerce. Merchants whom we should respect, can tell us of the
casualties which not only the Ships, but their estates are subject to by
adventures. Mariners whom we must pity, can teach us of the ordinary dangers
not only that Ships and goods, but their lives are subject to by sea. I must
not then exprobrate that to them which is to be imputed to the Sea; nor are
they to be blamed out of reason for that which deserves, in humanity,
commiseration; nor is England bounded by our Horizon, to go no further then we
see. We have learned long since, that Mercatura si tenuis sordida, si magna
splendida: the stranger the Country, the greater the adventure; the more famous
our Nation, the more worthy the Merchant. Before we were, even Herace writ,
Currit Mercator ad Indos. Loath then am I to borrow that saying of Demosthenes
on his courting of Lais, to pay it to the Indian Trade, by alleging, that Non
tanti Emam poenitentiam, only having now in common that Roman prouiso, Ne quid
detrimentiresp. capiat. Let us examine that which may move patience, that our
woods are cut down, and the Ships either lost or not serviceable: Our woods I
say, cut down in extraordinary manner, neither do the Ships die the ordinary
death of Ships. Our woods extraordinarily cut down, in regard of the
greatness of the Shipping, which does as it were devour our timber. I am able
out of sufficient testimony to affirm, that since the Indian Trade, and
merely through their building of their ships of so great burden, and their
repairing (the building notwithstanding began but five years since) that
timber is raised in the Land five shillings, and more, in the load, nay,
almost not to be had for money, which the Company (no question) being sensible
of, very wisely seek to help themselves in, by building of ships in Ireland
for their service: yet it seems their encouragement that was, is but
necessitous in regard by their own saying, besides the hazard, the charges are
little less; and which is worse, that kind of timber is but untoward for that
use, being so extreme heavy, that a ship of small burden, draws much water.
If in five years space their building, together with their repairing of
ships, almost equal to building, beget such a scarcity, what will a little
continuance bring forth? Bring forth I cannot say ought, but a privation will
follow even of all our timber-wood. The Kings Navy must be maintained, other
Merchants of lower rank must have shipping, and the sea-trade may increase,
and then either we must trade without shipping, or make ships without timber.

When the Norman Conqueror having subdued the most part of the kingdom,
passed from Essex into Kent, which then made head against him, the Kents,
having by the advice of their politic Bishop, and their stout Abbot, cut
down great boughs, and with them in their arms marched toward the
Conqueror; whereby, besides the nouelty of the sight, the Army appeared double
as big. William himself so conceiving it, as also amazed to see woods walk;
more feared and discontented with that sight, then otherwise assured with his
former success, condescended to what demands soever were made by those people,
to have such weapons laid down, and to gain such ingenious subjects; whereby,
to their eternal benefit, and credit, their persons were never in bondage,
nor their Laws altered. In this their Land-stratageme, I see our sea-Arts, in
that and these woods being the fatal instrument of our fortunes, boughs of
Trees kept the Kentish-men out of servitude, when they held them in their
hands, and but for show; their bodies will keep us in liberty when they
contain us, and are for service, and by their moving on the water they will
amaze both French and Spanish, and whomsoever, and keep them, and all others,
from coming near us: 34. Hen. 8.17.13. Eliz. 25.
Out of which provident foresight, our most worthy Princes formerly reigning,
have made diverse Laws in favor of timber trees: Forbidding by Proclamation
the building with Timber.
and our most noble King has provided thereto with new accessions for the
preserving and increasing of them; but that a parricide of woods should thus be
committed by building of ships, it was never thought on by any of our royal
Solons, and therefore there was no prouiso for it: Nay, this inconvenience was
so little suspected, that our said famous Princes have provided clean
contrary, with great bounty and indulgence, haning encoraged by reward out of
their own purses the builders of great ships; as bestowing on the builders
five shillings on the Tun for every Tun that is builded above one hundred Tun
in a ship, so necessary did the Prince think his maintenance of shipping, the
accession thereof consisting much in their greatness, to the honor and safety
of the Kingdom; and such use he made account he should have of them. Whereas
now this way he contributeth, to the spoil of his woods, to the loss of the
ships, and to the hurt of the Kingdom. I heard a Ship-wright say on the loss
of the Trades Increase, that if you ride forty miles from about London, you
could not find sufficient Timber to build such an other. It was a ship of
eleven hundred Tun for beauty, burden, strength, and sufficiency, surpassing
all Merchants ships whatsoever. But alas! she was but shown, out of a cruel
destiny she was overtaken with an untimely death in her youth and strength;
being devoured by those Iron worms of that Country, that pierced her heart,
and brake many a man's withal memorable in her misfortune, only redounding to
the Commonwealthes loss. For as for the Merchants, though I pity their
adventures with all my heart, yet in this their part of loss was least; for
all their goods were on shore; and she had brought abundance out of the Mecha
Fleet, which she did both tith and toll: And thanks be to God, they are more
then sauers by what is returned from her, and more then that often, by the
grace of God, will come from her to the Merchants gain.

The like untimely fall had the other three of great burden, galla nt ships,
never having had the fortune to see their native soil again, or the honor to
do their Country any service, in respect of all other ships that wander
ordinarily to other Countries, therefore I may justly say that they die not the
ordinary death of ships, who commonly have somer est, and after long service
die full of years, and at home, much of their timber serving again to the
same use, besides their Iron-worke, and the rest otherwise serviceable, and not
in this bloody and unseasonable fashion, rather indeed as coffins full of live
bodies, then otherwise as comfortable ships. For the rest that live, they
come home so crazed and broken, so maimed and vnmanned, that whereas they went
out strong, they return most feeble: Our ships are feign to take in the
natives of the Indian Countries to supply the wants of our dead Seamen to
bring home their ships.
and whereas they were carried forth with Christians, they are brought home
with Heathen. What the profits are to the Merchants, for so great an adventure,
I know not. I am sure amends cannot easly be made for so great a loss, even in
this point which is our special subject now, for wast of woods, and spoil of
shipping.

And thus we have surueyed all the fountains whence our shipping especially
does flow: which before I shut up, I remember me of a new Spring in Greeneland,
that batheth some ships and burdeneth them likewise with her own natural
freight, with the which the Whale is so richly laden withal. This place is
but of late frequented so especially, and has employed this last year some
fourteen ships, and more would do, but that the poor Fishermen, who though
they knew the place before, yet being belike afraid of the Whale, The Moscouy
Merchants have procured an inhibition for all others from fishing there.
are now swallowed up in the Whales ships.

I cannot find any other worthy place of foreign anchorage. For the Bermudas,
we know not yet what they will do; and for Virginia we know not well what to
do with it: the present profit of those not employing any store of shipping:
and for this other it is yet but Embrion: no question a worthy enterprise and
of great consequence, much above the Merchants Ieuell and reach. And sure in
regard of the great expenses they have been at, and the poor return that is
made, they are much to be regarded and commended for holding out so long: I
could wish, that as many of the Nobility and Gentry of the land have willingly
embarked themselves in the labor, so the rest of the Subjects might be urged
to help to form and bring forth this birth, not of an infant, but of a man;
nay, of a people, of a kingdom, wherein are many kingdoms. When Alcmena was in
travel with Hercules, the Poets say Jupiter was feign to be Midwife; and sure,
as we have the countenance of our earthly Jupiter, so we are humbly to emplore
the propitious presence of our heavenly God, toward the perfection of this so
great a work. And so leaving to meddle further with what we have nothing to do,
let us return to our ships, out of whose entertainements we may either rejoice
at their increase, or by other observations prevent their decay: and because we
propounded to our selves the necessity of our home-fishing out of the want of
our shipping, we will affirm that by this our superficial view we find a
decay thereof, and that out of two reasons; because that in places formerly
frequented, our shipping lesseneth, and in places new found, they do not
succeed: we have given reasonable probability of these already without any
pleasure, and there is no need of repetition, and it will be more apparent in
the preferring of this desire of Fishing, out of the examination of the next
induceme^t thereto, which is want of Mariners.

Want of Mariners.
Mariners, they use the weapons, ships, they wear the ornaments, ships,
out of them ships, are strength and pleasure: otherwise they are but Pictures,
that have but a show, or are as carcasses bereft of life. It is the good Pilot
that brings the Ship to the Haven: It is the wise Master that governs
the men in the Ship; but without men the Master cannot govern, nor the ship
go: What is a Leader without an Army, and that of Soldiers? the same reason
of Seamen in a ship; the body must have life, blood and flesh: the same are
Seamen to a ship. Columbus found out the new world, Drake brought home the
hidden treasure in a ship; but they were both provided well of men, and
governed well: therefore as Ships are manned; and as Masters use their men,
so ordinarily their ships succeed. As for this last matter of government,
it is besides our business, we will leave that to whom it concerns. Now then,
though we cannot use shipping without men, and therefore they must go
together; yet we must consider the one after the other, and having looked into
the strength of the one, we will view in them the state of the other, in the
which we will not be long, for that the subject is unpleasant, and our Tale is
half told already: for the consequence is necessary. As ships are employed,
so men are busied.

For Moscouy, it is apparent that the shipping thitherward is decayed; so
neither Mariners are well employed that way, nor any. Seamen almost bred. The
fleet that went ordinarily thitherward entertained three or four Nouices in a
ship, and so bred them up Seamen, which might make in the whole happily some
four score men yearly, which was well for their parts. Now then there were
some five hundred Mariners and Sailors employed withal: so then this way there
is want.

The like reason of the Straights in their proportion, the very bottom of the
Straights failing in thirty ships, makes yearly seven hundred Seamen and
Mariners at the least, seek some other courses which were that way employed,
besides the vnder-growth hindered of some hundred and forty seamen yearly. And
but that I am loath to renew our complaints; I would say it were great pity of
this so great an ebb of our men in these seas, for that besides the voyages
were of encouragement even to the Fry, all in general commonly went and
returned in good health, a ship seldom loosing a man in a voyage; nay, I heard
a proper Master of a ship say, that in eighteen years, wherein he
frequented those parts, he lost not two men out of his ship: and whatsoever may
be imputed to the incontinencie of our men, or the vnwholsomnesse of the women
in other places, surely in those parts I hear the common sort of women to be
as dangerous, and the generality of our men as idely disposed.

Naples, Ligorne, Marseilles, and those parts of the straights, may employ some
four hundred men, and breed of these about forty.

Malega employing besides some four hundred men, the employment that may come
by all other places in Spain and Portugal, not arriving to four hundred men,
in regard of the poverty of the trade, and the superfluity of the commodities,
it being indeed rather entertained because they will not be idle, otherwise
then that they are well busied, like food that keeps life, not else
maintains strength; yet it has a pretty mystery in it, that though the gain
scarce provideth for the Merchants liuelihood, yet the commodities make the
land merry: and howsoever, I am of the opinion that the former hostile state
busied more Seamen then twice the Trade of Spain can nourish, yet I differ
from those that would rather by reprisall make Soldiers, then by nourishing
commerce increase Mariners.

Our shipping into France, is not such as it has been, but nourseth many young
men, or rather shows them the Sea, and may busy some seven or eight hundred
men.

Hambrough and Middlebrough always have been counted the ancient maintainers
of Mariners for the States service on all occasions, being ready at hand, and
therefore as we wished well to their Ships, so we desire encouragement to the
men. There may be belonging to their employment some four or five hundred
Mariners and Seamen.

Norway and the Sound may breed and employ some four hundred men, those parts
being most frequented, those commodities most brought in by the Hollanders.

Newcastle voyage is the next, and if not the only, yet the especial Nursery,
and School of Seamen: For, as it is the chiefest in employment of Seamen, so
it is the gentlest, and most open to land-men: They never grudging in their
smallest vessels to entertain some two fresh-men, or learners; whereas, to the
contrary, in the Ships that voyage to the Southward, or otherwise, far out
of the Kingdom, there is no Owner, or Master, that will ordinarily entertain
any land-man, be he never so willing, as being bound by their Charter-partie to
the Merchant, as they say, not to carry but sufficient men, and such as know
their labor, and can take their turn at the helm, top, and yard. It is by
great favor that others slip in, and they very likely; and therefore whereas
in former adventures I allow them the bringing up of two or three men in a
voyage, it is in general to be understood, that they were first trained up,
either amongst the Coliers in this journey: or else came out of Fishermens
Boats, and yet but Nouices to those Seas and Saylors, so then this Trade,
without all exception, admits of all sorts that never see the Sea before:
whereby are yearly bred and employed, out of the great store of ships busied
therein, some two or three thousand people. A great comfort to youth, and men
that want employment, and a great stay to the Sea state, that shall have need
on all occasions of their help. I have showed my good will enough, being so
private, to further their employment; and being so ignorant I must not be
bolder.

Island entertainment, asks and nourishes some two thousand five hundred
men; after the number of shipping and barques set down, and ordinarily
employed.

New Foundland may breed and employ some fifteen hundred; but seeing what
discouragements they have, what casualties they are subject to we may judge of
their incertainty.

Out of the extraordinary number of all people busied in these two former
employments; it is no unnecessary observation, that in any Trade in particular,
our coal excepted, our special employment, nourishment, and increase of
Seamen, is even in this foreign fishing, which I hope will prove but petty,
when it comes to be balanced with our home fishing.

The last Consistance of Shipping propounded, was that of the East Indies:
which though youngest, was found in show and state to have ouer-topped all the
rest; as a bird that makes herself gay with the feathers of all other fowls;
having borrowed; nay, having bought the best Ships out of other Trades to
honor their voyage, and plumed even Constantinople her self, of her shipping:
therefore that men are entertained extraordinarily in this voyage, it is
apparent out of the greatness of the Shipping; the entertainment of them
increasing, it should be a consequent that Seamen increase this way: But that
we may not by ambages triumph in their loss, or our calamities, we see this
way that our Ships perish, and therefore our men they shrink. Nay, though
ships come home, yet they leave the men behind: so in this voyage, there is
a twofold way toward our want of Mariners.

In that Ships, nay great Ships, are extraordinarily subject to be cast
away, and then there must be loss likewise of men; In that though they come,
they come home emptied of their men.

By the loss of four Ships, we have lost at the least four hundred and
fifty men: and in the adventure of some three thousand that have been employed
since that voyage began, we have lost many above two thousand.

David refused to drink of the Well of Betheleme, which the strong men had
fetched, when he thirsted and longed, because it was the price of blood. This
Trade, their commodities are at a far deerer rate, being bought with so many
men's lives.

But happily some will say th^^ the greatest loss of these men was at the
beginning, when as all things are difficult: but since our men, framed to a
better composition of themselves, to the variety of this Clymate, and heartned
to the tediousness of this voyage, have better endured and overcome those
difficulties, and returned more comfortably. Herein the latest voyages will
inform us best, and we will instance it in the three last that have made
returns.

The first was under Sir Henry Middleton, whose former government in that kind
of voyage, had approved his wisdom and moderation. His ship was that famous
and unfortunate vessel of eleven hundred Tun; The Trades Increase.
his company in that ship some two hundred and twenty men. After four years
errors up and down the sea, wherein he underwent many constructions at home,
and overcame strange difficulties abroad; having, to his eternal reputation of
policy and courage, out gone the perfidious Turk, and revenged their barbarous
wrongs, to the Merchants gain, and the Kingdoms repute. After He, and his,
had, I say, been accompanied with many sorrows; with labor, hunger, heat,
sickness, and peril; That worthy Commander, with many a sufficient Mariner,
with the whole number (ten excepted) of his live Cargazon, perished in that
Acheldama, in that bloody field of Bantam.

Nicholas Dounton, the Vice Admiral of that Fleet returned, and of seventy he
carried forth, brought home some twenty; the rest, their labors and lives were
^^crificed to that implacable East Indian Neptune: Captain Pemerton that
escaping imprisonment at Moha, iournying in that unknown Country 15 miles by
night, got to the sea side, and finding a small Canow, made a sail of his
shirt, and a mast of a stick, and so recovered the ships.
the Darling of that voyage is yet there, nor never will the Master, an
approved Seamen, return, with diverse others.

The second was that of Captain Saris, and Captain Towerson, men formerly
exercised in those iourneys, and therefore thought meet to command. Whether
they were short of the opinion conceived of them or no, I know not; if they
were, I should attribute part of the loss of their men to their insufficiency,
but that the destiny of that country chalengeth it all to it self. Captain
Towerson who first returned, having left behind him of some hundred and twenty
carried forth, fourscore and five; and Captain Saris, of some 90 and odd not
having brought home above two or three and twenty: the Thomas of that voyage,
which went forth with some 60 men, was brought home by way of a wrecke, By
staying an Armenian ship, wherein at least were some 400 men bound to the
Indies, and commanding the Port, he drew from the^ plain dealing, and made
honorable conditions for the Merchants. He encountered four Gallions, wherein
might be some two thousand men.
you know the destruction of men that name imports.

The third, that of Captain Tho. Best, Admiral of the Fleet, a man whose
former behavior in Sea-affaires, drew into that iourny with great expectation,
and which is very seldom and hard, his carriage in this employment went beyond
the great expectation of a reposed demeanor, indulgent to his men, vigilant in
his charge, his courage like to his carriage; and his fortune above all: he
checked the Indians, he mated the Portugals: those honor our King, these fear
his forces: he settled a trade in Cambaya, reduced things in order in Bantam,
brought riches home for the Merchants, and kept reputation for himself; yet
for all this he had, Nemesin in dorso, the Indian vengeance hanted his ship
even to our coasts; of some hundred and eighty men under him when he went
forth, depriving him of one hundred and odd men for ever. Some four or five
and twenty of the remainder are left, on the desperate account of men, for the
Countries facteridge, only thirty are returned. In two great Sea Fights with
the Portugals and their Gallions, which continued four whole days, he lost
not four men. It was not then the fortune of the war; neither out of want of
ought that victuals and good government could afford; imputations to some
other voyages: Nor had the length of time any fault, part of others bane; he
having made the voyage in shorter space then any other ordinarily; the dogged
Star of those Clymates, the stench of those Countries were his Fatality.

As one Swallow makes no Summer, so it is not much to be maruailed, that in
all these voyages some one Ship has not been scarred, and not else much hurt
in this journey: She indeed but even seeing those Coasts, and presently on so
great a glut of our men and ships, with the which it seems the Sea and Land
was then busied and full: when as Captain Newport returned with little loss,
and in short time.

Now then as we have said before, that the Indian ships die not the ordinary
death of Ships: and that we have shown likewise before, that men do die
extraordinarily in this voyage, which is almost incredible: they are distressed
likewise after their death, and that is very apparent by the mean account made
to their heirs of what they had in possession in their life time, by what
should otherwise be due to them in their purchase, by the calamities of their
wives, children, and friends, after their death. Fabulous and fantastical
Legends have been made of the restless death of many concealed extortioners,
and murderers, whose ghosts have been said to walk in pain and penance. On
the contrary, how many live bodies, indeed the true images of the deceased,
complain on the death, call for the due of their friends, Fathers, Husbands,
Children, Kinsfolks, and Creditors? Poor Ratlife, Lime-house, Black wall,
Shadwell, Wapping, and other Sea-townes abroad can sensibly tell. The Merchant
he is at home, and therefore he cannot embezell the goods abroad: and it is
likely, that what is directly proved due, is paid here to theirs. Then is the
calamity of that journey more fearful, because out of his own ill Planet it
makes so many miserable. How this is recompensed it is neither my purpose, nor
my part to examine: For certain there is want of Trade: the Hollander would
grow greater, if he had all this Trade in his own hands. The Kings customs are
now advanced: This way Shipwrights are set on work, which must be maintained;
and other Mechanical Trades live hereby, with a number of poor busied. And
surely he that would not have the poor to live, I would he might beg: And he
that would not advance the Kings profire in all liber all manner; and
Merchandise is a fair means, I would he might dye: and he that regards not
his Countries good, it is pity he was ever borne. I desire not, like a second
Phaeton, to make a combustion. All that I would enforce at this time is, that
in this trade our men are consumed, and thereby more want of Mariners. Let the
Straights-men, and the Lisbone-Merchants complain of their hinderance this
way, and say their traffic before was more beneficial by much, and more
certain to the Custom-house then the Indies be now. Let others report that the
foundation of this trade was laid in the ruin of a Caricke that Sir James
Lancaster took in the first voyage, and that the maine of this after-iollity
proceeded of the forced trade driven with the Mecha Fleet by Sir Henry
Middleton, Wherein he was his own Trade-caruer out of ten hundred thousand
pounds worth of goods.
whereby diverse durst not go presently after to the Straights, as the Angel,
and other ships, out of rumor of revenge for violence offered by our Indian
men to the Turks in the red sea. Let the common people say that their
commodities are unnecessary: ask the Tradesmen, nay all men, what they have
cheaper: look into the price of victuals how it rises out of their great
provisions. Let the whole land murmr at the transport of treasure, and bring
in Charles the fifth his opinion, Hall Chron. An. 25. Hen. 8.
speaking to the Portugals of their trade to the East Indies, who said that
they were the enemies to Christendom, for they carried away the treasure of
Europe to enrich the Heathen. Let go the speech of the small relief thereby
to the poor, and they whom it does concern, may suggest the Indian home state
and particular profit. Once I am sure, that as Vespasian the Emperor said, He
had rather save one Citizen, then kill one thousand enemies; so his royal
Majesty had rather have his Subjects, then Custom for them: and you see
plainly, that his Majesty's subjects, our countrymen, fall this way, and this
way is want of Mariners.

Greenland ships, which before I had forgotten, entertain some Mariners, and
help to breed others; as of late being fifteen sail, employ some four
hundred men, and may breed of these some fourscore, which help somewhat, and
may be, by reasonable encouragement, far more beneficial, if it be more
public.

And thus we have run over the material trades state and condition in them
of seamen. In all in general we conceive want, in regard of the small
increase of what is needful to furnish this great Machina, this goodly Engine
of our Seastate, either by supporting their own members, (the Newcastle trade
excepted) or all joined together, to make up the great body of our Lands Navy:
witness that general press that was made of men from all the Coasts, to man
the ships that were to attend that matchless pearl, that peerlesse
Princess the Lady Elizabeth her grace, with her hopeful and happy mate, the
illustrious Palatine, at their departure; and our nakedness that would appear
if there were sudden occasion to furnish some six of his Majesty's ships:
all which makes for the furtherance of our proposition of fishing.

The third motive hereto was Want of Employment.
As the Cosmographers in their Maps, wherein they have described the habitable
Globe, use to set down in the extremity of their Cards, on unknown Regions
and Climates, That beyond those places they have noted there is nothing but
sands without water, full of wild beasts, or congealed seas, which no ship can
sail, or Scithyan live in: so may I write in the Map of employment, that out
of it, without it, is nothing but sordide idleness, base condition, filling the
mind with a hundred Chymeraes and gross fantasies, and defiling both body and
mind with dissolute courses and actions; like fat ground neglected, that
brings forth a thousand sorts of weeds, or unprofitable herbs. And with this
disease is our Land affected, our people infected; whereby so many come to an
untimely and reproachful death in the Land, and many more live so dissolutely,
and so wickedly on the seas. I do not think that in any two kingdoms in
Europe, there are so many Iustized for Murderers and Felons yearly, as in
England. And above all Nations we are most infamous for Pyracies; wherein,
against the law of sea-robbers, or at least, besides ordinary example of any
other Nation, we forbear not to prey on our own Countrymen; nay, we
forbear not our own acquaintance. Sure the want of grace, and fear of God,
is much in most of these: but that men should leave their wives, children, and
family, and rebel against their own Sovereigns laws, and make war on all
people, proceeds more out of want of means, want of emploiment at home.
Besides, how many that have more grace, and the same wants, are straightned in
their Fortunes, notwithstanding their abilities of body and mind; and are, as
it were, damned to poverty? and more then all these, that have a little grace,
and less means, that lead the loathsome life of begging?

Now, if the means may be found, nay, if the means long found already be
offered unto us, to redeem us out of this disaster, why should we not
understand them? why should we not apprehend them? why should we not be
industrious in them? We are not those rebellious Israelites that could not see
the flowing Land, much less enjoy it: we have this place in possession, and if
my Ephemerides fail me not, I dare say, Natam inde esse artem, that shall not
only take away all those discontents and miseries, that want of employment
breeds in any of our unfortunate contrymen, but that shall also repair our
Navy, breed sea men abundantly, enrich the subject, advance the Kings
custom, and assure the kingdom; and all this in our own Seas, by fishing,
and especially out of Herring. Toward the which, apparent necessity having
hitherto made us the way, we are to persuade you to follow in it by the
Facility, Profit, and Use of this fishng.


The Facility, in that the means are in our own hands. The Place, our own
seas.
The Art, well known.


The means in our own hands, in that we have all things that shall be used
about this business, growing at home in our own Land (Pitch and Tar
excepted) whereas the Hollander, having nothing growing in their own Land for
it, is feign to go to six several Countries, and those remote, and under
diverse Princes, to furnish themselves, and do furnish themselves merely with
the barter of Fish and Herring taken out of our seas.

Then the place is not far removed, if in our own Seas, if in his Majesty's
Dominions, on the coast of England, Scotland, Ireland, is this principal
fishing: for by the report of many exercised in this mystery, and the relation
of two especially, painful herein by their Treatises, Hitchcockes and
Gentleman,

The Herrings first, and toward the ending of Summer, shoot out of the deepes
on both sides of Scotland and England; and begin to do first so, on the Scots
coast at Midsummer, when is the first and worst fishing.

The second and best is about Bartholomewtide, from Scarbrough in Yorkshire,
till you come to the Thames mouth.

The third, from the Thames mouth through the narrow Seas, but not so certain,
for that extreme weather makes them shoot on both sides of Ireland, likewise
on the Coast of Ireland is good fishing for Herring, from Michaelmas to
Christmas.

On the North-west seas of England, over against Carliel, about Wirkentowne, is
good fishing for Herring from Bartholmewtide till fourteen days after
Michaelmas. So then it appears by these reports, that this fishing for
Herring is especially on his Majesty's dominions. And to this end ask the
ancient custom of the Hollanders and Flemming, that before they began their
fishing for Herring, craved leave of Scarbrough aforesaid: which easily
obtained, they then laid their Nets. And howsoever it pleases his Majesty to
allow of his royal Predecessors bounty, in tolerating the neighbor Nations
to fish in his streams: yet other Princes take more straight courses. For
whereas till Christmas, on the coast of Norway, called the Mall Strand, all
strangers do fish, as Hitchcockes writes, they then paid a youhendale on every
Last of Herring, to the King of Denmark. And I can likewise remember, that
certain of our Merchants of Hull had their goods and Ships taken away, and
themselves imprisoned, for fishing about the Ward-house, and not paying the
duty imposed on them by the King of Denmark.

The place, our Seas likewise, for other necessary and profitable fishing: on
the Coast of Lancashire from Easter to Midsummer, for Cod, for Hakes; twixt
Wales and Ireland, from Whitsontide until Saint Iames-tide, for Cod, and Ling
about Padstow, within the Lands end of Seuerne, from Christmas to middle Lent,
and in seven or eight several places more about the Coasts, and within his
Majesty's Dominions, the which is largely set down by Hitchcockes.

Now besides this fishing treasure lies easily to be found in our own Seas,
what good Harbors fitting thereto lie open to us in our own Coasts, as
Colchester, Harwich, Ipswich, Yarmouth, with a number of other, set down
painfully by Gentleman, together with the commodities they afford for Timber,
Workmanship, furnishing, and harboring Busses, Nets, and Men?

As the Havens lie open to us, as the Seas be our own, and as we have all
things almost fitting for such a business at home, and naturally, so that
nothing may be wanting to us but our selves; the Art is well known to us
likewise. Masters for Busses may be had from Yarmouth and Sold, and the rest
of the coasts down the river. Use makes Fishermen, and these places afford
store of Seafaring men for the purpose. In Orford Haven and Alborough be many
good Fishermen, whose abilities exercised in Busses, would (by Gentleman's
report) put down the Hollander. The like may be said of Sold, Dunwich,
Walderswich, which breed Fishermen. In all these, and many other places, is
this rich Art known, but not used. In all these, and all other, the Hollanders
swim like Elephants, we wading like Sheep. We keep the Banks and Shoales,
when as they are in the depth.

Besides, to encourage us the more, the charges are not great, the pains are
not great, the time is not long, the hazard is nothing at all. This is very
apparent, and exactly set down in Gentleman his Treatise, whom I shall but
obscure to contract; neither is he long.

The next motive to this fishing, was that of profit; wherein if ever it were
true, that a good cause makes a good Orator, here is a subject to enable all
mean Rhetoricians. Every man almost is taken with the attention to profit.
Love does much, but Money does all. Here is money, here is profit in
abundance, and diverse ways. In abundance, for that the whole charge of a
Busse, That is between sixty and eighty tun.
with all furniture and appurtenances, between thirty and forty Last, will
cost about five hundred pounds: the charges for keeping her a whole summer at
Sea, may be some three hundred three score and five pounds: the whole Summer
fills her three times, with making one hundred Last of barrels, amounts to
one thousand pounds; whereby, allowing one hundred pounds for wear of ships,
and reparations of nets, there is gained five hundred sixty five pounds by one
Busse in one year, and this is after ten pounds the Last, which was so rated
in Hitchcockes time, which is some thirty three years ago; the Hollander, now,
selling them for fifteen, twenty pounds, and upward the Last, at Danske. Hence
one may gather of the great gain, that even rises to a private purse, by this
fishing, with a small adventure, Busses being the maine (and those likely
likewise to continue, by Gods grace, some twenty years) So then her charges
returned for keeping her at sea; the first year also she quitteth her own
self, and there is, I say, five hundred sixty five pounds, as long as she
lives afterward, dc claro. I would feign know, not desiring to be too curious
in a strange Commonwealth, but rather to inuit my Contrymen into this
society, what Trade in the Land did ever in his strength promise so much;
howsoever, never any, I am sure, performed so much, so easily, so continually.

When Antiochus, in his show to Hanniball of his glorious Army in battel-range,
his Elephants being most richly adorned, and all his Soldiers in very brave
and costly harness and abiliments, willing to draw some acknowledgement from
him of his power and strength, asked his opinion of it: the warlike Soldier
replied again, That it was an Army able to satisfy the most covetous enemy.
No question, though the Carthaginian noted the people of cowardice; yet it
would require great charges, and cost some blood, to overcome such an Army.

In the best Trade in appearance now that is, (and in those Countries certain
there are infinite riches) you see how remote it is, and with what cost of
purse, and loss of people followed, yet without such satisfaction. Here is
wealth enough to satisfy the most thirsty thereof, without much cost, without
any spoil; even almost Salmacida spolia; if not, sine sudore, sine sanguine,
and not for a time, but permanent. All other Trades are fetched as it were, out
of a Well, out of the Deep, I mean from far, here is a mere spring which
is in superficie hard by us, out of our own inexhaustible Sea, from the
euer-lasting store of Herring, whence only the Hollander reapeth a million of
gold yearly; besides, the most gainefull fishing with other vessels for Cod
and Ling. Hitchcockes long ago discovered the same, his book is extant; and
forenamed Gentleman has very plainly set down, and in very probable and
particular manner disclosed the mysteries thereof. And the conceit the
Hollanders have of it, calling it their Chiefest Trade and Gold-mine: and the
confidence they have in it, as laying out their Childrens money given them by
friends, in aduenturing in Busses, and fathers likewise putting in their
childrens portions into Busses; presume of the increase that way, and so
proportion a sum certain out of that gain, in a certain time; as also that
there is for Orphans laid out, and so increasing that way for the maintenance
of them. Here then we may get treasure in abundance, and certainly; and
besides the gaining of it, we shall stay the unnatural tide of the departure
and transportation of our gold; a mischief, which notwithstanding our royal
King was sensible of in the raising of it, yet it still departs with Vestigia
nulla retrorsum, out of the lazy and disgracious Merchandise of our Coasters,
that give away our coin to the stranger for our own fish. Which unseasonable
and unprofitable humor of Cauponacion, is this way to be diuerted only.

But some will say, that our men are not so apt, nor disposed thereto: which
cannot be, in regard of the store of Fishermen that our Coasts nourishes,
which live as hardly, and take as great pains in their fashion; only wanting
the use of Busses, and seem to rejoice at the name of Busses, and may on very
good reason; for that this Busse-fishing is more easy then any other kind of
fishing, which now we use in Crayers and Punts, as being armed this way better
against all weathers, which others suffer and perish in, in other vessels
yearly. And as their provisions are better, and the dangers less, so their
pains are likewise less.

Again, who will not be exceedingly encouraged with the benefit of such
gain, in so honest a manner, when once the sweet is tasted of, when as
otherwise our Countrymen run such laborious and desperate courses, especially
out of want.

Others will say that our Land will not utter them in any quantity, in regard
that the feeding on herring, and fish, does not taste us, nor is so received as
amongst those Holland and Sealand Mermaids. And sure, if those necessary Laws
provided by our advised State, for the keeping of fish days clean through our
Land were better observed, it would be more wholesome for our bodies, and make
much for the advancing of our fish, and plenty of other victuals; besides the
deerenesse of our fish victual, which more hurts our purse then our
appetites, for that the price is within this 20. years almost trebled, which
indeed makes the true distaste, as all Householders find, and thereon feed
their households with flesh, and otherwise; this fish victual being now
obtained by Merchandise, which indeed is our own Staple commodity, whereon
grows this penury to the poor, this great price to others, this disvse to
all, and in these the Kings, the kingdoms loss. Yet notwithstanding there is
such quantity of herring, besides other fish, consumed amongst us, that
Hitchcockes allows 10000 Lasts for our provision of herring to be spent here
in the Realm; so that it would save at home 100000 pounds of treasure, which to
our great shame and loss, the Hollanders carry away, even for our own
provision: besides, that provision is of the worst, such as they call
Roopsicke, and such as they are forbidden to bring home. Now to be served of
our worst, whereas we might be our own caruers, and to give our gold for that
we may have for nothing; judge of the loss, of the indignity. And as we may
easily remedy this by our own industry, so we cannot otherwise excuse the
fault: our gracious Prince, no question, 1399 the Art of making cloth, being
grown to good perfection, King* Henry the 4. first prohibited the invention of
forrainemade cloth.
being ready to assist us herein by the same favorable authority which other
Trades for their benefit taste most plentifully of, by forbidding the sale and
uttering of herring to his loyal subjects by any forrainer or stranger
whatsoever. And in Holland it is not lawful for them to buy any of our
Herring, if they be brought thither; Nay, if we bring any thither they are
burned. Besides what other effects of his incomparable clemency would bless
our industries herein, he being Lord Paramount of these Seas where this
fishing food grows, and which now is taken by strangers? and therefore he
would not questionless allow strangers to eat up the food that was provided
for the children; the crummes we would not envy them, though we are now fed
under their Table.

Now farther it may be alleged, that we can utter no such quantity, nor can
afford no such penny worth. For the first, that must arise out of our
diligence. No question we once attaining the Art of the Flemish usage of these
Herring, they will be in as great estimation as the Hollanders, in Normandy,
Nants, Bordeaux, Rochell, and other such Countries; for which, return is made
of Wine and Woad, for which is always paid ready gold, with a number of other
commodities: They will be in as great estimation in the East Countries, Revel,
Rye, Russie, Danske, Poland, Denmark, the returns whereof are set down in
Gentleman. And the quantity of Herring that these forenamed Countries consume
is infinite. Therefore though the Hollanders spend more Fish and Herring by
much, in their Countries then we do, yet it is their foreign Trade with all
other Nations that is their Basis, else they could never employ so many
Ships, nor gain such wealth, or get such strength thereby. And in all these
places we can and do Trade, and all their returns we need and use, and
therefore may utter them in as great a quantity as they do.

Then for the affoording of Herring and Fish at as good a rate as they can, let
any consider of the likelihood in our behalf. First it stands with reason,
if we have the like vessels, we can go with as few men: and our fishermen on
the Coast, by diverse reports, can live as hardly as they. And let any judge of
the hardness, when the principal time of fishing for Herring is in September
and October, and a six weeks time, and they are almost in sight of our own
Coasts; and besides good provision of butter and cheese and Beer, they have
the plenty of the seafish: then this way we may afford as good penyworths as
they. But I go further, and say that we have great vantages of them.

The Seas be our own, therefore we journey not so far as the Hollander does,
whereby likewise our travail and charge must be lighter: our ports, harbors
and roades be at hand; nay, which is more, all vtensiles and appurtenances
belonging to shipping, as is before showed (Pitch and Tar excepted) are found
in our own Land; whereas they with great cost, pains, and hazard, fetch them
from six several places. So then we shall be able to afford better cheap
then the Hollanders; You English we will make you glad to wear our old shoes.
and so we may sell when they cannot, and so the English shall and may weary
them, and wear out those flouts wherewith our poor Fishermen are scorned.
For if they be put by the uttering of their Herrings abroad, they will be
driven to leave their great Ships, and fish in smaller vessels near the shore
to serve their own turns, as heretofore they have caused us to do; when as
likewise on every tempest they openly triumph over us, for not taking the
blessings of God powered into our lappes.

These hindrances objected taken away, we may now resort again to the sweet
fountain of profit: which besides that it waters our private estates with
the continual spring of great gain, keeps in our treasure, which
exceedingly now wastes, brings in all commodities that either the East and
North Countries, France, or Flaunders, affoords even for this barter; it
runs into the sea of the Kings custom: the venting only of ten thousand
Last of Herring beyond sea, comes to five thousand pounds after the rate of
the ordinary poundage, besides the custom of Cod and Ling, very near as
valuable as the benefit of Herring, the particular view whereof is set down by
him whom I have so often named, and in whose book you may see the greatness
of the custom amounting to above 50000 pound starling, that accrueth to those
Countries out of this fishing Trade. And yet all this to them is nothing: their
keeping in their treasure, their carrying away our treasure, their abundance
with all other commodities, their greatness of their custom this way, is
nothing in regard of their profit, honor, safety, that their increase of
shipping, increase of Mariners this way begets to themselves, amongst all
nations, to their state.

The life of the sea is in shipping, nay one may say to ships, Mare non est
mare, vos estis mare. The beauty of the Sea is in Shipping: and sure the Poets
affirming Venus to be the daughter of the sea, might mean a Ship by her. For
Haec vna Venus omnium surripuit Vener^s: and this little land of the
Hollanders, exceeded in quantity by Norfolk and Suffolk, has gotten this
sea, has gained this Venus; England, Scotland, France, and Spain, for
shipping and seafaring men, not answerable to them; and all spawned out of
fish and fishing.

There has been numbered in sight two thousand sail of Busses, and other good
vessels, gone out to sea at once of the Hollanders: and there has been found
(by computation) some thirty seven thousand Fishermen in diverse sorts of
vessels at one time employed herein. Hence proceed their great undertakings,
and prodigious aduenturing to all places: hereby they out-goe us, and
ouer-beare all Trades where ever they come. We think the West-Indie gold to
be the cause of the pride and presumption of Spaniards: we may assure our
selves, that our North-Indies counteruaile that treasure, and are the only
confidence of the Hollander; even by breeding seamen, and increasing of
shipping in that abundance, as that hereby they both swarm euety where, and
France, Spain, and the East Countries are full of their shipping. Hence they
fetch our coals, and carry them abroad; from Norway and Danske they bring us
all commodities, and carry forth ours, at a far better rate then we can our
selves: they have filled Moscouy, whence we are emptied, with thither shipping;
and the Straights abound with them, once our possession. They go into, nay they
arm in the West Indies where we may not be seen; and in the East Indies they
have had long settled Factories before us, and have four men to one of ours
there, and go beyond us as far, besides the number in store of goodly
shipping; whereby, as they hinder our trade, so they forbear not (which I
cannot but write with stomach) the honor of our King and kingdom, as
presuming sometimes to call themselves English, and pretend Embassage, and
presents from his Majesty. Which they did to the King of Siam: in other places
calling the Crown and State of England into comparison; which made the King of
Achem ask captain Best, whether the King of England, or the King of Holland,
were the greater Monarke.

Besides, what an infinite number of ships and men of war have they always
in a readiness at home? And as the In-keeper of Chalcis said to his guest,
admiring tantam ferculorum varietatem, It was with Art all cookt out of pork;
this their store, this their abundance, is raised all out of fishing. Who then
would not be moved? who would not be stirred up therewith? Who would not go a
fishing? You see what want we have of shipping, what want we have of Mariners,
what discouragements we have in trades, what wants our men are in. When Naaman
the Sirian complained to Elizeus of his leprosy, he was bid wash himself in
Jordan seven times. He looked for other miraculous courses to be taken by the
Prophet, and could hardly be persuaded thereto, because Abna and Pharphar
(floods of Damascus) were better. Naaman was a Heathen, and had never any
experience of Gods Jordan: yet he was in the end persuaded. To supply our
wants, to satisfy our hunger, to heal our diseases, there is not a river, but
a Sea, shown us, and that not in another kingdom, but in our own; we are
but bidden go and take fish out of it. We are Christians, and it is God that
has provided this remedy: and we see by experience no water like ours, and we
see our neighbors from every place resorting thereto, and healing themselves
thereby. You see how it concerns us; let us in the end likewise be persuaded.
What the number is of our Seamen, bred and employed by all sorts of Seatrades,
(our petty fishings excepted) may easily be ghest at; and whatsoever it may
amount to. If out of our whole Land there be but four hundred Busses built,
and set forth, of seventy tun the piece, there are in two years nine
thousand Mariners more then was in the Land before: let men of experience and
state judge of the proportion by the way of comparison, every one can perceive
the increase simply. Besides, by the report of some of our best Mariners, these
thus bred, prove not only equal, but better able then any bred otherwise, for
Sea-affaires, and public service.

On this publik profit of fishing thus spread abroad the maintenance of Havens
and Haven towns in England besides, have no small dependancie, and are so
material to the land, so plainly understood of all his Majesty's subjects; and
so welwished to by Hitchcockes and Gentleman, that it is enough for me but to
point at them: we all know the use of them: they show the decay; and this Art,
the reparation and maintenance of them.

The use of this fishing is implied much in the profit, but more eminent by
the consideration again of the infinite number otherwise of idle people, and
out of employment. Only by this Art, it is reported not one goes a begging in
all the Low Countries; and what a number of people have we, that, now destitute
of means, may this way have a calling? It is a grievous sin, Idleness, and
brings forth, as we see, horrible effects: to get a living by the sweat of
our brows, is the ordinance of God, and this way there is a recompense. There
were found in Yarmouth the last year, three or four hundred, and those of
honest disposition, that wanted means: and how many hundred more are there in
other places, that would gladly be thus used? Hichcockes allows to every one
in this employment, twenty pounds yearly, besides his diet, for his reward, a
good savor to honest men that now have no means; and this only out of two
voyages for Herring. A number of Carpenters and Shipwrights shall be set a
work, Coopers busied numbers of people making lines, ropes, cables,, dressers
of hemp, spinners of third, makers of Nets, bred; many salt-houses set up,
besides what store of poor people, all along on the seacoasts, which are now
very poor and idle in England and Wales, to be used in splitting of fish,
washing of fish, packing, salting, carrying and recarrying of fish. And on
these foresaid occupations depend an infinite number of servants, boys and
daily laborers, for the use of things needful. Nilus, whose fertility is
envied, affoordeth not so many sorts of fish, of monsters, as this fishing
entertaineth sorts of people: which humbly committing to the high disposer of
all hearts, and to the due consideration thereby of his Ministers here on earth,
I will leave further to enlarge; and shut up this abrupt discourse with the
allusion of that of Basil to this sea-businesse, Putei dum hauriuntur
speciosiores.

Now for a Corollary to all these imperfect lines: whereas in the superficial
survey of want of shipping, we find most of our sea-trades, either decaying, or
at a stay, let me out of themselves, without offense, propound the
consideration of one remedy thereto; even by a freedom of Traffic for all his
Majesty's subjects to al places. Hereby his majesty's customs will increase,
the navy and seamen will receive nourishment out of more employment, the whole
incorporation of merchants reap comfort, in that they may communicate with all
adventures, and the universal body of the subjects of the land content, in that
they may become merchants; being very ready in this aduentrous world to make
new discoueries: whereas now otherwise merchandise, sorting and settled in
companies, confineth merchants into those limits that private orders tie them
in, so that they may not help themselves through any discouragements in one
trade, but by suit and submission of themselves to the other; though, I say,
their trades fail them, and other have too much: nor may any else of the
kingdom come amongst them, though never so able and well disposed, unless
they come in on such conditions as the victor pleases to propound. A thing in
ordinary sense somewhat harsh to fellow-subiects, and equal Citizens in this
great Monarchy, to be so seruiceably tied and subject one unto the other; and
the rather for that those privileges, by the indulgencie of the Prince, being
granted as a reward to some for their industries, and exemplary to others
encouragements, are strictly used to the eternal benefit of a few, and the
wrong of all the residue.

The French company manifests this plainly, which if it had continued (and it
began but the other day) had undone all the Western men.

The Moscouie company declares the same, as being granted on condition of
serving his Majesty of all materials (as Flax, Oil, Wax, Tallow, Cordage)
belonging to shipping: whereas now it is supplied by strangers, even ten for
one ship, and those double our burdens; and notwithstanding they do not
perform, and have let fall their Trade, yet none may enter but on their
conditions.

The Greenland company, out of the pretense of their first Whale-hunting, keep
all Fishermen, notwithstanding they knew and used those seas, from further
resort thither: and some Merchants of Hull were taken by them in that journey,
and brought back; notwithstanding, as I am informed, those contrymen found
it first.

The Virginia company pretend almost all that Maine twixt it and New Foundland
to be their Fee-simple, whereby many honest and able minds, disposed to
adventure, are hindered, and stopped from repairing to those places, that either
knew or would discover unfound even for fishing.

The East India men, not able to furnish those places they resort to, keep out
other from coming amongst them, and to look into those parts they know not,
and would give out of their largeness and riches, entertainment to all the
Merchants in the Land. Besides, how tedious and costly they, and all other
Companies, make it to their own Associates, when as out of orders, and cause
of upholding their Trade, men can neither dispose of their own as they would,
nor have the benefit under a long time. Besides, how private do they, and
other Companies, make it, when as out of orders and maintaining their Trade,
how plentifully soever the commodities are brought in, and at what advantage
soever they buy them, they will be sure to keep up the price, either by
sending forth most part of the commodities abroad, or else by buying all
others into their hands? that other is hard for the owner sometimes, but he does
it in his own wrong; but to the buyer this is always iniust, for that he
suffers against his will, the commonwealth being made private, suffers by
all; this, that, the first, and all the more disco^tentful, in that besides
that all other Nations resort freely to all those places whence they keep out
their own Countrymen, the like fashion of Companies and Societies is not used
in all Christendom else; it being lawful and usual to all other amongst
themselves, promiscuously to frequent and communicate with places, and Trades,
one by the other. Nay, this separation of Trading, and excepting of Subjects
from places, between diverse Princes that had but peace one with the other, was
so admired and disallowed of, Hall. Ann. 15. Hen. 8.
formerly, that Charles the 5 Emperor, being moved by the Portugals, being
under their own absolute King then, to forbear the Eeast Indie Trade, because
they had found it; answered, That he had peace with them, and therefore he
would have Trade with them; for they were not his friends, but his enemies,
that would hinder him of it. How much more we, murmuring at this iniquity, may
affirm that we are all Britains, all subjects to one royal King, all
combined together in one natural league, and therefore not to be barred from
trading equally to all places? which his gracious Majesty, together with the
whole assent of the high Court of Parliament, openly professes, Ann. 3.1
Jacob. 6.
when as there was enacted free liberty for all his Majesty's Subjects, to
Trade into the Dominions of Spain, Portugal and France, with most sufficient
reasons therefore; for the increase of shipping, mariners, thousands of
Handicrafts men, of prices of their own commodities, and augmentation of them,
together with the plenty of foreign commodities, and a cheapnesse of them, and
the bettering of his Majesty's customs. No one man ever invented all Sciences,
nor any Merchant found all places: yet they make a compensation one to another.
Society first began, and knowledge and ciuility, by communication. But if the
world in his infancy had been resolved to have held private what they had in
possession, and to have concealed what they knew, there had not only been no
ciuility, but no society. Yet as the first maintainers of Society had their
honor; the first inuentors of Sciences and Arts their rewards; and in all
well-disposed States, the Industries of those that do benefit them, have their
encouragements: so is not this my proposition of free Trade otherwise
entertained, then that there should be a due respect had of all worthy
adventurers, an especial consideration of the charges and hazard of the first
discoueries: which the solertious Hollander examples us, by forbidding their
own Subjects to trade to those places which some particular purse has, or
shall find out, before that the first Founders have received reasonable
benefit of their pains and charges; allowing them some six returns to their
own private adventures, before any else set thitherward. If those adventures
or returns were increased here for the Finders content, and profit: there is
no man would grudge it. But to keep others out for ever, unless they pay, and
submit themselves according to their order, and to their government; or under
the pretense of one place found to include more then was ever meant; seems
very injurious. Again, my Proposition is not any way so tumultuous, as that
thereby I would excuse all order and form of Government, in Trades, or
otherwise to intend a promiscuous kind of calling, or rather confusion of all
sorts. Who knows not that the Commonwealth consists, Non ex medico, and
medico; sed ex medico, and Agricola? as also that there must be an Oeconomicall
and discreet partition and proportion among the members; Diverse trades, to
maintain the general body Commerce? I have only poynted at some aberrations,
but as the Nouice, traveling through strange Countries, Topmando, or tanquam
canis ad Nilum. The prosecuting of this Argument would draw on a larger
discourse then all the whole former, and would then exceed a Corollary, and
detain the Reader too long. Neither like I the issue of meddling, when men tire
themselves with controuling of public matters, yet many times cannot manage
their own affairs. I make no intrusion into Merchants Mysteries, neither
desire to pry into the States secrecy. It was a foolish complaint of the Poet,
Cur aliquid vidi? it is much more for me to say, Cur aliquid scripsi? I am so
far from giving any cause of public offense, that I would not justly provoke
any private person. I was borne in the City, and live amongst Seamen. And as
some Almanacke-makers, when they pretend exactness in their Calculations,
though they do but roue, use to appropriate their observations to the place
they live in: so I, writing with the same knowledge, would say I desire good to
the Meridian of these two places; notwithstanding, as they say also, These may
serve alike to all the Land.

FINIS.

