HEAVENLY KNOWLEDGE

Directing a Christian to ye. assurance of his Salvation in this life Written
in Latin by Barthol: Keckerm. done into English by

The second Edition with Addition

Pro. 14.6 Knowledge is easy to him that will understand Ecclus. 6.35 Be
willing to hear every godly discourse Let Christ be magnified in me whether
it be

Christ is to me life

Death is to me gain



London Printed for Thomas Jones 1625.

The Chair KNOWLEDGE
The Priests lips should preserve Knowledge Malach



The Church. DEVOTION
My house shall be called ye. house of Prayer Matthew.



REPENTANCE
Baptism 1. Pet. 1.20 21.



FAITH
the Lords supper 1. Cor. 10.^.4.





This pains, whatsoever it be, is Dedicate, TO THE SERVICE, AND GOOD of the
Church of God, under the Patronage and Protection of the thrice Worthy and
Religious, my much honored Friends: The Right Honorable Countess of
Devonshire; A virtuous Woman indeed; like Her that was righteous before God,
and walked in all the Statutes and Ordinances of the Lord without reproof.
Luke 1.
The Lady ANNE NEVIL: Parallel to that Gracious Gentlewoman of her Name, Annah,
the mother of Samuel, famous for her zeal in the Spirit, 1. Sam. 1.

The Lady ANNE FETTIPLACE: comparable to none better, then that Good Annah, the
Widow, A President of Piety and devotion. Luke 2.

and

Mistress MABELL BLENERHASSET. This is that Elect Gentlewoman, whom I love in
the truth, not only for that Oil of Grace in Her self, but for that Ointment
of Goodness powered upon Me. Quod spiro and placeo, (si placeo) ejus est. That
I breath, and live, and write, and please; if I do so, it is from her, (I must
acknowledge it ever with thanks) next under God, and my Parents.

T. V.

A PARENETIQVE DIRECTED ESPECIALLY TO THEM that call themselves Catholics.
In the Septuagint of Sixtus 5. his Edition Pro. 27.21. you have this sentence,
which is not in our Bibles, (...). An honest and upright heart will quickly
seek after knowledge and information of the Lord. Howsoever then the scornful
take pleasure in scorning, and the fools hate knowledge. Pro. 1.22. yet be
sure thou apply thine heart to instruction and thine ears to the words of
Knowledge. Pro. 23.12.

GOod Reader, there be now some years past, since I gave the onset to the
Translation of this Book, a Book of small volume, but of great valor, of a
little price, but very precious. The Author himself is famous, well known to
have been a man rarely qualified, and beautified with admirable endowments, the
characters whereof are to be seen in his writings; a man, by whose exquisite
skill and exact endeauours I persuade my self we should have had (if the thread
of his life had been a little more lengthned) that (...) our Fathers dreamed
of lively portayed, fully perfected. But I list not to stand any longer on this
theme, this only I will add, that it is hard to say whether the Author does
more commend the Works or the Works the Author. In this little Theological
Tract (wherein summarily are delivered the heads of Christian Religion) I have
traced his steps with all diligence and faithfulness, and that out of a
longing desire from my hearts root in Christ Jesus, to further the simplest of
my Country-mens grouth in all godliness, wishing that they would not think light
of my labors In templo Dei offert vnusquisque quod potest aurum, argentum and
lapides prociosus, alii byssus and purpura and coccu^ offerunt nobiscu^ been
agitur, ^^tulerimus pelles and capraru^ pilos, et tame^ Apostolus
co^temptibiliora nostra magis necessaria (...) Hier. in prolog: Galeato.
(slender though they be) for whose sakes they were primarily undertaken. And
those are all unlettered and Ignorant persons, which are either such as have
lived under the Gospel, and that so long, that Heb. 5.12
for their time they might have been teachers, but by reason of their gross
and dull ears they be but babes in understanding, and have need to be
instructed in the very first Principles of Religion; or they be such as do
live in the bondage and captivity of more then Egyptiacall darkness of
Popery, who being beclouded with the mist of erroneous doctrine, have not as
yet had the clear beams of the Gospel shining in their hearts. With the
former sort, or at lest such of them who seek for knowledge as for gold, Pro.
2.4.
my pains (whatsoever it be) I am persuaded will not altogether be lost. But
for the latter I am a feared, I shall but be accounted to sing a song to deaf
cares. For such (alas!) is the bewitching Cup of that Whore of fornications,
Reu. 17.1.2
although her vanity and vileness be as open as the Sun, that she not only
keeps fast in bondage whom she has once lulled asleep, D.D. Halls Quo
vadis? p. 15 1. edition
entangleth also every day more and more lovers, the Lord of Heaven permitting,
the Devil of Hell seducing, the Locusts of the infernal pit assayling both by
Sea and Land to gain unto them Proselytes. Such is the impudence of this
whorish presumptuous woman of Rome, Iere. 3.3. Ezec. 16.30
that she does not after the manner of other women. For other Harlots are
wooed, Ezec. 16.3 Ezec. 23.4
but she does woo; others have gifts sent unto them from their Lovers, but
she sends to her Lovers gifts and fair promises of preferments and
promotion* if they will take part in her whoredoms. And this (to give one
instance for all) that learned and Religious Doctor thinks to have been the
chiefest motive of D D. Carriers Apostacy, D D. Hakewels Answ: to the 2.
letter, page 25.
in that perceiving his ambitious hopes to quail at home, he would try his
fortune there, where Abbyes and Bishoprics, and perhaps, Cardinalships are
promised to such as with more diligence then others negotiate for the Pope. Her
Proctors and Factors she sets about this work, are the Jesuits and
Seminaries, men that have devoted themselves to all ill services, Liu. alicubi.
Quibus qu^stui sunt animi superstitione capti, that is, as Saint Peter seems
to me elegantly to express it, Through covetousness with fained words make
merchandise of men's souls, 2 Pet. 2.3.
and so in fine, (...) not only perverting, but subuerting silly souls, as
the word imports, Act. 15.24. And surely such as the mistress is, such are her
messengers, she of a most impudent face, they of most impudent carriage: she a
strumpet queen, they her bastadly brood. These DD. Hals Quo^vadis? Page 70.
Panders to their own Mother, for the enhansing of her power, and the
enlarging of her pomp, according to their commission, get themselves with all
ill-speede to foreign Nations. What State is not haunted with these ill
spirits? yea what house? yea what soul? etc. DD. Halls Censure of Travel,
Page 57. We see the proof of their importunity at home. No bulwark of Law, no
Bars of Justic^ (though made of three trees) can k^epe our rebanished
fugitives from returning, from intermedling. Id. Ibid. Page 56. His Holiness
knows full well what a sweet morsel he lost, when this Kingdom shakt off
his tyrannical yoke, and therefore for regaining hereof, Reu. 16.13
he blows over whole Jesuits like Apricocks heretofore, here and there one
succored in a great Man's house, now you may have them in every Country
village, I.D so that we may say (I fear me) of them, as Rob. Grosthead, a
good B. of Lin^. in Hen. 3. days, said of the Popes Legates. So many disguised
daily come into the Realm, that the very names of them recited, would be
tedious for any man to hear. Fox Mar. p. (mihi) 326.
swarms of these Locusts into England, where sitting theeuishly in blind
corners of our streets they entrap the simple folk, and lurking in their
secret dens of darkness they ensnare the poor and wavering minded, making
them, being once caught in their grin Mat 21 15
two times more the Chidren of darkness then they themselves are. Which indeed
how can it otherwise fall out, sithence their doctrine and their doings be
both of darkness The Doctrine of the Papists, a doctrine of darkness.
Their doctrine as it is a hotchpotch of beggarly rudiments; like a beggars
cloak full of patches, some of Iudaisme, some of Turcisme, some of Paganism,
some of Pelagianisme (and in some what is it else but a Vt quicquid passim in
variis regionib. est sordiu^, tande^ per diuer so flumina in mare vnum
deportatur: it a quicquid blasphemia ru^ in variis ac diuersissimis sectis
reperitur, totu^ id confluxit in Romana^ colluuiem. Tilleman Hesbus.
compound of errors?) so in nothing more does it bewray it self to be raked
out of the pit of darkness, then that it will not abide the light of Gods Word
to be tried by. For what 2 Cor. 6.14.
Communion has darkness with light? are not these two (...). Hereupon, well
knowing what would betide them Iuel Apolog page 116. The Religion of Papistrie
is like a Curtain made to keep out the light. B.R.
if the Gospel should clearly shine forth in all men's hearts; they muffle the
understanding of the simple people, giving them to wit, that all is Oracles
that they speak, not giving them once leave or leisure, yea, which is more,
interdicting them to search the holy Scriptures with the Act. 17.11
Noblemen of Beraea, and to see whether those things be so as they speak
them. Let our late worthies, who have descried the imposture of the Church of
Rome, let them speak in this case and hear their verdict. Nos luci fidimus,
(says blessed Apolog. ecclesiae Anglic page 147.
Jewel) isti tenebris, We trust and desire to be tried by the light of Gods
Word, they put their confidence in darkness, Vt latro crucem, ita isti
horrent verbu^ Dei. Iuel.
whereupon it is that a thief stands not in more fear of the Gallows, then
they do of the Scriptures: We labor to plant knowledge in all (says the
reverend, and my much honored My Lord of Chichester in his Preface to his
Book entitled, Directions to know the true Church.
Lord of Chichester) and are desirous that every man may know the things
needful for his salvation; they labor to hold all in ignorance: their hope is
not in the goodness of their cause, for they see the ruins of Babylon falling
eueryday; only their care is to blind you, and keep you Ignorant. Jf the
light of knowledge might freely shine to the world, Popery would soon be
ashamed of it self, says D D. Halls Que vadis* p. 3^* 1. Ed^^.
another worthy in our Church. And not to be infinite in this kind, M. Anton.
de Dominis (who was once welcomed by us from the Tents of Antichrist, and is
ours still, if covetousness, the root of evil, and hypocrisy, the color of
good has not put out both his eyes) confesses in that little book wherein he
expresses the reason of his departure out of the Chapter of Rome; the Prodromus to
his larger and more fruitful labors, that this closing up of the Scripture
from the people, gave him occasion to suspect their Religion, and to fear his
estate, and to think on conversion; freely professing there in these terms,
Scripturae summa apud nos ignoratio, M. Anton. de dominis Archiep. Spalat.
that there is nothing whereof the Papists are more ignorant, then of the
Scriptures. Nay, a certain Bishop of Italy was not ashamed to tell Claudius
Espencaeus, Master Sheldon ex Claud. Espenc. Coment in cap 1 Epist. ad Titum.
a famous Pontifician, that the learned men of Italy it self were afraid to
study the holy Scriptures, least thereby they should become Heretics, and
that therefore they employed themselves in commenting upon the Popes Law
books, Decrees, and the Decretalls: the which Book, though full of lies,
contradictions, impertinences, yet because it is the Popes book it must be
respected, whilst the holy Scripture lies as it were in the streets
neglected. And therefore to bar their ^educed followers utterly from this
godly exercise of reading, they bear them in hand that to read the Scripture
is very perilous Quia experimento manifestu^ est, si sacra Biblia vulgari
lingua passim sine Discrimine permittantur, plus inde ob hominum temeritatem
ditrimenti quam vtilitatis oriri, idcirco etc. Index lib. prohibit confect. a
deput. Concilii Trident. reg. 4. Quid quod populus non solum caperet fructum ex
Scripturis, sed etiam caperet detrimentum acciperet enim facillime occasionem
errandi tum in doctrina fidei, tum in praeceptis vitae and morum. Bellarmin.
Lib. 1. de verbo Dei. cap. 15. see DD. Hakewells Answer Likewise to D D. Car.
second letter, Page 11.
and the cause of erring from the faith. Sed execratione ac detestatione
dignior est ista vox quam responsione. Hiper. de quotid. ^lectione S. Script
lib. 1. page 175. Wicked impostores! as if God our heavenly Father, who has
made his Will and Testament, and has revealed it by writing unto us his
Children, would not have it Vehementer ab istis disse^tio, qui nolint ab
idiotis legi diuinas literas in vulgi linguam transfusas, five quasi Christus
ta^ inuoluta docuerit, vt vix a pauculis theologis possint intelligi, sieve
quasi religionis Christanae prasidium in hec situm fit sinesciatur, etc. Erasm.
in Paracles. ad Christian philosophiae studiu^
read and understood b^ us? Blasphemous wrethes! ^ if God, who can neither b^
deceived nor deceive, ca^ sing his holy Will to be pe^ned, both as touching h^
own Worship, and also ^ touching the means of man Salvation, and that so
powe^fully, and yet plainly wit^ all, that he should seek her^ by to Neque
adeo (...) humanus suit Deus, vt voluerit huius rei ignor^ tione per omnes
aetates homines torqueri, cum (...) que vllum in Sacris Scripturis passus est
esse locu^ quem si accurate pensitemus, interpretari non pos^mus. Aug.
Steuchius in Genes. cap. 2.
entrap and enfold h^ glorious Creature Man, t^^ Creature of his good-wil^ with
the mists of Ignoran^ and Error? Far be it from the thought of every go^^
Christian, once to think the from such a good tree shou^^ Woe unto you (says
Christ) that take away t^^ Key of knowledge, Luke 11.52.
^^me such bad fruit, that from ^^ch a blessed cause should ^^oceed such a
dissastrous ef^^ct, that from the light should ^^ow darkness, Dei ordinatio
non potest esse peccatorum obstetri^. Cyprian.
from the re^erend reading of the Scrip^^res, errors. The Papists doings
works of darkness. John 8.44.
As for their ^oings, that they also are of ^^rkenesse, it would (if I ^ould
particularize them) re^uire a large Volume. But (...) single out, and to
instance (...) one, wherein they much re^^mble their prince of darke^esse, the
Devil, who has ^eene a murderer from the ^eginning. Let their cruel and
barbarous butchering of (...) many Saints of God, meere^^ in the matter of
Religion; ^t the bloody stabbing, and ^iolent murdering of so good and
gracious Kings, which ^hewed themselves like good ^Zechias, forward and bent to
reformation; Though we be in DD. Carriers books no less the^ Schismatiks
for obiecting the hainousnes of this horrible Treason, yet we will not leave to
object it, but cry and thunder against it, being as his sacred Majesty has
rightly observed, not only a crying sin of blood, but a roaring and
thundering sin ^ fire and brimstone. DD. Hakw Answer to DD Carrier, Ca. 2.
Sect. 13 See likewise the worthy S^ F. Bacon (now Lord Saint Albon) his
Essays, Pa^ 2. Ess. 1. Of Religion.
Let the Devil in the Vault, who was the contriuer of that matchless Treason,
and the Powder. Pioners, that should have bee^ the Actors of the intende^
Tragedy; let all these speak^ if they belong not to darkness, if they be not
the son of the night? John 13.2. They the dig through houses in the dark,
etc. Job 2^ 16, 17.
Qui male agit odit lucem. Ask the Powder plotters, if they hated no^ and
shunned the shining ligh^ least their deeds should hau^ been reproved,
censured condemned as they were, an^ as it fell out happily to thi^ State and
Country by the watchful eye of his Providence, who is the Psalm* 121.4.
Keeper ^ our Jsrael, and never slumbers nor sleeps, but is always ready at
hand to shend and defend his people, whom he has set his love upon, even for
his own mercy and goodness sake; howbeit we have by our sins deserved to
be cassier'd out of his favor, to be overtaken with imminent dangers, and to
be ouerturned with the power and powder, the fire and fury of our enemies. But
ever loved and blessed be his merciful goodness and patience, Psalm. 124.6.
that he has not given us over as a pr^y unto their teeth. Their snare was
broken, and our soul was delivered. O let this mighty and wonderful
deliverance be written on the posts of our gates; let us be ever talking of
it to our neighbors and friends, to our children, and strangers, that all
with joint mouth, and consent of heart, may praise the Lord God of Israel for
ever.

Now I do from my soul desire, that the blind-folded Papists, and ignorant
Catholics (as they will be termed) would but a little consider of these
Doings, of this Doctrine, Hispan. reformat. C. 10.
and then tell me if they be not nuzled in most pernicious heresy, and most
tyrannically held under the, very power of darkness it self. Quod si illi
haec omnia tranquillo animo et ad audiendum discendumque comparate spectare
velint non tantum probabunt institutum nostrum, qui relictis erroribus Christum
eiusque Apostalos secuti sumus sed ipsi etiam a se deficient, se que vltro
aggregabu^t ad parts nostras Iuel. Apolog. page 148. See the occasion^ of Mr.
Copleys conversion, and among the rest you shall find the Powder-plor. Copl.
Doct. and Mor. obseruat. cap. 2. sect. 6.
They that have but the least spinke of ingenuitie, will bewray betime, and
will timely bewail their woeful estate. These (to use the words Ezech. 20.43.
of the Prophet) shall remember one day their ways, and ^ll their doings,
wherein they ^aue been defiled, and they shall loath themselves in their ^wne
fight for all their e^ils that they have commit^ed. And they shall know that
^he Lord is GOD, when he ^ath wrought in them this co^^ersion for his own
Names ^ake, not according to their wicked ways, nor according ^o their corrupt
doings* Such desperate ones as Jeremy describes, Iere. 18.12 Noluerun^ veritati
consentire nec victi. et Quod volumus, sanctu^ est. August. vincent Epist. 48.
But for the ignorant, obstinate, ^bdurate Papist, who will not ^eare and
understand, and be ^onuerted, who spurns at the ^ery motion of Reformation,
Quaerimus vos qui a perist^, vt de inuentis gaudeamus, de quibus perditis
dolebamus, August. Vincent. Epist. 48.
and being settled on his lees, grows bold and impudent ^n the cause, (for
who so bold ^s blind Bayard?) Let him be ^gnorant, let him be misted, ^et him
be miss lead still These men shall one day know, that there has been many
Prophets among them who are clear from the bloo^ of all men; Si saepitis, been
et recte, si autem non sapitis, non vestri curam gessisse non pa^it^bit.
August. lib. 3. contra Epist. ^e^^ an. c. 59. ad finem. Pr^l^ps.
and they shall fin^ that their blood must rest up on their own hard hearts,
an^ stiff necks.

What Sir? may some o^ them say, do you so hastil^ include us all in the pit
o^ confusion, because we pr^fesse another Religion? I te^ you truly, we have
as goo^ hope to come to Heaven a^ your self. Do we wal^ in any other save in
the step of our -- with them still,
Custom has borne must way,
and ever will,
And good or bad, what their Forefathers did.
They Will put in practice too,
(else God forbid.)
G. W.
forefathers, a^^ progentors? D^ we profess an^ other Religion, Tantum se isti
debent inscitia ac tenebris superiorum temporum, luel. Apol. page 138.
then that which the bequeathed unto us, and which we will live and dye in too
The Moales speech in Mast. Scots Vnio. page 37. of his Philomythology.
We our forefathers customs still obey,
Do as they did, and follow their blind way:
Not striving busily our wits t'approue
By searching doubts, but rather show our love,
By loving even their errors that are gone.
Or reverently believing they had none.


True, it is like enough you will do so, whatsoever be said to the contrary.
For as the wise King says of a fool, Prou. 27.22
Bray a fool in a mortar, and he will never be the wiser. The holy Spirit
has branded those people with black, who practiced that long since, which you
plead for now. 2 King. 17 41. v. Mr. Scots Vnio. in the Epimythium. p. 48.
So those nations feared the Lord, and served their Images too: So did their
children, and their childrens children: as did their fathers, so do they unto
this day. It was but a Pagans argument to Theodosius the Emperor; Seruanda est
tot seculis fides nostra, Ex Ambros. Epist lib. 5. Epist. 30.
and sequendi sunt maiores nostri, qui secuti sunt foeliciter suos. And the
Emperors Letter to the States of Germany assembled at Worms against Luther,
sounds and runs in the same tenor. Fox Martyrol. page 851 col. 2.
Our predecessors were obedient to the Romish Church, and therefore we cannot
without great infamy and stain^ of honor, degenerate from the examples of our
elders, but will maintain the ancient Faith, and give aid to the Sea of Rome.
But here first of all we desire no better advocate for our selves then
Gratian: I will set down his own words. Si consuetudinem fortassis opponas,
Disti^ct. 8. cap. ^.
duertendum quod Dominus dicit, egosum via and veritus. Non dixit, egosum
consuetudo, sed veritas* Etcer^^ (vt beati C^priani vtamur fante^tia) qualib^t
consuetu^do quant^^is vetusta, quantumuis vulgata veritati omnino est
postponenda, and vsus, qui veritati contrarius est, abolendus. Secondly, M.
Caluins note on the fourth of John's Euangell, and the 20. verse, Ioh. Calvin in
Euangel. Ioh.
is here worth the noting Verae pietatis desertoribus solenne est, vt
patrociniu sibi ex Patru^ exemplis quarant. It is a very ordinary thing with
Sectaries and Apostates from Religion, to urge for their doings their fathers
examples. (...). Acts 7.51.
Oh ye Apostaticall generation, which do as much as in you ^es, to resist the
Holy Ghost, as your Fathers have done, so will you do too.

But your time blind obedience well befits. Mast. Scots hylomythie pa. 40

Such earth bread, doltish, dull, and sluggish wits,
But ayery Spirits acquainted with the light,
Will not be led by custom from the right.
No love, no friends, no predecessor shall
Pervert their judgments; they examine all.
This is the practice of some in France, observed out of Calvin, by Reg. on the
artic. of Religion, Art. 21.
Your Fathers have stepped awry in some points of doctrine, and you having once
entered their by paths will needs run into the desert of error. Your Fathers
living in the stinking air of Popery, could not choose but be tainted with
some infection of Heresy. What then? Dare you say they died in their
pollution? Did God reveal unto you the time, the hour of their conversion? Do
you not know that God might have his secret working performed upon them, even
at the very last gasp? Do you not acknowledge that God can save such as are
not pertinatious in their Heresies, even, Jnter pontem and fontem? When there
is no sensible hope? When their foul is at the pits brink, he can call it
back again, that the pit shall not shut its mouth upon it. I have often
greatly wondered (says M. D. Luther) how that in all the time of that
tyrannizing Sect of the son of perdition, Luther in epist. ad Galat. ca. 2.
tom. 5. operum fol. 311
for so many hundreths of years together, the Church should subsist in the
midst of such great darkness, and in the throng of so many errors. Afterward, I
conceived that there were certain called of God by the Word of his Gospel and
Baptism, who walked in the simplicity and humility of their heart, thinking
the Monks only, and such as were anointed of Bishops to be holy men and
Religious, but themselves to be profane and irreligious, and in no wise to be
compared with the other. Whereupon finding themselves empty of all good works
and merit^ which they might oppose to the displeasure, and rigor of Gods
Justice, they clung close to the passion and death of Christ, and in that
simplicity were saved. Neither was this the case of simple ones only, but
even of their deep Doctors, 1 Ioh, ^.19
their holy Hermits, their sanctified Monks, of whom I may truly say, That
howsoever they lived among them, yet were they not o^ them, Which assertion
though it might have been doubte^ of all their life time, their habits, and
cooles, and manner of living, coloring it out to the world that they were
Papists, yet the point of death approaching put the matter out of question;
when for all their regularities and obseruances, as Monkish as ever for all
their comport and carriage, as superstitious as ever: for all their means and
manner of living, We do justly conclude that many Papists especially our
Forefathers, laying their whole trust upon Christ and his merits at their last
breath, may be, and oftentimes are saved.
as Popish as ever could be devised, they will be found to have dyed true
Protestants, casting from them all trust and relyance on their own works, and
putting their whole trust and affiance in the mercies of God through Christ
Jesus. Such was that good Hermit Agatho, good in name, and in truth good. Such
was that blessed Saint Bernard, the best Monk that ever was. Both which on
their deathbeds to have renounced themselves utterly, His Maieties speech in
the Parliam. 1605. De Agatho ne vide Luther vbi supra fol. 313. De Bernar in 4
cap. ad Galat. fol. 400. tom. 5.
and to have had recourse only unto Christ, you may read in that worthy
Author before cited. And I think verily (says Luther) that Jerome and Gregory,
and many other Fathers and Hermites were after the same manner saved. And the
ground of this his thus reasoning is, for that we are not to doubt, but that
even in the Old Testament, many of the Kings of Israel, and other Idolaters
likewise were saved, for because it pleased God even in the hour of death to
turn their hearts, causing them to cast away all their vain confidence they
put in their Idols, and to apprehend that promise of God as concerning that
seed of Genesis 22.18
Abraham which was to come, to wit, Christ, in whom all the Nations of the
world should be blessed. Vide in hanc sente^tiam D D. Hake^ in his answ. to DD.
Carier an English Italionated Doctor. c. 2. sect. 19 p. 127. Potens est dominus
miserecordia sua indulgentiam dare. Non tamen quia aliquando erratum est, ide^
semper errandum est. Cyprian epist. 73. v. etiam, Directions to know the true
Church, page 83. Non intelligendi viuacitas sed credendi simplicitas tutissimos
facit. Aug. Apostolus de iudais dicit zelum Dei habent sed non secundum
scientiam: pares estis omnino exceptis duntaxat illis, quicunque in vobis sunt,
scientes quid verum sit, and pro animositate sua peruersitatis, contra
veritatem etiam sibi notissimam dimicantes. August. Vincent. epist. 48.
Hence proceed our charitable censures of such of your Fathers, who living in
the darkness of superstition, could not so well see the way to heaven, and to
reformation in their life time, as their meek hearts could have wished. But as
for those obstinate wretches, furious spirits, branded with the mark of the
Beast, and therefore firebrands of hell, too too headstrong in their erroneous
opinations, as the Lord gave them up to a reprobate sense, that they should not
receive the love of the truth and so be saved, and they now fry for it: So
assure your selves, if ye insist in their steps and resist all good
admonitions, you can never fly their Mat. 23.33
punishment. For it is just with God, that those which have been Quos similis
culpa coinquinat par quoque paen^ constringer. Gregor.
pares culpa, shall be also pares pana. Be partakers of their sins, you
shall certainly be sharers in their punishment* O then ye Mat. 3.7
generation of Vipers be forewarned of the heavy vengeance to come. Do not
with the deaf Adder always stop your ears to all godly and Christian
admonitions, but take them at length to heart, and say not with your selves,
We have had rank Papists to our Fathers, we have had such as have derided and
mocked your Orthodoxe Religion, for our patterns and presidents: for I dare
boldly affirm in the words of our Savior, that unless ye repent and be
converted, you shall likewise perish. Be not like them in Saint Austine, Verum
est quod dicitis, to profess all true, that we say, Non est quod
respondeatur, and that you have nothing to say against it, Aug. Vincent epist.
48.
Sed durum est nobis traditionem Paretum relinquere; but it seems a hard
thing unto us to forsake the faith and tradition of our Fathers. For (consider
it well in your hearts) why should your Fathers examples mislead you into
error!

O what a senseless part is this in you, Mast Scots Phylomythologie. p. 41.

Your Fathers faults and errors to allow?
And not much rather to reform your own,
By shunning the defect which they have shown?
Shall the vain conceit of your Fathers worth, Ezech 20.18.19.20. Quos
Christus vocat secum in aternum mansuros, pater forsa^ reuocat secum in
aeternu^ arsuros. vid Bern Epist. 2.
weigh down Gods holy Word? Will you confer, nay prefer man to God? If the
Fathers of your bodies lead you one way, and Father of Spirits bid you go
another, have you not learned to obey God rather then men? will you not grant
that which reason has always held for certain and grounded truth, Demosth.
contra Aristocrat.
Viuendum est legibus non exemplis? Go to then, think not to shroud your
doings with your Fathers exemplarie dealings. For as it is well uttered by the
Heathen Orator, Jmpudens est Oration dicere, sic factum est. But let the bright
and clear Law of God shine in your hearts, let it dwell in you plentifully in
all wisdom, here the Word of God from others, Si non dedignentur legere, male
mihi sit, ita enim in tanta causa iurare ausim, nisi tandem capiantur. Petr.
Mart. Loc. com. c. 6. clasi 1. sect. 14.
read it by your selves, Ab eo speranda est intelligentia, qui and pulsantibus
aperiet, and querentibus demonstrabit, and petentib. non denegabit. Hilar. in
Ps. 125. Multum domini de tua bonitate praesumo, quoniam tu ipse docet petere,
quarere, pulsare, and tu domine, qui iubes petere, fac accipere: consulis
quarere, da and inuenire: doces pulsare, aperi pulsanti: and confirma nie
infirmum, restaura nie perditum, suscita me mortuum, etc. August. Meditat. cap.
39. sect. 9.
pray to God for a right understanding of it, mark it well, ponder it in your
heart, and examine all your tenants and courses by it, and then the Lord
opening your eyes to see your own mis-doings, and your Fathers mis-leadings,
you will confess your Fathers follies, wherein you have lived, and profess to
leave them with all speedy reformation in new obedience unto Gods holy will
and Commandments. And this I pray God, that of his infinite goodness, he will
grant unto you, that so, by the conversion of your souls, his holy Name may be
glorified, his Angels gladded, his faithful confirmed, ^ our hearts comforted,
and the borders of Christ's Church enlarged; and that for the merits of Chrst
Jesus, his only true natural Son, our alone all-sufficient Savior and
Redeemer, Amen.

An Apologetique to t^ Christian Reader for the work in and about the
Translation.
Gregor. Nazian. Monostich. Horat. Carm. l. 3. od 6. Reu. 1.8.
(...). Hinc omne principium, live re^ exitum. Of all thy studies and intentions
se^
That God the Alpha and Omega be.
DA veniam Scriptis -- remembering that of the ^postle, 1 Cor. 12.7. The
ma^festation of the Spirit is gi^ to every man to profit with The Spirit, (...)
th^^ is the g^ and graces of the spirit of (...) are bestowed upon us, no^ be
wrapped up in a Napkin (...) hid in the earth, but for ma^festation. (...)
Whereupon the a^ent Greeks well expressed (...) and light by one common na^
(...) as Plutarch shows in the ^^futation of that common M^ (...), and what our
Savior spoke with a primary direction to his Apostles: Vos estis lux mundi,
Ye are the lights of the world, may in a secondary application be affirmed of
every Christian, or else Saint Paul would not say, Among whom ye shine as
lights in the world. Now least any one should exempt himself, therefore every
one is put in the ^ext. (...)
For as there are none furnished with all gifts, so there are none but they
have some gift, and the doner will look for his own with advantage. As every
man therefore has received the gift, so let him minister thereof to others,
for the good of others. Look not every one on your own things, (...)
but every one on the things of other. A good lesson for this incroaching and
Monopolizing world, wherein every man is for himsefe, as the proverb says,
and as the Apostle

The Attestation of a friend touching this Book, inserted in a Letter to the
Translatour.
-- In your Translation you have labored, that they that will read may have
delight; and that they that are desirous to commit to memory might have ease;
and that all into whose hands it comes might have profit. 2 Man. 2.25

Adam Airay S.S. Theol. Bat.

M.D. Esquire, To his good Friend, T.V.
WHat Thou do teach, by others heretofore
Has likewise bin. But yet by no man (...)
To the true life. That by thy godly care,
Thou and thine Author equally do share.
Thou praisest him Translating, but if he
Understood English he would more praise th^^e.
Thou to our Nation have his Doctrine shown;
Which to our vulgar else had not ^eene known;
As much by this thou get'st as ere he wan^^:
England praise Vicars, D^nt^k her, Ke^ke^man.
Mich. Drayton

(...) (...) ^postle complains. Every man seeks his own things, and none
^he things of Christ Jesus. But what says the Scripture? Non prohibet
Euangelium nisi cupiditatem, non praecipit nisi ^haritatem. The Gospel (says
Austin) does not prohibit any thing more then incroaching co^^etousnesse, it
enioynes nothing so much as dilating charity. It is ^ poor center of a man's
action, Himself. It is right earth, as a ^reat Scholar speaks. Where^ore,
let us attend then to the Apostles rule, who wills, that every ^^e should seek
another wealth; and he prescribes us no other rule, ^^en that he himself
walked in. Non quaero quid mihi vtile ^ed quid multis, I seek not ^ine own
profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved.

By him that desires thy profit and proficiency in knowledge and godliness. T.V.

The Contents.
I. A monit^ it Preface to Catholique^ II. A Manuduction to Theology. III.
Brief directions for Communicants. IV. The Sum of Diuini^ie* V. The
Controversy touching F^^will. VI. A plain and profitable meth^^ of Peaching.
VII. The Gospel of Saint Thomas.
A GODLY AND ^euout Treatise, teach^ng with what due prepa^ation we ought to
come to the holy Communion, which is indeed an Abbrigement of the Systeme of
Divinity, and may serve for a Catechism of Christianity.
WHat is Christian Religion? De Religione, Zanch tom. 4. in fol page 263. and
Seqq.


It is that worship and service which every good and ^odly men ought by virtue
of ^ond and obligation to tender unto God himself. Wherein is chalked out unto
us the way as well of living here ^^nestly, Thologia disciplina est non
contemplatrix sed practica Syst. Theol. page 2. Is diuinas scripturas recte
legit, qui vertit verba in opera. Ber. Hoc Philosophia genus in affectibus
situ^ verius, quam in Syllogismis, vita est magis qua^ disputatio, etc. Eras*
in Paracel. ad studium Christian Philosoph.
as living hereaf^ happily; as Augustine sai^ in his Book of true Religion the
first Chapter. The o^ course of living well and happ^ consists in true
Religion, where we know the only true God, ^ worship him in holy purenes^ For
by Religion the soul ^ man, which before by sin^ was separate from God bei^
now reconciled, is again ^ed and reunited to God, from whence Religion has
its ^ry name: For when we ^lige, as it were; that is, obl^ and bind over again
o^ souls unto God, thou w^ empty our selves of all supe^stitious worship
contrary ^ Gods service. So says Lact^^ lib. 4. cap. 28. Syst. Theol. page 4.
and lib. 6. cap. ^ We are by the tie of Religi^^ bound and obliged unto G^^
whereupon it is called re-ligion, Calu. Instit. l. 1. c. 12.. 1
not as Cicero will have it, of relection, but of religation, in as much as God
does hereby bind us over to his service, whom it is our part to serve as our
Lord, and to obey as our Father. For in very deed this is the duty of man,
wherein the sum of all and the su^mitie of a blessed life does consist. This
is the very first step in wisdom, Omnes promiscue venerantur Deum, ^aucissimi
reuerentur. Call. Instit. l. 1. c. 2.. 2.
to know what it is for God truly to be a Father unto us, and him with all
sanctity to worship and reuere, obeying his will, and wholly deuoting our selves
to his service.

Which be then the principal parts wherein Christian Religion, or, the
special actions wherein the worship of God stands.

There be three of them. First, The meditation of the word of God, and
consequently of faith in Christ our Savior, which is especially comprehended
in the word of God, to whom we must refer all in our meditation. Secondly*
The use of the Sacraments instituted by Christ. Thirdly, Invocation of Gods
holy name joined with the love of God, and our Neighbor* Of the former and
last part of Christian Religion, we ha^^ spoken else where, and at another
time; at this opportunity it is our purpose only t^ treat of the middle or
secon^ Branch of Christian Religion* or the service of God, an^ therein
touching the use o^ the p^incipall Sacrament o^ the New Testament, namel^ the
Lords Supper, which is called commonly the holy Communion, as also the
Eucharis^ that is, a most eminent sacrifice of thanksgiving to Christ our
Savior.

Wher^in consists the true use and due preparation to the holy Communion?

In two things; to wit, in Knowledge, and Devotion.

Of what sort is that Knowledge* which appertains to our commendable
preparation unto, and our lawful using of the holy Communion?

It is of two sorts, General, and Particular.

Of how many kinds is our general knowledge?

Of two either it is Prima^y and indepentant, or Secondary, and arising from
the ^ormer.

How many parts has the former kind?

It consists of a double do^trine, the one of God, the other of Gods Word.

What is God?

1. Syst. Theol p. 10. 2. Ibid. p. 93. 3. Ibid. p. 105 and seqq. 4. Ibid. p.
116 5. Ibid. p. 117 Zanch. Co^fess. p. 483. and Loc. Comun: Theol. 1. de
diuinis nominibus and proprietatibus. Zanch. tom. 2. detribus Elohim in Illud
Ioannis. 1 Ioh 5.7. copiosissime Zan. tom. 1. Si non est vnus, non est. Tertul
Deus est vnus imo, si dici potest, vnissimus. Bern. Syst. Theol. p. 14. contra
Tritheitas and Manichaeos. (...) Justin. Mar. and Damasc Syst. Theol. page 19.
De Deo loqui etiam vera periculosissimu^ est. Arno^. Syst Theol. p. 55. and 58.
God is a spiritual Essence, First, before all, most perfect* eternal.
Secondly, infinite* Thirdly, Almighty, of incomprehensible wisdom, goodn^sse.
Fourthly, mercy. Fifthly* Justice, subsisting in three persons, the Father, the
Son and the holy Ghost.

What are we to consider ^ God?

Two things, the Essence, a^^ Person.

What, and of what sort is ^ Essence of God?

It is most simple, and one^ one, so that God, in regard^ his Essence, is
simply on^ as ^he Scripture witnesse^ Deuter. 6. verse. 4. Heare^^ Jsrael, the
Lord our God is ^ God. 1. Tim. 2. v. 5. One G^^ and one Mediator.

What is the Person?

It is the manner of being God, whereby Gods Essence is made relative, and
respective; which relation notwithstanding neither multiplieth the Essence, nor
diuides it into parts, which may in some sort appear by the degrees of light
and heat. For in the Suns light, there are certain degrees, as morning or
twilight, and noone-light, or perfect sunshine. And yet for all those
degrees, the light is the same. So in heat lukewarm, and scalding hot,
though they make two degrees, yet they make up but one mumericall caliditie,
Ibid. p. 16.
which in a higher degree is in boiling water now, before being in the same
water inclining to fervent heat, in a lower degree So then, that we may apply
this instance to our present purpose, in some resemblance, the Persons of the
Deity, In Dei est alius and alius non aliud and aliud Vint. Lerinens. M^^^
D^^^ tam non habit hoe and illud, quam non haec and illa Bern.
or these diverse manners of Gods being, do not multiply the Divine Essence,
no more then the diverse degrees of heat or light do multiply the light or
heat^ so that I speak right when I say there are more persons in the divine
Essence, but it cannot be uttered without blasphe^y, to say there are in God
more Natures, or more Gods then one.

(...). Nazianze^ Qui nescis Trinitate^, ito ad Iordanem. Mat. 3. Aug. Syst. Th
p 46 vide etia^ p. 35. and seqq. Dicamus tres sed non ad praiudicia^ vnitat^,
dicamus vn^^ sed non ad confussionem Trinitatis. Ber. v. Syst. Theol p. 49.
(...). Na. Quomodo pluralitas in vnitate sit, aut ipsa vnitas in pluralitate,
scrutari hoc temeritas est, credere pietas est, nosse vita, and vita aeterna
est. Bern.
How many persons are there?

Three, the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, which is proved by manifest
Testimonies of holy Writ. Matthew. 28 19. Go teach all nations, baptizing them
in the nam^ (sc. by the Authority and appointment) of the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost. Job. 15.26. When that Comfort shall come, whom I will send
t^ you, from the Father, even t^ Spirit of Truth, who proceeds from the
Father, he well testify of me: where they are all three plainly named; the
Father, from whom the holy Spirit is sent; the Son, who sends; and the Holy
Ghost who is sent. 1. Ioh. 5 7. There be three which bear record in Heaven,
the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one, in Essence or
Nature.

How prove you that these three persons be that one God?

First, I must have it granted, that these three persons are distinct, because
he that sends, is distinguished from him that is sent, and he from whom, is
distinguished from him that is sent. Now I^^c. 15. plainly says, that Christ
is he that sends, the Holy Ghost him that is sent, and the Father, from whom
the Son sends the holy Ghost. Whence I do necessarily infer, that these
three manners of being in God are distinct: which being granted, I shall
easily prove this threefold manner of being, or these three Persons in the
divine Essence, to be that true God. For first, as touching the Father, the
very adversaries themselves yield, Christus est Deus (...) co^tra Ariu^ (...)
contra Apolinar. (...) contra Nestor. (...) contra Eutych. Syst. Theol. page
52. and seqq.
that he is truly God. And touching the Son, we have manifest testimonies
of the Scripture, Romans 9.5. Of whom (namely the Israelites) are the fathers, of
whom Christ came as concerning the flesh, who is God above all, blessed for
ever. If above all, therefore about those, who by reason of their excellent
gifts are called Gods. That the holy spirit is God, these Sentences of
Scripture plainly prove: Acts 5.3 Peter says to Ananias, Why has Satan
filled thy heart, that thou should lie against the holy Ghost? And presently
he adds, verse. 4. Thou have not lied unto men but unto God. Therefore the
holy Ghost is God. Another place is 1 Cor. 2.10. The Spirit searches all
things, even the profound things of God: And the verse following, For who
knows the things etc. Whence we may thus reason, whosoever knows the
secrets, the profound secrets of God; or which is all one, whosoever is
omniscient, is God: but the Holy Ghost is Omniscient. Ergo* The Mayor is
evident, the Minor is expr^sly in the Text. Secondly, whatsoever is in God, is
God: but the Holy Ghost is in God: Ergo. The Proposition is of certain truth,
for that God, who is a most simple Essence, void of all difference and
composition, cannot consist of any thing which is not God. The assumption is in
the Text, v. 11. where it is said; As the reasonable soul is in man: that is,
of the essence of man, so the holy Spirit is in God. Hitherto may tha testimony
1 Cor. 3.16. be referred: ^. August. Enchirid. cap. ^6.
Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the holy spirit dwells
in you? where the latter words do expound the former: for it is all one, as if
the Apostle had said; Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, seeing that
the Holy Ghost dwells in you, who is God* But if the Adversaries say, that
the spirit is nothing else, save the effects and gifts of God, they are most
manifestly confuted, and confounded by the words of the Scripture, 1 Cor.
12.4.5.6. There are diversities of gifts, but the same spirit; there are
diversities of ministrations, but the same Lord, etc. And verse 11. All these
gifts works that one and self same spirit distributing, etc. Whence arises
this argument; He that distributeth a gift, is not himself that gift that is
distributed, but the Holy Ghost is the distributer of all those gifts: Ergo.
The Proposition is clear enough. The Assumption is plain in the Text, where
it is said, that the spirit works, and distributeth al those gifts. Another
argument out of the same text may be this: He that is endued with a will, he
cannot be a bare virtue or accident, but is a substance subsisting by it self,
but the Holy Ghost; etc. Ergo. The Mayor is clear: for whosoever wills, he
understands, and whosoever wills and understands, he must be a
substance by it self subsisting. The Minor is clearly set down in the text,
where it is said; The Spirit distributeth to every one as he will.

Fuit principium essendi DEVS, sequiter cognoscendi principium VERBVM DEI, non
(...) Verbum Christi. Syst. Th p. 167. Qui Scriptura^ ignorant, Christu^
ignorant. Hieronym, de Scriptura, Zanch. Confess. page 482. item in illud Pauli.
2 Timothy 3.14 tom. 8. p. 319 and seqq.
I have heard the doctrine concerning God, tell me now besides what the holy
Scripture is?

It is that testimony and witness which God has given to Mankind, as touching
his own nature and will, and as touching those things which appertain to the
salvation of man.

How is the holy Scripture divided?

Three manner of ways: first, by reason of the Time wherein it was revealed:
secondly, by reason of that Authority it has in proouing: thirdly by reason of
the Matter which it handles.

How is the Scripture divided in respect of the time wherein it was revealed?

Into the Old and New Testament. The Old Testament therefore is that part of
the Scripture, which God revealed to the first of Mankind, and people of the
Jews which lived until the Ministry of Christ, which he revealed, I say, by
the Prophets, as by his Scribes and Notaries. But the New Testament is called
that part of the Scripture which God has revealed to Mankind after the birth
of Christ, by the Evangelists and Apostles, as by his Penmen or Notaries.

How is the Scripture divided, in respect of that authority it has in proving?

So it is divided into the books which are Canonical, and those which are not
Canonical, but Apocryphal?

Which do you call the Canonical Books?

Syst. Theol. page 169. item p. 173. Hi constituu^t (...). Chrysostom.
Those which are of undoubted authority in proving the Articles of Faith, or
which are the Square, and Rule of our faith: for Canonical is derived from
Canon, which signifies as much as a Rule or Square.

Of what sort are the Canonical books?

Of two sorts, either of the Old, or of the New Testament.

Which Books of the Old Testament are Canonical?

The Canonical Scripture of the old Testament is divided into four rancks,
Syst. The. page 182.
the first contains the five Books of Moses; the second, those Books which
are called Historical, as these; Joshua, Judges, Ruth, the two Books of
Samuel, the two Books of Kings, the two Books of the Chronicles, the Books
of Esdras, Nehemiah, Ester. The third, Books which are written in verse, which
are called Poetical, as these; Job, the Psalms of David, the Proverbs of
Solomon, Ecclesiastes, and the Song of Songs: the fourth comprehends the
Prophets, which are either greater Prophets, in number four, or lesser, to
wit, twelve.

Which Books of the New Testament are Canonical?

The Canonical Scripture of the New Testament is divided into the History of
the Evangelists, the Acts of the Apostles, the Apostles Epistles, and the
Prophecy, or Revelation of John.

Which are called Apocriphall, or not Canonical?

Syst. Theol. page 190.
Which are not of infallible truth and authority in proving the Articles of
faith, and consequently which are not the Rule, and Square of our belief, but
contain precepts of life, and historical instructions.

Which are those Apocryphal Books?

Among the Books of the Old Testament, as we have before said, there are some
found not to be Canonical, such as the Book of Tobias, Judith, Wisdom,
which falsely is ascribed to Solomon; Ecclesiasticus, or Syracides, the third
and fourth books of Esdras, all the Books of the Maccabees, Baruch with
Jeremy his Epistle, the Prayer of Manasses, the fragments of Ester, the
additions to Daniel, as is the Song of the three Children, the History of
Susanna, the History of Bell and the Dragon. None of all these Books are to
be found in the Hebrew tongue, in which Language only God would have the
Books of the Old Testament to be written, neither were they written by the
Prophets, or any person immediately called of God. Neither does Christ, the
Evangelists, or the Apostles cite them at any time: and to conclude, there be
many untruths in them. Wherefore when the Papists urge any thing out of these
Books against us, we must answer, that those Books contain not the
infallible Word of God, and consequently that they have no firm force, or
validity in proving.

How is the Scripture divided, in respect of the matter it handles?

Into the Law and the Gospel: for that part of Gods Word is called the Law,
wherein we are taught what we ought to do, but the Gospel is that part of
Gods Word, wherein we are taught, what we ought to believe, and consequently
wherein we have the remission of our sins promised us by faith in Christ

I have heard sufficiently, touching the division of the Word of God, J pray
you also instruct me in the proprieties of it?

That will I willingly do, so I first admonish you, that hereafter we shall
always take the holy Scripture for the Canonical Books only, and not at all
for the Apocryphal.

What is the first propriety of the holy Scripture?

The first propriety is, that it deriues all its authority from God alone, Syst
Theol. page 171.
not from the assembly of godly men, which is called the Church.

How prove you this?

I prove it by these reasons: first, the testimony of God has not any
authority from men. The Scripture is the testimony of God alone: Ergo. It has
none authority from men; yea, the most holy men that be; and consequently not
from the Church, which is nothing else but a company of godly and sanctified
men The force and pith of the argument you shall find, 1 Ioh. 5.9. If we
receive the witness of men, the testymonie of God certainly is greater.
Secondly, that must needs be before the Scripture in natural order, of which
the authority of the Scripture depends: But the Church is not before the Word
of God: Ergo. The Mayor proposition is evident, because that which depends of
another, must needs come after that, on which it depends. The Minor is thus
proved: That which is gathered, governed, regenerated by the Word, or by the
Scripture, that is in order after the Scripture. But the Church. Ergo. The
Mayor is plain, the Minor is proved by 1 Pet. 1.23. We are regenerated, and
borne anew by the word of God. James 1.18. He has begotten us by the word of
truth. Ioh. 17.20. Which by their word shall believe in me. Thirdly, the
foundation of any building depends not on the roof, or upper rooms, which are
built upon the foundation, but contrarily those same upper rooms, and the
roof depend upon the foundation: but the Word of God is the foundation: Ergo.
The Mayor is plain in it self. The Minor is confirmed by that, Ephesians. 2.20.
You are built upon the foundation of the Profits and Apostles. Tim. 3.15. Where
the Church is said to be the pillar and ground of truth. Whereto we answer, a
Dicto secundum quid a dictum simpliciter: For the Church is not called the
pillar and ground of truth, in regard of it self, but in regard of Christ the
head, who is that corner stone And further it is so called, in regard it is the
keeper of the Scripture, Syst. Theol page 181.
for so much as God has made the Church only to have to do with the treasury
of his Word, and in the Church, as on the pillar and door of his house, or
palace, he hangs those holy Tables, which every man must go thither to read.
No otherwise then the Magistrate hangs up on pillars, and gates of his Court,
Tables, containing in them his Laws and Decrees, to the end that his Subjects
may there read them, as in a public place. Lastly, the Church is called the
Pillar of Truth in this respect, because that God uses the testimony of the
Church as his instrument, and means for the proposing, teaching, and
expounding of the holy Scriptures unto men: for the Ministers of the Church are
the conseruers of truth, and the interpreters of the Scriptures, yet not so, as
if the authority of the Scripture did depend on them, but because God uses
them as his servants and Ministers to propound, and to beat into the memories
of men his holy Scripture; even as a Prince uses a Crier for the promulgation
of his laws unto his Subjects. And here take this similitude with you: a man
goes to the University, as unto the very shop and storehouse of Learning,
yet hereupon it follows not, that the truth of that learning we are taught
there in the University, does depend on the authority of the University.
Besides, this must also be observed, that whatsoever the Papists say touching
the authority of her Church above the Scripture does nothing at all profit
them, but that they manifestly beg the point in question, whilst they thus
argue: The Church has authority above the Scriptures: The Pope of Rome is the
Church: Ergo. For suppose we grant them their Mayor (which notwithstanding is
false, as we have manifestly proved) yet they are never able to prove their
Minor, as shall be shown anon more distinctly.

What is the second propriety of the word of God, or the holy Scripture?

Syst. Theol. page 176.
That it be entire, perfect, and sufficient to salvation, which is proved by
that, Io^. 20.30. Many other sign^ did Jesus which are not written in this
Book; but these things are written that you may believe, that Jesus is the
Christ, that Son of God* and that you believing, might have life by his name.
Out of which place ^ thus reason: That which is s^ written, that by it we may
believe in Christ Jesus, and s^ obtain eternal life, that, (...) say, is
sufficient to life eternal: But the Scripture is so written: Ergo. Again
thence I thus argue: The holy Scripture was written to this end, that we might
believe in the Son of God, and get eternal life: Ergo. Whatsoever Word is
not written, profits or avails us nothing to faith, and to eternal life
which must diligently be noted against the error of the Papists, which say,
there are two words of God, Quod non legi, vsurpare non debeo Amb. Non sum
alioru^ sermonum discipulus, nisi coelestium. Origin.
the one written, the other unwritten, upon which pretense they will needs
obtrude unto us Traditions, which they call Apostolical, the Decrees of the
Popes, and the custom of the Church. Of which the Council of Trent in the
fourth Session thus speaks: Whosoever does not with like affection of mind,
reverence the Traditions of the Church, as he does the holy Scriptures, let
him be accursed. But against those Traditions, first, note the sufficiency of
the Scriptures. Secondly, this argument* The Traditions of the Church either
agree with the holy writ, or they dissent from it. If they be co^sonant to it,
then they say the self same thing the Scripture says, and so the^ are
Scripture: for that ough^ not in all reason to be done b^ m^^, which may be
performed by fewer. Or they dissen^ from the Scripture (as all the Traditions
of the Popes, as namely, that Tradition, whereby the Cup in the Lords Supper is
prohibited to be administered unto the lay people and such like). And if they
disagree with the Scripture* they cannot fill up the Scripture, for that which
is repugnant to any thing, does not fill up, but rather quite overthrow it.
Another testimony of the perfection of the holy Scripture is most manifest, in
the 2 Timothy 3.16. The whole Scripture is given by inspiration from God, and is
profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, to instruct; that the man of God
may be perfect, and perfectly instructed to every good work. From whence we
may frame these arguments. First, the Scripture is a totum, an entire thing:
Ergo, it is perfect; for a totum is that, which wants no necessary parts.
Secondly, that which suffices us for doctrine, Adoro plenitudinem
Scripturaru^. Tertul.
for reproof, for correction, and instruction, that is full and complete: for
there is none that can show any thing besides, whereunto the Scripture should
be profitable. But the Scripture is sufficient to those things: Ergo. Thirdly,
that which makes a man perfect, and furnished to every good work, that same
must needs be perfect: but the Scripture does so. Ergo. The Mayor is therefore
true, because there is no effect which is more perfect then its cause, or
because a perfect effect presupposes the cause to be perfect, and nothing can
give that to another which it has not it self, if the Scripture therefore
make men perfect then it must also be perfect.

What is the third propriety of the holy Scripture?

That in the Articles of faith, Syst. Theol. page 199.
which are necessary to salvation it be plain, easy and perspicuous; easy,
I say* and perspicuous; first, in respect of them to whom (...) ought to be a
light for the^ salvation, according unto the 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid,
it is hid to them which perish: whence it necessarily follows, that the
Gospel is not hid, but clear, and open to those which do not perish, as
Peter says. 2 Pet. 1.19. You do well, in that you attend to the word of the
Prophets, as unto a light that shines in a dark place. Psalm. 19.7.8. The word
of God is clear. Psalm. 119.105. The word of God is a light to our feet and
steps. Secondly, the Scripture is easy, as it is an instrument, which it
has derived to it from the principal guide, the holy Spirit, who is that true
teacher and interpreter of the Scripture. Ioh. 14.26. The Advocate which is the
holy Ghost, he shall teach you all things. 1 Ioh. 2.27 That anointing, that
is, the holy spirit, teaches us of all things. Also Ioh. 16.13. When that
spirit of truth shall come, he shall lead you in all truth. Lastly, it is
easy, if that in the handling of it we use convenient means, and expound one
place by another, according to the rules of good and lawful exposition, which
you may read in the 201. page of my Systeme of Divinity. If then any shall
demand, Syst. Theol. page 201.
who has the authority to interpret the Scripture, if the Pope of Rome be he?
I answer, that every one is the best interpreter of his own words, whereas
therefore the Scripture is the Word of God, and of the holy Ghost, and not of
the Pope of Rome, therefore the holy Spirit has the authority to interpret, as
that true advocate and teacher of verity. But why then does the Bishop of Rome
challenge to himself this authority to interpret the Scriptures? I answer,
because he knows well enough, how bad his cause is, and therefore dares not
submit his Tenants to the Word of God, or the Scripture, if it be rightly
understood, and therefore will he wrest, and stretch the scriptures at his own
pleasure. Touching which point, I would have you note the words of a certain
Apostate from the faith, Casper Schoppius Papist, who is now at Rome with the
Pope; he in that Epistle he wrote touching his defection from us unto the
Papists, about six years ago, set out at Ingolstadium, in the 24 page, says
thus, The sum of all controversies betwixt the Catholics and the Lutherans
consists in these two things; that besides the holy Scripture, the Traditions
of the Apostles, and of the Church, are necessary to be believed. And that the
holy Scriptures themselves, neither can, nor ought to be interpreted of any
with authority, save of the Catholic Roman Church. In which two doctrines, if
one be once persuaded and settled, he will easily yield and aioyne himself to
the Church of Rome in the rest of the chief points of faith: For if I were to
dispute with the Heretics, about any article of faith, it must needs be that
there be somewhat set down in the Bible, touching my opinion, or that there
be nothing at all to be found for it. If there be nothing in the Bible form,
presently then I say, that it was wont so to be observed by tradition from the
Apostles, in the Church of Rome. But if there be somewhat contained in the
Bible, touching mine opinion, and the Heretic will interpret it another way
then might serve my turn, then presently I oppose to him, the Church of Rome,
that it has so interpreted it: so that every Dispute ought to be reduced to
these two heads. Thus far he. And truly this is it that the Pope of Rome
labors for, that he may wrest the Scripture as seems him good; and then it
is, as if any offering to fight with another, and the weapon should be a sword,
he would fight upon this condition, that he may be suffered to weild his
adversaries Sword as he will. And so it is likewise, as if any would have a
suite in Law, tried before the Judge according to the laws, but upon this
condition, that it may be lawful for him to interpret the Law on his own
side; just so the Pope does, for he says, I will dispute with you out of the
Scripture, but so, that it may be lawful for me to interpret the Scripture
on mine own behalf. I would have this also noted, that if the Papists demand
who is the Judge in the controversies of faith? We answer, Syst. The. page
174. item. p. 203.
that the chief and highest Judge of controversies of faith, is he who is the
Author, both of faith and of the scripture, to wit, the holy Ghost. According
to that of Ioh. 16.8. When the Comforter shall come, he shall reprove, he will
judge the world of sin. And then only the Scripture to be the Law and
Sentence of this Judge, according where unto judgment must be given concerning
controversies of faith, as it does manifestly appear by Ioh. 5.45. There is
one who accuses you, even Moses. i. e. the writings of Moses which give
judgment against you; and yet more manifestly, Ioh. 12. verse. 48. He that
rejects and receives not my words, has one that judges him. This word, etc
It is not true therefore which the Pope of Rome says, that he is the chief
Judge and decider of controversies: for he is not fit to be a judge who is
accused and found guilty of deprauing and falsifying the Word of God.

I have heard you sufficiently about the former sort of knowledge of Christian
Religion, or touching the principles of Divinity, to wit, God and Gods word:
Now I desire to be instructed in the second kind of knowledge, arising from
the former, that is, touching tthe parts of this heavenly Doctrine which does
spring from the doctrine which is of God and of the holy Scripture?

You tell me right, and I perceive you well understand the method and
progress, which ouhgt to be observed in understanding the doctrine of
Religion, and therefore now will I instruct you touching the parts of Divinity
or Christian Religion.

How many parts has this secondarie or derived knowledge?

Two: whereof the form, is of the end it self, the latter is of the means
that lead us to that end.

What is the end of Divinity?

Salvation, or life everlasting.

How many ways is the salvation of man considered!

Two manner of ways: either as it is perfect and complete, or as it is but
begun and imperfect: or, either in respect of the life to come, or of this
present life.

What is perfect and eternal salvation?

It consists in three things. Syst. Theol. page 110.
First, In most absolute perfection of body and soul. Secondly, In that
unutterable joy wherewith we shall triumph before God, the holy Angels, and
godly men. Thirdly, In that most evident Majesty, glory, and honor, wherein
we shall triumph over death, Satan, sin and sinful men. And this is that
which Peter says, 2. Pet. 1. v. 4. We shall be made pertakers, says he, of
the divine nature, of divine perfection, joy and glory. And Phil. 3. verse. 21.
Christ shall transform our base body, that it may be like the glorious body of
Christ. Esaias. 64. verse. 4. 1 Cor. 2. verse. 9. The things which the eye has not
seen, nor the ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man to conceive,
are those which God has prepared for them that love him.

What is imperfect salvation, or that which is begone only?

It is a taste of eternal salvation, Syst. Theol. page 211. V page hic 115.
and seqq.
or that comfort and joy of conscience which we have in this life arising from
the forgiveness of our sins, and from that confidence we have toward God, whom
we certainly know to be reconciled unto us by Christ Jesus* so that no
calamity whatsoever can be able to separate us from his love, no not death it
self, or that anxity and horror which usually we feel a^ the hour of death.
Of this the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. uers 1. Therefore being justified by
faith, we have peace, e. i. a joyful and merry conscience in the very midst of
callamity and death, Romans 8. verse. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall oppression? shall anguish? etc.

I see now what the end is, I may expect to reap from this heavenly doctrine,
which how much the more it is desirable, so much the more J long to know the
means, by which I may be conducted to this end?

The means whereby thou may com to this most desired end, are two. First,
Parts Theologiae duae, (...) and (...). Naziaenzen Syst Theol. page 212.
the knowledge of thy misery. Secondly, of thy redemption out of that misery.

The former part of this heavenly science touching the diseases of the Soul.

How may I come by the right knowledge of my misery, or of the sores of my
soul?

If thou shall weigh well with thy self these four things. First, that which
went before thy misery. Secondly, the efficient cause of thy misery. Thirdly,
the parts of thy misery. Fourthly, the exemplary cause, or glass wherein thou
have represented unto thee thy misery.

What is that which went before the misery of mankind?

Quanto videmus maiora fuisse bona, quae amisimus; tanto grauiora cognoscemus
esse mala in quae incidimus. Vrsin. Syst. Theol page 218.
That happy and blessed estate wherein man was invested by God before his fall,
on the Image of God which wa^ in man.

What is the image of God in man, or rather what was it?

It was nothing else but that absolute and perfect estate before the fall,
consisting in the perfection of the understanding and the will of man, De
imagine Dei Zanch. tom. 3. page 678.
and further in the majesty of man whereby he far excelled all other of the
creatures; or, that I may speak yet more plainly, the Image of God in man was
either prime and principal, or secondary and depending of the former. The
prime Image was both in his mind and in his body. Syst. Theol. page 224.
In his body there was perfect health and safety. In his mind there was
understanding without error; will without stain of sin. De libro arbitrio
Zanch. Loc. Com. 3. item tom. 4 p. 87.
That other Image which pepended or arose from this, was that majesty and
alacrity was in man, springing from the perfection of his body and soul;
touching which, the Scripture speaks, (...)
Genesis 1. v. 26. Let us make man according to our Image, and according to our
likeness: Ephesians. v. 4.24. Paul calls true righteousness and holiness the
Image of God. Nazianze^.
Hitherto must be referred the whole doctrine touching the state of Man before
the fall, and touching his living in Paradise, anent which you may read Genesis 1.
ver. 27.28.29. and all the second Chapter of that Book.

What is the cause of man's misery?

Syst. Theol. page 233.
The fall of our first Parents or the defection of Adam and Eve from God in
their first estate of innocence, which was by eating of the forbidden fruit.

What have we to do with the fall of Adam and Eve, seeing then we had no being
at all?

Adam and Eve did represent all mankind, and therefore they had given them
felicity and the Image of God for all mankind; wherefore in regard, they by
their offense lost that which they had received for all mankind, they lost it
not in themselves alone, but in all their posterity. Even as if a King should
give any one some Privileges for himself and his posterity, and he that had
these Privileges granted, should be attainted of Teason against the King, then
surely he himself should loose all those privileges which he had gotten of
the King, and his posterity should get no benefit of them neither.

And was this so great a matter to bite an Apple, and to eat of it?

The eating of the Apple was a most grievous offense, not in regard of the
Apple it self, the loss thereof was but small, for there were Apples good
store in Paradise: but because that eating flowed and issued as it were from
the fountain of most horrible sins, V. Aug. Enchirid. ad Laure^t ca. 45. and
46.
to wit, from pride man thereby affecting the seat and Majesty of God, Qui
manducauerunt vt essent quasi Dii, perdiderunt quod erant facti homines
immortales. Augustine.
and so became guilty of high treason against Gods Majesty, as God mockingly
casts man i^ the teeth, Genesis 3.22. Behold, Adam is made like unto one of us,
that is, he is made as it were one of the persons in the Sacred Trinity.
Another si^^ is unbelief, in that our first Parents did not believe Gods words
to be true, when he said, in what day soever ye shall eat of it, ye shall
die the death. But contrariwise, in that they readily believed the Devil who
spoke unto them by the Serpent as by his instrument, and told them, that they
should not dye at all, and so they gave more credit to him then unto God. The
third sin is contemptuousnesse, and disobedience, for we ought to obey God in
all his commands, even in those which we think are but of little reckoning.
The fourth sin is unthankfulness, for man was created after the likeness
and Image of God, and therefore it was his duty to obey Gods Commandments in
token of his thankfulness for the benefit. The fifth and most grievous sin
was that apparent revolt and falling from God to the devil, namely when man
went about to attain to be like unto God by the Counsel and help of the
devil, and so conspired as it were with the devil against God

I have also heard of the cause of misery, or of the diseases of the soul,
tell me now further, what be the parts of our misery?

They be two: Sin, and the punishment for sin; for in these two things our
misery consists. First, that we are sinners: And secondly, that we for sins
are liable to temporal and eternal punishments.

What is sin?

Syst. The, page 247. Geminum peccati formale, pugnantia cum lege and ordinatio
ad poena^. vrsin. (...), 1 Ioh. 3.4 Est dictum factum concupitum contra legem
Dei. Augustine. De peccato Zanch in c. 3. Genes. tom. 4. page 1. and seqq. item
tom, 6. page 78. S. Th. p. 251. Nihil peccato originali ad praedicandum notius,
nihil ad int^lligendum secretius. August. Peccatum originis est carentia
iustitia originalis debitae inesse. August. Peccatio^ originis est, quod
trahimus a natiuitate per ignorantia^ in mente, and per concupiscentia^ in
carne. Hugo. S. Th. p. 268. Committe^do qua vetantur vel omittendo, quae
mandantur, nam boni viri est non tantum recte agere. sedetiam recte ociari.
It is a stepping aside from that rule of perfection and righteousness which God
requires at our hands. Or, it is whatsoever is repugnant to the Law of God.

What sorts of sin be there?

Two: Original and Actual.

What is Original sin?

It is that stain had corruption of humane nature, of the understanding and
will of man, whereby a man even from his very birth is carried, and haled along
to sinful actions; of this sin speaks the Scripture, Genesis 6.5. The
imaginations and thoughts of man's heart are only evil continually: Psalm. 51.5.
In iniquity was J formed and conceived, and in sin has my mother brought
me forth: that is, My sin was conceined and borne with me. Romans 5.12. By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin. Also; By the disobedience
of one man, many were made sinners.

What is Actual sin?

It is that obliquitie or prauity, by which the actions and doings of a man,
are carried in a course contrary to the Law of God, or else when a man offends
against the will of God, not only in inclination and pronenesse, but indeed it
self.

I have heard of the former part of man's misery, namely, of sin; what is the
other part of humane misery?

The punishment of sin.

How many kinds of punishments for sin be there?

Two: Temporary and Eternal.

Temporary punishment wh^ is it?

Syst. Theol. page 225.
It is that misery which man endures in this life, as poverty, disgrace,
diseases, an^ at the last, death it self, which is called, the wages of sin*
Romans 6.23.

What is eternal punishment*

Syst. Theol. page 186.
It is that unspeakable sorrow, torment, and disgrace, which the damned shall
suffe^ in hell with the devil and (...) Angels.

I conceive now the parts of man's misery, show me (...) the exemplary cause
whereby as in a glass, J may (...) to the knowledge of my misery?

The glass wherein we may perfectly see our misery, is that high and strict
rigor of the law of God, both in exacting that righteousness, which we are
never able to perform, and also in threatening most grievous punishments which
they must abide, which do not satisfy the Law of God, either by themselves, or
by another.

Whence may we know the rigor of Gods Law?

First, De Lege Zanch Co^fess. cap. 10. item Loc. Com. 5. ite^ com. 4. page
185. and seqq.
even by every Commandment of the Decalogue, of which we cannot in this life
perform so much as one perfectly; the sum of which Commandments are
contained in those words, which Says Matthew has, Chap. 22 Luk, 10. Thou shall
love the Lord thy God, etc. Secondly, by those grievous comminations, which are
added to these Commandments: Cursed is every one that abides not, etc. Deuteronomy.
27.26. Gal. 3.10. This then is our greatest misery, that we cannot satisfy
the Law of God, sithence we are not able nor apt of our selves to think any
good; 2 Cor. 3.^. and consequently that according to Gods word we must be
cursed both in this life, and in the life to come, unless we can obtain from
the great mercy of God, redemption and remission of our sins; which is
another thing, even an excellent remedy against o^^ misery, that this heavenly
discipline sets out unto us, and which we mean now to handle.

The Second part of this celestial Science, which is touching the freeing of
Man from his misery, that is, from sin, and the punishment of sin.
I Know well my misery, I would gladly know how I may be freed from this
misery, or what remedy there is for these diseases of my soul?

The remedy is two fold, either prime and independent, or secondarie, and
depending of the former.

What is the prime, or independent remedy?

It is our free predestination and election, Syst. Theol. page 296. De
praedestinatione. Zanch. tom. 2. p. 476. and seqq. item Miscellan: 1. part. p.
1^3. and seqq. and page 279. and seqq.
whereby God has decreed from all eternity, to redeem and save everlastingly
some certain men by his Son, of which these sayings of the Scripture bear
witness: Ephesians. 1.4.5. He has elected us in Christ before the foundations of
the world were laid. He has predestined us, whom he might adop^ for sons
in Christ Jesus, eue^ out of the good pleasure of hi^ own will. (...). De
gratia salutis sonte Zanch. Loc. Com 4. item tom. 8. page 180. Disputare vis
mecum? mirare meum and exclama, O altitudo! Augustine.
Romans 8. verse 30. Whom he has predestined them also he called. Rom, 9.
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy: therefore election is not in him
that wills, or i^ him that runs, but in (...) which shows mercy, Psalm.
15.16. Acts 13. verse. 48. An^ so many of them as were predistinated unto life
eternal believed, Mat. 20. verse. 16. M^^ are called but few elected.

J have heard as touching the prime remedy of our mis^ry, to wit, election
unto (...) eternal, now instruct me (...) the other kind or remedy?

That is divided into three heads: First, Redemption. Secondly, Justification.
Thirdly, Sanctification.

What is Redemption?

It is the setting of us free from sin, and the punishment of sin, wrought
by Christ Jesus, the Son of our Redeemer.

How many things offer themselves to be considered about our Redemption?

Two: the efficient cause, or Author of Redemption: Secondly, the object of
it, whereunto Redemption appertains.

Who is our Redeemer?

Jesus Christ: De Rede^ptore. Zanch Confess. c. 11
for he is made unto us of God Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30. 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one Mediator betwixt God and
man, even the man Christ Jesus.

How many things are we to consider in Christ our Redeemer?

Two: his Person, and his Office.

How many things are there to be considered in the Person of Christ?

Two: to wit, the parts of it, and their Union.

Of how many parts does the person of Christ consist?

Syst. Theol. page 312.
Of two: the divine nature, and the humane. And this I p^oue, that Christ
consists on these two Natures, because he is true God, and true man. That he
is true God, we have spoken before, when we proved the Son to be God. And
truly that there is another Nature in the Son of God, besides the humane
nature, may be proved by two manifest arguments, the former whereof is this:
In what person soever there is made a distinction and limitation, so that one
thing is attributed to it, by reason of one part, and another thing agrees
unto it, by reason of another part, in that person of necessity there must be
two natures: but in the Person of Christ there is such a limitation: Ergo. The
Minor is proved out of Romans 1.3. where the Apostle says, that the Son of God
was made the seed of David according to his flesh. Whereupon it necessarily
follows, that there is another thing in Christ besides his flesh: for when as
I say, that man is immortal according to his soul, it must needs follow, that
there is some other thing in man beside his soul: for every limitation,
argues a diversity in that which is limited. The other argument is, to whom
many things are attributed, which can in no wise agree to humane nature, in him
there must needs be another nature or essence distinct from the humane nature.
But unto Christ many things are so attributed: Ergo. The Minor is proved by
that, John 8. verse 58. Verily, Verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I
am. This can by no means be understood of the humane nature, because Christ's
Nativity was two thousand years after Abraham. That trifling exposition which
the Samosatenian Heretics give of this place, before Abraham was, to wit, the
Father of the faithful, I am, is altogether unsound, and not sounding with the
text, neither with the scope and intension of Christ in this place; for he was
to answer to the objection of the Jews, who had said in the verse going
before, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen Abraham? Now
what an answer should this have been, if he had said, Before Abraham was the
Father of the faithful, I am: for that should have been as ridiculous an
answer, as if when one should say to me, thou art not yet forty years old, and
have thou seen Sigismund King of Polonia? and I should answer, Before my son
shall get a son, and be a father, I am; would not all laugh at such an
answer, given to that question? and that Christ is Man, it needs no proving,
because all grant it.

Why is not the sole humane Nature of Christ, called a Person as well as every
one of us be called persons?

Persona est 1. substa^tia 2. singularis 3. Intellige^s 4. Non purs alterius. 5
Non sus^^tata ab alio. 6. In communicabilis Syst. Log. l. 1 cap. 5. Totus
totu^, me assumpsit vt toti mihi salute^ gratificare tur: quod u. in
assu^ptibile est incurabile est Lumb.
Although the humane Nature of Christ consists of a soul and a body, even as
we do, notwithstanding it cannot subsist a part by it self, without
adjoining it to the divine Nature, whereas we can subsist every one by
himself severally; otherwise he is like unto us in other things, sin only
excepted, as the Scripture witnesses, Heb. 2. verse 14. Because therefore the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, even Christ also was made partakers
of them. And verse 16. He took not the Angels, but the seed of Abraham,
whereupon he ought to be made like unto all his brethren in substance;
namely, according to his soul and body: Which may be observed against the
Vbiquitaries, Syst. Theol. page 320.
who conceit there was another kind of humane substance in Christ, then such as
we have; namely, such a one as can be in one, and the self same instant of
time every where in all places both in heaven and earth, and so they confound
the divine and humane Nature one with the other.

I have heard what be the parts of Christ's person: now show me what is the
union of those two parts in Christ's Person?

It is that indissoluble knot, whereby the humane Nature is so surely tied unto
the divine, and the divine Nature so linked to the humane, that of them two is
made but one Person, and that those Natures for ever cannot be disioyned the
one from the other.

What are we to consider in this union?

Two things, to wit, The cause of the Union of the two Natures in Christ, and
then the properties of this union?

What is the cause of the Union of these two Natures in Christ?

Syst. Theol. page 313. Assumpsit quod non erat, non a misit quod erat. Aug. De
Incarnatione. Zanch. tom 8 page 16. and seqq.
The conception of the humane Nature in the Virgin Mary's womb wrought by the
Holy Ghost, and then the Nativity and Incarnation, whereby after that most
strait conjunction of the humane Nature with the divine in the Virgin Mary's
womb, the man Christ was borne and brought forth into this light, See Syst.
Theolog. page 323.

How many proprieties has this Union?

Syst. Theol page 316. (...). Cvrill.
Three: First, that it is exceeding fast and sure. Secondly, that it cannot
possible be dissolved. Thirdly, that by reason thereof, those things that
agree only to the one Nature, are notwithstanding attributed to the whole
Person, Silua proprietate vtriusque natura, suscepta est a maiestate hum^litas,
a vertute infirmitas, ab aeternitate mortalitas. Leo. Vid. Pet. Lumbard. l. 3.
sent. distinct. 21. Syst. Theol. page 326.
because of either of those two natures. See Syst. Theol. page 320.

I have heard as touching the Person of Christ, now it remains, that I be
instructed in the Office of Christ, and first of all that you tell me how the
office of Christ is called generally?

It is in general termed the Office of a Mediator.

What is a Mediator?

Generally a Mediator imports such an one as does reconcile the party
offending to the party offended, which reconciliation consists in these three
things. 1. The Mediator must make intercession for him that has grieved the
party offended. 2. He must satisfy the party offended for the injury and
wrong done. Non mediator homo praeter de itatem, non mediator Deus praeter
humanitatem sed inter diuinitatem solam and humanitatem solam mediatrix est
humana diuinitas and diuina humanitas. August.
3. He must promise and lisewise provide that the offender shall not offend any
more. And therefore when we say Christ is a Mediator, it is as if we say that
Christ is that Person that has appeased God, whom mankind by their sins had
most g^ieuously offended, and who has given satisfaction to the Justice of God
by his Passion and Death, who prays for sinners, and applies his merit unto
them by faith, who regenerateth them by his holy Spirit, that they may begin in
this life to hate sin, and to be wary that they offend God no more.

Of how many sorts is the Office of Christ our Mediator?

Of three sorts: Prophetical, Scerdotal, and Regal, in regard whereof our
Savior is called Christ, i. e. anointed and appointed unto this triple Office,
because in the Old Testament by Gods own command, there were anointed Profits,
Priests, and Kings.

Which is the Prophetical Office of Christ, and in what does it consist?

It consists in two things. 1. Syst. Theol page 333.
In the Office of teaching: And 2. In the Efficacy of his teaching: for Christ
is called a Prophet. 1. Because he has revealed God and Gods will unto Angels
and unto men. For God could no otherwise be known, then by the Son, according
unto that: John 1. 18. The Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he has
revealed him unto us. 2. Because he has appointed and preserved in his Church
the Ministry of the Gospel, and bestows on his Church able Teachers and
Ministers, fitting and furnishing them with gifts necessary for teaching,
Ephesians. 4. verse 11. Christ has given some to be Prophets, other to be Apostles,
and Teachers. 3. Because he is powerful by the Ministry of the Word, and
inclines the hearts of such men as are elect, to believe and obey the Gospel,
Luke 24. verse. 45. Then he opened their understanding, that they might
understand the scriptures. Acts 16. verse. 14. The Lord opened the heart of
Lydia, to atte^d unto those things which were spoken by Paul.

Which is the Priestly Office of Christ, and wherein does it consist?

Syst. Theol. page 340.
It consists in three things. First, in the purging of our sins. Secondly, in
the virtue and applying of that Purgation. Thirdly, in his Intercession for us:
for as the Priest in the Old Testament had two Offices, the one to make
atonement for sin, and the other to pray for the people. So likewise the
Priestly Office of Christ herein consists. First, that he should offer
himself as a Sacrifice to his eternal Father for our sins. Secondly, that
he should make Intercession for us unto his eternal Father.

What are there to be considered in the first part of Christ's Priestly Office,
to wit, in the satisfaction for our sins?

There be two: namely, the causes or means whereby Christ wrought this
expiation, and so satisfied for our sins; and secondly the Proprieties of
that Expiation.

What be the causes by which Christ wrought this expiation?

These be of two sorts, either Prime, or arising from the prime causes.

What is the prime cause?

Syst. Theol. page 342.
The obedience of Christ in that he humbled himself, and was subject to the
Law, to the end that he might satisfy for us, who had broken the Law.
According to that, Romans 5. verse 19. As by the disobedience of one man, to wit,
of Adam, many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, to wit, of Christ,
many shall be made righteous.

What is the other cause arising and springing from this prime cause?

It is twofold. The Passion; and the Death of Christ.

Of what sort is the Passion of Christ?

It is of two sorts. External, and Internal.

What is the External Passion?

It is both that anguish which Christ endured in his most Sanctified body; and
also that ignominy and shame which he sustained for our sakes.

What was the Internal Passion?

That wonderful sadness, Deum pati plus est
and heaviness, which Christ felt in his soul for our sin; Of which it is
said, quam omnes homines in omnem aternitate^ pati.
Mat. 26. v. 38. My soul is heavy even unto the death, where, by death he
understands not only corporal death, but eternal, as if he had said, my
soul is as heavy and sorrowful, as their souls are which must for ever be
damned.

How many were the torments of Christ in soul?

Two.

Which is the former?

Syst. Theol. page 348.
The former was in the Garden, before he was apprehended and led to public
judgment: Audi vtra^que vocem, tum carnis infirmae, Pater, si possibile sit,
transeat a me calix: tum prompti animi, Non tamen vt ego volo sed vt tu vis
fiat. Ambros.
for there began he to be afraid of himself, lest God should leave and
forsake him, whom he then beheld as one who was grievously offended for the
sins of Mankind, and consequently who was extremely angry with him that had
taken and translated upon himself the sins of the whole world.

Whereby do you know the greatness of these torments, and sufferings in the
soul of Christ?

By two tokens. First, in that Christ there needed Angels to comfort him, and
to hold him up, lest being too much afraid by that horrible sight of the angry
and wrathful God, he should have fainted. See Luke 22. v. 43. and hence it
was that he uttered that speech, My soul is heavy unto death, even to
eternal death.

What is the other token of those most grievous torments in the soul of
Christ?

His bloody sweat; for this was a manifest sign that all the natural forces
in Christ were much weakened, and as it were bound from doing their Office, by
reason of that great torment and terror, so that nature could not keep the
blood any more in the veins, but was feign being coniealed, and clotted, to
cast it out as it were, and drive it to the exterior parts, of which great
violence and terror, the like example can no where be read in any History.

Which is the other suffering or torment of Christ in soul?

The latter was that which a little before his death he felt upon the Cross,
when he strove against that temptat^o^ of his perpetual separation and
objection from the face o^ God, whereupon he sent forth that doleful cry, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? where by a Metonymy he calls that
fearful temptation (wherewith those are won^ to be troubled whom God has
cast from his sight, and quite forsaken) desertion or forsaking. For requisite
it was that Christ should endure such a temptation, that he might deliver us
from eternal damnation.

I have seen the passion of Christ, now tell me his death? Syst. Theol. page
355.


The death of Christ, is the separation of his Soul from his Body, whereby he
satisfied for, and purged our sins and delivered us from eternal death. And so
much the very shedding of blood and water out of Christ's side did manifest, of
which John speaks, John 19. verse. 34. One of the Soldiers (says he) pierced
his side, and presently issued out blood and water; by the blood, Christ
signified that our sins were ransomed, and satisfied for: by the water, that we
are washed from the filth of our sins.

It follows now in order that you instruct me as touching the proprieties and
benefits of Christ's Passion, tell me therefore what is the first propriety of
Christ's Passion?

This it is, that it was altogether necessary, in regard that mankind could no
way else be freed from eternal death, but by the death of the Son of God:
And that for this reason, because the most high God is most just, and therefore
never remitteth sins without satisfaction; sithence, that by nature he
hates sins, and can in no wise endure them: for he that is justice, most
eminently, cannot away with injustice, even as the fire cannot abide water. As
it is said, Psalm. 5. verse. 4. Thou art not a God that wills wickedness.
Again, plain places of the Scripture do testify the same. Romans 8. verse. 3.
That which was impossible to the Law, that has God done by sending his Son,
i. e. that which by no other means could have been performed, was done by the
death of the Son of God, Heb. 2. v. 14. Therefore because the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also in like manner was made partaker of
them, that he might abolish by death him that had the power of death, that is,
the Devil; and in the ver. following, and might set at liberty those which
through the fear of death were subject unto bondage all their life long: that
is, that he might redeem those which otherwise should have perished
eternally, unless Christ had wrought their Redemption. And truly if there had
been any other way to have satisfied for sin, then that might have been
performed, either, by our selves, or by some other creature. But we could not
have done this for our selves. First, because whatsoever good we do, we do
already owe it unto God, and that which we owe unto God is not the price of
Redemption or satisfaction: but it is due debt. Secondly, because we add
somewhat to the score of our d^bts every day, and therefore we can never be able
to satisfy and pay them. And that we daily add sin unto sin, See 1 John
1. v. 8. Psalm. 130. v. 3. Math. 6 v. 12. Math. 18. v. 25. Thirdly, because
sin is a wrong and injury to God, and so an infinite evil, and therefore
also deserves either eternal punishment, or one equal thereunto, out of
which (if it had been laid upon us) we could never have been able to have
freed our selves. No other creature could satisfy for us; for example, Not the
Angels* first, because man, and no other creature may be punished for that
sin man had committed, the Justice of God requiring that it should be so, as
it is said, Ezech. 18. verse 4 That soul that has sinned, even that shall
die. Secondly, Homo debuit sed non potuit, Deus potuit sed non debuit, etc. O
sapientia potens attingens vbique fortiter! O potentia sapiens, disponens omnia
suauiter! Bern. Non satiabar dulcedine mirabil^, considerare altitudinem
consilii tui super salutem generis humani* August.
Because no creature, no not the Angels are able to escape and free themselves
out of eternal punishment. Whereupon it follows, that it was requisite, that
he who should satisfy the Justice of God for our sins, should be truly God,
and truly man. Man he was to be, because man had sinned, and therefore Gods
Justice so requiring, he that should pay and smart he must be man, as it is
said, Heb 9.22. Without shedding of blood, there is no remission of sins:
wherefore that Christ might shed blood, it was meet he should be man. And he
was to be God too: First, that by the power of his divinity, he might
undergo the infinite anger of God against the sin of mankind, with which
anger Christ should certainly have been overwhelmed, Opus si^e exemple,
gratia sine merito, charitas sine modo Bern. O foelix culpa, quae tale^ and
tantum meruit redemptore^!
if he had been but bare man; Because God is a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4. verse.
24. and therefore as man he desires the cup of his Passion might be taken
away from him, as being that which he could not bear, as he was man: And as
man he cries out upon the Cross, Oh God, why have thou forsaken me?
Secondly, It was needful that he should be truly God, who would satisfy for
our sins, that his suffering and punishment might be of infinite worth, and
so equivalent to eternal damnation: For, because we by our sins had deserved
not only Temporal but Eternal punishment, it was necessary that he wh^ would
take in hand our deliverance, should undergo not the temporal punishment
alone, but the eternal too; the Eternal, not by reason of the extent and
continuance of it, but in value and equiualence, that is, his punishment was to
be equivalent to eternal punishment, or to have an equal proportion with
eternal punishment. But no man's punishment can equalize eternal punishment,
but only of him who is himself eternal, who is truly God, whereupon the
Fathers said very rightly and devoutly. For God to suffer, it is more then for
all men to be damned eternally* Thirdly, Because the satisfaction must needs
have been of infinite worth and value, to the end it might sufficiently serve
for the purging and ransoming of all men's sins. But none there is that can
work such a satisfaction of infinite value, unless he himself be infinite,
that is, God.

What is the second propriety of Christ's Passion?

That it was truly expiatory, and satisfactory, that is, our sins by virtue
of Christ's expiation were forgiven us. Which must be noted, 1, against the
Samosatenians, who blasphemously say, that the Passion of Christ was only
exemplary, that is, that Christ by his Passion would give us only an example to
obey God in all things, and to bear the Cross which God shall lay upon us
patiently, as Christ before us patiently did bear his Cross. This dangerous
doctrine, that throws our consciences headlong into the pit of despair,
arose from no other spring, then the denial of the Godhead of the Son of
God. For, because there was none could satisfy for our sins, except he were
God, as we have also a little before proved, and the Samosatenians deny Christ
to be truly God, therefore no far lie was it, if they thought, that the Passion
of Christ was not satisfactory but only exemplary. But to their blasphemies we
oppose; First, the Divinity of the Son of God, proved and euicted already by
evident testimonies, to wit, when we concluded this necessarily, that Christ
who suffered for us was the Son of God, and hence it will follow that his
suffering was of infinite valor, and consequently, that it was satisfactorie.
Secondly, most apparent testimonies of holy writ, Esa. 53. verse. 4. He
himself carried and bare our infirmities truly, and verse. 5. He was tormented
for our sins, and he was broken for our iniquities, Romans 5 verse. 9. Now then
being justified by his blood, we shall be saved. 2 Cor. 5. verse. 18. All
these things are of God, who has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ,
and verse. 21. He made him who knew no sin to be sin for us. 1 Timothy 2. v.
5.6. There is one God, one Mediator of God and men, even the man Christ Jesus
who gave himself, a price of our Redemption: an example is one thing, and a
price or ransom is another thing. Galat. 2. verse. 20. The Son of God has
given himself for me, for if righteousness be by the Law, then Christ died
without a cause; as if he had said, Christ dyed to that end, that by his death
he might bestow on us righteousness, in satisfying Gods Justice thereby for
our offenses. But there is a very plain place, Gal. 3. ver. 13. Christ
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, when he was made a curse for us: for it
is written, cursed is he that hangs on the tree. 1 John 1. verse 7. The
blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, purges us from all our sins. 1.
John. 2. verse 2. He is the propitiation for our sins. These are most
pregnant places of Scripture for this point, whereunto we may add this
argument. If the Passion of Christ was but exemplarie, surely he would never
have cried out with a loud voice, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
for those words are not set down as an example for us to follow, nay rather we
ought to do quite contrary to them, even to have always sure confidence in
God, and never to think, or cry out, that we are forsaken of him, as it is
said, Romans 8. verse. 15. we must cry Abba Father, in thee do I settle my
soul. Again, if the Passion of Christ was but exemplary, how were then the
Fathers saved which were before Christ, and so had not his example? and how was
the thief saved, that could not imitate Christ in his example, whereas he was
now hanged on the Cross as well as Christ, and that before his conversion.
Secondly, this same propriety of Christ's Passion must be noted against all
such, as attribute the purging of their sins, and the merit of the
forgiveness of them to almesdeeds, or other works of their own: for if so be
that there is no remission of sins, but by shedding of blood, as we have
shown before, and almesdeeds, or other works, even the best of the^ shed no
blood, certainly then by no works of ours whatsoever can there be wrought
expiation or remission of sin.

What is the third propriety of Christ's Passion?

That it was most sufficient, Per Christum hominem iustitiae Deiplenissime
satisfactum pregenere humano. Bellar. lib. de asccusment in De um, grad. 13.
cap. 3.
neither need we any more expiation: which is proved by that, Heb. 9. v. 26.
New was he in the end of the world made manifest by that offering up of
himself once to take away sin. And verse 28. Christ was once offered up, that
he might take away the sins of many. And yet more evidently, Heb. 10.12.
This man after the offering of his sacrifice, sits for ever at the right
hand of the Father. And verse. 14 By his one oblation; that is, by that his
oblation, which only is most perfect and sufficient. Now that with is said, Col.
1.24. I fulfill the remainders of Christ's suffering or passion in the flesh;
Soluti.
It must not be so understood, as if the Passion of Christ were not of it self
sufficient, (...) Christi sunt duplicia quaedam (...) in carne sua, quada^
(...) in membris quae sunt Christi, quia me^broru^. Za^ch.
but needed some addittament to fill it up: but there, by a Synecdoche, the
Passions of Christ he calls all such, as the members of Christ were to
suffer: as if he said; I must also endure those afflictions, which Christ shall
feel in his members, as he expressly annexeth; I fulfill the remnant of
Christ's Passion in the flesh, for the body of Christ which is his Church: that
he might plainly show, that he spoke not of that passion which Christ
suffered for our sins, Omnes sanctorum afflictiones, vel sunt (...), q^^bus
puniuntur peccata, vel (...) quibus probatur fides vel (...) quibus confirmatur
doctrina, and de his loquitur. Melanct.
but of the crosses and afflictions which the Church must sustain in this
world, which Church by a Metaphorical kind of speaking is the body of Christ.
And this which we have spoken about the sufficiency of the passion of Christ,
we must note again against the Papists, who reach and say, that expiation and
purging of sin, is partly by good works, which shall be confuted in the
doctrine of Justification, partly by the Mass, which shall likewise be
confuted in the point of, and concerning the Lords Supper, and partly by
Purgatory, which (say they) is a fire, in which the souls of men after this
life are tormented with temporal pains, and are purged from sins, and from
which the souls of such as are alive by favor and by prayers, may be
delivered, as the Council of Trent says in the fifth Session. Against which
observe these reasons: First, Calu, ^nsti l. 3. c. 5.. ^. and seqq.
in the sacred Volume there is no one testimony of Purgatory, nor not so much
as one example of any one that was in that Purgatory fires Ergo, it is a mere
invention of their own brain; They urge a place, by the fire shall be made
manifest, and proved, every man's work of what sort it is. But they apply this
to Purgatory very foolishly: Solus.
for the Apostle speaks as touching the edif^cation of the Church, and says,
that the time shall come, when it shall be tried and examined, how much every
one has profited in edifying the the Church, by the word of God, and the holy
Spirit, which two he calls fire, by a Metaphor. He adds further, Verse,
15. He shall be saved but even as it were by the fire: where abiding still in
the Metaphor and similitude, he says, that not all those who have not edified
aright, shall straight way be damned for ever, but that they shall suffer a
trial in their own conscience, because they have not so faithfully discharged
their Office as they should. Secondly, observe two manifest sayings of the holy
Writ, wherein you shall find but two places only that must be in the next
world pointed out unto you, the one for the blessed, the other for those, who
are eternally damned* Mark the last. 16. John 5.24. Verily, verily, I say unto
you, who so hears my word, and believes in him that sent me, shall not come
into judgment; and by consequence not into Purgatory, which is a part of
Judgment; but shall pass from death to life. Revel. 14. verse. 13. Blessed are
they henceforth which dye in the Lord. Henceforth; that is, from the very
moment wherein they dye. There is also a plain place. Luke 23.43. where Christ
says to the thief; To day shall thou be with me in Paradise: whereas he (if
any) needed this Purgatory fire.

I have heard sufficiently, as concerning the first part of Christ's Priestly
office, namely, the purging away of our sins; tell me what is the second part
of the Priestly Office of Christ?

Syst. Theol. page 357.
It is that effectual application, whereby Christ does alsufficiently and
powerfully apply that his purging performed by him unto the faithful, so that
by it they may obtain remission of sins, reconciliation and peace.

What is the third part of this Office of Christ.

It is his intercession for us

What do you mean by intercession?

I do not mean any Prayer, or suite, whereby Christ would get unto us again
the the favor of God, as one man is said to interceed for another, that he may
procure him somewhat; but I understand, first that perpetual value and virtue
of the Sacrifice of Christ, namely, in that Christ presents his passion,
which he suffered for us, unto the eternal Father. Secondly, the Fathers
consent resting in this Passion of Christ, contented and agreeing, that this
Passion of Christ shall be of force for us for ever.

Which is the third Office of Christ?

His Regal Office: Syst. Theol page 359.
for Christ is not only a prophet and a priest unto us, but he is also a King.

In what points consists the Regal Office of Christ?

In four: First, in that he governs the Church by his Spirit, and by his
Word; and does not only show unto us by his Word what we ought to do, but by
the work of the Spirit in us, enableth us to do them. Secondly, in that he
defends us against our enemies, Satan, Sin, and Death, that they have no
power to hinder our salvation. Thirdly, in that he beautifieth his Church with
excellent gifts, and appoints the Ministry of his Word, making men obedient
unto his own ordinance. Fourthly, in that at the end of the World he shall
appear to be Judge of all men, Syst. Theol. page 368.
and shall condemn the wicked to eternal punishments, but shall make the godly
to shine with eternal glory.

I do already conceive the office of Christ what it is, and and of how diverse
sorts it is: now I would have you tell me what the object is about which
Christ exercises this his Office?

It is the Church. Calae Instit. lib. 4. ca. 1. De Ecclesia. Zanch Miscellan.
2. part page ^1. and seqq. item Confess cap. 2^.


How many ways is Church taken?

Two ways: in a large, or in a more strict signification.

What is the Church taken in the large accepti^n?

It is the multitude or company of all such men, Syst. Theol. page 371.
as have the word of God preached unto them, in which company there be many
Hypocrites which do not believe truly, and therefore are damned for ever.

What is the Church as it is strictly taken?

It is that number and company of men, which are elect of Christ by faith unto
eternal life. Syst. Theol. page 383.
And this company is wont to be parted into two ranks, the one Militant, the
other Triumphant. That company of the elect and godly, is called the Militant
Church, which remains yet on earth; but the Triumphant is that company of the
faithful that is already in Heaven. And so the rule of the Fathers is to be
understood: Non peruenit ad praemia Christi qui relinquit ecclesiam Christi.
Cypr. Non Deus huic pater est, cui non Ecclesia matter. (...). Nazianz.
He shall never be a member of the Church Triumphant, that has not been a
member of the Church Militant. But whereas the Church is divided into the
visible and invisible Church, that is no true division to speak properly, but
only a distinction of diverse respects in the Church. For the Church is said to
be visible, in respect of the men themselves which are in the Church, and may
be seen^, and invisible, in respect of the internal graces, to wit, of faith,
and other gifts of the holy Spirit, which are not so obuious to the senses.
Which must be noted against the Papists, who would have the Church to be a
glorious appearing company, which may by the very senses be pointed out, and
acknowledged by the external pomp of ceremonies, as Bellarmine affirms. The
Church is as visible, as the common wealth of Venice. Contrary whereunto our
Savior speaks, Luke 17.20. The Kingdom of God comes not with observation;
where it is apparent enough out of the Text, he speaks of the Church in this
world, namely, that it shall be no such glorious company, as should be known
by external ceremonies and observations, or by solemnities, aparrelling of
Senators, of Counselors, and other such like.

What are to be considered about the Church?

The Head, the Members, and the Proprieties.

Who is the Head of the Church?

Syst. Theol. page 374.
Christ alone is the Head of the Church, as well of the Millitant, as the
Triumphant, which is confirmed, first by apparent testimonies of holy writ,
Ephesians. 1.12. God has put all things under the feet of Christ, and has
appointed him over all to be the Head to the Church, which is the body. And
Ephesians. 4 15. Christ is the head, by whom the whole body is coupled and knit
together Col. 1.18. Christ is the Head of his Body the Church. A like place
there is Col. 2.19. It is proved, secondly, by reason, because every head ought
to infuse vigor and lively virtue into all the members, as our head, for
instance, infuseth lively spirits into every part of our body for sense and
motion: but Christ alone can infuse that lively vigor into the members: Ergo.
True (say the Papists) Christ is the Head of the Church, invisible Head,
therefore there is need of another visible Head, who must be Christ's Vicar on
earth, and Peter the Apostles Successor; to wit, the Pope of Rome. Papists,
there are contained many puddles of error. The first error is, that Christ
has need of a Vicar, or Deputy on earth, whereunto we oppose these
arguments. First, there is no of the principal Regent, or Governor. For
therefore Kings have their Deputies, because they be but weak men, not able to
look unto all their Subjects by themselves, but Christ is an omnipotent King.
Secondly* He needs a Deputy, who cannot upon all occasions be every where
present with his Subjects, but Christ is always every where present with his
members, as he promises, Matthew, 28.20. Wheresoever two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I is the midst of them: that is,
immediately Ego fidentur dieo, quia quisquis se vniuersalem sacerdotem vocat,
vel vocari desiderat, in elatione sua Antichristum praecurrit. Greg. Mag. Galu.
Instit. lib. 4. cap. 6.
as the Hebrew phrase teaches. The second error is, that they think it a
righteous thing for some one man, and he a Bishop, or Minister of the Church,
to attribute unto himself this power, to be the universal Head and Governor
of the whole Church, whereunto we oppose these Arguments: First, because
Christ does plainly forbid primacie in the Church, Matthew. 20.26. Luke 22.26.
Secondly, because the Apostles themselves, divided the Office of the
Apostleship, among themselves, for that they saw, that one man could not be
over all Churches. As the Scripture witnesses, Galath. 27.8.9. where Paul
says; When they saw that the Gospel of uncircumcision was committed unto me,
as the Gospel of Circumcision unto Peter: and when James, and Cephas, and
John, which were counted Pillars, knew of the grace given unto me, they gave
unto me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that we should do the
Office of the Apostles among the Gentiles, and they execute the same Office
among the Jews. Thirdly, Moses, who was a far greater man then the Pope,
could not bear the burden of judging the people of Israel alone, but was
constrained ^o part it, as it is Exodus 18. much less therefore can the Pope
govern the whole Planu^ est, Apostolis interdicitur dominatus. Bern. Quicunque
desiderauerit primatum in terra, inueniet confusione^ in caelo. Distinct. 40
cap. multi.
The third error is, that they feign Peter to have bin Head of the Church,
whereas not withstanding, 1 Christ flatly forbids Peter and his other
Apostles, to seek after this Head ship; and secondly, Paul to the Gal. 2.7. in
plain terms says, that James and Peter and John were counted, or thought to
be pillars, that is, by an erroneous conceire they were taken to be such by
them, who might by the abuse of that title, deceive the Galathians. They object
that place, Mat. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, super hanc Petram,
will I build my Church. Whereunto we answer, (Peter) will I build my Church;
but we say, this is the intention and scope of Christ's speech, namely, to
commend the confession of Peter, Tu es Petrus and supra hanc petram, etc.
sapius ex posui, vt s^per hunc intelligeretur, quem confessus est Petrus
dicens, tu es Christus filius Dei viui. Non enim dictum est ei, Tu es Petra,
sed tu es Petrus. Petra autem erat Christus, quem confessus. Simo^ dictus est
Petrus. Aug.
which he sets out by a Paranomasie, or allusion unto the name of Peter; as
if he said, I rightly set upon thee the name of Peter (see the first Chapter of
John, where Christ gave Peter his name) because thou in the name of the other
Apostles, have made such a confession, and uttered such a doctrine, as upon
which, as it were on a Rock my Church shall be builded. First then, Christ
commends Peter, and in the person of Peter, all the Apostles, for that they
believed Christ to be the Son of God. Secondly, he shows the profit and
fruit of that confession, to wit, for that this doctrine and confession was to
be the foundation whereupon Christ's Church should be built, so that it should
never be ouerturned by Satan. Otherwise that Peter never understood these
words of himself, as if he were that stone or Rock, upon which the Church is
reared, he himself professes openly, 1 Pet. 2.4. where he says, that Christ
is that very stone, upon the which the Church was to be built. The Peter was
Bishop of Rome, and so consequently, that he was at Rome, which not
withstanding is uncertain, neither can it be firmly proved, that Peter was
ever at Rome, but the contrary; for that place which before we cited, Gal. 2.
is very remarkable; namely, in that Paul did so divide the Apostleship, and
part it with Peter, they shaking hands on the motion, that Paul should go to
the Gentiles, to convert them, and Peter should labor in the conversion of the
Jews: This promise, the right hand being given upon it, Peter should have
broke, if he had gone to Rome to convert the Gentiles; neither do we read
that two Apostles went into the same City, especially, it being so far off,
to preach the Gospel. Wherefore sithence by the confession of all, it is
apparent, that Paul preached the Gospel at Rome, what need was there that
Peter should come thither, especially at the very same time. As the Papists say
that they were both at Rome in Nero his time. II. Out of the last Chapter of
the second to Timoth. v. 16. In my first defense, says Paul, when I appeared
before Nero, there was none that stood to me, but all forsook me, I pray God
it be not laid to their charge: But if Peter had then been Bishop of Rome, as
the Papists will have it, what a disgraceful thing had it been and unworthy a
Bishop to forsake his brother and his own companion? Bellarm. says, that
Peter was at that time gone abroad to visit the Churches. But we answer, that
it was not meet that he should go away, then when he should have assisted
his brother, but should rather have put off the visitation unto some other
time, which he would have done, doubtless, if he had been at Rome. Again I
say, that Bellarm. coins that answer of his, because he neither backs it with
any place of Scripture, nor of any Historian, but speaks it out of his own
brain. III. This may be concluded by the circumstance of time, for they say
that Peter was 25 years at Rome, and 7 years at Antiocheia, which make 32
years, and yet they say that Peter was crucified at Rome under Nero, and that
he came to Rome the 2 of Claudius the Emperor. Now Claudius reigned but 13
years, and Nero 13, so that both their Regiments lasted but 26 years;
Secundum Hieronym.
how then could Peter come the 2 of Claudius, and continue 27 years Bishop of
Rome, and yet be crucified under Nero? IV. We say, that Eusebius and Hierome
who are of that opinion, do not agree with themselves; yea, and Hierome
especially manifestly contradicts himself. For when as he in one place had
said, that Peter was crucified under Nero, afterward expounding those words of
Chapter Mat. 23. Luke 11.49 Behold I send unto you Prophets, etc. Flatly affirms
that Peter was crucified by the Jews at Jerusalem. When the Ancients therefore
are opposite unto themselves, hereby it may appear that they knew no
certainetie in this point, and consequently we see how much we are to detest
the impudency of the Popes, which set down for certainety, that Peter was
Bishop of Rome. Rome to be Peter's successor: for first there is no sure
ground to euince that Peter was ever at Rome; how then could the Pope of Rome
succeed Peter? Secondly, if we grant this to the Papists out of pity, Calu.
Instit. l. 4. c. 7.. 23
that Peter was at Rome, yet it does not follow, that the Pope of Rome was
Peter's successor: for the Turk also has his seat at Constantinople,
notwithstanding it does not follow, that the Turk is the lawful Emperor of
the East, or of Greece, the Emperors before having their lawful residency,
and abode at Constantinople: for the place makes not the succession lawful,
but two things there be which make lawful succession: first, the power given
of God; secondly, the imitation of the Predecessors in life and manners. As
Cyprian says in a certain place, and after him Ambrose and Hierome: Cathedram
Petri non tenet qui fidem Petri non tenet.
True succession is succession in doctrine, and he cannot be said lawfully to
hold the Chair of Peter, who holds not the doctrine of Peter. But neither of
these the Pope of Rome has: first, whence will he prove, that God has given
him that power to sit at Rome, as the Monarch of the Church? surely he cannot
bring so much as one letter out of the Scripture of God to prove this; nay,
Christ enjoined the contrary to his Disciples, to wit, that one of them should
not desire to be above another. 2. The true succession, which is in doctrine,
the Pope of Rome has not: for if the Decrees of the Pope, and the Epistles of
Peter be compared together, there will appear as great difference betwixt
them, as betwixt light and darkness: yea, we are about to prove by and by,
that the Pope of Rome is the Ringleader of Idolaters, so far is he off from
being Peter's successor in Doctrine.

Which be the members of the Church?

They be all the Faithful which do believe in Christ unto eternal life; for
they all are united to Christ, even as the members of our body unto their head.
They are united, I say, by the holy Spirit, who produces such like motions in
them, as are in the humane nature of Christ assumed; that is he makes that
the Faithful become partakers of the Sacerdotall, Prophetical, and Regal
power which is in Christ. About which matter Peter Epist. 1. c. 2. v. 9.
speaks most sweetly, You are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy
Nation, a people whom God has chosen, as peculiar to himself, that the
virtues of him might be manifest, who has called you out of darkness into
his admirable light. See concerning this most comfortable doctrine, to wit, the
union of the members with Christ the Head, in the Syst. of Divinity. page 376.

What sorts be the members of Christ of?

Calu. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3. De Ministerio Zanch. in Epist. p. 135 and in
pracept. 4. Objection
They be of two sorts, the Ministers of the Word, and the Hearers. Here the
Papists challenge us, that we have no lawful Ministers in the Church, and by
consequence that there be no lawful sheep, because (say they) where there are
no true Pastors and Shepherds, there can be there no lawful or true sheep.
But we deny the Antecedent, Soluti.
where they say, that in our Churches there be no lawful Pastors: because he
is a right Pastor, who rightly and lawfully executes his charge, which is done
by the pure preaching of the Word, and the administration of the Sacraments.
But (say they) from whom had your Luther and Calvin their callings? We answer:
That we depend not on Calvin and Luther, but on the Prophets themselves, and
the Apostles. As for Luther and Calvin, they were neither Prophets nor
Apostles. But if they would know what kind of calling Caluins and Luther his
was, we answer; It was ordinary: for Luther by the public authority of the
University at Witenberg, was created Doctor of Divinity, and so was he called
to teach by an ordinary vocation. Yea, but the University at Witenberg, it was
Papisticall? Answer: True, it was so at that time, yet it called Luther to the
sincere preaching of the Gospel For the Papists themselves say not, that when
Luther was called by them to teach, that he was called by them to teach
heresies, but to teach the Truth. Therefore when afterward he taught the
Truth, he taught it, being ordinarily called thereunto, although he taught it
not according to the Popes mind and his Bishops. Yea, but he taught errors
of Papistrie before? I answer: that that fault of Luther made not his vocation
void. The same we say of Zwinglius, Calvin, and others, which were created by
Bishops; where not withstanding it must be considered, that unto that
ordinary calling, there was somewhat extraordinary adjoined, to wit, in that
God set forth, and adorned those first Miinsters of the doctrine of the Gospel
with a singular virtue to discover the fearful abominations of Popery: for
the rest of our Ministers, which have, and yet do teach in the Reformed Church,
they were called ordinarily by them who have authority, and as yet to this day
are so called.

Now I much desire to hear of the proprieties of the Church, and first tell
me what kinds be the proprieties of the Church of?

They be often two kinds, some of them do notify and point out unto us where
the Church is, other are bare proprieties.

How many demonstratiue proprieties of the Church be there, or how many be the
true marks of the Church?

Calu. Instit l. 4. c. 1.. 9.
There be only two; first, the purity of Doctrine and Sacraments: Secondly,
obedience and sanctity of conversation answerable to the Word of God, which is
proved out of the tenth of John 27. My sheep hear my voice. Mat. 28 v. 19.
Go, and teach ye all nations, baptising them. Ioh. 15.14. Ye are my friends,
etc. Ioh. 13.35. By this shall all men know, that ye are my Disciples, etc. The
Papists say, these are not the notes of the true Church: for, say they, Syst.
Theol page 393.
all heretics can challenge to themselves thus much, that they have the pure
word of God, and the lawful use of the Sacraments. Therefore I answer; by an
accident, does not take away that which is per se. Now it is but by accident,
that the heretics take this usurpation on themselves: for what is there more
excellent in the Church then the pure Word of God, and the lawful use of the
Sacraments? But in setting down the marks of the Church, they do not agree
among thecselues. See the 396 page of my Syst. of Divinity. Yet generally they
say, that these are those marks, 1. Antiquity. Whereto I answer; Id est
verius quod prius, id prius quod ab initio, id ab initio quod ab Apostolis
Tertul.
which we say and affirm to be in our Church, in that, namely, her Note and
Mark is the pure Word of God, then which nothing is more ancient. But your
Church (do they object) began but with Luther some 80 years ago, Proleps.
Look beyond Luther.
therefore it is not the true Church? I answer: that it is an untruth, that our
Church did but begin then. For our Church begun presently in Paradise, and
was also in the time of the Prophets. The second mark they make a continual
succession, Pietatis successio proprie successio est astimanda. Greg. Naz Non
habent haereditate^ Petri, quifidem Petri non habent. Ambros.
or a perpetuity of doctrine in the Church, and some condemning our Church, as
in which there has been no such continual succession, they insult over us,
saying: Where were your Churches before Luther those 600 years, wherein you
say, the World was obscured by the darkness of Popery? Whereunto we answer,
clearly manifest, Calu Instit. lib. 4. c. 2.
sometime it is more obscurely apparent; if therefore by succession they
understand the state of the Church always alike flourishing, then we say, that
it is false that such a succession is a propriety and mark of the true Church:
Ecclesia est quae aliqua^do obscuratur and tan quam obnubilatur multitudine
scandalorum, aliquando tribulationum and tentationum flucti bus operitur atque
turbatur. Cum Arriani etc. Aug.
for the visible state of the Church consists in religious-worship, and in
doctrine, wherein the Church is not always like unto it self, having her
obscurings, and as it were eclipses, such as the Sun and Moon have; and
sometimes it is wrapped about with errors, so that it cannot show its head by
any visible estate, or ministry whereunto the Scripture bears manifest
testimony, 1 King. 19.18. where it is plain, that the estate of the Church was
altogether obscured, insomuch that Elias thought with himself, that he alone
was left alive of all the members of the Church, being privy to none beside
himself, that worshipped God purely; yet even then the Lord said unto him, I
have reserved unto my self seven thousand, Syst. Theol. page 389.
which have not bowed their knees before Baal. So in the time of Christ his
living upon the earth, the state of the Church was a most corrupt state, so
that beside Christ and his Apostles, there were very few members of the true
Church; yea, and before Christ's birth a little, Mary, Joseph, Zachary, and
Elizabeth, and a few more, which lay so secret, that there was no show of them
to any man, made up the true Church. Such like unto these was that estate of
the Church those 600 years under the Papacy, of which time there was express
prediction before, Revel. 12.6. that the time, to wit, should come, that the
Church should be obscure, as it were hid in the wilderness. But therefore can
any conclude, that there was no Church? No surely, no more then it does follow;
This man is hid; therefore he is not a man. There were in that most thick
darkness of Popery, and under the Kingdom of that Antichrist of Rome, Syst.
Theol. page 408.
true members of the Church, although by reason of that cruel tyranny of the
Pope they lay hid, neither was there so few of them as the Papists feign, which
at that very time under Popery had the pure doctrine and the Sacraments, but
there were very many of them, even whole Countries that were not defiled by the
corrupt Doctrine of the Papists, as the Albin genses, and the Valdenses, and
they of Picardie, who propagated the holy Truth in Bohemia, and Polonia, in
spite of all the Popes resistance. As also a hundred years before Luther, Et
si Papatus non sit ecclesia voluit tamen Deus in Papatu seruare ecclesiam.
Theod. Beza.
there were the Hussites, Brethren of Bohemia, who maintained the true Doctrine
of the Gospel, as those times would give them leave. Yea, and further in all
and every of those years there were by Gods working, continually raised up
Witnesses and Teachers, who openly and before all, showed their detestation of
the Pope, and Popish errors, which Witnesses of the Truth, even in the time of
Papacy, they are all gathered together in a Book most worthy the perusing,
which we ought always to oppose to the Papists, which has for its Title,
Catalogus testium veritatis: that is; A Catalogue of the Witnesses of the
Truth. The third Note the Papists do make universality, Syst. Theol. page 404.
ought to be Catholic? I answer: That the Papists here do contradict
themselves, when they say, the Church of God must be Catholic, and yet the
Romish Church must be that Church of God; which is all one, as if I should
say; the Church must be the universal Dantiscan Church, or the universal
Cracouiun Church, or a particular universal Church; for to be the Romish
Church, and to be a particular one, is all one, Again, we answer, that we do
not deny, that the Church ought to be Catholic, in that sense wherein the
word is used in the Creed, as afterward it shall be made plain. And we say,
that our Church has always been, and now also is Catholic, because that
after the Apostles had gathered the Church out of all Nations, there did
always from time to time remain some relics of the true Church in all
Nations, although those relics were hid and obscured, as that book Catalogus
testium veritatis; which we have a little before cited, does testify, that in
the very time of Popery, there was always in Greece, Italy, Spain, Germany,
Bohemia, Polonia, some found that opposed and resisted the Pope. But whereas
the Jesuits object unto us, that in America, and in the East Indies, there are
no Protestant Preachers of the Gospel as yet, but all Papists, and especially
Jesuits laboring the conversion of the people? I answer them: first, that the
Pharisees also did run about both by Sea and Land, to draw men unto their
faith, and yet for all that, their Religion was not true. Secondly, I say, that
the Papists have slain more in the Jndies then they have converted, as you may
see by a place, which I have cited in my Politiques l. 1. c. 4. that in a very
short time a hundred and forty thousand men were murdered by them. Thirdly, I
am sure the Devil also goes a compassing the whole world, and seduceth many,
yet is he for that never a whit the better. Fourthly, I auerre, that our
Ministers also have taught the true Gospel in America: inasmuch as Calvin sent
thither two Ministers of the Church from Geneua, the one whereof was Joannes
Lerius, who committed that story to writing. And at this day there are
Orthodoxe Ministers in the East Jndies: which do publicly preach the true
doctrine of the Gospel, carried over thither by the Merchants of the
Low-Countryes. And doubtless toward the end of this world, the true Religion
shall be in America; as God now is preparing the way for it by the English and
Low-Countrie Merchants; that that of Christ may be fulfilled, Matthew. 24.14.
The Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole World, that it may be a
witness to all Nations. For GOD in in all his works is wont to effect a thing
successively, and therefore first he sends unto those Nations some light of
his Essence and his Truth by the Papists, and afterward will make these things
shine more clearly unto them by the true and faithful Ministers of the
Gospel. unity and good agreement. Vt est ecclesia Dei vna, sic est Diaboli vna
Babylon. Aug.
Consent and unity is but so far a mark of the Church, as the consent is in
truth and goodness, and not in evil and falsehood: for such an agreement in
evil and falsitie is among the very Devils, and what greater agreement and
consent then among robbers? so also among the Turks, there is very great
consent, so that Mahometisme is far and hear by them propagated; yet does it
not hence follow, that Mahometisme is the true Church. Secondly, I answer, that
in our Church there is great consent in the truth; for howsoever after Luthers
time, there arose many Churches, the Devil being always busy to cast his
plots against the true Church, and to stir up in it diverse Sects; yet the
Orthodoxe Professors are at good agreement about the Articles of Faith, as
that excellent Book called, the Harmony of Co^fessions does testify; wherein
it is manifestly proved that there is exceeding great consent betwixt the
Churches of France, England, Scotland, Bohemia, and those which are in Germany
near unto Rhene, and in other Provinces. For that disagreement which is
betwixt the Lutherans and the Orthodoxe Professors, does not straight way
quite dissolve the unity which is betwixt the members of the true Church.
Thirdly, I deny that there is so great agreement in the Romish Church, as they
boast of: for it can be easily shown, that the Popish Writers agree not in
any one Article among themselves, as it does appear out of Bellarmine, who
ordinarily disputes against other Papists, and alleges their oppositio^s,
and co^tradictions to themselves: this may further appear by Joh. Pappius and
Matthias Illyricus his Book of the Sects and Dissentions and co^tradictio^s
among Popish Doctors, printed at Basil, 1565; whereunto the Papists have not
as yet answered. Andr. Chrastouius likewise has written a Book he calls Bellum
Iesuiticum. The good agreement the Jesuits have among themselves, who neither
is as yet confuted. In the Bodleian Library at Oxford.
That same Book of Chrastouius was printed at Basil in quarto 1593, and it
contains 205 Jesuitical contradictions.

Which is that bare, or secondary propriety of the Church?

To the Church of the New Testament, Syst. Theol. page 404.
this propriety does also agree that it is Catholic, and that first in
respect of places, not because it possesses many Kingdoms, but because it is
scattered over the whole world, and not tied to any one certain place, to any
determinate country, or city. Secondly, in respect of men, because it does
consist of men of all sorts, gathered out of the condition of al men of all
Nations, Act. 10.35. Thirdly, in respect of times, because it shall continue
all times, even unto the end of the world, as it is said, Matt 28. I will be
with you even unto the end of the world. Fourthly, in respect of unity,
because the Catholic Church is at all times but one, to wit, in the unity of
doctrine, and consent in that doctrine. And thus much we have spoken of the
proprieties of the Church. Now if we shall examine and try the Popish Church by
these proprieties it will appear to be no pure Church, but to be very
corrupt, even as a rotten apple is an apple corrupted, and no otherwise, then a
man that is infected with the plague, is a man, but no sound man. And that the
Popish Church is not the pure Church, I will prove it by two manifest reasons:
the first, An idolatrous Church is not the true and pure Church, but such a one
is the Popish Church, Ergo. The proposition is evident, because God does
abhor nothing more then Idolatry; therefore he says, Fly from Idols; and,
No Idolater shall be saved. The assumption I confirm thus: That Church which
gives that honor, which David gives unto God the Creator, in the very same
words unto the creature, to wit, the Virgin Mary, that same Church is
idolatrous. But the Church of Rome does so go now, that the Church of Rome
does attribute that honor which is due unto God, unto the Virgin Mary: I prove
it by a most evident testimony out of that same Psalter of Marie the Virgin,
which was compiled by Bonauentura, who lived 250 years ago, and canonized of
the Pope of Rome, so that he is accounted among the Saints, and the title of a
Seraphicall Doctor, which is more then Angelical, given unto him. This same
Psalter was by the permisson of the higher powers printed in Latin at Brixia,
and Bononia in Italy eight years since, being before printed at Ingolstadium
in the Dutch tongue some 20 years ago: in the Preface whereunto it is
expressly said, that it was compiled, the holy Ghost inditing and dictating it.
And further, that very Psalter is in special use in the Romish Church, but
especially it is current among the Monks of Saint Bennets Order, which are
called Cistercians. Now in this Psalter, all those things which David
attributes to the high and most mighty God, Ye have this Psalter in
Bonaue^tures works printed in seven Tomes at Rome 1588 vol. 6. page 502, in
Latin; in English ye have diverse passages of it, and amongst the rest, these
in Foxes Martyrology, printed 1583. fol 1600. Missale Roman. edit. Salmanticae
A D. 1588. feria 6. in parasceue p. 223.
are by them put upon the Virgin Marie, as Psalm. 51. Have mercy upon me, O
Lady, and cleanse me from all mine offenses. But that of all other is most
blasphemous, which they apply unto her out of the Psalm. 109. according to that
distinction, The Lord said to my Lady, sit thou mother mine at my right hand;
where Mary is made the mother of God the Father, as though the Father had been
incarnate, and made man, that I may not say further, that to be set on the
right hand of God, is to have a like power, and equal glory with God himself.
Again, that the Romish Church is an Idolatrous assembly, I prove it out of
the Romish Mass book, where in the Service appointed for Good Friday, it is
said, that the Priest so soon as he has put off his shoos, and then
approaches to adore the Cross, shall kneel 3 times, before he kiss the
Cross, and then afterward the Ministers of the Altar, they must also kneel,
and three times adore the Cross. II. Arg. That Church which approves manifest
crimes, is not the pure Church: but the Church of Rome is such. Ergo. The
Proposition is herein manifest, for that the Papists themselves do yield
sanctity and holiness of manners to be a note of the Church. The assumption I
confirm, 1. for that the Pope does dispense for Incest, Sodomy, and other most
grievous crimes See the Taxes, Fines, or Nundinations of the Court of Rome
described at large in Musculus his Common Places, 2. It is confirmed out of
Costers Enchiridion, Coster. Enchirid. c. 5. propos. 9.
where you shall find it written, that a Priest committing fornication, or
keeping a concubine in his house, does not so grievously sin, as he that does
marry. This does Gretzer allow of in his History of the Jesuitical order:
page 115. Most truly wrote our Coster, Gretzer Ingolstad. A.D. 1594.
that a Priest should not so grievously offned, if he should commit
Fornication, as if he should marry. And he adds; Yea it is truly spoken,
that a Priest does less sin in committing Adultery, then in marrying a Wife.
Bellar. 2. lib. de Monach. cap. 30. It cannot truly be said of a Nun that has
vowed continency, that it is better to be married, then to burn, for both in
her is evil, to be married, and to burn; yea, worse it is to be married,
then to burn, whatsoever our adversaries say to the contrary, that it is
written, 1 Cor. 7. It is better to marry, then to burn. Here that is worthy
marking, which Sleidan sets down in his first book, that a certain Italian
Bishop, Casa by name, has written a whole Book in the praise of filthy
Sodomy. Where we may note for a conclusion, that although all those things be
granted to the Papists, which they most gloriously dispute about the Church,
yet they can gain nothing hereby, because they ought to make it plain first
unto us, that the Popedom is the true Church; which in that they have not as
yet proved, nor shall ever be able to prove it, they do but delude themselves
with a vain title of the Church. And whereas they say, that it is absurd,
before the point of the Church be discussed, to take in hand to dispute of any
of the Articles of faith; that also can little avail them, because we do
dispute, and judge of doctrine and faith by the word of God, and it may be so
disputed, although that point of the Church be not before handled: Syst.
Theol. page 390.
for the Word of God is before the Church, and above the Church, neither has
the Church any authority to wrest the Scripture, as we have formerly proved in
the common place of Scripture. But here I would have noted the exceeding fraud
of the Popish Writers, that when they have made a great stir about the
Church, and stood long upon it, at length they conclude, the Church to be a
Council, consisting of the Pope, the Cardinals, and Bishops; and so exclude
all other, which are neither Cardinals nor Bishops, from the Church; at least
remoouing them so far, that they shall not make up the Church, properly so
called, and principally, that hereby they might the more establish the insole^t
pride of their Spiritaltie, against the manifest Word of God.

You have made plain the Doctrine of Redemption unto me, now it follows, that
you instruct me in the matter of the Justification of man before God;
wherefore show me J pray you what is Justification?

It is the absoluing of sinful man from his sins; Syst. Theol. page 413. De
Iustificatione, Zanch. Co^fess. c. 19. item. Loc. Com. 11. Calu instit. lib. 3.
cap. 11 and seqq.
or it is a forgiving of sins by the mere grace and favor of God, for the
merits of Christ imputed and applied unto us by Faith.

What are to be considered about Justification?

Four things: 1. the principal cause: 2. the isntrumental cause: 3. the
effect and fruit: and lastly, the necessary adiunct.

What is the principal cause of Justificatio^ before God?

The principal cause is either primarie, or secondary: the prime c^use, is the
grace and mercy of God, the other cause is the merit of Christ, or the death
and passion of Christ made ours, imputed unto us, or appropriated unto us, so
truly, that the Passion of Christ should besteede us as much, as if we our
selves had hanged on the Cross, and had died for our own sins. Hereof we
have manifest testimonies of the Scripture, Romans 5.8.19. As by one man many
were made sinners, Ipse peccatum and nos iusticia, nec nostra sed Dei, nec in
nobis sed in ipso, sicut ipse peccatum non suum sed nostrum, nec in se sed in
nobis. Sic ergo sumus iustitia Dei in ipso vt ille est peccatum in nobis nempe
imputatione. Aug.
etc. Romans 4.5.6. Blessed is the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness,
without the works of the Law, 2. Cor. 5.21. He made him which knew no sin,
to be sin for us that we might be made the righteousness of God in him,
Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, whilst he was
made a curse for us. Philip. 3.9. That J may be found not having my own
righteousness, but that which is by the faith of Christ. Now there is no
opposition in this we say, Syst Theol. page 420.
that a sinner is justified by the mere grace of God, and yet by the merit of
Christ, because it was brought about by the mere mercy and grace of God, that
Christ performed that meritorious work for us: for Christ was in no wise bound
unto us, to die for us, but he out of his mere grace and mercy did undergo
death for us.

What is the Isntrumental cause of Justification?

Only faith in Christ, De Fide Zanch. Loc. Com. 7 and 8
insomuch as by faith, even as by a hand and instrument we lay hold on, and
apply unto us the merit and satisfaction which Christ has performed for us.

What is Faith?

Faith is not only a bare knowledge of the History of Christ, Syst. Theol. page
427. Calu Instit. lib. 3. ca. 2.
but it is also a sure confidence of the heart, whereby we set down in our
selves for certainety, (...).
and be persuaded that our sins are forgiven us of God for the death and
passion of Christ. Note here two maine errors of Popery, whereof the first
is, that faith is only a certain Historical knowledge, and no true and sure
confidence of the heart: against which the Scripture it self directly speaks,
Romans 14.5. and Heb. 10.22. where faith is called a sure trust and persuasion.
See my Gymnasium logicum, wherein you have this in that Theme Fides, some what
opened. The second error is that we come by the remission of sins, Calu.
Instit. lib. 3. cap. 14 and 15. and 17. and 18.
not by faith alone, but also by the merit of good works: contrary unto those
sayings in the Scripture, Ephesians. 2.8. By the grace of God you are saved through
faith, and not of your selves. Romans 4.3. Abraham believed, and that was imputed
unto him for righteousness. Again, Unto him not that work ethe, but that
believes in him, which justifies the wicked, his faith is counted for
righteousness. Luke 8.50. Mark. 5.36. Si credis, fidei cur alia infers? quasi
iustificare non sufficiat sola Chrysostom.
says Christ, only believe: which is all one, as if he had said; By faith
alone thou shall obtain everlasting life. So then although these words be not
manifestly extant, By faith alone we are justified, yet the sense is
manifestly put down, and other words thereunto equivalent are contained in the
Scripture: for whereas the Apostle says, Romans 3.28. We conclude, that a man
is justified by faith without the works of the Law. Certainly it is all one,
as if he said, We conclude that a man is justified only by faith; for a man
must needs be justified either by faith, or by works: a third way none can be
able to show, Paul plainly says to the Galathians, Gal. 2.16. Non opus est
lege, quando impius per solam fidem iustificatur Ambros. Ephs. 2.5. Tit. 3.5.
We know that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ. Not By those righteous deeds which we have done, but by his
own mercy he has saved us through the Lauer of regeneration, and renewing of
the holy Spirit. Therefore it remains that we say, that faith alone does
justify a man. And that no man is justified by works, and so consequently,
that our works do not merit for us forgiveness of sins, I prove it by
evident testimonies of holy Writ. I. Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.8. Qua^taelibet fuisse
virtutis antiquos praedices iustos, non eos saluos fecit nisi fides. Aug.
By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, not of works, least any should boast. Secondly, Philip. 3.9. Romans
3.24. II. We are justified before we do any works, as S. Paul expressly
witnesses of Abraham, that before he had done any good work he was justified
before God. Romans 4.2. where he says; Non praecedunt iustificand^u sed
sequuntur Iustificatu^. Aug.
If Abraham had been justified by works, he had wherein to boast, but not with
God. To him that works, the wages is not given upon favor, but debt: but he
that works not, but believes only in him, who justifies the wicked, his
faith is imputed unto him for righteousness. III. Arg. is taken from the
propriety of our works. Our works are debts, therefore by them can we deserve
nothing. Nihiles per te, Deum inuoca. tua peccata sunt, merita Deisu^t,
supplicium tibi debetur, and cum praemium ad venerit, sua dona coronabit non
merita tua. Aug. Vae etiam laudabili hominum Vita, si remota misericordia, eam
discutias. Aug. Ipsa nostra iusticia, qua^uis vera sit, talis tamen est, vt
potius peccatorum remissione conslet qua^ virtutum perfectione. Idem. Nostra si
qua est humilis iustitia, recta forsan, sed non pura; nisi forte meliores nos
esse credimus qua^ patre nostros, qui non minus veraciter qua^ humiliter di
cebant Omnes iusticiae nostra sunt tanquam pannu^ mulieris menstruata Bern.
Antec. is confirmed by Luke 17.10. When you have done all that you can do,
etc. 2. Good works are not ours, but Gods; now by that which is another, and
not our own, we can merit nothing. Antecedent is proved, Phil. 2.13. God it is
who works good in you, and perfects it, Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works which he has prepared, that we
should walk in them, Thirdly, our good works are not perfect, therefore we
can merit nothing by them; for three things there be required of him that will
merit; first, that he has that, by which he will merit of his own: secondly,
that it be no debt: thirdly, that that be perfect: which three conditions our
good works have not, as it is said, Esa. 6.64. All our righteousness is like
unto a menstruous cloth. And Phil. 3.8. Paul calls his works dung.

I understand what iustifiing faith is, now tell me the causes thereof whereby
it is begotten in us?

The principal cause whereby saving faith is engendered, is the holy Spirit,
the isntrumental cause or means is either ordinary, or extraordinary.

What is the ordinary means whereby the holy spirit works faith in us?

It is twofold, namely, Syst. Theol. p. 436.
the Word of God, and the Sacraments.

The Word of God you have already touched, now tell me what is a Sacrament?

It is a holy sign instituted of God, Syst. Theol. page 439.
whereby God makes the believers sure of his favor, the forgiveness of their
sins, De sacramentis, Zanch. Co^fess. c. 14.
and other benefits likewise by Christ his passion and death to be bestowed
upon them.

Of what sorts are the Sacraments?

Of two sorts, Sacraments of the Old and New Testament

How many Sacraments were there in the Old Testament?

Syst. Theol. page 448.
Two, to wit, Circumcision, and the Paschall Lamb.

How many Sacraments be there in the New Testament?

Syst. The. page 451.
Two only, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord?

What is Baptism?

Calu. Instit. l. 4. c. 15.
It is a Sacrament of the new Testament, whereby sprinkling of the water in the
name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost being made, we are initiated and grafted
into the Church, and whereby there is sealed unto the faithful forgiveness of
sins by the blood of Christ, and regeneration unto life eternal. See more in
my Syst. of Divine. page 451. and in the Comment on Vrsins Catechism, page 429.
according to the last Edition.

What is the Lords Supper?

This we shall handle afterward in the opening of our particular knowledge,
wherewith we must furnish our selves, regard that the knowledge hereof comes
nearest unto our lawful and seemly preparing of our selves to the Lords
Supper. Here only would be noted that error of the Papists, who have made
seven Sacraments of the New Testament, to wit, Baptism, Calu. Instit. l. 4. c.
19.
Confirmation, Penance, the Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Orders and Matrimony.
But that number of Sacraments is neither vpholden by any testimony of holy
Writ, neither is it propped by the authority of any of the ancient Fathers, but
it is a new devise, hatched not above 200 years ago in the time of Lombard,
the Master of the Sentences. Besides, every Sacrament should have a sign and a
thing signified, but Penance, Orders, Matrimony have no signs at all. Further
yet, every Sacrament has annexed promise of grace, and appertains to all
believers in the Church; and to conclude, it is more then manifest, that all
Sacraments ought to be instituted by Christ; every of which marks of a
Sacrament cannot be auerred, and truly attributed unto those five Sacraments
the Papists feign, no, to none, save Baptism and the Lords Supper.

What is the extraordinary means of Faith?

Miracles, Syst. Theol. pa. 465. Miraculae necessariae erant vt crederet
mundus, postquam vero iam mundus credidit, qui miraculum quaeritmagnum est ipse
prodigium. Aug.
which are extraordinary signs, whereby God after a wonderful manner, wrought
and confirmed faith in the time of the Primitive Church. And here must be
observed a double error of the Papists; First, in that they are of opinion,
that now there is need of Miracles; whereas this is only the use of Miracles,
namely, to confirm doctrine at the beginning, and first setting a broach of
it; and therefore must cease after the doctrine be sufficiently confirmed.
Second error is, in that they think, that Miracles is a mark of the true
Church, Quasi hoc non scriptu^ esset venturos qui maximas virtutes ^edent ad
corrumpendam veritatem. Tertullian.
when as even very hypocrites oftentimes have done miracles; yea, and can do
them, Mark. 13. v. 22. Luke 21.8. where it is plainly told us that toward the
end of the World, there shall arise false Prophets, which shall work miracles.
But 2 Thessalonians. 2. ver. 9. is a notable place against the Papists that do so brag
of their miracles. The coming of Antichrist is in the power of Satan, with all
power and signs, and lying wonders; whence it may appear, that before the
end of the world to do many miracles, is a mark of Antichrist; and the
Apostle calls those Miracles, lying wonders; time and long experience
testifies so much: for in the Monasteries, how many sleights and iuggling
tricks do the Monks find out and practice to deceive the common people, and
make them believe that they work miracles.

I have heard the causes of Justification, tell me also what is the fruit of
Justification?

Syst. Theol. page 416.
It is that peace of conscience, by which a man is made sure of the grace and
favor of God, and of eternal life, which must especially be noted against
that detestable error of the Papists; De certitudiuine salutis. Zanch.
Miscellan. 1. par. p. 214 and seqq. Calv. Insti. l. 3. c. 13.. 3.
who in their Trent Council, Session 6. boldly affirm, that a man cannot
hereof be certain in this life, but ought always to doubt of it; and they
add, that there can be no greater sin before God, then that a miserable
sinner, should assure himself of Gods favor; yea, and further they add, that
whosoever shall hold that opinion, ought to be accursed. To this their
abominable error, we oppose most plain places of holy Writ, Romans 8 verse. 15.
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage, but that spirit of Adoption, by
which we cry Abba, Father; which spirit bears witness to our spirit, that
we are the Sons of God: This is a very horrible impiety that we will not
receive the testimony of the Spirit, but doubt of the truth, and certainty
thereof, 1 John 5.10. He that believes in the Son of God, has the Testimony
in himself. And surely if God would have had us to have doubted, Hoe dixit
Deus, hoc promisit, si parum est. hoc iurauit. Aug.
he would never have sworn, that he would be merciful to us. But now he
has sworn thus much very evidently, EZech. 33.11. As I live (says the Lord)
that is, as truly as I am, and live, I will not the death of a sinner, but
that he live. Also, John 5.24. Verily, verily J say unto you, whosoever
believes in the Son, has eternal life. And, Woe be to thee then (says
Saint Austin) if thou believe not God, when he swears to thee. But the
Papists object; Tria considero, in quibus tota spes mea consistit, Charitatem
adoptionis, veritatem promissionis, Potestatem redditionis, etc. Bern.
They that are weak are subject to falling, and they cannot be sure of the
grace of God. Answ. Who so are weak they may easily fall, I limit the
proposition thus, unless there be one that is mightier, who vpholdeth them.
Now God it is that holds us up, and that helps our infirmities. And
therefore certain we may be of the forgiveness of sins, and of the grace
of God, not by any thing in our own nature indeed, which is weak, but by the
help and assistance of the holy Ghost, making us strong according to those
sayings of holy Writ, Psalm, 37.24. Though the righteous fall, he shall not be
cast off, because the Lord puts under his hand. John 10.28. I will give unto
my sheep eternal life, neither shall they perish for ever, neither shall any
one take them out of my hand, my Father which has given me them, is greater
then all; that is, he can supply their wants readily, and uphold them
mightily. Romans 8.38. I am persuaded, that neither life nor death, neither
things present, nor things to come, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ. Again, they object that place, Cor. 10.12. He that
stands, let him take heed that he fall not I answer: Eccles 9.1. A man
knows not whether he is worthy love or hatred. First, that this is a
fallacy not being limited, we ought then thus to limit it; A man knows
not of himself, but he may know it, The fathers speak against a vain
presumption, not a godly assurance.
God revealing it unto him, and the holy Spirit witnessing it. Secondly, a man
knows not by those humane causes, and by the event of Fortune, and the
chances and changes of these outward things. And therein the Text it self is a
mouth to expound it self, for there it is said, that a man by external
changes, such as are riches, poverty, health, sickness, honor, contempt,
that a man cannot by these things, nor any other external estate, judge, and
certainly know, whether he be in the favor of God, or be hated by him. And
therefore that their Argument is not sound, which argue thus, as many do, I am
rich, Ergo, I am the son of God: or, I am poor, Ergo, God does hate me. This
judgment then, whether we be in the favor of God or not, we must take from
Gods Word. Sithence therefore it is certain that a faithful soul may be
assured of the favor of God, and the forgiveness of sins, and may be made
partaker of the peace of Conscience, as it is said, To. 5.1. Being justified by
faith, we have peace: thence another thing does necessarily follow, De
perseuerantia Zanch. Miscellan. 1. part p. 91. and seqq. ite^ page 347.
to wit, That a man when he is once received into the favor of God, and has
obtained remission of his sins, that he (I say) cannot fall away from the
Grace of God, nor lose his Faith, nor be obnoxious unto eternal damnation. For
because we ought not to doubt of the grace of God, therefore, neither can we
fall away from the grace of God: for if we could fall away from it, then we
might doubt of it; but we being once received into the grace and favor of God,
that we cannot altogether loose that grace of God, the Scripture witnesserh,
Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus: if no
condemnation, then perpetual favor, and if no condemnation, then also no time
is wherein they may slide from the grace of God, and fall into condemnation: for
by no condemnation, is excluded both all the kinds thereof, and all occasions
of falling thereinto. Hitherto appertains that place, Ipse ergo eos facit
perseuerare in bono, qui facit bonos: qui autem cadunt and pereunt, in
Praedestina^orum numero non fuerunt, August.
which before we have cited, John 10.28. My sheep none shall take out of my
hand, which is all one, as if he had said, My sheep shall never be taken out of
my hand. Which must be diligently noted against the Papists, who affirm, that
a man after that he is taken into the favor* of God, may fall again out of his
favor, even as if he had never been in favor, but may have of a merciful God,
an vncompassionate, and irreconcilable God; even as when one falls out of the
favor of the King in stead of a gentle and kind master, he has now an angry
and cruel Lord. David after that horrible sin of his was committed, prays,
Restore unto me the joy of my salvation, verse. 12. therefore, say they, he
had lost the favor of God. my spirit which I had lost; but he says, restore
my joy, my comfort again to me. Therefore that text makes against themselves;
for if David had lost that grace and spirit of God, then had he lost that his
salvation, but he speaks otherwise, he says only restore comfort unto me;
for a true believer, when that he falls into sins, the holy spirit for all
that remains in him, yet it does not cherish his conscience, but it grows
sad and heavy, and so cease to be glad, and merry as before times he used to
be, he does therefore desire of God that he would take away this sadness and
heaviness of heart from him, and that he would restore unto him a joyful and
gladsome spirit.

I have heard as touching the fruit of Justification, what is that you told me
was necessarily conjoined and annexed thereunto?

Because the just man falls seven times even in a day, Not (...) only but
(...).
therefore to Justification there must always be adjoined Repentance.

True repentance of what parts does it consist?

De penite^tia Zanch. Loc. Com. 9. Calu. Iustit. l. 3. ca. 3
Of two parts, one of them as it were contrary unto the other; to wit, grief,
or sorrow for sins committed, and the offending or displeasing of God, and
then comfort and confidence of the forgiveness of sins, which is to be had,
by and for the merits of Christ. See the 467. page of my Syst. of Divinity,
and in the comme^t upon Vrsins Catechism, page 640. Calu Instit. lib. 3. c. 4.
Here note a double error of the Papists, whereof the first is, Quid mihi ergo
est cu^ hominibus vt audiant confessiones meaes, quasi sanaturi sint omnes
linguores meos?
That unto true repentance there is required Confession to a Priest. To which
error we oppose our judgments: First, because such a Confession is no where
commanded of God. Secondly, because there is no one example for it of any Saint
through out the whole book of God; Curiosum genus ad cognoscendum vitam
alienam, desidiosum ad co^rige^dum suam. Quid ame quaerunt audire quisum, qui
nolunt a te audire qui sint Aug.
no example I say, but which teaches us to make confession of our sins only
to God: So does David Psalm. 51.4. Again, thee only have I sinned O Lord. And
the Publicane. Luke 18.13. Standing in the Temple confessed his sins only to
God, and thence w^nt away justified: Whereupon (says Chrysostom.) Confess thy
sins to God, for to do this to man it is not safe for thee, for that men may
either discover them or vpbraide thee with them The other Popish error is, Non
gloriabor quia iustus sum, sed gloriabor quia redemptus sum. Gloriabor non quia
vacuus peccati sum, sed quia mihi remissa sunt peccata. Non gloriabor quia
profui, neque quia profuit mihi quisquam sed quia pro me aduocatus apud Patrem
Christus est, sed quia pro me Christi sanguis eff^sus est. Ambros.
that Repentance which they call penance is satisfactory, as if we by our
repentance did satisfy for our sins: unto which detestable error, those
places of the holy Bible are to be opposed, by which we have before made
clear that the passion of Christ does sufficiently satisfy for all our sins.

You have already sufficiently instructed me about Redemption: now take the
pains I pray you, to instruct me about sanctification?

De Regeneratione. Zanch in Epist ad Ephesians page 161 and seqq. Calu. Instit. l.
3. c. 5.
Sanctification, Regeneration, and new Obedience, or Conversion unto God, are
all one in signification. And it is nothing else save the changing of our
depraved, or corrupt nature into better, and then a settled resolution to avoid
sin hereafter, and to frame our lives to some new course which may be pleasing
unto God, and beseeming our profession of Faith and Religion; Syst. Theol. page
475.
which regeneration in this life certainly cannot be perfect, but only
inchoate, and always co^ioyned with a combating, and a reluctance against sin,
or of the flesh and the spirit, As the Apostle very largely sets it down, Romans
7. Gal. 5. The good (says he) that I would, J do not. But in that other life
we shall perfectly be regenenerated, sanctified, and reformed unto the Image of
God; yet for all this, Calu. Instit. l. 3. cap. 16.
Gods will it is our regeneration should be begun in this life, and that
good works be done by us, as our Savior commands, Math. 5.16. Let your
light so shine before men etc. 2 Pet. 1.10. Labor to make your vocation and
election sure by good works, that is, Labor to give unto your selves a sure,
and to others an evident testimony, that you have true Faith from whence do
spring and arise good works; for Faith without works is dead, and indeed is
no Faith. 1 Thessalonians. 4.3. V. Zanch. in Epist ad Thessal.
This is the will of God even your Sanctification. Romans 6.12.13. Make your
members henceforth weapons of righteousness. And most dreadful is that
speech. Heb. 12.14. Without holiness none shall see God: Wherefore if it be
demanded whether good works are necessary unto Salvation. I Answer, That if we
take Salvation for our first entry thereunto: namely, Remission of sins, and
justification; then good works are not necessary: because it is most
necessarily required that first our sins, be forgiven us, before we can do
any good works pleasing unto God: good works therefore are of no force to
procure remission of sins, which we do obtain only by Faith, contrary to
the Papists tenent: but if the word be not taken for the remission of sins,
but for life eternal, which hereafter we shall be possessed of: there is
need then of good works, Sunt via ad regnum non causa regnandi. Ber.
as a mean and way, but not as any meritorious cause of salvation; for then
indeed shall we be clothed upon, if we be not found naked: that is, in that
other life, we shall be fully renewed and conformed, if that we begin that
reformation, and sanctification in this life. And this is that which the
Apostle speaks Heb. 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness without
which none shall see the Lord.

How many parts are there of our Sanctification?

Two: God works, and Prayer; For in these two stands our whole Regeneration
and conversion; namely, to do good works, and daily to call upon God by
Prayer.

What are good works, or what things are required unto Works which are good,
or pleasing unto God?

Three things be requisite to good works: First, that they spring from a true
Faith: For Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6. Without
Faith it is impossible to please God, etc. Secondly, that they be commanded by
God; for what works soever are enjoined by men, and not by God, those are not
good works. Ezech. 20.18.19. You must walk in my Commandments, and not in
the Commandments of your Fathers. Math. 15.9. They worship me in vain,
teaching for doctrines men's precepts. Thirdly, that our good works, be
always referred to the glory of God; and not unto vain glory and hypocrisy.
1. Cor. 10.31. Do all unto the glory of God, Mat. 5.16. That men seeing your
good works, may glorify your Father which is in heaven. Hereby may easily be
discerned, what is to be thought of the most of the Papists works, wherewith
they think that they worship GOD, such as are their Watchings, and Pilgrimages
to holy places, and adorning of Churches with Shrines and Images: for such
works are no good works; First, because they are not done out of Faith, but
out of a most pestilent opinion of meriting and satisfying for sins. Secondly,
because they are not commanded by God, but invented and appointed by Popes and
Bishops against the express commandment of God: as that of Fasting and
abstaining from Flesh on Friday; which manner of Fasting and difference of
meat is expressly against the Word of God. Mat. 15.11 That which enters into
the mouth does not defile the man; but that which comes out of the mouth,
that defiles the man. 1 Timothy 4.1.3. The Apostle expressly and plainly names
the Forbidding of certain meats, and so of Flesh, among the Doctrines of
Devils. Colos 2.16. Let no man condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect
of Holy days. Romans 14.14. I am persuaded by our Lord Jesus Christ that nothing
is unclean, or common of it self; but to him that thinks any thing to be
common or profane: for the Kingdom of God is neither meat nor drink, but
righteousness, peace and joy in the holy Ghost. v. 17.

What is then the rule and square of our good works, and so consequently
whence do we know what works be commanded by God?

The Moral Law, Syst. Theol. page 475.
or the Decalogue is the only square of our good works, whereby we may know,
what works are acceptable unto God. This law is reduced to two heads, to wit,
the true worship of God, and then the works of charity, Syst. Theol. page 480.
which we perform to our neighbor. The worship of God is set down in the
former part of the Decalogue; and the love of our neighbor, with the works of
charity, is comprised in the second Table.

Which is the other part of sanctification?

Invocation of Gods name

How many ways is God inuocated, Calu. Instit. lib. 3. ca. 20.
or called upon?

Syst. Theol. page 487.
Two ways; the first way is Petition, or beging of those things whereof we
stand in need: and the second is Thanksgiving for those which we have
received: both which kinds of Invocation is either public or private. As
touching both of them, read my Syst. of Divinity. Page 487. And here must be
observed two maine errors of Popery: Honorandi sunt sancti propter
imitationem, non adora^di propter religione^, and Angelos honoramus charitate
non seruitute, nec eis te^pla co^stru imus. Nolunt enim sic se honorari a
nobis, quia nos ipsos, quum boni sumus, templum summi dei esse nouerunt. Aug.
First is, touching the Invocation of Saints: Secondly, about the worshipping
of Images, and adoring of relics. As touching the former of these twain, we
in opposition thereunto maintain, th^^ God alone is to be called upon in
Prayer; that is, the devout affection of our mind, is to be directed even unto
God, and not unto Angels, nor unto the Virgin Mary, nor unto the Apostles, nor
yet unto those fourteen Helpers, as they call them; by whose mediation and
merits, the Papists do most blasphemously say, that they are rid, and
delivered from all adversities; as are, George, Erasmus, Basil, Pantalion,
Vitus, Christopher, Dennis, In Antoninus his time, under Paul's picture was
written, Per hune itur ad Christum: and under Dominicks, Sed peristu^ facilius.
Flac. Illyric.
Dominick, Achatius, Eustace, Gyles, Margaret, Barbara, and Catharine. Hence is
the Mass of the fourteen Helpers. But unto this their praying unto Saints, we
oppose the plain Word of God: whereby will be plainly proved, that we owe
the devour affection of our minds only unto God: Deuteronomy. 6. The Lord thy God
shall thou worship, etc. Which place Christ repeating, Mat. 4.10. expounds
thus: Desanctoru^ inuocatione Zanch. in 1. Epist. Joan.
And him only shall thou serve; producing it against Sata^s temptation. See the
like places, Exodus 20.3.4. Psalm. 50. v. 15. Psalm. 95. v. 6. Psalm. 99.5. The
Angels themselves forbid this, and refuse to be worshipped, as being
idolatrous. Judge. 13.16. where the Angel says unto Manoha: Martyribus non
sacrificantus sed vni Deo. Aug.
If thou will make a burnt Offering, offer it up unto the Lord, and not unto
me. Revel. 19 v. 10. also the 22. v. 9. the Angel forbids John, and stays
him from falling down before him, and worshipping of him. Whereupon he says
to him; See thou do not this, for I am thy fellow servant; that is, I am also
a creature as well as thy self. Abalio ora re non possum, quam a quo sciam me
consecuturum: quonia^ and ipse est qui solus praestat, and ego sum cui
impetrare debetur, famulus cius, qui eum solum obseruo, qui ei offero opimaem
hostiam, quae^ mandauit orationem de carne p^dica, de anima innocenti, de
spiritu sancto profecta^ Tertull.
Paul Coloss. 2. 18. expressly condemns worshipping of Angels. And note I pray
you a very plain place. Rom 10.14. How shall they call on him, in whom they
have not believed? Whence thus I argue: We ought not to believe in the Saints;
therefore neither ought we call, or pray to the^. And the Apostle further in
his Epistle to the Galathians, Chap. 4.8. blames the Heathen, for that they
called on them, which by nature are not Gods. Whence I also argue: Reuera
Sanctu^ erat corpus Maeriae, non tamen Deus: reuera virgo erat Maria and
honorata, sed non ad adoratione^ nobis data: Epiphan. Ibi sunt spiritus
defunctoru^, vbi non vident quaecunque aguntur aut eueniunt in ista vita
hominum. Aug.
The Saints are not by Nature Gods: Ergo, they are not to be called upon: or if
they be called upon, then is committed flat Idolatry. Yea, but the Saints may
mediate for us, therefore they are to be called upon. Whereunto we answer,
denying the Antecedent, that the Saints can mediate for us with God: First,
because we have one only Mediator, to wit, Christ Jesus, as it is written;
There is one Mediator betwixt God and man, even the man Christ Jesus. 1. Tim.
2. v. 5. Like places hereunto, see Ioh. 10.9. Romans 3. 25. Romans 8.34. Heb. 2.17.
Heb. 7.25. Heb 9.12. Secondly, the Saints cannot be Mediators, for that they
do not know the groanings, and sighs of our hearts, and understand not our
private troubles and afflictions. For these be the conditions of an Advocate
or Mediator; first, that our Mediator be nominated and commended unto us
upon good and sufficient warrant of Gods Word: Secondly, that that same
intercessour be perfectly righteous and holy: Thirdly, that he also know, the
groanings and afflictions of him, for whom he means to mediate: none of all
which agrees unto the Saints. For the Saints are neither appointed unto us by
God to be our intercessours, neither have we any command in holy Scripture,
that we are to make the Saints Mediators for us, or to call on them. Nay,
rather quite contrary precepts hereunto, which we have before cited. Again
we find not through the whole volume of of Gods book, any one example of any
Saint, that has prayed unto a Saint, and entreated him to play the Mediator
for him. Neither does the second condition agree to them, for that they are not
altogether pure before God, yt they may mediate for others: but they themselves
rather have need of a Mediator: as it is said, Job 15.15. Yea, in his Saints
be found uncleanness. Thirdly, the Saints are ignorant of our afflictions and
affections, how can they therefore interceed for us, if they wot not what we
ask? for God alone challenges this privilege to himself, to be the searcher
of the heart, and the discouerer of the thoughts, and groanings of men. Yea,
but (say the Papists) the Saints as the friends of God have all our groanings
and prayers disclosed unto them in the glass of the Trinity. Note. Si quando
homines exorare oportet, ianitorib prius occurrere oportet, etc. In Deo nihil
tale, ad quem confugies? ad Abrahamum? non te audiet. Ille solus precandus and
exorandus qui and scriptam in te damnationem delere potest and incendium
restinguere. Chrysostom.
Whereto I answer: first, that if the Saints come to the knowledge of our
groanings by God, what need is there, that first we should call on the Saints?
and to what end is it to have any such Mediators with God, sithence he to whom
they mediate, knows better what is wanting to us, then the Mediators
themselves? For it should seem to be a preposterous course to use any
intercessour unto a King, if the King knew the party, for whom the Mediator
would interceede, Solent tamen pudore^ passi miser^ vti excusatione per istos
posse iri ad Deu^ sicut per comites peruenitur ad rege^, age nunquid tam demo^s
etc. Vide Amb. in 1 ca. epist. ad Romans
better then the Mediator himself. And how absurd should it be, if the
intercessour should say: Tell me, I pray you, O my King, what this felloW
asks, for whom I am to mediate? Secondly, I say, that the Scripture has
broken that prospectiue glass all to shiuers. Esaias 63.15.16. Hear from heaven
thy holy dwelling place: for thou art our Father: Abraham hears us not, and
Israel is ignorant of us: but thou art our Father, thy name is from
everlasting. Where it is plainly affirmed, that Abraham and Israel, which long
ago were dead, and whose souls rested with God in the Heavens, did not in any
glass behold and know the groanings and afflictions of the Church militant on
earth. And indeed that the Saints departed are not privy to our affairs done
upon the earth nor know any thing in specialtie, what happens among the
living, that place in the second of Kings, Cha 22.20. witnesses, where God
says unto Josiah, a most religious and holy King: I will gather thee unto thy
Fathers, that thine eyes may not see all the evils, which I will bring upon
this place, Esaias. 57.1. The just and the righteous are taken away from the
sight of the evil, that in his years he may not behold the calamities, which
are to be sent upon the Land for wretched impiety. Ec. 9 4 the dead know
nothing any more, to wit, of those things, which are done upon the earth. Hence
therefore is it rightly inferred, that the Saints cannot be Mediators. And
indeed we have no need of them to be our intercessours: first, because God
knows our afflictions better then they, yea, better then the Angels:
secondly, because God is more merciful then any Saint, and more desirous that
we should live, then any Saint can be. Ideo ad regem per tribunos aut comites
itur, quia homo vtique est rex, and nescit, quib. debeat rempub credere. Ad
Deum autem, que^ vtique nihil latet, etc. Vid Am. vbi supra in 1. cap ad Romans
Now that we do use the intercession of some Noble man, or great man unto
Kings (which is their most plausible argument), it is for the great defect and
weakness that is in man: for that Princes are not acquainted with all men's
grieuances: secondly, because Princes are more affected unto one man, then unto
another; but no such respect of persons is there with God, as it is said, Acts
10.34. the Papists bring us in a distinction betwixt (...) service, and (...)
adoration: and say that the one, to wit, Service is due to Saints, the other,
that is, Adoration is due to God. Against which distinction, Calu. Instit. l.
1. cap. 12.. 2.
you may read a most clear disputation in the exposition of Vrsins
Catechism, page 739. where it is proved by holy Scripture, that (...) and
(...) both the one and the other agrees unto God, and neither of them both unto
Saints. Only this one thing I will not let pass, that the Papists themselves
break down the pale of their own distinction, which I prove by this reason:
All those things which David in the Psalms gives unto God, he gives them all
by the way of adoration: but all those very things wc David gives unto God, are
attributed unto the Virgin Mary in Bonauentures Psalter: Ergo. The other error
of the Papists is, about the worshipping of Images, and so also of that
worship, which they make unto the Relics of the Saints. And first of all the
Papists hold, that those prayers which are made in, or at certain set Chapels
and Churches, and before the Images of the Saints, are of greater efficacy,
and greater worth, then those which are in other places powered forth before
God: quite against the holy Word of God, Ioh. 4.21.23. The time shall come,
when the true worshippers shall neither be at Jerusalem, nor in this mountain,
but in spirit and truth worship the Father. Matt. 6.6. Christ bids us, go into
our chamber, and there the doors being shut, to power out our prayers. 1. Tim.
2.8. The Apostle wills men to pray in every place, lifting up pure hands. Now
against relics and Images, let that place be well observed, Esaias, 42.8. My
glory will I not give unto another, nor mine honor unto the graven Images. Calv.
Insti l. 1. c. 11.. 9
But we (say the Papists) do not worship Images, and we know, that it is said
in the second Commandment; Thou shall not bow down thy self unto them, etc.
To this what shall we answer, but that they say one thing, and do another: for
we have already proved, that they fall down, and worship the Cross; Behold
the sign of the Cross, come and let us worship it. Again, it is impossible,
that ones whole affection should be bent and settled on an Image, and yet that
he should not direct some devotion unto the Image; as one of the Ancients has
well said: It cannot possible be, Placuit picturas in ecclesia esse non
debere: ne quod colitur aut adoratur, in parietib. pingatur. Council. Elibert.
that the affection should be withdrawn from that, whereon our whole sense is
fixed, and fastened. Therefore Lactantius says, that there can be no true
worship performed, where it is done with respect unto Images. Thirdly, we say,
that both these are equally forbidden of God, namely, the worshipping of the
Image it self, and the worshipping of God at, (...). Atha. Quis ergo iste
honor Dei est per lapideas and ligneas formas discurrere, and inanes atque
examines figurastanquam numina venerari, and hominem, in quo vere^ imago Dei
est, spernere? Clem. Romans
or before an Image. For this you have a plain place, Leu. 26.1. You shall
make you none Idols, nor graven Image, neither rear you up any pillar, neither
shall you set up any stone or image within your Land to worship before it: for
I am Jehouah, the Lord your God. But Images (say they) are Laymens Bibles, and
therefore they may be borne with, as certain historical docume^ts for the
good of lay people: whereto I answer: first, that it is no little blasphemy to
affirm, that Images are Bibles, that is, the Word of God: for the authority of
Gods word, and of the Bible, is the greatest that may be, and it is
unspeakable: But who dare say, that the authority of Images is as divine and
eternal, as that of God himself. Secondly, Images cannot be Lay-peoples
Bibles, because the Bible contains the true doctrine of God: but Images are
deceitful and lying Teachers, Calu. Instit. l. 1. c. 11.. 5
teaching lies, as it is manifestly written by Ier. 10.8. and by Habb. 2.18.19.
Further we ought not to be wiser then God, who has instituted, that his
church should be taught, not by dumb Pictures and Images, but by the lively
preaching of his Word, and the lawful use of the Sacraments. And these things
be spoken also, as touching the adoration of Relics, for the worshipping of
them is confuted by those very same places of Scripture, by which the
worshipping of Images has been overthrown.

You have led me by the hand through all Divinity, and so have helped me to
some general knowledge, whereby I may in some sort be prepared unto the holy
Supper of the Lord: now it remains that you furnish me with some particular
knowledge about the same Supper of the Lord, whereunto I desire to prepare my
self?

You say well indeed, S. Th. p. 439
and I do it very willingly, so be that, before all, you note that the word
Sacrament is no where extant in holy Scripture, but there are diverse words
aequiualent unto it; as Romans 4. the word Sign or Seal; where Paul calls
Circumcision the seal of the righteousness of Faith. A Sacrament then, Calu.
Institut. l. 4. c. 14
is a holy sign or seal annexed to the Word of God, as unto Tables and
Letters, wherein God promises unto us his favor, and the forgiveness of sins
by the death and suffering of our mediator Jesus Christ. Now signs be of
three sorts: Some there be, which are only Significatiue, (...).
and noting out somewhat, as the Meare-stone signifies the fields, which it
parts, to be diverse: (...).
Some are Memoratiue, representing us the memory of somewhat, and exciting our
affection and will, thankfully to think on it: as when one friend gives unto
anoth^r some excellent book, or a piece of gold to be a sign unto him of his
friendly remembrance. Lastly, some Signs are Confirmitiue, (...).
whereby some benefit or other promised unto us by any man, is made certain
unto us. As the seal hanging at the Kings Letters Patents, does not only
signify and put the party in remembrance of some benefit, but it does
especially certify him; as namely, by which he, to whom the letters are
granted, is certainly assured to obtain that benefit or good thing, which is
promised him in the Letters. A Sacrament then is a Seal or Sign, assuring us
the forgiveness of sins, promised in the Letter Pattents of the Gospel. In
which short and plain description, the whole nature of Sacraments does
consist; neither is it here any whit needful that the godly heart should be
troubled or molested with any subtilties either of Papists, (...).
or of Vbiquitaries. (...).


J conceive what a Sacrament in general is, I would have you to show me what
the Supper of the Lord is?

It is a Sacrament of the new Testament, or, it is a holy sign ordained by
Christ in the New Testament, that by bread broken and eaten, S Th. p. 454 Calu.
Institut. l. 4. c. 17 De coena Domini Zanch. Miscellan. 1. part. page 387. and
seq.
we may be admonished and certified, that the body of Christ was broken upon
the Cross, and given for us: and by wine powered out, and drunk, we may be
remembered and assured, that the blood of Christ was shed for us, for the
remission of sins.

How many things are we to consider in the Lords Supper?

S. Th. p. 440
Three things, as in every other relation; first, the two terms of the
relation, the Relate, and the Correlate: Secondly, the foundation and ground of
this relation: thirdly, the end or final cause of this relation.

What is the Relate in the Lords Supper, and what is it called?

It is called the sign, or the thing which puts us in mind, and gives us
assurance of some other matter.

How many kind of signs be there in the Lords Supper?

The Relatum or sign in the Lords Supper is twofold: Substantial and
Accidental.

Which is the Substantial?

It is true bread, and true wine. Sub vtraque; specie sumitur ipse totus
Christus, sed si in altera tantu^ sumeretur, ad alterius tantum, id est, animae
vel corporis, non vtriusque pariter tuitionem valere significaretur. Ambros.
Aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur, quia diuisio
vnius eiusdemque mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio fieri non potest. Gelasius.


Which is the Accidental?

It is the breaking of the bread, and the taking of it; likewise the pouring
out of the wine, and the taking of it.

What is the Corelate in the Lords Supper?

It is called the thing signified, or that thing where of we are put in mind,
and assured in the Lords Supper. The ancient Church called the Relatum, the
earthly matter, as is bread and wine, for both of them spring from the earth
and the thing signified, it called the heavenly matter; whereupon, it rightly
and religiously taught that the Supper of the Lord did consist in two things, a
terrene or earthly, and a celestial or heavenly matter; and therefore that it
behooued those which came unto the Lords Supper, to think that there they
should receive two things, to wit, an earthly thing after an earthly fashion;
that is, bread and wine with the mouth of the body, and an heavenly thing after
an heavenly manner, that is, the Body and Blood of Christ by a true faith.

What be the things signified in the Lords Supper?

The thing signified is of two sorts, substantial, or accidental.

What is the substantial?

Even whole Christ our Mediator according to both natures, divine and humane,
but especially according to his body and blood, in as much as in his body, as
the subject of his passion he suffered for our sins, and by his blood shed
he purged our sins. And this it is which Christ says, This is my body which
is given for you; that is, in the Supper of the Lord you are put in
remembrance, and assured of my body, as it hung upon the Cross, and also of my
blood which was shed likewise for you upon the Cross.

What is the Accidental?

Even all those benefits, which do acc ew unto us by the passion and death of
Christ, as the forgiveness of sins, regeneration sanctification, and in fine
life everlasting: as Christ says, My blood which is shed for you for the
remission of sins.

I have heard of both thy terms in the Lords Supper, to wit, the Relate and
the Corelate: now J would be instructed about the foundation and ground of holy
admonition and certification, as you called it?

The fundamental or efficient cause of the Lords Supper is, Syst. Theol page
446.
partly in respect of the thing it self, or the Sacrament, partly in respect
of us which do use the Sacrament.

What is the foundation, in respect of the Sacrament it self?

It is two fold, the institution of Christ, and the agreement or
correspondencie betwixt the sign, and the thing signified.

What are to be considered in the institution of Christ?

Two things: First, the History of the institution of the LORDS Supper, set
down by the Evangelists: secondly, De verbis Caenae. Zanch. Epist lib. 1.
page.. 179. Calu. Instit. l 4. cap. 17.. 12. and seqq.
the especial words of the institution, which are, This bread is my Body which
is given for you: 1 Cor. 11.24. This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood.
verse. 25.

How are those words to be understood?

Syst. Theol. page 457. Dominus non dubitauit dicere hoc est corpus meum, cum
signum daret corporis sui. Aug. Hoc. est corpus meum, id est, hoc est figura
corporis mei. Tert. Panis dicitur corpus suo modo, cum sit sacrame^tum; non
autem dicitur rei veritate sed mysterio significante. Aug.
They are to be construed according to the nature of signs or sacraments,
which are not transubstantiations of things, but, as we have a little before
noted, significations and seals of things. These words therefore are not
substantially to be understood, as if the Bread were the substance of the Body
of Christ, for by that reason bread should have been crucified for us, bread
should have been given to die for us; and so the Cup likewise should have
been shed for us upon the Cross, the Cup should have issued out of Christ's
side. Neither are they to be understood consubstantially, as if the body of
Christ were included in the bread, and the blood of Christ included in the
wine; for Christ says not, in this bread is my body, or in this wine is
contained my blood, Vt quid paras dentes and ventre^? creed and ma^ducasti.
Idem. Antequam sa^ctificetur panis, pane^ nominamus* diuina autem illa
sanctifica^te gratia liberatus est ab appellatione panis, dignus autem habitus
est dominici corports appellatione, et si natura panis in eo remansit.
Chrysostom. (...). Macar Seruator noster nomina co^mutauit, and corpori quidem
id, quod erat symboli ac signi, nomen imposuit; symbolo autem, quod erat
corporis, causa mutationis manifesta estiis, qui etc. Theodoret.
neither would our Savior teach his Disciples, where his body or his blood
was, for they saw that well enough, in that Christ was sitting with them at the
Table. But those words are to be understood in a commemoratiue, or
certificatiue signification: as if Christ had said, the bread does for a
certainty signify unto you, and gives you notice of my body, which is
delivered unto death for you; and the wine does most certainly notify and
assure you of my blood which is shed for you, for the remission of sins.
Christ's speech then is altogether the like, as if when a Prince has granted to
any one a fair Manor, and he give withal unto the Grant his letters with
his Broad seal, and delivering the man these his letters with the seal, he
should say, Lo, there is your Manner. Now he gives not the Land substantially
into his hands, and by consequent it will follow, that that speech of the
Prince must not be understood substantially, as if those letters and the seal
were the very substance of the demain, or because the demaine were enclosed in
the seal, but it is a significatiue and certificatiue kind of speaking, which
must be thus understood and interpreted; these letters of mine, and this seal
does import and assure thee of the certain having and possessing of that
Manor, Farm, or demaine. Wherefore we conclude* that the Body and Blood of
Christ according to the substance thereof, is neither in the bread, nor in the
place where the Supper of the Lord is administered, but in heaven, as is usually
said, he ascended into the heavens, from whence only he shall come at the last
Judgment; but that the Bread and Wine do give us notice and assurance, that
that very body which now is in heaven, was given for us on the Cross, and that
the Blood of Christ was shed for us. Which must be observed against the
Papists and Vbiquitaries, who seek after the body and blood of Christ in that
very place where is the bread and wine.

What is the other foundation, in respect of the Sacrament?

Si sacrame^ta aliquam similitudinem earum rerum quarum sunt sacramenta non
habere^t: ne sacramenta quidem essent. Aug
It is the agreement or meet analogy betwixt the sign, and the thing
signified, or, it is that fitness, whereby the Bread may signify and
ascertaine us of Christ's body given for us, and the wine may notify and assure
us of the blood of Christ shed for us.

Wherein consists the fitness which true Bread has to signify the Body of
Christ.

It consists in three things: 1. that like as the bread is broken, so the body
of Christ was broken and torn upon the Cross for us: as Paul says This bread
it is the communi^ of the body of Christ. 2. The like as bread has the force
of nourishing, so the body o^ of Christ given for us vn^ death, has power to
refres^ our consciences forlorn, and almost spent and pined away by reason of
sin. 3. Like as bread does not only nourish, but it does also strengthen our
body: so the body of Christ in like manner delivered unto death for us, has
power continually to cherish and sustain our drooping miserable consciences.

Wherein consists the correspondencie that Wine has unto the Blood of Christ?

In three things also; first, even as the wine is poured out into the Cup, and
poured also out of the Cup: so the blood of Christ sprung out of his body, and
was shed upon the Cross. Secondly, even as wine has the power of reviving and
quickening, or of heating and moyst^ning of our body, and of increasing vital
and animal spirits; so the blood of Christ, or the merit of the blood of
Christ has the power of quickening our Consciences benumbed and dried up by
reason of sin Thirdly, even as wine makes glad the heart of man, and has
great virtue in it to cheer up the mind: so the merit of Christ, or the blood
of Christ works an unspeakable joy in our souls: whereof David speaks,
Psalm. 51. Restore unto me my joy again.

J have heard what the foundation of the Lords Supper is in respect of the
Sacrament it self, or the things themselves, now tell me what is their ground
and foundation which do use it, or the foundation in respect of us?

It is true Faith, whereby we do so look upon these signs, as they
signify, remember, and assure us of the body and blood of Christ, Si quis
ma^ducauerit ex ipso, non morietur in aeternum. Hoc pertinet ad virtutem
Sacramenti non ad visibile Sacramentum Qui manducat intus, non foris; qui
manducat cord, non qui premit dente Aug Quasi non possit tangi quum iam
ascenderit; at vtique poterit, sed affectu, non manu; voto, non oculo; fide,
non sensibus Bern.
and so consequently of his whole merit: and so likewise of assured remission
of our sins following upon that merit. For in the supper of the Lord remission
of sins is not granted unto us, neither has the Bread or the Wine any power to
purify from sins, as the Papists peruersly do imagine: But our Faith is
confirmed and strengthened by th^se signs in the remission of sins; which was
granted and given unto us before that we approached the Supper.

Wherein consists that Faith, which we must bring to the Lords Supper, thereby
to be confirmed and strengthened.

It consists in two things: First, in a sure trust and confidence, whereby we
believe for certain, that Christ's body was giu^n and his blood shed for us:
that is, for that person that comes to be partaker of the Lords Supper.
Secondly, it consists in application, whereby we appropriate unto our selves
Christ's passion, steadfastly believing that we as Christ's members are so made
one with Christ our head, that as he suffered for our sins, even so the
pardon for all those sins for his passion sake we should as certainly be
persuaded of, as if we our selves had been crucified, and there have given our
own proper bodies, and shed our own hearts blood.

I have heard as concerning the foundation and ground of the Lords Supper; it
remains that I hear somewhat of the end or the final cause, for which the
Lords Supper was instituted, and for which it becomes me to communicate at
the Lords Table?

The end or final cause is first in respect of Christ, then in respect of our
selves. In respect of Christ, Reliquit nobis Christus (...). i. e. Monumenta
suae salutaris passionis, quae proposuimus iuxta eius ma^data. Basil.
the end is the commemoration of that his most bitter passion, which he endured
for us both in his soul, and in his body. A commemoration (I say) that is, a
gratulatorie remembrance, to the end that for that so great a benefit, and
unutterable love toward us, we should in the public assembly and
congregation, in the very face of the Church, yield together with that
remembrance most hearty thanks. As Christ says, Do this in remembrance of
me. 1 Cor. 11.24. in an Eucharisticall or thankful wise. Whereupon this
Sacrament is also called the Eucharist, for this principal use of the Lords
Supper. In respect of our selves the use of the Lords Supper is either Primary
or Secondary.

What is the Primarie use of it in respect of our selves?

It is two fold: First, the confirming and establishing of our Faith as
touching the forgiveness of our sins, for Christ's body given unto death for
us, and for his blood shed upon the Cross likewise for us. The other use is
the nourishing, strengthening, reviving, and chearing of our consciences, which
were by the burden of sin oppressed, withered, and disconsolate.

Which is the secondary use arising from the former?

It is three fold: first, the consecration of our selves, that even as Christ
offered himself once upon the Altar of the Cross for us: so we should in this
public action of the Church offer up our selves, and our whole life, even all
that are ours unto God and his Son. Secondly, the public confession of the
faith, to wit, that by these external symboles and tokens, as by a military
mark and badge we may testify, unto what company we belong, and to what
religion we adioyne our selves. Thirdly, the obligation of our selves, that
we should also by this public action in the sight of the Church, bind our
selves to love our neighbor, and to do the works of charity, especially to
them that are partakers with us in the same belief and religion. And hereupon
it was, that the Ancients called this Supper of the Lord (...), that is, a
loue-feast; and that they were always wont, which came unto the Supper, to
give some Alms unto the poor, that so they might testify, how that by the
use of the Lords Supper, they were obliged to perform works of love and
charity toward their Neighbors. And this is the true doctrine of the Lords
Supper, drawn out of the only word of God, Syst. Theol. page 459. Calu.
Iustit. lib. 4. ca. 18.
and taken from the nature of Sacraments. But contrariwise, the Mass is an
horrible monster, an Idol of Antichrists own making, consisting of diverse
horrible blasphemies, whereby the whole dignity and excellency of the Lords
Supper is defaced, and quite taken away; namely, while they say, that Christ in
the institution of the holy Supper, before that ever he gave his body and
blood unto his Disciples, did under the bread and wine offer up himself truly;
though after an unbloody manner, for the honor of his Father, and that he did
appoint then his Disciples, and all Ministers afterward to do the like. Si
Deus dimisit peccata per vna^ bostiam, nec dum iam opus est secunda. Chrysostom.
Saluatoris hostia semel oblata absoluit omnia, fidaque in omne te^pus perdurat.
Aarom successores dati fuerunt; Dominus autem sine transitione and successore
sacerdotiam ob^^net in aeternum. Athanas.
As the Mass Priests indeed after a few words uttered, like Magical Spells and
Charms, and after a few histrionicall gestures and ceremonies do bear us in
hand that they do And further they blush not to affirm, that this Sacrament is
a sacrifice, a most true propitiatory sacrifice for the sins, punishments,
and all wants not only of the living, but of the dead too. And so blasphemously
tread, as it were, under foot the Passion of Christ, which as formerly we have
proved, is the alone and only propitiation for our sins, which was only to
be made and performed by Christ, and not often to be reiterated, as are the
express words of the Apostle against that Idol of the Mass worthy to be
observed. De sacrificio Christi. Zanch. in Epist ad Ephesians. 180.
Heb. 10.12. Christ having made that one only offering for sins, for ever
sits at the right hand of God: And v. 14. By that one oblation has he
consecrated for ever those which are justified. You may read more abuses and
abominations of the Popish Mass very plainly propounded in the explication of
Vrsins Catechism, at the eightieth question.

You have fitted me for the Lords Supper by knowledge, both general and
particular: now it remains that you prepare me also by true devotion. What
things then, I pray you, do appertain unto that true Devotion?

Two things: first, that you bethink with your self, how often you are to use
the Lords Supper: secondly, that you consider well, how you may use it worthily.

How often must I use the Lords Supper?

Very often; where truly there can be no certain number of times prescribed
unto any man: Non est audaciae saepius accedere ad Dominicam mo^sam sed indigne
accedere, etiam si semel ta^tum id fiat in tota vita. Chrysostom.
because every one out of his godly understanding, is to set down that with
himself. But in the Primitive Church, the Christians surely did use the Lords
Supper, as often as ever they came together to hear the Word of God; as may
appear out of the 3 of the Acts, where the Christians are said to have met to
hear the Word of God, Scio Romae hanc esse consuetudinem, vt fideles semper
Christi corpus accipiant. Hierom. Accipe quotidie, quod quotidie tibi prosit:
sic viue vt merearis quotidie accipere. Qui non meretur quotidie accipero; non
meretur post a^num accipere. Amb.
and to the breaking of bread, that is, the Supper of the Lord. But it would
be convenient four times in the year, or twice at the least every year to
approach the Lords Table; and that for these reasons. First, because frequent
and solemn thanksgiving is by us to be performed for that so excellent
benefit which was afforded unto us by Christ's Passion. Secondly, because
Christ in express terms commands. How often soever you shall do it in
remembrance of me; where the word how often soever, enforces an often usage:
that is, so often, as often as you shall come; so that it presupposes, that
we are often to come. 3. And thus far are we indebted to our faith, that
we often strengthen it, so much we owe unto our consciences, that we may
often hereby cherish, quicken and cheer, Qui vulnus habet, medicinam quaerit;
vulnus habemus dum sub peccato sumus, medicina est Sacramentum Bern.
them up: for by this good help and means, we stir our selves up to lead
a new life, whilst that we consecrate and offer up our selves to God by the
use of the Lords Supper. Thus much we owe likewise to the Church that we may
hereby make open profession, and give a public testimony, that we be
fellows and members of it. Lastly, thus much we are bound to perform for the
avoiding of corporal punishments: for 1 Cor. 11.30. it is said, For this cause
many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep, etc. where the Apostle
teaches, that God punished many in the Church of Corinth with diseases and
death, because they did not rightly use the Lords Supper. Now if God did lay
his punishing hand on them by diseases and death for the wrong use, we may be
sure that he will punish for the rare use of the Lords Supper.

Teach me now further how I may worthily use the Lords Supper, and so how my
devotion must be qualified?

Qui sibi nullius mali est conscius, hunc oportet singulis diebus accedere: qui
vero peccatis occupatus est neque poenitet, ei nec in festis accedere tutum
est. Nec enim se mel in anno^ accedere liberat nos a peccatis, si indigne
accesserimus: quin hoc ipsum auget damnationem, quod cum semel tantum
accedamus, ne tum quide^ pure accedimus. Chrysostom.
That indeed is it, which above all other is most necessary, because of that
most sharp sentence pronounced by the Apostle. 1 Cor. 11.27. Whosoever
therefore eats this bread, or drinks this Cup unworthily, he is guilty of
the body and blood of Christ; that is, he is held guilty of the violating of
this sacred sign and seal, whereby the body and blood of the Lord is
represented, and withal assured unto us. Whereupon he further adds; Let
every man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread and
drink of this Cup; for who so eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation, not discerning the Lords body, that is, not using
with reverence those most holy signs and pledges, whereby we are assured of
the Lords body, and so consequently not discerning, or putting any difference
between common bread, which we eat every day at our Tables, and this bread,
which by reason of the use and office of certifying and assuring is made holy;
and so likewise of the Wine.

Of what sorts is that devotion, I pray you tell me?

It must be of two sorts: either Antecedent, going before the receiving, or
Concomitant, and joined to the receiving of those holy mysteries.

How is the Antecedent devotion called?

It is called, The examining of a man's self, according to that we erstwhile
urged out of the Apostle; Let every man therefore examine himself, etc, 1 Cor.
11.28.

What is the true trying of a man's self, and of what parts does it consist?

The examination, or proouing of a man's self, is nothing else but the sifting
of ones conscience, what a man thinks of himself; and this examination is
three fold.

Which is the first examination?

The first examination is as touching our misery, which again is either
general, namely, when we consider with our selves the misery of whole
mankind; which did betide us by the fall of our first Parents, which does
consist in sin, and the punishment of sin; or special, when our thoughts are
occupied about our own peculiar misery; which examination stands in 2 things:
first, in the acknowledging of those sins, which thou every day have
committed, either by omitting good things, which should have been done, or
committing evil which should have been left undone, and that both in respect
of good works, which we ought to do, as also in respect of prayers, and
daily inuocating on Gods Name, which has been either altogether neglected, or
but coldly performed, together with a due and diligent consideration of those
punishments both corporal and eternal, which we might for those our sins
fear would justly fall upon us. Secondly, In a serious grief and repenting
sorrow for those our sins. It were, me thinks, very meet to make such an
examination of our selves on the third day (as it were) for examples sake, on
Friday before the celebration of the Lords Supper; and on that day to be read
both the first part of sacred Theology, and also the 20. Chap. of Exodus the
28. of Deuteronomy. and thereunto to be added that prayer of David out of the 51. and
38. Psalms.

Which is the second examination?

Apprehe^sio Applicatio. Si credis peccata tua non posse deleri, nisi ab eo cui
soli peccasti and in quem peccatum non cadit, been facis: sed add adhuc vt
credas quia per ipsum tibi peccata dimitu^tur. Hoc enim est testimonium
Spiritus Sancti, dimissa sunt Tibi peccata. Bern.
The second is concerning our faith, namely, whereby we recover our selves out
of our former sorrowful meditation, fixing our faith and belief on Christ,
thinking on his Person, his Office, and especially his Passion and Death, and
applying that his Passion and Death to our selves, every one of us assuring our
selves, that for that his Passion all our sins are forgiven. Where it will also
be expedient to read over the whole doctrine of the remedies against our
miseries, even unto the doctrine of Justification, and thereunto to adioyne the
26. and 27. Chapters of Matthew the 17.18.19. of John; the 5.3. of Esaias, and
likewise the 8. of the Epistle unto the Romans.

What is the third examination?

The third must be occupied about our sanctification, or new life; which
consideration, is absolved by a double reason and steady purpose of heart: the
first, of doing those good works hereafter, which are to be performed either
toward GOD or toward our Neighbor. The second, of daily calling on God by
prayer. Where it shall not be impertinent to recall the whole doctrine of
sanctification, and to read the fifth and sixth Chapters of Matthew; the 12, and
the following Chapters of the Epistle to the Hebrews; the latter Chapters of
the Epistle to the Galath. the Epist. to ye Coloss. to the Ephesians. both the
Epist. of John and of James. And this may be done upon the Sabbath day.

Thus far I have heard of that devotion which ought to go before the use of
the Lords Supper: now tell me also somewhat of that devotion, which I ought to
use at the receiving of the holy Communion?

That devotion is either external, namely, that we do soberly and reverently
approach unto this holy action, in regard of our outward gesture, or internal
and principal, which consists in these four points, First, that thou render
unto Christ most devout and hearty thanks for that his passion and death,
which for thy sake he suffered and sustained. Secondly, that thou taking the
Sacred bread do make sure thy faith and appropriate unto thy self the merit
of Christ's passion, and so of the breaking of his body upon the Cross,
cherishing and strengthening thy conscience with that assurance; and then taking
the wine, that thou bethink with thy self, how that the blood of Christ was
shed for thy sins, and so withal reviving and filling with joy thy drooping
conscience. Thirdly, this devotion must be also in consideration of thine own
self, that thou do hereafter dedicate and consecrate thy self wholly both in
soul and in body, and all thy works unto God. Fourthly, that thou do also
remember the Church, in whose sight thou use the Lords Supper, firmly
resolving with thy self to abide always in that Church, and to do the works
of charity unto the Brethren. For the better effecting of these 4 points of
this internal devotion, every one may use some pithy form of prayers about
the very act of receiving. And so have we finished the doctrine of true
preparation unto the Lords Supper, and together with it have laid down the
sum and Epitome of all Divinity. Now what remains, but that we earnestly
entreat of God, sithence his Word is a Lantern unto our feet, and a light to
our paths, that he would enlighten our minds, and open our hearts, that we
may understand the undoubted truth of his holy word, and be piously
transformed into those things which we understand, so that we may not in any
thing displease his heavenly Majesty, and that for Christ Jesus sake our Lord
and only Savior. So be it.

A brief direction how to examine our selves before we go to the Lords Table,
how to behave our selves there, and how to try our selves afterward.
BEfore we must dare to come to the holy Communion, we must diligently and
carefully sift and examine our selves.

I. The subject of our examination is our A man must not set up his Consistory
in other men's C^ns^ien^es. My Lord (...)
selves, and not others, as the Apostle says; Let every m^n examine himself
and so let him eat, etc. 1. Cor. ^1.28.

II. The matter wherein out examination must chiefly consist (presupposing our
general and particular knowledge) is of three sorts. The first is, as touching
our repentance: the second concerns our Faith. The third is about our Charity.

Touching our Repentance thus. We cannot choose but know (our consciences
witnessing unto us) how grievously we do daily offend against Gods holy
Statutes, both in thought, word, and deed: wherefore we seeing our hideous
sins and misdeeds; for which, if God in his justice would deal with with us,
1 Contrition for 2.3. Confession and Detestation of 4. Resolution to forsake
sin.
we might expect nothing but destruction and damnation: Let us enter into the
closets of our own hearts, and see whether we find our selves inwardly sorry
for all our misdoings: Secondly, confessing all our sins unto the Lord: and
thirdly, growing to an inward hatred and loathing of sin, both in our selves
and others: fourthly, fully purposing to conform our selves according to Gods
holy Laws and Commandments. Which sorrow of heart for by past sin, and good
purpose of mind to prevent sin hereafter if we shall find in us, then may we
persuade our selves of true and unfeigned Repentance.

Touching our Faith in this manner. Sin was that by which man became
miserable, and because he brake the commandments of God, and lightly regarded
the behests of the most High, therefore was he not only turned out of his
most blissful and happy estate; but stood guilty of eternal death and
condemnation both of body and soul for sin. When man, sinful man, stood in
this doleful case, destitute of all help and succor either from himself, or
other creature living in the world, it pleased God of his own love and free
mercy graciously to behold wretched man, and to send him a Savior, even Jesus
Christ the righteous, promising remission of sins, liberty from the snare of
the Devil; and in stead of condemnation, everlasting life to all those, which
with a true faith and steadfast belief lay hold on Christ merits, applying the
promises of God in Christ to their own souls in particular. This, when we
shall have diligently, weighed in our minds, then let us turn to our hearts,
1. Apprehe^siue persuasion.
and see whether we 1. feel our consciences assured by the Spirit of God, that
the punishment of our sin is fully in Christ discharged; and that 2. 2.
Particular Application.
whatsoever he has done for man, appertains not only unto others, but even
to us also And thus, if we shall perceive our hearts affected, we may persuade
our selves of a true and lively faith.

Touching Charity, on this wise. As Charity is the fruit and effect of a true
and lively faith (so that it is impossible we should have a sound faith but we
must be fruitful in good works and deeds of Charity; for as the light can in
no wise be separated from the Sun, Ego non credam veram fidem esse intra,
nisi bona opera videam extra. Ioh. Huss.
nor heat from the fire, nor breath from a living body; so neither can these
two inseparable virtues be disioyned, but if faith be the root, good works
and charitable deeds will be the fruit, insomuch that hereby may we more then
probably judge of the pureness and sincerity of our faith:) So likewise many
be those fruits and effects of true Charity and Christian love; which if by our
search we shall find in us, we may certainly assure our hearts of the
possession of that rich gemme, and precious virtue Charity. 1. Reconciliation,
which we must affect and seek after, Mat. 5.23. Ephesians. 4.32. 2. Entire
affection, which we must harbor toward our neighbor. Romans 12.17, 20.
They be set down by Gods own Spirit: the Penman is the Apostle Paul 1. Cor
13.4.5. etc. Love suffers long; is bountiful; love enuieth not; love does
not boast it self; it is not puffed up; it disdaineth not; it seeks not her
own things; it is not provoked to anger; it thinks not evil, etc. This
place when we have read distinctly and discreetly, let us enter into a serious
cogitation, and examine our selves first, Cui semel ignoueris cura vt ille
sentiat bona fide id esse actum and si qua in re illum iuuare potes experiatur
te amicum. Lud. Vines.
whether we be reconciled unto such as we have offended, and heartily forgive
such as have offended us: and secondly, be ready withal to do them all the
good we can: And this affection if we shall find in our selves upon our survey
and examination, we may persuade our selves of true and sound Charity.

III. The form of our Scrutinie is after a judicial manner of proceeding.

First, 1. Examination as Justices.
we must examine our selves, and take a Catalogue of our sins, the Devil
himself has in store against us, by which we have offended Gods justice.

Secondly, 2. Enditement, as Clerks.
then according to the ten words of the Law, we may frame ten several actions
and inditements; as for instance (because I would speak to the capacity of my
weakest Brethren) muster up before thee all thy Atheistical conceits, or at
least so many as thou can remember, and then indite thy self for the first
Commandment; look and see whether thou have not set up an Image, or an Idol
in thine heart, and so indite thy self for the second Commandment. Call to
mind thirdly, whether thou have not by swearing and blaspheming, taken Gods
Name in vain; remember fourthly, whether thou have not often profaned Gods
holy Sabbath fifthly, whether thou have not been disobedient and refractary to
Parents and Governor: sixthly, whether thou have not harbored in thy breast
murdering malice and envy: seventhly, whether thou have not set open thine
eyes to uncleanness and vanity: eighthly, whether thou have not injured thy
neighbor in his goods: ninthly, whether thou have not wronged him in his good
name: nay, whether tenthly, thou have not given the reins loose to all
concup^scence; See the particular sins against every Commandment in my Lord
of Landasses Preparation Page 18. et seqq. and in Perkins his Treatise of the
nature an practice of Rep^^ta^e 3. Verdict ^f conden^ation, a (...).
and so for the breach of every commandment, frame a several indictment, and
plead guilty. This may thou do by thy se^fe, yet if thou art weak, and
desire help; thou shall find the indictment drawn at large for thee in the
Practice of Piety, Page 565. 566. and seqq. of the eighth Edition. For further
help see Master Theologus, schooling Asunetus in Dents Plain Man's Path way
to Heaven, Page 332 and seqq. of the fifteenth Impress^on.

Thirdly, t^^n add thereto so many several sentences of condemnation.

And so forthwith, fourthly, 4. Sentence, as Judges.
pronounce a perpetual confusion due to us, with a shame for that which is
past, with a grief for that which is present, and with a fear of that may
come hereafter. (And when we can thus bring our selves into the worst taking
that can be, Tunc optime habet, says Bu^er, qui possime habet For having thus
pronounced this shame of face dew unto us, God will cease from his sentence of
anger; nay he will say, This man has condemned himself, I need not to
condemn: seeing he has straightly examined himself, I remit all, I will
examine him no further, he is free, let him come, and so let him eat of my
Bread, and drink of my Cup.) Then being constrained to conclude we are
unworthy; we must in the next place go out of our selves, and faint after the
righteousness can make us worthy, which cannot be effected but by Faith, M
Greeneham.
which comes by the blessing of the Gospel: whereby we (being conscious of
our own unworthiness) do seek wisdom out of our selves, and sue for
obedience in the Son of God Christ Jesus our Lord.

These are those duties which we must think upon, before we come to the Lords
holy Table: now for our behavior there, observe thus much.

The duties which are required of us in the celebration of the holy Communion
are of two kinds, either General, See Master Brinsleys true Watch 1 part page
183. of the eight Edition.
or common to this and other times, or Peculiar and proper to this service.

I. The general and common duties are to join with the Congregation in
confessing of sins, in singing of Psalms and Hymns, in hearing with
reverence and devotion Gods holy word preached, in praying, and the like.

Secondly, touching the proper duties more peculiarly belonging to this
service, Corpus Christi dicimus esse ca^auer, nosque opporiere esse aquilas, vt
intelligamus in altum subu^landum esse si velimus ad Christi corpus accedere,
haec ^nim aquilaru^ mensa^ est, non graculorum. Chrysostom.
and our behavior in the receiving of those holy Mysteries, as the Church has
retained it, there is a commandment given, that we lift up our hearts to the
Lord. And we must indeed be as Eagles soaring up to heaven by having careful
meditations on heavenly and i^uisible things, a rising from the due
consideration of the things themselves offered unto us, that is, the outward
elements of bread and wine; as also from a regard full contemplation of every
action in that holy ministration.

First therefore when we see the bread and wine set before us on the Lords
Table, we know that they are appointed for the nourishing and strengthening of
our bodies, but here we must not stay. Our hearts hereby are to be led to
meditate on the body and blood of Christ; which is appointed to be our souls
nourishment to feed us to eternal life; for so he prof^sseth of himself,
Ioh. 6.55. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.

Secondly, when we see the breaking of the bread, and pouring out of the wine,
our hearts are to be led to the meditation of the c^uell death of the Cross,
which Christ suff^red for the remission of our sins, when his most blessed
body was broken, and his most precious blood shed for the redemption of mankind.

Again, when we see that the bread which is broken and given unto us by the
Minister, is all of the same loaf, or at the least of the same grain; and the
wine whereof we drink, that it comes from the same grape, and received by us
in the same Cup, we are hereby to be led to the meditation on that communion,
which we have with all Gods Saints, which are partakers of those holy
mysteries, and to the consideration of that union, which we have, or should
have among our selves, as members of one mystical body, whereof Christ Jesus
is the head.

Lastly, when we eat that holied bread, and drink that consecrated wine, we
know, that they turn to nutriment for our bodies, and so co^seque^tly that
they grow into one substance with us: hereby are we led to a further meditation
on our incorporation into Christ Jesus, to be made one with him, and he with
us: so that hereby we may assure our hearts of our reconciliation with God,
and of all the benefits of Christ's death and passion: for seeing Christ is
become ours, how shall not God with Christ give us all things?

And these are those holy Meditations whereupon we must bestow the best of our
thoughts in that so sacred a business: now as touching the trial of our
souls, after the receiving of those holy mysteries, note but this.

After that the Lord has fed our souls so graciously at his own Table, we
must take heed that we prove not unthankful to the loving kindness of the
Lord. And therefore it is required of us, and that not for a day, or a week,
or some small time, but even for ever continually to retain a thankful
remembrance of those blessings, whereof we are made partakers in Christ Jesus as
also never to let sl p out of our mind that intercha^geable promise, which has
past betwixt God and us. The Lord promising to be our God, and we promising
henceforth to become Gods faithful and obedient servants, to serve him in
holiness all the remainder of our life. Whence the ordinary custom in these
days may worthily be reprehended: for howsoever men for a day, or a short
space seem to have a Christian sense of that holy duty, whereto they have
bound themselves by their p^omise; yet notwithstanding within a while they
return with the Dog to the vomit, and with the Sow to wallowing in the mire.
Wherefore to good purpose it is, that we propose to our hearts a trial of our
selves, even after our receiving. For though a man by the sight of the soil
may gather by some guess, what fruit will come up; yet when he sees the
fruit, the matter is far more sure. And therefore because those Accidents
Antecedent, as repentance from dead works, faith in Christ, and love toward
men may sometime deceive us, it is good (to put the matter out of all doubt) to
try our selves afterward, if we can hear the Word more joyfully, if we
travel for the righteousness of faith more soundly, and make the score of our
sins less then they were before. And these indeed are comfortable fruits of
the truth of our holiness.

FJNIS.
(...) OR, Recapitulation of the chief Points, handled in this Treatise.
CHristian Religion is the serving of God in Christ. The actions thereof are;
most eminently 1. Meditation of Gods Word, which testifies of Christ 2. Prayer
unto God through Christ. 3. The use of the Sacraments, instituted by Christ. Of
the two first elsewhere, here only of the third. Page. 1. and seqq.

That we may use the Sacraments aright, we have need of Preparation, which in
this Book is both largely deciphered and concisely proposed.

^reparation largely deciphered consists in 2. things, Knowledge and Devotion.

Our knowledge is either general in points of Religion, or particular, about a
Sacrament.

Our general knowledge is either primarie and independent, or secondarie and
derived.

The primarie and independent consists of a double doctrine. I. Of God
according to the Essence, which is one, and Persons which are three. Page 6. II.
Of Gods Word, or the Scripture, of which see the definition Page 14. The
division which is threefold Page 15. The Proprieties which are 3.1. It deriues
its authority from God alone. Page 21. ^2. It is perfect and sufficient to
salvation Page 26. 3. In the Articles of Faith, and matters necessary to
salvation it is easy and perspicuous Page 30.

The secondarie and derived knowledge consists of two parts. I. Of the End it
self, Salvation, considered in respect of the life to come, perfect; or this
present life, incho^te Page 38. I^. Of the Means to come by that End; and
that's a double knowledge. I. Of thy Misery. II. Of the Remedy for thy
misery. Page 41.

Thy misery is thoroughly known by the consideration of 4. things. I. That
which went before thy misery; the Image of God. II. The efficient cause of thy
misery; Adams fall. III. The parts thereof, to wit, Sin Original and
Actual, and the punishment for sin Temporal and Eternal. IV. The Exemplary
cause or glass representing thy misery, which is the rigor of the Law. Page
42 and seqq.

The remedy for thy misery is twofold; Prime and Independent; which is
Predestination to life. Page 53. Or secondary and dependant divided into 3.
heads: Redemption, Justification, Sanctification

Redemption here is. I. defined. II. it is further opened both by the Efficient
cause thereof and by the object hereof

^he efficient cause of our Redemption is Christ, in him consider. I his
Person, and so 1 the Parts thereof, the humane and divine natures: 2 the Union
of those two natures: II. his Office, of which ^ in general, as it is called a
Mediatorship: 2. in special, and so it is Prophetical, Sacerdotall, and
Regal. Page 55. and seq.

The object of Redemption is the Church, which is largely taken, Page 93
strictly and properly, Of it are considered the head, the members, the
proprieties. Page 96. and seqq.

So of Redemption, there follows Justification, which you have I defined, Page
137. II. unfolded by the cause, the effect, and the adiunct.

The cause of justification is either principal, the mercy of God, and merit
of Christ. Page 138. or isntrumental, Faith, which is defined, and then
further opened by the causes, which are principal Gods Spirit: isntrumental,
and those either ordinary, the Word and Sacraments: or extraordinary Miracles.
Page 139. and seqq

The effect or fruit of justification, i^ the peace of conscience, by which a
man is assured of the favor of God, and his own salvation Page 151.

The adiunct of justification is Repentance, of which see Page 160.

So of Justification, there remains Sanctification, or Regeneration, which is
I. defined, and then further opened by the parts thereof, (...), Good works and
Prayer or invocation. Page 162.

Thus far goes our general knowledge, our particular knowledge I said was
touching a Sacrament, and that is either common to both Sacraments, where you
have the name and nature of a Sacrament, Page 185. or appropriate to the
Supper, which you have, I defined Page 188. and then further opened by three
considerable things, the matter, the form, the end.

The matter is both elementarie and spiritual, which are called the terms of
the Relation (for a Sacrament is a Relation) Page 189.

The form or ground, or foundation of the Relation is, ^. in respect of the
Sacrament, I. the Institution of Christ, II. the Analogy betwixt the sign and
the thing sigfied: 2. in respect of us it is Faith. Page 193 and seqq

The end or final cause of this Relation is twofold, namely, in respect I. of
Christ, and it is a grateful commemoration of his Death and Passion. II. Of
our selves, and it is either primary, the confirming of our faith, or
secondary, and it is threefold. 1 a consecrating of our selves to God; 2. a
public acknowledgement of Christianity; 3. a profession of our Charity. Page
203. and seqq.

Thus have we briefly run over the first maine part of preparation, consisting
of knowledge: the other maine part is Devotion, which consists; I. in a
frequent use of the Lords Supper, Page 209. II. in worthy receiving* And this
devotion is twofold, Antecedent, or going before receiving, which is
Examination: Concomitant, or joined with that sacred act which is the decent
gesture of our body, and the devout affection of our soul in the time of
receiving those holy Mysteries. Page 212. and seqq.

Thus far have you heard Preparation largely deciphered. Preparation
concisely proposed, is wholly spent in these three short directions; I. How to
examine (...) selves before we come to the Lords Table: II. How to behave our
selves there. III. How to try our selves afterward, written for their sakes
that study piety and love bteuity. Page 223.

FINIS.
A Postscript to the READER.
GEntle Readers, I am to satisfy you, anent two things you have met withal in
reading the foregoing Treatise: first, that the reasons and arguments now and
then are very concisely proposed, the syllogismes wanting one of the premises,
or the conclusion, or both. And my reason of thus doing was, because I wrote
unto men endued with Logic, at least, natural; which having the pith of the
Argument is able to suggest inferences. The other thing is that whereas there
is often cited Kecker. System of Divinity, you would be pleased to have
recourse unto that which was printed Goloniae Allobrogum, that is, at Geneua.
Ann. Dom. MDC. XI. where according to the order of pages, you shall find the
points enlarged, which are here but briefly touched. There is also added now,
where the same points are handled in Caluins Institutions, and Zanchius.
Zanchies Works cited in the Margent are in Fol. in 8. Tomes, printed. 1613.

FINIS.
A TREATISE WRITTEN TO THE GLORY of GODS Grace, against FREE WILL.

Item, A plain Method of Preaching, for the use of Younger Students in
DIVINITY.

By T.V; B. of D.

Printed at London for Thomas Jones. 1625.

A Short Treatise touching Man's SERVILE WILL, before the working of GODS grace
plainly and fully as I trust opening that Controversy even as it was written
to a Friend, in answer of a Popish Pamphlet, touching Man's Free Will.
MY good Friend, Praloq.
I suppose you gave me not that Popish Script to ouerlooke it only, but to
examine and censure it, for your resolution and satisfaction in that point of
Controversy (which it only touches upon) concerning Free Will and the power of
nature before grace. A point, which if the Author of your Script had thoroughly
understood, he might well have blamed himself in the choice of that Doctrine
for the countenancing of his Religion which of all other does monderogate from
the credit of the Romish faith. For I am utterly of this mind, that there is no
one Doctrine throughout the whole body of Divinity which does more directly
cross and thwart the truth of the Gospel, which does more lively argue and
convince Popery of Antichristianisme, then the Papists tenent touching
Free Will.

Haemanus Romamerigent?

Nullas spes habet Roma, si taleis habet.

Has Rome no other hand, to prop't then that?

Rome, without other hopes, must needs fall flat.

And therefore your Author whosoever it was light upon this point unluckily.

First, he offends in limine, Status contron.
in the very proposal of the question; for the question is not Whether Man in
the state of corruption has Free Will, or freedom of will, who ever denied
that? but the State is this. Whether a man in his corrupt estate, has of
himself before the working of Gods grace in his soul, any power or ability
naturally to turn himself unto God, to affect that which is truly and
Theologically good either for the willing and proposing of it to himself in
cogitation or for the absoluing and performance of it in action. The Jesuits,
who are the most refined Papists, do hold that an unregenerate man has such a
natural power and strength, by which he does prepare himself for his
conversion and salvation, and by which he does affect and effect too that
which is truly and univocally good. We teach and affirm that there is in the
unregenerate no such power of nature, no such strength of free will, nor any
faculty to do ought that good is; but only he is led by the corruption of
nature to that which is evil till Gods grace has wrought a change in the
whole man, by an effectual and irresistable call.

(...).
Adam indeed our common Father had such a quality and natural faculty of the
soul bestowed upon him by God in his first creation, whereby potuit non
peceare, if he had would, he should not have sinned. This he had for himself,
and for his posterity, he being the root of Mankind; but by his disobedience
and auersion from God, he deprived himself and consequently his Posterity of
that excellent quality, as Saint Austin very appositely. Homo male vtens libero
arbitrio, and ipsum perdidit and seipsum: Man not using his Free Will aright,
lost both it and himself too. Now what we lost in Adam, we do not regaine but
by Christ Jesus. It is Christ alone that makes up those breeches: and therefore
till a man be regenerate by the grace of Christ, till he be implanted into
the body of Christ, till Christ dwell in his heart by faith, he can never look
to be freed from that misery, whereinto he was plunged by Adams first
transgression. This is the true state of the Controversy, whereby you see what
we hold, and what they oppose. The proofs which are brought on their side (to
give your Author his due) are very orderly and distinctly proposed; but some of
them are impertinent, some frivolous, all as weak as water: for a general
answer to them all, do but observe a double distinction.

I. Man is considered in a fourefold Estate. 1. In statu instituto, in the
state of integrity, before the fall; wherein his will was inclinable to good or
evil. So inclined to good that it might decline to evil; which he did, and
we feel it and smart for it. 2. In statu destituto, in the state of
corruption, after the fall; wherein his will is inclinable only to evil,
being made the slave and servant of sin, yea dead in sin. 3. In statu
restituto, in the state of Regeneration by Christ: wherein his will is
inclinable to good and evil; the Spirit calling to good, the flesh calling to
evil. 4. In statu praestituto, in the state of glory, whereunto he was
predestinate in Christ: wherein his will is inclinable only to good, and that
immutably!
II. The things whereabout the will of man is, conversant, are of three sorts.
Natural, as to eat and drink, hear and see, talk and walk, and the like,
in these he has freewill after the fall. Civil Affairs, as to argue and
dispute, to follow a trade, to resort to the Church to listen outwardly to that
is taught, in these he has freewill, though it be very weak and maimed, as
S. Austin says. Spiritual, which are either appertaining to the Kingdom of
Darkness, as all sins, and to these a man is freely carried by the corruption
of nature. God, as the duties of holiness, and in these actions an
unregenerate man has no freedom of will at all.


Now the reasons that are brought against the Orthodoxe truth do either speak
of man in his integrity, and the state of regeneration, and so conclude not
that which is in question about the corrupt estate of man abiding under the
Dominion of Sin: or they speak of freedom in natural and civil affairs,
which we do not altogether deny; but that he has no will to desire nor
power to effect Spiritual actions appertaining to the Kingdom of God, these
reasons following shall most evidently euict. (...).


I. Who can bring a clean says holy Job, and he answers himself with his own
words. No body can do it. Job, 14. An evil Tree (says our Savior) cannot
bring forth good fruit, Math. 7.17. but the unregenerate, a man in his corrupt
estate is an evil Tree, Math, 12.13. therefore he can bring forth no good
fruit, he can do nothing that is good.

Genesis 6.5. if all be evil, and only evil, and continually too, there is no
imagination nor inclination to good at all.

Sin is the death of the soul, grace is the life o^ it. But an unregenerate
man is dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. and therefore he has no more
power to raise himself out of the grave of sin, or to walk in the ways of
godliness, then a dead man has to raise up his body out of the Sepulcher, or
to walk and work as a living man.

IV. If by the Power of That which is borne of the flesh is flesh, and that
which is borne of the spirit is spirit, Joh. 3. The force of this Argument I
think none will deny that has read the Combat between the flesh and the
spirit, in the Apostle, Galat. 5. whereby it manifestly appears, that in every
faithful Christian there are two contrariant Principles of action. The one is
flesh, that is the part unregenerate: the other is spirit, and that is the
regenerate part. The spirit calls us to good; the flesh haleth and draws us
along unto evil. Now then, Freewill being of the flesh, and belonging to the
part unregenerate (for whatsoever is not spirit, is flesh) cannot produce any
spiritual action. Those actions are derived from another Principle. The works
of the flesh proceed not from the spirit, therefore the works of the spirit do
not issue from the flesh. The causes will always be distinct, and the effects
different, That which is born of the flesh will be flesh, and that which is
borne of the spirit will be spirit. Ioh. 3.6.

our selves so much as to think a good thought, then we cannot will any thing
that is good, before the grace of God has brought us out of our corruption.
Ignoti nulla cupido, we cannot desire that we know not; we know not that,
that we cannot think upon. But we are not able of our selves so much as to
think a good thought as of our selves, but all our sufficiency, the word in
the original.

is Emphaticall, all our idoniety and aptitude to good, is from God. And
therefore says Austin Omne bonum opus gratia Dei praecedit. Epist. 106. The
grace of God must of necessity precede every good work of ours, or else there
will be no good done.

VI. Our actions depend by the understanding, the understanding cannot direct
except it be enlightened. Now our understanding is darkened naturally; so the
Apostle describes unregenerate men, having their understandings darkened,
walking in the vanity of their senses, Ephesians. 4, 18. Nay, which is more, we are
naturally darkness it self. Ye were end darkness, says the Apostle; but
now ye are light in the Lord. and Ioh. 1.5. the light shined in the darkness,
and the darkness comprehended it not.

VII. If an unregenerate man can do any good thing before his conversion, then
all his doings are not sin, but he may do something which is pleasant to God.
But he can do nothing pleasing to God, for without faith it is impossible to
please God, but he has no faith. And again, all his works are sinful, for
whatsoever is not of faith is sin Romans 14. last. They may appear glorious in
outward show, but bring them to the touch once and they will prove to be
nothing but splendida peccata glistring sins, as Saint Austine calls them.

VIII. Naturally we are enmity with God, Romans 8 7. Our wisdom is
foolishness with God, 1 Cor. 1. Our hearts are stony hearts; so that God must
be feign to take them from us, and to give us for them hearts of flesh. Ezekiel.
11.19. We must be made new creatures before we can follow that which is good,
Ephesians. 2.10. We are the workmanship of God, created unto good works. Did man
(who was nothing) confer ought to his creation? no more can we (who are
worse then nothing) confer ought to our conversion. Alas, we are quite
averse from it, as I said a little above, and therefore must be drawn of God,
according as our Savior speaks. No man comes unto me unless the Father
that sent me draw him. Ioh. 6.44. It is a very strange speech, and yet true,
because the Truth it self has spoken it; we must be drawn to Christ or we
shall never come to him. But you will say, voluntas non potest cogi, that the
will of man cannot be compelled. I acknowledge the truth of that
Philosophical axiom, but see in our Saviors speech the condition of every
man as he is in his corrupt nature, he is averse, he is unwilling to receive
good, to do good, sed ex nolentibus volentes facit says S. Austine, of
unwilling God does make us to be willing. Certum est nos velle cum volumus,
fed ille facit ut velimus, It is true and certain that we do will when we
do will, but it is God that makes us will, Certum est nos operari cum
operamur, sed ille facit ut operemur. It is true and certain that we do well
when we do well, but it it God that makes us to do so: so that all must be
ascribed to God and nothing to our selves, which shall be my ninth reason.

IX. If every good thing in in nobis sine nobis ^in us without our help. But
whatsoever good thing is in man it proceeds from God. For what have thou that
thou have not received? says Saint Paul, and Saint James very plainly, every
good giving and every perfect gift comes from above even the father of light.
I am 1. And therefore we shall find, reading the Scriptures with a single eye
and sincere heart, that the beginning and progress and consummation of our
salvation, all is from God and from Gods grace, nothing from our selves. By the
grace of God. I am what I am, says the Apostle. 1 Cor. 15. He that has
begun that good work in you will also perfect in until the day of Christ
Jesus Phil. 1.6. there is the b^gin in expressed and consummation too: and, not to
reckon all, in is God that works in you velle and perficere, both to will and
to do even of his own good pleasure. Phil. 2.13. Mark that last place well,
it beats down the strength of corrupt nature, and batters the walls of
Freewill; especially if the whole context be considered. For he says: Work
out your salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in you
both to will and to do, even of his own good pleasure. It is the common use
of ignorant Papists to take the first part of this sentence, for their working,
but they leave the latter part which expounds the former: for we must work
out our salvation with fear and trembling. True, but when we work so, the
Apostle tells us that God set us on work, and the work which we work is Gods
work. We in all our works that are good do but follow the motion of the
first worker, which is God working in us. See Didac. Stella upon the first
verse of the first Chap. of Saint Luke. I conclude with that speech of Saint
Austine, lib. 1. de. gra. and lib. arbit. Cap. 16. Vt velimus, Deus sine nobis
operatur. God does work a willingness in us to do good without our help,
Cum autem volumus and sic volumus ut faciamus, nobiscum cooperatur. When we
are once willing and so willing that we do indeed that which is good, God
works with us ( praeuenit gratia ut velimus, he does prevent us with his grace
that we may will, subsequitur gratiane frustra velimus, and he does follow us
with his grace, that we may not will in vain) tamen fine illo operante ut
velimus, vel cooperante cum volumus ad bona pietatis officia nihil valemus. So
that except God first work in us the will, and then work with us when we
will, we are not able to perform any work of Piety and Godliness.

The X. and last reason God in his glory, ascribing part to Gods grace, part to
man's Free Will. Our tenent disrobes man of all boasting and glorying in
himself, and teaches, that he that glories must glory in God; the Popish
tenent ascribing a great part to corrupt Natures strength, teaches a man in
part to glory and boast of his own goodness, and so pares away from Gods
glory, and therefore the Protestants opinion is true, and the Papists false.
It was the saying of good S. Cyprian, Jn nullo gloriandum est, quia nostrum
nihil est, We must not glory in any case, for we have nothing to glory of. I
will conclude the whole reason and proofs with the speech of Bonauenture, whom
the Romanists account the Seraphicall Doctor, Piarum mentium semper fuit vt
totum attribuant gratiae diuinae, and nihil libero arbitrio. This has been
the practice of all godly and religious minded men in the world, to ascribe the
whole glory of our conversion and salvation to the grace of God, and nothing to
Free Will. And he proceeds further, and tells us, that look what we attribute
to Free Will, we detract so much from grace; and look what we attribute to
grace, so much we detract from Free Will; and that this later is the safest
way, whereas the former is not without danger. By this shall ye know says our
Savior whether my Doctrine be true, or whether J speak of my self. He that
speaks of himself seeks his own glory; but he that seeks his glory that
sent him, that man is true, and there is no unrighteousness in him. Here is
then that Lydius lapis, the very touchstone by which any indifferent man that
is an intelligent Scholar withal, able to judge of things without partiality,
not fast^ning his opinion upon any man's sleeue, but submitting himself to the
evidence of Gods Word, may try true and sound Doctrine, from false, erroneous
and rotten hypocrisy.

(...).
Thus far have I proceeded in the (...), or confirmation of the truth; a word or
two as my leisure will serve of the (...), or confutation of the adverse
proofs. The Arguments which the Author of your Script has well compacted
together, mostly strike upon one string, as the two last from the authority, of
Scripture, the 2 first from the authority of the fathers, the 3. 4. 5. and 6.
from demonstratiue reason: I will cast them all into one mould, because I may
not unfitly apply one answer to them all. The argument is this. Ob. Similia
olim cum obiectarentur Augustino libellum de corrept. and gratia scribere
coactus fuit. Galu. Instit. l. 2. c. 5.. 4. and seq.
Take away free will from a man, then to what end serves all the reproves,
complaints; exhortations in the word of God? why does God promise us any thing
upon condition of our obedience? Why has God left unto us his holy
commandments, if we can do no otherwise of our selves then evil? If the
Condition be impossible, or the performance of his Commandments, (why!) he
may seem to mock us in bidding us do that which is impossible for us. I
answer, Resp.
1. the precepts and commandments of God dispersed through the Volume of the
Scriptures, do not import what we are able to do, but what is our duty to
do; not what we can do, but what we should do; yea, and what we could have
done once in Adam, that so seeing our duty what we ought to do, and our
infirmity, that we are not able to do it, we might have recourse unto God by
prayer, that by the mighty power of his grace we might be made able to do what
he commands us, as Leo a good Bishop of Rome excellently speaks, Ideo datur
praeceptum, vt requiratur praecipientis auxilium, and S. Austin Synonymally,
yet more fully to the same purpose. Iubet Deus quae non possumus, vt nouerimus
quid ab ipso petere debeamus. God commands us those things which are above our
power to do, that we may run unto him by prayer and petition, for his aid and
help to do them. I assure you it wrought this good affection in holy David,
as you shall find, Psalm 119.4. Thou have commanded (says the Prophet to God)
that we should diligently keep thy commandments. Whereunto he answers not in
all haste as a Pelagian or a Papist would, O Lord I will, I can keep thy
commandments, because thou do command me so to do: but what is David's
answer? O that my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy Statutes.
The Imperative in God (as one wittily) begets not a potentiall but an optatiue
in David, Upon Gods Precept there follows immediately David's Prayer; Tu
praecepisti, Thou have commanded that we should diligently keep thy
commandments, there is Gods precept. O that my ways were made so direct that I
might keep thy Statutes! there is David's Prayer. And let us learn this Lesson
of the blessed Prophet to distrust our selves, and fly unto God for the
assistance of his powerfully working grace with that short and pithy prayer of
S. Austin. Da domine quod iubes and iube quid vis. Lord give us grace to
perform what thou command, and then command what thou will. And this is yet
a thing more evident by the common practice of the Church, and of all the godly
in the Church. For to them that demand to what end are precepts and
exhortations, if we cannot of our selves do that which is commanded? we may in
like manner interrogate, why does the Church pray continually for grace to do
those things that are commanded, if it be in our own power to do them? But
the Church of God does pray thus daily, as appears plainly by the
Seruice-Booke; wherein you have 3. Collects to be said every morning and
evening Prayer. And whereas one of them is for the day, the other for peace and
defense against dangers, the third is always for grace. And there is no Papist
that can justly take exception at those prayers. For as touching these Collects
for grace used in our Litturgie, both at morning and evening Prayer we find
them expressly and verbatim in their own Masse-bookes. In officio B. Virginis,
and in horis B. Virginis ad vsum Sarum; printed at Paris, 1510. Now I say the
Church by praying to God continually for grace to do his commandments, does
acknowledge the true use of hearing precepts and exhortations, which is not to
be proud of any power in us, or to presume of that which is not in us; but to
pray, and thereby to acknowledge that we have it from grace.

God made man at the first righteous, and endued him with a power of doing
whatsoever he should have commanded him, but we have fought out unto our
selves many inventions, as the wiseman speaks. Give me leave to make this
plain unto you by an easy and familiar comparison.

You are a Gentleman of good means, yet given to retyrednesse, and you are
desirous to rent out, or set to farm your whole demeanes. Say you covenant for
four or five hundred pounds per annum. Your Farmer at the making of the
bargain is an able, substantial, sober man, well able to pay you your annual
rent. But so it falls out, that soon after, he is with-drawne to lewd and
riotous courses, and spends both time and estate upon luxury and vanity. So
that now he is Bankerupt, not worth five pence in all the world, and
consequently altogether unable to pay you five hundred pound. What then? may
not you in equity and just law require of him your annual rent, although it be
impossible for him to pay it? I know you may. Just so it is betwixt God and
man. At the first man was created in perfect righteousness, and so was a person
fitted to the observance of all good duties; but soon after, he turned
bankrupt, he fell upon riotous and disobedient courses, being tempted by the
woman, and she by the Serpent, to eat the forbidden fruit. Before he was the
servant of God, now he is become the slave of sin So that he has no strength
to run in those good ways* wherein at first God set him. What then? Because
he is not able to do any good, may not God in equity exact of him the keeping
of his commandments? I trow he may, yea I am sure he does, and that rightly,
because the thing is become impossible to man merely through his own default.

3 The exhortations and dehortations, the promises and threatenings which have
annexed wheat, that is, the elect gathered into Gods barn, the tares, that is,
the reprobate gathered into sheaues to be burnt. So then the precepts of God in
the Word, and the exhortations of the Ministers according to the Word are
directed either to the reprobate or to the elect, and not one jot of the Word
of God shall fall to the ground. For to the one it becomes the savor of death
unto death, to the other the savor of life unto life. I open my self thus.
The exhortations, threatenings, promises, warnings, etc. set down in the Word
of God and published by the mouth of his Ministers, being directed to the
reprobate make them the more inexcusable, that their mouths may be stopped, and
that they may not say another day, that if they had been exhorted to such a
good duty, they would have embraced it, if they had been admonished of such a
fault, they would have forsaken it. For here there consciences shall convict
them, and they shall know then that there has been a Prophet among them. If
they be directed to the elect, they be either such as are not yet effectually
called, and then the holy Spirit enwrapping himself in his Word, works an
admirable change in their hearts, and begets those good things in them
whereunto they are exhorted; for the Word of the Lord is mighty in operation,
as the Apostle says, and the Law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul,
as the Psalmist speaks; or else they be actually called, and then by those
denunciations of judgment they become more wary in their carriage, by those
exhortations to godliness, they become more lively and forward in all good
courses, tending and striving after perfection. So that in all this here is no
mockage at all, neither can God without blasphemy be said to do any thing in
vain. This because it is the most substantial doubt and most stood upon by
your Author, therefore I have endeavored to clear it thus at large as you
see, and to afford it a full answer.

Ob.
For the other, they are either impertinent, as that out of Ecclus. 15.14. which
speaks of man in his first estate of creation before the fall, Sol.
wherein we deny not man freewil; besides, I say not, that the Book is
Apocryphal, although that might serve for a sufficient answer; or they be
frivolous, Ob.
as that of Cain, Genesis 4* 7 wherein it is not said, that he shall have dominion
over sin, Sol.
but there God urges an argument to cool the heat of his anger, taken from
the subjection of his brother Abel. Ob.
Of this Bran is that testimony taken out of Iosuah 24. Sol.
wherein he gives them their choice whether they will serve the true God or
not, not as if it had been in their power to have chosen, but only that he
might draw from them a confession of the true worship of God, by which
protestation they might the more be tied to Gods service after Iosuahs death,
and held the more inexcusable if they fell to Idols after this solemn
profession to fear God, and to abjure all idolatrous worship. And that
instance of Ananias, Ob.
Act. 5. is like, because it speaks only of an humane and civil matter, Sol.
the sale of a piece of land, which was in his own power. Ob.
The first demonstratiue reason, which is, argumentum cornutum, carries some
better show with it, but concludes nothing against the truth. Haec Pelagii
quoque arma erant ad impete^dum, Augustinum Calv. Instit. l. 2. c. 5.. 1 Sol.
It is this: Sin is either necessary or voluntary; if necessary, the^ it is not
sin if voluntary, then it may be avoided. The horns of this argumentation are
too short and weak to push down the truth. If sin be necessary, then it is
no sin? How prove you that argument? You must remember (which you also
learned in moral Philosophy) that (...) and (...) voluntarium and inuitum are
opposed, not (...) and (...) voluntarium and necessarium. God and his Angels
are good necessarily, and yet they are voluntarily good. The Devil and his
Angels are evil necessarily, and yet they are evil most willingly too. (...)
oportet, there must be heresies, says the Apostle, Necesse est, It is
necessary that offenses come, says our Savior; and of Judas his bloody sin*
and the Jews malicious conspiracy against Christ, it is expressly said, That
they did nothing but what the mighty hand of God had decreed long before to be
done. Briefly then, sin is both voluntary and necessary. Voluntary in respect
of man's will; for we say that a man may be carried freely and with a full
swing to the works of darkness, even to commit wickedness with greediness,
neither is it necessity, but compulsion, which takes away the liberty of the
will. And it is also Necessary in respect of Gods decree, which is immutable.
For this is a most certain and undoubted truth, that nothing can be done in
the world, which his right hand has not before determined either to do* as in
all good things, or suffer to be done, as in all sinful actions; as S. Austin
very fully and learnedly proves in his Enchiridion to Laurentius.

Conclus.
It was Themistocles his commendation in Thucydides, that he could (...) ex
tempore, and on a sudden speak to any point and counsel always for the best.
For my self I must confess I am none of those ready wits, yet thus much I
have been bold out of some former acquaintance with this point of doctrine, to
write raptim on a sudden to this question for your satisfaction, which I trust
also will be sufficient to persuade any ingenuous man, that is only tainted
with Popery, and not branded with the mark of the Beast (for there is no hope
of such) to think and conceive well of the truth of our doctrine. If I had had
my tools about me, I should have made it a more perfect work, but you know I
am far from my books. Such as it is, it is yours, and I am yours to use in all
Christian offices.

T.V.

Aug. de lib. arbit. l. 2. c. 20. Tu tantum pietatem inconcussam tene, vt
nullum existimes tibi bonum vel sentienti, vel intelligenti, vel quoquo modo
cogitanti occurrere posse, quod non sit ex Deo.
(...) Or The Heads of a plain and profitable method of Teaching shadowed and
pointed at.
WHereas there be now in use two ways of delivering the precepts of any Art,
according to the doctrine of Plato, the one, (...), a longer; the other, (...)
a shorter way: in the setting down of these few rules following, I have made
choice of the later; because I am sure I have only to deal with intelligent
men, or scholars, to whom (as the old saying runs, Verbum sat) one word is as
good as a thousand.

I. Preloquution, if the matter require; under which Coherence, avoid
affectation. I mean not only an affectation of big words and phrases; but also
of a far fetched entrance into the Text, as he that in every Sermon he made,
whatsoever the Text was, would be sure to begin always at the beginning of
the world.

II. Partition, into as few parts as you can. Avoid curiositio. As for example,
if I were to handle those words of Christ, Weep not for me, but weep for
your selves, I would not divide them thus. The parts are six. I. Weep: II.
Weep not: III. Weep not, but weep: IV. Weep not for me: V. Weep for your
selves: VI. Weep not for me but for your selves; for fear I should seem
rather to play with the Text, then to divide the word aright.

III. Interpretation, if terms or words be ambiguous. Avoid needless
criticismes, as if I were to open the name of Paul, I should say it came from
Pi in Hebrew, which signifies ^s, and (...) in Greek, that is, tibia. Master
Seldom has intermixed many needless Criticismes in the History of Tithes,
observed and exploded by diverse Worthies: so that I shall not need to say any
thing; but only pray for him that the pride of his heart in worm-eaten
learning, and his malice against the Ministers of the Gospel, which he has
discovered by th^^ Book, though covertly, and aliud agens, may be forgiven
him; and that the sin of many close-fisted sacrilegious Patrons, which detain
the Churches Of the point before the famous History saw the light. DD.
Carleton, now L. Bishop of Chichester. Tithes proved due to the Ministers of
the Gospel by divine right. Sir Hen: Spelman De non temerandis Ecclesijs. M.
Eburne. The Maintenance of the Ministry. M. Robarts. The Reuenew of the
Gospel, Tithes. M. Gosthwick. The truth of Tithes. To the point and person too.
S. Iam: Sempill. Sacrilege Sacredly handled. DD. Tillesley. Animaduersions on
the famous History. DD. Sclater. The Ministers portion, and question of Tithes
Reuiewed. M. Montague. Diatribae on the History. M. Nettles. Answer to the
Jewish part of M. Seldom.
Right, and think they have gotten a very good pretense for so doing by the
writing of that Book, be not one day laid to his charge.

It is a wonder to see what ado the Friars make with the first word in the
Angels salutation, Aue, Luc. 1. First, say they, Aue is as much as sine vae,
making it come of a priuitiua particula, in Greek, and vae in Latin.
Secondly, they find the name of our great Grandame in it, and because Eve
wrought man's destruction, and Mary man's Salvation, therefore the Angel does
most fitly begin the Salutation with Aue, which Anagrammatiz'd, is Eua. Joan
Picus in his Heptaplus finds I know not what Mysteries in the first word of
the Bible Berescit, by transposing and conioyning the Letters diversely (as
though he were ringing changes) he pickes out three words, the intellectual,
Celestial, and corruptible, and withal this sentence. Pater in filio, and per
filium principium, and fine sieve quietem creauit caputignem and fundamentum
magni hominis foedere bono. All this as he conceiues, dissults out of the
resolution and com^osition of the first word in Genesis.

IV. Collection of Doctrines or conclusions out of the several parts as they
shall naturally arise, avoid straining, as Christ bid some body loose Lazarus
and let him go, ergo the Ministers have power to loose and absolve sinners: it
is Sixtus Senensis his Collection. Moses says that the Stars were created to
be signs, Ergo, the Astrologer may come to the knowledge of men's fortunes,
and of particular events by the Stars: it is Sr. Chrystopher Heydons Collection
Abraham paid Tithe to Melchizedech of all the spoils, even of the spoils,
Ergo, the spoils only: it is Mr. Seldens Doctrine. God made man after his
own Image, Ergo, Images are to be suffered in Churches. The Sun is greater
then the Moon by many degrees, Ergo the Pope is above the Emperor. David
says, Praise God in his Saints, Ergo, we may pray unto the Saints. Christ
said to Peter, thy faith shall not fail, Ergo, the Pope of Rome cannot err.
These and the like inconsequences, are mere wrestings of the Text. And so it
is likewise when a Parable is urged beyond the scope and drift of it, very
common among Popish interpreters.

V. Probation, 1. By authority of Scriptures opening them along, if need be.
2. By arguments or reasons illustrating them some way as you can. Avoid
prolixitie. That Is S. Austins counsel, Lib. 4. de doct. Christ. 22. and his
reason. is, Quando prolixa est oration in vno genere minus detinet auditorem:
and therefore he would not have a Preacher stand long upon any point, when it
is once understood of the people, but slide into another. I have heard of a
Preacher that stood upon a short Text seven years together; and I have read I
am sure of one Thom. Hasselbachius, that was twenty one years in preaching upon
the first Chapter of Esaias; neither did he come to the end of it in all that
space, but left in an imperfect work twenty four large volumes behind him of
that he had expounded. Take heed of such prolixity, and remember the old
saying, Varietas delectat.

VI. Solution of doubts if any occur, avoid tedious disputes. That a Minister
may move doubts in his Sermon, if he be able to solue them, Saint Austin does
warrant, Lib. 4. de doct. Christ. c. 20. But for one to draw in by the neck
and shoulders a disputable question, and upon the smallest occasion that may
be to fall into a large field of controversies, by handling the points pro and
con, as there is mention made of Will in the Lords Prayer; therefore for a man
to fall upon the doctrine of Free Will, and dispute the question thereupon,
this is not warrantable. Long disputes are fitter for the Schools then for the
Pulpit.

VII. Application, 1. By way of Confutation, if it be a matter of controversy.
2. By way of Reprehension, if you preach against any sin, or if you commend a
virtue, you may reprehend the contrary vice. 3. By way of Exhortation to the
good, Dehortation from evil. 4. By way of Direction, urging and showing he
motives and means how to attain the good, how to eschew the evil. 5. By way
of Consolation, if it will conveniently arise. Avoid all indecorums. An
indecoru^ is, when circumstances are not rightly observed in the application.
Verbi causa. If any man should preach of the life or death of S John Baptist,
on S. John the Evangelists day in Christmas, and apply it to that Festival;
though it be bonum, good, at all times to be remembered of the sobriety and
austerity of that holy man of God; yet it is not been, id est, apposito dictum,
well done, and therefore an indecorum, because it is verbum non in tempore suo,
a word not in his fit season. Keckerman in his Ecclesiastical Rhetorique (I
will not cite the Chapter and Page, because I would have you read the whole
Treatise) tells a tale of a Friar, that following his Postill, and sticking too
close to the very words that he found written, had almost brought the whole
town where he lived about his ears. And it was thus. The Postiller had very
bitterly inueighed as it seems against the sins that reigned in the Town
where he preached during the time of a common plague, and had told them that
because they continued in those sins God had sent the plague among them. The
Homiliary Friar, finding this in his Postill, and taking little thought, save
only to get it by heart, and pronounce it boldly enough, delivered the very
same words in his own congregation, inueighing against the sins that reigned
in the Town, and told them that for those sins God had sent this grievous
plague among them. At these words all the Auditors were greatly astonished, and
came upon him presently after Sermon, to inquire in what house, or what part of
the town the pestilence was that he spoke of in his Sermon, for they knew of
none. The silly Ignoramus could not resolve them, but answered thus. Howsoever
it be, whether the plague be in the town or not, I am sure I found it so as I
said in my Postill.

For the opening of these short rules, and more full understanding of the whole
matter, let not a young Divine trouble himself with multitude of books. Among
many Worthies who have written of this subject, I have found these three very
useful and profitable. Keckerm. de Rhetoric. Ecclesiast. Augustine. de doct.
Christian. and M. Bernards Faithful Shepherd.

And Mr. Weemse his Book of Lathoquar in Scotland, written of late as it seems
of purpose to help young Divines in this way and Method of teaching,
entitled, The Christian Synagogue.

In setting down these few notes and rules, I would not be thought to take
upon me to prescribe unto Academicall Preachers (nolo sus Mineruam) but to
Rural; neither to instruct the grave and learned, well experienced among them;
Veteranos Jesus Christi Milites, but new beginners. Neither do I tie them to
this only Method. It may be every Text will not admit of it, and it may be
every man's gift does not lie for it. But my desire was to help my self by
these Collections, and those that are weak; and I pray my brethren to give a
candid interpretation of my good affection, being most ready to entertain any
other more profitable way of teaching that they shall suggest.

-- Si quid nouisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti; si non, his vtere mecum.
FINIS.
THE GOSPEL OF St. THOMAS. MY LORD and MY GOD.
An Ode thereupon, gathered out of the Psalms of David.
It will go to the tune of the C. Psalm.
MY LORD MY GOD, strength of my head,
Sraffe of my joy, Spring of mercy,
Guide with thy grace, bless with thy love
Thy Servant in necessity.
Thou art my Lord, this is my Song,
And I will render thanks to thee:
Thou art my God, and I will praise
Thy mercies ever towars me.
Thy Servant lo, thy Servant I
My self confess, and ever will
Take thee to be MY LORD AND GOD;
And rest upon thy goodness still.
Thou art my Lord, this is my Song,
And I will render, etc.
In calling thee MY LORD, I know
Thy hand of power does govern me:
In calling thee MY GOD, I know
Thine eye does all my doings see.
Thou art my Lord, this is my Song,
And I will, etc.
MY LORD because my fortitude,
To save me from the fiends of Hell:
MY GOD, because my righteousness
To make me with thy Saints to dwell.
Thou art my Lord, this, etc.
MY LORD MY GOD, my Sun, my Shield,
My hope, my health, my life, my stay,
Loose me from out these mortal bands
To live (O Christ) with thee for aye.
Thou art my Lord, this is, etc.
FINIS.
The Contents of this Book.
I. A Monitory Preface to Catholics. II. A Manuduction to Theology. III.
Brief directions for Communicants. IV. The Sum of Divinity. V. The
Controversy touching Free Will. VI. A plain and profitable Method of
Preaching. VII. The Gospel of Saint Thomas.
THE PARTICVLARS of the foregoing Treatises.
IN the I. general, namely, The Monitory Preface is showen, that both the
Doctrine of Popery is a doctrine of darkness, and that the Doings of the
Papists are works of darkness. And therefore that it concerns much the
seduced Catholics to look unto their dangerous estate, to come out of the
snares of darkness, wherein they have bin held now a long time.

In the II. namely, The Manuduction to Theology, you have these particular
places of Divinity.

1. Of Religion. page 1.

2. Of God. p. 5.

3. Of the Scripture. p. 14.

4. Of Salvation. p. 38.

5. Of the Image of God. p. 42.

6. Of the fall of man. p. 44.

7. Of Sin. p. 48.

8. Of the Punishment of sin. p. 50.

9. Of Predestination. p. 53.

10. Of Redemption. p. 55

11. Of Christ our Redeemer, his Person, his Office, his sufferings. p. 56. and
seqq.

12. Of the Church redeemed. p. 93. and seqq.

13. Of Justification by Faith. 137. and seqq.

14. Of the certainty of salvation. p. 151 and seqq.

15. Of Repentance. p. 159.

16. Of Sanctification. p. 162.

17. Of Good Works, and Prayer. p. 165. and seqq. Where also of Jmages. p. 181.

18. Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, where of the Mass, and of Trans.
and Co^substantiation. p. 185. and seqq.

19. Of the often, worthy, and devout receiving of the holy Communion. p. 209.
and seqq.

In the III. namely, The Brief Directions for Communicants, you have these
particulars.

1. The subject of our Examination, who. The matter of it, wherein. The manner,
how it must be performed. p. 223. and seqq.

2. The duties required of us at the Lords Table. p. 233.

3. The duties to be practiced after the Communion. p. 238.

Jn the IV. namely, The Sum of Divinity, you have the Analysis of the whole,
and methodicall co^catenation of the parts of Divinity. p. 241. and seqq.

Jn the V. namely, The Controversy touching Freewill, you have 1. the terms
of the Controversy opened, and the question stated. p. 251. and seq.

2. The truth confirmed with impregnable reasons. p. 260. and seq.

3. The maine arguments of the Papists answered. p. 274. and seq. Jn the VI.
namely, The method of Preaching, you have a few rules concerning Preaching, not
impertinent nor unprofitable for young Divines. p. 292. and seqq.

Jn the VII. namely, The Gospel of S. Thomas, you have the Authors Motto, and
his Song upon it. p. 306.

Errata.
IN the Title page Vickars for Vicars.

In the Praface p. 6. for Portayed read pourtrayed p. 7. r. preciosos p. 9. r.
but entangleth p. 11. r. bastardly p. 17 r. and detrimenti, and instead of lib,
1. r. lib. 2. de verbo. p. 18. r. wretches. p. 22. r. Apostolos p. 23. r.
misled p. 26. r. aduertendum, and Cypriani. p. 27. r. earth-bred p. 28 r
pertinacious. p. 29. r great p 32. r. misericordia. p 33. r. too too headie in
the pursuit of error, and too too headstr. etc. p. 34. r of those vipers. p.
35. r parentum. p. 37. r. for the merits of Christ p 38 r. (...).

In the Manuduction. p. 2. for Thologia r. Theologia for Philosophia r.
Philosophiae for P^racels r. Paracles. p. 23. for Profitts r. Prophets for a
dictum r addictum. p. 25. for her Church r. the Church. p. 38 for former.
former. p. 40. for 115 r. 151 p. 41. dele Nazianzen. p. 43. for ^epended r.
depended, for libro r. libero arbit. p. 48. for (...) r. (...) for had r. and.
p. 51. for life r. life for com r. tom. for Says r. Saint Matthew p. 54. dele
Psalm. p. 55 for os r. of for Son of our Redeemer, r the Son of God, our
Redeemer. p. 63. for Silua r. Salua p. 192. r. ground of that holy admonit.

The Attestation of a friend touching this Book, inserted in a Letter to the
Translator.
-- In your Translation you have labored, that they that will read may have
delight; and that they that are desirous to commit to memory, might have ease;
and that all into whose hands it comes might have profit. 2. Mac. 2.25.

Adam Airay S. S. Theol. Bac

M. D. Esquire. To his good Friend. T. V.
WHat Thou do teach by others heretofore,
Has likewise bin. But yet by no man more
To the true life. That by thy godly care,
Thou and thine Author equally do share.
Thou praisest him Translating, but if he
Understood English he would more praise thee.
Thou to our Nation have his Doctrine shown
Which to our vulgar else had not been known;
As much by this thou get'st as ere he wanne:
England praise Vicars, Dantsk her Keckerman.
Mich. Drayton.

AN ACROSTICKE. To his as duly beloved, as truly Loving, Learned and Religious
COVSIN,
Mr.

Truth may triumph, Religion justly joy,
Having so many faithful forward Friends,
Obseruant Servants, ready to employ,
Maugre Romes rage, their love their labors ends
Against the Force and Fraud o^ Error bace,
Sincerely, soundly to display Truths Grace.
Upon which sacred Subject thou have spent
Iudiciously, industriously, thy pains;
Choice Pearls of learned Keckerman to vent
Amongst us, us to enrich with godly Gains:
Romes pedling Parsons, Errors Trash may sell,
Sound Wares of Truth, our Vicars vttreth well.
The true embracer of your Piety and Familiarity. JOHN VICARS.


