The dyaloge between Iullius the second / Genius / and saint Peter.

Reader, refrain from laughing.

A Dyaloge made by a certain famous learned man, pleasant and fruteful /
showing how Julius the second, and great bishop of Rome knocking after his
death at the gates of heaven, could not be suffered to come in, saint Peter
being the porter, albeit yt in his life time he was called most holy, yea and
by ye name of holiness it self / and thereto a great co^querour in many
batayls / whereby he supposed hy^self also to be ye lord of heaven.

Speakers in this dyaloge ben these Julius, Genius, and Petrus.

Julius. Genius. Petrus.
Julius. What a myschyef is this? be not the gates open? I trow either the
lock is changed / or else doubtless it is troubled.


Genius. Mary look betyme, leest per adventure thou have not brought the right
keye. For this door is not opened with ye same keye, wherewith thou do open
thy treasoury. And therefore, why have thou not brought hither both twain? For
surely this is a keye of power / not of conning.


Iul. Forsothe I had never other but this / neither I se not what needs the
other key, wha^ this is present.


Genesis Neither I of troth / but for because we be shet out in ye mean time.


Iul. This freateth me not a little. I will break dowue the gates. Hey, hey,
some of you, quyckely come open the gate. What a reckoning is this? Will no man
come forth? What causes this porter to tarry so long? I think he is fallen
in to some dronken sleep.


Genius. Se ye not how this man estemeth all other men of his own condycyons.


Petrus. It is happy that we have so strong a gate, or else he would have
broken it. He must needs be some gyaunt / or some great ruffler / or beater
down of walled towns. But, o, i^mortall god / what a synke I smell here? I
will not be hasty in opening ye door / but I shall spy here out at this grate
what monster it is. what art thou / or what eyleth the?


Iul. Wherefore do thou not open ye gates as fast as thou can? which
sholdest have met me, if thou had done thy duty, and all the pomp of heaven to.


Pet. Lordely spoken. But I pray the tell me first of all / who thou art.


Iul. As though thou may not se what I am.


Pet. May not se quod he? of truth I se a new sight, and such one as I
never saw before / to speak plainly a very monstre.


Iul. But and if thou be stark blind, I trow thou know of old this key /
albeit that thou know not this golden oak, and thou see here to this
tryple crown / and also this cope shynynge on every syde^ with gold and
precious stones.


Pet. As for the silver keye in deed I know of old, after a manner / and
though ye have brought it alone, being yet much unlike to those which
Christ the true pastor or shepeherde of ye church did ones del^uer me. But how
were it possible for me to know this crown so glorious, as never any strange
tyraunte durst wear / much more no such (certaynely) as would be let in
here. As for this goodly vestiment, I pass little upon / which dispysed and
was wont to tread under my fete, both gold and precious stones, like as I
did tyle stones, But what thing is here? I se both in the key / crown / and
garment / tokens of some knauysshe tapster, and false iugler / having my
forename, yt is to say, Symo^ / but nothy^g following my profession / which name
I confounded ones by ye assystence of Christ.


Iul. Leave these brablyng words, if thou be wise: for I (if you know me not)
am Julius the lombarde, borne in Liguria / and I think thou know these.ij.
letters.P. and.M. oneles you dydest never know thy crosrowe.


Pet. I wene they signify the greatest pestylence.


Ge. Ha, ha, ha, How right he hytteth the nail on the heed.


Iul. No not so, the greatest bishop.


Pet. How great so ever thou be / and though thou were greater than
T^ismegistus the neuewe of great Mercurius, thou shalt not be received in to
this place, onles thou be also optimus, that is to say holy.


Iul. If it make any thing to the matter to be called holy, you art past all
shame, which doubts to open me the gates / seeing thou was calmany years ago,
only holy. For truly no man called me but most holy. There remains at
this day.vi.M. bulls.


Genius. Bulls in deed.


Iul. In which I am called, and that not ones, most holy lord. Beside this I
was entitled under the name of holiness it self / and not of a holy man,
what so ever was my pleasure.


Ge. Ye though thou were st^^ke dronke.


Iul. That, men would say ye holiness of most holy lord Julius had done.


Pet. Than go ask heaven of such flaterers yt was wont to make ye most holy
/ and let those give ye felycite, which gave the holiness: But supposest you
alone, to be called holy or to be holy i^ deed.


Iul. Thou angrest me to ye heart If I might live again, I would neither
desire this holiness nor felycite.


Pet. O voice the declarer of a very holy mind. Nevertheless when I do but
only look on the I perceive much vngoodlynes / but no token of holiness in
the. What meneth this new guard, so unmeet for a bishop? For thou bryngest
almoost.xx.M. with the / and I se not one among them all that looks like a
good christen man. I se a fylthy sort of men / sauourynge nothing but of
bawdry / dronkenes / and gonpowder. They seem to be hired to rob / or rather
a sort of spyrytes come out of hell, to make bataile against heaven. Now the
more I behold thyselfe / so much less I se any step of an apostolyke man.
First of all, what a monstre is here? Which wearest above the garmente of a
priest / and underneath thou lokest al fyersly / and clynkkest within with
bloody harneys. Beside all these, what a cruel look / how stoborne a face /
how thretnynge a forheed / how hawt and disdeynous a countenance: I am truly
ashamed / and very weary for to se it / yt there is no part of thy body, but it
is defiled and vicyate with tokens of prodigyous / and abhomynable lust. And
ferthermore, it need not to speak how thou do ryfte / and smellest al
together of excess and dronkennes / and me thinks thou lokest as thou had of
late vomyted. To be short, such is the shape of all thy body / that thou
apperest not so broken, roten, and overcome so much with age, as with
surfettes.


Genesis How right he has painted him in his colors.


Pe. Yet although yt I se the but even now thretnynge me as it were with thy
countenance. Yet for all that, I can not but utter my thought. I do suspecte
yt the most pestileut heathen Julius is come again disguysed from hell, to
laugh me to scorn / thou art so like to him in all points.


Iul. Madisi.


Pet. What said he?


Ge. His holiness is now an angered. At this word there is never one of the
cardynalles that would tarry in his sight / for if he did, he should have felt
his most holy fyste / and namely after dinner.


Pet. Me think thou perceyuest very well the man's appetyte, therefore tell me
who thou art.


Genesis I am the great spyryte or angel of Julius.


Pet. But I think the evil angel.


Genesis What kyn one so ever I am, I belong to Julius.


Iul. But I say, leave these try flynge tales: and open the gates: except thou
had leauer have them broken open. What needs many words? see thou what a
sort of co^panyons I bring with me?


Pet. Truly I se a sort of erraunt thieves. But ^o put the shortly out of
doubt, these gates must be won with other manner of artyllery.


Iul. I say here is words plenty, if thou will not spedely obey, I will bend
against the, the thonderbolt of exco^municacyon / wherewith I have feared
sometime the highest kings of the earth, and also many great kingdoms / I
trow thou see here a bull provided for the same purpose.


Petrus. But I pray the what thondre or thondreboltes, what bulls calves and
crakynge words do thou speak of to me. For I never herd any such of
Christ.


Julius. But thou shalt feel, onelesse thou will obey.


Pet. If thou have in time past feared any with such cards of.x that is
nothing to this place / for here thou must occupye true war. This howlde is
vaynquysshed with good works: not with evil words: But I pray the thretnest
thou me with the thondrebolte of exco^municacyon? tell me by what auctoryte.


Iul. By very good auctoryte. For thou art now but a pryuate person, neither
any better tha^ every layke priest, ye scarcely so good, seeing thou can not
now consecrate.


Pet. Because I trow that I am now departed from that life.


Iul. Even therefore.


Petrus. But thou which art more than so deed, art nothing better than I by
this reason.


Iul. Nay not so sir / for as long as the cardynals strive for the chusyng of
a new Pope / so long is the office mine own.


Ge. How he dremeth of his dremyng life.


Julius. But yet ones again, open the door I say.


Petrus. I say thou labourest all in vain, onelesse thou can show thy
deseruyng merits.


Iul. what merits?


Petrus. I will tell the. Have thou passed all other in holy doctrine?


Julius. I knew never a dele / nor I had leyser thereto, having so many
batayls / but I have freres ynowe, if this pertayn to our matter


Pet. Therefore it is like enough thou have won many to Christ, with thy good
living.


Genesis Ye rather to hell, and that great plente.


Petrus. Wast thou clear and shynynge with miracles?


Iul. Thou spekest of such matters as were clean out of use with me.


Pe. Have you ben accustomed to pray purely, and besyly?


Iul. What tryfles he prateth.


Pet. Or was thou wont to macerate, or subdue thy body with fastings and
watches?


Genesis No mo of these matters I pray the, to this man / lose not thy labor.


Petrus. I never knew other orname^tes of a right bishop, if this man has
other more like to ye apostles: let him show them forth.


Julius. Truly it is far vnfyttynge yt the great conqueror Julius (which
was never yet over come) should now give place to Peter / to speak no
ferther, a poor fyssher, and in manner a very beggar. Nevertheless because you
shall know what a great prince thou set naught by, here me three or four
words. First of all I am borne in Liguria / neither I am no jew as thou art /
with whom I am sorry yt I have had so much lykenes to / as that I was ones a
pylote of a ship.


Genesis That is nothing to be sorowed for. For here in is much dyfference
between you / for he fysshed to get a poor living / thou were wont at a
little wage offered the, to pluck down tht sails:


Julius. Moreover of Sixtus which was doubtless the greatest pope.


Genius. He means his greatness in myscheues:


Iul. I was his neuewe by his sister / and first promoted by his special
favor, and mine own polycye, to spyrytuall dygnytees / than after clymmed up,
as it were by stayres, to the heygth of a cardynalles hat. After exercysed with
many sharp storms of fortune, being thereto tossed up and down, with most
cruel chances / and beside many other dyseases. I had also the kings evil.
To be short, I swarmed all full of the french pockes. Beside all this I was a
banysshed man, odious, condemned abiecte of all men, and almoost past all
together / yet I never mystrusted (...) be the greatest bishop / such a
courage had I ever. But as for thou waste afraid at the voice of a maiden /
and was glad to deny thy master. A woman took clean away thy stomach. It
fortuned contrary wise to me / for there was a wise woman, or sortylege, that
put me in all this trust / which in the time I was drowned in all my
misforunes, whyspered me pri^yly in the ear, saying: Stand styfly, and be of
good courage Julian. be not agreued, whatsoever thou do or suffer / thou shalt
ones be crowned with three crowns / thou shalt be king of kings / and lord
of lords. Neither my hope than her prophecy disceyued me. For to that I came
wrastlynge through many cares: no man supposing any lykelynes in me / partly
by aid of the frenchemen, succouryng me in my exyle / and partly with an
inestimable power of money, made by usury. Neither it came to pass without
great polycy.


Pet. What policy was it?


Iul. That is to say not without many promised benefyces / and that by sure
covenant / with great craft for to find sureties for the same purpose. For
^ruely it had been to much for rich Crassus to have paid so great a sum of
money at ones. But I speak these things to the in vain, which every audytor
does not well perceive. I have now rehearsed the how I crepte up to mine
office. Now in mine office I handled my self i^ such wise, that there is
never one among all the old bysshoppes, which in respect of me appears
worthy the name of bishops / neither there is any of ye new bishops to whom
ye church, yea Christ himself is so much bound as to me.


Genius. How straight this be plays Thrasoes part.


Petrus. I marueyle what end thou will make.


Iul. For truly I (with many new found offices, as they call the^) have
highly increased and enlarged the popes treasory. I found (than after) means
how bysshopryches might be bought without Simonye: For it was decreed by my
predecessoures, that he which chanced to have a bysshopryche, should depose
or lay down his office: Which words I did interpret in this wise. Thou art
commanded to give up thine office: but that is not given up which thou haste
not: thou must bye therefore that office which thou may give up. By this
policye every bysshopryche was worth to me six or seven thousand duckates /
besyd all such exactions as ben asked customably for bulls. Moreover, I gate
great vauntage of ye new money, wherwt I filled al Ytaly: Neither I ceased at
any time from gatherynge riches, perceiving right well (without that) yt neither
holy nor profane domynion could have been ryghtly done without that. But and to
speak of greater points of my practice, I restored and delivered up Bonony
than in habyte with ye bentiuoles. To y^ see of Rome I ouerthrwe in battle y^
Ueniciens, never vaynquesshed before I had almoost take in a snare ye duke
Ferrare, long vexed with battle. The scysmatyke council I deluded in good
time / feynynge an other council / and so put away one myschief (as the common
saying is) with an other. Last of all I drove the french men (than sore adred
of all chrystendome) clean forth of ytaly / and was purposed likewise to do
the Spanyardes (for I did holly so entende) if the fatal sentence of god had
not taken me out of this life / But se here, how coragious a stomach I showed.
I began to vewe dylygently the borders of hye France. I let than grow my
white berde, when all thing was in despyracyon. But full sodeynely comes a
golden messenger showing that at Rauenna a certain thousands of French men
were slain. At such tidings / Julius reuyued again. Moreover I lay three
days for deed. Also I felt no life at all my self, but here (both above al
other men's hope, and mine also) I reuyued again. So great is my auctoryte and
power, with my other polycy, that there is at this day never a christen prince,
but I can cause him to make war / notwithstanding they be never so sure
inleged. For an example, I brake the last band and leyge (Which the
cameryckes made between my holiness, and other princes. That is to say ye
french king, and the king of Romans) so craftily, as though there had never
ben mencyon of it. Beside all this I kept so great an host / garnysshed so
many glorious and shynynge tryumphes / so many ioly maskeryes / so diverse
buyldi^ges / and yet I left.l.C.M. ducates at the time of my death / intendyng
to prove hyer maistryes, if that jew my phisicyon (that by his sorcery did
proroge my life) could have prolonged me any more. But would god now some
magyke could restore me to life, that I might yet finyshe such things, as I
did gorgyously begin. Albeit at the point of death I was most besy to
provide, that batayles which I had graciously begone in all parts should not
cease by my death. And I labored that the treasour which I left might be
saved for ye same purpose, this was my last words at my departing. Now
disdeynest thou to open Christ's gates, to a bishop deseruyng so much, both
of Christ, and his church. He shall more marvel at these things that
perpendeth and consydereth by what wysoome and policy I brought all these
matters to pass, having no other help at all, as other be commonly wont, nor
of my kyn. For I knew never my father, which thing I say to my praise / nor
by beauty, for every man abhorred my ugly face / neither by any lernyng,
which I never tasted / nor by bodyly strength, which chanced me in like
manner, as I have descrybed before. Neither by favor of aege / for I did all
these things being an old man. Not by ye common fryndshyp for every man
hated me. Nor with any clemency or gentilnes, which being so hard herted, yt
I would often be so cruel against some, to whom all other were wont to be
entreated by.


Petrus. Good lord, what a tale is this?


Genesis Although this appear to an other man hard to bring to pass, yet it is
but a tryfle to him.


Julius. But notwithstanding that fortune, aege, personage of body. To make
few words, both goods and men were against me. I (having no other aid but
mine own wit and money) have done these great and valyaunte feats in few
years. Leaving also so much aid to my posteryte, that they may have enough
to do withall^ for the space of.x. years. I have spoken these things of my
self, and that very truly / but nothing to that I could say. But if one of
my rethoricye^s handled the matter, thou sholdest say thou herdest a god, and no
man.


Petrus. Most valiant warryour / for so much as all these matters which you
show me be to me very strange, and such as I never herd of before. I pray
you to pardon mine ygnoraunce and rudenes, and that it be not grievous to your
highness to make an answer plainly to me, in such things as I will ask of
you. What be these goodly minyons that follow you?


Iul. I keep them for my pleasure.


Pet. What be these black company all full of skarres?


Iul. They ben soldiers, and their capitaynes: which have been ma^fully slain
in battle for love of me and the church. Some in the syege of Boleyn le grace
/ and many also at the battle against the Uenyciens. A great sort at ye syege
of Rauenna, to whom heaven is due by covenant. For I promised them long ago,
by my great bulls, that al they should fle straight to heaven, that fought for
ye mayntenaunce of Julius power, how soever they lived before.


Pe. Therefore to my ymaginacion they were of this good fraternite, that has been very often grievous to me, or thou came hither, showing forth their
folysshe bulls. Howbeit they made no such facynge as to enter in by force.


Iul. Therefore as fer as I can se, thou would not suffer them come in.


Petrus. I trowest thou? no never one of the lynage. For truly so has not
Christ taught me, to admyt any that brings such instruments. But to them
that has clothed the naked, and fedeth them that be an hongred / given drink
to the thyrsty, and visyteth the sick, and help poor prisoners, and
harborowe the barbourlesse. For saying he would, they should be excluded yt
has prophesyed in his name / that has cast forth deuylles / that has
wroughte miracles. Thynkest thou than that they shall be let in, that brings
hither nothing but a bare bull in the name of Julius.


Iul. Ah, what if I had known this before.


Pet. I wot well what ye would have done, if any of your friends had come from
hell, and showed you these things / ye would have proclaimed open war
against me.


Julius. And not only that, but I should have cursed the, as black as a cole.


Pet. But go forth / wherefore art thou all in armor?


Iul. As though thou knew not that both the swerdes pertayned to the highest
byss^op, except thou will have men fight naked.


Petrus. Truly when I occupied thy rowme, I knew no sword at all, but the
sword of the spirit / which is the word of god.


Julius. But Malchus will tell an other tale, whose ear thou cut of. I trow
without a sword.


Pet. I remember and know that right well. But tha^ I fought for my master
Christ. Not for my self, for my masters life. Not for money, or temporal
dignyte. And than I fought being neither pope nor bishop. And at that time
when the keys were only promised me, but not received. Neither I had received
yet ye holy ghost. And notwithstanding at that time I was commanded to put it
up again / and monysshed openly, that such manner of fighting, was not
sitting for priests, neither for any christen man. But these things shall be
more mete for an other place. Why do thou so much boste thy self to be a
L^mbarde / as though it were any thing materyall to the vycar of Christ what
country man he be.


Julius. Yes surely / for I think it the highest kind of love to auaunce and
magnify my country. Therefore I write this title in all my coins of money /
pictures in all vautes, and walls.


Petrus. Ergo he knew his country, which knew not his father? But at the
first I thought thou had mente of the heavenly Jerusalem / the country of
beleuers, and of the only prince of the same / by whose godly power, they
which be there desires to be sanctified / that is for to say, made clean. But
what means this addicyon? Sixtus neuew by his sister, whom I marvel never
came hither, namely when he was the high bishop, and cousin to so great a duke
as thou art. Wherefore tell me I pray the, what manner of fellow was he? Was he
any priest?


Iul. I promise the he was a valiant warryour, and of an high religyon / that
is to wit of saint Frau^ces order.


Pe. In deed I knew somtim^ Fraunces, one of the best syse among the lay
fee / and an utter despyser of riches / pleasure / and worldly ambicyon. But
has that poor creature gotten him now such great rulers under him?


Iul. As far as I perceive, thou will not that any man shall rise to
promocyon. Truth it is, yt Benet was ones a poor monk / nevertheless his
posteryte or successors, be now so rich that we popes do envy them


Pet. Uery well. But return to thy matter of Sixtus neuewe.


Julius. I said for the nonest, to stop their mouths, which affirm liberally
that I was his son / and begoten on his sister.


Pet. Liberally spoken in deed. But what of that, say they not truly?


Iul. How soever it be, it is not for ye popes honor, whereto specially I must
have regard.


Petrus. To speak of regardy^ge, surely me thynkes yt honor could not be
more regarded, than if they did noth^g that might justly be laid to their
reproach. But I require, and adjure the / and that by thy pontyficall majesty,
to tell me without fablynge. Is this way (that thou tellest me now) ^he common
trade and means to come to the high papacy.


Iul. Well I wot there was no other fassyon in many years, o^les he yt
succedeth me, be made otherwise. For after y^ I had my purpose / by and by I
sent a bull under leed to warn them, leest any man should enter in to the
honorable see, by such means. And also renewed the said bull a little before
my death. How much it shall prevail, let them care that need has.


Pet. I suppose there could no man descrybe the mischeuous corrupt fassyon,
better than ^hou. But one thing I marvel of, how any can be found that will
take the office upon him / seeing that it is so paynefull to keep, and
dangerous to come by / when I was ye bishop I could scarsly enforce any to
take on him ye office of a poor priest, or deacon.


Iul. It was no great meruel. For yt time y^ state or condition of the by^shops
and other fathers was nothing else but labors / watchynges / fastinges /
preaching / and often times death. But now it is al hole a kings life, and
better. Therefore who is it / if he have any tru^t at all to vaynquysshe / yt
would not go to hand grypes for so sweet a life.


Pet. But tell forth, what said thou of Bonony. Went it out of ye faith, that
it neded to be restored to y^ see of rome.


Iul. Peace yt was no matter.


Pet. Perchance the cominalty decayed by the mysgouernaunce of Bentinofus.


Iul. No in deed. For at that time the city was most in his flowers /
repaired, and illustrate with many goodly buyldynges. And therefore I was more
gredy over it.


Pet. I perceive ye matter now. Did he not tha^ come in by a wrong title?


Iul. That was not the matter. For he came to it by ye favor of the hole body
of the town.


Pe. Than ye Bononyes would not suffer him to be rule over them?


Julius. Yes mary. They held styfly with him / and were almost all together
against me.


Pet. What than was the cause?


Iul. Plainly this was al ye matter. Because he governed in such wise, that
there came but a few thousands of the unreasonable so^mes of money, which he
gathered of the cyrezyns to our treasour house. Beside all this it was a very
necessary thing so that, which I went about. And so by help of the French
men, and many other which I en^orced thereto with the thondrebolte of my curse,
I voyded him and his the town. I put in their rowmes cardinals and bishops
to rule the same / so yt no part of the profytes might escape the sea of Rome.
An other cause was, that the chief title and honor of ye empire of Rome
appeared ell together to be theyrs. But now are set forth in every part of
the town our images / our tytles be red / our tokens and monume^tes of victory
be worshipped / and in many sundry places stands a Julius of stone or brass.
To be short if thou had seen with what a regal pomp and triumph I entered in to
Bonony, perchance thou would the less have set by all the tryu^phes of
Octauians or Scipions / and yt it was not without a cause, that I entreprised so
far. For you might have seen there the very church milytaunt and tryu^phaunt,
both at ones.


Pet. Therefore when thou reigned (as I perceived) that fortuned which Christ
commanded us to pray for, in the Pater noster. Let thy kyngedome come to us.
Now I pray the, what heinous displeasure had the poor Uenyciens done to the?


Julius Fyr^t of all they followed all together the Greeks, and made me their
laughyng stock / speaking ever al they could to my reproach.


Pet. But was it true or false yt they spoke.


Iul. What matter is that? It is plain sacrilege ones to whysper of the bishop
of Rome, except it be done to his praise. Moreover, they bestowed al their
benefyces at their own pleasure. Nor they would suffer no appeles hither, nor
bye any dispensacyons. What need many words? They vexed the sea of Rome (...)
such wise, that it could not be suffered Which moreover wthelde a great part
of thy patrimony.


Pet. Of my patrimony? I pray the what patrimony tellest thou me of? that left
all together and poorly followed poor Christ.


Iul. I speak of certain towns that belong to ye see of Rome. For so it
pleased the most holy fathers to call a particular part of their possessions.


Pe. Truly ye have gote^ much lucre and auantage to my great sclaundre. And
do you therefore call this an intolerable hurt?


Iul. What else?


Pe. Ye but was their manners to be suffered? or their love toward god decayed?


Iul. Tusshe, thou speak of tryfles / the matter is this. They wthelde from
us yearly infinyte thousa^des of duccates, which had been suffycient to find
an armyryall.


Pet. Be my troth a great loss to such an usurer. But that same duke of
Ferrare, what had he done?


Iul. What had he done? A chorle of al chorles: whom Alexandre the vicare of
Christ had in ^uche favor (though he was but of base blood) that he married
one of his daughters to him / and gave thereto great possessions, for her dowry.
And yet nothing at all reme^bryng his humanyte and kyndnesse ever barked and
whyned against me / calling me often scismatyke / ^^ggerer / and frantyke
fellow. And farthermore, he claymed many trybutes / which albeit they were but
small / yet a dilyge^t curate would not utterly dispyse them.


Genesis Nay, a crafty merchant.


Iul. But to come to our matter / it was somewhat expedyent to that which I
went about, to have that goodly town coupled to our patrimony / because it
lay co^modyously for us, therefore I was purposed (that ones brought to pass)
to give it to a kynsman of ours / a fellow very actyue, and bold enough to
atte^pte any manner of thing, for ye auau^cement of the church, / which slew
not long ago the cardinal of Papia with his own hand, for my pleasure but as
for his daughters husband is contented well enough.


Pet. What here I? Has also the hye bishops wives, and children?


Iul. They have no wives of their own, but what strange thing is it for them
to have children / since they be men as other be, and no geldynges?


Pet. But tell me what caused that scismatyke counsel.


Iul. It were very tedious to recyte all from the first beginning, therefore I
shall touch the affecte as briefly as I can.

Certain persons began to wax weary of ye court of Rome, they reported, yt al
together was corrupt with fylthy lucre. With prodigyous, and abominable
lechery. With preuy poysonynges / sacrilege / murdre / symony / and other
unlawful marchaundyse. They said also, that even I my self was a symoniake /
a dronkerde / a buggerer / puffed up with a worldly spirit. And all to gyther
such a one, that has vnthryftely occupied ye rowme / and to the great
confusyon of all the christianyte. And so these matters out of frame must be (in
gods name) redressed, by a general counsel. They said thereto, yt I was
sworn to so^monde a general counsel wtin two years after I took my honor /
and yt upon this condicyon I was made pope.


Pe. But was it truly said?


Iul. Yea, it was troth in deed. Nevertheless I losed my self from yt oath /
when I thought most expedient. For what is he that will doubt any thing to
swear a main, to come to such a botye? Godlynes may be reuere^ced otherwise /
as one Julius / such an other as I am / was wont to say most elegantly. But
mark the boldenes of these loselles: and se to what point the matter came.
Nine cardynalles shronke from me at ones. They showed me they would have a
counsel, and cyted me to be there / and prayed me to sit as resident or judge.
When they could not bry^ge me to the point / they sent out a general
commandment every where, by ye auctoryte of Maxymilian the emperor / and
also by the auctoryte of Jews the french king, the.xij. of that name,
^ycause the hystoriens wytneseth, yt in times past che counsel was wont to be
so^moned by the emperors of Rome. I quake in speakinge it / how greatly they
indeuore them to cut asondre ye cote of Christ without any seame / which his
crucifyers left hole.


Pet. But was thou such a fellow as they reported the?


Iul. What matter is it, if I were? I was ye hye bishop. But I put case I were
more tyrannous than ye Cercopyans / more folysshe than Morichus / or most ass
in the world / yea more fylthy than a common synke / who soever keeps this
key of power, it is mete he be had in reverence, as Christ's vicare, and to
worship him as most holy father in god.


Pet. Ye, though he be an open mysdoer?


Iul. That forces not. But to be plain, it is not convenient, that he which
is in gods stead in earth / and represe^teth al hol^ly as it were a god among
men, should be rebuked, or evil spoken by of every vile fellow.


Pe. But ye common reason cries against this, that we should judge well of him
whom we se do openly evil, or say well of such as we perceive to be naught.


Iul. I am content, every man think what he list, so he say well, or else hold
their peace, For truly the bishop of rome may not be rebuked, no not of a
general counsel.


Pet. This is one thing I am assured of^ who soever is in Christ's stead here
in earth, ought to be as like to him in living as can be. And so likewise to lead al his life, leest any thy^g may be reprehended in him, or leest any
person (of his deseruy^ge) might speak evil of him. It is not well with popes
and bishops, if they be come to enforce and constrayne men, rather with
thretnyng than with good deeds to speak well of them, whom you can not lawde
without ly^nge^ whose greatest glory is, the const^ry^^^ seyle^ce of such as
thy^ke ^uyl of them. But answer me hereunto. I pray the may not the pope (yt
^e ^e a pestilent caytyfe, and a capitayn of mischif) be in no wise deposed^


Iul. Oh, wise man? who should depose him, which is ye highest of al?


Pe. Mary so m^^he y^ rather ought he to be put down. For the gr^^^e^ man, the
more myschief may he do. And to prove that, the law cyuile does not only
depose an emp^rour for his evil rulyng, but also wylleth hi^ to be put to death.
^, what an unhappy condition and sta^e is the church in, which must ^e
constrained to sustain a bishop of rome, doing what myschief soever he list,
and may in no wise bliss us from such a cruel tyrant.


Iul. That reason is naught worth For if the bishop of Rome might be put
down, it must be done by the auctoryte of a general counsel. yea, and beside
this, a counsel can not be holden without the popes consent / for else it is but a
conue^tycle, and no counsel. But if so be it be gathered in most due manner,
yet nothing at all may be ordained and decreed, but if ye pope be willing
thereto. Therefore ye next way I know to surpresse a pope is an absolute power,
whereby (if it should be tried) one bishop is able to do more than all the hole
counsel. Therefore it is euydent, yt he may not be deprived his patrimony for
any manner offense.


Pe. No? not for murdre.


Iul. No if he killed his fader.


Pe. Nor for aduoutry.


Iu. Enough of such words: Not if he had lain with his sister.


Pe. Neither for wicked symony.


Iul. No not for.vi.C. symonyes.


Pet. Not for poysonynge.


Iul. No, nor for no sacrylege neither.


Pe. Nor for blasphemynge against god?


Iul. I say no.


Pe. What if he had done all these together?


Iul. It forces not. For put thereto (if you will).vi.C. mo, and worse if thou
can feyne them, and join them all together / yet may not the hye bishop of
Rome be put out of his place, for them all.


Pe. Thou tellest me of a dignyte which I never herd of before / if he only
may be as noughty as he list, and no man correct him. And also a more new
unhappy case of ye church, if it may in no wise drive out so abhomynable a
monstre / but be co^streyned to worship and keep such a bishop, as no man would
suffer to keep his horses.


Iul. Some say that he may be put out for one thing alone.


Pe. For what goodness is that? For as for noughtynes, it can not, if these
things before rehearsed can be no causes.


Iul For heresy / and yet must he be openly conuycte. But that is but a fable /
and hurts him not a point / and this is the reason. For first of all, he may
at his pleasure abrogate the law, if he like it not. And again / who dare
accuse his highness of heresye? namely, being so strong in power, and having
so much aid. Moreover, if it chance him to be thyrst down by the counsel,
yet has he a good remedy, as to revoke his heresy, if yt he may in no wise
deny it. To make short, there be a thousa^de stertinge holes for to escape out
easyly at them, without he be all together a stock and no man.


Pe. But tell me by thy popysshe dignyte, who made all these goodly laws?


Iul. Who else but the bishop of Rome, wellheed of al laws. And yet may he at
his pleasure both abrogate and expound, wrythe, and wrest them how soever he
seems best, for his profit.


Pe. An unhappy pope by my truth, which may delude, not only a counsel,
but also god him self. Nevertheless against such a wretch as you have
described to me even very now. That is to say an open maintener of mischief / a
dro^kerde / a manqueller / a symoniake / a poysoner / a periurer / an
extorcyoner / an open buggerer. A counsel is not so much to be desired, as all
the multitude armed with stones to kyl hy^, as a common pestilence of all the
world. But go forth and tell me, for what cause thou abhorrest so much a
general counsel?


Iul. Nay, but first of al, ask this one thing of great princes of the world
/ wherefore they hate great semblees, and temporal parlyamentes. Sure ye cause
is, yt at the great confluence of so many honorable prelates, ye dignyte of the
pope is somthynge shadowed, and suffers some damage. And it fortuneth ever in
such semblees, yt they which be of great lernyng and judgment, their
co^ninge makes them bold to speak, such as have a clear cons^ience speak
more liberally than is expedient for us. And likewise some there be called to
great office and rule, which use their auctorite and power to the uttermost.
Among whom comes commonly many, which sore disdeyneth our glory. And at
their coming be of this intent, that they would pare away part, both of our
auctoryte and richesse. The worst of al is, that there sytteth neither better
nor worse, but he thinks yt he may speak lefully against the pope, by reason
yt he is one of the counsel, which else durst not ones say, buffe. Therefore I
knew never counsel yt chaunsed so well, but ye pope has had some of his
feathers plucked / whereunto you may bear wytnes thy self, oneles you have clean
forgoten, For although your counsel holden at Jerusalem, were but for tryflynge
matters, neither of hole empyres, and kings raunsoms, as ours be now. Yet James
was not afraid to add a great piece of his own mind, after you had given
sentence. As it is evident in ye.xv. chap. of ye acts. For wha^ you had
clean delivered ye Gentyles al together fro ye burden of Moses law, James
reasonyng after the, excepted fornycacion, cloked blood, and eating of things
offered to ydolles. Correctyng as it were thine or^ynaunce and power. In so
much that some there be at this day moved by this example, yt say, James had
the auctoryte of the pope, and not you.


Pe. Think thou than that the kyngly majesty of one high bishop is rather
to be preserved, and maintened in high estate and wealth, tha^ ye hole
multi^ude, and comynalte of the christen people.


Iul. Let every man provide ye most for his own singler profit and
advantage, we do work for our selves.


Pe. But and if so be yt Christ had do^e in likewise the same, than should we
not have had any church at all, whereof you bostest thy self to be only the
heed. And surely I do not perce^ue by what reason he which will be esteemed as
ye vicar of god, may enbrace a manner of living clean contrary But tell forth
now, by what pretty polycy and shyfte you dasshedest out of cou^tenau^ce ye
foresaid scismatyke counsel as thou call it.


Iul. Forsooth I will tell the truly, understand it well if that you can. First
of all Maxymilian the emperor, for so they do call him, likewise as he is very
tretable. And albeit yt he had so^moned by his solemn and accustomed
messagers a counsel. Yet notwtstandynge I led him an other way, by such
means as I will not speak of. Moreover I persuaded by a little pollycy certain
cardinals in such wise, yt they were glad to deny that thing before notaries
and wytneses, which they had confyrmed before by their open wrytinges.


Pet. And might yt be suffered?


Iul. Wherefore not, y^ the pope approve the same?


Pe. Than it recketh little of taking an oath, seeing he will dispense with al at
his pleasure.


Iul. Nay, to speak ye truth plainly, that was somewhat beyond good fassyon /
but there was no better shyfte to be made. Beside this, when I espied it would
come to pass, that by ye envy of the counsel I should in many places be thyrst
under fete, namely wha^ it was prouulgate, not to exclude me. But they prayed
me in the humblest wise to sit as resydent in the counsel. Merke what a pretty
wyle I found here, following ye trade of my predecessors. I likewise appeled
to the counsel next to come co^playnynge, and feynynge cause, yt neither the
time nor place which they appointed was conuenyent. And by and by so^moned a
counsel to be kept at Rome. where I supposed none other would come, but Julius
friends, or y^ would be entreated, for so I learned by many examples. And in all
haste to this purpose I created many such cardinals, which I thought mete for
to bring my matters about.


Genesis That is to say of the most unthriftiness,


Iul. And again this counsel, oneles it had been so^moned by me, had been no
counsel at all. And yet for all that, it was not greatly expedient for my matters
yt such a company of bishops / and abbottes should come thither. Among whom
it could not be thought, but that some should be godly and well dysposed
persons. Therefore I gave them warning to spare their purses: and every
country should send but one or two at the uttermost Notwtstandyng when I
perceived this deuyse scant sure enough / and yt those few of so many sundry
provinces should al together amount to over great a no^bre for me. I sent them
word about ye time yt they were preparing them to take journey, to defer
their coming for yt time. And yt ye counsel should be proroged unto an other
time. Feynyng for ye same prorogacio^ many probable and appare^t causes / and
again by such manner of pollycyes all luche things dashte. I preventing ones
again ye day prescrybed held a counsel at Rome / with such alone as I provided
for the same intent. Among whom also if there was any yt durst be so bold to
desent fro me. yet I was sure yt ye proudest of the^ al durst not resist me. I
was so far above them al in artillery and soldiers. Now I brought this
scismatyke co^uentycle of France in such hatred, by this manner that follows.
First I sent out letters against ye counsel which was kept in France, to
every country / where I made mention of our most holy counsel holden at Rome,
cursynge their counsel / calling it oftentimes, the co^uenticle of Satan /
the deuyls parlyame^thous / a co^spiracy of scismatikes, against ye holy
church.


Pe. I think those cardynalles, which were the authors and doers of yt wicked
counsel must needs be false traitors.


Iul. As for their falshode I let pass. But the chief captain of all this
besynes, was the cardinal of Roan, who ever applied him self (by what a
popish holiness I wot not) to redress the manners of the church, and likewise
showed his tender love in diverse places / but death happily took him, to whom
succeeded a spanyshe cardinal, a good liver, well aged and a doctor of diuynite,
which people be wont to be unfriendly to ye popes of Rome.


Pe. But had your man, which thou namest to be learned in diuynite no probable
reasons to lay for yt which he did.


Iul. Yes, to many. For he said yt there was never so unquiet a world as it was
at those days. And yt the church had never more need to have her sykenes
cured and healed. And therefore (he said) it was my duty to help it with a
general counsel. Also that I had taken mine oath at my ^reacyon, to so^monde it
within two years after. Yea, so to be bound by virtue of mine oath, yt I might
in no wise be dispensed therewith. No not by the consent of the collleyge of
cardinals And yt it had been often put in remembrance of my brethren ye
cardynals, and instantly desired. Also often instaunsed by great princes / and
how I could in no wise here of it. In so much they said, yt every man might
se, as long as Julius was living, there was no lykelyhode to have any
counsel. Thereto they alleged against me the examples of ye counsels holden by
our predecessors, to bind me thereto. And alleged moreover certain auntike
laws, to prove that I and mine adherentes did refuse a connsel. And thereupon yt
the very auctoryte to let call it did pertayne unto them. But for so much as
other princes did also (for the popes pleasure) wink at the matter / yt than
the auctoryte to somonde the counsel did rest only in the emperor of Rome,
the which was wont in time past to command it at his own will. And to the
fr^che king, which by ye title of most christen king was wo^te to bear a
stroke in the same.


Pe. But did this doctor and cardynall with his part takers use in their
writing to the no such fassyon as did become them.


Iul. No mary they / the vilaynes were wyser in this behalf than I wol^e they
had been. They handled the thyn^g of truth very abhominably with great sobrenes.
And they did not only refrain from evil words / but they did never so much
as named me, without an honorable preface desiring and prayenge me for saints
and souls, that I would (according as it besemed me, and for the performau^ce
of mine oath) sit as judge over the counsel / and help to cure the diseases
reignynge in the church. Nor a man can not think i^ what envy I was brought
by their meke and cold fassyon / specially because they saused al their
wrytinges in with holy scripture, whereby it seemed some well learned men were
procured for that purpose. They joined hereto ye co^mendacion of fasting /
prayer / watching with other good deeds, to the^tent they might the rather
thrust me down with the title of holiness.


Pet. Under what pretense dydest you tha^ so^monde a counsel?


Iul. Under as goodly as might be. I told the^ that I was minded, first of all
to correct the heed of the church, yt is to say my self. Than after the
christen princes. And last of al, ye hole cominalte.


Pe. Surely I here of a goodly pastaunce. But now I am desirous to here the
conclusion, of all together. And also it should please me well to here what the
diuynes in Sathanas parliament decreed.


Iul. Most miserable and abominable matters: my heart rises to ^eme^bre them.


Pe. But I pray ye may they not be spoken?


Iul. Forsothe not well / they be far worse than sacrilege, or heresy.
Against which if I had not set to my helpyng hands in time: yea both with wepon
and w^t, ye dignity of ye church had been clean cast down under foot.


Pe. I am with child for to here of them.


Iul. Yea, but I quake for to speak of them. These most ungracious wretches
went first about to bring the holy church (most flourysshynge now both
in domynions and inestimable rychesses) to her old beggary and miserable
pouerte wherein she was in the apostles time, and to bring the cardynalles
(Which in all worldly port, at this day passen fer all kings chrystened) to
some poor life. That bishops abbottes, and other prelates should live much
more scarcely, and to be content with few waytyng men and horses / and as some
say hoores. And that ye cardynalles should not so universally swalowe up both
byshoprykes / abbeyes / and benefices. And yt no man should keep two
bysshoprykes. And yt such priests as would heap benefice upon benefice till
they had vi.C. at ones / and care not if they might be suffered, should be
corrected, and be content with such a lyuinge as might suffyse a sobre and
honest priest. An other was, that neither pope / bishop / nor priest, should
be made for money, favor, or flattering service / but only for his pure
life. But if ye contrary should chance, that he should by and by be deposed.
Yea yt it was also lauful to thrust out ye pope also, if he were known an evil
liver. And yt dronken and lecherous bishops should be put from administracyon.
That prestes which were openly known hooremongers and mysdoers, should lose,
not only their benefyce, but also be gelded / with many such like (I am weary to
show al) which were only to lode us with holiness taking away our richesse and
dominion.


Pe. What was ordained against these in your holy counsel at Rome.


Iul. Me thinks you have an ill remembrance. I told the before that mine
intent was nothing else but under the pretense of a counsel (as the proverb
says) to drive forth one pegge with an other. My first syttinge was driven
forth with certain ceremonies, and auntyke customs, which pleased me well
enough, although they were nothing at al material. There were two sole^pne
masses, one of ye holy cross an other of ye holy ghost, as though that al
together should be co^duced and led by his holy inspiracio^. Than after was
made a goodly oracion, all to the lawde of my holiness. In ye next syttyng I
cursed as depely as I could those scismatyke cardynalles pronounsynge, as
dampnable, accursed, and heresy, all those things, ye which they had decreed,
or should decree. At the third metynge I did excommunicate or curse the realm
of France / and changed ye Martes fro the cite of Lions. And nevertheless in
the said interdiction, I excepted by name certain places of ye said realm. And
all this was to alyene and turn the hertes of al ye people from their king.
And to reyse some rebel and sedicio^ among themselves. And for to co^fyrme ye
same, I sent out ye curse under my bulls of lead, to such princes and
governors as I perceived propense and bowynge toward our pretenced factions
and sedicions.


Pe. But did they nothing else?


Iul. That thing was done which I desired, for if our devises be regarded I
know I have ye victory As for those.iij. cardynalles which were so styffe
against me in those noughty matters, I with all solempnite belonging thereto,
depryued their cardynalshyps. I have also given all ye pencions of their
benefices to other being friendly to me / so that they can never be restored to
them again. Themselves I have given to satan, much rather willing to brenne
them clean up, if I might catch them.


Pe. Mary, but yet for all that, if all be as you do say, the decrees of that
scismatical parlyament seems to be much more holy, tha^ is thy holy synod,
whereof I se nothing else at all, but tyrannous thretnynges / cursings / and
great cruelnes mengled with myschief and deceyte. And if so be that Satan was in
deed as thou say, the author of the said parlyament. Surely me thinks ye
devil goes more nigh unto Christ than ye sorry ghost, the holy ghost I would
say, whom ye bost the moderatour of your holy counsel.


Iul. Nay but take good head what you say. For in all my bulls I have cursed
al such which favors by word or deed that same false conuentycle.


Pet. Oh, caytife / he is yet ye same old Julius. But what was the ande of
this besynes?


Iul. In this case I left it, whereto it shall come let fortune rule.


Pet. Truly the scisme remains still.


Iul. Ye mary I warrant the, and yt most peryllous.


Pe. And had thou (being gods vicare) rather have so horrible a scysme
than a true counsel.


Iul. One scysme quod he? by my mothers soul, a hundred such rather tha^ I
would be constrained to keep their ordinances, and to make them account of
all my life.


Pe. Thou know thy self so gilty.


Iul. What matter is yt to the?


Pe. It is surely so, the matter might well enough have been unmoved. But who
thynkest you shall have the victory?


Iul. All that is as it pleases fortune. Nevertheless we have more money in our
party, for as for France is now with long wars sterke beggered. England
which I suppose be my friends, has yet hills of gold untouched. But this I
may be sure of: If France have ye victory as god forfende, there must needs
be a great and horrible change. Than shall our holy counsel of Rome be called
ye conuenticle of satan, and I an ydoll of a pope. And the holy ghost is all
together theyrs / and we have done all ^y ye spirit of satan. But surely I
have yet great trust in my money, which I have left.


Pet. But what chanced than at the length against y^ french men and their
king, whom your pdecessours adorned and decorate with the title of most christian,
namely wha^ thou can not denay, but through their aid and help thou have
not only be socoured in thy poverty, but also exalted to this dignyte much
above any king or emperor, by whose aid you dydest recover Bonony with other
cities, and vaynqueshed the Uenicyens, never overcome before. But how chanced
the to forget all together so great kyndnes, and so lately done? broken so many
leages.


Iul. It were to long to tell y^ this tale from the beginning. But for to make
few words, I began nothing newly of my part, but yt which I was so long
before with child within my mind I began to attempt. Which thing I had also
(for lack of portunite, and many other causes) dissembled unto y^ time. For
troth it is, I never favored h^rt^ly the french nacyon. No More does any
Italyen en^tyerly favor any foreign nacyon (as we call them) any otherwise, but
as y^ wolf does the lamb. But I being not only an Italyen, but also a Ienuay,
did so long keep those rude people my fre^des, as I had need of their aid and
socoure, which hitherto was necessary for me. Where in the mean time I both
suffered, disse^bled, and imagined many m^^^rs. But as shortly as all my matters
were brought to such effect as I would have them / tha^ reimaned nothing but yt
I should show me what I was in deed. And thrust out the filthy forysters clean
out of Ytaly.


Pe. What manner of beestes be they which you call barbariens and forysters?


Iul. They be men as other be.


Pe. Be they men saint thou, and be not also christened.


Iul. And also christen men to. But what is yt to the purpose?


Pe. Ergo, they be christian men. But perauenture without laws and learning /
living ^^estly.


Iul. Without lernyng quoth he? Mary sir they excede us both in lerni^g and riches
/ whereat we do most envy


Pe. What means this word barbariens? Why spekest you not?


Ge. I will tell the, for he is ashamed. Ytalyens because they be begoten of
the vilest cast aways of al other nacyons, resortyng among them, being the
pumpe of all fylthynes: yet out of their gentyles learning, they conceived
such a furyous pride, as to call other country men barbaryens and forysters.
Which word is more heinous to the^ than to be called a murderer of thy
parents, or sacrilegian


Pet. So it appears. Nevertheless in as much as Christ dyed for all manner of
men, having no more respect to one man than an other. Forthermore in so much
as thou professest the to be ye vicare of Christ, wherefore than did thou not
favor alyke al them whom Christ has not forsaken, but redeemed with his blood.


Iul. I can be ce^tented to favor, ye even the yndiens / affricans /
ethiopiens / and thereto the greeks: if they would fortify me, and aknowlege me
their prince by some customary duties. But as for all these iij. co^ntrees we
refused and shaked of long sith / and next after the greeks, for because ye
wretches were so covetous, and would but litel reverence the popes power.


Pe. Than I se well that ye see of Rome is as it were the common barn of al ye
world.


Iul. A great matter surely, if we repe temporal goods of al men wha^ we be
ready to sow our spiritual sede to al men.


Pe. What spiritual sede do you tell me? For hitherto I here nothing of the
but fleshly sede / perchance thou drawest men with thy holy doctrine to Christ.


Iul. There be ynowe beside me, to preach if they will, which I do not
inhibyte, so long as they bark not against our power and profit.


Pe. What if they be ynowe. what thereof?


Iul. What? For what cause does the co^mens give to their heedes what soever
they do demand? but to knowledge yt they possess what soever they have by
license of their princes, yea though they received never of them one myte,
even so what soever ye profane sort has any where perteynyng unto godlynes,
yt must be imputed unto us, as our deed / yea albeit we do but slombre all our
life time. And yet also beside all this, we do give most large indulgences,
and pardons. And that for a very small so^me of money. And moreover we do also
dispense after the same wise, in great weighty matters. We give our holy
blyssynges, in every place where we come / yea and y^ all together Gratis.


Pe. I do not know, what so much as one of al these matters does mean. But
return again to the effect of the purpose. For what manner of cause did thy
holiness so much dispyse these alyens, and barbariens? as you call them. So
that you had rather set al on heaps, tha^ to suffer them still in Ytaly.


Iul. I will tell the. All these barbarous sort (but in especial the french
men) be very persticyous. And as for ye spanyardes dyffers not much from us,
neither in language nor manners: Yet notwithstanding I would have utterly exiled
them as well as ye other, to thentent that we might have used al together our
own fassyon, without any check.


Pe. Does the barbarous curres, as you call them, worship any strange gods
beside Christ?


Iul. Nay, but they worship him but to curyously. I^ so much that I do wonder
right greatly to se how grievously they be offended with a sort of old words,
the which of a truth in time past has been much accustomed amongst us but
as now they be clean left out of use.


Pe. But perchance they were some unthrifty words of coniuracyon.


Iul. Mary you may say yt again, for their manners were symony, blasphemynge of
almighty god zodomite / Intoxicacion, or poysoni^g / sortilege.


Pe. Peace man.


Iul. Nay, they abhor such matters, as much as thou do.


Pe. Well, as for such names I let pass, but the things self does so much
reign among you as I thy^ke in any country in the world.


Iul. Neither those barbariens are al without vice. But because they be infect
with other maladyes, they wy^ke at their own, and cry out upon ours. And we on
the other side do favor our own ded, and abhor theyrs. We esteem poverty
none other wise than a great offense, and to be eschewed of al men, though it
force not how. They contrary wise think it a point of a scarce good
christyan to habou^de in riches, though they be gotten without fraud or gyle.
We darre not so much as ones name dronkenshyp. Nevertheless the Almaynes
thinks it a light fault. yea rather a merry iape or pastau^ce tha^ offense.
Albeit we will not so much dyffer for this, if we agreed in all other matters /
they abhor greatly usury / nevertheless we think no manner men under heaven, so
mete for the church of Rome. As for buggery, they reken so detestable, that if
so be a man do but ons name it, they think both the air and son, by and by
enfected, and also polluted. But we Italiens be not al together of that mind.
As for symony whose name was long since gone and banysshed, they flee as the
devil does holy water / against which they had made certain laws, though
they be now out of use, albeit here in our conceyte is somewhat differynge / and
many such other they be infect with, which be clean contrary to our fassyo^ of
living. In so much tha^ as we be so contrary to them i^ our manner of life: so
much more necessary it is to keep them from knowledge of our secrets, The more
they be ignorant of our manners; ye more praise they will give us. For if they
ones knew the secrets of our court, they would surely utter them to our
rebuke. For how ever it fortune / they be somewhat quycke in reprouynge their
neighbors fautes. They write cursed bytynge books against the abusing of
some of their country. They preach and cry every where, that the sea of Rome
is not the sea of Christ, but rather the great pumpe of Satan. They dispute
of mine auctoryte and power, whether I came by ye popedom by reason of my good
living, or no. Also if I ought to be taken as gods vycar or not? And so first
of al by this means they dimynishe ye good opynion that the people had in us /
and so consequently abateth our authorite and rule. For before such
brabblinges, the people herd never other thing of us, but that we did bear the
rowme of Christ / and that we had the next authoryte to god / yea rather chek
mate with him. But by reason of such unprofitable opynions, ye church
susteyneth intolerable damage. For we utter now fewer dispensacyons, and
such other wares, and be feign to sell them better cheap. Also our rent and
casualtees is less leuyed of bysshoprykes / abbotshyppes / and other
benefyces. Yea and ye people pays with much worse will that which is required
of them. To be short, our rentes on every side decaieth, our fayers and
markettes waxes barayne. And that is most of all to be lamented, our dreadful
darts be less and less feared. But if their malipertnes come to such a
wylfull and beestly boldenes, that they dare ones say that the pope being
cursed of god, can hurt no man with his curse, and so dispyse cursings / than
it will shortly come to pass, that we shall surely dye for hongre, but if they
be kept farther of from reasonynge of such matters, and rather be brought in
fear of our curses. For than such is the nature of such stoborne lowtes, yt
they will have us in great awe and reverence. And so shall we with our bulls
and other instruments (if they be discretely handled) order al things as we
would have it.


Pe. It is an heavy case if thauctoryte of the pope and bisshops depend upon
this hasarde, only yt if their noughty living were known, they were even
utterly undone. For when we lived upon earth truly we coueyted nothing more
than yt all yt we did might be known, yea that which we did in our preuy
cha^bres. For we were most regarded when our lives were most manifest and
known. But one thing I pray the / be the princes so godly now adays, as
thou reportest them / or do they so much fear the priests: as to run one
upon an other, even at the beck of such an holy plate, as it might be
thyselfe? For in my time I remember well, they were ye extremest enmyes we had.


Iul. As touching their godly living, they be not (thanked be god) very
supersticious. And as to our honor they regard not very much / but makes us
their laughinge stocks, except some certain of spyced conscience / which so
much fears our thondrebolte and curse / as though it could hurt them yt
deserved it not. And yet those same persons all together ignorant in the
nature of the thing, be only moved of a mad spyced conscience, rote^ by long
custom of time. Some there be likewise, which for the hope they have to come
to our riches / and some for fear of us, do give place to our dignyte. Other
there be yt think verily they shall come to an ill end, which in any wise
does hurt a pressed, what manner a liver soever he be. And most comenly all
men, the more gentylly they be brought up, the more they regard our
ceremonies: provoked thereto by such pretty feats as we have devised, but to
comen people they be as fables and disgysinges. Nevertheless we practice more
weighty matters by means thereof. For sometime we paynte and set out the great
princes of the world with glorious tytles, calling him defender of the church,
an other defender of the faith, though it be nothing so, and al such as will
aid us, our well-beloved sons. They on the other side, call us in all their
wrytinges most holy fathers, and sometime they submyt them for to kiss our holy
fete. Now and than in things of no estimacyon give place to our power, to the
intent they might be called virtuous princes. We send to some hallowed roses /
cappes of mayntenaunce / swerdes, and such other. And also long and large
bulls to confyrme their dignyte. And they send again to us fair coursers /
men of war and money / yea sometime fair young children. And thus one of us
claweth an other, as mules be wont.


Pe. If they be so spyced conscience: yet I do not well perceive how thou
sholdest so sone styre the^ up to so great wars, saying thou have broken so
many truces with them.


Iul. Yet if thou be able to perceive these things which I will tell the you
shall perceive a co^ueyau^ce far above any of thappostles.


Pe. Say on I will do my best endeavor.


Iul. First of al my study was ever to know ye natural i^clinacion of al
countries: but namely of princes and rulers, and in likewise their co^dicyons,
affections, power, and endeuermentes / which of them were friends, and which
not. And so to use every and singular of them to our co^modite and profit.

And to begin withal, I raised the french men against the Uenyciens /
renewynge the old festred malice which had be betwyxt the^ long before /
perceyuyng moreover the insatiable lust of the frenchemen to amplyfy their
domynion, and that ye Uenycie^s did unjustly wthold diverse of their cities,
whereupon I intermedled my cause with theyrs, and so took a part with France
against the other, and so did Maximilyan also / although he favored them but
fayntly, not knowing any other means to redeem such fair towns as ye
Uenyciens wthelde from him. But shortly after when the french men began to be
more welthy, tha^ my will was, for (to say as I think) they had but over good
chance at that time. I not long after found means to reyse the king of
Spain (a man of no great constancy) against them. Whose profit it also
somewhat touched, yt the french men's feathers should be blucked, and yt for
diverse matters. But namely, leest it might be their chance to flee in to his
lordeshyp of Neaples, and put him out. And albeit I loved in no wise ye
Uenyciens: yet for a face I made them my fre^des, to the end I my might set them
upon the french dogs. Which Uenyciens were not long before sore vexed of
the french men. And again I made the emperor and them twain, whom a little
before I had made all one. This I brought to little, with certain of my letters to
the emperor, wherein I feyned the kings envy against the emperor, and partly
with money, which bears ever a great stroke with such men as have need. After
I had renewed again the festred wrath which Maximylian bare against the
french curres, wherewith ye man would have merueylously fret himself / yea
though he could in no wise revenge his cause. Over this I was perfyte of the
deedly enmyte between ye English men and the french men. Betwyxt the scotts
also and the french men. Moreover I perceived the english nacyon very
welthy, ferce, and desirous of battle / and that specially where any thing is
to get / and also somewhat supersticyous, for the far distaunce from Rome.
Finally they being somewhat wanton, half at sedicyon among them selves: so
that I thought it easy enough to encyte them against the french men. All
these pagyentes I played, for the auau^tage of the church. Than after I
wrapped the princes in deedly wars with my crafty letters: not leuyng so much
as one in all christendom vnattempte co the same. Neither ye king of Hongary /
nor yet of Po^tyngale / nor the duke of Burgony, a man nothing inferyor in
domynion to many kings. But because that matter perteyn^d nothing to them, I
could in no wise induce them to i^uade the french men. But one thing I
perceived well, yt if the other princes fell ones by the ears together, they
should not be in quyetnes. Now these princes which by my practiced polycy made
war one against an other received of me again for their good service glorious
tytles, to the end they might be brought to believe yt the more christen blood
they shed, ye more godly they appeared to defend ye church of god. But that you
may the more commend my clean conueyaunce and happy chance / the same time
it fortuned the king af Spain held wars with the Turks, which turned to
his great co^modyte, and profit. Yet he leuynge all together came down with all
his power to aid me against the french men. And although I had incitate the
emperor against the^, as I said before / yet was he other wise bound by
diverse co^posicyons, between him and me. Albe it that he (by their manyfolde
benefytes and aid) had won again his towns in Ytaly. And beside all this,
that he had much to do of his own / as to socoure his neuewe ye duke of
Burgony, against his mortal enmy the duke of Gelders. Yet I brought to pass
that he left his neuewe in ye briars: and took upon him (for my pleasure) to
war agay^st France And farthermore although there be no nacyon that passes
less upon the authoryte of ye pope of Rome, than ye English nacyon, as it is
open to him that list to read and merke well the life of saint Thomas of
Cauntorbury, and the co^stitucions of ye old kings. Yet the same prouynce, so
impacient of all exactions and taxes, suffered for my pleasure to be shorn to
the bare skin. To speak of ye spiritualty of yt realm, it is wonder to se
how they were wont to wtholde from ye pope of Rome all they might, yet to
aid me in my besines were contented to pay exactions how paynfull so ever
they were. Not merkyng very dilygently what a wyndowe they opened to their
lord and king, in so doing. And to speak ye blunte truth the king and his
nobylles was not than most cyrcu^specte to suffer such exactions to be
gathered in his realm. But to show by what crafts I bronght these christen
princes one against an other it were very tedious. Which princes no pope
before me, could at any time styre up against the Turk.


Pe. It may chance that wars thus kyndled by the, may destroy all ye world.


Iul. Let them brenne on hardely, so the dignyte and possessions of the sea of
Rome may be kept safe. Howbeit I did all my devour to rydde the Ytalyens from
all wars / and to cast all the besynes on the necks of other strange
nacyons. Therefore let them strive as long as they list, we shall give them the
lokynge on, and laughe them loudly to scorn.


Pe. Be these ye acts of a good shepeherd, or of a most holy father, taking
on him to be called the vicare of Christ?


Iul. Why should they than cause a scysme in the church of god?


Pe. Sin must than be suffered, if more hurt depend upon the medicyn than
remedy. But and thou had suffered a counsel to be, there could have been no
scysme.


Iul. Speak no more of that. I had lever have.vi.C. batayls than one counsel.
For what I pray you, if they had put me down, as a symoniake and a merchant of
spiritual wares, and not the true vycar of god? What if so be they had vttred
my life to the common people people?


Pe. Admyt thou were never so good a bishop, yet were it better thou lost
thine honor wrongfully, than to keep it in such wise as it is to ye great
hurt of al christendom, if it may be said a dignite, which is bestowed to a
very w^etche / but I should not call yt given which is but rather sold, yea
rather stolen. But it is comen even now unto my mind, that by the prouysion
of god thou haste ben his scourge to the french men, the which first of all
brought the a peste and plage in to the church.


Iul. I swear by my tryple crown, and by my glorious tryumphes, if thou break
my pacyence, thou shalt feel mine omnypotent power.


Petrus. O mad Bedlem, what crakest thou of thy power, when I here nothing
else hitherto, but an vnpreestly and worldly capytayne. Thou gloryest that
thou art able to break peace between princes / to cause batayles / to cause
them murdre one an other, which power belongs to the devil / not to Christ's
vicare, to whom it behooves to follow as nyghe as can be his example. There is
in him (I grant) an hye power as can be, but such a power as ought to be
joined with most high wisdom, and knowledge of gods word / and thereby at all
times ruled. There ought to be in him the wisdom of serpents: but withal
must be joined the simplycite of a douue. In the surely I se the image of
power, coupled with great malice and folishnes: so that if the devil would
make a deputy, he could choose none more mete than one like to the. Tell me if
thou can, wherein thou did ones fulfill the office of a true apostle?


Iul. What can be more apostolyke than for to encreace the church of Christ?


Pe. But if the church of Christ be as it is in deed / the christen people
conglutynate and united in Christ's spirit, than me think you have al together
subverted this co^gregacyon, in mouyng all the world to these most cruel
bloodsheddynges / to the intent you might pass thy life in all mischyef without
any correction at all.


Iul. We call the church the temple which is made with man's hand, and the
priests also but in especyall the court of Rome, and me namely, which am the
heed of the church.


Pe. But Christ made us minysters, and himself the heed, except any other
heed be spronge out of late, because one is not ^uffycient / But wherein is the
church so much amended?


Iul. Now thou co^mest to the matter / this I will tell the / that same hongry
and poor beggary church floryssheth now with all ornaments.


Pe. With what ornaments? With a sure faith in Christ.


Iul. Yet again thou plaist Jack ouerth warte.


Pe. With holy prechyng?


Iul. Thou make me weary of ye.


Pe. With contempt of worldly things?


Iul. Tusshe, let me speak. I say it is garnisshed with such as be worthy to be
called true ornaments: for these which you spoke of be but words.


Pe. With what orname^tes therefore?


Iul. With goodly palaces mete for kings / with many goodly horses and mules /
with great bonds of men following their tails / with armies well appointed.


Ge. With fair hoores and trusty bawdes.


Iul. With gold / purple / customs / so that there is no king, but he might
be counted as a beggar, if he were compared with the richesse and pomp of the
pope. Never a man so ambicyous, but he grant himself overcome in this
behalf. No man so welthy, but he may give us over hand. Neither any so great
gaynes, but he may grudge at our riches. These be ornaments wherwt I have
endowed and amplyfied the church.


Pe. But now tell me who first infected and surcharged the church with such
orname^tes which Christ would have kept clean from al worldly fassions.


Iul. But what is that to our matter? We keep, occupy, and enjoy our
possessions, and that is the surest way of all. Howbeit some say that
Constantyne did give to Syluester the pope ye hole magesty of his empire: as
his horse and harneys / charyot / helmet / gyrdle / cote armure / his guard /
sword crown of gold / yea, and yt of the most pur^st gold. His hole army with
all manner of artyllery belonging to war / towns / cities / countrees / and
kingdoms.


Pe. And be there any sure specyaltees of this lyberall gift?


Iul. None, but sely gloses joined to the decrees.


Pe. Peraue^ture it is but a fable.


Iul. That I conjecture my self. For who is he in his wit that would give so
worthy an empire to his own father? but it pleases ye church of Rome to give
credence here unto / and put to scylence all that endeuoreth them to refell
these.


Pe. Yet I here nothing saving worldlynes.


Iul. Truth it is, for thou dremest yet of the state of the church as it was
in thy time / wherein thou with certain hongry bishops dydest live very
nedyly, subject to pouertye, sweet, perils, and infynite ieopardyes, and
dangers / but now process of time has changed it to better. The pope of
Rome is an other manner man now, than he was tha^ / as for thou wast but a
syphre in augrym. What if thou dydest se so many su^ptuous temples / so many
thousa^des of fat benifyced priests / so many bishops / which may be fellows
(both in their cychesse, and power) to kings. Such a sort of fair houses
belonging to prestes / specially if thou dydest se at Rome so many purple
cardynals waited upon with legyons of servants / so many palfreys passing
far any kings / so many mules trapped with velvet, gold and perle, and some
of the^ shod with silver / some with gold. Now if thou dydest se the pope him
self, sittyng on high in a chair of clean beaten gold, and carried upon men
sholdres / and how all men fall down on their knees at ye waggyng of his
finger / the noise of the hagbusshes, the melody of the shawmes, and trumppes:
the clappynge of hands of the people / the showttynges / all the streets
shynynge with torches / and how hardely the great princes of the world shall be
admytted to kiss his blyssed fete. If thou had seen the same priest of
Rome setting a crown of gold upon the emperors heed with his fete /
notwithstanding he is the highest of the worldly princes (if laws written for
the same be of any authoryte) howbeit he has not much more of that which he
should have beside the shadow and ^ytle. These things I say, if you had
herd and also seen, what would thou tha^ say?


Pe. I would say, I did se a deuyllysshe tyrau^t, ye enmy of Christ / and
pestyle^ce of the church.


Iul. Thou would say other wise, if thou had but seen one of my
tryu^phes. Whether it had been yt wherein I was carried in to Bonony / or such
one as was at Rome, after I had overcome the Uenyciens / or at my departing
from the said Bonony to Rome again. Either that same which I caused to be made
at Rome last of al, at the time when so many french men were slain at the
syege of Rauen^a, above al lykelyhode / and in manner possibylite. If you had
seen the goodly bond of men, all at ones in array / ye good palfreys / so great
an army all in complete harneys / their capitaynes so well appointed / so
goodly a sight of fair and amyable boys / the torches and cresettes brennyuge
in every corner / the costly purueyaunce for bankettynges / the pomp of
bisshops / the great and lusty port of cardinals / the glorious monumentes,
and tokens of victory / the raunsomes and spoils gotten in wars / the cry and
showte of the common people, and of the men of war / the joy of them, and
noise of their speech and feats / the melodye of ye shawmes / the tho^dring of
drommes / the bounsynge and crackynge of hagbusshes / the plenty of money cast
among the people. And if thou had therewith seen my holiness, the heed and
author of all this goodly pomp, carried upon men's sholdres in a chair of
gold, as though I had been god himself / thou would count the tryu^phes of
both ye Scipions Emilians, and all the emperors, but very beggary, in respect
of my majesty.


Petrus. Oh, most gracyous knight, you have rehearsed ynowe of thy chymiryng
tryu^phes / in so much yt I utterly dispyse al those hethen princes, which
your holiness has vouched to me in comparyson of you, which most like an holy
father in Christ have caused so many glorious tryumphes. Forthermore of so many
christen men slain for your gracyous pleasure, your grace being the author and
causer of the slaughter of so many legyons / never wan yet so much as one
poor soul to Christ, neither with your preaching nor living. O, most fatherly
love. O worthyest vicar of Christ, which contented to bestow thy life to save
thy flock / or else carest not for ye mayntenau^ce of one pestyle^t caytife, to
destroy ye hole world.


Iul. Well, I se now you speak all this, because you enuyest my glory / and
specially when you remembrest how poor and beggarly a bysshopriche as thyn was
in respect and comparison of mine.


Pe. How dare thou most shameless wretch, compare and liken thy glory with
mine, which is yet not mine, but rather Christ's. F^rst of al, if thou will
grant me that Christ is ye best, and the very prince, and souerayn he^d of the
church, tha^ is all thy pompous glory not o^es to be compared to mine. For he
in his own person gave me ye keys of his kingdom / that is to say, authoryte
to preach his law and gospel / and committed unto me his sheep to be fed. He
co^me^ded my faith with his own mouth. But as for you art come to dignyte by
means of thy money / by parcyall favor of men / through deceyte and subtilte.
If a man so promoted may have ye name of bishop, I have won to Christ by
preaching gods word many thousa^des of souls / but you with thy abhomynable
living, have brought innumerable to confusyon. I taught Christ to the Romans,
living before in all gentylite / but thou have ben to the same Romans a
teacher of all gentylyte, and falls worshippynge I healed such as were sick,
with the ^hadow o^ my body. I delivered men being possessed with deuyls /
restored the deed to live. And in every place yt I came I was benefycyal to all
men. What like I pray ye were done in all thy tryu^phes? I could with my word
deliver whom I list to Satan. The experyence whereof thou may se in Saphyra
and Ananias her husband / the fyfthe of the acts. Moreover what power soever
I had, I spent it to the profit of every man. But thou was ever so
unprofitable to all men as thou might be. Ye, what was that thou might not do
to the common confusyon of al ye world?


Iul. I wonder why thou do not recyte among thy other honors, thy beggary
and watchynges / traueylinges / enprysonme^tes / fetterynge / thy checkes and
rebukes / beatynge, and scourgyng, with such like promocyons.


Pe. Thou reme^^rest me in good time. For herein I have more cause to glory
than in any miracles. For Christ him self has command us to rejoice and be
g^ad in these things / and pronounces us all blyssed, which pacyently
suffers them. And so likewise Paul sometime my fellow, in the.xi. chap. of his
second epistle to the Corynthiens, bostyng as it were to them his valyau^t
acts / neither so much as ones reme^breth any towns won by force of arms,
nor legions of men, slain with ye sword / neither how many princes he provoked
and moved to war / or any tyrannous or cruel statelynes / but rather the
dangers which he was in upon ye see, his enpry^onme^tes, his whippings, and
scourgynges, the peryls of false brethren. These be the tryumphes of a true
apostle. These be those things which a captain of Christ should glory and
rejoice in. He bosteth how many he has begoten in Christ / how many he has
withdrawn from wyckednes and ungodly living / and not (as thou do) how
many.M. duccates he has heaped together. Wherefore we now make everlasting
tryumphes with god in heaven / honored and praised both of good and evil. But
contrary wise, as for the, every man curses, onelesse he be like to thy self,
or else such as flater the.


Iul. I never herd of such rekenynges before.


Pe. I think ye same. For how sholdest thou have any time to read over the
holy gospelles, and the epystles (which my brother Paul and I did write) being
always besyed about so many i^bassades, so many legeys, accomptes, so many
armies and tryu^phes. The study of scriptures requires a mind void of al
worldly cares. The discyplyne of Christ does also require a breast clean purged
from ye spotte of all worldly besynes. Thou may be well assured that so great
a doctor as Christ was, came not down from heaven to teach us any vulgar or
common learning. The profession of a christen man is no idle time, nor without
cares, as to despise all pleasures as things venomous / and tread riches
under thy fete as thou wylt do a clot of clay, to set nothing by this life in
gods cause and thy neighbors. This is the professyon of a true christyan. But
for because these things seem intolerable to such as be not governed with
the spirit of Christ. Therefore they deflecte and torn them away to vain and
unfruitful ceremonies / and unto such a Christ and heed, feyned by themselves,
they countrefeyte a like body.


Iul. What good thing than do thou leave me, if thou take away my money /
depryue me of my kingdom / spoil me of mine honor / and bare me of pleasure.


Pe. By this reason thou countest Christ himself a very wretch / which
although he was lord over al together, yet was made a common laughing stock
/ ledyng all his life in poverty / sweat / fasting / hungre and thurst / and
finally dyed a most heinous death.


Iul. He may perchance find some yt will commend his life, but surely he
shall find none now adays that would follow it.


Pe. Nay not so, for ye very praise of his life, is the following of ye same.
Albeit troth it is yt Christ does not bereue any of his their good. But for
such things as are falsely called good / he enrycheth them with the true and
eternal riches / which he does not before he have purged and take clean away
their flesshly appetytes. For even like as he was all together heavenly, so his
will is to have his body / that is to say the congregacyon of christen men knyt
together in his spirit, to be in all things most like to him, that is to
wit, clean purged from all spots of worldlynes. For else how can he be all
one with him which sytteth in heaven most glorious and shynynge, if he were
drowned over the heed in worldly fylthynes, and dregs. But when he is ones
purged from such pleasures, which be rather displeasures / and moreover from
all worldly affections. Than at the last Christ shows forth his incomparable
treasures, and gives unto his a most sweet taste of his heavenly joys, for
their voluptuous pleasures of this world, ever mengled with a sour sauce.


Iul. What pleasures I pray the.


Pe. Esteemed thou the gifts of prophecy, entrepretyng ye scryptures / the
gift to work miracles: but as common gifts, and no pleasure? Moreover
supposest you Christ him self but as a vile person / whom who soever has has
in his possessyon all together? Finally, one^es thou think yt we here in this
place do lead a miserable life.


Iul. Ha, ha, ha. Than I se well, ye more wretched life that a man does live
in the world / the more delycately he lives in Christ / ye more beggarly a
man is here, the rycher he is in Christ / the more abiecte that a man is here,
the higher and more honorable he is in Christ / the less he lives in this
world, the more he lives in Christ.


Petrus. It is surely so / that Christ will have al his body be pure and clean
/ and namely the mynisters of his word / that is to wit the bishops. And
among them the higher he is, ye more like he ought for to be to Christ and the
less ouercharged, and forther from all carnal pleasures. But now I se clean
the contrary, that he which will be esteemed highest in dignitees / and next of
all to Christ himself, is most of al overwhelmed in all worldly filthynes / as
in riches / domynyon / strength of men / batayles / truces. As for all other
vices. I let pass. And although thou be never so contrary to Christ /
nevertheless thou abusest the title of Christ, for the mayntenaunce of thy
deuyllysshe pride / and under the pretense of him which despised the kingdom
of this world, thou playest the worldly tyrant / and being the right enmye
of Christ, thou requyrest the right honor dew unto him. Thou do bliss
other, thy own self being cursed of god. Thou take upon the to open the
gates of heaven to other men, from whens thou art now thy self exclude. Thou
consecrates^ other / thy self being vnconsecrate? Thou excommunycatest other
/ thy self having no co^munyon or part at all with god or his holy saints.
Tell me wherein thou dyfferest from the great Turk, save only because thou
allegest the title of Christ / for clearly your ente^tes and minds are both
one, your beestly lives both like: saving thou art the greater morreyne of all
the world.


Iul. Wherefore say thou so, seeing mine intent has been ever to endote the
church with all kind of goods? But there be diverse which says that
Arystotle spoke of three manner goods / whereof some be called the goods of
fortune / other some goods of the body / and the rest goods of the soul.
Wherefore I not willing in any wise to inuerte and transpose this diuysyon of
goods, began first of all at the goods of fortune / and perchance should
have come by little and little to the goods of the soul, if that death
coming the sooner upon, had not to rathe have taken me out of this world.


Petrus. Uery rathe in deed, for because thou art but three score years old
and.x. But what deed were it to mengle water with the fire?


Iul. Well, but and if these co^modytees lack, the common people will not set
a straw by us: Where as now they both fear and worship us. Which if they
did not, the church of god should soon decay, and be ouerronne, onelesse she
could defend her self against the vyolence of her enmyes.


Petrus. It is nothing so, for if the poor christen people could espy in the
and such other, the very gifts of god, as good living, wholesome doctrine,
brennynge charity, the true enterpretyng of gods word, with other virtues
requysyte to the true vycare of Christ / yea, and they would the rather worship
the, because they perceive the pure and clean from all worldely and ^uyll
affections. The common welthe of all christendom should much ye better
increase, if such priests might reygne which (with their sincere living,
their utter despisyng of worldly pleasures / riches / dominyons / yea, and
death if need were) would move both the ygnoraunt people, and also them which
has not received the faith to marueyle at their godly conversation. But now
christendom is not only contracte and brought in to a little angle, but also
if thou look nerely, thou shalt find a great nombre of those few that be
christened in names only. But tell me I pray the, dydest thou neu^r so much
as ones consydre in thy mind when thou was the high shepeh^rde of the
church, how it began, and by what means it was augmented / and also whereby
it was establysshed / whether with blody batayles / great treasours / pa^frayes,
and such other. Surely it was nothing so, but rather with pacy^ence / blood
of martyrs, as mine and other / with pacyent suffrynge of enpryso^m^ntes, and
other paynfull beatynges. But thou call ye church enryched when the
ministers thereof be even laden with worldly domynion. Thou call it garnysshed
and adorned, when it is polluted with gifts and pleasures of the world. Than
thou call it defended when all the world lies by the ears for the rentes
and ammities of priests. Thou say it flouryssheth, when it is dronken in
voluptuous pleasures. Thou say it is in good quyetnes / when no man dare
speak agayn^t it. And it habou^deth in welthynes, or rather in vice and
noughtynes / but this have thou taught the uexyble princes of the world,
which blinded with their noughty learning, does call their great robberyes,
and furyous bataylles, the def^nce of Christ's church.


Iul. To this day herd I never such things before.


Petrus. What did the preachers than teach the.


Julius. I herd nothing at all of them, but high co^mendacions / thondrynge
out my great virtues and praises / with painted words, calling me the great
Iupyter, which caused all the world to quake, and fear with my thondrebolt /
yea, that I was a very god, the co^m^^ health o^ all the hole world / with
many moo.


Pet. No maruayle at all truly, though none of them could season the, seeing
thou was but folys^he, and unsavory salt. For the office of the true vycare of
Christ, is to preach and teach him purely to the people.


Julius. Will thou not than open the gates?


Petrus. To any other rather than to such a pestylent wretch. For to the in
thy conceyte, we be all no better than exco^munycate persons. But wylt thou
have a good and profitable counsel? Thou have a company of worthy warryours,
innumerable richesse / thy self a wise buylder / therefore go build the a new
paradyse, but take heed it be well defended, that it be not beaten down of ill
spirits.


Julius. No sir. I shall do a thing that shall please me a little better. I
will tarry a few months, till my company be better increased, and stronger /
and than I will return and drive you clean out of this hold with strong
hand, unless you will yield you unto me. For I doubt not but within a short
space here will be above.lx.M. slain in battle.


Petrus. O most pestylent wretch. O miserable church / but come hither
Genius, for I had leauer comen with the, than with this horrible monstre.


Genius. What say ye to me.


Petrus. Be all the bysshoppes such?


Genius. Of truth a great part of them / but this was the capytayne of all
myschief.


Petrus. Was it thou that moeued this man to so many horrible deeds.


Genius. No for god, it neded not. For he ran^e so hastyly of his own courage,
that I coud scarce over take him with any wings.


Petrus. Of truth I maruayle nothing at al, that so few comes to this
place, when so pestylent caytyfes be governors of the church.
Notwithstanding the poor blyn^e people I conjecture hereby: is not all
together incurable, that they give such honor to this foul stynkynge
wydraught, for the bare title of bishop.


Genius. It is matter in deed / but I must go strayghte away hence / for my
capytayne has becked upon me to follow him / yea, and for my long taryenge
has shaked his staff upon me, therefore I will bid you farewell.


The translatour to the reders.
THis Julius (good reder) reigned from the year of our lord.M.CCCCC. and.iij.
to the end of.ix. years and more, in such wise as appears in this dyaloge.
Which thing causes me often to marueyle at them that say, the Pope of Rome
(as they call him) can not err. For compare his life to the living of
Timothe, or Paul / and I suppose thou shalt find very little agreynge. But
Alas, in how miserable case were they which sat in the carte, when such a
pheaton had it to govern at his pleasure. Wha^ lykelyhode were betwyxte him
(whose study was to enchayne all the world in deedly malice) and them which
cried evermore, that we should love our enemies, and pray for such as do
persecute us. This Julius gave his blyssynge, to encyte one to kill an other /
where the hoole body of scripture teaches us pacyence. But if we consydre
this sore scourge wherewith god punished us so many years, it is high time to
submytte and humble our selves unto him which will give us to drink of the
water, not which the venomous Natryx has infecte with her poison: but such
whereof if we drink, it shall make in us a well of water, leapyng in to
eternal life: which Christ grant us all. AMEN.

Imprynted at London by John^ Byddell / dwelling in Fletestrete at the sign
of the Son against the Cundyte. The year of our lord.M. CCCCC. and.xxxv.

CVM PRIVILEGIO REGALI.




