A SVRVEY OF THE NEW RELIGION, DETECTING MANY GROSS ABSVRDITIES WHICH IT
IMPLIES.

Set forth by Matthew Kellison doctor and Professor of Divinity.

Divided into eight books.

Math. 7. Nunquid colligunt de spinis vuas, aut de tribulis ficus?

Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles?

2 Timothy 3. Vltra non proficient: insipientia enim eorum manifesta erit omnibus.

They shall prosper no further: for their folly shall be manifest to al.

Printed at Doway, by LAVRENCE KELLAM, at the sign of the holy Lamb. 1603.

Approbatio.
VISIS trium S. Theologiae Doctorum Anglorum testimonijs, quibus testantur hunc
librum cui titulus: A Survey of the new religion, a Rdo. D. Matthaeo Kellisono
S. Theologiae Doctore and Professore conscriptum, nihil continere, quod fidei,
aut bonis moribus aduersetur: sed plurima, quae ad fidem Catholicam
stabiliendam, and Sectariorum errores profligandos faciunt; dignum censui, quem
and ego calculo meo approbarem.

Astum Duaci 25. Julij 1603 Georgius Coluenerius S. Theologiae Licentiatus and
Professor: and librorum in Academia Duacena visitator.

TO THE MOST HIGH, AND MIGHTY Prince, JAMES the first, by the grace of God,
King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defendour of the Faith.
YOU will marvel peradventure (most dread Sovereign) how a Preeste,
whose very name has now of long time, been odious in your Realm of
England, dares be so bold, as to appear in the presence of so Mighty a
Prince, sitting in a throne of Majesty and terror, crowned with a Diadem
of greater glory then hitherto has stood upon the King of England his
head, and holding in his victorious hand a nevve Scepter, by which he
commands all the Bretaigne Islands, and like a Neptune, is Lord of the
Ocean sea, which honor was reserved for your sacred Majesty, the first King
James of England, the only King James of England, and the only King of
Scotland, and England. And it will seem strange unto your Highness, to see
one of my coat and condition, amid the congratulations of all the Princes of
Europe, saluting you with so long a Proeme; and even then when their
honorable Legates, have so great and so importaunte affairs, to communicate
unto your Majesty from their Lords and Masters, to intrude into your Chamber
of Presence, so rude a Messenger, and euil-spoken Legate of mine, who speaks
only by signs of written words, and demands audience in his masters
name, who is feign to send because he dares not come: not that he doubts of
your Graces Clemency, or his own Innocence, but because such as he is,
having been for so long a time, forbidden all access both to their Prince and
country, he dares not approach so near unto your Gracious prefence, though
he be assured, that you are as mild a Prince, as mighty, and now as
mighty, as any Prince of Europe. Yea, I may be thought peradventure, to
want both Face and forhead, who nether blush, nor ame abashed, to present so
great a Prince with so little a present, as is a book of Paper ill printed,
because in a strange Country, and as ill indighted, because by one who has
lived longer out of his country then in it; and even at that time also, when
all the Princes of the Christian world, present your Highness, with the
rarest and ritchest guiftes, which sea and land can afforde. But if it shall
please your Highness, to give ear to your lowest subject, he will not doubt
but to clear him self of all these three inciuilities, which maybe supposed
to have been by him committed, and he will count it noe small honor, to be
permitted to speak for him self, before so Potente a Prince, and dares avouch
it to be no dishonor for your Highness to stoop to so low a subject,
because Princes, who by ascending can mount no higher, as being in temporal
Jurisdiction next unto God, by condescending to their subjects, do arise in
greatness, because therein only, they are greater then them selves, in ouercoming
them selves. And from the first the Emperor Adrian will excuse me, who
commended unto Minutius his Proconsul of Asia, as a thing of importance, ne
nomen condemnaretur sed crimen: that the name should not be condemned, but the
crime. For, Tert. Apol^. c. ^.
says Tertulian against them that hated Christians, in whom they could find
no other thing to hate, but the name, christian, which they should have loved:
S^ nominis odium est, quis nominis reatus? quae accusatio vocabulorum? nisi aut
barbarum quid sonet, aut infaustum, aut maledicum, aut impudicum. If the name
he hated, what is the guilte of the name? what accusation is there of words?
unless they sound of barbarism, or vnluckines, or maledictio^, or unchasteness.
And therefore if Preest-hood be no offense, the name Priest, is deuoid of harm,
and if Preesthood be noe treason, a Priest in that he is a Priest, can be no
traitor: Unless we will accounte Christ and his Apostles traitors, who
were Priests, and the first Priests of the new law, and esteem after the
same manner, of all the ancient Priests both of England, and other countres,
whom Kings and Emperors have honored as their worthy, and have loved as
their most faith-full subjects; who were so far from being enemies to the
crown, that from their hands all Christian Kings almost, have hitherto
received their consecration, crowns, and Scepters. As for the second
supposed, or rather presumed inciuilitie, that is so far from deterring me
at this time, that I think now to be the very time, when the Legates of the
Kings of earth, in their Lords and Masters name, vvish you a long and a
Prosperous Reign, to salute you from the Great Monarche of heaven, whose
Legate I am, in that I am a Priest, though a miserable sinner, in that I am
a Man, and your Majesty's lowest subject, in that I am an Englishman.
Nether can I think, that the Legate of the great king of heaven, whose
Legacy you shall understand a none (your Highness will pardon such High
speeches, because it is the manner of Legates to use them, for their Masters
honor) shall be denied audience of your so gracious Majesty, when the
Ambassadors of the Kings of earth, who are but his Viceroyes, Lieutenauntes,
and Tenauntes at will, are hard withdraw so favorable a countenance, and such
attentive ears. And if I were never so base, yet is now the time of
Coronation, when it is lavvfull for your basest subject, to congratulate your
new and high dignity, and when the poorest man in the Realm has as good
leave to cry Viue le Roy, God save King James, as any noble manne or Pere of
your Realm. Nether is the third obstacle any obstacle at all: because
although my present be small and your personage great, yet to accept of a
subjects little present, is not to diminish, but to a grandize your Greatness;
because in that, you are greater then your self, and likest the Greatest, who
took in as good part the widow mite, as the ritchest Offringe. But yet I
would not have your Majesty to esteem of this my book, only as of a bare
bundel of papers; because I present you vvithall, that humble heart, and
sincere affection, which a subject can bear, or owe unto his Sovereign,
and with my affection, I offer my self as your Majesty's most lowly and
faithful servant; which is a guifte so great, be ye giver never so vile,
that ye great King of heaven requires, yea desires no more at our hands, but
esteems that we give all, when we give our selves, and that we give noe
little, when we give our All, be it never so little. Nether is my present it
self to be misprised, nether can it of such a Prince, because the book is
not my present, it is but the box, the present is that which it contains.
And if your Majesty demand of me what that is? I answer; not gold, nor
Iuorie of India, not rich, and orient pearl, for with such treasures your
England, like an India abounds; but it is that which is more vvorth, and
which your India only wants; and what is that? It is religion? the
worship of God, the Salvation of your soul, the safety of your Subjects,
the health of the body of the Realm of which you are the Head, the strength
of your Kingdom, the peace of your people, and the ritchest pearl of your
crown. This is the subject of my discourse, these are the contents of my
book, and this is my guifte and present, which amongst so many guiftes,
which by so many and so mighty Princes are presented unto your Highness, I
offer with all humility, hopi^g, yea persuading my self, that such a guifte
as Religion, can not but be grateful unto that Prince, who is the Defendour
of the faith, and Protector of Religion. And because this unhappy age has
been more fruitful then profitable, in devising of religions, in so much that,
as all is not gold that glisters, so now all is not religion, vvch is called
so; least I may be thought to offer Counterfeit for currante, and heresy for
true religion, it is the Catholic Religion (most noble Prince) which I
present, and which my book conteyneth, and by many arguments as occasion
serves, not only proves, but also conuinceth to be the only sincere, and true
Christian religion; and unmasking the new religion by a severe, yet sincere
Examination, declares it to be nothing else but error, and heresy, though
under the painted face of a Reformed Religion, it has deceived some part of
the world, and especially your little world, England; which the Poet chose
rather to call a world by it self, separated from the greater world, then,
a part or parcel of it; because like a (...) and little world, it contains
compendiously, and in a lesser room (which also is a grace) all commodities
and perfections, which in the greater are dispersed. But because I am more in
examining and refuting the new religion, then in confirming the old (because
the good corn grows easily, when the vveedes are extirpated) I entitle it
a survey of the new religion. And if your Majesty demand of me, why I
dedicate such a book unto you? I can not want an answer, because I can
not want a reason. Flauius Vegetius will tell your Highness, that it has
been ever the custom, to dedicate books to Kings and Emperors (as he him
self did to Valentinian The Elder) because (says he) nether is any thing well
bego^ne, unless after God the King favor it, nether do any things, beseem
Kings better, then books, who as they govern all, so if it were possible,
should know all. For as in the head which guides the vvholle body, are all
the senses, so a Prince, the head of the people, should be indevved with all
sciences; and as the Son, because it illuminateth the planets which under it
rule, and guide the inferior world, is replenished with more light then
they, so the King who is the Son of his own world and Kingdom, from whom
not only the people, but inferior Princes also, are to receue their light and
direction, should be illuminated with a greater light, and knowledge, then
any of his subjects: and therefore Cirus was wont to say, that he is not
worthy an Empire, who is not better, and vviser then the rest; which also in
effect King Solomon surnamed wise, affirmed, when he gave that wholesome
counsel to his fellovv-Kinges: Sap. 6.
Si delectamini sedibus, and sceptris (o Reges populi) diligite sapientiam, vt
in aeternum regnetis: If you be delighted in thrones and scepters (o Kings)
love you vvisdome, that you may reign for ever: and to signify this by an
Emblem, God him self gave his people for their first King, no other then
Saul, who was higher then the rest of the people, by the head and shoulders.
And seeing that your Majesty is not only a King, but a learned King also, as
by many monumentes of your rare vvitte, and learning, which the learned
admire, does plainly appear; to whom ought I of duty to consecrate this my
work, but to such a King, who for his authority, can protecte it, and for
his vvisdome, can Judge of it. Yea the very subject of my book which is
religion, seemed to require of right no other Patron, then your most Excellent
Majesty, who by office, and Title, are the protector of Religion, the
champion of the Church, and Defendour of the Faith. This common congratulation
also, not only of your own little world, but also of all the Christian
world, this universal joy, these triu^phes, these bonefyers, which the
frenchman calls feux de joy have moved and stirred me up, to show some
sign also of my affection and joy, vvhervvith my heart is so full, that my
toungue can not be silent. All reioise (most Gracious Prince) at your
Coronation, as though it concerned all, and the hope, which is generally
conceived of your Graces Bounty, has not only passed your seas, but the Alps
also. The world admires the svveet providence of the Almighty toward your
Majesty, who even from your infancy has protected you from many imminent
dangers, as though he had reserved you (as no doubt he did) for the crown
of England. The world expected either civil vvarres, or foraine invasions,
after the death of her Majesty of late memory, because the Heir apparaunt
was not named, and though all men had their eyes, and expectations, and
desires also, fixed on your Highness person, yet they feared that which they
desired, and hoped not without fear; and yet conscience directing your
Nobles, and God governing their conscience, without any blood shed, without
contradiction, yea with great applause of all, your Highness is placed
peaceably in your Regal throne; and vvch is rare, England was so inamoured
with your Princely virtues, and so moved by your undoubted Title, that she
sent for you, as for her loving spouse, and has betrothed her self so fast
unto you, that the death of your person, can not dissolve this Mariadge;
because her mariadge with your person, is the spousage with your noble
posterity. These great favors and benedictions of the Almighty toward
your Majesty, make the world to think, that God has culled you out for some
good purpose, and that your Highness to show your self grateful unto him,
will employ your self in some honorable service for that Church and faith,
of which you are called the Defendour: in so much that if the general voice
grounded only on the great expectation, which commonly is conceived of you,
were as true as common, I should not need at this time to be the Suppliaunte
for the freedom, and liberty of your distressed Catholics. And although
your Catholic subjects at home, have not yet obtained so great a benefit,
yet so rich hopes, and so firm confidence, do they repose in your Graces
Bounty, that from the first day of your reign, they hoped, that your Majesty
will prove another Moses, who shall deliver your Realms and Kingdoms, from
a worse then Egiptian captivity, I mean heresy, which makes the
understanding a slave to error, under a shovv of verity; yea that you will
be unto them another losue, who shall bring them to their land of promise,
the Catholic Church, which is the land of all Gods promises; and that
after a long famine more then Ievvishe, or Saguntine, not of body but of
soul, you shall be another Joseph, who shall store us by your vvisdome and
authority, with the spiritual provision of the true word of God, true
faith, and sacraments, by which the soul is nourished; Yea that you will
be another Constantine to appease the boisterous storm of a long
persequution, and to repair the ruins of the Catholic faith and Church of
your Realms, of England, Scotland and Ireland. And I also armed with the same
hope, and bidden by your Bounty, and constrained by necessity, to be bold:
in the name of all your Catholic subjects of whom I am the least; in the
name of the Catholic Church, of which I am a member and you a Defendour, in
the name of all Catholic Princes, yea of all the Christian world, which has
conceived such an expectario^ of your Gracious Goodness; in the name of the
Great King of heaven and earth, by whom you reign, and by whom you were
preserved and reserved for this Croune and scepter; that it would please your
Majesty, to cast a Gracious regard upon the great affliction of your loyal,
natural, and most anciente subjects, the Catholics of your Realm, and to
bend your most compationate ears, to their humble and suppliaunte petition,
who desire nether lands, nor liuinges, nor offices, nor pardon for offenses,
but liberty for their consciencee, whose restrainte they count more
grievous, then imprisonment, yea death of their bodies, and not to contristate
them with a heavy repulse, at this time especially, when even thieves and
murderers, are pardoned so Graciously. Our zeal toward Christ, and his
Church, the love of our Religion, the desire of the salvation of your
Majesty's Person of your loving Spouse, our most Gracious Queen, of your
Royal Children our Noble Lords, of your Kingdom also our dear Country,
moves us to desire your Highness, to restore wholy tha^ Religion, which
your Glorious predecessors maintened with Crown, Scepter, and Sword, as
for the defense the^ of, they were all sworn at their sacre^ Coronation. But
if it shall not stand^ with your Graces pleasure, to grant v^ so much, we
most humbly desire o^ our knees, liberty only of our conscience, and
Religion, which the nature o^ both requires, Nether (as we hope) will
your Majesty condemn us of to great presumption, for demanding that, which
has been so long denied us, because there is no Prescriptio^ against
conscience, when conscience is enforced and your princely Prudence well
perceives, that necessity on our part is importune, Bounty on your part
imbold^neth, and the Religion on your most Noble Progenitors part, for which
we plead, promises a Gracious grant For if it much skilleth, from what tre^
the graffe or fruit is taken, why shall it not much importe, to come of a
Catholic Race? True it must be, which the Poet says: Fortes creantur
fortibus, and bonis; Hor Flac.

Est in ^^uencis, est in equis, Patrum
Virtus, nec imbecillem feroces
Progenerant Aquilae columbam.
I grant that Religion is supernatural, and is not transfused with flesh and
blood, but infused by God, with consent of our will, and operation of Grace;
but yet children are naturally bent, to like of that in which their parents
have excelled. And truly, for zeal toward the Catholic Religion, almost all
the noble Kings of Scotland, which were your Highness progenitors, are most
famous; as the Valiant and noble Malcolmus, and the blessed saint Marguerite
his spouse, Histoire abbregee par David ^hambre.
King David who builded 15. Abbeyes, and erected 4. Bishop-rickes, James the
fourth your Great Grandfather, surnamed protector of the faith, James the
fifte your Grau^dfather, a most just King, and liberal to the poor; to omit
diverse others not only of Scotland, but also of England, yea and France also,
and namely that warlike and most Catholic House of Guise, to which you
are allied; but of all, your Glorious Mother is most renowned; who, as for
her goodly personage, she deserved to b^ Spouse to a King of France, and for
he^ Princely qualities and Royal blood, vva^ worthy a double crown in Earth;
so for her Zeal in religion, and more then manly Fortitude shevved for the
defense o^ the same at her death, She deserved the third Crown in Heaven,
called Aureola Martyrum. Is it possible then, tha^ your most Excellent
Majesty, beholding such rare virtue in your Mother should not desire it in
your self? Or tha^ you should not love to live in that Religion, for which
she loved to dye? I have hard of some that were belonging to her, and
entertained by her, when she was rather detained, then entertained in
England, that she spent many hovven in prayer, shed many tears of sorrow gave
great alms of charity, and used diverse means of providence, that your
Majesty might be made a Catholic, and amongst other She devised the means
that you should be baptized, Nicol Burn in his preface to king lames the sixth.
and confirmed by a Catholic bishop. That ran still in her mind, that was
deepest i^ her harre, and oftenest in her mouth, for that she fetched many a
sighe, and sighe^ out many a vvishe: and as living for thi^ she shed many
tears, so dying, no doubt, she offered no little part of her innocent blood;
which as it cries vengeance before God against her enemies, so like a
pleasing sacrifice (as we hope) it cries for conversion of your Majesty, and
your Kingdoms, to that religion, for which it was shed. So that, as saint
Ambrose said once to saint Monica, who was always praying, weeping, and
vvishing for saint Austines her sons conversion, who then was a Manichee;
Filius tantarum lachrimarum perire non potest, I may say of your Highness; to
wit, that the son of such a Mother, and Prince of such a Princess, and
Inheritour of such virtues, such examples, such tears, such wis hes, can
never perish, that is can not but be a Catholic. This her zeal toward
religion, these her desires and vvishes, these her prayers, and tears, and
above all, her Glorious Martyrdom; will ever be before your Graces eyes, to
move your heart, if not to admit wholy the Catholic religion, at least to
permit it, at least not to persequute it, which she loved her self so
well, and wished to your Highness, so heartily. And truly (most Gracious
Liege) such is our repose in your goodness, that if there were noe other
motives, then your Glorious mothers example, your Catholic subjects misery,
and your own innate clemency, we would not at all despair, of a grant,
of our petition; but seeing that, the thing we request, concerns not only our
good, but your graces honor also, and the true felicity of your Kingdom,
we hope confidently, not to suffer a repulse in that, in which your Highness
also has a part, and for which not only we, are humble suppliauntes, but
your self also, to your self, and for your self, are an Intercessour. And
first, he grant of our petition, shall be most honorable for your most
Excellent Majesty. King Lucius was the first king Christian of our Country,
and the first king, that labored in the conversion of it, with Pope
Eleutherius, by whose Counsel, and preachers which he sent, he extirpated
idolatry, and planted Christian Religion: and for this glorious fact, his
name and fame, is, and ever shall be, most renowned, both in heaven and earth.
King Ethelbert was ye second king, who by the means of Pope Gregory (by
Popes alvvayes countries have been converted) and twelve Monks of saint
Benedictes Order, the second time restored this Country again, unto the same
Christian, and Catholic Religion, the which by the inuasio^ of the Saxons,
was again become Idolatricall, and Pagane; and he is noe less glorious,
before God and men, for so honorable an enterprise. But if your Highness shall be
the third King, who shall again reduce this country to the same ancient
Religion, you shall be as much more glorious, and your name as much more
renowned, Th 2.2.4.10.4.6.
as heresy is worse then Paganism, and more hardly extinguished. William
the Conqueror, from whom your Majesty is vvorthilie descended, is reckened
amongst the Worthies of the world, and written in the list, and catalogue
of the most Warlike Kings, for that famous conquest which he made of your
little world. But if your Highness shall get the conqueste of heresy, your
honor shall be as far more greater then his, as the conquest of men's souls
and minds, is more glorious, then subdevving of bodies. In such a Conquest,
the war is Christ's, the victory is his and yours, the crown yours only,
not in earth only, but in heaven also. You have the occasion offered (o mighty
Prince) by which you may make your name and fame immortal, let not such an
opportunity pass; if you can atchieue so glorious a Conquest, as you can if
you will (because the body of your Realm will follovv the will of their
head) you shall be more Glorious then all the Kings of England before you. If
it please your Majesty, to set before your eyes, those Glorious Champio^s of
the Church, Constantine, Theodosius, Pepine, Charles, all surnamed Great, more
glorious for their victories over heresy and idolatry, then for conquestes of
Countries, more renowned for propagating the ancient Catholic Religion (for
it was not Lutheranisme nor Caluinisme which they promoted) then for
enlarging their dominions; you will easily perce^e, that it is much greater
honor, for your Highness to consorte with them, rather then with Constantius,
and Vale^s, those Ariane Emperors, enemies to that Church, which they
defended, and enriched, and Leo Isauricus, and Constantinus Copronymus, those
infamous Image breakers. And if you please to call to mind the Catalogue of
the noble Kings of England, Lucius, Ethelbert, Egbert, osvvald, osvvine,
Alfred, and many others before the Conquest, with William the Conqueror, and
so many Henry's, Edvvardes, and Richardes, after the Conquest, all your Noble
predecessors; so mighty in force, so rich in treasure, so noble of birth, so
fortunate in vvarres, so courageous in fight, so glorious in victories, so
wise in Government, so just in punishing, so mercitall in pardoning, so
upright in life, so zealous in Religion; who builte so many goodly
Monasteries, erected so stately Churches, founded so learned Colleges, enacted
so wholesome laws and wise statutes, and got so many, and so strange
victories in France, and other Countries, even unto Palestine; your Princely
vvisdome will easily see, that greater vvilbee your honor to ioyney our
self to these worthies, then to stand so nakedly accompanied, with three
only of your Predecessors, who have protected the new Religion, and ruined
what they have builded; vvherof the first was not wholy for the new
Religion, because by Parliament he enacted six Catholic Articles, and at his
death founded a Mass for his soul, the second was so young, that he was
rather ouerruled the^ ruled, the last was but a vvoeman: and though they
vvanted not Guiftes of nature, which might beseem princely authority, yet for
persequuting the Catholic faith, and follovving other paths then their
predecessors had trodden, their names are not eternized with that immortal
fame, which their predecessors have purchased by their Religious Acts.
Secondly (Redoubted Prince) the Catholic Religion will be greater security,
for you temporal State. For^ your Highness dare rely upon them who by
Religion, Call. l. 3. Inst c. 19. 14. l 4. ^. to 5.23. 27.
may disobey you^ Laws and Ordinances (as I have in my sixte book
demonstrated) much more may you put your trust and confidence in your
Catholic subjects, whom conscience and religion, byndeth to obedience. For
they are taught by Religion, that Authority is of God, 1. Pet. 2. Rons. 13.
and that in conscience they are subject unto it, and bound to obey kings,
though otherwise difficile and hard to please, not only for fear, but for
conscience also. And this obedience they give not only to Christian, but also
to Pagane Kings, such as all were, when saint Peter, and saint Paul
commanded us to obey them, E^. Eus.
We are taught (said saint Policarpe to the Proconsul) to give to higher
powers that honor which is dew to them, and not hurtful to us. Apol. c.
3. and (...) S. apula^.
We (said Tertulian to the Ethnikes) pray for the Emperor, and reverence
him next to God, and more then we do your Gods. To be brief, (as I should
be with a King, if the matter did not enforce me to be longer then I should
be) give us (says saint Austine) such Judges, such magistrates, Epist ^. ad
M^r ellinu^.
such soldiers, such subjects, as our Religion requires, and Princes shall
reign securely, and their kingdoms shall flouri^h more happily, then Platoes
common wealth. And because Religion, good, or badde, bears a great sway in
the rule of man's life; the Professors of the nevve Religion, must needs be
more prone to disobedience, and rebellion, then we; because Religion, which
serves for a bridle to us, is a Spur to them. Wherefore by Catholics, all
your Predecessors have been served with great fidelity, both in war and
peace: and your glorious Mother, if she were living in Earth, as she is better
liui^g in. Heaven, would not let to vvitness, what affection she has found
amongst the English Catholics, and would vvarraunt your Grace, that they
will never be false to the Son, who have been so true to the Mother. But
if your Highness doubt of our fidelity, we will bind our selves by
corporal oathe, to obey your laws in all temporal causes, and to defend your
Roial Person, your Dear Spouse our Gracious Queen, and your tovvardlie
Children, our Noble Lords, with the last drop of our blood: and this our
oathe we shall be contented to diuulge to all the Princes of Europe, yea all
the Christian world. And as your Grace may accounte of us as of your surest,
so not of your fevvest nor weakest subjects; for notvvithstanding this long
persequution, we are so many, Apalog. c. 37.
that as Tertulian said to the Paganes, of the Christianes of his time; we
fill your Courts, your Universities, your Cities, your Towns, your Villages,
yea your prisons, not for theftes or murders, but for Religion; only we have
left the Churches to the Ministers, because in them is practiced and preached
a Religion, which our consciences can not brook. Yea a greater part are
we, then any particular sect in your Majesty's Realm, and we are linked
in Religion to all Catholic Princes and countries about you, who will be
more loving neighbors, if they see that we their brethren, synde this
desired favor at your Graces hands: and the noblest and mightiest of them,
will be more desirous to join in mariadge with your Royal posterity: vvherby
how your Kingdom shall be strengthened, and your Dominions enlarged, your
Princely vvisdome easily perceueth, and you have an example in the noble
House of Austria. Your Noble Brother of France that now reigns, may be a
president in this matter, who though he was once an enemy to the Catholic
Religion, yet finds more faithful correspondence in his Catholic
subjects, then in all the rest, and by permitting both, is served of both,
and serves him self of both. Thirdly (most Gracious Sovereign) to admit
the Catholic Religion, or at least to permit it, is your greatest safety for
your conscience. For as you are a Prince, so are you a Christian Prince, and
therefore a champion, cap. 4.9.
and (as the Prophet Esaie says) a Foster-father of the Church; and as the
Kings of France even from Clodoueus, the first Christian King of that
Realm, have been called Christianissimi, for their good offices toward the
Catholic Church, Genebrar l s. Chron. Baron. to 9. Annal.
and the kings of Spain, From Ferdinande, yea from Alphonsus, yea as some
think, from Recaredus, for extirpating Arianisme, and propagating the
Christian faith, Geneb l. 4. Chron. Sleid l 3. Georg. Lilius in Chr. Angl.
are surnamed Catholic; so the Kings of England, from King Henry the Eight,
your Graces great uncle, for his Catholic, and learned book, written against
Luther, and other his most honorable services, which he performed for the
Catholic Church, are called Defendours of the Faith, that is, the Catholic
faith. Wherefore your Majesty, first because you are a Christian King, Secondly
because you^ are a Defendour of the faith, are to see that the right worship
of God, and the true Christian religion, be practiced in your Realm. This the
honor of God, under whom you reign, this the good of his Church, whose
Champion you are, this the salvation of your people, whose King you are, this
the spiritual health of the body of your Realm, whose head you are,
requires. For if in any country it be true, that the inconstaunte people,
changes withdraw the King, in England it is most true, as we have seen by
diverse changes of religion, in this Unhappy age: and so, in your Majesty, it
lies, to save or not to save your people, which so admireth your authority,
and Princely virtues, that your will is their law, and your law, their rule
of religion. And where can your Grace find a securer haven, for the Salvation
of your self, and your subjects, then the Catholic Church? In which so
many Martyrs have dyed, so many Doctors have taught and preached, so many
virgins have lived in flesh, like Angels, and so many saints have wrought
so strange and vvonderfull miracles: by which so many heresies have been
condemned, so many Councels called, so many Ecclesiastical laws enacted, and
such goodly order and discipline established: For vvch so many monasteries,
Churches, Colleges, Universities, and hospitalles, have been builded and
founded. In vvch so many Emperors, Kings, and Princes have lived, reigned,
dyed, and (as it is to be hoped also) have been saved; and against which, so
many cruel persequutours, in vain have raised forces, and used torments, and
so many heretics have raged and railed; which is descended from the Apostles,
and can prove a continual succession of her pastors, and religion, from them,
unto this day. Vvheras the new Church began but yesterdaye, and her Preachers
with her, who also can not prove their mission, nor distinguish them selves
from false Prophets; whose doctrine has all the marks of heresy, and is
rather Antichristian then Christian, plucking at Christ's Divinity, spoiling
him of many Honorable Titles, to wit, Redeemer, Spiritual Phifitian,
Lavv-giuer, Aeternall Priest, Judge of the quick and dead, equalizing every
Christian with him, making him an ignorant, desperate, and damned man: which
has nether Priest, nor sacrifice, nor in effect, any sacrament, no prayer, not
so much as our Lords prayer, no, nor a sermon, according to their doctrine, nor
any of the essential parts of Religion: which is blasphemous in many points
against God, injurious to State and Authority, favorable to vice, and bending
to Atheism; all which pointe^ I have proved in this book. But if you^
Majesty's pleasure, or leisure, be not such as by perusing this book, to
inform your self, which is most likely to be the true Christian religion,
if it shall please your Highness, to command a conference or disputation,
which has ever bee^ the usual means to determine co^troue^sies, (as
appears by the disputation o^ Helias with Baals Prophets, ^ Reg 18.10 8.
Act. 7.9 17. 18 19. 20. Aug ep. 47. Ruf. l. hist
of Christ with the Jews, of Saint Paul with jews and Gentiles, and of
the ancie^ doctors in Councels, and out of Councels, with Ethinkes and
heretics) you^ Majesty shall find diverse of your C^tholike subjects, both
at home an^ abroad, who will present them selves a^ such a disputation, if
you shall but pleas^ to command. Lastly suppose your Highness should persequute
the Catholiqu^ religion (as God forbid, so Glorious Prince should receue so
foul a disgr^ce) besides the dishonor vvher vvi^^ your noble Crown and
Name should be obscured, besides that you can not pe^sequute this Religion, but
you must mak^ war against your Noble progenitou^ even your Glorious mother,
you shou^ sooner make a conquest of all the Cou^ tries about you, then
extirpate this Re^gion; whose nature is to gather greater force, when
greatest fury, is armed against it. This Palm Tree (O Mighty Prince) the
more it is pressed, the higher it grows; this Camomile the more it is
trodden, the thicker it grows; This vvallnuttree the more it is beaten, the
more fruitful it waxes; this corn, by treshing, is severed from the chafe;
This gold, by a fiery persequution, becomes purer, and brighter; This Arc by
a raging Deluge, mountethe the higher; Killing of Catholics (most Clement
Prince) is but cutting of boughs, from that tree, which reaches from sea to
sea, and this cutting is but lopping, the tree afterward in height is taller,
and in boughs fuller; and this spilling of Catholics blood, is but watering
of Christ's Vinyarde, in which, for one Catholic cut of, many an hundred
springs up in the place. Those Neroes, Domitians, Diocletians, and Maximians,
ca^ bear vvitness of this, of which the last tvvoe, having gathered great
force, and provided all the Engines and Instruments of cruelty, that a cruel
heart could devise, made full accounte of a conquest of the Christian race, and
engraued this their presumed victory in Marble pillars in Spain, with this
Inscription: Diocles. Iouius, Maximin. Hercules, Caess. Aug. amplificato per
Orientem and Occidentem Imperi^ Romans Eus l. ^. c. 13.25* 6 29. Zon 3. par.
Annal. Sur. 10.6. die to December. Aidus Man post Schol in comm Caes. Bar ann 204
and nomine Christianorum deleto, qui Remp. euertebant: But they counted their
Chickins, before they were hatched, triumphed before the victory, gave a blaze
before their light went out, and exalted their hearts before their ruin;
depriving them selves of their Empire, for the disgrace, which they conc^iued
in such a foil, and dying a death so miserable, that it seemed the beginning
of their Hell. And those your Predecessors, who have persequuted the little
Flock of the Catholics of your Realm of England, would assure your Grace,
if they were living, that this little part of the catholic Church,
follovveth the nature of the vvholle^ because notvvithstanding so many
confiscations of their goods, so many confininges, and imprisonmentes, and
banishmentes of their parsons, so many tortures, and deaths of their bodies;
Catholics, and Catholic Priests, are more at this present in your Realm,
then they were forty years since. It must be true vvch saint Leo
avouches: Non minuitur persequutionibus Ecclesia, Ser in not. Apost.
sed augetur, and semper Dominicus ager segete ditiori vestitur, dum grant quae
singula cadunt, multiplicata nascuntur: The Church by persequutions, is not
diminished but augmented; and alvvayes our Lords feeld is clad with a ritcher
Harvest, vvhilest the graynes which fall, spring forth again more multiplied.
And the reason is, because that must be performed, which Christ promised:
Mat. 16.
Portae inferi non praeualebunt aduersus illam: the gates of hell shall not
prevail against her. Her enemies are dead, rotten and forgotten, she stands
sure upon a rock, alvvayes ye more glorious, the more she is assaulted. But I
crave pardon mosthu^bly of your Gracious Cleme^cie, for my tedious petition.
The misery of our state, and the importance of our humble supplication,
required a longer, but your rare Clemency and humanity (which has already
vvonne you the hearts of your people) demanded a shorter. Wherefore I shall
desire your Highness, only to imagine, that in this petition, your Catholic
subjects are not alone; your noble progenitors and Predecessors, your most
Glorious Mother, all the Catholic Princes, to vvho^ you are allied, and their
Catholic Countries which border upon you, ye vvholle Church of God, ye
Saints of your Realms, the blood of Martyrs, shed in the same, and for ye
same, ye misery of your most ancient subjects, your Highness honor and
security, both for the temporal and spiritual state of your Kingdom, demand
this also with us. Yea this your own self, so Gracious a Lord toward
all, requires of your self: wherefore using no other Intercessour, the^ your
self, we desire your Grace to harken to your self, which if it shall
please you to do, we make noe doubt of our most humble petition. In the
mean time we shall pray to him who has the Hearts of Kings in his Hand,
Prou. 21.
to bend your compassionate heart toward your Catholic subjects, and so to
rule it and inspire it, that you may be a King according to his heart, that you
under him may rain long and prosperously in the Realm of England, and he by
you in the Church of England, and that so you may reign under him here for a
time, as you may reign with him herafter for all eternity.

Your Highness most humble and obedient subject MATTHEW KELLISON.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THE inanimate and unreasonable creatures (Gentle Reader) because they have
nether sufficient knowledge to direct them selves to their end, nether will
to move them selves unto it, are by the proudident Governor and Menager of
all, indevved with natural inclinations, propensions, or instinctes, by
which they are carried every one directly to their end, as though they knevve
it, and desired it. For as the Arrovve, though it know not the mark, yet,
because it is directed by one that knovveth it, flies as directly to it, as if
it knevve it, and as svviftely, as if it were in love with it; so these
creatures although they know not their end, yet because they are directed by
natural propensions, and instinctes, which God, vvhovvell knovveth it, has
put into them, aim always at their convenient places, ends, and
perfections, as if they not only knevv them, but also most earnestly desired
them. The heavens, as we see, do move so uniformly, as though by common
consent they were aggreeed, to be the never erring dialles, which measure our
actions, and distinguishe our times, and seasons. The Sun rises at a just
time, as if he were Man's cock, to call him up to his work, and his
candle also to give him light by which he may see to work; and he sets
also at his time, putting man in mind, that then it is time for him, to take
his rest, and to cease, from labor. The Moon in her Change, is
unchangeable, and constante in her inconstancy; and both the Sun and
Moon, are so sure moderatours of times and seasons, that vvinter and So^mer,
Spring, and the Fall of the leaf, never change their order; not that these
Planets know their time, but because they are moved by one that knovveth.
Brute beasts as soon as they are able to nibble upon the grass, can choose
the herbs, which are most convenient for them, as though they were cunning
herbistes, and you shall seeldome or never see them dye of surfitting, or
mistaking one herb for another: not that they know the virtues of Simples,
but because God has given them an Instincte of Nature, to take that which is
aggreable to nature. The birds of the air, Keep a certain, and a most
convenient time for breeding, and building; and their nestes they build as
artificially, as if they were Carpenters by occupation, and their youngones
they feed with that discretion, as if they were expert Nurces. The spider
will not yield to the Fisher, who as coningly vveaueth his vvebbe, and
places it as craftily to take the fly, as he does his netteto take ye
heedles fishes. The Be when the vvinde rises, takes claye in his mouth,
least the vvind have to great force over his little body. I will say nothing
of the so well ordered common vvelthes of Bees and Antes, nor of the staunge
operations, of other living creatures, because of them I am to treat in diverse
places of my book. Plants and trees, seeldome, or never deceive the husband
man, but after the dead of vvinter, all which time they also seemed dead, they
send forth, first their leaves, and afterward their bloomes, as messengers
to fortell the fruits, which for his labor in pruning them, they mean to
bestow, upon him. And never shall you see them budd in the midst of
vvinter, but in the spring only, when the air is so vvarme, that their yonug
ones can take no harm; not that they know the most convenient time, but
because God who Knovves it, has engraven such an inclination in them. But
more bountifully, has the Almighty dealte with man, then with any other
corporal creatures, because he is more noble then them all, and is an
abridgement of all; for to him he has given understanding to know his God,
his Good, his End, and Felicity, and a will also, to desire and pursue the
same. And least his understanding should banger, in approving falsehood, for
truth and verity, he has engraven in it a natural prope^sio^ to verity, and
least his will should embrace evil, and badde for good, she also has the like
inclination to good. In so much that, as the eye sees nothing but light or
colors, and the ear hears nothing but sound, so the understanding aymeth
only at truth, and the will desires nothing else but good; and as the eye
can not perceue sound, nor the ear colors, so the understanding can not give
his assent to a known untruth, and the will can not affecte evil, as evil.
Hence it is that we can not with heart think that the crovve is white, or
the svvanne black, because this is a known untruth, and where nether the
truth nor falsehood is apparaunt, there we doubt, and suspend our Judgment,
which is the cause why we nether judge the sands of the Sea, nor the
stars of the sky, to be eue^ or odd in number, because we have no more
reason to think the one, then the other. The will in like manner can not
affect a known evil, as evil, because her obiecte is Good, lib. de diuinis
(...) c. ^.
and therefore Dionisius Areopagita said, that no man intends evil as evil,
but even then when he embraces vice, which is the greatest evil, he aymeth
at some apparaunt good of pleasure, or profit, which he imagines in that
evil. Wherefore all known Goods, such as knowledge, virtue, and Faelicitie
are, every man desires and loves even in his enemy whom he hates, though
he like not of the difficulties, which are to be devoured, before he attain
unto them. Who now would think that man, either should or could approve
errors and heresies, for true doctrine, and fall in love with vice in which
is no true goodness to be liked? But nothing is so good which may not be
abused. God has given man free will, not to sin, but to merit, vvch if he
had not, his vveldoing would deserve no God a mercy, and his evil deeds
should be worthy no blame, because they who of necessity do otherwise then
beseemes them, are rather to be pitied, then blamed. And yet from hence
proceeds all iniquity, from vvhe^ce, virtue, merit, and laudable actions,
should have had their source and beginning. He has grafted in our nature
passions of love, fear, anger, and such like, that by love we might embrace
Good, by fear, avoid evil, and by anger, chastise vice and evil: and yet
vvhilest we give passions the head and bridle, passions rule, reason is
ouerruled, man is ouerthrovvn, and ruined by that, by which he should have
stood. He has imprinted in us a natural love, and liking of Beatitude, in so
much that no man is so barbarous, who, if you ask him whether he will be
happy or not, can, or will say, noe, with heart and mind. Wherefore saint
Austine says, l. ^^. Trin. c. ^^
that the Iester, who promised that he would tell every one the thing which
his heart desired, had hit the nail on the head, if he had said, omnes beati
esse vultis, miseri esse non vultis: you will all be happy, miserable you
will not be; and yet vvhilest by this natural propension, we seek for
faelicitie in honors, riches and pleasures where it is not, and not in God,
where it is, that is made our bane which should have been our good. And so
God has bountifully bestovved on us understanding, wholy bent to truth, and
only to truth, and yet by abuse, that is made the fountain of all errors,
which should have been the offspring of verities. For vvhilest like Aesops
dog, we snatch at the shadovve, instead of the flesh, that is, seek after
truth in those things in which is no truth at all, but only a show and
shadovve, we make our natural propension which we have to truth, a cause
of our error, which should have been our best direction, and with as great a
vehemency we embrace our errors, as we are propense and prone to truth,
even as that dog, the more greedily leaped at the shadovv, the more desirous
he was of the flesh. And hence proceed Idolatries, superstitions, sects, and
heresies, to which we would never give so obstinate an assent, did we not
imagine some truth to be, where only is deceit and error. He has given us
also a will, wholy bente to Good, and altogether auerted from evil; and yet
vvhilest with those foolish birds, we pecke at Appelles painted grapes,
that is seek after good in pleasures, riches, and honors, where is but a
painted hevve of good, we embrace vice our greatest evil, instead of our
greatest good, and so much the more greedily, by how much we are more
inclined to Good. And hence proceed fornicatio^s, aduouteries, theftes, and
murders, which we would never desire so vehemently, did we not apprehe^d in
them, Good, that is pleasure, or profit. So that the ba^gers of our will,
proceed only from mistaking of badd for good, and the errors of our
understanding, proceed not from any prones which we have to untruths, but
from mistaking of apparaunte, for true verities. And this is the cause (most
gentle Reader) why I have made so exact a Survey of the new Religion,
because I know thy understanding to be so naturally inclined to truth, and so
auerted from all untruths and errors, that to lay open unto thy view, the
manifold and gross absurdities, which it implies, is to refute them, and to
make them known unto thee, is to dissuade thee from the^. For truly I find
many points of this religion, so opposite to light of reason, that I dare
anouch, that noe man can be either Lutherane or Caluiniste, unless he want
vvitte, or having wit, enter not into consideration, or be carried away with
passion, or partial affection. I will not deny but that many a good vvitte
may be found amongst the Professors of this Religion, but yet I say, that
these good vvittes, if they laid a side passion and partiality, and would
vouchsafe also to enter into due consideratoon, could be nether Lutheranes nor
Caluinistes, because to evident untruths, the understanding can give no assent
nor approbation. And what more evident untruth then Lutheranisme or
Caluinisme? First of all their preachers can say no more for proof of their
authority or doctrine, then Simon Magus, Ebion, Cerinthus, Basilides,
Nestorius; Eutiches, Arius, Vvicleph, or any other heretic could have said,
and enerie false prophet hereafter may say, preach he never so absurdely, as I
have demo^strated in my first book most evidently. For nether can they prove
their mission to be ordinary by succession, nor extraordinary by miracle, and
so if you give ear to them, you must bind your self to harken to all false
prophets, vvh^ will say and swear that they are sent from Christ, and if
you put them to the proof of their mission, they will say you are partial,
who reiecte them, and yet receive Luther and Calum, vvh^ can not prove their
missio^: But no man can with any show of reason admit all false Prophets,
because some of them teach contraries, ergo he can not have reason to receue
Luther and Calvin, as the true Messengers and ministers of Christ, and
consequently, he can not in heart receue them, because the understanding can
not approve a thing for which she has no probable reason. Secondly their
doctrine, if it be well considered, is as evidently false, as that virtue is
vice, or black, is white, but the understanding (as is already proved) can
not approve manifest false-hood and evident untruthes, ergo noe man of
understanding and consideration, can admit Luthers and Caluins doctrine. Now
that their doctrine is evidently false, I can not only evidently, but also
easily prove. For to a Christian it is evident, supposing the verity of
Scripture, that heresy is error and falsehood, but in my second book I have
demonstrated, that all the marks of heresy, aggree as fitly to this new
doctrine, as to Arianismen any old heresies, ergo to a Christian it is
evident, that this new doctrine is error, and conseque^tby, it can not be
approved by a Christian of Judgment and consideration, because the
understanding can not give asseni to an open untruth. It is evident also to a
Christian* that Antichristian doctrine, which is dishonorable, and repugnaunt
to Christ, can not be true, but Lutheranisme and Caluinisme, is altogether
opposite to Christ, because it pulls at his divinity, and makes him nether
Redeemer, nor spiritual Physician, nor law maker, nor eternal Priest
according to Melchisedechs order, nor Judge of the quick and the dead, but
rather aequali Zeth every Christian to him in grace and sanctity, and makes
him ignorant, fayneth him also to have despayred, at length brings him to
hell and damnation, and hates all ^inges which have been beloved of him, or
belonging to him; all which the third book conuinceth, ergo a Christian of
vvitte and consideration, can not in heart brook such a religion. In like
manner to a Christian yea to every man that believes that there is a God and
religion, it is evident that Religion can not stand without Priests,
sacrifice, sacraments and prayer; but it is evident also, that in the nevve
religion, none of these essential parts of religion can be found, especially
according to the doctrine of the same Religion, as my fourth book makes
manifest, ergo a Christian of wit and dew consideration, can not aepproue it
for true Religion. Likewise it is evident to reason, that all lavvful
authority is of God, that Princes laws bind, that their tribunals are just
and lavvfull, and that corresponde^ce betvvixte the Prince, and subjects, and
betvvixte one subject and another is necessary to uphold society, to which
God and nature incline us, all which is proved in the fifth book, but the
reformed doctrine, despoileth Princes of authority, brings their laws and
tribunals in contempt, and ruineth all Society, at is evidently also proved
in the same book, ergo a man of common sense and judgment, who enters also
into a dew consideration, can not with heart admit of this religion.
Lastelie, as evident it is, that this nevve religion is absurd, as that God is
not the autour of sin, and the only sinner, that he is not unreasonable,
cruel or Tyrannical, but according to the reformed doctrine, all these
blasphemies are verified of God, as my sixte book teaches, ergo the reformed
doctrine is evidently absurd. Vice also, and Atheism, by light of reason, are
evidently Known to be repugnaunt to reason, wherefore seeing that this nevve
Religion leadethe to all vice, and Atheism, and that by many points, and
principles of the doctrine of the same, as is in my seventh and eight book
demonstrated, it is an evident absurdity, evidently repugnaunt to reason, and
consequently can not be approved by a man of reason and consideration, because
the understanding can no more assente unto ^n evident untruth, then can the
will affecte and like of evil, as evil, as I have already proved. Wherefore
(most gentle Reader) if thou be a Catholic, and vouchsaffe to peruse my
book, I hope thou shall be more confirmed, if thou be a follovver and
professor of the late and new religion, when thou see the foul
absurdity of thy own religion, and the plausible verity of the Catholic, I
hope thou vvilte reiecte the one, and embrace the other, because my book will
make manifest unto thee, both the one and the other. At least, as this I
intended so this I have endeavored. And if my intended purpose be well brought
to pass, God was the Principal Agent, I only his vnvveldy instrument, and so
he only is to be praised; if ill, mine is the fault, yet such as I hope shall be
excused, because it was not voluntary. If thou reap commodity by my
labors, I count them well bestovved, because they have the revvard I looked
for: if thou do not, yet are they not lost, quia aliquid est voluisse,
because some thing it is to have desired thy good, and I have taken no more
pains then thy good deserved. If the style of my book please thee-not, refuse
not gold, because it is ill fashioned, and remember, that though the autour be
thy countriman by birth, yet he is more a stranger then an Englishman by
educatio^. If thou find faults in the printing, yet find not fault with the
Printer, he knevv what he did, because he understood not what he printed; and
I had not the leisure always to over see his labors. If I seem to speak
to sharply some times, it is not for any toothe against any person, but for
hatred of heresy. And if thou take this my impolished work in good worth,
thou vvilte give me the occasion and courage to take in hand another, in
which I shall explane (as I have in part already) and make as plain, and
plausible, those points of the Catholic Religion, (to wit Indulgences,
Merit, Satisfaction, worship of Saints, Images, and Relics, with many such
other) which seem to the deceived, to imply injury to Christ, or
absurdity, as I have discovered the gross errors of the Nevve Religion. But
now for a Vale and freindly farevvel, I beseech the to take this counsel at
my hands. Build not upon that, not so flattering, as false opinion, vvher
with many use to comfort them selves, to wit that thou may be saved in
any religion. My second book will assure thee, that without a true and
intier faith, it is impossible to please God, and that out of the true Church,
See the second book, and 4. chap.
there is noe salvation: As God is but one, the truth but one, so his
Religion, Church, and worship is but one. This Church and Religion is not to
be found amongst the reformers, as my second book will tell thee, because it
has all the marks of heresy: It is only to be found amongst the
Catholics, who are Nicknamed Papists, as thou may see by the same book,
and by some chapters of the first book, and by other parts of the other
books, evidently demonstrated. The Catholic Church then is the haven of
Security, to which thou must repair, It is the port of Salvation, the Arc
vvherin Noe lodges and his family, that is Christ and his faithful people,
It is the barn where the good corn is laid up, till the vvinovving day, It
is the fold of Christ's Sheep, The pillar of truth, The treasure-hovvse of
Christ's Graces, The Shop of spiritual Negotiation, The land of promise, The
paradise of the second Adame, The Temple of the second Solomon, The mystical
body of Christ, The terrestrial heaven of those that hope to be blessed, The
only way to life everlasting. If then thou desire to be free from tempests,
and contrary vvindes of disagreeing heresies, direct thy ship and sail to
this quiet haven; if thou vvilt not make shipvvrake of thy soul, fly to this
port of Salvation; If thou vvilte not be drowned in the deluge of sin or
Infidelity, have recourse unto this Arc, out of which none can escape
damnation; If thou vvilte be of Christ's chosen corn, repose thy self in this
his barn, vvch is the only place of purging from the chafe of sin; If thou
vvilte be one of Christ's flock, run to his fold, that thou may be fedd
with his sheep; If thou vvilte be sure of the truth, keep thy standing
upon the pillar of truth; If thou vvilte be enritched with Christ's
spiritual treasures, this is the treasure house of all his graces. If thou
vvilte traffic for heaven, and heavenly merchandise, enter the Shopp of
Christ, I mean his Church, the only place of merit, and Christian
negotiation; If thou vvilte be pertaker of Christ's promises, dvvell in the
land of all his promises; If thou vvilte en^^y faelicitie, enter into this
Paradise of the second A. dame; If thou vvilte honor God with true sacrifice
and worship, this is the only Temple, out of which nether prayers, nor
oblations, nor sacrifices, are pleasing; If thou vvilte receue any influence,
and motion from Christ the Head, incorporate thy self to the Church his
mystical body; and if thou vvilte be pertaker of his spirit, vvth is the
soul, and life of this body, dismember not thy self, that thou may be a
lively member; If thou vvilte enjoy the bliss of Angels in the upper heaven,
enter first into this lovver heaven, out of which is no hope to ascend to the
higher; If thou vvilte attain to life everlasting, pass by the Church, it is
the only way; If thou vvilt be one of the Church triumphaunt, be first one
of the Church militaunte; and if thou vvilte have God for thy father, take his
Church for thy Mother. Nothing more dangerous then to live out of this
Church, and no surer damnation, then to die out of this Church. Be not
careless therefore in seeking out this Church, and when thou have found it,
differ not thy entrance. It is thy greatest affair, and a matter of most
importance, because thereon depends, not a temporal state of thy body, but
aeternall salvation, or damnation, both of soul and body. Farevvell, and pray
for him that wishes thee well, and prays for thee, that thou may do
well. Iul. 18. an Dom. 1603.

MATTHEW KEL.

THE FIRST BOOK
CONTAINS A SVRuey of the grounds and fondation of this new religion on
which it may seem to rely: which either are the authority of their
preachers, or the evidence of scriptures which they allege, or their private
spirit, or credible and probable testimonies, or some visible judge who
determines of controversies: for want of which it is proved that if we
receive this new religion, we open the gappe to all heretics and heresies.

The first chapter examineth the mission of the preachers of this new
religion, and proves that they cannot prove them selves to be sent from
Christ, and that consequently we cannot gine ear unto them, unless we will
harken also unto all false prophets.

HARDLY shall we find a subject so disloyal, or private man so imprudent,
who will arrogate unto him self the honorable office of an Imbassadour, to
deal betwixt Prince and Prince in denounicinge war or offeringe peace, of
in establishinge a new league or renevvinge an old, unless he have authority
from his Prince in whose name he deals, and can by letters of credit or
other tokens make an evident remo^strance of his legatine power and
commission. For if he go unsent, he abuses his princes name, and if he cannot
show his commission, he runs on a sleeueles arrande. If this be so (as
experience teaches us that it is so and reason tells us that it must be so)
and thath betwixt man and man: we have noe reason to think almighty god to
be so deuoid of princely prudence, as to send his Apostles and preachers to
denounce his will and impart his mind to his people, and not to give them
with all letters patentes of their commission; or to be so unreasonable as to
bind us to give credit or audience to such Imbassadours, who ca^ne only
brag of their e^bassage but cannot by any probable proofs acertaine us of
it: for so we might embrace a false preacher and Apostle when in deed we
have a lewd and lying prophet by the hand. This Moses well knovving, Exodus ^.
never dreamed of that great embassage in which he was sent from God to
Pharao to deal for the deliuerio of the oppressed Israelites, until God had
called him and told him that he intended to send him, knovvinge that if he
should have gone vnse^t he should have abused his lord and masters name. Aaron
also durst not adventure upon preestlie function, Exodus^^. Leuit.^.
before that Moses by Gods commandment, had consecrated him whose example
Saint Paul proposes unto all pas^ours as necessary to be follovved saying;
(...)
Nec quisquam sumit sibi honorem sed qui vocatur a De^ tanquam Aaron; Neither
does any man take unto him self honor but he who is called of God as Aaron
was. The prophets likevvoise presumed not to tell unto the people gods mind
and will nor to fortell the things to come, of which god vvouldehaue his
people for warned, with out an express commandment from god as may
appear by the proheme and beginning of their prophecies. And those immortal
creatures which are by nature spirits are by office called Angels, because
they are sent from god as his legates, and imbassadoures, for so much the
greek word (...) imylyeth from which our Inglish word Angel, is derived.
Wherefore the Angel that came to Daniel declares unto him his con mission
before h^e tells him his message. Daniel (says he) stam gradu tuo nunc enim
missus sum ad te: Dan. 10.
Daniel stand in thy stepp for now I am sent unto the. And saint Luke
describing that great embassage of the Archangel Gabriel unto the blessed
virgin Marie, Luc. 10
says that he was, sent from God into a city of Galilie which was called
Na^areth unto a virgin despoused unto a man whose name was Joseph. In like
manner S. John Baptist the precursour of Christ and more then a prophet of God,
vvhonot only for told the Messiah but also poynted him out with his finger,
Malach. 3. Mat. 11. Ciril. l.^ in Io. c. 17. Beda in c. 1. Mar.
is called an Angel, not because he was an Angel by nature as Origin imagined,
but because he was an Angel by office as being sent to make the way and to
prepare it for the Messiah. Yea Christ him self would not undertake the
office and function of a Messiah and Mediator before he was sent by his
father: Io. ^.
For I (says he) came not of my self but he sent me and therefore he says
his doctrine is not his own but his fathers because although he preached the
same, (...).
yet because he preached it in his fathers name who sent him he calls it his
fathers doctrine. And as Christ was sent from his father sovvere his Apostles
from him, Io. 20.
else had not their name aggreed to their person, because the word Apostle
comes of the greek word (...) which signifies a messenger or Imbassadour.
And if they had not been sent they could not have preached, because as faith
and religion is revealed only by God, Matthew. 1^.
so none can have authority to preach it but from God according to that of S.
Paul: Romans 10.
How shall they preach unless they be sent? And as it is proper to all true
Apostles not to presume to preach before they be sent, so is it as common to
all false Prophets to ro^ne before they be sent, and to preach their own
fancy with out mission, or commission; who therefore in diverse places of
scripture are said to come but never to be sent. All they (says Christ) who
came before me are thieves and nobbers. Io. 10.
Where you must note that he says not all they who were sent, because
Moses and the prophets were sent before him, and yet were nether thieves
nor robbers, but hesaieth, all they that came before me, are thieves and
rohbers, Maldonatus in Io. 10.
that is who came of their own heads nether sent nor commanded, by cause
they stole authority from God, and arrogated that unto them selves, which he
never gave them, using and abusing his name and crying that the lord says so
when he never said so nor meant so. Of which kind of thief our savior
speakinge notes him with the same mark of a false Prophet which is,
coming. Io. 10.
A^theef (says he) does not come but to steal and kill. The like manner of
speech uses saint Paul saying; 2. Cor. 17.
If he that comes shall preach unto yon any other Christ. To be brief he
that cannot he because he is the prime and first verity, and will not lie
because he is goodness it self, gives us this mark to know a false Prophet by
Bevvare (says he) of false Prophets, Mat. ^.
but what mark do thou give us (o lord) to know them by, that we may
take heed of them? Who come (says he) vnt^ you in the garments of sheep but
in vvardlie are ravening wolves. So that if any preachers come only, that is,
come unsent they are thee^es that steal authority which was never given
them, and they are false Prophets which conne on their own heads before
they be sent, and preach their own devises, before they have commission. If
then our new reformers and Prophets of the lord (as they call them selves) be
sent from god (as they say they be) to reform the church not only in
manners, but also in faieth and religion, let them tell us their mission and
show us their commission, and we will reverence them as the messengers, and
respect them as the Imbassadours and Angels of god. But if they come on their
own heads or cannot give us assurauuce that they are sent from god they must
pardon us if we give not ear unto them: for if they be not sent they have noe
authority to deal with us, and if they cannot prove their mission we have
noe vvarraunt to deal with them. Tvvoe manner of missions which god uses
insending preachers unto us I find in holy write, which also have been
practiced in the church of god, the one an extraordinary the other an
ordinary mission. The extraordinary mission is made immediately from god, the
ordinary mission god makes by means of some other whom he has sent
immediately from him self. For as god ordinatilie does nothing immediately by
himself, but by means of second causes, causing light by the son, and
heat by the fire, producing fruits by trees, men and beasts by some of their
own kind, yet he does not so tie him self unto his creatures, but that some
times extraordinarily he works by him self without any concurrence of
them as he did when with a word, or touch, he restored health, which
ordinarily he does by physicians and second causes, so likvvise ordinarily
god sends pastors and preachers, and gives the^ authority by others, yet
sometimes also extraordinarily he sends them immediately from him self. As
for example: Moses and Aaron in the old law were sent immediately from god
to recall his people out of Aegipt, and to rule and govern them in matters of
religion; but the high priests which succeeded Aaron and were consecrated by
him and his successors, were sent by an ordinary mission. In like manner in
the nevve law, saint Peter and the rest of the Apostles were called and sent
extraordinarily and immediately from Christ but they which succeeded the
Apostles and were ordained by them by imposition of hands and other
ceremonies, were sent by an ordinary mission, because our savior Christ
vvhem he instituted his Apostles did also appointe a continual order, by
which others should succeed them in their offices, which was imposition of
hands by a Bishop lavvfullie consecrated and so the Bishops which now are,
may truly affirm that they are sent from Christ to rule and govern his
church, because they are consecrated and instituted by the order which
Christ has appointed and they succeeded the Apostles whom Christ immediately
sent to preach, teach, and minister sacraments. Now betvvixte these tvvoe
missions, this amongst others, is one difference; that an extraordinary
mission must be proved by miracles or plain prophecies, else every one may
brag that he is sent extraordinarily and noe man shall controlle him, but an
ordinary mission needs noe such proof, and therefore he who is sent by an
ordinary mission if he can shevve that he was instituted by the ordinary
means which Christ has left in his church, and that he succedeth them
who were counted lavvfull pastors and preachers, he gives sufficient
testimony of his ordinary mission and commission. If then our new preachers
be sent by an ordinary mission le^t them show their succession and tell us
the pedigree of their predecessors that we may see who were bishops
before them, and who consecrated and instituted them, and who gave them
commission and authority to entermeddle in the rule and government of the
church: for so Christ ordinarily sends preachers and pastors to his
church. ^ prescr. c. 38.
Thus Turtullian urged the heretics of his time. Let them (says he) shevve
us the origin of their churches, let them unfold the order of their bishopes
which by successors, so ronneth on from the beginning, that the first bishop
have for his autour and predecessor some one of the Apostles or apostolical
men which lived in the Apostles time, etc. As the church of the Smyrneans
does register Polycarpe placed by ^hon, as the church of the Romans has
Clement ordained by Peter, etc. To this proof S. Augustine puts the
heretics of his age: e^n. partem ^Donati.
number (says he) the priests even from Peter's seat and look which to
which succeeded in the order of those ffathers. And in an other place he
says that this succession of priests is the thing, cont. ep. fundamenti c. 4.
which holds him in the catholic church, because he knevve, that there is
the true Church, where is true religion, there true religion, where true
pastors to teach it, and there true pastors, where one succedeth to another
by an ordinary succession. And thus we must urge our nevve reformers to
declare unto us the pedegres of their ancetours, and to shevve who be the
predecessors to whom they be successors, if they will have us to admit
them as the ministers of God sent by an ordinary mission. But this they can
never do for who I pray yon was the immediate predecessor of Luther and
Calvin? or who was he that made the first superintendent in Inglande? I am
sure and all the world, yea they them selves will witness, that they are
noe successors to the catholic bislopes and pastors, because they degenerate
from them altoge-ther, and they were feign to contemn and disobey them before
they could open their mouths in pulpites. Yea our pastors were so far from
ordayning them, or instituting them and giving them authority, that they cried
out against the^ as nevve startuppes, condemned them for heretics,
Antipastours, and nevve, yea false Apostles. Nether can they derive the^ selves
from any other lavvfull pastors for before they them selves took upon them
the name and office of pastors, there were none at the time of their rising,
but our catholic pastors. Yea as in the next book is proved, they cannot
de^iue their descente from ancient heretics, because in all points they agree
not with any of them; and if they could, yet were not that sufficient, for
they were counted and condemned for arra^t heretics, and intruded them selves
as these men do into the true pastors offices, and were the^ selves as these
men are, the first of their family, succeding to noe predecessors. Here they
find the^ selves much pressed, and know not I dare say, what to answer,
but yet they will play small play rather then sirte out, and will make
hard shifte rather then noe shifte, and shape a misshapen answer rather then
noe answer. And what is that? They say that the Apostles which were the
first bishops, and pastors, had for a time their lavvfull successors, but at
the length the Church failed and the pastors with it, and with them the
succession decayed; but yet afterward Luther and Calvin revived this dead
Church again, and restored the pastors: And so (say they) we succeed the
Apostles and their immediate successors, but by interruption of many hundred
years. But this God knovves is a poor shifte and a stale shifte. For this
was the answer of the heretics of Tertullians time, against whom he uses
noe other argument then the absurdity which follovveth so absurd an
answer. l. prese.
Then (says he) truth which was imprisoned expected Marcionites her
redeemers and in the mean time pastouts preached falsely, and the christians
belecued erroniouslie, many thousands were vvronglie baptized so many
works of faith ministered a miss, so many chrismes evillie wrought, so
many preest-hoodes and ministeres not rightly done, so many martyrdoomes all
invayne. The like may be said against Luther, Zuinglins, Calvin, and other
nevve Apostles of this time If the Church failed before your coming, then she
expected many hundred years for you in particular, then all ministry in the
Church was all this while wrong, preaching and teaching was false, they
who boar the name of true pastors were not so, that society which was
dispersed throughout the world and was counted the only christian Church
and was persecuted for the same by the devil and his ministers, was a
synagogue of the devil, established and vpholde^ by the devil; and so one
devil psecuted another, all martyrdomes in that Church were in vain, all
acts of religion were superstitious, all conncells which were gathered in
this Church, all pastors that ruled in it, all doctors that vvrote and
tanght in it and for it, deceived, and were deceived. Happy then was the
day in which Luther leaped out of his Monastery, disobeied the Pope and
Church, and having gotten a yoke fellovv, out of a cloy ster of professed and
vowed virgins, devised a nevve religion to cloak his villainy. And could not
Christ all that while find out a man fit to restore his Church from death
to life? was there noc Ambrose, noe Austine, noe Hierome, noe Gregory fit
for such a purpose? and was Luther the only man who for learning and virtue
(thonghe he were an apostata) was according to God his heart and likinge,
whom God wished for, and expected so long? But if I demonstrate that the
true Church cannot die nor decaie, the^ is their Church a bastard synagogue
which as they say once flourishing in the Apostles time, and after their time
also for some small time, and astervvardes died for noe little time, but rather
for some hundred years: or elfe they must of necessity shevve a succession of
their Church and Religion from age to age, and of their pastors from pastor
to pastor; and if they cannot they are not sent by an ordinaire mission because
they succeed to noe predecessors but are the first of their family. Chap. 5.
This I have demonstrated in the second book as the reader may see if he
please to turn oner a fevve leaves; and so hear I may suppose it, and
supposinge conclude that they are not sent by an ordinary missio^ because they
succeed to none. But if this ansvverre will not serve as a blind man may see
that i^ does not, then they have another in store: and what is that? they say
forsooth that they are true successors to the Apostles and that they have
their predecessors who believed as they do, ruled the Church, ministered and
received sacraments, but secretly, and inuisibly because their Church it
self was all that time invisible. And so if you demand of them who were
their predecessors, they will ansvverre that they had predecessors but they
were invisible. This is another blind shifte of theirs which I shall refute
in the next book at large. Hear only I demand whether this invisible
Church was invisible to them selves, Chap 5.
or to papists only and paganes who were not of their religion. If it were
invisible to them selves, how can they tell that there was any religion
like to theirs before their time, or that there were any pastors of their
kind? for that which was invisible unto them could not be seen of them,
and so we are noe more to be leeue them in saying that they had a Church
and pastors before Luthers time then a blind man that will determine of
colors. If they say it was invisible only to papists and paga^nes and
others which were not of their Church; then as it is like, Luther and
Calvin who were members of that Church knevv well the pastors to whom
they succeeded, and of whom they received authority. Let them tell us then
who they were else we cannot receive them as ministers of God sent by an
ordinary mission, because they can not shevve us their predecessors to whom
they succeeded. Thus I have plainly proved that these men are not sent by an
ordinary missio^ because they succeed to none who were their predecessors.
What now can they say why we should not reiecte them as false prophets,
who ro^ne before they be sent and preach before they be called to that
function? They will say as osten times they do, that they were sent
immediately from Christ by an extraordinary missio^. But then we must put
them also to the proof of this their mission. And first of all in saying that
they are sent extraordinarily, they bevvraie the^ selves to be those Apostles
which run unsent, because it is manifest in scripture that Christ
appointing Apostles, Ephesians. 4.
ordained a succession of pastors to the end. For as he instituted a visible
Church which is never to fail or fall (as shall be in the next book
demonstrated) so did he appoynte perpetual governors and pastors to govern
and rule this Church in a visible manner as there also shall be proved, Chap 5.
else should that visible and goodly mystical body of Christ, have been
left headless with out a visible head, and because the same pastors could
not alvvaies live to govern the Church visiblie, it follovveth that Christ
instituted a succession of them, and consequently that Christ sends none to
rule it his Church but by succession to some others by whom they were
ordained and instituted, and therefore he that enters into the government of the
Church and not by this entry, and door of succession, he is a thief that
seeks windows, corners, and by-vvaies as them selves do, who because
they mean noe good, dare not enter into the house as honest men do by the
ordinary way. Let not then the reformers brag of their extraordinary
mission because Christ having instituted a perpetual succession of ordinary
pastors means not to send any extraordinary preachers, rather they may be
ashamed of their monstrouse natiuities for they are like unto those heretics
of whom Optatus speaks qui de se prodigiose nasci voluerunt: l 1. cont. Pa^.
Which would be borne of them selves prodigiously without any ffather or
mother. They are like to Victor the Donatiste who as Optatus affirms was a
son without a father, l. 2. cont. Par.
and a disciple without a master. They are not unlike the Nouatianes who as
saint Cipriane auerreth, l. 1. ep. ^.
Nemini succedentes a seipsis episcopiordinati sunt, Succeding to noe man, they
were ordained bishops of them selves. But let us give them leave to say at
least that they were sent extraordinarily, that so we may see better how
they can prove their extraordinary mission, and how we can disprove the
same. First I demand of them where they read in scripture that after Christ
had established a succession of pastors to govern his Church to the end,
Ephesians. ^.
he would send somtymes extraordinary ministers to put them out of office,
and to enter into the government of the Church to reform all absurd abuses^
for if they can not bring scripture for this they are not to be credited, and
that by their own confession. But I know they can not allege any one line
of scripture for that purpose, and I am sure, and they are not ignorant, Mat.
^^.
that Christ said he builded his Church upon a rock so that it should not
need the repairinge of these nevve masons, and established a kingdom and
consequenly governors which should continue for ever and so should need noe
innovation, Second book
which point hear after shall be more amply proved. chap 5.
But suppose that our savior had foretold the fall and ruin of his Church
and ordinary pastors, and had fore warned us of nevve Apostles and pastors
to be sent to make a reformation, Hi^r. e. 1^.
yet seeing that God has also warned us of false prophets who will
falselie prophecy in his name vvheras he sent them not, and who shall divine
and foretell lies and vanities saying that the lord said so, and saying that
the Apostle commands us vearie straightly to take heed of false prophets
which come in sheep fleeses yea in coats of true pastors, Gal. 2.
bearing the name of pastors and alleging scriptures for a cloak to their
heresies, as true pastors do for their true doctrine, yea sithence that
Christ him self bids us to bevvare of false prophets who come in the
garments of innocent sheep but in vvardlie are raueninge wolves, Mat. 70
that is (as Vincentius Lyrinensis expounds) who inuest them selves in the
goodly garments of the prophets and apostles testimonies but in vvardlie, l
cont proph^^ nas haresu^^ nouitates c. 37.
if you unmask them by expounding the testimonies which they allege, yon
shall epsy raueninge wolves under sheep and sheepcherdes coats ad byti^ge
yea deuouringe heresies covered very coninglie with the sayings of the
Prophets and Apostles: seeing that I say we have such vvarninge of false
prophets, we have good reason to suspecte these reformers for such kind of
cattle, and we have noe reason to harken unto them as unto true prophets,
unless they can prove their extraordinary mission by extraordinary signs
and tokens of prophecies or miracles, and so can give us a note to distinguishe
them from the false prophets, whose cominge is so often and so plainly
foretold. Other wise if it be sufficient that they can say they are sent
extraordinarily, then do we open the gappe to false prophets, who when
they come will not let to say yea and to swear as much, and so they can not
be excluded if these men be admitted. Yea we make God most unreasonable, to
think that he will send extraordinary messengers and yet give them noe
letters of credit, noe extraordinary signs or tokens of their imbassie. For
in so doing he should either cause them to run on a sleeules arrande or else
he should bind us to give ear unto them who can prove their commission noe
better then false prophets can, Exodus 4.
of whom not with sta^dinge he commands us to bevvare. This Moses well
perceiuinge would not take upon him that great imbassie until that God had
promised him the guifte of vvorking miracles by which he might prove his
mission. Non credent mihi (says he) neque audient vocem meam, sed dicent non
apparuit tibi dominus: They will not believe me, nor give ear unto my voice,
but will say God did not appear unto thee. As if he had said; thou say o
lord that thou meanest to send me into Aegipte unto the Tyrant Pharao to
deliver thy people from his tyra^nie, but how shall I make it known either
unto him or unto thy people that thou in deed do send me? my bare word
will not be taken because they vvil say I am a stranger unto them, and for
any thing which they know, may come as well in mine own name yea in
thedeuills name as god his name. Exodus ^.
This seemed to God so reasonable an excuse, that he gave him by and by the
guifte of vvorkinge miracles, by which he might prove his extraordinary
missio^. For he said unto Moses, What is that which thou have in thy hand
Moses ansvvered, a rod; and God said, cast it on the ground. He cast it,
and it was turned into a serpent. And this says God I do that they may
believe that I appeared unto thee. wherefore when after his cominge into
Aegipte he had wrought so strange miracles, and admirable works, the
Israelites believed that he was sent to deliver them, Lue. 1.
and accordingly they follovved him, though Pharaoes heart was so obdured,
that all those miracles could neither break, nor mollify it, he by his free
will resistinge gods graces, and forccible callinges. In like manner saint
Ihon Baptistes mission was proved not only by the prophecy of Malachie, but
also by his miraculous nativity and the testimony of an Angel; although he
came not to preach any nevve doctrine but only to exhort the people to
penance, which before by other prophets had been inculcated, and to point
out the Messiah with his finger, who me all the prophets had fortolde so
plainly, that when Christ appeared, it was almost evident that he was the
man on whom had run so long a bead roll of prophecies and predictions. The
Messiah also him self Christ Jesus, because he succeeded to none but came
with extaordinarie authority, sent immediately from his ffather, proved his
mission by so manifest works and miracles, that se said his works did
testify, from whom he was sent, and the people also confessed that he
could not have wrought such wonders, if he had not been of God. And altough
Christ had sufficiently by miracles and prophecies which ran of him,
proved that he was the Messiah: Yet he thought not that sufficient for the
proof of the mission of his Apostles, but because they were sent immediately
from him, and were successors to none (for to Christ they were only
vicegerentes) he gave them also power to work miracles by which they might
prove their mission and confirm their doctrine with signs that follovved.
Meth. ^^.
Now then if our gospel spillers be sent by an extraordinary mission
immediately from God, let them (hevve us some miracles for proof of their
extraordinary commission, or else were we more then mad to credit them
being forevvarned that false prophets shall come, from whom these men can not
distinguishe them selves, unless they can shevve us some manifest prophecies,
or work some vvounders amongst us. Let Luther then the first man of this
nevve family, who as he and his say, So Cocleus. writes.
is sent by God extraordinarily to reform the christian world and to make
us nevv-noe christianes, let him I say shevve his miracles if he will have
any audience for else we may justly fear least he be one of those false
prophets of vvho^ before hand God has warned us. In deed I grant that he
on a time to shevve him self a true prophet, avouched veric boldy after tvvoe
years preachinge that he would be the death of all Popes, and would banishe
Cardinals, Monks, Nuns, masses, and bells out of the christian world.
But Luther is gone long since and yet Popes reign, Cardinals flourishe,
Monks and Nuns possess their old monasteries, saving in Ingla^de, and some
fevve other corners; masses also are not only said but sounge solemnlie, and
bells do ringe still and the world does ringe of bells. He caused also to be
engraven upon his tomb this verse in Latin.

Pestis eram viuens moriens ero mors tuae Papa. Suri^u anno domini. 15^^.


Vvilest here I lived I was thy plague and dying (Pope) I Will be thy death.

But yet Popes live and may tread upon Luthers grave, still Popes reign,
and though they be excluded from Ingla^de, Germany, Scotland, and some fevv
other places, yet do they exercise their authority still and as much as ever
in Italy, Spain, France and other countries, and have by the Benedictins,
Dominicanes, Jesuits, Lopes l. r. c. a. Genesis l. 4. ^ron. ^nno Christi 1492
Go^zal. 2. p hist de la Chine. c. 24. l. 3. hist genesis c. 28. ^. care^. Regem
Angl.
Augustines, and Franciscanes means and industrious labors, extended their
jurisdiction to the Indies and other nevve-founde lands and countries
Likewise the same Luther in his railing book against king Henry the eight
thus again prophecieth: Dogmata mea stabunt and Papa cadet: viderit Deus vter
primo fessus defecerit, Papa, an Lutherus. My opinions (says he) shall
stand, and the Pope shall fall let God look to it whether the Pope
vvearied out or Luther shall first fail. And yet we see that Popes live and
reign, and Luther is dead and descended to hell, and his doctrine decaieth
more and more, and many are now vvearie of it and see more and more into his
absurdities. On a time also this man of God, this great patriarch^ and fifte
Euangeliste, this second Elias and eight wise man, to get him self a name,
Stephilus ^pol. 2. Genebr chro^ ^. 4. ann. Christi 166.
assaied what he could do in dispossessing of a devil, but it vvoulde not
be, and the reason I think was, because one devil will not or ca^ not cast
out an other, yea the devil so scarred Luther for attemptinge so great a
matter, that the doors being shut by the devil, the man of God was feign to
break the windows least thedeuill should tear him in pieces. But
peradventure he will brag of his nativity. in deed that was strange for
although he was not borne by miracle as saint Ihon Baptiste was, yet some
are of opinion that he is descended either by father or mother from the devil
him self who was incubus to his mother, Fout in tract. sacr de stat^ rel.
or succubus to his ffather. Ihon Calvin also an other patriarche of the nevve
Church made the like attemptes but they had the like success. Bolsec. ^ 13.
He aggreed on a time for a piece of money with a man to feign him self first
sick, and after dead, and he coniured his wife to weep and lament the
death of her husband that by her tears and lamentations the jest might seem
more probable. The sick man was commended at every preach to be prayed for,
after ward the man feigned him self to be dead, his wife cries out, Calvin
goes a vvalkinge which a great troop, and passinge by the sick man's house
demanded as one altogether ignorante of the matter what was the cause of
those cries and lamentations, and ansvverre being made that one was dead, he
enters in, falls down on his knees, prays to God to shevve his power in
raising the dead to life, and their in to glorify his servant Calvin, that
the world might know that he was the man whom God had culled out to be the
only man who should reform and repair the Church of Christ. And haiunge
ended his prayer, he takes the man by the hand and commaundes him in God his
name to a rise. But the man after much calling not a risinge, his wife
calls on him also, and rubbes him on the side, to signify that now was
the time to rise, but he neither could answer nor move, but by God his inste
indgment (who neither will nor can work a miracle to maintain a falshoode)
was stone-deade and as cold as claye, and so the ieste was turned into good
earnest and the comedy into a tragedy. which his wife perceauinge cried out
on Calvin and called him a cooseninge knave, and murderer of her husband; but
Calvin departs with a flea in his ear saying that over much greef had
operessed the wife and deprived her of her vvittes. Wherefore since that the
nouellers can work noe miracles, raise noe dead men, dispossess noe
devils, foretell noe future things, heal noe diseased, not so much as a lame
dog to prove their authority, what reason have we to harken unto them? And
if we give ear unto them; who may not challenge audience at our hands? For
suppose some branisicke Brovvniste, some brother of the ffamilie of love or
some other if it may be, more fantastical, should preach the dreams of his
drovvsic head, and vain conceiptes of his idle brain, calling them nevve
points of religion, and reformations of the old, might he not allege some
scripture for every fancy of his though never so vain, and make a shevve
also of proof if he expound it as he please? might he not discannon books of
scripture which seem to stand in his way? and being demanded by what
authority he takes all this upon him, might he not say that he is sent from
Christ immediately? And being further requested to shevve some miracles as
extraordinary signs to prove an extraordinary mission, might he not easily
answer and that out of scripture also that miracles are for insidells and
that Luther and Calvin are accepted of who never could so much as heal a
haltinge dog, and therefore that he and his preachinge cannot be refused if
they and theirs be admitted? And so we see that if we accept of the reformers
of this time as the true Apostles, ministers, and messengers of God, not with
standinge that they can nether shevve succession for their ordinary, nor
miracles for their extraordinary mission, we open the gappe to all
falseapostles, and heretics whatsoever: the door is open for them, they may
enter in thick and threefolde into the ministry and can not be excluded if
these nevve reformers be received, without plain and palpable partiality.
And so thon see gentle reader that in Inglande and other places where this
new doctrine has taken root that they have noe probable assurance of their
religion by the authority of their preachers, because they can say noe more
for proof of their authority, then can the false Apostles. Sithence therefore
thou art warranted that the Church and succession of her pastors shall never
fall nor fail, and art forevvarned also, that false prophets shall come and
say they are sent when God never sent them at all, how canste thou hang
thy salvation on these nevve ministers whom thou can not distinguishe from
false prophets, because they can shevve noe more probability of their
ordinary or extraordinary mission, then they did, and to vvho^ thou can not
give care, but thou must harken also by the same reason unto all false
propheter who can say as much for them selves as thy preachers can do,
and therefore can not be rejected if these be received, with out plain
partiality.

The second Chapter shows how the Reformers grounding their Religion on
bare scripture, do set the gate open unto all heretics and heresies.

THE devil has alvvaies played the ape even from the beginning: for after
that he perceived that he could not be God in deed, to which dignity by
climing thoughts he had ambitiously aspired, he endeavored by all means
possible so to bring his intentes to pass, that he might at least go for a
God, and be taken for a God; and therefore like an ape he has ever imitated
God so nearly, that he would be honored and served in the same fashion and
manner as he savve the true God was worshipped. Tert l. pras. c. 40.
God is served with sacrifice, as with a service dew unto divine Majesty,
the devil was ever honored amongst the paganes with his Hecatombs and
Sacrifices even by the Emperors of the world, God has his preests, the
devil his flamins, God has his sacraments the devil his expiations and
ceremonies, God has his baptism, his Euchariste, his Nonnes, and the devil
has his vvashings, his oblation of bread, and his vestal virgins, and as God
promises a heaven to his seruanntes and worshippers so does the devil
promise his Elisian feelds and threatens his stigiane lake. Tert. ibid.
And even as the devil by idolatours has imitated Gods sacrifice,
Sacraments, and manner of worship, so by heretics he has alvvaies affected
to be as like as may be to Christ and his Apostles, in citation and allegation
of scripture. Wherefore Vincentius Lyrinensis notes it to have been the
practice of heretics the members of the devil, l. cont. proph. ^. ^7.
to allege scriptures against the true Christians and members of Christ, as
once the devil their head, against Christ Jesus our head, wrested a place of
scripture to prove that he must needs cast him self headlong from the
pinnacle of the temple to prove him self the son of God. Mat. 4.
Marcion (as Witnesses Tertullian) to prone that the world (which he
imagined to be of an cuil nature) was created of an evil God, l prase. c 51.
used that place of Saint Matthew: Mat. 7.
Non potest arbor bona malos fructus facere, a good tree can not bring forth
evil fruits. l. de carne Christie. 20.
Valentinus (as the same autour relates) to persuade the world, that Christ's
body was framed of the substance of the heavens and consequently was noe true
flesh nor truly conceued and borne of the Virgin Marie but ra there passed
through her vvo^be as through a Pipe, taking noe substance of her; alleged
saint Paul's words who comparing the first Adame from whom we fetch our
carnal pedigree, withdraw the second Adame Christ Jesus, from whom we are
descended spiritually, uses these words: The first man of earth earthly, 1.
Cor. ^^.
the second man from heaven heavenly: Not knovving or not vvilling to know
that Christ is called heavenly, either in respect of his divinity and divine
person, or because he was not earthly that is subject to sin which
proceeds from earthly and terrene desires, or because his body by right was
from the first moment of his conception, celestial, that is glorious, as are
the bodies of the blessed (which therefore saint Paul calls also spiritual)
and afterward was the first body that rose to that glory to which it ever
had good right, Ibidam.
because a gloriouse soul such as Christ's was from the first infusion of it
into the body, Io. 4.
required as dew a glorious body but Christ would have his body to want
this dew vvhilest he lived with us, that he might suffer for us, which he
could not have done in a glorified body. The Arrians to prove God the son
inferior to his father, and not consubstantial nor coaequal unto him, brought
his own words against him: the father is greater then I: omitting many
pregnaunt places which avouch the son to be consubstantial and aequal unto
him, to which places this also is not contrary, August. l. 1. Trin. 6.7.
because it proves only that Christ as man is inferior to his father. The
Nestorians by those places by which we prove two naturs in Christ the one
human the other divine proved two persons in Christ. The Eutichianes by the
same places of scripture by which Catholics do prove that in Christ was but
one person, endeavored to prove that in Christ was but one nature. And it has
been the property of all heretics to make no bones of scriptures, but
prodigally to spend them and to lauis he them out to prove thereby their
heresies, were they never so fantastical. Supra.
Hic fortasse (says Vincentius Lyrinensis) aliquis interroget, an and
haeretici diuinae scripturae testimonijs vtantur, Vtuntur plane and vehementer
quidem, nam videas eos volare per singula quaeque diuinae legis volumina: Here
perchance some will demand whether that heretics do use the testimonies of
holy scripture? they use them assuredly and that vehemeutly, for you shall see
them fly through every volume of the heavenly law. Read (says he) the
works of Paulus Samosatenus of Priscilianus, Iouinianus, or Eunomius, and
thou shall find an infinite heap of examples, almost noe page omitted which is
not dyed and colored with sentences of the old and new Testament Remember
(says Hilarious) that there is no her tike which does not feign that his
blasphemies which he preaches are according unto Scriptures. Orat. ^. con^.
Constable.
And faint Austine is of opinion that heresies proceed from no other fountain
then scriptures vvro^gly expounded and crookedly wrested: Non aliunde natae
sunt haereses, Tract. 1^ in 10.
nisi dum scripturae bonae non intelliguntur been: From no other place heresies
do proceed, but vvhilest good scripturs, are euilly understood. But yet herin
these heretics are liberal of that which is none of their own, and like
Aesops crovve they proudly deck them selves with other byrds feathers. For
what right or title have they to scriptures of which they are so prodigal? or
how came they to get the possession of scripturs? truly as thieves take
possession of other men's goods. For Catholics have had the scripturs in their
keeping time out of mind, as all histories, all vvritings of the fathers, all
counsels and ancient tradition will witness for us: and so at least by
prescription, Catholics are the true and lavvful possessours of scripturs. Yea
histories, and the ancient books of the fathers, who from the first age
alleged scriptures, are arguments that we are the lavvfull heirs to the
Apostles concerning the inheritance of scripture, Second book chap. 1.
because as herafter shall be proved we only are the successors to the ancient
fathers and Apostles them selves. And seeing that such arguments would cast
them in law, if the controversy were but about apeece of ground, I see noe
reason, but that if the reformers of this time and the Catholic should put
this case to any indifferent judge, to wit whether they or Catholics are the
lavvfull possessours of scripture, the judge must needs give sentence for the
Catholic par tie which was the first possessour, and possessour even from
the Apostles of holy scripture. Yea the Reformers of this age Luther and Calvin
when they began to preach, received not the Bible of any of their
praedicessours, because before Luther, there were no Lutheranes, nether were
there Caluinists before Calvin, but they found the Bible in the Catholic and
Romain Church which ever had the custody of this treasure, and out of this
Church they took the Bible else had they never come to the knowledge of it,
and seeing that they took it with out the lavvfull owners leave, it must
needs follovv that they are thieves and noe lavvful possessours, and
consequently have no right to use it especially against the right owner.
Wherefore if they will fight with us with noe other weapons then scriptures
we must first put them to the proof of their title, least we admit the^ to
scriptures, who have no right unto them, and permit them to use our own
vveapon, to cut our own throats. And seeing that they can not prove them selves
lavvfull possessours of scripture, nether are we bound to dispute with them
by scripture, nether have they any right or reason to allege scripture against
us. But yet as I have declared, heretics fingers itche, and are never well
but when they are fingring of Scripturs, and their tongues are never so
glibbe, as when they are fauced with textes of scripture. And why think you
do they so willingly allege scripture, and decide all by the bare letter of
scripture? Many reasons there are why they do so. For first their guilty
conscience urges them thereunto. For as the foul and beautilesse maid,
perceuing her defect and want of natural beauty, is feign to use extrinsecal
colors, to make a show of beauty vvher in deed is none, so the heretics
either doubting in conscience of the verity of their opinions, or at least not
able otherwise to defend the^ from error, are constrained to use scriptures
as colors, to make at least a show of verity vvher in deed no verity is to
be soound. Amb in ^. vlt. ad Tit
Fos as S. Ambrose says, impiety seeing authority to be esteemed; covers
her self with the veale of scripture that vvheras by her self she is not
acceptable byscripture she may seem most co^me^dable. Wherefore Vincentius
Lyrine^sis says, Supra ^. 17.
that heretics herin are like to sluttes who perfume with svvet odours and
pouders those things which of the^ selves are stinking, or to those nurses
who anointe the cup brimmes with honey to make heedles children to drink
down the bitter potion, or to those Apothecaries who upon the boxes which
co^tein poison, write the names of sovereign restauratiues: for so heretics
with the svveet odours of scriptures perfume the ordurs of their heresies, and
with the svveet honey of Gods word which tasted to Dauidlik the honey comb,
Psalm. 11^.
deceue the vnheedy and make them drink poison in their golden cupps, and
applying scripture to their poisonfull doctrine they make the simple to buy of
them deadly poison in steed of wholesome medicines, that is heresies instead of
true faith and religion. Let not then our Reformers brag so much of
scripture, nether let them think to carry away the bucklers because they
allege scripture for every thing, and let not the simple people think them
selves secure, because their minister proves what he preaches by scripture,
because every heretic does the same and the devil him self has alleged
scripture, Mat. ^.
and would have proved that Christ must cast him self headlong from the
pinnacle if he might have had that liberty which all heretics do take, Li
praescrip. c. 19.
that is to expound scripture as he pleases. Wherefore Tertulian refuses
flatly to dispute with heretics by bare scripture, and countes it but lip
labor. And good reason had he, because either they will deny scripture when
they can not dravve it to their byas, or they will expound it as they list,
if it may abide glossing; and so they shape not their doctrine according to
scripture but rather scripture according to their doctrine. yea it is so usual
a thing amongst them to discanon books of scripture or to dismember and may
me them if they stand in their way that there is almost no part of scripture
which by one heretic or other has not been rejected or mangled. Cast no
(...) Scriptura. Si^t^^ l ^.^. Bibl.
Marcion was so coning in this point that Tertulian calls him mus Ponticus
the mo^^se of Pontus, Li. ^. contra Marcionem.
for gnavving of scriptures. Cerdon denied saint Matthevves Ghospel because it
settes down the Genealogy of Christ which could not stand with his heresy
that avouched that Christ had no true flesh, Ters. l praescr. c. ^1.
and that he was not truly borne. Iron l. 1. c. 28. Epiph. ser. ^0.
The Ebionits refused saint Paul's Epistles because they reiecte the Jewish
ceremonies which those heretics allow ed of. Prefat in Euang Cocl. in vitae.
And why did Martin Luther the Archeretike of this age disallovv of S. lames
epistle but because it is so opposite to his solafidian justice? otherwise
what more certainty has he of saint Paul's epistles then of that of saint
James, especially he having noe knowledge nether of the one nor the other but
by the Romain and Catholic Church, which esteems of both alike: Saint
Austine was so far from doubting of the verity of this epistle of Saint
lames that he affirms it to have been written of purpose against certain
heretics who misconstred Saint Paul's epistles, V. de operibus ^. 14.
Infra l. vltio c. 3.
as Luther and Calvin do. Why does Luther discanon Job? Why iesteth he at
Ecclesiastes? Why contemns he all the Glospells but saint Ihons, the epistle
to the Hebrews, and that of Judas? Why does not Calvin like of
Ecclesiasticus, Judith and the Machabees, but because that these books are
opposite to some point or other of their doctrine? What merueil then if we
refuse to decide controversies with them by bare scripture, who if we bring
a place of scripture, against them, will deny it to be scripture though all
the world say contrary? And although they admit some books of scripture,
yet those they so admit, that they will have the bare letter, or joined
with their voluntary exposition, to be the judge of controversies, that so
they may make scriptures to speak as they list, and to give that sentence
which pleases them. For bare scripture is of a vvaxie nature, and is as
pliable to admit diverse expositions as wax is to take diverse impressions.
Which is the cause why heretics out of scripture so easily can excogitate
and devise even contrary heresies. Li ^. contrae Brent.
Luther therefore calls scripture the book of heretics, and Hosius relates
hovvone compared scripture to Aesops fables, because you may as diversely
interpret scripture as you may moralize those fables. Others call scripture a
nose of wax, because it may be wrested and vvried every way: which
comparisons although they be odious, and little beseeming the majesty of
scripture, yet are they true if by scripture you understand the bare letter of
scripture, without an assured interpretour, as the Reformers do. For the ba^e
letter of scripture is so ambiguous and may have so many senses and meanings
that it may be applied to what you will, and may be, and already has been
used for the proof of the most absurd heresies that ever were. But vvhilest
they allege the bare letter of scripture for confirmation of their doctrine,
well may they so delude the unlearned, but men of learning and intelligence, are
well assured that the bare letter is no more scripture, then the body of a man
is a man. For as the soul is the life of the body, and that which makes a
man, so the sense is the life of the word and that which gives scripture
life, essence, and being. Com. ad. Gal.
Wherefore saint Hierome says that The ghlospel is not in the word but in
the sense, not in the bark but in the sap, not in the leaves of the words
but in the root of the meaning. Let not therefore out Reformers vaunte in their
pulpits that they try their doctrine by the touchstone of scripture, nether
let them insulte over Catholics as though they relied only on men's decrees,
and Popes Bulls for if they give us the letter of scripture with the true
meaning which is the formal cause and life of the word, we will reverence
it as the word of God, and prefer it before all the decrees and writings
of Pope and Church, but take the true sense from it, and it is no more
scripture then is a man without a soul, because as the same body may be the
living body of a man and a dead carcas also, so the same letter with the true
meaning is the word of God, with a false meaning, it is the word of the
devil. As for example, those words of our Savior: The father is greater then
I, Io. 1^.
taken in the right sense, that is according to Christ's humain nature, are the
true word of God, but taken in the meaning of the Arrians who imagined
Christ a creature inferior even in person to his father, they are noe word
of God but of the devil, unless you will grant heresy to be the word of
God. The reason of this is, because words, are words, in that they are
signs of the minds meaning, and do explicate her inward conceit, and
consequently that is Gods word which explicateth his meaning, and divine
conceit; but if it explicate the mind of the devil or of his ministers such as
all heretics are, then is it not the word of God but rather of the devil.
Vverfore when the letter of the scripture is joined with the right meaning,
then do we grant though men vvrote it, that is is the word of God, because
it explicateh his meaning, who spoke unto the holy vvriters in that meaning,
and directed their hearts and hands in the vvriting of the same. Isa. 1.
In so much that God says to Isaie: Heb. 1.
Behold I have put my words in thy mouth. And saint Paul says that God
diversely and by diverse means spoke in times paste unto our forfathers, in the
Prophets, that is in the mouche of the prophets, putti^g in their mouths that
which they were to speak and directing their, hands to write it. For as the
vital spirit of man frames his words in his mouth and gives them their
meaning, so the words of the prophets and other holy vvriters were framed in
their mouths by the spirit of God. Which is the very cause why divines say
that God was the principal speaker and writer of scripture, and that the
Prophet, Apostle or Euangeliste, was his instrument, and as it were the pen,
mouth, and tongue of God, Psalm 44. Praefat. in Mat. 1. Li. 7. conf. ^. vlt l
^^. Ciuit. c. 38. Hom 10. in ^exam.
in that he was guided and directed by him and his holy spirit. Wherefore
David who was one of these vvriters says that his tongue is the pen or
quill of him that vvriteth svviftly; and saint Gregory and saint Austine
affirm scripture to be the venerable style of the holy ghost, and saint Basil
says that not only the sense of scripture but also every word and tittle is
inspired by the holy ghost. Vvherin a difference is put betvvixte scripture and
definitions of the Church, Pope, or Councels. Because these are assisted by the
holy ghost, only that they may define the truth, and so the sense of a
Counsels definition confirmed by the Pope, is of the holy ghost, but it is not
necessary that every word or reason in a Council proceed from the holy
spirit of God, and therefore divines say that in a Council, that thing only is
necessarily to be believed, which the Council of set purpose intended to
define. But as for other things which are spoken incidently, and as for
reasons which the Council alleges, they are not of that credit, although
without cuident cause they are not to be rejected. And this is the cause why
the ancient fathers do way and ponder every word and tittle, which
interpretours of the Councels canons, or definitions, do not. Vver^ore (as I
said) let them not charge us with contempt of scripture, for our opinion and
estimation of scripture is most venerable, if it be in deed scripture, yea we
avouch that in it self it is of far greater authority then is the Church or
her definitions, because though God assiste both, yet after a more noble manner
he assisteth holy vvriters in vvriting of scripture, because he assisteth them
infaillibly not only for the sense and verity but also for every word which
they write, and every reason and whatsoever is in scripture, vvheras he
assisteth the Pope and Council infallibly, only for the sense and verity of
that which they inte^de to define, but nether for every word nor for every
reason, nor for every thing which is incidently spoken as is already
declared. And yet we say also that although scripture of it self be greater
then the Church, and indepe^dent of her, because not from her but from God it
has authority and verity, yet the Church is better known to us then
scripture, and therefore though she make not scripture, yet of her we are to
learn which is scripture, and what is the meaning thereof; which is noe more
disgrace to scripture then that faint Ihon and the Apostles should give
testimony of Christ because they were better known then he, though his
authority in it self was greater the^ theirs and not depe^ding of them. yea
the reformers every one in particular be he a Cobbler, is according to their
doctrine to judge by his private spirit which is scripture and what is the
meaning of scripture, which seems to have more difficulty then that the
Church, and her common spirit, which Christ promised her, ^^. 1^.1^.
should challenge unto her such authority. Give us therefore true scripture and
we will reverence it as the word of God, but corrupt this scripture by
putting a false sense and signification to the letter, as the reformers do, and
then we will not acknovvledge it for the word of God, because it explicateth
not his mind and meaning, but rather we detest it above all other words and
vvritings whatsoever, because in that it bears the name of the word of God
and yet is not, it is the most pernicious word that is. For as the sovvrest
vyneger comes of the best wine, so the most pernicious word is the letter
of scripture corrupted and misinterpreted. If then our adversaries will have
scripture to be judge in controversies of religion, let them allege true
scripture, that is the letter with the true meaning, of which not every
private spirit, but the common spirit of the Church must be judge, as shall
herafter be proved. But if they will make the bare letter to be judge, we
deny first that the bare letter is scritpure, and then we avouch that the bare
letter is noe good rule nor lavvfull judge of religion, because the letter of
scripture, may have diverse senses, and may serve every heretic for his
purpose, as before is declared, and so can be no rule nor judge, which both
must be assured, and certain. To this they answer that scripture is so easy
that the meaning is evident to every one that has eyes to see it, and so he
may as easily see the conformity of their religion unto the rule of
scripture. For as when the measure is known it is evident how long the cloth
is which is measured by it, so scripture as they say being easy, it is most
evident when religion is true, because it is evident when it is agreeable, and
conformable to the assured, and known measure of scripture, by which all
religions are to be squared out and measured. But that scripture is not easy
to be understood, it is easily to be proved and so this answer is as easily
to be rejected. ^. Pet. 3.
For first scripture her self confesses her own obscurity. For saint Peter
in his epistle which is a part of scripture, avouches that in S. Paul's
Epistles, which our reformers will not deny to be another part of scripture,
are certain hard things, hard to be understood which the unlearned and
unstable deprave, as also the rest of the scriptures, lib. de fid. and op. c.
14.
to their own perdition. And saint Austine says plainly that those hard
things are his commendations of faith which the ignorant even from the
Apostles time did so misco^ster, as though his meaning had been that only faith
without charity and good works does justify. Act. 1^.
The Eunuch could not understand Esaie without an interpretour, Psalm 1^8.
David cries for understanding at Gods hands before he dares adventure to
search the law, Luc 24.
the Apostles could not understand scripturs till Christ opened their sense and
eyes of understanding, and yet our reformers are so eagle-eyed that they can
see clearly and that at the first sight into the darkest and obscurest place of
scripture. The ancient fathers affirm that scriptures are obscure, and
amongst them saint Hierome says that the beginning of Genesis and the end
of Ezechiel, Ep. ad Paul.
in times past was not permitted to be read of any till he were thirty
years of age, and why but for the obscurity which might rather deceue, the^
direct the younger sort? l. 2. con. c. 14.
S. Austine that great light of the Church and miraculous vvitte, who when he
was but twenty years of age understood the predicame^tes of Aristotle at
the first sight, thought nether so highly of him self nor so basely of
scripturs, as to think him self able by reach of wit to attain unto the
profound sense and meaning of them, but rather though he had studied them more
days and nights then our ministers have done days only, Ep. 3. ad V^lus.
yea or hours, and had written more for the interpreting of scripturs then
ever they read, yet says he: So great is the profunditie of them that I might
every day make profit in them if I should with greatest leisure, greatest
study, and a better wit, endeavor to come unto the knowledge of them only,
and that from my tender youth unto crooked old age. And in his books which
he vvrote upon Genesis, in his tractes upon saint Ihon, and diverse other
parts of scripture he moves many doubts and difficulties; Prafat. assert.
^rt da^.
and yet Luther says that scripturs are more plain and easy then all the
fathers commentaries. Petrus Lombardus commonly called the master of sentences,
Li^. ^. d. 12.1. p. q 65.
saint Thomas and other divines armed with philosophy, and furnished with
the school literature, apply not vvithstanding all their vvittes to the
explicating of the first chapter of Genesis and the creation of the world in
the first six days, (...) Hexam^^.
as also saint Basil, saint Ambrose and others do. And yet Luther boldly
affirms that no part of scripture is to be called our counted obscure. l. de
seru^ ar. bit.
Saint Gregory Nazianzeen and saint Basil studied scriptures for thirtene
years together, and yet durst not svverue a iotte from the interpretation of
the ancient fathers. Ruff. l. 11. c. 4
Saint Hierom not vvithstanding that he was so well seen in the Greek and
Hebrew tongue, ep. tot. ^^.
and other both profane and sacred literature, yet went he as far as
Alexandria to confer with Didimus. Who also ronning after a cursorie manner
over all the books of scripture fyndeth such difficulty in every one, as
though he understood this only in scripture that he understands not
scripture, or as though this only in scripture were easy to be understood,
that Scripture is not easy, and ending with the Apocalipse thus he
concludes: Apocalypsis Ioannis tot habet sacramenta quot verba, parum dixt pro
merito voluminis, laus omnis inferior est, in verbis singulis multiplices
latent intelligentiae: The Apocalipse of Ihon has as many sacraments as
words, I have said little for the merit of the volume, all praise is
inferior, in every word there lie hidden many senses and meaninges. And yet
Luther and Calvin and commonly Puritanes and Protestants avouch scripture to be
facile and perspicuous, that by the own light you may see it, and see into
it, and need noe more help of an interpretour the^ of a candle to see the
son when it shines in the midde-daye. But if this doctrine be true why is
there such contention amongst the Reformers for the true explication of diverse
places of Scripture? Why did the fathers, and why do the Reformers make so
large commentaries upon scripture? Why retain they a divinity lesson in
Oxford and other Universities, especially now that they have turned the Bible
into the vulgar tongue, which being done, by the private spirit of the
minister at the first sight it is easily understood? If this be true then
certainly had the ancient fathers very dull pates, who with all their study,
industry, prayer, fasting, solitude, tongues, philosophy, and sanctity of
life, could not attain to that knowledge of scripture in a long life's time,
which a minister by and by gets at the first opening of the Bible. But tell
me in good sadness: are you in jest or earnest when you say that scripture is
easy? When you read the first chap. of Genesis the prophecies especially of
Daniel, the Psalms of David, Iobes vvitty sayings, Salomons Proverbs and
Canticles, saint Paul's epistles, S. Ihons Apocalipse, do you find no
difficulty? I can not think it, because even experience teaches that nothing
is more evident then that scripture is not evident. For first the very letter
and phrase of scripture is obscure and ambiguous. Secondly many speeches in
scripture are prophetical, many parabolical, many metaphorical, which commonly
are full of obscurity. Thirdly it is proper to scripture to have many senses
under one letter, as the literal sense which the holy writer first intended,
and this sense some times is signified by proper words, some times
metaphorical, yea sometimes also this literal sense under one letter, is
diverse. Sometimes the sense is spiritual which is that which the things
under the letter do signify as for example those words of saint Paul
Abrahame had tvvoe sounes one of the handmayd another of the free woman, Gal.
^.
literally do signify Abrahames two sons, because that the letter imports
and that first is intended, but these tvvoe sons were figures of the old and
new Testament or the tvvoe peoples which lived under those Testaments, and so
this is the spiritual signification of those words which they not immediately
but by means of those tvvoe sons do signify. And this sense is either moral
or tropological when it tends to manners, or allegorical which tends to
faith or the Church, or anagogical which tends to heaven or life
everlasting. Wherefore this word Jerusalem literally signifies the city so
called, morally, the soul of man which God inhabiteth by good life or the
devil by badde, allegorically, the Church militant, and anagogically, heaven
and the Church triumphant. Now who is he that dares promise to tell us
infaillibly when a place of scripture is to be understood literally or
spiritually and in what literal or spiritual meaning? in c 16. Ezec.
Saint Hierome affirms that Apollinaris, Tertulian, and Lactantius, and
other millenarians, imagined after the resurrection, a reedification of the
Temple and terrestrial Jerusalem, and that Christ in it should reign for a
thousand years and we that time should live in all corporal pleasurs, because
they vndetstood certain places of scripture literally and properly, which
should have been understood spiritually and metaphorically. And contrariwise
the same father ascribes Origens errors in the exposition of the beginning of
Genesis to no other cause, ep. ad Paul.
then that he imagined that the said chapter ought to be understood
metaphorically and spiritually, which should have been interpreted
historically, properly, and literallie. And what man in his vvitte can think
it so easy to hit always of the right sense, where the senses are so
diverse and in which so many learned men have banguered. Truly when I
consider with my self how evident a thing it is that scriptures are hard
and obscure, I marvel how our Reformers can persuade the^ selves that
scriptures are easy. and some times I am induced to think that when they say
so they speak not as they think? but yet when I call to mind another
opinion of theirs, which is that the true meaning of scripture is that which
every ones private spirit imagines, I see it to be as easy to interpret
scripture, as to imagine, which is most easy, because the imagination is free
and can as well imagine Chimeraes as true obiectes. As for example if that
were the true meaning of Aristotle which every one would imagine, then were
it an easy matter for every cobbler to understand Aristotle were he in Greek
or Latin, because he can imagine what it pleases him with great facility.
And this if I be not deceued is the cause why now every sister of the lord
whom saint Paul commands to be silent in the Church, will needs be a
bibliste and an interpretour of Scripture. For if that be the true sense of
scripture which the private spirit imagines, if she have the spirit (as why
should she not as well as the minister especially it being a receued doctrine
amongst them that every one by his private spirit can judge of scripture) why
may not she comment upon the scripture, and mount also into the pulpit, there
to preach the doctrine of her spirit. But o fancies, o Luciferia^ pride, to
which heresy leads even the frail and imperfect Sex which nature seems
to have debarred from pulpits. Lib. praesc.
This pride Tertulian espied in the heretical women of his time. Ipsae
mulieres hereticae quam sunt procaces quae docere audent, contendere exorcismis
agere, curationes repromittere, forsitan and tingere: Even the heretical women
how malapert are they, which dare be so bold as to preach, and to take upon
them to exorcise, and to promise miraculous cures, yea perhaps to baptize. And
vvheras Apprehe^tices are bound seven years to an occupation, to learn only
a mechanical trade, the art and science of expounding scripture which is the
highest science that is, seems to these subtle vvittes so easy, Ep. ad Paul.
that as saint Hierome observed in some of his time, every cobbler, every old
trotte, and doting fool can with out a Doctor find out the secret meaning
of scripture, and teach before they be taught. But let them say and believe if
they can or will, that scripture is easy, the experience and reason which I
have alleged will prove the contrary. And truly if honey be hidden in the
comb, marovv in the bone, and pretiouse stones in the sea, if gold be gotten
with labor out of the bowels and secret veins of the earth, and roses be
hedged in with pricking thorns, if nature has hidden all perfection and
natural sciences and vealed them with such obscurity that without great
industry they can not be discovered, good reason was there that the mystical
meanings and sacred senses of scripture should be vealed with an obscure
letter and covered with many aenigmatical speeches. For first by reason of
this difficulty the study of scripture asks a ma^s vvholle life, and so
keeping him occupied, distracteth him from profane, idle, and evil
occupatio^s. Secondly the difficulty of scripture makes a man to have a better
esteem and higher conceit of the same, because things easily learned are
easily co^te^ned, Li. 2. doct. Christ. c. 6.
and knowledge hardly gotten is highly priced. And therefore as S. Austine
notes, the holy ghost in scripture has provided easy things to satisfy our
honger, and obscure places also to take away lothsomnes. Because our
understanding with easy things only, would be soon cloyed, and with
obscurity only would easily be deterred. Thirdly this difficulcie imprinteth
in our memory the word of God more deeply. For as the iro^ is more hard to
receue impression then wax or water, yet keeps it more firmly, so that
which we learn hardly, we forget not easily. Fourthly it controleth our
high-clyming and deep searching vvittes and maket^ us to acknovvledge the
weakness of our intellectual eyesight, which if it be so dim ne, that it
can noe more sustain the blazing sple^dour of natural verities, the^ can the
night-crovves eyes the beams of the son, much less^ can it behold (unless
it be by a glimse and glimmering) the splendent rays of supernatural
verities, revealed through the dark veale of holy scripture. Fifthly this
difficulty increases merit and deserte, when so constantly we believe
those verities which in scripture are rather vealed them revealed. Sixthly
this difficulty preserves scripture from profanation, and is the cause why
every one can not babble of scripture as they do of easy things, and as the
heretics of this time do, because they imagine scripture to be easy.
Seauenthly it hides our sacred mysteries from profane infidells who are noe
more worthy of this divine knowledge then are the beastly swine of preciouse
pearls. Orig. li. 1. in Le^it.
Eighthly as Cirill or rather Origin very well observes, these obscure phrases
and figures vvherin the divine verity is cladde, are as it were a seemly
habit which graceth the word of God and makes it seem the better unto our
vveakish eyes. For more are we delighted to see the verity of the sacred
Eucharist under the figure of Manna, and of the Sacrament of Baptism, in that
shadovve of the red sea, then if we savve the same set forth to ourvevve in
bare words though never so plain. But now let us see what our ghospellers
can say to this experience and reason by which I have proved scriptures to
be hard and difficile? It is true says Luther, scriptures are in many places
hard, but where they treat of things necessary to salvation, there are they
plain and perspicuouse. Is it true (Luther) that so me parts of scripture are
hard? Supra.
then must thou eat that word of thine in which thou sayedst. Ego de tota
scriptura dico, nullam eius partem obscuram dici volo. I say of all scripture,
I will have no part of it called obscure. And vvilt thou stand to it, that
where scripture treats of things necessary to salvation, there it is plain
and easy? I ask then of thee, whether the doctrine of Baptism be not
necessary to salvation? And if thou say yea, then is some part of scripture
which treats of things necessary, hard and difficile, for otherwise
Calvin would never have cauilled so much about those words of Christ. Io. ^.
Unless a man be borne agan of water and the holy ghost. Is not the doctrine
of the blessed Sacrament necessary to be believed? And yet who sees not,
how many diverse expositions the ghospellers have devised upon those fevv
words. Mat. 26. Luc. 22.
This is my body? Is not the doctrine of justification necessary? And yet it
is so obscurely set down in scripture, that Osiander a voucheth, Ex Bol to 3.
l. 3. l. 2. de Iustif. initio
that amongst the confessionistes there are tvve^tie different opinions about
the formal cause of justification, and every one is deduced out of scripture.
At least they will grant me that the doctrine and faith of the blessed
Trinity and of Christ's divinity, and humanity is of necessity to be
believed; and yet the Ebionites, Arrianes, Nestorians, Eutichians,
Valentinians, Monothelites, and Appollinaristes, who held diverse heresies
concerning the Trinity and Incarnation, proved the^ all to their thinking out
of scripture. Which is a sign that scripture is not easy, for vvher al is
plain, all men commonly aggree, and if scripture where it speaks of those
mysteries were perspicuouse they would never have banguered so grossly in
expounding them. But rather then my adversary will stand out, he will be
content to play small play. If says he thou be a good Gra^marian, all
will seem easy unto thee. And was not I pray thee S. Austin who read
Rhetorike in Millan, was not S. Hiero^vvhoe was excellent in all the three
tongues, a Grammarian? They were, They were, and yet they confessed as I have
declared, that scriptures were full of difficulty. Yea in England our
ministers have the Bible in English, and so have no need of any help of
Grammar, and yet can they not aggree about the scriptures meaning. Yea in all
sciences, it is one thing to be a grammarian another thing to attayn to the
knowledge of the science, for many a school master in England can constrevv
Aristotle which yet can not understand him, and if grammar were sufficient,
then after grammar, we should need no study nether in divinity nor
philosophy, nor any other science: And to use no other argument then
experiens, let our Gra^marians in Ingland after they have constrevved the
psalms, tell me weather they do yet understand the psalms? But my adversary
will show that he is not tongue tied and therefore will not be put to
silence. If (says he) you confer one place with another, one will
explicate another. This is another starting hole which he has found out. But
this also is but a poor shifte. For although one place conferred with another
many times gives a great light to both, yet does it not so always fall out.
For diverse have conferred the same places and yet have gathered diverse
meaninges, yea somtymes conference of places augmenteth the difficulty, and
makes a shovv of contradiction which before appeared not. Now gentle reader
thou would think that this man were satisfied or else that his mouth were
stopped, but yet he desires one answer more, and if that will not serve, he
will either yield or hold his peace. If you pray to God (says he) to
illuminate you, he will reveal the meaning of scripture unto you, or if you
have the spirit and be not carnal but spiritual, or if you be praedestinate,
you shall find all as plain in scripture, as the kings high way. This
answer is so poor, that it well argues that our adversary is put to an
hard shift and to a last reply: because in this answer he declares ignotum
per ignotius, an unknown thing by that which is more unknown. As for
example, I would have him to assure us whether that we expound scripture
rightly or vvrongly and he tells us that if we pray as we ought to do, or
if we be of the elect, or if we be spiritual men, we shall easiilie
find out the meaning of holy scripture. And seeing that nothing is more
uncertain the^ whether we pray as we ought to do, whether we be
elect or not, or whether we be true spiritual men or not: by this rule
we shall never, be assured of the true sense of scripture. And were not I
pray you saint Austine, saint Hierom, and other ffathers before mentioned,
the elect Saints of God? was it not like that if any prayed a right, that
they did so? were not they liker to be spiritual men, then our fleshly
ghospellers, whom their vviues can not content? Or can the reformers assure us
that they them selves are elect, that thy pray just as thy ought to do, that
they are spriritual men who have the right spirit of interpreting
scripture? It follovveth therefore which I intended to prove that if we
believe these reformers, because they allege scriptures according to their
own exposition, we must of necessity give ear unto all false prophets,
who can, and have already and herafter will allege scripture for what
soever they shall preach; and so if these Reformers be admitted no heretics
nor heresies can be excluded or rejected. Which conclusion although it
necessarily propceedeth from the premises, which before are laid down, yet
to help the readers memoire, I will lay the^ down again breefly, that out
of them he may gather the intended conclusion more easily. Thou must therefore
(gentle reader) call to mind which before is proved; to vvite that it has
always been the manner of heretics to allege scripture, and with such
cloakes to conceal their heresies; That they had no authority to use scripture
against our vvilles who ar the only lavvfull possessours; that all though
they perforce have ever used them, yet in very deed they gained naught thereby,
because that word which they used was no scripture, and is so hard,
obscure, and ambiguouse that unless the meaning be first aggreed upon, it may
ferue for a proof of all heresies, as hither to it has done; and seeing that
our reformers use no other proof for their doctrine, but the letter of
scripture interpreted at their pleasure, we can give no credit unto their
doctrine, unless we will allow of all ancient heresies, nether ca^ we
admit their persons for lavvfull preachers unless we will admit also al
false apostles, who have alvvayes alleged scriptures for their heresies, and
so can not without plain partiality be rejected, if our new pretended
reformers, be received.

The third Chapter treats of the pri^at Spirit which the pretended Reformers
have made supreme judge in earth in the interpretation of scripture, vvherby,
as it is proved, the gappe is opened to all heretics, and none can be
excluded, if these new Reformers be admitted to determine of religion by the
private spirit.

Self-love (says one) is as good as guilding, which makes that to seem
goodly, vvherin our selves be parties. For as guidling makes all to seem gold,
be it but stone or vvood underneath; So selfeloue makes to our selves, even
our selves, and all our actions to seem comely and seemly, be they never so
absurd and unseemly. Suum cuique pulchrum (says the) latin adage, to which
is ansvvearable our English proverb, Every man as he likes quoth the good man
to his covve. To Pan, his own pipe and piping sounded more melodiousely the^
A pollo his harp and harping. Every maid thi^kes her self of all to be the
fairest, or if she acknowledge any one defect in beauty, she thi^ks that to be
counteruayld in many other perfections. Every mother deems her own children
the most well favored, to every hen her own chicken is most pleasing, yea
every ovvle and crovv thinks her own youngone fayrer and better fethered then
the white dove, hawk, or Eagle. Artizanes praise most their own
vvorkemanship, Poets price their own poemes at the highest rate, and every
scholar thinks his own vvitte most pregnaunt, and every doctor preferres his
own books and writings before all other. Yea all men by nature not ruled by
reason, nor corrected by grace, fall most vvilling ly in love with their own
co^ceipts, and the broods and youngones of their own devising vvitts. The
reason hereof is, own self, to which, as every one is more near, then to
another, so is he most addicted and affected. For to our selves we are one, to
others we are only united, and so first we like our selves and our own
doings, next of all, those and their actions, who arnearest and most united
unto us. Wherefore although, in that God is the cheifest good and goodness it
self, he should by all reason be first and best beloved, yet because he is
not so near unto us, as we are to our selves, we give the may denhead and
prime of our affection unto our selves. l. de diligende Deo.
This saint Bernarde in his book which he made of the love of God observed
long since. Imprimis (says he) diligit hemo seipsum propter se, caro quippe
est and nihil sapere valet praeter se, cumque se videt persenon posse
subsistere, Deum sibi quasi necessari^m incipit diligere, at vero cum Deum
coeperit occasion, propriae necessitatis colere and diligere, Deus illi
dulcessit, and sie gustando quam suauis est Dominus, transit ad tertium gradum
and diligit Deum propterse: First of all man loves him self for him self,
because he is flesh, and can like of nothing but him self, and when he sees
that of him self he can not stand, he begins to love God as a thing
necessary unto him, but when he begins to love God upon occasion of his
own necessity, then God begins to wax svveet unto him, and so by tasting
how svveet God is he passes to the third degree and loves God for him self.
And as we love our selves and our own things best, so does this self love
blind us and hide from our own eyes our own defectes. Vverfore Demosthenes
was wont to say that it is a most easy thig to deceive our selves, for
while we desire especially to have our own actions liked, we easily
persuade our selves that they are to be liked. l 9. de leg. ^. p.
And therefore Plato counsayleth every man to fly this vice of self love
which the Grecians call (...) and not to be ashamed to learn of others
especially when they are our betters. Now if ever any were sick of this
disease, it is the heretic especially of our time, who prefers his own
opinion before the common consent of fathers, and his own private and
particular spirit before the common spirit of the Church: who though a
general council, in which all the gravity, sanctity, wisdom, and learning
of the Church is assembled together, define the contrary, will never change
his opinion, but will prefer his own particular opinion and private spirit
before all councelles, fathers, ages, and Churches, and he but one, vvil stand
against all, and he but one, will be judge of all in interpretation of
scripture, and will be judged of none. l. ^. cont. haer. ^.2.
This intolerable pride and self love of their own opinions Saint Ireneus
avouches to be a common disease amongst heretics. Vnusquisque (says he)
fictionem quam a semetipso adinaenit, illam esse sapientiam dicit, seque
indubitate and incontaminate and sincere absconditum scire mysterium. Every one
says that his own fiction which he has devised is vvisdome, and that he
undoubtedly, incontaminatly, and sincerely does know the hidden mystery. A
rius that famous or rather infamous heretic, not for spoiling Dianaes temple
but for robbing Christ of his divinity, was so wise in his own conceipte,
Nic l. 8. c. 7. l. 4 c. 12.
that he thought none of the ancient fathers worthy to be compared with him.
Aetius another soldier of Lucifers ba^de was wont to say that he knevv God
as well as he knevv him self. Theodoreth. l 4. her. fab.
Manicheus bragged that he was not only an Apostle of Christ, Aug. cont. ep.
fund.
but also a Paraclete. Nestorius eloquent indeed, though not so svveet in
uttering, Socr l. 2.3.22.
as forvvard to come to the vtteraunce, took such pleasure therein, that he had
noe mind to read the ancient fathers. But to leave the old and to come to our
nevv-borne heretics, you shall see that in this self love and liking of their
own opinions, they degenerate not a iotte from their ancetours. Luther seeing
him self oftentimes to be pressed with the old fathers authority, prefers
his own private opinion before their common sentence, and decree, and
blusheth not a whit at the matter. Li, cons. ^^gem Angl.
Nihilcuro (says he) si mill Augustini, mill Cipriam, mill Ecclesiae
contra me sentiant; I care not if a thousand Augustines, a thousand Ciprianes,
a thousand Churches think otherwise then I do. Pro l. lib constatut^
E^clesiae.
And in a another place: Doctrinam meam (says he) nolo iudicari a quoquam
necab Episcopis, nec ab Angelis ommbus, volo per eam and Angelorum iudex esse:
I will not have my doctrine judged of any nether of Bishops nor of all the
Angels, I will by my doctrine be judge even of the Angels. And again in
another book of his: L do s^r^^^ arbier^^.
Ego (says he) in hoc libro non contuli sed asserui, and assero, net penes
vllum, iudicium esse volo, sed omnibus suadeo vt praestent obsequium. I have
not conferred in this book but I have affirmed, and I affirm, nether will I
that any man judge hereof, but I counsel all to obey mine opinion, But
especially he triun phe^li^n another place of the before said book which he
vvrote against Henry the eight. I oppose (says he) the ghospel (but expounded
as he pleases) against the sayings of fathers and Angeles (as though Angeles
were in opinion contrary to the gospel.) Here I stand, here I remain, here I
glory, here I triumph, here I insulteagainst the Papists, Thomistes,
Henricistes, Sophistes, and all the sayings of men though never so holy. See
how this man pleases him self in his own opinion, and how he prefers it
before all men and Angeles. For all though he will seem to prefer only ye
ghospelle before them, yet seeing that the controversy is not betvvixte
scriptures, and fathers (because the fathers reverenced scriptures more then
ever Luther did) but whether Luther or they expounded scripture most righthy,
he in deed prefers him self before all the fathers that ever were, and in
conceit, triumphs over them all, but before the victory. Calvin also in
this self pleasing opinion shovveth him self as bragging and Thrasonicall as
Luther for his heart, and conte^deth with him who shall stout it most. l. 4.
Inst. ^.9.
Nulla Conciliorum (says he) Pastorum, Fpiscoporum, nomina, nos impedire
debent, quo minus omnes omnium spiritus, ad diuini verbi regulam exigamus: No
names of Counsels Pastors, Bishops, ought to hinder us from examining the
spirits of all men by the divine word. And in another chapter of the same
book, c (...).
explicating those words of scripture This is my body in a contrary sense to
the Lutheranes he says that he having by dilligent meditation examined those
words does embrace that sense which the spirit tells him, Mat. 26.
and leaning to this (says he) I despise thevvisao^ of all me^ which can be
opposed against me. See, see, the pride of an heretic, may not Luther and
every false prophet say that he has used diligence and that the spirit tells
him the contrary? Were not the fathers as diligent as Calvin, as Wise, as
learned, and as virtuous, who expounded those words in their proper sense?
No, no, one Calvin in his own conceit surpasses them all, and his opinion
and private spirit must take the place and upper hand of all the Austines,
Ambroses, Gregory's, Hieromes, of all the Counsels, yea and Churches also,
all though they were thousands in number. Virg. Aeneid. 9. Ovid. meo. 1.
Of these men's private spirits may be said that of the Poet Sua cuique Deus
fit dira cupido: Every ones cruel lust is his God. Sibi quisque profecto est
Deus: Every one truly is to him self a God. For these men especially, who
prefer their private opinions before Fathers, Counsels, Churches, yea and
Angels also, What do they but adore the idols of their own imaginations,
as their God? Truly these men which are not sicut caeteri homines, like other
men at either gods or beasts, and that by the sentence of Aristotle the prince
of Philosophers. For if by this philophers verdit, solitary men or rather
haters of society, whom the Grecians use to call (...), be other gods or
savage beasts, what are these men who flying always the company and
common consent of Christians, v^ill go alone in all their opinions, and
symbolize or sort them selves with no men. But this it is to leave the
Catholic Church, which when the heretic forsakes, he bidds adevv to all
fathers, counsels, antiquity, and common consent, which only are to be
found, in this Charch; and must of necessirie stand post-alone, and stick to
his private spirit and opinion against all the Christian world. I would saint
Bernard had been to deal with these singular spirits, but because he is rid
of these troublesome companions, we will at least allege his words which he
once used against one Petrus Abailardus possessed with the same evil spirit,
who said that man was not delivered by Christ from captivity of the
devil: and although (says he) the doctors of the Church think the contrary,
yet other wise it seems unto me. What (says saint Bernard) shall I deem
more intolerable in these words? Epist. ^^0.
blasphemy, or arrogancy? What more damnable? rashness or impiety? Were it
not more meet that such a mouth should be bobbed and beaten with stones then
refuted by reasons? does he not justly provoke all men's hands against him,
whose hands are against all? All (says he) shink thus, but I think
otherwise. But what do thou think? what bring thou better? What more
subtilitie do thou find; What greater secret do thou boste to have been
revealed unto thee, which has not been known to so many saints, which
has escaped so many wise men? yet tell us, what that is which seems true
unto thee and unto no man else? And so forth. If to these words of Saint
Bernard gentle reader thou add Luther or Calvin in steed of Petrus Abailardus,
and putting out his singular opinion put one of theirs in the place, thou vvilt
easily peroeiue that these words may as well be used against them as him,
for they are noe less singular then he as appears by their proud assertions
which I have alleged, Luth. art 27.28. Ca u l. 2. Inst.
and may appear more by their opinions of the private spirit which in other
places they make the judge of the meaning of scriptures and of all other
controversies of religion. Do not they say still in effect that which saint
Bernard calls intolerable and damnable: I say so, let all the world say the
contrary? Do not they prefer their own exposition of scripture before
fathers, councels, Churches, yea Angels also? Do not their mouths out of
which have proceeded such arroga^t speeches deserve rather to be beaten with
stones then to be refuted by reasons? Behold England my dear and fovvly
deceived country, to what pride these Lucifers have induced the. Why did
thou forsake the Romain Church which was ever taken even of infidels for the
only Christian society? Whom did thou follovv when thou did leave that
Church, but only a singular spirit? And vvhereon now do thou rely, vvhero^
do thou ground thy religion? Not upon fathers, nor counsels, nor
antiquity, nor Church, nor common consent, for all these, thy nevvapostles
whom thou have follovved have rejected. do thou then rely upon Luther or
Calvin or the nevvfound ministers? Thou see by the first chapter how they
can not prove their mission nor distinguish them selves from fall prophets,
which are assuredly to come and are all ready come. And what reason had
thou to forsake thy grave and learned for fathers for these skipiacks, and the
common spirit of the Church for their fingular spirits which are so private
that thou shall hardly find tvvoe of them conspiring in one opinion. Do
thou ground thy self on scripture? Bare scripture as I have proved in the
second Chapter is no sure ground without the true sense, and how do thou
know that thou have the right meaning of scripture? I know thy answer: My
spirit (say thou) tells me so. This then is thy stay, this is thy ground
in religion, this is thy last refuge to which thou must needs stick unto as I
have declared, when thou leauest the Catholic Church. But is not this
intolerable pride to make thy private spirit to be judge of scripture and sense
of scriptur? Is not this intolerable arrogancy to make thy own private
spirit judge of councels, fathers, Church and all, and to prefer thyn own
private opinion, before their common consent, as though thou being but one,
could see further into scripture and that at the first reading, then they all
could do by great study and labor? But what assured stay thou have in this
thy spirit we shall see anon. now I will put a difference herin betwixt
these spiritual men, and that absurd heretic Sue^kfeldius, least I seem to
do, injury to my adversary, and not to be able to overcome him, unless I belly
him. Suenkfeldius therefore denies all Sacraments and scripture, and is so
spiritual, that he will live only of the spirit, and nether of the word,
nor Sacraments. But Luther and Calvin admit both Sacraments, and the word of
scripture, mary yet they will have the spirit to give sentence of scripture
and the meaning of scripture. For if you ask them how they know that faith
only justifies? they will answer by scriptur. But ask them how they know
that which they allege for that opinion to be scripture, or that to be the
true meaning of scripture in which they take the scriptures by the^ alleged?
They will not say that by the fathers, counsels, or Church, they at assured,
but by their own private spirit. So that although Calvin vvriteth against the
Libertines for relying only on the spirit, yet at last he falls into the
same labyrinth him self, for vvhilest he will be judged by scripture, yet so
that his spirit must give sentence which is scripture, and what is the
meaning thereof, he pronounces the last sentence, from which is no appeal, by
his private spirit. Against this spirit of theirs I could bring many arguments,
but of it self it is so fantastical, that these fevv shall suffice to refute
it. First I say, that allthough God might have governed his Church by
internal revelation of a private spirit, which should propose unto every one
in particular, which is scripture, and what is the meaning thereof, which is
true faith, what is the will of God, which is the way to salvation, and
what are the co^maundeme^ts, never theless this were a government rather for
angels then for men. for men are visible and have a visible conversation, and
therefore are tobe directed by visible pastors, visible laws, and rules, and
nor by an invisible spirit? For this cause almighty god who could sanctify
us as he does the angels without any visible means, yet because we ar
men, he has alvvaies bestovved his graces upon us by sensible signs and
sacraments and by a visible dispe^sation of men. Secondly suppose God should
govern every one by his inward spirit, yet this were not sufficient for
others amongst whom we converse for how shall they know my spirit to be
of God, and not of the devil? Wherefore this spirit is not sufficient to
govern and direct men in a peaceble conversation: because vvhilest every man
would bragg of his spirit, and none could prove the same unto othersno more
then our spirits in England can, they would fall together by the ears about
their spirits and never should be able to part the fray or to end the
controversy. Thirdly nether is this spirit unless it be joined with a plain
revelation (as our spiritual heretics see by experience that it is not)
sufficient for a man's own self to rely on for the assurau^ce and quietness
of his conscience. For I ask of him that thiks him self most assured, how he
knovves that his spirit is of God and not of the devil? If he answer, that the
spirit bringes, with it a certain firm persuasio^ which makes a man to his
thinking aslured; I say that this is not sufficient, because every heretic
yea every Turk has this inward persuasion, and Suenkefeldius who denied all
Sacraments and scriptures, and would be guided only by the spirit, was fully
thus persuaded by his spirit, which he also did verily think to be of God.
If these me^ thought verily that they had the spirit of God, and yet were
deceived; why may not Calvin, why may not every brother, begin to doubt of
his spirit? Yea why should we believe him on his bare word, to have the true
spirit unless he can prove it by miracles or the authority of the Church to
whom Christ promised this spirit, which he can never do. For as for miracles
heneuer could raise a dead lovvse from death to life, and to prove his spirit
by the authority of the Church, were to prove it conformable to the common
spirit of the Christian Church, which he nether can nor will do, because be
will be singular. If he prove his spirit by the scripture he vvindes him self
in a circle out of vvch he can never get him self out with honor or
honesty. For even now he proved scripture and the meaning thereof by his
spirit, and now he proves his spirit by the scripture, and if you ask again
how he knovves this to be scripture, he will answer, by his spirit, and so
will never get out of this circle but will still prove scripture by his
spirit, and his spirit, by seripture, for which kind of argument the
Logicians, will deride him and hiss him out of the school. For to prove
scripture by the spirit, and the spirit by scripture, which scripture
according to Calvin is not known but by the spirit, is to prove the spirit by
the spirit, and idem, per idem. But behold I pray you to what the devil can
persuade man when he has blinded his eyes by depriving him of the light of
faith. There is nothing so secret unto man as is this spirit; because the heart
of man is a bottomless pit, whose depth a man's own self can not sound, it is
a labyrinth into which when you enter you can hardly find the vvayto get
out, spirits also are diverse, and want not in man's ^arte, places to shrovvd
and means to tra^sform^ them selves: They will osten times make a show of the
spirit of God, when indeed they are the spirit of the devil, who long since
promised that he would be a lying spirit in the mouths of all false prophets,
and yet every brother of the new religion vvaranted nether by miracle, nor
evident reuclatio^, nor Church, nor council, will needs be persuaded yea and
assured also, that his spirit is of God. Fourthly God had been unreasonable if
he had given us no other judge to interpret his laws, then this secret
spirit. For he has bound us to a religion which is above reason and often
times against sense and sensuality, and this he has delivered unto us in a
book very obscure and hard to understand, and with all he has obliged us to
the belief, and obseruarion of this law and religion, under pain of aeternall
damnation. Now if he has given us no other interpretour of this law but our
own private spirit which is to secret and subject to error, he should seem to
have intended and desired our damnation, and to have given us a law not for a
rule to direct us but for a snare to catch us, and a pitfall to ruinate us, by
cause we can not keep this law unless we understand it, and not keeping it
we shall be damned. Truly better had princes provided for their subjects then
God for his, because princes make plain laws and yet least the subjects
shousld plead ignorance or complain that they are punished for not keeping a
law which they understand not, they have provided interpretours whose
glosses are plain; and yet Christ our lavvegiver according unto Caluins
opinion, has given us an obscure law, and a more obscure interpretour to
wit the secret and uncertain spirit, and with all exacteth hell pains of us
if we observe not his law in the right sense and meaning. Fifthly if this
private spirit be admitted for an vmpier in matters of religion all Hierarchy
and order in the Church, falls, for then all are heads none are feet, all
are eyes to direct none are inferior members to be directed, all are pastors
noe sheep, all are masters noe scholars. Away then with Bishops yea and
superinte^de^ts also; avaunte preachers we are not tied to any men's spirit in
particular, no not to the Churches spirit in general, bieause every man is
(...) taught of God immediately by his private spirit. It is not true which S.
Paul says that Christ gave us some pastors some doctors, Ephesians ^^
because all ar pastors; It is not true which the scripture affirms in many
places which shall herafter be alleged that the government of the Church is
monarchical, no nor Aristocraticall, but rather Democraticall and populare,
because every one of the people by his private spirit is supreme judge and a
supreme head in matters of religion, every cobbler or tinker if he be a
faithful believer, judges all and acknovv ledgeth no superior; because
vvhilest his spirit judges which is scripture and what is the meaning of
scripture, to which all are subject, he sumoneth all to stand to his
judgment, and he will be adjudged by none: and so vvhilest all are
superiors, none are inferiors yea none are superiors because a superior can
not be with out an inferior, and where is noe superior nor inferior there
is noe subordination, where is noe subordination, there is noe order, where
noe order, there is confusion, and so where the spirit rules, there can not be
the Church, because it is compared to a city, yea unto a kingdom also, in
both which is a seemly order. Lastly this spirit opens the gapp unto all
heretics and heresies which according to my promise I shall prove evidently
and lay open manifestly. For if that be true sense of scripture which the
private spirit suggesteth, if the reformed new religion be the sincer religion
because it is squared and ruled by scriptur, or rather by scripture interpreted
by the private spirit, then certainly by the same way that this pretended
religion is entered in to the world for current; by the same way, may all
heretics and heresies, al false prophets and false apostles, claim free
passage also, and by no equity can be excluded if Luther, Calvin and their
brotherhood be admitted. For every lying prophet can allege scripture as
well as they, he can brag of his spirit as well as they, he can say and
svvear that he has the right spirit which assures him also that he expou^des
scripture rightly, and preaches truly; and seeing that the reformers of this
age can say noe more (for they have nether miracles nor other authority to
prove their spirit as all ready is proved) it follovveth evidently, that if
they be admitted and received, noe false prophet, though never so
fantastical, can be rejected.

The fourth Chapter demonstrateth that in rejecting fathers and councels,
which consisted of fathers, the pretended reformers open the gapp, and gate,
to all heretics and heresies.

PArricide, and murder of parents, in old time was deemed so heinous an
offense, and so unworthy a fact (as being not only contrary to reason but
also repugnaunt unto nature) that Solon the famous lavv-maker decreed no law
against it, not for that he thought it not worthy punishment, but because ^ee
counted it more barbarouse, and inhumain, then could be by man committed. And in
deed man's nature so much abhorred this un natural fact, that until six
hundred years after Rome was built, no man ever is read of so vnki^de as who
could find in his heart to imbrevv his hands in his pare^tes blood. Cic. pro
Roscio
Lucius Ostius, as some do think, was the first who laying aside all
humanity, against natures propension and natural affection, laid violent
hands upon his father, and deprived him of being, of whom he had received
being. Which fact was no sooner committed but nature abhorred it and the
Romans then the most civil people, to represent the enormitie of the
offense, divised a punishment which should not only be a just pain but also
an emblem of the fault. Cic supra. Iuuen Sa^yr. ^. Plut. in vi ^a Ostij.
They decreed first of all that the murderer should be sevved up in a lether
sack. Secondly that sacked, he should be cast into the water. thirdly with
him were included a cock, a viper, an ape, and a dog, to acompanie him at
his death, whose natures he had imitated in his life. he was enclosed in a
sack and so cast into the river, that so at one time he should lose the light
of the son, which he could not see, of the fire, vvch he could not feel, of
the air, in vvch he was not permitted to breath, of the water in vvch he
svvimming was not refreshed, of the earth vvch he touched not; and so he was
deprived at one time of the benefit of the son, and the four eleme^tes of
which all were produced, because he had been unkind and unnatural to him, of
whom he was begotten. His companions at his death were a Cock, because as
this byrd fights with his fire, and treads the he^ne which hatched him,
so he has been iniuriouse to him that begotte him; A viper, because as this
beast eats him self out of his damnes belly, so he ruineth him who gave him
being, an ape, because as he imitateth man in his actions and some what
resembles him in form of body, yet is in deed no man, but a beast, so this
unnatural murderer, caryeth the shape of a man, but in conditions is noe man,
because he has cast of all humanity; And lastly a dog, that this creaturs
faithful service to his master who only feeds him, may confound this monster
and condemn his treachery who has been so false to his pare^t who has not
only fedd him but begotten him. This kind of death in mine opinion were a
punishment not unfitly to be laid on heretics especially ye most mallicious
(for with the^ who err not of malice I vvishe more gentle deali^g) who are
so unnatural children to Christ their father as shall appear in ye third
book, who so revile and miscall the ancient fathers of whom they received
faith and religion, and are so unkind unto the Catholic Church their mother,
which by the Sacrament of Baptism regenerated them, and gave them their
spiritual being. For they deserve to be deprived at one time of the heavens and
eleme^tes of which all things are in some sort produced, who contemn the
Church, the counsels, the fathers, and cheef pastors, of whom and by whom
they received their supernatural being by which they are Christianes. They
deserve a cock at their death, because as the cock fights often times with
his sire, and abuses the hen that hatched him, so they contend with ancient
fathers and as much as in them lies deflovver their mother the Church vvch
bare them spiritually; a viper also ought to dye with them, because like
vipers by schisms and heresies they ear them selves out of the womb of the
Church; an ape must also suffer with them, because as he resembles man but is
in deed a beast so they like apes imitate true Christians bearing the name of
Christ as they do, admitting certain scriptures and Sacraments as they do,
devising superintende^tes for the bishops of the Church, ministers for
priests, tables for aultars, and a profane Cene and supper, for the sacred
Eucharist, and yet in deed are no true christianes but monstrouse infidells and
worse then Jews and Paganes; Th. ^.2. q. (...). ar. 6.
a dog also to make up the number they vvorthily deserve, to put them in mind
that dogs may teach them fidelity for dogs though they receive some times
blows, and never any greater benefit then crustes and bones, yet are so
faithful to their masters, that they will not leave the^ todeath, vvheras the
heretic is so ungrateful and unfaithful to Christ and his spouse the
Church, that for no other cause then an itching humor of pride and self love,
he will run after every sectmaster that can only dropp a fevv textes of
scripture interpreted by his own spirit, leaving the Church and ancient
fathers, and consequently Christ him self because they ever went together,
and who hears one, hears the other. But least I condemn them to the
punishment of parricides for contempt of ancient fathers, before I prove them
to be guilty of the fault, I will set down word by voord, their own
sayings and assertions, by which shall appear, what respect they bear, and
what kindness they show, toward their ancient forfathers. Ex Epiph. her.
Basilides an infamous heretic vaunted that he and his only knevve the truth,
and that all his forfathers were sues and canes, hogs and dogs, not
worthy of the margarites of his doctrine. Lib. s.c. ^0.
The Valentinians (says Ireneus) if you urge them with scriptures which
they can not answer, will deny them, if you provoke them to be tried by
tradition delivered unto us by a succession of priests and fathers,
aduersantur traditioni dicentes se non solum presbyteris, sed etiam apostolis
existentes sapientiores, sinceram inuenisse veritatem: they oppose against
tradition saying that they being vviser then the preests and apostles, (...) 3.
have found out the sincere verity. Arius as before I have rehearsed thought
none of the fathers comparable unto him: Nestorius disdained to read their
works; and our reformers of this age, show by their vnreuerent, and railing
speeches against the fathers, that they are descended of the same race of
parricides and reuilers of their ancient fathers. To begin therefore with the
first patriarch of this new religion, Martin Luther that man of God (although
by his own confession he was so familiar with the devil that he has
eaten a bushel of salt with him) in his book against the king of England
having called him blokhead, l. ^ cont Reg. Axgl. fol. 348
beetlehead, grossehead, dull pate and such like names, for pressing him with
the authority of fathers thus he decideth the matter Hencricus dicta patrum
inducit pro sacrificio missario etc. Henry for his massing sacrifice bringes
in the sayings of fathers. Here say I, that by this means, my sentence is
confirmed: for this is it which I said, that the Thomisticall asses, have
nothing which they can allege but a multitude of men, and the ancient use.
But I against the sayings of fathers, men, angels, and devils, put down the
gospel which is the word of the aeternall majesty: here I insult over the
sayings of men though never so holy, so that I care not though a thousand
Austines, and Ciprianes, should stand against me. Thus one Martin Luther
braueth them all and thus this good child reuerenceth, and respects his
ancient fathers: for as I said in the last chapter, although he seems only
to prefer the scripture, yet seeing that they admitted, and alleged scripture
also, the question is, who has better skill in expounding scripture, and if
we believe this man all the fathers might have gone to school to him. in
expos. a. 6^* fol. 167.
Zuinglius will not be behind Luther in this matter. They affirm (says he)
and we deny that the mass is a sacrifice. Who shall be judge of this
controversy? The sole (say I) and the only word of God. But by and by thou
beginnest to cry, The fathers, the fathers have thus delivered unto us. But I
bring to thee not fathers, nor mothers, but ^ require the word of God. Calvin
desires to be counted modest, but herin also he could not contain him self.
l. ^. Inst. ca. 8. ^. 10.
When the adversaries object to me (says he) that this was the cusstome, I
ansvverre that the old fathers in this matter vvanted both law and exemple,
and were carried away into an error, vvhilest they attributed to much to the
name of poenaunce, and the common peoples opinions. ^
And again, I am little moved with those things which occur cuery where in
the vvritings of fathers concerning satisfaction. I see truly many of them yea
(I will speak simply as it is) all almost of them whose books are extant,
were in this matter dece^ued, and spoake hardly. And in another book of his
he calls the fathers of the council of Trent hogs and asses. in Antid. can ^.
Peter martyr calls papists, Patrologos, not Theologos, (...) votis.
for alleging fathers. Doctor Humphrey in the life of levvell, perceiving
that levvell had offered to much when in the heat of his sermon he was
content to be tried by fathers; says that he might have used a better defense
for him self, then the authority of fathers, Who (says he) if they
teach contrary it little skilleth, for what have we to do with fathers,
with flesh, and blood, or what pertains it to us what the false Synods of
bishops do decree. Vide ^undem in praefat in Orig.
Beza calls Athanasius Satanasius, and the fathers of the Nicen Council,
blind sophistes, ministers of the beast, and staves of Antichrist. ^^ont.
Papatu^
And although Luther affirme^h that saint Gregory the great, was the last
good Pope, yet Bibliander calls him in derisio^ the Patriarch of ceremonies.
Melancthon condemns him for allowing of the sacrifice of the mass, for the
dead. praef. ep Zui^^ gl. and Mel.
Paulus Vergerius vvrote a book of the toys and fables of Gregory. Horn in
his book against Abbot Fecnam, calls this saint (to whom we English men
owe noe less then our conversion from paganism to christiantie) a blind
bussard. Cent 1. page 66 72 Cent. ^ par. 678.
Bile the cronicler sayet^ that this saint, sent Austin the monk to plant in
England his Romish religion, but yet (says he) Lat^mer is much more worthy
to be counted Englands apostle, because Austine brought nothing but man's
traditions, mass, crosses, letanies, vvheras Latimer with the hook of truth
cut of these superstitions. Whitaker in his book called reprehension, Page 8^.
says that the fathers for the most part were of opinion that Antichrist is
but one particular man, but in that as in many other things the^ erred. The
like respect they bear to general Counsels in which the vvisest and grauest
fathers of the Church were always assembled. Luther in his book of Councels
calls them Sicop^ants, and flaterers of the Pope, and says that the canons
of the Council of Nice, which Constantine reuere^ced and honored with his
presence, are hay, straw, sticks, and stubble. Ibidem.
Yea in this council he finds a plain co^tradiction, because the council
forbiddes all Eunuchs to be promoted to preesthood, and yet commands
priests to live chastely As though only they who are gelded could live chaste,
and as though there were no mean betwixt vviuing, and gelding. Yea says
Luther, l. ^^nt. Regem Angliae.
if all the decrees of counsels were povvred into theee with a pipe, yet
would they not make thee a christian. l. 4. Inst c. 9. sect. 8.
Calvin will examine all counsels by the word, before he will give any
credit unto them, and seeing that the fathers in counsels examined their
decrees by scripture also, Calvin will make an examination upon their
examination, and so will be Judge of them all. But least I weary the reader
with to long a catalogue of reuiling speeches of these contumelious chammes
and parricides, I report me unto the indifferent reader, whether they deserve
not the punishment of parricides, who so scoff, taunte, contemn, and revile
their forfathers? But my meaning was not to condemn them upon whom God his
sentence must pass, my drifte is herby to show how much in reuiling fathers
they crack the credit of their religion, and how vvithall in rejecting this
authority, they open the gapp to all heretics and heresies. And as concerning
the first point, it is well known, that antiquity was always reverenced:
old age was ever respected, old coins priced, ancient statues admired, old
vvritings esteemed, and in all arts, the most ancient professors of the
same, bear the bell a way. In painting Appelles has the credit above all
painters, in statuary works Lycippus; in comedies Plautus and Terence; in
Tragedies Seneca; in histories Liuie, Salust, Iustine; in Poetry, Homer,
Virgil, Ovid; in Rhetoric Demosthenes, and Cicero; in Philosophy, Plato, and
Aristotle; in Divinity, Peter Lombard, saint Thomas of Aquin, Scotus, and
such other subtle schoolmen; And shall not the ancient fathers and doctors of
the Church, who by their art professed exposition of scripture, be
reverenced, and credited in their art before our unlearned and vpstart
ministers? shall antiquity give credit to Poets and painters, and not to
Doctors and interpretours of scripture? What is this but to prefer profane
literature before religion, Philosophy before faith and divinity, paganism
before Christianity, yea Poets and painters before Doctors and fathers of
the Church? If any one now should say, that Plato, and Aristotle were but
doltes and Asses, that Appelles was but a blurting painter, that Cicero was
but a raili^g Rhetorician, that Virgil and Ovid, were but riming Poets, Whose
ears could abide, such co^tumelies? Think then (indifferent reader) how
foul mouthed the heretics of this age are, who thus miscall the ancient
fathers, renowned for their skill in interpretation of scriptur, and other
learning, as appears by their learned commentaries, homelies, and other
works? Think how arroga^t these men are, who prefer them selves before
all ancient fathers, even in that learning, which was their profession, and
for which they have been for many hundred years, as famous, as ever Cicero
was for eloquence, Aristotle for Philosophy, or Virgil and Ovid, for Poetry.
But vvhilest they contemn the authority of ancient fathers, what greater
authority do they bring but vpstarte and unlearned ministers? Vvhilest they
reject the fathers as me^ who mighterre, are they godds or angels? are not
they men as the fathers were, and not worthy to be their men and servants
to carry their books after them? But now according to my promise, I vvil
declare ye first point by me proposed, to wit how in rejecting fathers, they
crack their own credit. For these fathers were learned, grave, wise,
gloriouse in vvorking miracles, and great in bearing of authority in the
Church of God. Their profession was preaching, teaching, and interpreti^g of
scripture, in which art they are ancient, and famous for many hundred
years: Some of the^ were scholars to the Apostles, others succeeded
immediately the Apostles scholars. The new Apostles are new and young, who
began but the other day to study, and to interpret scriptures, and
peradventure many of them would never have been able to make a sermon, had
they not the help of the fathers commentaries and homelies. Let then the
indifferent reader be judge, whether the religion which the fathers taught
and professed or that which these new Apostles have devised, be likest to be
true, and whether it be not more probable, that they preached and teached
according unto scripture, rather then our new and later Bible-clerkes. Truly
to say that a Luther, Calvin, Zuinglins, Beza, is herin to be preferred before
Austines, Ambroses, Hieromes, Gregory's, were as absurdly spoken, as if one
should prefer the painters of these days, before Appelles, or the Physicians
of this age before Galen. More over where these fathers went, there alvvaies
went religion, where they were Doctors, that was the Church of Christ,
vvher they were pastors, there was always the fold of Christ, of them
co^sisted all the general counsels, by them were the ancient Canons decreed,
and old heresies condemned, all the Bishoprikes, seas, and Churches, by them
were governed, and by their means erected. They were the men who in all
ages opposed them selves against heretics, as true pastors against the
ravening wolves who had only the coat of shepherds, against them and their
people, were raised all the persecutions as against the only Christianes,
their actions, their offices, in God his Church, their books, their miracles,
their lives, their deaths, do fill Ecclesiastical histories, the vvriters
vvherof intending to write the beginning and progress of the Christian Church,
write only of the Roman and Catholic Church, the pastors and Doctors
vvherof, were the ancient fathers. So that vvhilest our reformers refuse the
authority and doctrine of the fathers, they cut them selves from the Church of
Christ, because that, and the fathers (as all histories and monume^tes
declare) vve^t ever together, and they join in part with all old heretics,
vvho^ the fathers by doctrine, and censure, ever condemned, because in one
heresy, or other, they aggree with them all, as shall be in the next book
demonstrated, and they let not to confess, with Tobie Matthew, that no man
can read fathers and believe them, and embrace this new religion. Read
Genebrard (gentle reader) and thou shall see how in the end of every age he
sets down a catalogue of all the ancient fathers who were counted the
only true pastors, as also a list of all the heretics. them the Catholics
which now live profess to follovv as the heretics of this age will
confess, those infamous heretics, the reformers adore and embrace their
doctrine, as I shall prove hereafter in the second book. Judge thou then
whether the Church and Christian religion be with these reformers and
reuilers of fathers, or with the Catholics vhom they have. Nicknamed
Papists. This argument of the fathers authority, put Luther many times to his
trompes, and sometimes afflicted him, with no little scrouples; but because he
had a large conscience, he svvallovved them up, Praefat l. de abrog. miss^
priuata.
and in time digested them all. How often (say eth he) did my trembling heart
beat with in me, and reprehending me, object against me that most strong
argument? Art thou only wise? Do so many worlds err? Were so many ages
ignorant? What if thou errest and dravvest so many into error to be damned
with thee aeternallie? And in an other place. To. 5. ann^^. breniss.
Do thou, a sole man, and of no accounte, take upon thee so great matters?
What if thou being but one man offendest? If God permit such, so many, and all
to err, why may he not permit the to err? Hither to apperteyn those
arguments. The Church, the Church, the fathers, the fathers, the Counsels,
the custom, the multitudes, and greatness of wise men. Whom do not these
hills of arguments, To. ^. in Gal.
these clouds, yea these seas of examples ouer-vvhelme? And yet again this
scrouple assaulte^h him. Some (says he) will say unto me: The Church so
many ages has so thought and taught, So have thought, and taught, all the
primitive Churches, and Doctoures most holymen, much more great and more
learned then thou. Who art thou that dare dissent from all these, and
obtrude unto us a diverse doctrine? Thus God moved Luthers heart, which might
have been a sufficient call, to have recalled, and reclaimed him; but he being
obstinate; thus put this motion by: When satan thus urges, and conspireth
with flesh, and reason, the conscience is terrified and despaireth, unless
constantly thou retourn to thy self, and say, whether Cipriane, Ambrose
Austin, or Peter, Paul, and Ihon, yea an angel from heaven, teach
other-vvise, yet this I know for certain that I counsel not men to humane
but divine things. Art thou sure Luther, when thou have so many, Se Reinolds
in his refut. c. ^.
and so learned fathers against thee? Dare thou prefer thy own particular
judgment, before their common consent? Yea (lays M. Vvhitakar) Luther in some
case may prefer him self before all the fathers, and a thousand Churches. For
when his doctrine is according to scripture then is it to give place to noe
fathers. But this is as much to the purpose as the patch beside the hole,
because the comparison is not betwixt fathers and scriptures, which are to be
preferred: because the fathers allowed and alleged scripture even for those
points of doctrine for which Luther does, and all the Luthers in the world
can not prove that all the fathers held any one opinion against scripture; but
the question must be, whether Luther or all the fathers did best understand
the scripture; and therefore if Luther hold against the fathers in exposition of
scripture, he prefers him self before them all. As for example, Luther
alleges scripture to disprove free will, all the fathers allege scripture
to prove it, and Luther expoundes scripture one way, they another, else they
could not both allege scripture for contrary doctrine. Wherefore if Luther
says that he expounds scripture truly, and therefore cares not for all the
fathers, he prefers his own judgment before them all, and so can not
answer that argument grounded in the fathers authority, nor comfort, him
self with this, that he forsooth has the word of God which is above the^
all. And so Luther must give us leave to come upon him with his own
argument, which he shall never answer. The Church from the begi^ning has
taught, and expounded scripture other wise then thou do, so many Austines,
Ambroses, Ciprianes, Counsels, and ages, have preached other wise. Are they
all deceived have thou only found out the truth? What if thou rather art
deluded? Thou art but one, they are many, thon art of late, they of ancient
standing, thou a sinner, they saints, thou some scholar, but they were
learned doctors, thou have a vvitte, but all their vvittes were of a greater
reach, thou see some thing, but so many eyes must needs have a greater
insight; Thou have studied scripture but they more, thou have vvatched at thy
book, but they in night-studie have spent more oil then thou, though thou
peradventure more wine the^ they, and thou alleagest scripture for thy
doctrine, they for ye contrary. And so their judgment must be preferred
before thine, and co^seque^ly theirs shall be ye true doctrine, they ye true
Pastors, theirs the true Church; and so ours now is the true Christian
religion, we the right Christianes, who aggree with those fathers, and the
Church of which they were pastors and preachers: and Luther and the
reformers, who will have noe part with the fathers, are no members of the
true Church, because the ancient fathers and the true Church were never yet
separated, but alvvayes went together. The first point being proved we will
come to the second, in which I shall prove that in rejecting fathers they open
the gapp to all heretics who may say what they will (as the reformers do)
if that authority be contemned. But first it shall not be amiss to declare
what authority the fathers have, and whether they have infaillible
assistaunce of God to expound scriptures righthly; for if they have not: nether
are Catholics assured of their faith by their authority, nether do the
heretics open the gappe to heresies by rejecting their authority, which if
it be not infallible, may it self also authorize and countenance heresy.
Ephesians. ^.
Saint Paul says that God has provided us of some Apostles, some
Prophets, others Evangelists, others Doctors and Pastors to the consummation
of saints to the work of the ministry unto the edifying of the body of
Christ, that if for ye instruction of his Church. Where the first place is
giu^n to Prophets, Apostles and Eua^gelistes who vvrote the scripture, in the
second place follovv doctors and pastors because their office is not to
write scripture but to interpret it; And the reason is yielded why these
doctors are given unto us, least that we should waver like childrem and be
carried about with every vvind of the doctrine of men. Ibidem.
Now if all the pastors and doctors vvch we call fathers should of could
err, then were they not appointed to keep their sheep from vva^dering,
rather should they be the cause of their error, for the sheep must here the
voice of their pastors, and so if the pastors err, the sheep must err
with them, if they wander the sheep who know nothing but by their
pastors, can not keep the right way. And if thou say that in case of
error the people must leave the pastors, I demand of thee how they shall
know when the pastors err, who know nothing but by the voice of their
pastors? And suppose they should leave their pastors. then is the frame of
the body of Christ's Church dissolved, and the members are separated from the
head, and the Church is a headless body: then do they leave the salt, by
which they should be salted and preserved from corruption in religion: Mat. 5.
Then do they leave the ligt, by which they should be illuminated. Mat. 2^.
And how then is that true; upon Moses cheer sit the Scribes and Pharisees
do those things which they say? are the pastors of the Church of less
authority then the pastors of the synagogue? If they can err, then is it not
true which Christ said who hears you hears me, unless you will say
that Christ also may err in them and with them. But our heretics will
say that all the fathers are men. I grant it but they are men directed by the
holy ghost, and Christ was a man, and yet not only as God, but as man also, he
could not err; and the vvriters of scripture as Moses, and Solomon, and the
prophets of the old law, and the Apostles and Evangelists in the new
law, were men, and yet they erred not, nor could not err, unless we will
call scripture in question. But where (say they) read you, that the fathers
have the infallible affistaunce in exposition of scripture? Where I read that
they are light, that they are salt, that they are pastors to whom when we
harken we harken to Christ; Mat. ^^. Io. 21.
Vvher I read that we must do what they say, where I read that the Church
ca^ not err which must follow her pastors, where I read that the Church
which learneth all of her pastors, is a pillar of truth. 2. Tim. ^.
But some fathers have erred. I grant it, but never all aggreed in one error
together: never all the fathers of all ages, yea not all of one age (for to
these also we must harken) have conspired in an vntrutrh. And I demand of
our reformers. Whether they be not men also? And I think they will not
deny it. If they be men, I ask whether they can not err in expounding
scripture? If they can then have nether they nor others by them any assurance.
If they can not err because every one of them has the spirit: Then say I,
that more probable it is that so many spirits of the fathers conspiring in one
can not err, then that noe particular and private spirit can err, especially
seeing that these private spirits are diverse and contrary, and we have noe
more assurance of one then another. Judge now (gentle reader) whether that
the Catholics religion which is conformable unto the fathers and pastors of
the Church be the sincere christian religion, or rather the religion of the
heretics, which is aggreeable to noe common but only to a private spirit;
especially seeing that we have such vvarraunt for the common consent of
fathers but non at all for the private spirit of every private man. Now let
us see in a word how by rejecting this infallible authority of fathers, they
leave noe certain rule for exposition of scripture, and so open the gapp to all
heretics and heresies. For lay away fathers which were in all ages counted
the only pastors of the Church, the authority of Counsels is nothing vvorth,
for they consisted of fathers, the authority of the Church is of as little
esteem, because she all vvayes believed as her pastors did, yea she could not
tell what to believe but by their instruction: scripture therefore is only left
and the private spirit, and seeing those tvvoe bare authorities, as before is
proved, open the gappe to all heresies, the denial of the fathers authority
must needs do the same. For suppose a new heretic, yea a devil from hell in
the likeness of a man, should preach a nevve heresy contrary to all the
heresies that ever where, might he not allege scripture for it, expounding it
as he pleases? And if you demand of him how he knovveth that he expounds
it aright, might he not say that his spirit tells him so? And if you allege
that all that ever taught before him were of another opinion, and gave another
exposition of scripture; might he not say as casilie as Luther and Calvin do,
that they were men and erred all the pack of them* And so if authority of
fathers be rejected he or any other might say what he would and noe man could
control him. Wherefore to conclude if we give ear unto the ghospellers of
this time who have rejected, the authority of fathers and will consequently
judge all by scripture sensed by the private spirit, we must harken to all
heretics, and open the gappe yea the door to all false apostles, who can
not without manifest partiality be excluded and repelled, if these men be
admitted.

The fifte Chapter shows that they have noe probable means to induce a
reasonable man unto their religion, and that therefore if we give credit unto
them, we must give credit to all heretics preach they never so absurd and
fantastical paradoxes.

IT is a common opinion amongst the ancient fathers and divines, that our fay
the being supernatural, can not be demonstrated by reason, as opinions of
Philosophers may be, because it aymeth at things a boue reason Philosophy,
soars no higher then reason gives her leave, and so in Christian religion we
ought more to rely on faith and authority, then reason, and we can not show
our selves more reasonable, then to leave of reasoning in things above reason.
But all though it be so that we can not prove our religion by reason, yet we
may set it forth with such testimony of miracles, antiquity, common consent,
and such like motives, as shall convince a man of reason, that this religion
inuolueth noe evident absurdity against reason, but rather is very probable,
and most credibly to be belceued. 2.2 (...) ar. (...)
For although as saint Thomas says our religion be not euide^tely true, yet
is it euidenter credibilis, evidently credible, because though in it self it be
obscure, yet has it been so credibly delivered unto us by credible signs and
tokens, that no man can vith reason think it otherwise then very credible, if
he well consider what testimonies may be alleged for it, which as David
said are credibilia nimis, Psalm. (...).
^o to credible, that is so credible as we ca^ not with reason desire greater
testimony for things above reason. In the beginning God cathechised man in
this religion by Angels whom he sent, and by Patriarchs and Prophets whom
he inspired, by whom he taught the people what sacraments to use, what
sacrifices to offer, and other points of religion, such as then men were
capable of. In the law written he delivered his will and meaning concerning
law, and religion, and the ceremonies, and sacraments belonging there unto by
his servant Moses, ^u^d. (...).
to whom he appeared by an angel in thundering, and other such signs, and
by whom he vvrougth in Aegipt, and in the desert so many miracles, for proof
and confirmation of this religion. After wards in the law of grace and
fullnes of time, and time of spiritual plenty and riches, as in more ample
manner, so with greater testimonies and signs, this faith was delivered unto
us. For first our Savior proved his mission by all the ancient prophets, who
had fortold his coming, and the manner, of his coming, his office, the place
and circunstances of his nativity, life, and death, which all aggreing to him
concluded him to be the Messiah. Secondly by infinite miracles he proved his
authority and doctrine in so much that he said, (...). 10.^.
that the works which he did, gave testimony of him, yea the Jews
confessed that he could not have done so straung things if he had not been of
God. And seeing that he wrought these miracles to prove him self to be the
Messiah, and his doctrine to be of God, it could not be otherwise, because as
God can not deceue being prima verita^, the first verity, nor be deceived
being wisdom it self, so ca^ he not give testimony of an untruth by
miracles, for so should he be both a liar and a deceiuer. Act. 2.
The apostles in like manner, after that in Pentecost they had received the holy
ghost in a visible form and manner, received power also to give this holy
spirit visibly to others, and to work miracles also to prove their mission,
and doctrine; Mar. vi^.
in so much that saint Mark says that they preached, and God confirmed,
their doctrine by miracles, and signs that follovved. Wherefore allthough the
doctrine which they preached was out of reasons kenning, yet it was made
evident by testimony, and so was evidently credible, because if God can not
give testimony to an untruth, then in that he gave testimony by miracle of
their doctrine, it must needs follovv that it was of God. Secondly the
strange conquest which the Apostles made of Idolatry in despite of all the
Philosophers and Tyraunts of the world, and the miraculouse planting of the
Christian faith, is an argument to prove our religion to be of God most
pregnaunt, and a motive to persuade any reasonable man, most forcible. For as
once the Israelites by making a procession about the wales of Hierico, Iosus
^.
and sounding of their trompetes (an unlikely stratagem to surprise such a
city) dismantled the town and leueled the wales with the ground, so Christ
Jesus by the circuit of a fevv Apostles and disciples about the world, and by
the blastes of their mouths, which were the golden trompetes which
promulgated the new law, ransaked the city of idolatry, which then was
as great all most as the world, made the Romain Empire subject to Christ's
Church, and caused the Scepter to yield to Christ's cross, and made
Philosophy as an handmayd, to serve and attend ^ppo^ the faith of Christ. A
strange conquest certes, whether you consider the vvarryers, or the manner of
fight, or the force of the enemy, against vvho^ they vvaged battle. And as
concerning the soldiers, good lord how unlikely me^, to atcheue such a
victory? Vvarriers should be men of force and strenght to make the assault,
and to give the onsett, to defend or offend: These were feeble fisher men. 1.
Cor. 1.
Infirma mundi elegit Deus: God chose the vveakelings of the world. Vvarryers
especially ye king or general should have riches and treasures good store;
because armies can nether be relieved, nor levied without money, vvch therefore
is called, neruus belli, the sinevv or strength of war: These me^ were
poor fishers who had no other treasur then ragged nets, and their General
Christ Jesus, was as poor as they, living on alms, and not having sometimes
that which wolves and vvilde beasts have, a chamber to lodge in. Lus ^.
Vvarriers especially if they be the leaders, must be of noble birth, and
parentage, for souldious are hardly ledd by them who are base, and not easily
commanded by them, who are as mean in quality and condition as them selves:
These men were fisher men the basest kind of People, if we believe
Plutarche, that are to be found: who therefore by their trade are banished
humain society, and co^uerse more with fishes then men, and live more on the
water then on the land: ignobilia and contemptibilia huius mundi elegit Deus:
1. Cor. ^^
God has chosen the ignoble and co^temptible of this world. Vvarriers should
be wise and ingeniouse to lay plottes, to devise stratagemes, and to use force
of wit, vvher force of arms will not serve: These were simple Fishermen,
never trained up in schools, and more coning with a hook, then with a book:
Stulta huius mundi elegit Deus: ^. Cor. ^.
God chose the foolish of this world. Soldiers should be many in number
least the gross troops of the adversary terrify them with the sight of the
multitude: These were a small army, and a silly flock, Luc. 1^.
only twelve Capitaines, the twelve Apostles, and 72. private soldiers I
mean seauentie two disciples. And yet these vveakelings, were to vvrastle
with the might of the Romain Empire, These poor beggars were to deal with
them that had the wealth of the world, These base fishers were to co^tende
with the nobility of the world, These simple souls were to encounter with
the Vvisest Philosophers; and these fevv vvaged battle against all nationes
upon earth, yea all the devils in hell, who also opposed against them all
their hellish forces. And as touching the manner of the fight, that made the
victory more incredible. For the enemies came with the flourish of eloquence,
these with half barbarouse simplicity, they came armed with power, these
with infirmity in which virtue is perfited, (...). Cor. 1^.
they with pride, these with humility, they shot maledictions, these
benedictions, They laid on blows, these boar them patie^tly, they cried,
kill, kill, these cried, suffer, suffer. A strange manner of fight, where the
soldiers overcame, by putting up injuries, not by revenging, by bearing not
by giving blows, by laying the body open to the enemies vveapon, not by close
vvarding or defending. But if these fevv soldiers so ill armed, might have
kept together, they had been more strong, because force united is greater then
the same dispersed; but these fevve soldiers divided forces, and one man
single went against a vvholle country, yea somety mes many Countries. Saint
Peter setts upon Pontus, Bithinia, Galatia, and Rome it self, saint Paul
goes against Illiricus, Cappadocia, Ciprus; saint James the elder encounters
with all Spain: saint James the younger with Jury; saint Thomas with
India, saint Matthew with Aethiopia; others with other countries, and in
fine, thus they conquered the greatest part of the world. Now if we
consider in what consisted the victory it will yet appear more admirable.
This victory consisted not in surprising of a city, in undermining a castle,
in burning of villages, in gayning of rauelings, in maymi^g, and killing
bodies, but in extinguishing of idola^rie, in extirpating vice, in subdevving
men's understanding, in ouercomming their vvilles, in curbing and bridling their
affections, in planting a new religion never hard of before, which
commands men to believe firmly things above reason, and to observe laws
contrary to sensuality, vice, and pleasure, which by long custom were
become all most narurall unto men. And to this they persuaded not a fevv, but
all the world, nor fools but philosophers, such as Dionisius Areopagita,
Justinius martyr, and others were; not poor men but Kings, yea and Emperors,
such as Philip, and Constantine were, and that in despite of all the tyraunts
in earth and maugre all the devils in hell. Yea so firmly they persuaded m^
unto this new religion and new life, that thousands by and by were ready to
suffer all torments, rather then to deny the least article of this new
belief. Let not any therefore object unto us that our religion is obscure, and
that it teaches things above reason, for all though we can not by reason
see the truth, nor prove the truth of this religion, yet it can not but be
true and of God; because such men as the apostles were, to such as all
thevvorld but they were (that is nusled and persuaded in a contrary religion)
and after so strange a manner, could never have planted so hard a religion,
and that in despite of the tyraunts in earth and devils in hell, unless God
had seconded and assisted the^. Let not the^ the A theiste of this godless
time, call in question the miracles of Christ and his saints wrought by them
in confirmation of this religion* and related in the scripture, and
ecclesiastical histories, as though they were but old vviues tales which
they tell amongst their mayds spinning by the candle; Let them not say that
never miracle was wrought for this religion, by this they shall gain
nothing, I vvil come upon them with that of saint Austine; that such a
religion by such, and in such a manner should be planted in the world without
miracles, is the greatest miracle of all, and so in denying miracles, will
they, nill they, they grant a miracle. Deny if thou vvilt our miracles (for
which not with standing we have as good, and better histories, then thou
have for the Romain Emperors, Captains, legions, vvarres, and victories) thou
can not deny, but that a fevv fishermen, obscure, base, unlearned, have
turned all the world vpside down, for this thou see: Thou can not deny
but that the world is dissuaded from idolatry unto Christian religion, from
sensuality to chastity, from gluttony to fasting, from riches to voluntary
prouertie, from usual vice to unacquainted virtue, from the broad and easy
way which leads to perdition, unto the strayt and narrovv way which
tends to salvation. Thou can not deny, but that men unlearned, and
impotent, have done this, whom thou can suspect nether to have used deceit,
nor compulsion. Thou can not deny, but that many Emperors have resisted
these men, and yet they have gotten the victory. Let then this religion be
never so repugnaunte to sense never so high above reason, I believe it is of
God, I believe it is true, else by such men and after such a manner, it could
never have been persuaded. Hugo de 8. Vi^t.
Yea I will boldly say with a certain lerued man: Si error est (domine) a te
decepti sumus: if this which we believe be an error, thou (o lord) have
deceived us: But thou can nether deceue nor be deceued, therefore we are
assured of our religion. God therefore who has alvvayes delivered faith unto
us so credibly, and induced us unto it so svvetly by probable means, yea by
evident signs and testimonies; if he has permitted this faith to decay or to
lie hidden for many hundred years, or if corruption and error in religion,
has for long time been taken for sincere religion, then noe doubt by them by
whom he restores this religion again, and delivers it in the former
perfection, by whom he reformeth these errors which have gone for truths,
he vvil give us probable and credible means, by which like reasonable men,
we may be induced unto this reformation. For if we have many hundred years
by our for fathers been taught that there are seven Sacraments, that the
sacrament of the Alt^r is a sacrifice, and conteyneth Christ's body and blood
reallie, that there is purgatory, that we have free will, that good works
are necessary, that our evil works, are no works of God, that prayer to
saints and reverence done to them and their images is not superstition; the^
noe doubt if God will have us to leave of these old opinions, and to embrace
new, he will in so importaunt a matter as this is, which touches salvation
and damnation, use probable and credible means to dissuade us from our old
errors, least that seeing noe reason why we should leave them, we persist
still in the^, or least that we expose our selves to danger of embracing new
heresies, for old religion, as easily we may, if without any reason at all,
we will forsake that faith in which we and our great graund fathers were
baptized. For allthough faith be a Theological virtue and therefore as divines
say consists not in a mean betvvixte two extremes in respect of God, who
is the obiecte (because he is prima veritas, whom we can not credit to soon
nor to much) yet in respect of us, and the means by which we come to know
God his authority, we may exceed in believing, and we may be vvanting in
belief. They are deficient and to slovve in believing, who when God his mind
and will is proposed by sufficient motives, and tokens, yet will not give
credit. This was the fault of the Jews who were so slow and hard of
belief, that though Christ by miracles and prophecies had proved him self to
be the Messiah and his doctrine to be of God, yet they would not believe him.
This also was the fault of the Apostles though not in so high a degree,
whose eyes were so blinded with Christ's passion, that all though the stone
of his sepulcher, Luc. 14.
was removed, and that the angel had affirmed that he was risen, yet they
would not believe it, who therefore were called tardi cord ad credendum slovve
of heart to believe.. They are rash and to hasty in believing who believe
with out sufficient reason or testimony. Such were the Galathians who were
to easily carried away from that which was preached unto them. Gal. 1.
Vvherfor the wise man says, Eccl. 19.
that he is light of heart who believes to quickly. And in deed if God
would have us give our assent vvher we se no reason nor testimony
sufficient, he should first do us great injury, because it is the nature of our
understanding to be moved at least by probability, or credibilitie. Secondly
he should expose us to danger of error, for he that will believe when no
probability moves him, may easily fall into an error. Vvherfor it may well
be supposed for certain, that God will not have us to believe any religion,
though it be preached in his name, unless we have some credibilitie or
probability to persuade us there unto. If then our reformers would have us to
believe that in these and these points we and our forfathers have erred, and
that henceforth thus and thus we are to believe; they must at least show us
probability that we have been deceived, and that they are sent to put us
into the way. For other wise we being for warned of false prophets and
commanded also to hatke^ unto our pastors, we have no reason to forsake our
ancient religion and to embrace new opinions, nor to leave our ancient
pastors, and to run after strangers, unless they can bring some
probability, yea and that greater then the old fathers can bring for that
which they have taught us. Tvvoe means only I find which a doctor or
preacher can use to persuade his auditors. The first is evident reason which
conuinceth the understanding of the hearer or scholar. And by this means our
religion can not be proved, because reason can not reach unto mysteries of
faith which are above reason. And so the reformers can not convince us by
reason that they are sent from God to reform us and that their doctrine is the
verity, because they teach many things above reason as well as we do, to
wit the Trinity, Incarnation, Resurrection, faith, justification, and such
like: yea as I shall prove herafter many things also against common sense and
reason. not the first, because they are above reason, not the second, because
they are against reason. The second means to persuade is the authority of him
who teaches. This means Pithagoras is said to have used in his school,
A^l. Gel. l. 1. ^.9.
who commanded his scholars to silence for the space of two years, all
which time, they might only harken, but not ask any questions: and for that
time they wear called (...) hearers. After wards they might ask questions
of their Master, but when he had ansvverred they might ask noe reason, but
must content them selves with his authority, and count it sufficient that
(...) he said so. Now, authority is vvonne either by wit and learning, or
by virtue, or antiquity, or number, or office and dignity. And the reason
hereof is, because wise and learned men are likest to see farthest into
matters, and so the more willingly we believe them; virtuous men are
dearest unto God, and so we are more easily persuaded to think that God
imparts his mind unto them most amply; Truth also is the daughter of time,
vvch in time bringes the truth to light, and therefore we are most prone to
beleene old men, to whom long time brings great experience, and we well
imagine that to be true which for a long time has been holden for true; And
because many men see more they one alone, we count the voice of many men, the
voice of God, and we reverence that for a verity, which most men have
auerred; Romans 1^.
and lastly because all authority is of God, and men in office are appointed
by him to govern, we are ready to think that God especially directs the^,
who have charge not only of them selves but of others also, which is the very
cause why we use to reverence superiors decrees, unless we see a manifest
absurdity in them. If then the reformers will have us to forsake old
pastors, and to harken unto new, if they will have us abjure old religion
and embrace a new; let them show us greater authority then that of the
ancient fathers, else we have no reason to prefer them and their doctrine,
before old doctors, and old religion. But this they can never do, and so they
can never bind us in reason to accept of their religion. For if we compare
them with the old and ancient fathers in all the means alleged, by which
credit and authority is gotten, we shall find them to come short by many
furlongs in every one of the^. And first for wit and learning I think nether
Luther nor Calvin nor any of them all, unless their faces be brazen, have the
face to compare with the ancient fathers. For they were Gregory's, Austins,
Ambroses, Basilles, Hieromes, Cirilles, and such like, who vvrote more then
ever they read, and studied more then ever they loytered, and were in all
literature so learned, that the reformers were scarce worthy to carry their
books after them. And allthough Luther and Calvin vvanted not altogether
learning, yet they came short of these men; And as for their followers vvch
were never trained up in our schools, well may they prattle in Greek, and
flourish in a fevve vain latin phrases, yet solid learning either in divinity
or philosophy, they have not. Let the universities of Oxford and Cambridge, of
Basil and other places, let the confraternitie of Geneua, show us a
Bellarmine, Baronius, Molin, Suares, Vasques, Bannes, Gregory of Valence, an
Allene, Hatding, Bristovve, Gregory Martin, Stapleton, if they can? What
works have they set out co^parable to the books of these Catholic
vvriters? Let an in different reader pervse the learnedest book of these
reformers, Ievvel. Plessis.
and he shall see in them false allegations of fathers, corruptions of
scriptures, fathers and counsels, lies, impostures, affirmations without
proofs words without matter, and praeterea nihil, and nothing else. As for
virtue, if they have any modesty remaining, they vvil not (being guilty of so
vicious lives) make any comparison with the former fathers who by the common
report of all were saints; and their writings, miracles almesdeedes,
fastinges, austere penance, prayer, chastity, mortification, contempt of the
world, and such like, will testify no less. And although they may object
that many amongst us also have lived viciously, yet we can give the^ herin a
ma nifest difference. For first, the first founders of our religion were me^
of great perfection, as the Apostles and their successors in the primitive
Church, yea as the planters of religion in every country were. l. 1. c. 23.
and 26.
Read saint Bid and you shall see that the benedictines whom S. Gregory
sent into our country to recall us from idolatry, were Saints, and moved
m^^e the king by their holy co^uersatio^, the^ by their preaching and
miracles? And yet even the first of these nevve families, the first preachers
of this reformation, even Luther and Calvin then selves, were notorious, and
infamous for evil life. Luther was an Apostata, he married a Nonne, he lived
beastlike, and dyed accordingly. for after a merry and a moist supper, he was
found dead the next morning in his bed, with his tongue hanging out. Calvin
lived like an epicure served his belly for his God, he was a man given to
revenge and puffed up with pride, and ambition. True it is, he carried marks
on his back but not such as saint Paul carried, but such as the minister of
justice noted him with all for his abominable lethery, ^^lsec. in vita qius.
and Genesis l. 4. an. Christi ^^66.
and as he lived so he dyed, an Herodes death: because lise were his
executioners. Secondly although many be badde amongst us, yet I think, more
amongst them. Thirdly evil life amongst us, is a fault of our own perverse
will and nature, but amongst them it is the fruit of their doctrine, which
(as by many arguments I shall prove hereafter) leads and induces unto all
dishonestie. In the seventh book.
Lastly they which amongst us lead a viciouse life, are never amended by
coming unto you: which experience has taught, and proved in some loose
Catholics, who partly for fear, partly for liberty, have repaired unto
you. For they were so far from being reformed by you, that so long as they
conuersed with you, they fell daily from one vice to another, and never
stayed, till they came to the depthe of iniquity. And yet we have see^ many
vvilde Gallau^tes loose in life, and rioutouse in conversation, who after that
they be admitted into our Church ad society, and instructed in our faith and
religion, do cast of all evil customs, become modest in behavior, temperat,
sober, and who before feared nether sin, nor God, nor the devil, wax
scrpulous, and fearful of conscience, and who before could not spare one
half hour in a day for prayer, think now vvholle days to short a time.
Yea, you seem to give good life unto us. For you will trust our word more
then an obligation of one of your own sect, and if you see a man mild,
modest, chaste, temperate, given to prayer, fasting, almesdeeds upright in all
his actions, and exemplair in conversation, you suspect him for a papiste. Yea
when our preests would the better escape your Pursiuauntes, they must feign
then selves in out ward show and habit to be roistours ruffions and dissolute
companions, as though vice were the badge of your religion. As for number we
exceed them by many countries and ages in which they never lived, and for one
new minister we have hundred^ of ancient pastors and learned fathers, For
antiquity, although they feign an invisible Church before Martin Luther, yet
as I have proved in the first chapter and shall again herafter, their preacher
are up startes, their doctrine is as young and vvheras we can show a
succession of our religion and pastors for the space of sixteen hundred years
even from the A postles, they can derive their pedigree noe higher, then from
Martin Luther Lastly our doctors were pastors, and boar great offices in
the Church of God and the first of them in our country and in every country
proved their authority by miracles, ^. 31.
and their successors proved the same by succession; but as yet the new
preachers could never prove their authority and mission to be either
extraordinary, by miracles, or ordinary, by succession, as is already
demonstrated in the first chapter. So that for learning, virtue, antiquity,
number, dignity, by vvch authority is gotten, we and our religion, do carye
the bell away. What reason then have men to forsake Catholics and their
pastors, and preachers, to harken unto these new prophets, who nether in
learning, nor virtue, nor antiquity, not number, nor dignity, can make any
just comparison with them? Suppose some one should be wavering, and
doubtful (...) religion, and deliberating with him ^olfe whether to follow
the old fathers (...) new preachers, should make this discourse with him
self. I have been baptiaed, and brought up in the Catholic religion, and so
were my fore fathers ty me out of mind, but of late years some have been so
bold as to avouch that they were all deceived and damned also unless igno^unce
excuse them, vvherfor seeing that without true faith noe man can be sa^^ed, it
is good that I look into both the old and new religion, to see which by all
reason I ought to embrace. But before I give ear unto these Reformers which
say that they come to correct old errors, let me see what probability they
bring for their pure and reformed religion. First I see they aggree not, and
yet every one says that he teachethe the true faith and reformed religion,
and seeing that one brings noe more authority then another, that is,
scripture interpreted by his own spirit, I see no reason why I should give
credit more to one then to another, and therefore because I can not give credit
to all, I see no reason why I should credit any of them all. Hier. ^^.
Secondly I am forvvarned that false propheres shall come unsent and yet
auouche also that they are sent from God, and therefore unless these men can say
more for them selves then they ca^, I see noe reason which can bind me to
give ear unto them. They say they are sent from God. So will false prophets
say. And I examining what is their mission, find therein a great defect: for
either it is an ordinary mission; and then they must show a succession of
pastors whose rooms they supply, which I see they can not do, because noe
history makes mention either of their pastors or their service, or practice of
their religion; or it is an extraordinary by which they are sent immediately
from Christ, and then they must prove it by miracles, else I must by the same
reason harken unto every false prophet. Nether does it suffice to say that
they preach no other doctrine then the Apostles did, and therefore need no other
miracles then those which were wrought by them; for so every archeretique
may say, and you can not control him, unless you put him to his miracles. But
they allege scripture for their doctrine; so have all heretics done as is
shevved in the second chapter. But heretics expounded scriptures amiss, these
men have hitten upon the right meaning. How shall I know that? they say they
have the true spirit in interpreting of scripture. And how shall I, or how
ca^ they ^ell that, seeing that nothing is so secret as is this spirit, as is
proved in the third chapter? And did not Arius say that he interpreted
scriptures by the true spirit, when he alleged them to prove that the son
was a creature, and netherequall, nor coequall, nor consubstantiall, to his
father? Yea do not all heretics say so, do not all the Reformers say so,
even when they hold contrary opinions? I see noe reason therefore not so much
as probable why I should harken unto these reformers, unless I will harken
also unto all the heretics that ever were or shall be. Much less can I see
any reason why to forsake my ancient pastors, who made me and my for fathers
Christians, and to prefer these pretended reformers before them. For as for
learning they surpassed these reformers, and for virtue they excelled, and so
were more likely men to see into the sense of scripture, and verity of
religion, and were fitter instruments for God to use, and vessels more
capable of God his spirit and revelations. In antiquity they are before the^
by many hundred years, in number they are an hundred at least for one; for
authority they were honorable Prelates, and Bishops of the Church, who
proved their mission, commission, and authority by succession, yea and by
miracles also; nether of which proofs the reformers can alleag for their
mission, and authority. Shall I then leave such learned men for such young
clat kes, so virtuous men for so vicious, so ancient Pastors for so new and
so late vpstartes, so many for so fevv, and men of such pastoral dignity, for
them that can not prove their commission, no more then a false prophet can do?
Surely I see no reason why I should, and seeing that God vvil not bind me to
give credit to them that can bring no probability, for their own or their
Doctors authority, I see not how with any show of justice God can at the
latter day condemn me, for not harkening unto them; for I might answer with
reason that I savv noe reason why I should harken to them, rather the^ to
every false prophet, much less why I should forsake mine ancient religion for
a new, and mine old and grave fathers for a fevv young ministers who were
borne but yesterday. By this gentle reader thou may see how little reason
men of understanding have to give credit unto the nevve religion. But least I
may seem to partial or thou (gentle reader) may be to timorous in
pronouncing the sentence, let the matter be brought before an indifferent
judge, who is net her of the old, nor the new Religion. l. 1^. A^^.
In Iose phus his history I find an example in the like case of controversy.
The Jews (says he) and the Samaritanes contended once about the place,
vvher God should be worshipped; The Jews said Jerusalem was the place;
Deus. 19.4 Reg. 17.10.4.
The Samaritanes would have it to be ye mount Garizim. The matter was brought
before a Pagan king, yet a discreet and indifferent Judge: Proloquutours were
appointed on bother sides to plead the cause, Sabeus, and Theodosius for the
Samaritanes, Andronicus for the Jews. Andronicus had leave granted to speak
first; who recounteth a succession of the high precstes from Aaron unto his
time, all which time the Jews were counted the true worshippers of God; he
declares the Antiquity of the Temple of Jerusalem, and of the sacrifices
there offered; he tells how that place was ever taken for the true place
of worship, and that therefore it was adorned and enriched not only by the
gifts of their own kings, but of strangers also, and hamely by the kings
of Asia, and that there was never doubt of this, till the Samaritanes made a
schism. After that Andronicus had told this tale, the proloquutours of the
Samaritanes began to speak; but being demanded to shovv the like antiquity
and succession they could not, but rather were enforced to bewray their
infancy, and the reuolte which long after that God had been worshipped in
Jerusalem, they made from the Jews. Wherefore the king pronounces sentence
for the Jews, and declares them to be the right worshippers and the Temple
to be ye right place where the Jewish religion was to be exercised. If in
like manner before the like Judge, I for the ancient Catholic religion, and
some one of the ministry for the new religion were appointed proloquutours,
for whom, think thou (gentle reader) would the sentence be pronounced? If
I should begin to show a succession of our pastors and religion, by all
histories and monuments even from the Apostles* Iren. l. ^. c. 3.
If I should shevve a catalogue out of Ireneus of all the Popes from saint
Peter to Eleutherius, l. ^ cont. Donatist. Epist. 16^.
out of Optatus unto Damasus, out of saint Austin unto Anastasius, out of
Eusebius, Genebrard and others, even unto these days, and that in this
succession by noe Historiographer was ever noted any change, or fall in
Church, or religion? If I should prove out of the same histories that this
ancient catholic Church was that which was persequuted by the evil
Emperors, and afterward enriched by Constantine and other good Kings and
princes; that for this Church, Churches and monasteries were builded, that in
this Church all the general Counsels were holden; that by this Church all
heretics were condemned; that this Church was even by paganes counted the
only christian Church, that all ancient fathers, doctors Martyrs, and
Saints, were members of this Church; should I not incline the Judge to my
part? If when I had done, some one of the Ministry should rise up and
begin to tell his tale and say that all the ancient Christians were
deceived and lived in error and ignorance until that Luther, or Zuinglius,
or Calvin, like so many sons appeared in our horizont, that the religion of
these men, is the reformed religion though it was never hard of before. And
if being by me demanded how their preachers proved their mission, he could
allege no proof at all; or being asked how they proved their religion he
should answer, by scripture sensed by his private spirit, which always
has been the proof of all heresies; and being commanded by the Judge to
show (if their Church be Christian) a succession of their bishopes preachers,
and practice of religion; he should fly unto an invisible Church, or say that
the Church Christian decayed quite after the Apostles time, and yet could
nether tell the time, nor the occasion of so notoriouse a fall, nor allege one
historiographer that vvriteth of so great a mutation in the world; If I should
tell ye first tale, and he the second (for I see not what better answer he
can make) for him self; thinks not thou (gentle reader) that the judge would
answer, that although he believed not at all in Christ or his religion, yet
that it seemed most probable that Catholics are the true Christianes, and that
their Church is the place of the practice of this religion, as the Temple of
Jerusalem was of the Ievvishe service and worship of God. If the^ there be
no probable reason by which these Reformers can persuade us to their
reformation, there is noe reason why we should forsake our ancient pastors
to follovv them, unless we vvil byndeour selves also to harken unto all false
prophets, preach they never so absurd and improbable doctrine, and so open
the gappe, unto all heretics and heresies.

The Sixth Chapter proves that they have noe Judge in matters of religion, and
so do open the gappe to all heretics who may preach what they list, if there
be noe judge to contrelle them.

AS yet there was never seen any society well ordered, were it great or
little, but some governor or moderatour ruled and menaged the same. for many
men as they have many heads, so have they diverse opinions and as they are of
different complexions and constitutions, so are they of diverse conceits and
inclinations, and therefore will never aggree in one, unless they be directed
and commanded by one, or at least by diverse which aggree in one. Wherefore
we see that every kingdom has his king, every dukedom a duke, every common
wealth a magistrate, every City a Maiour or Baily, every army a General, yea
every village allmoste has a constable, every family a good man of the
house, every schole a scholemaister. And shall not the Church of god, the
society of his faithful and chosen servants, have a visible head to direct
it, and a Judge to rule it by laws, and govern it by authority? Or shall we
think that he has left that society vvch he calls his spouse, and which
he loved so dearly that he dyed for it, as a kingdom with out a king, a City
with out a maiour, an army with out a General, a shipp with out a Pilot, a
fold with out a pastor or a body with out a head? No no, I vvarraunt you, he
that descended from heaven to earth to establish this spiritual kingdom, and
shedd his blood to enrich it, has well provided for the government of the
same, and so well, that thereby you shall perceive the skill and vvisdome of
the Governor. And truly if by the effect we may take a scantling of the
cause, the good ly order, the firm peace, and long continuance of the Church,
will bear witness of a most prudent princes gouuernement For as diverse
stones in a building could never have kept that order as to make a goodly
palace, had not some intelligent vvorkeman disposed them, so this goodly order
and Hierarchy in the Church could never have been established, had not some
prince and gouuernour put every subject in his room and place. And as many
stringes or voices can never make one musical harmony, unless some coning
musician tune the stringes, and give unto every voice his tone, so shall many
people of diverse, dispositions, nations, sexes conditions, (such as are in the
Church) never live in peace, free from iarres and discords unless there be a
Superior to tune these diverse natures, and a head to direct these diverse
members of the body of the Church. And as the Sheep which want a Shep heard
can not long keep together, but are like to wander and to come in danger of
the wolf; as an army can not long vvithstand the enemy, unless some
General appoint, and commannud every soldier to his standing; and as the
Ship, is never any long time free from sands or rocks, when the mariner
is absent: so could never the Church of Christ, especially against so many
violent persequutions, for so long a time, have endured, unless some potent
and prudent gouuernour, by his laws, vvisdome, and authority, had vpholden,
guided, and directed it. And ye reason is, because in a society and especially
that of the Church, are diverse men, yea diverse nations, and diverse men have
diverse natures, and diuerses natures, have diverse dispositions, and diverse
dispositions cause diverse opinions, and diverse opinions move co^tradictions,
and contradictions end in factions, and factions make an end of all societies,
unless there be a moderatour to prevent them by his wisdom, or appease them by
his authority. A head then is necessary in all societies, and not only
necessary, but also principalle. For although the obedient and complying nature
of the subject does help much to the maintenance of peace and order, yet the
head and Superior most of all prevails. For as the head is the principal
part, so does it bear most sway in the government of the body; which is the
cause why the body is affected according to the head, and why the subject
follovveth the princes humor. Yea even as when the head in man's body is
intoxicated the vvholle body reeleth, and if the head want eyes the body
tumbleth into ditches, and falls into danger; so if the head of a society
be inconstaunte, the vvholle society vvauereth, if the superior want eyes of
circumspection, the subjects are in danger. Wherefore Philip King of Macedo
and father to Alexander the great, was wont to say, that he had rather have
an army of fearful hearts governed by a Lion, then of lions ruled and
commanded by a heart: insinuating there by, that as the head in a society is
the principal member, so is it the most necessary. If then the Church of
Christ be a peaceble, and well ordered body, it has a head to guide and rule
it. And if we look into the government of the same even from the beginning,
we shall find that this goodly common wealth never vvanted a Prince and
governor. In the law of nature first of all Adam our first parent, as he
was our common father according unto flesh, so was he a priest and pastor of
the souls of all those who lived in his time, and a governor of his family
which was descended of him, not only in domestical, civil, or temporal,
but also in spiritual matters concerning faith and religion. For this cause
he was indevved with all knowledge and science, that as the first doctor he
might instruct and direct his posterity; and although by his fall, he lost
all infused knowledge, yet did he still so long as he lived, remain pastor
and supreme head of the Church. Wherefore Theophilus Bishop of Antioche says,
l. 2. ad. Autol.
that God for no other cause framed Eve out of Adams side but to demonstrate
unto us a mystery and figure of the monarchy of his Church: that as Adam was
head of the same in his time, so ever after there was one pastor the cheef of
all. Ho 34.1. Cor.
And saint Chrisostom says plainly that Adam was one head given unto all;
and his reason is because (says he) God Knevv, that aemulation could not be
avoided amongst aequalls, vvherfor he would have no popular government but a
kingdom. After Adams death, Seth and others succeeded him in the like pastoral
authority even unto Noe. Noe dying, Sem his eldest son undertook the same
charge; and even unto Aaron the first high priest of the Leuiticall law, all
the heirs males of every family (if we believe saint Hierom) were preests,
q. heb. q. 7.
who ministered sacraments and offered sacrifices every one in his family.
And amongst all the preests of diverse families, one was the supreme pastor
and Judge of the rest to whom belonged the final sentence in matters of
religion; and this supreme authority as it seems belonged always unto the
most ancient, to whom all the rest as they were in age inferior so were
they subject in authority. As for example Abrahame and Sem, were preests at
one time, because Abraham was the eldest son of Their, Sem of Noe, yet
because Sem was the most ancient, he was the higher priest, Genesis 11.
and therefore to him (for the Hebrews as saint Hierom witnesses, affirm
that Sem and Melchisedech were all one) Abraham offered tithes and was
blessed of him as of his superior. Yea it seems probable that Melchisedech
in his time was ye high priest and supreme head of the Church. Vvherfor
Theophilus speakig of Melchisedech, Supra.
utters these words (...). This man was a priest the first of all the
priests of God the highest. Where he can not mean that Melchisedech was the
first in time and years, because Adam, Abel and Noe were before him, and
therefore his meaning must be that Melchisedech was the first priest in
dignity, and the highest of all the preests of his time. So that even in the
law of nature, that is from Adam to Moses, there was always an high
priest to rule the Church, and to compose controversies, that might arise in
matters of religion. After that, in the law written the high priest ruled all
in ecclesiastical affairs as is plain in the books of Exodus and Leuiticus.
In Exodus we read how Moses like a spiritual Judge gives sentence in
causes ecclesiastical and answers all doubts and questions which arose
concerning the observation and interpretation of the law, Exodus 1^.
and although to ease him self he was persuaded to lay part of his charge and
burden upon others shoulders, yet still he reserueth to him self the judgment
of all marters concerning the law and ceremonies. c. 17.
And in Deuteronomie we find that the people were commanded in all
difficulties of religion to have recourse unto the priest of the Leuiticall
law who ruled at that time, and God threatens that if any be so proud and
stubborn as to refuse to obey his sentence, he shall suffer death by the decree
of the Judge. Where a blind man may see that the synagogue had her Judge to
decide all controversies in religion. And shall we imagine that the Church and
spouse of Christ, wants a head to direct her, and a Judge to give her
satisfaction in all doubts of religion? No, no, in the law of grace, as God
has bestovved more grace on his Church then on his Synagogue, so has he
provided her of a Judge and governor, whom for his Churches sake he assisteth
more particulerly. And first of all Christ him self vvhilest he lived
governed this Church him self, and in all points played ye part of a supreme
head, high priest, and pastor. For he instituted a new law, a new
sacrifice, and new sacraments, he ordained priests and ministers and gave
them authority to preach, and to minister, and to govern in the Church, under
him. And after that he had vvithdravven his visible presence from us, he left
us not with out an vnder-pastour, but presently after his resurrection, he
appointed saint Peter his vicegerent in earth, that still the Church might
have a visible judge to whom she might repayer in all her difficulties. Io. 21.
For after his resurrection he appears to his Apostles and singling out
saint Peter from the rest, he demands of him three times not only whether
he loved him, but also whether more then the rest; and finding in deed that he
did so, and that consequently he was the fittest (for the cheifest thing in a
pastor is love) he makes choice of him before the rest, and comitetth unto
him the charge of his sheep, in so ample manner, that he excepteth none, but
gives him authority over all both lambs and sheep, that is lesser and
greater Christianes, even Apostles and Bishops, who all must acknovvledge
Peter for their pastor, if they will be the sheep of Christ. For as saint
Bernard notes, l. de consid.
where there is no distinction, there is no exception. And seeing that after
saint Peter's death the Church has noe less need of a visible pastor, then
before it had, as Christ left him for his vicegerent, so in him did he
appoint a continual succession of his successors, that the Church might
always be provided of a visible pastor. And therefore as bishops are the
successors of the other Apostles, so some one must succeed saint Peter and
must have that superiority over other Bishops, which saint Peter had over
the Apostles. And truly to omit other proofs, noe man more likely to be this
man then the Bishop of Rome. For in the Sea of Rome saint Peter did last of all
reside, there he dyed, and there, before his death he appointed Clemens, who
refusing, Linus succeeded, and after him Cletus, after him Anacletus, after him
Clemens, and so forth even unto Clement the eight who now in Rome residing,
rules the Church not only of Rome but of all the christian world. Vverfore
the Bishops of this Sea were ever called the vicars of Christ and successors
of saint Peter, they have ever called general Counsels and confirmed the
same, they made general laws to which all bishopsyea all Christians
acknowledged themselves bound and obliged; they have excommunicated Bishops
and Emperors wheresoever they lived, thinking none that are Christianes to be
out of their jurisdiction, they have taken appellations from all parts, and
shevved them selves in all these actions supreme pastors not of Rome only, but
of all the world, and yet were never counted usurpers; and therefore sithence
that saint Peter must have a successor, and that needs there must be one
visible Judge under Christ, to whom in all doubts we must repayr, the Pope
of Rome is likest to be he, or else if any one be more like, then let the
adversary name him. And if they name any other but him, I will avouch that
the Church has been without an head these 1600. years, for all this while
never any executed that office but he. S. Hierom I am suer took the Bishop
of Rome to be the man, for he in a doubt and controversy of the high mystery
of the Trinity flies unto Damasus Bishop of Rome, Epistol^ ad Dam.
not that he was learneder then saint Hierom, but because he Knevv that for
saint Peter and consequently for his successors Christ prayed that he might
not err, Luc. 22.
but rather confirm his bretheru. A pastore (says he) praesidium ouis
flagito: Of my pastor I demand the help dew to a sheep. Now then let our
new Christianes, if they be the Church of Christ, which ever had a visible
head, tell us who is their supreme Judge, and pastor? They will say
peradue^tur that Christ him self is their Judge and pastor, and that they need
no other, because as he planted his Church, so still he rules the same. But
this shifte will not serve the turn; for Christ now conuerseth not visibly
amongst us, and so beside him, the visible Church must have a visible head, as
hither to she has euerhad. And altoughe Christ still remains our high
priest, Io. 10.
doctor, and pastor, yet he offerreth not sacrifices immediately but only by
his vnderpreestes, nether does he teach us by his own voice, Ephesians 4.
or revelations, but by doctors whom Saint Paul says he has appointed;
nether does he feed us by his own hand but by the hand of inferior
pastors, who minister his Sacraments unto us, and deliver his word in the
true meaning, by which the soul lives. Mat. 4.
Wherefore besides him the Church being a visible body, must have a visible
head, else we may say of it, as once Epaminondas said of a great army vvch
vvanted a General, Video pulcherimam bestiam, sed sine capite: I see a very
fair beast but without a head. And the reason hereof is because a head and
Judge in the Church is necessary to decide controversies in religion which
arise all most every age, yea ^ome times often times, in the same age. since
then we can not now have access to Christ, beside him we must have a
visible Judge. which Christ him self well knovveing, presently after he had
left us, appointed S. Peter as his vicegerent, as is all ready proved. I
demand then of all the professors of this new religion, especially of them
in Ingland, who is their Judge in controuerlies of religion? They can not say
that Scripture is this Judge, because scripture is but a vvritte^ law vvch can
not speak, nor interpret her self, and therefore if the controversy be which
is scripture or what is the meaning of it, scripture can give noe sentence;
yea I have demonstrated in the second Chapter that bare scripture is no
sufficient Judge in any matter of religion. Supr^.
They can not allege the spirit to be this Judge, as is evidently proved in
the third Chapter: nether will they confess that the Pope, fathers, or
councels are this Judge, and if they would, all they would condemn them, as
is declared in the fourth Chapter. Peradventure they vvil be Judged by their
founders, Luther, Calvin, and such others. But first these aggreed not, nether
one with another, nether with them selves: for what one affirms another
denies, and what one of them taught one year, he corrected the next. but and
if they had aggreed yet were they no sufficient Judges because they can not
prove their mission, as is proved in the first Chapter and so are not to be
admitted for lavvfull Judges, unless we will admit also all false prophets.
Who the^ is this Judge to whom in controversies they repayr, and by whose
judgment they square out their religion? They vvil say perc^^^nce that the
Prince is this Judge. But this is as unlikely, and as flat against scripture
and practice of the Church as any thing can be. And although her Majesty of
late memory and her Father before her, did chaleng as dew unto them
authority in cause Ecclesiastical, of which I dispute not at this time, yet
I am sure they would not entermeddle in matters of religion to give sentence
what is the meaning of scripture, which books are canonical, and what
opinions are heretical and contrary unto god his word, no more then they
would entermedle in ministering of Sacraments or preachi^g of Gods word. For
they knevve full well what Iosaphat that good king said, ^ par. 19.
to wit, that Amarias the high priest was to rule in matters of religion, and
Captain Zabadias to menage matters belonging to the Kings office. And ozias may
be a sufficient example unto all princes, ^ par. 26.
who was stricken with a leprie for usurping the preests office in
incensing. We read in deed that Christ commanded Saint Peter to feed his
sheep and to govern his Church, Io. 21. Act. 2^. Ephesians 4.
preests also and pastors have the same charge committed unto them: yea the
prophet Isaie says that Princes are Nurces, furtherers, and favorers and
defenders of the Church, Is. 49.38.60.
but he never calls them rulers of the Church, nor Judges in religion.
Wherefore saint Ambrose Bishop of Mila^ vvriting to his sister says that he
told Valentinian the Emperor what belonged to his office in these vvordles:
Ep. 13.
Trouble not they self, O Emperor, as to think that thou have any Imperial
right to meddle in divine matters. Extolle not they felf, but if thou vvilt
raygne long, be thou subject to god. It is written give to god which is
belonging to god, and to Caesar which belongs to Caesar. Unto the Emperor
palaces appertain, unto the priest Churches. The charge of the public
wales is committed to thee, but not of sacred and holy things. A sentence
worthy to be set in a tablet of gold, and to hang about a Princes neck. And
truly if Princes were Judges of religion we must change religion at their
pleasures, and so we should have almost as many religions as Princes. Much
less can the parliament be Judge in religion for that consists of temporal
men, and although in England the lords spiritual are joined with the
temporal, yet are they all ruled by the prince. And vvher I pray you does
scripture vvarraunt us that the parliament is our Judge in matters of religion?
yea we see that parlamentes varye in religion, and so they can give noe
certain sentence for religion. In France the Parliament is Catholic and is
content to be subject to the Pope, and in no wise will meddle with matters
of religion. In King Henry's time the eight of that name, the parliament enacted
six Catholic articles. In King Edward's time the parliament allowed of another
religion, in Queen Mary's time of another, and in Queen Elizabethes time of
another. If then the same man had lived in all these princes time (as many have
done) then if the Parliament be Judge he must in conscience though religion be
but one have changed four times his religion, else had he been four times
an heretic and as often: traitor. Yea I think if the parliament were
demanded to define which books of scripture are canonical, and which is
the true meaning, they would answer that such matters belong not unto them.
But they will answer that the parliament is Judge when it is conformable to
scripture, as it is at this present, but was not in Queen Mary's time. Thus
they may answer but with how little reason, it will easily appear. For
either the parliament precisely, or the parlame^t aggreeing with scripture is
this Judge? If they grant me the first, then must we in conscience change
religion as often as the parlame^t changes decrees; If they grant only the
second, then is the parliament noe infallible Judge, yea no Judge at all; for
yet we must have a Judge to Judge the parliament and to determine when the
parliament follovveth the word of God, else shall we never be satisfied. And
who I pray you is this Judge? Now I see not whom they can name, unless it
be my lord of Canterbury, or the ministry of England, or of all countries
where their religion florisheth. But then I demand of them, first where they
read in Scripture that their Clergy is an infallible Judge in matters of
religion? They will say that the scripture commaundes us to give credit to our
pastors. True, but if I deny that they are true pastors, they can not prove
them selves to be so, because they can not prove their mission, as in the
first chapter is proved most evidently. Secondly the Clergy of England since
King Henry the eight, has changed religion diverse times, and this nevve
Clergy was never yet constant in faith for one vvholle year together, yea
they aggree not amongst them selves, and so can be no assured and infallible
Judge. Thirdly either the Clergy of England is Judge in matters of religion,
because it is the Clergy of England, or because it is the Clergy of a vvholle
country, or because it conspireth with the universal Clergy of their
religion. If they grant me the first, then does it folvvith we must have a
Judge to Judge the parliament and to determine when the parliament follovveth
the word of God, else shall we never be satisfied. And who I pray you is
this Judge? Now I see not whom they can name, unless it be my lord of
Canterbury, or the ministry of England, or of all countries where their
religion florisheth. But then I demand of them, first where they read in
Scripture that their Clergy is an infallible Judge in matters of religion?
They will say that the scripture commaundes us to give credit to our pastors.
True, but if I deny that they are true pastors, they can not prove them selves
to be so, because they can not prove their mission, as in the first chapter is
proved most evidently. Secondly the Clergy of England since King Henry the
eight, has changed religion diverse times, and this nevve Clergy was never
yet constant in faith for one vvholle year together, yea they aggree not
amongst them selves, and so can be no assured and infallible Judge. Thirdly
either the Clergy of. England is Judge in matters of religion, because it is
the Clergy of England, or because it is the Clergy of a vvholle country, or
because it conspireth with the universal Clergy of their religion. If they
grant me the first, then does it follovv that only the Clergy of England is
this Judge, and so all other countries must be subject to the Inglish Clergy,
to vvch they will never aggree. If they grant the second, then every Clergy
of a vvholle country is judge, and so we shall have as many religions al most
as countries: and although the new Clergies of Ingland, Germany, Scotland,
Holland, Geneue, are contrary the one to the other, yet the people of every
country must acknovvlege them as Judges in religion, and so must embrace
contrary opinions. If they grant the third, I must desire them to aggree all
amongst themselves, before we stand to their judgment; for if this new
Clergy be divided into many sects, as all the world sees that it is, then
seeing that we have noe more assurance of one Sect, then another, we may
refuse to be judged by any of them, especially they them selves refusing to be
judged by one a another. Yea not all this new Clergy, nor any sect of the same
can prove their mission, and therefore are not to be admitted for true pastors
and judges in religion unless we will receive all false prophets also and
false Apostles. Is there no judge then nether in Ingland nor in all the new
Church of the ghospellers? If there be, let them name him, if they can; if there
be none, as it seems that there is not (for I have named and teiected by good
reason all whom I think they can name) then is not their Church the Church
of Christ, in which, as is before proved, is alvvayes resident a visible judge
to compose controversies: yea then the Church (which as I shall prove in the
next book is a peaceble kingdom) shall be a common wealth the vvorst provided
for that ever was; it shall be a body without a head, a kingdom without a
king or Prince to command, a conuenticle of vvranglers, the vvorst ordered and
the most disse^tious society that ever was; to be breef, the Church militaunt
in earth, shall more resemble that mutinouse route of the damned in hell then
the peaceable society of the Church triumphant in heaven: yea then shall that
follovv which I intented to prove, to wit, that in the new Church of the
ghospellers, there are noe means to compose and determine controversies,
because where there is no visible Judge, there every man may believe and
preach what he lift, and no man can controlle him, and if diverse preach
contrary doctrine, they may go together by the ears and noe man shall be to
part the fraye, because there is noe judge to take up the matter betvvixte them;
and so the gappe is open to all false prophets whose doctrine must go for
current be it never so absurd, because there is no Judge to give sentence of the
truth or falsehood of the same. And to make the matter more plain, suppose
that now in Ingland some new preacher should preach a new heresy, yea that
many at once should preach contrary opinions, and so fall together by the
ears: there would be no means to compose these controversies because there is
no Judge to take up the matter, nether is there any way to prevent them,
because vvher there is no Judge to define, every man may teach what he list,
and where every one may teach what he will, there arise iarres, and
discords, and where no means are to appease them, the society is ruined:
(...). 11.
Because every kingdom divided with in it self, shall be made desolate. But
in this case peradventure they would call a Provincial or general Council,
and so compose matters by common consent. Be it so that they could call such a
council, and could also, all, or the most part aggree, yet I see not how
we are vvarra^ted to assure our selves that they all can not err, and that
therefore we may rely upon their sentence; for if they say that we are
vvaranted because they are the true pastors, I ca^ tell them that this is not
so sure, because they can not prove their mission, and I demand of them
whether the Catholic Clergy, which is far greater and which for fifteen
hundred years before Luther was hard of, was counted the only Clergy, may
not have their voice, and if they may, certainly their voice vvil be negative
and opposite to their affirmative. But this is spoken upon supposition, that
they could call a council and aggree also in the same, for I have good cause
to doubt that they nether can call a council nor aggree in a council. For if
there be no visible supreme Judge nor Pastor in their Church, as I have proved
that there is not who should call this council and su^mone all the Clergy to
appear? Lut l cont. ^^ Calu. ^i ^. Inst. 6.7.
Luther and Calvin say that this belongs to the Emperor: but seeing that this
is an Ecclesiastical office concerning religion, it can not appertain unto a
temporal Prince, and now that the Emperor is a Catholic and a Papist as
they term him, I think they would not obey him if he should summone them to
apeare, especially because he would call Catholic bishops and would give the
preeminence to them. But I have proved all ready that the Emperor though in
the name of the Pope as an assistau^te, he may by the Churches permission call
a council, yet of him self he can not meddle in spiritual matters. Act. ^^.
Wherefore the Council which the Apostles called was, called without the
Emperors authority, where the^ there is noe Suprem Pastor (as I have proved
that amongst them is none) whosoever should take upon him to call a
council, should usurp, and the others might refuse to obey his call.
Peradventure they would choose one by common consent, and so would all stand
to his arbiterme^t. But in this also is difficulty, for where there is none to
command, who shall call them together to aggree in the election of this one
man? Yet let us suppose that they should meet by chance, as crovves do in the
Pease-feeld; when they are met, it is not so easy to aggree upon one, and
when they have aggreed, it is not so easy to aggree unto his sentence. For if
he pronounce sentence for the Protestaunte, the Puritan will repine, and may
say that he has noe vvarraunte of his sentence who is but a man, constituted
by men, and can show noe scripture to proves at he can not err. But truly I
can not think that in this matter, they would ever proceed so far. For as
yet they never called a Council together out of all parts of their Church,
and those that were called together, for want of a Judge to determine, could
never aggree in any one point of religion. Anno 1554.
Surius relates how on a time twelve Catholic Doctors and twelve
Ministers met at Vvormatia to make some atonement betvvixte the
Confessionistes, Genesis Cron.
but after a little disputation five of the twelve ministers were
excommunicated by the rest, Stapl l 4. de prim fed. c. 13.
and cast out for vvranglers; and so nothing was concluded. Diverse other
assemblies and meetings they have attempted, but all ended in thundering
excommunications, bitter taunts, and infamous libels, and as yet they never
could aggree in any council upon any controversy in religion, and all for
want of a visible Judge, and pastor, to whom all the rest are subject. And
this they have gotten by leaving the ancient Catholic Church which
acknovvledgethe the bishope of Rome as Saint Peter's successor, and Christ's
Vicaire, and relyeth upon his sentence as infallible, Luc. 22.
because Christ in fainct Peter prayed for him that his faith might not fail;
and because he has suprem authority (which all Catholic Bishops have ever
acknowledged) he has called many Counsels and determined many
controversies, and vvhilest the Church ever stands to his Judgment which
never yet was contrary to it is self, she enuoyethe great peace, and unity
in faith and religion: vvher as the ghospellers because they have noe visible
head, could never call Counsels, never aggree upon any one point of religion
which was before in controversy, and never shall hereafter; because matters
of religion are hard, and therefore vvher therare many heads, there are many
opinions, and where are many opinions, there are many co^tradictions, and so
no peace, nor unity, because noe one supreme visible judge to determine. And
as for want of a visible Judge they can not appease dissensio^s after they are
arisen, so can they not prevent them. For if there be noe visible Judge every
Cock-brain may preach his own fancies for true faith, and religion, and no
man shall controlle him, nor condemn his doctrine, nor forbid his preaching:
because if there be no visible Judge, no man has the authority, and so the
gapp is open to all false prophets, who may enter into the nevve Church
thick and three fold, because noe man therein is, of authority to forbid them:
whence it follovveth that if we accept of the new religion and incorporate
our selves to the new Church, we expose our selves to all false prophets
who may preach what they please because no man has authority to controlle
them.

THE SECOND BOOK
CONTEYNETH A SVRuey of the Marks of heretics which are proved to aggree so
fitly unto the professors of the new religion that if ever there were any
heretics, they are heretics.

The first chapter handles the first mark, of an heretic which is his
breach which he makes out of that Church which is commonly counted the true
Christian Church.

THEY say commonly, that although the devil disguise him self never so much,
yet by one mark or other he bevvrayeth him self. For although sometimes he
inueste him self in the habit of a young gallaunte, or of a mortifyed
religiouse man: yea although in out ward show he transform him self into
an angel of light, yet so it happens (and I think because God will have it
so) that by one mark or other, he is discovered. For either his staring eyes,
or stinking savor, or horned head, or forked feet or base voice, discryeth
this gallaunt creature, to be not as he seems, but as he is indeed, a foul
and deformed member of the devil, who though he shrovvd him self under the
goodly name of a christian, and vvrapp and lapp him self from top to toe, in
the innocent habit of a pastor, Vincent. Lytin ^. contra proph here is. nouit. c
36.
which is scripture, and the word of God, yet by one mark or other, yea not
by one only but by many, he descrieth him self to be as he is an heretic. And
the reason is because the counterfeit never attayneth unto the perfection of the
current, and art though she may imitate nature, yet shall she always be
vvanting in one thing or other. The counterfeit gold of the Alchimistes has a
great resemblaunce with the true gold, but either the sound, or wait, or
operation will prove the old proverb to be true: that all is not gold that
glisters. Appelles pai^ted grapes on a boys head so lively that the byrds
pecked at them, but yet art came short of nature, for if the boy had been
painted as well as nature frames her works, the byrds would not have been
so imboldned, yea the grapes vvanted some thing, for at least by pecking the
byrds perceived, that all is not grapes that seems so. Lysippus could in
marble stone make so goodly a portrait of a man, that he would show every
bone, vain, and vvrincle with all proportion, but the want of life and
motion well declared where in art was enforced to yield to nature.
Wherefore let the heretic counterfett never so coningly, let him use all ye
art possible to show him self a sincere and true Christian, yet the
counterfeit must come short of the current, and art must yield to nature, and
he in one point or other will bewray him self to be no true christian
which he professes him self to be, but a faythless heretic which he
would not seem to be. And the first mark by which he is bevvrayed, is his
breach which he makes out of the Church and Christian society. For as the
vvandring sheep was once of the fold, and the rebel was once a subject, and
the bow cut of, once lived and flourished in the tree; so heretics especially
Arch-heretikes, were at least for the most part, once sheep of Christ's fold
subjects of his kingdom, and members of his body the Church. Wherefore saint
Ihon gives us this mark to know an heretic by: Ex nobis prodierunt, l. Io. 8.
sed non erant ex nobis: They went out from us, but they were not of us. That
is, they lived amongst us (for else they could not have gone out) yet so that
they were not worthy our company and therefore as rotten bovves are soon
broken of, so they were soon shaken of and took occasion to go from us who
before for their evil life in desert were none of us. Or else, to follovv
another exposition, Aug tract. 3. in cp 10.
they were amongst us in out ward shevve because they frequented sacraments
with us, but they were heretics in mind and so none of us, and therefore
they vve^t out from us. They were in the Church but as evil humors in man's
body, and therefore were to be expelled because they were hurtful to the body,
and no part of the substance. For commonly heretics live some time secret
before they open and disguise them selves, and so before they vve^t out from us
openly, they were none of us secretly. Or else according to another
interpretation: they were once amongst us and like true Christianes lived
with us, Aug tract. ^. (...) 10.
but even then when they were by present faith and justice members of our
Church, God forsavv by his divine foresigt, that they would not continue
amongst us, and therefore they went out from us, because even then when they
were amongst us, they were none of us finally, to persevere with us: not
that God his prescie^ce was the cause, but because he forsavv which was to
be, that is, that they which were as yet of our society, were of their own
free will to leave us and so in God his foresight were finally none of our
company. So that one evident mark of an heretic is, that he makes a breach
out of the body of the Church, of which he either was, or seemed to be a
member. The same mark saint Paul gives us also to know an heretic when
he says that Some shall depart from the fayeth, 1. Tim. (...) Heb. 10.
and that some are accoustumed to forsake the assembly, and that some going out
from us, Act. 1^.
do trouble others with words. ^o. 6.
So the first Sacramentaries I mean the Capharnaites who would not believe
that Christ could give his body to be eaten, left Christ and his Apostles and
would walk noe more with the^. So that going out, or breakinge forth of
the Church, is a note and mark of an heretic. Wherefore Tertulian says, l.
praesc. c. 8.
that we must not marvel nor think the worse of our Church when some do
leave us, because (says he) this shows us to be of the true Christian
company, according. unto that: they went out from us, Ibid. ^. 10.
but they were not of us? Yea he says that all heretics were once Romans
in religion, and therefore now are heretics because they separate them selves
as Marcion, and Vale^tinus did, of whom (says he) it is certain that they
believed once in the Romain Church, until under Pope Eleutherius they were
cast out of the same. And this note is so certain that if you ro^ne over the
catalogue of all the ancient heretics you shall find that they all were once
members of that society, which was commonly called and counted Christian,
and when they left the same, they were by and by noted for rebels run
gates, and Apostatates. and as the scripture notes the time and occasion, 3.
Reg. 18.
when the Samaritanes left the Temple of Jerusalem and would vvvorship God
no more in that place as the Jews ever had done; so have Ecclesiastical
histories noted the time, and occasion of the breach of every arch-heretike
from the Church: and as yet we well remember (it is not so long) the time
and occasion of Luthers reuolte from the Catholic, and Romain Church. Yea him
self confesses that once he was a Papist and that in the highest degree, for
these words he once uttered in his commentaries upon the first Epistle to the
Galarhians: ^n t. cp. Gal.
Si quisquam alius, certe ego ante lucem ^uangelij pie sensi and Zelaui pro
Papisticis legibus, and patrum traditionibus, easque magno serto vt sanctus,
and earum obseruationem tanquam necessariam ad salutem v^si and defendi: If
ever any, truly I, befoee the light of the gospel (be means his own
gospel) thought holily and was Zealons. For the Papisticall laws and the
fathers traditions, and I urged and defended them, Ibidem.
and their observation as necessary to salvation. Yea he confesses how he
vvatched fasted prayed, and tamed his body when he was a friar, yea says
he: Tanta erat authoritas Papae apud me, vt vel in minimo dissentire ab ipso,
putarem crimen aeterna damnatione dignum: So great was the Popes authority
with me, that I thought it a crime worthy eternal damnation to dissent from
him in the least point. Ibid.
Yea once says he. I was so zealous for the Pope that I thought Ihon Husse
a wicked heretic and would have burnt him with mine own hands. And as
Luther was, so were all the pack of their first fathers, children of our
mother the Catholic Church; and sithence they are gone out, they wear the
badge and cognisaunce of an heretic. They vvil answer peradventure that we
were not the true Church, but vverelo^ge before metamorphized and changed
into the synagogue of the devil, and that therefore it was time for them to
leave us. But if we were degenerated I demand of them when? under what
Pope, or Emperor? and in what age? and from what Church did we degenerate?
out of what Church did we make a breach? for as nothing degenerateth but
from that which it was before. And if they can not tell us when we begone
to degenerate, nor no^ what Church then ca^ they not put this mark upon us.
Yea I shall in this book prove that our Church which now is, aggreeth with
the Church which in all ages even from the Apostles was counted the only
Christian Church. Nether is it sufficient to say that we were not the true
Church, for so Arrius, Nestorius, Eutiches, and every heretic was accustomed
to say, who notvvithstanding because they went forth of that Church which
was commonly called and counted the Christian Church, were counted heretics.
Sith therefore Luther, Calvin, and the rest have departed from our Church,
which was and still is called the Christian Church, either they are
heretics, or else Arrius, Nestorius, yea Simon Magus, Cerinthus, and Ebion,
were noe heretics. Nether ca^ they brag that many have left them also and
severed them selves from their company; for that was always the manner of
heretics, not long to continevve in one religion, but to divide them selves
into many sects. And if they count those heretics who go from the^ and
make new sects, then are they all even the first of them heretics, because
the first of the^ went out from us. Wherefore in fevve words to co^ prise
all, and to conclude which I intended, They can not name the Church from
which we departed, nor the time, nor the occasion; we can tell when they
departed, and from what Church, that is the Roman Church, which was and
is still commonly counted, the true Christian Church; wherefore it follovveth
evidently, that we are still in the right Church because there was never any
other out of vvch we could break forth, they are run out, we wear the
badge of true Christianes which is never to go out, never to forsake that
which once we have professed, they are noted with the mark of heretics,
which is to go out, and to forsake the common received Church; and so if
ever there were any heretics so called, and counted, for breaking forth, and
going out, then are they heretics, and never shall be able to hide this mark
go they never so disguisedly.

The second Chapter discovers the second mark of an heretic which is later
standing and novelty, which also is proved to agree as fitly to the
ghospellers of this time as to any heretics of former times.

GOod goes before badd, truth before falsehood, the current before the
counterfeit, and art before nature: because, evil is but a privation of the
good, and falsehood is that which svverueth from the truth, and the counterfeit
is but a resemblaunce of the current, and art is but an imitation of nature;
and so these come after, those of necessity must goo before. No marvel then
if religion take the precedence of superstition, and Christian faith, of
heresy, which is but a privation of that good; a falsitie svveruing from that
truth, a counterfeit resemblaunce of that current, and an artificial imitation,
of Christian sincerity. Religion was planted before superstition took root,
ver tue was rooted before vice was sowed, Mat. 18.
and the seed of true faith was sowed before the enemy scattered the evil
cockle of heresy, and as the true Apostles lived and preached before Simon
Magus and other false-prophetes his successors, so true fay the was sowed
rooted, and come to some height and ripenes before ever the false Apostles
scattered the nettleseed, and hempseed of their heresies. Yea not only by the
Apostles generally in the world, but also by their successors particulerly in
every particular country, fay the grevv and flourished before heresy was
sowed, ^i. ^.
for as Bozius in his fourth book of the signs of the Church learnedly
proves, the first conversion of every country from paganism unto
Christianity, was not to heresy but to the true faith and Romain religion,
and when that was received then heresy being but a corruption of true faith
as vinegar is of wine, begane to take place then the cockle spronge up after
the good corn. And therefore Saint Paul gives us this mark to know an
heretic, and for heresy, that they arise after the true religion. Act. 80
I know (says he) that ravening wolves that is heretics after my
departure shall enter amongst you not sparinge the flock. So that after
saint Paul had preached and persuaded true faith, the false prophets
entered, to ruin the spiritual building vvch he had framed. In like manner
the ancient fathers have ever noted heretics and their heresies of later
standing and novelty. l. praesc. c 2^
In all things (says Tertulian) the verity goes before the image, and last
of all comes the similitude. Yea says he it is a folly to think, that
heresy in doctrine is the first, especially seeing that the true religion
fortelleth heresies. And in another place, ll. 4. aduersus Marcionens.
thus he concludes; Insumma si constatid verius quod prius, id prius quod est
ab initio, ab initio quod ab Apostolis, pariter vtique constabit idesse ab
Apostolis traditum quod apud Ecclesias Apostolicas fuerit sacro-sanctum. In
breef if it be manifest that that is truest which is first, that first which
is from the beginning, that from ye. beginning vvch is from the Apostles, it
shall likewise be manifest, that that is delivered by ye Apostles vvch has
been inuiolably holde^ in the apostolical Churches. And in his book against
Praxeas he says that it is adjudged against all heresies, that that is true
vvch is first, that is cou^terfet vvch is later. And this he shows by a
similitude, for (says he) as the vvilde olive springs out often times out
of the svveet olive nutte, l. praesc. c 36.
and the vvilde figtree out of the good fig, so heresies have grown out of
our ground which yet are not ours, degenerating from the true grain of faith.
Ireneus also subscribeth to Tertulians opinion in these words: l 5. circa
m^dium.
Omnes illi valde posteriores sunt quam Episcopi, quibus Apostoli tradiderunt
Ecclesias. All they (he means heretics) are of much later standing then the
Bishops, to whom the Apostles delivered and committed the Churches. And as
heretics are noted of later standing so is their doctrine, counted to savor
of novelty. Wherefore Zozomenus says, l. 1. c. 1^.
that Arrius was not a frayed to affirm that which never any durst avouch,
to wit that God the son was created of nothing. And Vincentius Lyrinensis
vvriting a book against heresies intitleth it: against profane novelties, and
vvisely observes that the Catholic Church Keeps the old, and deuiseth noe
new doctrine, to which sense he explicateth those words of saint Paul: O
Timothee depositum custodi, c. 2.
o Timothee keep that which was deposed with thee and committed to thy
custody: Depositum custodi (says he) non quod a te inuentum sed quod tibi
creditum est, quod accepisti, non quod excogitasti, rem non ingenij, sed
doctrinae, non vsurpationis priuatae, sed pi^blicae traditionis, in qua non
author esse debes, sed custos, non institutor sed sectator, aurum accepisti,
aurum read, nolo mihi pro alijs alia subijcias. Keep that which is deposed;
not which is invented by thee, but which is committed to thee, which thou
have received not which tho have devised, a thing not of wit, but of
doctrine, not of private usurpation, but of public tradition, in which thou
ought not to be an autour, but a keeper, not an institut our but a
follovver, thou receiuedst gould, restore gould, I will not have thee put in
one thing for another. Vvherin he puts a plain difference bettvvixt
Catholics and heretics; that they stick to the old, these are ever devising
nevve doctrine. For although the Church by new counsels and definitions
adds greater explication of her religion, and although by the labors and
endeavors of the Doctors of the Church, which in no age are vvanting many
points of our faith are more illustrated and dilated, yet in substance, our
faith is still one and the same. And therefore divines say that faith never
from the beginning has increased in substance but only in explication, and
that the Church since the time of the Apostles never had new revelations in
the articles of belief, and that in general Counsels she defines noe new
things, but rather those things which before were extaunte in scriptures,
fathers, or tradition, she by her definition, declares more certainly, and
proposes more plainly to the view of the world. So that as Vincentius
Lyrinensis says, (...). 29.30.
even as man's body increases by nutrition and augmentation, yet gayneth no
new limbs and members, but only gets more quantity and strength in the
former, so christian faith by noe increase did ever yet gain new articles,
but only has gotten greater and clearer explication of the former. Wherefore
the same doctor counsayleth every preacher and teacher so to explicate things
after a new manner, that he preach not new doctrine: Eadem quae accepisti
(say eth he) ita doce, c. (...).
vt cum dicas noue no^ dicas noua: The same things which thou have received,
so do thou teach, that when thou speak after a new manner thou speak noe
new things. And the reason why faith admits no novelty is this: because
God speaks once and never recalls or ame^ds his word; Job 33. Psalm. 6^.
and in him that proverb takes no place: Secunda consilia meliora; second
counsayls are the best. For God is as wise and circumspect at the first as at
the last, and therefore he having once revealed and planted faith, that must
stand for good, and he that seeks to change, declares him self a corrupter
not a correctour, and in that he comes after with his diuising wit to add,
ordetract from the old received faith he bevvrayes him self to be of later
standing and so an heretic, and his doctrine to savor of novelty, and so an
heresy. Wherefore to conclude sith that it is certain that Catholics whom
they call papists, are of noelate standing, nor noe vpstarts, (for I demand
when they began, and after whom they arose?) they ca^ be noe heretics, and
seeing that it is noe less certain, that the reformers of this time be all
nouellaunts, and nouellers, vpstarts, and of later standing, arising many
hundred years after the Romain Church which was ever counted the only true
Church (for Luther the first of all this new frye and his religion is not yet
an hundred years old) it is as certain, that they are heretics and their
religion heresy, as that Arius, Nestorius, Pelagius, were heretics, and the
same fathers and scriptures before alleged, which have condemned them for
heretics because of their late standing, can not without plain partiality,
free our reformers from the same sentence, who wear the same badge, and are
noted with the same mark of an heretic which is later standing.

The third Chapter notes the Reformers with another mark of an heretic
which is a particular name which they take from their sectmaster.

THe heart of man is a secret closet, Psalm 7. Sap. 1. Hier. 11. Th. (...) p q.
57. art. 4.
of which God only Keeps the Key, it is a botto^lesse pit which he only
who searches the heart and reins can sound to the botto^, in so much that
unless God reveal, or this heart of man vouchsafe to open it self, nether
devil nor angel can discover the hearts cogitations, much less can one man
tell what another thinks. Wherefore that men might impart their thoughts one
to another God has guien them a toungue as an Interpretour of the mind and a
messenger of the thoughts, and a mouth also as a trompet vvherin the tongue
sounds forth by voice what the heart thinks. And because the things which
we would speak of can not by them selves immediately be brought into
discourse, the toungue frames words and gives names which go for the
things, that so when we hear the sound of the word and name, we may
understand the thing vvch is spoke of. Wherefore the new Christians of this
time must not meruaill, that by their name, as by an infallyble mark I seck to
discover them: for names are Symboles and signs of things by which we know
the natures of things together with their proprieties. But what will you
say is this name, by which they are convinced to be heretics? it is the
Surname which they take from their Sect master, by which they were alvvayes
more famous then by their proper names. At the first when all Christianes
were of one heart and lip, believing and professing the same, Act. 4.
they were called all by the same names, as Christianes of Christ, brethren
for their mutual charity, faithful, in respect of one faith; but when
certain inconstaunte and devising heads would vary from the rest of the
faithful in certain points of religion, their names changed as they them
selves were altered, and because they now began to leave the common
received faith which Christ by him self and his Apostles, and their
successors had delivered, they were noe more called by the common name of
Christian, but by the name by which their autour was called who devised
their religion: and so as in faith, they were separated from other Christians,
so in names also which explicate the natures of things, they were of
necessity severed. Simonians were named of Simon Magus, the Ebionites of
Ebion, Marcionites of Marcion, the Manichies of Manicheus, the Arrians of
Arrius, Nestorians of Nestorius, Eutichianes of Eutiches, Pelagians of
Pelagius, Donatists of Donatus, who not with standing before they varyed in
religion and follovved new Masters, were called only by the common names of
Christians, wherefore the ancient fathers ever condemned them as heretics who
were marked with these particular names. Saint Hierome pronounces boldly
this sentence: li. contra Lucifer. in fine.
Sicubi audieris eos qui dicuntur Christiani, non a Domino Jesus Christo sed a
quopiam alio nuncupari, v^pote Marcionitas, Valentinianos, Montenses, etc.
scito non Ecclesiam Christi, sed Anti-christi esse Synagogam: If any-vvhere
thou here of them who are called Christians, yet take their name not of Jesus
Christ. but of some other, as for example, of they be called Marcionits,
Valentinians, Montanists, etc. Know thou, that there is not the Church of
Christ but the Synagogue of Antichriste. Justinius Martyr discrieth heretics
by the same badge and mark: Dial. cum Triphone.
There are (says he) and ever were many, which come in the name of Jesus,
yet are called by diverse Surnames as Marcionits, Valentinians, Basilidians,
Saturninians every one Biorrovving a name of the first inuentour of their
doctrine. Of such kind of men this is saint Ciprianes opinion: They which
were once Christians, Ep. ad Nouatum.
now Nouatians, are now no more Christians, because (says he) primam fidem
vestram perfidia posteriori per nominis appellationem mutastis; you have
changed your former faith by a later infidelity by the appellation of your
name. And the reason why these fathers accounted always such nicknamed
persons as heretics is easily seen, Mat. 18.
because such as leave the Church and will not here her voice, were
always esteemed as heretics, as the Greek word (...) imports which
signifies election and separation; Li. 2. contr^ Faust c. 3. Cipr. l. 1. cp. 6.
and therefore S. Austin and saint Ciprian put this difference betvvixte an
heretic and a schismatike, that although both do separate them selves from
the Church, yet a schismatike only is divided in will, contumacie, and breach
of charity, an heretic also in faith and opinion, and therefore seeing that
these diverse names taken from diverse autours; argues such a leparation (for
if they had still remained in that Church which commonly was called Christian
and had not follovved nevvmasters, there had needed noe distinction of names
from other Christians) it must needs follovv that all such as are distinguished
thus in name from other Christians, are divided also from them in faith and
religion, and so are noe true Christians but perfidiouse heretics. I demand
now of our Lutheranes, Zuinglianes, Caluinistes, Osiandrians, Bezists,
Brovvnists, Martinists, and such like new named Christians of this age,
whether they dare stand to the sentence of Justinius Martyr, S. Ciprian, and
saint Hierom in this point? Truly I think they dare not: and I think also
that they have good cause; for if that they be heretics which are surnamed of
particular autours (as they plainly affirm) if our new Christianes be so
surnamed as all the world will be witness that they are, then must needs
follovv this conclusion, that they also are heretics. But to conclude more
plainly that which was intended; This mark of an heretic can in noe wise
aggree unto Catholics, but rather to them aggreeth the sign of the true
Christians. For as in the time of the Arians they were counted true Christians
which were called by general names, Christians, and Catholics, and they
were esteemed of as heretics, which had particular names derived from the
autour of their sect, as Arians, Aetians, Eudoxians, and such like; so now
we that are called by the same names of Catholics and Christians, but by no
name taken from any autour, must needs be taken for true Christians, who as
they never changed name, so never changed religion, and the reformers who
are called Lutheranes, Caluinistes, Zuinglians and such like of some particular
sectmaster or other, must needs be condemned for heretics. And as before that
the ancient heretics forsook the common received faith they went by the
common names of Christians and Catholics and never took unto them particular
names before they follovved particular masters and embraced particular
doctrines; so before Luther and Calvin revolted from the Church, they went by
the common name of Christians, and never changed their names, till they
changed their religion, nether were any Christians called Lutheranes,
Caluinistes, or such like, before they relied upon new and particular
masters. And as the Arians because they could impose no name of any autour to
the Catholic Christians, were feign to call them Homo^usians of their
doctrine, as before them they were called (...) that is carnal for defending
second mariadges against Tertulian and the Montanistes; so at this time our
reformers are feign to call Catholics Papists, for holding the supremacy of
ye Pope, who is no new autour of any nevve religion, but an ancient
succesfour of saint Peter, and Vicare of Christ. As for the names of Thomists,
and Scotists, they are no names of autours of new religion, because all held
the same faith, but of autours of some other new opinions or manners of
teaching in Philosophy and school points; like wise the names of
Benedictins, Dominicanes, Jesuits, are names derived from autours of new
states of life but not of new faith or religion. So that in us whom they
call Papists, is no name which argues us to be heretics, in the reformers
are particular names of particular authors of new points of religion, and so
they wear the caracter of the beast, and are infamous heretics, if Montanus,
Marcion, Arius, were vvorthily called heretics.

The fourth chapter discovers another mark of an heretic, which is a
renouation almost of all old heresies, which argues the reformers to be
heretics if ever any hertofore were justly counted so.

MAny there are in the world, who finding many absurdities in the new
religion, and yet some difficulties also in the old, will nether hold
altogether with the one nor the other; but comfort them selves with a
flattering opinion, that a Christian may be saved in all religions so that he
retain the principalle articles of Christian belief. For (say they) if he be
firmly grounded in a right faith of the Incarnation, and Trinity, persuading
him self that God is one in essence and three in persons, and that Christ is
one in person yet subsisting in tvvoe natures, that he suffered for mankind,
and is the Messiah and Savior of the world; he is a Christian good enough,
and may be saved well enough, whatsoever his opinion be in lesser matters, as
justification, merit, Sacraments, and such like, which to them be but petie
matters and not of such importance, as that a man's salvation should depend
thereon. But this opinion of theirs would they never so feign that it were
true, is most untrue, and as false as flattering. And the reason is, because
one only opinion in a matter of faith obstinately defended against the Churches
authority, Th. ^. ^. q. s. a. and s p. q. ^. (...).
is sufficient to dismember a Christian from the mystical body of Christ his
holy Church, in that it depriueth him of infused faith which is the glevv,
yea the s^ new which unites the members of this body together. And in deed
as yet we never hard of an heretic but he professed some principal parts of
Christian faith, as that Christ was God and man, or the Redeemer of mankind,
or the autour of the law of grace, or some such like: for if he altogether
denied Christ, he was rather an Apostata then an heretic. For he is an
heretic who professes Christ in some sort, and him self also a Christian,
yet obstinately denies some part of Christian religion; and he is an
Apostata, who quite renounceth Christ and his religion. Wherefore unless we
vvil grant that all heretics may be saved, we must needs confess that one
heresy is sufficient to damn a man perpetually. But in this matter least my
censur seem to rigorous and my sentence to severe, I will allege scriptures
which can not deceive us, if they be rightly understood. Our Savior Christ
denounces him to be like an ethnike an publicane, which will not hear the
Church, Mat. 1^.
and he says not, who will not give credit unto her in principal matters,
but absolutely he says, if he will not hear the Church, let him be unto
theee as an ethnike and publicane, that is shonne his company as the Jews did
all familiarity with paganes and publicanes. And again Christ threatens
that he, Mar. 1^.
who believes not sh^lbe damned. To which aggreeth saint Paul saying that
without faith, Heb. 11.
it is impossible to please God: meaning no doubt a vvholle and intier faith,
deuoid of all errors. For else all heretics may be saved who believe aright
some parts of Christian belief. Gal. ^^.
Wherefore saint Paul amongst the works of the flesh, that is of a man
which follovveth not the spirit of God, but his own sensuality and liking,
reckeneth not only fornication, dronkennes, murder, and idolatry, but also
dissensions, sects, and heresies, and against all these works he pronounces
the sentence of damnation: I fortel you as I have for told you, that they
which do such things shall not obtein the Kingdom of heaven: which sentence
as he would have pronounced against one fornication, or murder, so would he
against one heresy. To this aggreeth Athanasius in his creed saying that
unless a Christian Keep intierly and inuiolately the Catholic faith, Symb.
Ath^.
he can not be saved. Which to me seems a sufficient argument, that one only
heresy, is a sufficient matter of condemnation. And truly if we will look
back to ancient times, and take a view of ecclesiastical histories and
counsels, we shall sinde, that for some fevverrours, yea sometimes for one
only, and that not in the principal points of our belief, many have been
accursed and condemned for heretics. Pelagius believed that there were three
divine persons, aequall, coaequall, and co^substantiall; he professed that
Christ was God and man, and the Savior of the world, and that by his grace
we might more easily come to heaven: yet because that he auerred that
without this grace we might Keep the commandments, and with all, that
little infants were nether conceived nor born in originalle sin, hevvas by
the common voice of the Church and Christian world, Posiid. in vi^^ Aug.
condemned fora damnable heretic. Vigilantius beleeud also the Trinity and
incarnation, and yet for that he condemned and contemned relics, vigilles,
lighting of candels in the Church, prayer to saints, and with all aequalized
matrimony with virginity, saint Hierom condemns him even unto hell. l. (...)
Vigil.
Iouinian also for making all sins and good works equal in demerit and
merit, lib. cont. Ieuin.
and for putting noe difference betvvixte the state of Virgins and ye Married,
was by the same Doctor condemned for an heretic: to which his sentence all
the christian world subscribed. And no marvel. For if one heresy depriueth
us of faith, as it does, Th. 2.2. q. ^. a. ^.
because he that believes not God, and his Church in one article believes
them in none, if faith be the link which unites us as members to the
mystical body of Christ's Church, then one heresy is sufficient to separate
us from the Church, as the very name in Greek (...) imports, and
consequently one heresy is enough to damn us, because out of the Church is
noe salvation. For as the arm cut of dies, and the bow riuen from the tree
vvithereth, so whether by one or many heresies we be separated from Christ's
mystical body which he viuisicateth by his spirit, we dye and wither, and
remain deuoid of life, sap, and salvation, because the spirit if God which
is as is were the soul and spirit of this body, impartes it self to none but
those who by true faith are members of this body, and bovves of this tree,
Psalm. 79.
which extends it self by reaching bovves, from sea to sea. l. de vni^.
Ecel.
Vvherfor saint Cyprian says that whosoever is separated from the Church
has noe part in Christ's promises; he is an alien (says he) an enemy, a
profane person, and one that can not have God for his father, who has not
the Church for his mother. Yea (says he) such an one may die for Christ, he
may burn, he may be cast to the vvild beasts, but that death shall be no
crown of faith, but a pain of infidelity: such a one may be Killed, but he
can not be crowned. If then it be so that one error in faith obstinately
defended, is sufficient to cut a man from the Church, and to make him an
heretic; then certes the ghospellers of this time must needs be heretics and
that in the highest degree, who have renewed almost all the old heresies,
and even those which by the Christian world, were always condemned for
damnable errors. For if Simon Magus and his successors were ever heretics
for such and such opinions, if these men will defend the same opinions, they
must needs be condemned for heretics also, unless we will accept persons
and use plain and palpable partiality. Vine. Lirin.
Simon Magus said that God was the autour of sin, Aug. her. 65.
whom Cerdon and Marcion, Manicheus, Photinus, and Blastus follovved, Eus.
l.^.c ^^.
and were for this doctrine by the common voice of the Christian world
adjudged heretics, and shall not the same sentence pass upon our reformers
who say not only (as Simon Mag^s did) that God by a certain consequence is
the autour of sin, in that he has given man a nature necessarily inclining
to sin, Bell. l. 2. ^^. ^. c. ^.
but affirm also that he directly moves to sin, yea provoke us and eggeth
us forvvard? Shall Manicheus and the others above named be heretics who said
only that the evil God was autour of sin (for they imagined two Gods) and
shall our reformers be counted good Christians who, say that the good and the
only God is the cause and Promotour of all lies and wickedness? ^i de fide and
operibus c. 14.
Certain old heretics even in the Apost les time, ^ Pet 3. (...) li t.c.2 ^
Aug her 54.
grounding them selves upon saint Paul's Epistle to the Romans, which as
saint Peter witnesses they did vvrongly interpret, affirmed only faith to be
sufficient to salvation (which fantasy Simon Magus, and Eunomius also
embraced and for this they were accursed for heretics) and shall Luther and
Calvin: Lut. in c. ^. Ga^ Calu. in. Antid ses. 6. can. it.
and their adhere^tes go for sincere Christians, who teach the self same
doctrine. Leo the third Emperor, Co^sta^tine ye fifthe, and Leo the fourth
with their adherentes called Iconomachi, and Iconoclastae, Zonar. vitae Leo^.
Paulus Diaco ^bid.
Were condemned as heretics for denying honor to Images, and for breaking
and defacing them, and how can our ghospellers show their faces amongst
Christianes, who exceed those Image-breakers by many degrees. With the
Simonians, Iren. li. ^. c. 24 Ignat. ep. ad Smyrn. Th. Vvald. l. 2. de Sacram.
c. z. ^3. Damasc. l. de here is. Ter. l. de bap.
Menandrians, and others in saint Ignatius time, yea with Berengaria^s and
Vviclephistes, they deny that in the Eucharist Christ's body is really present:
with the Messalians and Caians, they deny that the Sacraments give grace,
with. Ihon Vvicleph they deny that Baptism, Confirmation, and Order, imprint
caracters in our souls, with the Pelagians they say that Baptism is not
necessary, Vvald. to. 2. ^. 96.
and that without it children may be saved by predestination or the faith of
their parents: with the Nouatians they deny the Sacrament of Penance: Infrae.
Soc l. 4. c. 24. Iren. l. 1. c. 30.
with the Gnostics, Manichies and Encratites, they say Matrimony is no
Sacrament, no more (says Calvin) then tillage of the ground yea spinning and
carding. Hier Proce. mio l. cont. Lucif.
With the Manichies they deny free will, with Aerius the Sacrifice, with
Heluidius and Iouinian, they make mariadge equal with virginity. Hier. l
cont. illos.
They marye preests, and despise Relics with ye same Vigilantius, and with
Rhetorius they praise all heresies, Sand l. 7. vi s^b. mon page ^7^.
and renew them all; and shall they for one heresy be accursed heretics, and
these men who have raked hell to rake them altogether, be esteemed of as
pure, sincere, and reformed Christians? Shall several heresies make them
heretics, and shall not all heresies almost, assembled together, be
sufficient to make these men heretics? Truly unless Apostasy excuse them from
beresie (who have denied all most all points of religion, only Christ
remaining to whose deny all notvvithsta^ding as the next book shall prove,
they have made a great stepp) I can not see why the ancient heretics for
several heresies should be counted heretics, and these for so many which
they have raked together, go for good Christians, especially seeing that any one
heresy is sufficient to make an heretic, because every one seuereth, and
separateth from the Church, and her faith and doctrine. Certes if these men be
no heretics, the old heretics were none, if these be noe heretics, never as
yet were any, If these have not the mark of an heretic, Simon Magus,
Marcion, Cerdon, Pelagius, Vvicleph, had none, if these be good Christianes all
heretics were so, or if they were noted with the caracter of an heretic,
these are so marked that they shall never be able to hide or wipe away this
mark, until they abjure, and renounce every one of the old heresies which
they have renewed, and embrace wholy and intierly the Catholic fay the
which they have forsaken.

The fifth Chapter handles another mark of an heretic which is want of
succession.

Our adversaries nether can, nor will deny, but that our Savior Christ and
his Apostles, once planted true religion and established a true Church in the
world, Ephesians. 4.
in which Pastors and Doctors were appointed to minister Sacraments, to
preach the word of God, and to govern and rule in the Church. The Acts of
the Apostles vvitness no less, Act. Apost.
which set before our eyes the beginning and progress of the primative
Church, the beginning in Jerusalem, the progress amongst the Gentiles. For
when Christ dyed the principal foundation and corner stone was laid, when
the Apostles were created, the building went on, and when they by preaching
and miracles augme^ted the number of the first Christianes, then was the
building of this Church perfited, and brought to that splendor and perfection,
that the Scribes and Pharisees emulated and envied the glory thereof, and
sought the means to ruin this work of God, Act. ^.
but in vain: for as Gamaliel told them, the work of God no power can
dissolve. Act 7.^.
Against this Church the devil raised a tempest which began with a storm of
stones amongst the Jews, but by the Emperors and heretics has continued
unto this day. In this Church was called a Council in Jerusalem where
saint Peter as the head pronounces the sentence, Act. 15.
and saint sames subscribeth. The first pastors of this Church were the
Apostles; saint James was Bishop of Jerusalem, saint Ihon of Ephesus, saint
Mark of Alexandria, Eus. l. 2.^.1^
saint Peter first of Antioche, then of Rome, vvch were his particulers
seats, for he was supreme Bishop also of all the Christian world. Io. 21.
And in Antioche Euodius succeeded to saint Peter, ep. ad Anti^.
and after him Ignatius. In Rome after that he had exercised the function of a
supreme pastor for the space of twenty and five years (departing not
vvithstanding some times as business or persecution enforced him) before his
death he appointed Clemens for his successor; but he refusing, Act. 1^. Gal.
2.
Linus and Cletus saint Peter's coadiutours, Epiph. har. 27.
succeeded him, and after them saint Clemens accepted of the charge. Sand.
page 256.
The other Apostles in other places left their scholars to succeed them, yea
and placed others in other places where them selves could not reside: as
saint Ihon appointed Policarp at Smyrna. Tert. l. praes. ^.3^.
To be brief Ecclesiastical histories, from the Apostles deriu^ a Christian
Church and succession of pastors unto these days. So that a true Christian
Church was once planted and established. Which if it be true, then
undoubtedly, that now is the true Church, they the true Christians, those the
true pastors, that the true fay the, which from the first and primative
Church by a continual succession can be deduced; for the Church is called
apostolical not only because is was once planted by the apostles but also
because it is descended from them by succession: And they must be heretics and
bastard Christians degenerating from their first institution, who can not
show this succession, and their Church shall be, l. pras. c. 20.
not apostolical, but apostaticall. This argument hand leth Tertulian in his
book of prescriptio^s vvher he shows how all particular Churches were
first planted by the apostles, and how other Churches from them re ceiued
faith and religion; and (say eth he) if now you will know what religion is
the true Christian religion, you must confer it with some former Church
from which it is descended, because (say ethe he) Omne genus ad suam originem
censeatur necesse est: It is necessary that every kind be valued and esteemed
according unto his source and origin. If you will Judge of water, mark the
fountain, if you will know a ma^s gentry, look how he descends from the
first of his family, if you will inform your self of any man's title unto a
lord ship, you must consider how the first lord entered in to possession, and
how he is descended from him. And so if we will discern the true Christian
from the heretic, we must have an eye unto the root and stock from which
he descends, for so we shall know whether he be legitimate or bafe-borne.
For if he fetch his pedigree from any other then the Apostles, or those which
by succession descended from them, then is he a bastard-Christian, and caryeth
the mark of an heretic. The Roman and Catholic Church which now is, can
derive her pastors, religion, and government, even from the Apostles and
those vvho^ they appointed Bishops and successors. For if you run over
Ecclesiastical histories, you shall find our Church and the practice of our
religion to have flourished from the begi^ning unto these days, for they treat
almost of nothing else but of the progress of our Church, of the persecution
vvher with it was assailed, of the heretics by whom it was molested, of
our Bishops, prelates, ^^artys, virgins, doctors, of our general and
provincial Councelles and of the miracles which were wrought in
confirmation of our faith: in so much that if our matters were not, the
historiographers should have had no subject to work or write on. ^. ^. c.
1. l. 2. cont. Donatistas. op 363.
Ireneus reckeneth the Popes of Rome from saint Peter unto Eleutherius,
Optatus unto Damasus, saint Austin unto Anastasius, Sand li de vi sib. mon.
others go farther, and doctor Sanders our countriman brings the succession
of our Popes, Bishops, Ceremonies, and religion unto Pius Quintus time,
Genebrard has done the like unto Gregory the thirtenth his time, Genesis in
Chronol. Baron in Annal.
and Cardinal Baronius in nine tomes all-ready set forth, has most exactly
set down the practice of our religion unto Ludouicus Pius of France. And if
our Church aggree with the primative Church, if our faith vary not from the
ancient faith, if our pastors be descended from the Apostles and their
scholars, as all histories and monuments do bear witness, then must our
Church needs be the true Church, because it aggreeth with the original, and
is conformable to the primative Church, which as it was nearest unto Christ
and his disciples, and was persequuted and honored for the true Church, so
was it likest to be the true Church, unless we will say that Christ and
his Apostles never planted a true Church. This succession was counted
always a mark of the true Church, which in our Creed we profess, Symb.
(...)
when we believe in the Apostolical Church to wit that which is by
succession derived from the Apostles and planted by them, and the want of it
was always esteemed a note to know an heretic by. Wherefore Ireneus
says that by succession we confound all heretics; Supra.
Saint Austine says that it is the thing, Lib. cont. ep. fund. c. 4 l. d^
vtilit. cred. c. 17.
which holds him in the Catholic Church, because (says he) that Church in
which is this succession, is the rock against which the gates of hell can not
preuail. If therefore our new Christianes will discharge them selves of this
mark of an heretic, which is want of succession, let them show us (as
Tertulian demanded of the heretics of his time) the catalogue of their
Bishops, and the origin of their Church, that if in the same we find them to
be descended from the Apostles we may acknowledge them as true Christians if
we find that they are not descended from so noble a race, we may hiss them
out of the Church for heretics. But I am sure they ca^ show no^ succession,
because they are the first them selves, and can as soon name their
predecessors; as they can find out Lutheranes before Luther, and caluinistes
before calvin. I will not deny but that they can derive some points of their
doctrine from Simon Magus, and other ancient heretics: but this succession
proves them also to be heretics as is before demonstrated, but a succession
from that Church vvhichvvas commonly counted Christian, they can not show, yea
they can not show us a succession of their doctrine from any ancient
heretics, but are them selves the first of their family, succeeding to none,
but sent and ordained by them selves, See the first book and first chap.
borne prodigiously of the^ selves, Children with out fathers and scholars
with out masters. for although they borovv their heresies of other heretics,
yet they iumpe with no heretics in all points, but either add or detracte,
and so succeed in all poincts to none. Vverfore though sometimes they vaunte
that they succeed the Apostles and the primative Church, yet some times the
truth breaks from the^ against their wills, as it does from the devil when
by coniuration he is compelled to tell the truth, and then they confess them
selves to be the first of their family; but this confession hangs them.
Oecolampadius they call the first bishop of Basil, and Calvin, the first of
Geneua, Latimer the first Apostle of Ingland, and knokes of Scotland: And
Martin Luther the most ancient of them all, is not afraid to say, that he
was the first man that manifested the gospel, and the truth unto the
world. In prafa^. disp. Lypsi^.
Audemus dicere (says he) a nobis primo diuulgatum esse Christum: We dare
say that Christ was first by us made known unto the world. He has piggs
in his belly and therefore he speaks in the plural number, but he has noe
brains in his head nor blood in his face to blush with all, and therefore he
dares be bold to say that he is the first man that promulgated the christian
law. Art thou the first, thou vaunting compagnion? modesty would yield at
least to the Apostles. So he will peradventure, but at least (says he) I am
the first after them. O monstrouse and Luciferian pride, and now not Luther,
but Lucifer. Art thou the first after the Apostles. Where then was the
Church all this while? Where were ethe Pastors and Doctors of the same?
Where were the Austines, Ambroses, Gregory's, Hieromes? Was there none all
this while to have been employed, but God must needs expecte till an Apostata
friar leaped out of a Cloister, and married with a Nonne notvvithstanding that
both had promised chastity before god and man by a solemn vow; But they
have a shifte or tvvoe by which they think to avoid this argument of
succession. The first is this: our doctrine (say they is) Apostolical and we
are the Apostles successors because we preach conformable to that doctrine
which they have left in the ghospells and epistles by them written. But this
shifte will not serve, See the second chap.
because this is to make bare scripture Judge of their doctrine (as all
heretics have ever done) vvch not notvvithstanding (as is in the first book
demonstrated) is noe certain rule to square faith and religion by. Wherefore
they have yet another answer in store, vvch is this: They grant that the
Apostles once planted a true church, true religion, and established true
pastors; but soon after, this Church failed and degenerated from that it
was, into the Synagogue of the devil vvch they call the Papisticall Church,
and possessed the world for many hundred years, till at length Luther the man
of god, builded this Church again, renewed the religion, and appointed new
pastors; and so (say they) we succeed to that Church which the Apostles
founded, not by a continual succession, but by an interruption of many hundred
years. But ask them what year of our lord, under what Emperor or Pope,
upon what occasion this Church failed, and then they can not give you a
resolute answer! Luther in the Assembly at Wormatia publicly avouched that
the Church fell in the time of the Council of Consta^ce in which Vvicleph was
condemned. Tom. 9. l cont Papatum.
The same Martin not always myndfull of every word which he has spoken,
in his book which he vvrote against Papacy says that this Church failed a
thousand years after Christ, and his reason is, biccause the Apocalips says
that Satan for a thousand years shall be tied, and so for six hundred years he
has been loose. l. de Capt. Babyl.
In another place he says that saint Gregory was the last good pope and
that since that time the Church and pastors are degenerated. Yet the same man
perceiving how little aggreeme^t is betvvixte his religion and that which was
practiced even in the first age, and time of the Apostles, and how unlike his
ministers are to those ancient priests and fathers, Act 15.
he says that the Apostles them selves erred in their Council holde^ at
Jerusalem, or else (says he) we all sin now in eating blood-puddings
which they forbad; not knovving (absurd companion as he was) or not
acknovv-ledging that ye precept was but for a time to content the Jews. As
for the Council of Nice which was with in 300, years after Christ, he
avouches that the canons and articles of the same are but Straw and Stubble:
^^pr^.
which epithetons he gives also unto saint James his epistle. Ep. ^d Sadol.
Calvin says that Bonifacius the Pope, was the first that was made suprem
head of the Church, by Phocas the Emperor, and so he thinks that then the
Church first degenerated, yet the same man in his preface to the king of
France, Prafat. Inst. ad Regem Galli^ in locis postre^^^ ^ditu.
says that the Church fell not till the time of the Council of Basil.
Melancthon says that Pope Zozimus was the first Antichrist, and that since,
there was never any true Bishop of Rome. But first this disagreement of the
time of this fall, is a sufficient argument that the Church never fell; for if
it had fallen (it having been once so famous, so glorious, so co^spicuous) the
fall thereof, with the time, occasion, and other circu^stau^ces could not have
been co^cealed: and as sone may the sons fall from heaven be unknown unto
the world, as the fall of the Church, Mat. 3.
which is sometimes called a city on an hill, Psalm. 1^.
some times a tabernacle placed in the some. Secondly if the Church fell then
certes it was not builded upon a rock but on the sands, Mat. 16. 2. Tim. 3.
then is it not ^ pillar of truth; Lu^. 22.
then did Christ pray that Peter's faith might not fail, that his father would
send his holy spirit to remain with the Apostles for ever (that is in their
successoures for with them in person he could not remain for ever) and yet
was not hard. Mat. 28.
Then did Christ promise that he would stay with them for ever, but performed
not what he promised; The^ was Christ an unfaithful spouse who betrothed
him self to his Church, but separated him self from her many hundred years.
c. 2.
And then did Daniel foolishly compare Christ's Church unto a Kingdom which
should never be ruined. Ser. 2, in Psalm. 107.
But as S. Austin well notes, it is the property of the^ who are out of the
Church to say that the Church is not. Sed illa Ecclesia (says he in the
person of the Donatists) quae fuit omnium gentium iam non est, perijt. Ho^
dicunt qui in illa non sunt. O impudentem vocem. illa non est, quia tu in illa
non es? vide ne tu ideo non sis, nam illa erit, etiamsi tu non sis: But that
Church which consisted of all nations now is not, it is perished. So they
say who are not in it. O impudent voice; Is not that extant because thou art
not in it? Look least thou therefore be not, for the Church will be,
although thou be not. Ser. ^^. in Cant.
Vvherfor saint Bernard who was one of this Church doubted not but that she
should persevere to the end: Ita est, and tunc, and deinceps, no^ deficiet genus
Christianum, nec fides de terra, nec charitas de Ecclesia, venerunt flumina,
flauerunt venti and impegerunt in eam, and non cecidit, co quod fundata erat
supra petram, petra autem erat Christus: So it is, both then, and after ward
the Christian race shall not fail, nether faith from the world nor charity
from the Church; fludds have come, vvindes have blovvn and have beaten upon
her, but the Church fell not because it was founded upon a rock, which rock
was Christ. Hom. 1. de Pent.
The words of Christ must be verified (says saint Chrysostom) because
heaven and earth shall fail before Christ's words: and what are those words
says he? even those and no other: Mat. 16.
Thou art Peter and upon this rock will I build my Church. This Church
says he was impugned but could not be overcome, darts were shot against
it, but could not pearse, engines of war were used to overthrow it, but
this tovver could not be beaten down: Consider (says he) the tyraunts,
beasts, svvords, deaths, darts, which the devil prepared against this Church
but all in vain, for the devil has emptied his quiver and shot all his
arrows, but the Church has no hurt: The persecutours are now dead,
rotten, and forgotten, but the Church florisheth. Where is now Claudius,
where is Augustus, where are Nero and Tiberius: these are now naked names,
for them selves are not extaunt. Ser. post exilium.
And think thou, o devil (says he) that thou can over throvv the Church
that art not able to encounter with a young Agnes, and tender Christian maid,
who has proved stronger then all thy force, and instruments of torments. And
if (says he) thou could not overcome the Church when she was young and
had the Jews and Gentiles Kings and Emperors against her, think thou now
to give her the foil or fall? And truly he that says that the Church has
failed, must consequently say with the Atheists, that it was the work of
men not of God, devised by men to Keep fools in awe; for if the Church was
established by God, then by Gamaliel his rule, Act. ^.
it could not by any force of man, be dissolved. This argument so presses them
that they dare not stand to this answer, yet they will play small play rather
the^ stand out? l. de notis Ecclesiae.
Luther therefore in his book of the notes of the Church, grants that the
Church never quite decayed but only for the most part, and so (says he) it
decayed even in the apostles time, for as Christ (says he) from the
beginning had his Church, so the devil had his chapel which was bigger then
the Church, and so there has been ever a succession of both, but the chapel
as it was ever bigger so was it most famous. And this chapel (says he)
is the Church of the Papists, which is so famous in Ecclesiastical
histories. But this shifte is poor and ridiculouse. For if the Church of the
Papists degenerated from the beginning as Simon Magus did, why were not we
called by particular names as all heretics are? Why was not our autour
named? Why is not the time and occasion registered? If our Church was ever the
greater then was theirs the chapel, for it is against the nature of a chapel
to be greater then the Church. If our Church was the greater and most famous,
then was ours that society which was commonly called the Christian Church,
then was our society that which condemned heresies and called Councels,
which was persecuted by the persecutours (and consequently was not the
devils chapel for he persecuteth not his own) and favored by Constantine and
other Christian Emperors, Kings, and Princes; for which monasteries were
erected, Churches builded, in which all the ancient doctors ministered
sacraments, preached, teached, ruled and governed. And where was then
Luthers little flock? What Historiographer vvrote the progress of it? What
Emperors persecuted it? What heretics rayled against it? What Churches
were builded for it? What ministers ruled it? And what was the manner of
gouerme^t in it? If there were no such societ^e, and noe other counted Christian
but ours, the^ either ours was ye true Church or else ye Church quite failed,
and so they must retourn to their first shifte, vvch yet will not serve their
turn, as is already proved. Wherefore if all other fail they have yet
another shifte, and that is this. We grant say they that the Church never
decayed but still stood immovable upon the rock upon which Christ founded
it, Mat. 16.
but soon after the Apostles time, or peradventure before they were all dead,
this Church became invisible, and appeared noe more openly, but was preserved
secretly in obscure corners, till at the length Luther (whom God and his
Church all that while expected) brought it to light again: And all this while
(because Ecclesiastical histories convince them) they confess that there was a
Church commonly called Christian in which Popes ruled, and Kings and Princes
were baptized, but that (say they) was not the Church of Christ, but the
conuenticle of Papists and chapel of the devil, Io. ^.
and thus these euildoers fly the light. This shifte serves them for two
purposes: for first thus they will free them selves from all iudgeme^t-seats:
for if you convent them before Ecclesiastical Judges, or the vvholle Church,
they will say that they are not lavvfull Judges, and that it is not the true
Church, which summoneth them to appear; and therefore they are not bound to
stand to their sentence, who have all authority, on their own side: And if
you ask them from whom they had authority, they will say that they had
their predecessors to whom they succeed, and their Church whose faith they
preach, and that from them they have authority; if you then bid the^ show
some history or ancient monument of their Church, they will answer that it
was invisible and so will say what they list, and by noe Church paste or
present shall you be able to controlle them, for they have a Gygas ring to go
invisible by. Secondly if the Church was invisible you can not urge them to
show any continual succession of it from the Apostles. For they will say
that their Church succeeded the Apostles, and is the same which they planted,
but after the Apostles time, was never seen till Luther pulled away the
bushel which covered this light. And truly I will easily grant that their
Church before Luther was invisible. For that which was not could not be
seen; but that the true Church was at any time invisible, is altogegether
improbable. For when happened this darkeness I pray you? Mat. 30 Psalm. ^^.
The Church was once a city upon an hill, and a tabernacle placed in the
son, how then could it on a sudden come to be invisible, and noe man in the
world to note it. Historiographers write of earthquakes and darknesses; and
all the world noted the darkness which happened at Christ's death; and was
there no man to note this darkeness which covered the vvholle face of the
earth, and happened after so conspicuous a light? Aristotle says that the same
sense judges of the object, and privation: as for example, the eye which
beholds colors and light, perceives also or at least gives occasion to the
inward sense called sensus communis to perceive darkeness when the light is
gone: why then could not they which had seen the Church flourish and shine
conspicuously, perceive also when first she lost her light? And if they
perceived it, how chances it that none ever vvrote of so straung an
accident? But what should I ask so many questions where I am sure to find
noe reasonable answers? I will now with one argument make all this
darkeness of this erroneous doctrine give place to the light of the truth, to
wit that the true Church can not be invisible. For Christ bidds us when our
brother will not harken unto our admonitions, Mat. 18.
to co^playn on him to the Church. Suppose the^ that some heretic should
preach false doctrine and being admonished to correct his error, would yet
remain obstinate; there is no other remedy but to co^playn on him to the
Church, and how shall this complaint be made if the Church can not be found
out, as it can not, if it be invisible? Suppose again some Christian or
infidel should begin to doubt of his faith, and would feign be instructed;
noe doubt his only remedy is to repayr unto the Church for a resolution,
where only truth is taught and salvation is found; but if the Church be
invisible or decayed, how shall he have access to this Church which either is
not (as they say) or at least is invisible? Truly if the Church either decayed
or was invisible, then was the world without means of salvation for many
hundred years. But let me demand of them how their Church was invisible,
which consists of men and is governed by men and maintained by visible
government, visible Sacraments and audible preaching? They lived not always
in holes, some times they came abroad, and coming abroad and carrying the name
of Christians, they were by Papists always enforced to frequent Mass and
sacraments, and to profess their religion, else had they been excommunicated,
and delivered to seculare power; whence it must needs follovv that either
Luthers and Caluines Church was never before them selves began to preach,
or that their Church dissembled against conscience for fifteen hundred years.
But what do I fight against shadows and that which never was or never was
seen? Let me conclude now that vvch I intended. The ghospellers can not deny
but that the true Church was once planted, and that therefore now, that is
the true Church, which can by succession, be derived from it (for to say that
the Church failed or was invisible is but a vain imagination) and seeing that
Catholics can by all Histories and monuments show that their Church is
descended from that which was in the time of the Apostles, theirs is the
Church, and they are the true Christians, and seeing that the reformers can not
thus derive their Church from the Apostles (because before Luthers preaching it
was never seen hard nor felt) it follovveth that their Church is not
Apostolical but rather apostaticall and heretical, and they noe true
Christianes, but heretics.

The sixth chapter handles the sixth mark of an heretic which is dissension
in doctrine, in which chapter is proved, that peace is a mark of the true
Church, and that the dissentious ghosppellers are heretics if ever any were.

CIcero that famous orator and Merchaunt of words, Philippica 13.
speaking of peace, gives it this worthy commendation: Pacis nomen dulce est,
res vero ipsa cum iucunda tum salutaris: The name of peace is svveet, but the
thing it self is both pleasant and sovereign. To which opinion of his all
men will easily subscribe if they enter into consideration of the nature of
peace. For what is more pleasant then that which all things desire? and
what more healthful and sovereign then that which preserves all things? So
pleasant is peace that even senseles creaturs seem wholy to desire it. The
heavens move all from ye east to the west, carried with the sway of the first
heaven called primum mobile, and yet by their proper motions at the same time
they move also from the west to the East and some svviftly some slovvly, yet
with such uniformity and aggrement, as though they desired nothing more then
peace and feared nothing more then iarring and disagreeing in their motions.
The Eleme^tes when they are out of their natural places, do move speedily,
and make great have to get to their home, because there only they find peace
and rest, to vvch their nature inclines. Brute beasts also of one kind
commonly Keep together, and follow one head as it were with common consent,
because one easilier makes peaceble aggreement, then many. Li. de va^^^
Idolorum.
Bees follovv one king (says saint Cypri^an) and obey the hu^ming of one
master-bee, In all flocks of sheep, there is one Belvvether, and in every heard
one is the ring leader; yea says saint Hierome: Cranes follovv one in a
long order; which they do for love of peace, for in follovving diverse heads,
they would be more divided, and less united. lib. ciu. c. 1^.
Yea says S. Austin no tigre is so cruel which does not lick and like her
young ones; noe Kite but loves her brood and seeks to conserve her family in
peace: much more does man who is indevved with reason, cover and desire
peace, seem he otherwise barbarouse and deuoid of humanity. The Passionate
man who fights continually against reason to satisfy his passions, seeks to
give the^ their desire without contradiction of reason, and consequently
coueteth peace, but this is an inordinate peace. The reasonable and virtuous
man, who seeks to subdevv his passions, and to make them to yield to reason
without repugnance, seeks an atonement betwixt passion and reason; and
this is an orderly peace. The rebelliouse and mutinouse subjects who rise in
arms against their lavvful Prince, are desirouse to enjoy their own vville
and to possess what they desire without resistaunce, and consequently intend
a peace; but this is an iniust peace. And all though by rebellion they break
common peace, yet that is not because they hate peace, but because they enjoy
not that peace which they desire. The just Prince who makes war against
iniust usurpers, Aug. ibidem.
even then when he bids war, aymeth at peace, and intends not war as
war, but as a mean to come to peace; and this is a just peace. Cacus that
barbarouse fellovv who lived in caves as beasts do, and fedd him self of
the spoils of others, was desirouse to enjoy his own desires without
molestation, and so desired peace, but a brutish peace. And a^ peace is most
pleasant and therefore desired of all, so is it most sovereign, and therefore
preserves all. Peace betwixt the humors and elementarie qualities in man's
body, is health, peace betvvxit the two repugnant parts in man's soul, reason
and sensuality, is virtue, peace betwixt God and man is Charity, betwixt man
and man, is frendshipp, peace and consorte in voices or instruments is music,
peace and aggreement in colors is beauty, peace in proportio^s, is good
making, peace in the heavens motions, and in the Elements qualities, is the
co^seruation of all. Peace is the maintenance of families, the preservation of
cities, the establisment of Colleges, the strength of common vvelthes, the
force of Kingdoms, and the felicity of all societies. Peace vpholdeth heaven,
Mar. 12. Marc. ^.
and without it hell could not stand, because every Kingdom, which is
divided in it self shall be made desolate. Peace and unity (says the
Philosopher) makes natural causes to pass them selves in force and efficacy,
because force united, is stronger then it self divided. You may break a
thousaunde arrows one being taken from another, but in a bundell or sheafe,
not so. Divide the greatest river which is, and a child will pass it, but
when the water is united, you must have a ship or boat to sail over. Lay
one cole in one corner of the house, and a another in a another, and you may
Stand in the midst, and blow your fingers for cold, but unite them
together, and they will vvarme the vvholle house. Oxe^ divided, can not dravv
that weight which they can united. The greatest army vvch is if it be
divided, is soon defeated, but when the forces are united, it is invincible.
To be brief, peace preserves all things, and gives streng the and force to
all. And contrariwise dissension is the bane of all. dissension or
distemperature of humors in man's body is sickness, disagreement of reason and
sensuality in the soul, is vice, iarring of voices or instruments, is
ungrateful discord, in colors it is deformity, in proportions, mishape.
Diffension is the undoing of families, the dissolution of Colleges, the
vveakning of cities, the overthrow of armies, the ruin of kingdoms, and the
bane of all societies. What Kingdomvvas more likely to have stood then that of
the Angels? Dissensio^ which Lucifer sowed, had almost quite ruined it.
What place better fenced, more fertile, and frutfull then paradise? yet
dissension betwixt God and man, yea betvvixte man and him self (for when man
disagreed from god his flesh began to resist his spirit, and all creaturs
before obedient to him, began to rise in arms against, him, banished thence
the happy inhabitaunts, and with the^ all foelicitie. Who more near then
Cain and Abell? dissension was the death of the one, and the reprobation of
the other. Who more likely to have lived lovingly together them Abraham and
Lot, Joseph and his brethern? dissension severed and separated them. What
kingdoms more strong and pote^t then those of the Medes, Persians, Chaldies,
and Romans? read histories and you shall see that dissension was the
cheifest cause of their ruins. If then the Maxim of the philosopher be true,
that one contrary sets forth another; by the destroying nature of
dissension, you may easily perceive how souerain a preservative peace is, and
how just cause all creaturs have, so vehemently to desire it. This Ievvel
Christ bequeathed unto his dear spouse the Church, when sone after his
resurrection, standing in the midst of the apostles, he said unto them: Io. 20.
Pax vobis: peace be with you. Io. 14.
Of this peace in another place he makes me^tio^ vvher he says: Pacem
relinquo vobis pacem meam do vobis: I leave peace unto you, I give my peace
unto you. Where, for a legacy he bestows on his Church, not gold and
silver, nor kingdoms nor possessious (though he permits kings to bestow
these things also upon her) but that which is more vvorth then all the
diadems and scepters in the world, to wit peace, with out the which, noe
society can endure. This peace the prophet Esaie long since forsavv and
forthold, Is^. 81. 65.
when he said: That the wolf and lamb shall dvvell to gether, and the Lion,
Bear, and Calfe, live peacebly one with another, and that a little boy shall
drive them a feeld. For his meaning is that in the Church shall be such
agreement, at least in matters of religion, that they who before their
conversion were persequuting wolves and Bears, shall live peacebly with the
harmless lambs and Christians, and that a little boy Christ Jesus, the autour
of all this peace, shall drive them a feeld, that is shall rule and govern
them. The same prophet by another metaphore describing the same peace, ^bidem.
says: In those days the infant from his mothers pappes, shall delight and
disport him self over the Aspes hole without receiving harm: That is, such
peace shall be in the Church, that the children of Christ's Church shall live
quietly with those, who before they received Christian fayeth, by heresies,
infidelity, or poisoning manners, ^. 2.
like serpents infected others. For as in the Ark of Noah those beasts which
were by nature savage, so long as they were in the Arc, forgot all cruelty
and lived with the rest most quietly, so how soever men before their
incorporation and admission into the Church of Christ, were barbarouse in
manners, and mutinouse in opinions, yet when they are once made members of the
peaceble kingdom of Christ's Church, they lay a side all sects and factions,
and live quietly together, at least in matters of faith and religion. Vvherby
it plainly appears that in the Church of Christ is peace and unity in
religion. Which the Apostle also insinuates in those words: (...).
Being carrefall to keep unity of faith in the band of peace, as you are
called in one hope of your vocation, one body and one spirit, one faith, one
baptism, one god and father of all. By which words we are taught, that as
there is one God, one heaven, one baptism, so is there, but one faith, and
that they are ye true chri stianes vvch conspire in the same. And the reason
hereof is because the truth is one never disagreeing from it self, lies are
many, mutable and contrary: and therefore seeing that the Church is the pillar
of truth, 1. Tim. 3.
it must needs follovv that where the Church is, there is unity, because the
truth in which the members of the Church aggree is but one. I will not deny
but that the Church consists of diverse nations, but yet they are so li^ked in
one faith that in Christ Jesus there is no distinction betvvixte the Barbarous
and Grecian, Rom 10.
nor between Jew and Gentile; and although these diverse nations speak diverse
languages, yet as Ireneus notes, these diverse tongues profess one faith. l. 1.
c^nt. her. c. 3.
I grant also that in the Church there are diverse functions and dignities; for
there are Popes, Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, Bishops, Ephesians. 4.
and so forth, and from them the state of the laity is distinct, and subject
to them; but these diverse orders make one Hierarchy. I confess like wise that
in the Church there are diverse states and orders of religiouse, as of
Benedictins, Dominicanes, Austins, Bernardins, Franciscanes, Jesuits, yet these
diverse members make one body, all linked under one head Christ Jesus by one
faith and religion. This unity, peace, and aggreement in one faith and
religion, which is to be seen in the Church militaunt in earth, seems to me
more admirable then that of the Church triumphaunt in heaven. And the reason
is, because the inhabitaunts of that happy kingdom behold God face to face,
and see most evidently that which we believe only, and see not at all, and
so their aggreement in understanding is not so strange, because the evidence
of the verities which they see enclines them to one assent. For as the
philosopher says the understanding of it self is prone to give asse^t unto
verity and truth when it is evidently proposed (which is the cause why in
things which are evident all men are of the same opinion) and therefore to this
proposition: The vvholle is greater then the half, all men aggree, but about
the creation of the world, the immortality of the soul, the felicity of
man, the substance of the heavens, and such like things which are not so
evident, there have been great disputes and contentions, whence has risen
that diversity also of the sects of Platonists, Peripateticks, Stoics,
Epicureans, and such like. Wherefore seeing that the happy inhabitaunts of
heaven do see evidently the divine nature, and all the mysteries which we
only believe, I marvel not that they all aggree in one opinion, because the
evidence of these things moves them to to one assent. But that so many
Christians, of so diverse countries, and times, so diversely affected, and
disposed, should aggree in one faith and opinion, and think, and believe the
same of all the mysteries of Christian religion, which they see not, this
seems to me most admirable, and so straung that I must needs say: Exodus ^.
digitus Des hic, The finger of God is in this matter, and he it is that is the
cause of this peace, unity, Scotus q. 2. prologi.
and aggreement. For seeing that the evidence of our mysteries causes not this
aggreement, and that it can not be the devil who thus linketh their
understandings (because this religion in all points is repugnant to him and his
designements) it must needs be God who inspiring into these diverse nations
and natures one light of faith, makes them all to conspire in one belief and
opinion. And therefore says Tertulian: Nullus inter multos euentus vnus est
exitus, l. praesc. 28.
errare non possunt qui ita in vnum conspirant: There is not one end amongst
many chances, they can not err who thus aggree in one. Thus we prove the
translation of the septuagint to be of God, Justinius oraet. paraen ad ge^t.
because those diverse vvriters, being placed in diverse Celles, and forbidden to
conferr, could never have so aggreed in the translation of the Bible out of
Hebrew into Greek as if all their translations had been copied out of one,
had nor God directed their understandings, and inspired them a like. Sith then
amongst the Catholics only, this unity is to be found, they only are the
true Church, to which Christ has bequeathed this peace and unity, and they
only are conformable to the primative Church planted by Christ and his
Apostles, Act. 4.
for then the Christian world was of one heart and mind. And for as much as
amongst the new Christians of this age, there is nothing but wrangling and
dissension and that in principal matters of religion, their Church is the
Synagogue of Satan, and they no members of Christ's Church, but heretics,
apostataes, and members cut of: for by this mark of dissension the ancient
heretics were ever known and discried to be heretics. Simon Magus the
first famous Arch-heretike began a sect, but it remained not one for any
time, but by and by degenerated into many, and from the Simonians proceeded the
Menandrians, Saturninians, Basilidians, Carpocratia^s, and from them were
descended the Gnostics. From Cerinthus spronge the vnappy branches of the
Ebionits, Marcionits, Cerdonists and such like. The Arians were no sooner
hatched but they were by and by divided into Aetians, Eudoxians, Eunomia^^ and
diverse others. So variable they were, l. 2. c 12.
that Socrates reports that they changed their Creed and form of belief noe
less then nine times. The Donatistes likewise, were by and by parted into
Rogatists, Maximinianists, and Circumcellio^s. The Nestorians were severed
into Tritheites, Theopaschites, Agnoetians, Seuerites, and such like; The
Eutychians into Monophysites, Iacobites, Acephalites, and Theodosians.
Wherefore the ancient fathers have observed that dissension is a mark
inseparably fastened unto heretics. l. praescr. c. 42.
I lie (says Tertulian) if they vary not from their own rules, vvhilest
every one at his pleasur alters and modifieth (he says tuneth) those things
which he has received, even as the first autour framed them at his own
arbitrament, the increase declares the nature of the beginning and origin: The
same is lavvfull for Valentinus, and for the Marcionits, which was lavvfull
for Marcion: to vvitte, to devise new sects and opinions as their sect masters
did before them. As Donate (says saint Austin) endeavored to divide Christ
that is the Church of Christ, l. de agone Christ. c. 29.
so him, his own Scholars by daily hacking and ma^gling divided into many
pieces. Now that the new Christians of this our last age are in like manner
divided, and consequently of the same paste and kind, it is toe toe manifest.
Luther was the first man who in this last age beat his vvitte to devise nevve
faythes and religions, and for a time he was follovved by many, but in time
also, his followers fell from him, who perceiving that they had as good
authority to preach new doctrine as Luther had (for they could say also that
Christ sent them, and they could allege scripture for their opinions if they
might interpret it by their private spirit (as why may they not as well as
he?) they thought it more honorable to be follovved, then to follow, and to
be Masters then scholars, and so leaving Luther in the lurche, they devised
also new doctrines different from his, and so became sect masters as well as
he. Zuinglius therefore being weary of Luthers service whom he had courted to
long, and perceiving how willingly Luther would have denied the real
presence (thereby to have prejudiced the Pope) but that the words of Christ (as
he confessed) seemed to plain, devised a gloss for those words: This is my
body, Mat. 26.
and said that Christ called the bread his body, not because it contains his
body really (as Luther affirmed) but because it is a figure of his body. And as
Zuinglius dealt with Luther, so did others. For now the Lutheranes are divided
into severe and moderate Lutheranes, and some glory in Illyricus Flaccus, some
adore Melancthon, so that now Luther is left of all his Scholars, and not
any one remains who aggreeth with him in all poincts. And as Zuinglius dealt
with Luther so did others with him, for from him are descended the
Osiandrians, Semiosiandrianes, and Antiosiandria^s. Yea out of Zuinglius sprung
that unhappy branch Calvin who adds to Zuinglius opinion, that although the
Sacrament be but a figure of Christ, yet with it we receive Christ verily
and really, but by faith: which doctrine how it can stand with it self, In
the least book.
we shall herafter in this work, discourse. And now these men's Scholars,
are divided into Lutheranes and double Lutheranes, Zuinglianes,
Oecola^padianes, Caluinists, Anabaptists, Trinitarians, Suenkfeldians,
Protestaunts, Puritanes, Brovvnists, Martinists, brethren of the family of
love, and of the damned crew, and I know not how many. And it is a world to
see, with what animositie these brethren write one against another. Luther
writes seuerly against ye Zuinglia^s, l. in Zuingl.
and Sacramentaries; and a little before his death in steed of a benedictio^
which this father should have bestovved upon these his children, he curses
them to hell; refusing all vvriting and communicatio^ with them, saying that
in vain they believe the Trinity, and Incarnation, unless they believe also
the real presence. To whom the Tugurine Zuinglians, Sur. an. (...).
ansvvered that Luther sought his own honor, not the honor of Christ, that
he was obstinate and insolent, and one who uses to deliver men up to Satan,
that will not aggree to his opinion. Apol. Eccl^ Anglia.
And yet our Sacramentaries in Ingland, say that Luther was a man of God, and
Calvin, says that he takes Luther for an Apostle, by whose labor
especially the truth was restored. It were a tedious thing to recount their
dissentions, and it is a pitiful thing to behold in steed of one faith (in
which all the world before Luthers preaching conspired) so many faythes and
religions. Of this dissension Hilarious complained in these words: l. cont.
Constable.
It is dangerous and miserable that now there are as many faythes as vvilles,
and as many doctrines as manners, and as many causes of blasphemies as vices,
and that vvheras according as there is one God, one Lord, and one Baptism, so
one faith also should be, we fall from one faith, and vvhilest many faithes
are feigned, noe faith remains. And as he thus complayneth of the Arians
dissensions, so may we of the dissensions of this age, of which also the very
autours of these garboils them selves complain most lamentably. l. cont. Zuing.
Luther him self says that there is such dissensio^ in the interpretation of
scriptures, that if the world continue, we must have recourse again unto the
trial of Counsels, else we shall never aggree. Deprauat. conf. Aug.
Cithreus co^plaineth that the Evangelical Doctors (he means ministers)
are at greater daggers dravving then any quarelling soldiers. Ep. de
Exoraismo.
Heshusius confesses that whether soever he turns his eyes nothing almost
occurreth but dissensions, new increase of errors, and falling of great
Doctors from the verity. So that even by their own co^fessions there is
nothing but wrangling and dissension in religion amongst them, and
consequently their Church is not the Church of Christ, in which peace and
unity florisheth: which has vpholden and shall still uphold Christ's
kingdom against the Tyranies of persequutours, and might and slight of the
devil, and all his members: vvheras the kingdom of heretics must needs fall
of it self by civil discord and dissension. Wherefore Epiphanius compares
them to the vipers of diverse Kinds, In Panarie.
which the Egyptians used to conclude in one place together, without either
meat with in, or means to get out: for as they when they were almost
famished began with teeth to tear and deeuour one a another, till that all the
rest being consumed, the last having nothing left to exercise his teeth on,
dies for honger; so heretics ruin one a another, and one sect deuoureth a
another, till at lenght, the last dies of it self by her own impiety. Others
compare them to the Cadmean brethren which were now sooner borne but they
killed one a another, others say that they are like sampsons foxes which are
divided in the heads that is in faythes, but yet are linked in the tails,
conspiring all in this intention to ruin the true Church, but in the mean
time they ruin their own, and beating them selves against the rock of
Christ's Church they do but break them selves as waves do. Li. 4. contra
Marcionem. Var l. 3 d^ regist c 16. Epiph. har. 44.
Tertulian compares them unto vvaspes, which as Varro witnesses, are like
unto bees, and singe like bees, but gather nether honey nor wax, and can only
stinge, and therefore are cast our of the hiue; but being cast out they make
their combs by them selves. For so heretics are baptized like true
Christians, carry the name also of Christians, and sing also like them, ever
having Christ in their mouths, the Lord, and the vverd, but they have nether
the honey of svveet doctrine, nor the wax of good works, only they can
stinge with their heresies and blasphemies, the right bees and Christians, and
therefore by the cheef Pastor, and as it were the Master be, they are cast
out of the good bees company, by the censure of excommunication, and being
cast out they make their combs, that is sects a part, which they also fill
not with wax or honey, but with the poison of heresy. If therefore some one
in England (as there are many such) should doubt of his religion, I vvoulde
feign know to vvch of all the Churches, Sinagogues, and sects, he should
repair for a resolution? If he demand where Christ is, where true exposition
of scripture is, where true faith is to be found? the Protestaunts will say
that it is to be found amongst them, the Puritanes will assure him that
Christ is with them; noe, will the Brovvnists say, he is with us. And so the
poor man shall be perplex and doubtful to which party he shall adioine him
self; for vvhilest none af all these sects and sect-Masters can prove their
mission, and every one of them will allege scripture and their private
spirit, and none can say more for his sect then another, he shall be in doubt
which to follow, because one has noe more reason to induce him then
another, and yet he can not follow them all, because their doctrines and
faythes are contrary. Wherefore he shall do well to give ear to none of
them, but rather his best will be to follow the Counsel of Hilarious: l. cont.
Constable.
that is to imitate the mariners, who after they have left the haven and are
lanced into the maine Ocean, if they find storms and tempests, return again
to the haven as the only place of security. For so he having left the
Catholic Church, and out of it finding nothing but storms, te^pestes, and
contrary vvindes of opinions, should return again to the same Church as the
only peaceble and quiet haven, where is no dissension in faith, but all peace
and aggreement. But they will say that amongst us also are great dissensions,
and diverse sects also of Thomists, Scotists, Nominalls, Realls, and such like:
To which I answer that this diversity of opinions is not in matters of
faith but only in certain subtilities of Philosophy, or Quircks of School
divinity, or other indifferent points of doctrine not defined by the Church,
but left to the free censure of every man. But yet these men as herin they
show them selves men, who commonly never aggree vvher any difficulty is, so
they show them selves Christians, who if the Pope or Church define any
opinion, are then all ready to yield and aggree, and then you shall see how in
Christ Jesus and his faith there is nether Scotist, nor Thomist, but all good
Christians. Which is the cause of the great unity in the Church, which must
needs be vvanting in the heretics Synagogues, who having left the Church,
and refusing to stand to her censure, have nothing to make them aggree. For
nether is bare scripture, nor the private spirit sufficient, nether have they
any visible Judge as is proved, and so vvhilest amongst them every man may
believe as he list, they must needs have almost as many opinions as heads.
Wherefore to conclude, seeing that in the Catholic and Romain Church, is such
peace and aggreement, that all nations which are members of the same, profess
the same faith and aggree all in one religion; that must needs be the Church
to which christ bequeathed his peace, and for as much as amongst the
ghospellers there is nothing but daggers-dravving and wrangling in religion,
that can not be the Church of Christ who is the autour of peace and concord,
but rather it is an heretical Synagogue, and they if ever there were any, must
needs be heretics, who were ever noted for vvranglers in religion.

The seventh chapter contains the seventh mark of an heretic, which is to
be of a particular sect.

THe nature of good is, not to contein it self with in it self, but rather
to imparte it self, and to make it self common unto others. That goodly Planet
and celestial body the Son, which is the light, and eye of the world, and
moderatour of times and seasons, is not content to abound in him self with
light, but he bestovves the same bountifully on all parts of the world: and
where he can not be liberal in light, he is bountiful in his influences
which reach even to the bovvells of the earth, and bottom of the Sea. Fire
will never be vvarme alone but heateth also the standers by; the fountain
will not only it self be full, but ronneth over, to water the feeldes,
medovves and gardens; The svveete balm or odoriferous ointme^t, co^teines not
it self with in itself, no not with in the box, but perfumeth all about. To
be brief, there is no good, which is not good to others. And herin the rivers
imitate their fountain, the effects their cause, and the creatures rather
resemble their creator, then attain unto his perfection. For he as he is the
fountain of all goodness, and goodness it self; so does he most bountifully
imparte this his goodness to others. In ye creation of ye world, what did he
but impart him self by participation unto all his creatures, more or less,
according to their capacity? But above all, in the Incarnation he has
shevved him self most bou^tifull, by vvch he has communicated him self to our
nature not by participation as he did in creation, but by hypostaticall vnio^o,
in substance and person. And because in man as in a little world all things
are contained (for man has being with inanimate creatures, life vvth plants,
feeling with beasts, and reason with angels) he has in man, in some sort
imparted him felfe to all creaturs. But especially to the humain nature of
Christ he has declared his bounty, to which he has in such an admiral
sorre united his divine person, that the same man Christ Jesus is God and man,
omnipotent, immense, infinite, and enriched with all the divine attributs, per
communicationem idiomatum. Wherefore since the time or Christ's Incarnation in
which he so bou^tifully bestovved him self, God would no more be so sparing
of his graces, as to conclude faith and Salvation with in the Confines of
Judea, Psalm. 75.
but he would have all saved, would be known to all by faith, and honored
of all, by religion. And therefore now he has called Jew and gentile, the
Grecian and the barbarous, and all nations under the son unto his faith,
Church, and religion. Wherefore this Church almost from the beginning even
when it was confined with in Jerusalem, Act. 2.
contained Parthians, Medes, Persians, Mesopotamians, and as the scripture
says, almost all nations under the son. And when the holy Spirit
descended upon the Apostles and Disciples in fiery tongues, Ibidem.
and gave them the guifte also to speak all languages, that was to signify
that the Church of Christ was not to speak English only, or Scotishe and
Flemishe only, but all languages. Wherefore God promised our Savior Christ
that he would give him, not England only, not Scotland Flanders and Germany
only, Psalm. 2.
but all nations for his inheritance. Psalm 71. Psalm 81.
And he avouches that his Church shall rule from Sea to Sea: and that all
nations hall have access unto it. Mat. 28.
And so accordingly Christ gave authority to his Apostles to preach unto all
nations. Vvherby I gather that the Church of Christ is not to be a particular
sect confined with in any straites and corners of the world, but rather an
ample Kingdom, reaching over all the world. Symb. Apost. and Niceph.
And this we profess in our Creed when we say that we believe the holy
Catholic Church. For Catholic is as much to say as (...) universal: l cont
ep fundamenti c. ^.
Which name (says S. Austin) holds me in the Church. And why? because he
knevv it to be a sign of the true Christian Church which never yet aggreed
to any heretical sect, Ibidem. and li de verae, rel c ^ l de vtil credendi c.
7.
either of the Manichies (of which once he was one) or of the Donatistes, or
Pelagians, or any other. And this says saint Austine is so manifest a mark
of the true Church, that heretics them selves ambitiously affecte the same:
but yet if you ask for the Catholic Church, they point to ours, knovving in
their conscience that ours only is in deed Catholic. ^^. ^ 2. l. 2.
And so saint Austin and Optatus refuted the Church of the Donatists by this
argument especially, because it was confined with in the limits of Africa.
And Pacianus says that so soon as certain singular Sect-masters devised
nevve religions, Ep. ^. ad So. phr.
and were called by particular names, the true Christians, to distinguishe
them selves from particular sects, took the name Catholic even from the
beginning (as appears by the Creed vvch the Apostles made) which name
sounds nether of Marcion, nor Cerdon, nor Apelles, nor Vale^tinus, nor
Ne^torius, nor Arrius, l. cont. Iudeos c. 1^.
nor Luther, nor Calvin. And Tertulian so long as he remained Catholic him
self, confessed that the true Church was that which was diffused through
out all the world. Yea he says that in his time the true Christians not
vvithstanding the violence of persecution filled the Paganes Cities, Apol. c.
37.
Islands, Castles, Courts, Senats, and only left their temples to them selves;
but noe sooner was this man become an heretic, but he affirmed most absurdly
that the Church might consiste of three persons though they were of the
laity. li de exhor. cast c. 7 l. de pudic c. 21.
Which he did partly because he would make up a Church of Montanus, Prisca
and Maximilla, to whom he had united him self, partly to deliver in him
self from the name of an heretic to which he savve him self subject,
because he was now of a particular sect. So that it is sufficiently proved
that the Church of Christ is Catholic, that is, a Society professing one
faith in all countries yea and ages also, cap. ^.
according to that of Vincentius Lirinensis: In Ecclesia Catholica tenendu^
quod vbique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum: In the Catholic Church
that is to be holden which every where, alvvayes, and of all, has been
believed. For that (says he) the name Catholic imports. Now let us see
whether the Romain Church and faith, or rather the Church of the reformers,
be the Catholic, and consequently the Christian Church, for these tvvoe
Catholic and Christian ever vve^t together. And here I require noe divines,
nor Philosophers to be Judges in this matter, only let me have me^ that have
ears or eyes and I desire noe more For the eye will easily Judge whether of
these two Churches be most like to be Catholic. The Roman Church which
the adversary calls Papisticall has flourished in all ages and in the most
part of the world, as all histories will testify. And now at this day
our faith and Church, one, and the same; is diffused through out Spain,
France, Italy, Portugal and a great part of Flanders and Germany, yea it
reaches even to the Indianes and other new found countries converted by the
Benedictines, See the first book and first chap.
Jesuits and other religious men. And so it is Catholic, because being one
and the same it has ever possessed all ages, and countries, and still does
even to this day. As for the reformers Church and faith, I see noe sign of a
Catholic Church in it. For first it began not an hundred years since, In the
fifte chapter.
as before is demonstrated. Secondly it never yet possessed the vvholle world
nor any great part of it, as the eye will bear witness; only it has
gotten entertaynme^t in certain parts of the world, as England, Scotland,
Holland, and some Cantons of Germany. Thirdly it is not one Church nor faith
that possesses all these places, but many, yea scarce one religion fills one
shire or city. Wherefore allthoughe England were all the world, and this age
all ages, yet were not their religion Catholic, because it is not one faith
and religion in all the shyres of England, nor all the years of this age: for
in, England are many sects and religions, and they also different from the
nevve faythes of other countries: for there is great difference betvvixte them
and the Lutheranes in Germany, Hugonots in France, and Gues in Flanders.
Nether is it sufficient for any of them to say that their faith is Catholic,
because all are invited to it and commanded to accept of it, for so every
sectmaster may say of his religion, and I have proved that the true Christian
faith, Church, and religion, is Catholic, in that it being one, possesses
all ages and countries. Wherefore to conclude, seeing that the Church or rather
Churches of the reformers never possessed all ages and countries, yea never,
one and the same filled any one country: it follovveth that their Church is
not Catholic and consequently not the true Christian Church, and so they are
no true Christians but heretics and singular sectmasters, if ever there were
any, because in that they are of particular sects they wear the same Badge
which Donatistes, Arians, Nestorians and such like have worn before them,
and for which they were ever counted and called heretics.

The eight Chapter discourses upon the eight mark of an heretic, which is
to be condemned for an heretic by that Church, which was commonly counted
the true Christian Church.

AS when the subjects begin to make rebellion, the prince suppresseth them
or cutteth them of, and when any sheep of the flock are infected the good
shepherd separateth them from the rest, least they infect the vvholl flock:
as the surgeon cutteth of the rotten member least it corrupt the vvholle body;
and the careful Husbandman pluckes up the vveedes least that they ouergrovv
the good corn: so the supreme pastor of the Church, when any rebellious
heretics rose up in arms against the Church, to whom they ought of right to
be subject, assembled always his forces together, that is called General
Councels of his Bishops, and by the censure of excommunication suppressed these
rebels, least that by their civil vvarres they should molest the peace of
Christ his Church, and endeavored to separate these infected sheep, least
that they should infect the vvholle fold of Christ, and to cut of these rotten
and rotting members, least they should corrupt the vvholl body, and to pluck up
these noisome weeds, least they might peradventure ouergrovv the good corn of
the Catholic Christians. And although in the beginning, by reason of
persequution and want of ability, the Church could not have her General
Councels, yet even then the pastors of the Church assembled them selves
together in vvriting, by which they refuted their heresies, and made the
autours Known, that others might the better avoid them. But after that the
Church had gotten a Constantine for her champion, and temporal princes for her
Protectours, then against Arius she gathered a Council at Nice consisting of
three hundred and eighteen Bishops: A^han. ep ad Iou and disp. con. Arian. Socr
l. 1. c. ^. Genesis 14.
by vvch number as Abraham once subdevved five Kings, so our Savior Christ by
Pope Siluester his Vicare, at Nice the city of Victory (for so much the Greek
word impotteth) by Victor also and Vincentius, whose names are victorious,
got the victory of Arius, and the Quartadecimanes, and defined against the
Arrians, that the son was consubstantiall to the father, and against the
Quartadecimanes what day Easter should be kept and observed. Which being done
the excommunication, condemnation, curses, and anathems were thundered our
against them: and a Synodicall Epistle was written to Pope Siluester, who
confirmed the Councels sentence in another Council at Rome. The Emperor
Constantine reuerencing this sentence as the sentence of Christ's church,
banished Arius, commanded his books to be burned and him and his to be taken
for accursed heretics, and after a banquet to which he invited the holy
Bishops he conueighed them home as honorably, as he called them together. So
against Macedonius was gathered the second Synod at Constantinople by the
authority of Pope Damasus, for the defense of the holy ghosts divinity.
Against Nestorius a general Council was called at Ephesus by Pope
Celestinus, vvherin was defined that in Christ is but one person. At Chalcedon
by the authority of Pope Leo the first in a general Council, Eutyches was
condemned for affirming but one nature in Christ. And the like general
consent of the Church in condemnation of the Pelagians, Berengarians,
Vviclephistes and such others I could easily allege out of Ecclesiastical
histories, and the Counsels them selves. But this may suffice to shevve that
whensoever any preached new doctrine, the Christian world wondered at the^,
the Church admonished them, and if they refused to obey her, she in General
Councelles condemned them, and the Emperors and Catholic Princes executed
their laws upon them which were enacted against heretics, and then all
good Christians shunned them as infected and infecting persons. l. con. proph.
haeresum nouitates. c. 1^.
For as Vincentius Lyrinensis says: Annunciare aliquid Christianis Catholicis
praeterid quod acceperunt, nusquam licet, nunquam licebit, and anathematizare
eos qui annunciant aliquid, praeterquam quod semel acceptum est, nunquam non
oportuit, nusquam non oportet, nunquam non oportebit: To preach unto Christians
other doctrine then that which they have already received, noe where is
lavvfull, and never shall be lavvfull: and to accurse as heretics those which
preach other doctrine then which before has been accepted, it was ever
behoueable, it is every where behoueable, and ever shall be behoueable. And
whosoever reads the Ecclesiastical histories shall see how always, they
were taken for heretics, who were condemned by General Counsels, and
holden so by that Church which commonly was called Christian. And good
reason, for he that will not obey the Church must be by Christ's
commandment eschevved as an Ethnike and Publicane. Mat. 18.
Let now the indifferent reader be Judge whether this note and mark aggreeth
not as properly to Luther, Calvin, and their followers, as ever it did to,
Arrius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutiches, and such like, who by their own
confession were infamous heretics. They taught strange doctrines never
allowed by that Church which was commonly counted Christian; so did Luther
and Calvin. At them when they began to preach, the Christian world wondered,
so did it when these men began. When they by the Churches admonition could
not be reclaimed, the Church by a general Council in which the Pope ruled
by his Legates, condemned them as heretics; so when Luther begane to preach
Leo the tenth Pope of that name warned him of it, and sent Cardinal Caietane
a larned and famous divine to confer with him, but he being protected by ye
Duke of Saxony, though some times he feigned that he would submit him self,
remained obstinate; wherefore a general Council was called at Trent, vvherby
the sentence of the learned, grauest, and vvisest Prelates of the world,
(for there were present six Cardinals, fovve Legates, three Patriarchs,
thirty and two Archbishops, two hundred and eight Bishops, and five Abbors,
seven Generals of religions, and Pro^utatours of religions, and other learned
men very many) Luther and all the heretics and heresies of this age were
condemned, even as Arrius and other heretics in other Councels before had
been. But they say that it was not the true Church which condemned them. And
might not Arrius have said the same? And when I pray you did the true Church
that once was and which condemned Arrius, degenerate? Under what Pope and
Emperor? In what age? in what year of our Lord? upon what occasion? But
this miserable refuge of theirs is already rejected. At least that Church
which when Luther began to preach was commonly counted the only and true
Christian Church, condemned them, and so if ever there were any heretics,
these men also must be counted so, else Arrius sentence, which that society
which was commonly counted Christian, pronounced against him, must be
reuersed, or at least again examined.

To these marks may be added others, as want of mission, allegation of bare
scripture, bragging of the private spirit, contempt of fathers, want of a
visible Judge, of which we have spoken in the first book, for these were
the properties of all heretics and are as proper to our nevve reformers as
ever they were to any ancient heretic, as by the same chapters does appear
most evidently.

THE THIRD BOOK
CONTAINS A SVRVEY of their doctrine concerning Christ, in which by many
poinctes of their doctrine, it is proved that they are Antichristians rather
then Christians.

The first Chapter proves that their doctrine despoileth Christ of his
divinity, and that they therefore are no sincere Christians.

EVERY man likes and loves that which he professes and will speak
honorably of him whom he follovveth in that profession. The Stoickes commend
Zeno, the Platonistes praise Plato, the Peripatetickes Aristotle, the
Epicureans Epicure, the Atheists Diagoras, and every one reuerenceth and
respects him whose doctrine and profession he embraces. If then the
reformers be sincere and real Christians (as they will seem to be) they must
think, and speak of Christ very honorably, and give that homage to his
parson, which his doctrine has deserved. And so in deed or rather in words
they seem to do. Luther when he first began to preach against Indulgences,
merits, satisfaction, good works, Lut. in c 17. Gal. fol. 2^^.
and inherent justice, affirming, that only to believe that Christ's Justice is
ours, is sufficient to salvation, used this for a Cloak; that forsooth he gave
all to Christ's justice, and nothing to our works. Calvin also in his preface
of his Institutions vvch he vvrote to the King of France, In pr^f. Inst. ad
Reg. Gal^.
commendes his own doctrine for this point especially, that it gives all
honor to Christ, and leaves nothing to our own force and ability. And
what does better aggree with faith (says he) then to acknovvledge our
selves despoiled of all virtue that of God we may be clothed, deuoid of all
good, that of him we may be filled, bond-seruaunts of sin, that of him we
may be made free, blind, that of him we may be enlightened, lame, that of him
we may be made straight, feeble, that of him we may be vpholden, to take from
our selves all matter of glorying, that he alone may be gloriouse on high, and
in him we may glory. So that vvhilest they deny good works to be
necessary and affirm faith only sufficient, vvhilest they say that we have
no inherent justice, but are the best of us though apostles, sinners before
god, that our best works are sins, and that we have noe other Justice
then the justice of Christ apprehended by faith and imputed only to us,
vvhilest they deny that we ca^ observe the co^ma^deme^tes, or have the power
and free will to do any good, or resist any tentation, they attribute,
forsooth, all to Christ, and leave nothing to us, that he only may be
glorified. But by this book I hope to make known unto the world their deep
dissimulation, who in words seem to give all to Christ, but by their
doctrine, do rob him and despoile him of all his honorable titles. And
first you shall see how sacrilegiously they pluck and pull at Christ's
divinity. I will not here relate the blasphemies of Michael Seruet who yet
was a brother of this religion, because they will say that for such doctrine,
Calvin caused him to be burned, for he said plainly that God the son was
not true God, l. Trin. fo. 7 34 35. l 2. fol, 8 and in dial.
not coaquall with his father, yea he said that God the father only was God:
which doctrine notvvithsta^ding he gathered, or might have gathered out of
Luthers and Caluins works. Nether will I say any thing of the heretics and
new Arians of Tra^siluania, who in this also aggree with Seruetus. Luther
the graund Patriarch and new Evangelist must not be omitted: who in his
book against Latomus says that he can not abide that word Homousion. These
are his words: anima mea odit vocabulum Homousion: (...).
My soul hates the word consubstantiall. So did the Arians hate the same
word and called it exoticu^, strange and unusual. But Athanasius gathers
this word out of scriptures and ancient fathers, Ep. Decr. Conc. N^i^.
who in that they affirm that the son is begotten of his father and coequall
unto him and one vvth him, affirm also that he is co^substa^tiall, and of the
same substance with his father, because nothing is equal and coequall to god
the father but God, and nothing is God vvch is not the same substance with
him, because there are not many Gods. And why should Luther hate this word
but for the signification, for the sound is no more ungrateful then the sound
of other words? If he hate the signification, then is he an Arian, who
believes not that the son is co^substa^tiall and of the same substance
with his father, and consequently he thinks him not to be God, or else he
thinks that there are many Gods different in substance. The same Luther as
diverse affirm, in an edition of his commentaries upon Genesis (which I have
not seen) calls the son of God the instrument of his father, by vvch he
created the world, in ^. ca. Genesis
which manner of speech Arius also used; And seeing that the instrument is
never of so noble a nature as the principal agent, what is this but to make
the son of God inferior to his father and consequently a creature? And this
testimony (as I have read) Seruetus alleged against Luthers Scholars in the
Albane disputation. Luther also blotted out of the Germain prayer books, those
ancient words Sancta Trinitas vnus Deus, miserere nobis: Holy Trinity one
God, have mercy upon us. And why? for some spite belike which he conceived
against Christ Jesus the second person in Trinity. For why else did he in his
Germain Bibles when he came to the translation of those words of the ninth
chapter of Esaie, Deus fortis strong God: Leave out, God? as though Christ
were strong but not God. Why did he leave out quite those words of saint
Ihons epistle, ^. ^o. ^.
Tres funt qui testimonium dant in caelo, Pater, Verbum, and Spiritus sanctus
and hi tres vnum sunt. There are three which give testimony in heaven, the
father, the word, and the holy ghost, and these three are one? The same Luther
in his book of Councels excuses Eutyches, l. de council. ^. (...).
and Nestorius and accuses S. Leo and saint Cyrill as men which were to
eagre against them, for (says he) as Eutyches said so may it well be said
that Christ's divinity suffered. O blasphemy? did the divinity of Christ
suffer? then was it not true divinity, and consequently Christ was not God,
because God as God can not suffer. I may use here Alamundarus vvitty answer
against Luther, Niceph l. 16 hist. c. ^^. Baron in Annal, anno Christi 509.
vvch he used against certain heretical Bishops that said that Christ's
divinity suffered on the cross: for he, when he hard that they were come to
speak with him, commanded his man presently after their entrau^ce to
whisper him in the ear; vvch being done accordingly, Alamundarus started at
the whispering and seemed astonished. The Bishops thinking that his man had
told him some evil nevves, demanded what it was at which he was amazed? My
man (says he) tells me that Michael the Archa^gell is dead. Tush, Tush
(said they) that nevves can not be true; because angels can not dye. Can not
Angels dye (said Alamundarus) and think you that God his divinity could
suffer? Anno 1554.
Melancthon in his book of common places, and in diverse other places has these
propositions. l. cont. Stan^. ep ad Elect.
The son of God according unto his divinity prayed unto his father for his
Kingdom, glory, and inheritance: The divine nature of the son, Ep. 2^.
tract* page 994.
was obedient to his father in his Passion. The like saying has Beza, yea and
Calvin also. Is not this to deny Christ's divinity and coaequalitie with his
father? For who but an inferior prays? ^^is. Kemn. epud Bell to. 1. l 3. de
Christo in initior Lut ser de (...) Domini ^0. ^.
Who but an inferior obeys? The Lutherane Vbiquetaries also, who affirm
that the divine attributes are really communicated unto Christ's humain nature,
and that in such sort, that the humain nature was immense and omnipotent as
the divinity was, destroy Christ's divinity, vvilest they extol his
humanity: for by this doctrine it follovveth that Christ's divinity was
nothing else but his human nature deified and really turned into divinity,
and seeing that humain nature can not in this manner participate of the
divinity, it follovveth that Christ is not true god, because he has not true
divinity. For allthoughe by incarnation man was God, and so consequentely
immense and omnipotent, by a certain communication which divines call
co^municatio idiomatum, Yet the humanity could never really be ye divinity,
nor omnipote^cie, nor any other divine attribute. And to come to Calvin, Li
cont Valentinct Gen^lem.
he says plainly that the name of god aggreeth to the Father (...) per
excellentiam by excellency. Vvch if it be so, then god the son is not so
Excellent a god as the Father, and consequently no god at all. He also in
diverse places avouches that Christ is not god of god, as the Nicen Council
calls him, li 1. Inst c 1^.9.19.23.31.
he denies that by eternal generation God the son has his essence from his
father, yea (says he in the last place quoted in the margent) the essence of
the son is no more generated then the essence of the father. To whom in this
point subscribeth our countriman whitaker in his book against ffather
Campian. page 1^3.
O blasphemy and of them that will needs be counted reformed Christians.
better were it to deny Christ flatly, then to profess his name, and yet under
hand to disgrace him: for dissembled religion is double iniquity. Is not
Christ God of God the father? then is he some other God, has he not his
essence from his father? Then is he not the son of God, because the son
takes his substance from his father. Is not the sons essence generated? then
is not the son begotten of his fathers substance, then is he not
consubsta^tiall to his father, but rather of another nature, and co^seque^tly
either a creature or another God. The divines grant that the essence and
divinity absolutely without addition, is not to be said to be generated,
for then it should be generated in God the father also, but yet they affirm
that God the son is God of God and begotten of his father, and that by
eternal generation he receives with out all imperfection his essence from
his father, and consequently that the essence is generated, not absolutedly,
but in the son, else were he not a son, nether should he be
co^substantiall to his father. Ep duabus ad Polon. Pet. Mar. duab. ep. Kem. l.
de duahus not. Mel. loc. c. de filio.
The same Calvin accompanied with diverse others both Caluinists and
Lutheranes, affirms that Christ according to his divinity was Priest and
mediator. To whom Ievvel in his book against Harding subscribeth, Ievvellus
ae 17.
where he says that in Christ there were two natures, the divinity and the
humanity, and that the humanity was offered in sacrifice, but the divinity
played the priest, and offered up this sacrifice. Se here another blasphemy.
Is Christ priest according to his divinity? Did his divine nature offer unto
the father the sacrifice of the humain nature? then certes Christ was not only
as man but also in respect of his divinity inferior to his father (for the
Priest is inferior to the God to whom he offers sacrifice, because in
oblation of a sacrifice he acknowledges God the supreme excellency) and so
was either a creature or a lesser God, and so noe God at all. The ancient
fathers and divines do grant that the same Jesus Christ was Mediator
betwixt God and man, and God also, to whom Mediation was made, by reason of
his tvvoe natures subsisting in one person for a Mediator like a mean, must
participate of both extremes, and therefore sith man had offended, and God
was offended, the Mediator must be God and man participa^t of both, for God
only could not satisfy because he could not suffer, man only could not
satisfy, because his satisfaction would have been less the^ was ye injury,
wherefore it was necessary that one who was both God and man should make
this mediatio^ and satisfaction. And so the same Jesus Christ God and man
satisfied, but not as God but as man, and he as the person offended, received
also the satisfaction, but not as man, but as God. In like manner the same
Christ Jesus was the Priest, the sacrifice, and the God to whom this
sacrifice was offered. And so Christ was the priest but not as God but as
man, for in this only respect Christ had a superior to vvho^ he might offer a
sacrifice: Christ also was the sacrifice, but as man, for his human nature
only suffered; And Christ also was he to whom the sacrfice was offered, but
as God, for so he was noe less offended and iniuried by man's sin then god
the father. I refer the Reader to a book which one Aegidius Hunnius a
Lutherane has written against Calvin in which he declares how Calvin still
expounds the old and new Testament in favor of the Jews, Caluinus
ludaizans.
as though the places spoke not of Christ, and therefore this man calls his
book Caluinus Iudaizans, Calvin playing the Jew. Tell me now gentle
Reader, whether these men as they say do attribute all unto Christ, who as
thou have hard, do despoyle him of his greatest titles of honor, that is
God, and the son of God? But thou vvillt say that in many places Calvin and
others grant that Christ is true God and the son of God. I will grant it
also, l. 1. Inst. c. 13.
for Calvin in the first book of his Institutions and thirteenth chapter,
indeuoureth to prove Christ's divinity, but yet thou see also how they
eat their words, and deny in one place which in another they affirmed. And
so to conclude, either they speak thus vvittingly of Christ, and so they are
noe Christians but renouncers of Christ, or of ignorance, and so thy are not
men to be fellovved in so great mattets as faith is, who have need the^
selves to learn their Catechism which teaches how to speak, and to
believe of Christ and God.

The second chapter shows how by their doctrine they make Christ an absurd
redeemer.

MAN once was free of condition as being created lord over all, and subject to
none but God, whose service is no seruilitie; he was noble of birthe as being
framed by God his own hands of virgin earth, Man's felicity in paradise.
which yet was not stained by sin; he was happy in state as being
indevved with a body immortal, freed from diseases, deaths, and
distemperaturs, nether benumbed with cold, nor parched with heat, nor pined
with honger, nor molested with thirst; enriched with a soul filled with
grace and spiritual treasures, which was prone to virtue, not inclined to
vice, nether molested with concupiscence, nor overruled by passion, but ruled
reason, which was ruled by grace. His superior part was obedient to God,
his inferior part to the superior, sensuality to reason, the flesh to the
spirit, and all creaturs to him were buxome and obedient. Besides this inward
foelicitie of soul and body, he was placed in Paradise, where he was
environed and compassed about with all delights, and pleasures, and far
from all displeasurs. Man's servitude after sin.
But when by sin man would not be subject to God, he became a slave to
his own flesh, passions, and sensuality, a bond man to sin, captive to the
devil, subject to death and mortality, hell, and damnation. And of all this
servile subjection, sin was the cause. for when Ada^ sinned and we in
Adame transgressed, we were by and by guilty of death which is the revvard
of sin, Romans ^.
and by sin we became slaves to sin, and concupiscence. For as Christ
says whosoever sins is a slave to sin: Io 8. l Io 5. 2 Pet 2. Romans 6.
and being slaves to sin we were slaves to the devil, who has noe
authority nor power over us but by sin: and being slaves to the devil we
were captives of hell, which is the prison where the devil holds sinners
perpetually. And behold here breefly in what bondage by sin the devil had
gotten us. After that by sin we were despoiled of grace, if he had tempted
us we could not have resisted, and if we had fallen by sin, Th. ^. 2. q.
109. a. 7.
we could not have risen again by force of nature, and force of grace we had
none, because sin had deprived us of it; and so we were slaves to sin,
and the devil also, and captives also and prisoners of hell, which is dew to
sin; wherefore saint Paul says that We were deteyned captives at the
devils will and pleasure. 1. Tim. ^.
To ransom this prisoner, and to redeem this bondslaue by way of aequitie and
justice, it was necessary that a divine person should become man: Man's
Redeemer.
for God only could not satisfy, because he was the party offended, and in
that he was God could be indebted to none; Man only was not able to pay so
great a ransom as sin required, only God and man, was a fit play master.
For as S. Leo says if he had not been true god he could not have given us a
remedy, Ser. 1. Not. Domini.
and if he had not been true man he could not have given example, yea he could
not have suffered, and so could not have satisfied. And amongst the three
divine persons, the second was the fittest. For who fitter to be a mediator
then the middle person? Who fitter to be the son of man by incarnation, then
he who from all aeternitie was ye son of god? Who fitter to repair the
image of god in man, the^ hevvhoe was ye image of his father? Who fitter to
make an amends for Adames inordinate desire of knowledge, Genesis ^.
then he who was the vvisdome of his father? Who fitter to abate Adams
pride who would have been like to God, then he who was in deed the likeness
of god his father, and yet by incarnation, of purpose became in outvvard show
as unlike him as man is to God? Breefly who fitter to appease the storm, then
Jonas for whom the storm was ray sed, for it was no other then the son of
God for vvho^ the storm in heaven was raised when Lucifer would be like the
highest. It was no other then the same son of God for vvho^ in paradise that
storm arose, when Adam puffed up with pride, would be like to god in
Knowledge of good and evil; for to him is proper the likeness and image of
God, which they inordinately affected. The ancient then of years became a
child, the word was mute, God became man, the second and middle person played
the mediator, the son of God became the son of man, and in man's nature
which he had taken upon him, repaired what man had ruined, and destroying
sin by flesh, which by flesh was committed, overcame the devil by flesh,
by which he had overcome: and vvher as with one tear, yea one word he
might have redeemed us, he would shed his blood for us, and vvheras one dropp
had been sufficient, he povvred out all, to show the greatness of his
charity, and the greatness of our ingratitude which still commit sins
which cost Christ so dearly, to show the malice of sin whose stain could
not be taken out without the blood of this lamb, and to shevve the greatness
of the ransom, and the price of our redemption. So great was this price which
was paid for us, 1. Pet. 1.
that saint Peter says We were redeemed not by gold and silver, but by
the pretiouse blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 6.
And saint Paul says that we were bought by a great price; so great,
Psalm. 13^.
that David calls it copiosa redemptio, a copiouse redemption. Prorsus copiosa
(says saint Bernard) quia non gutta sed vnda sanguinis per quinque parts
corporis manauit: Copiouse in deed because not a dropp, Ser 22. in Cant.
but a stream of blood issued out at five parts of his body, so rich a price
was this blood says he, Ep. 190.
That it was sufficient to have satisfied for the sin which shed it. So
that Christ is our redemer Who has deliuerd us out of the power of
darkness, Col. 1.
freed us from the slavery of sin, and the bondage of the devil. Ser. 197.
Domin. l. post Trinitatem.
For as (saint Austine says) Christ now has tied the devil in a chain, so
that he can no farther tempte us then we can resist: bark he may, tempte he
may, solicit us he may, but byte he can none but those, which will
vvillfully cast them selves with in his reach. Who now is so ungrateful as
not to acknovvledge this benefit? Who will arrogate unto him self the name
of a Christian, who will not also acknovvledge Christ for his redeemer? Dare
now the reformers deny Christ the title of a redeemer? they dare not. Yet by
their doctrine they make him a most absurd redeemer, and so more dishonor him
then if they had denied him this title altogether. For they say, that, there
is noe justice but Christ's justice, noe good works but his works, noe
merit but his merit, noe satisfaction but his, and consequently, that Christ's
passion was our justice, our merit, and our satisfaction. Out of vvch
doctrine they infer, first, that nether there is any inhere^t justice or
sanctity in man, nether is there any necessary, because Christ's justice is
ours by imputation, l. (...). Inst c. 11.. 2. Luth. in 2. Gal fol. 29^.
and that is sufficient. So (says Calvin) and to him subscribeth Luther, as
shall appear by their words, which shall be related and refuted in this self
same book, as also in diverse chapters of the seventh book. Secondly they
gather out of the same doctrine that good works are not necessary, because
Christ's works are ours, and they are sufficient: which doctrine I shall
lay open in the same book and first chapter. Thirdly hence they infer also
that noe laws, either human or divine, can bynd us in conscience, because
Christ's passion was the ransom, which freed us from all laws. Fourthly
that we are bound to noe satisfaction because Christ's satisfaction was
sufficient. Fifthly that noe sins nor evil works can hurt, us, because
Christ's justice being ours, noe sin can make us sinners, which doctrine
shall be set down in the same book. Sixthly that noe hell nor judgment
remains for us: because Christ's justice being ours, sins can nether be
imputed to us in this life, nor punished in ye next. And in these points they
say that Christian liberty consists. So that Christ according to these
doctors opinions, has redeemed us from the slavery of sin, because his
justice being ours noe sin can hurt us, he has delivered us from the yoke
of the law, because noe law can bynd us, he has delivered us from hell
and the devil, because howsoever we live, if we believe that Christ's
justice is ours and our satisfaction and payment, the devil has noe power to
punish us in his Hellish prison, because Christ has suffered the pain dew
to our sins before hand. Vvherin the discreet reader may easily perceue what
an absurd Redeemer they make Christ to be. For if Christ has redeemed us
from the slavery of sin because noe sin can hurt us, then does he open
us the gappe to all manner of sins and outrages. For who will care for
sin that is persuaded that Christ's passion is so imputed to him, that noe
sin can hurt him? If Christ has redeemed us from the yoke of the law,
because noe law now can bind us in conscience; then does he give us the
occasion to transgress freely, and contemn bodily all manner of laws and
ordina^cies. If Christ has delivered us from hell because he has paid
the punisheme^t de^e to sin, and requires noe other satisfaction at our
hands, then does he in a manner egg us forvvard to all vice, from which noe
man will absteyne, if fear of hell do not bridle his unruly appetites, and
keep him in awe. And so Christ's passion which was a sacrifice to abolishe
sin, is a cause of all sin, and Christ who came to redeem the world
from sin, fills the world with sin, and so is an absurd redeemer, so to
redeem us from sin, that he inuiteth us and eggeth us forvvardes unto
sin. So they make Christ not unlike to that father who seeing the excessive
expenses of his prodigal son, does not command him to use more
thriftines, but pays before hand to all disers, cooks, Inkeepers, and
merchauntes, all that possibly he can loose at dise, or lavish out in
apparel, or consume in banqueting: vvherin he does nothing else but inuit
his son to all unthriftiness, who needs never to care how, he spends,
when all his debtes are paid before hand. For so the ghospellers say that
Christ perceiving, that we could not keep the law, freed us from all
laws, and seeing that we could not avoid sin, imputed his own justice so
unto us, that noe sin can hurt us, and knovving that we were not able to
satisfy for sin, he abode the pain him self, and would have none required
at our hands. And in so doing, what else has he done, but opened the vvide
gate to all licentious liberty, vice and iniquity? How far more
reasonable is the opinion of the Catholic Church, which affirms that
Christ's passion was not our formal justification nor satisfaction, but only
the meritorious cause of our redemption and salvation: which deserved for us
at Gods hands grace by vvch together with our cooperation we may be saved
and redeemed. For as we fell by our own vvilles into captivity, so Christ
thought it good that by our own vvilles together with his grace (for
without grace we may fall but we can not rise again) we should rise up
again and vvinde our selves out of the servitude of sin and the tyranie of
the devil. So that Christ has redeemed us from the servitude of the law, not
that the law by ndeth us not, but because Christ has taken away the
heaviness of the law, and by his grace which he gives us, has given us
force easily to fulfill it, which otherwise would have tyra^nised over us,
in commanding more the^ we should have been able to have performed. Christ
also has redeemed us from captivity and bondage of sin, not because noe
sin can be imputed unto us, but because his passion has deserved grace for
us, by which we may dispose our selves to justification which is a
resurrection from sin to nevvnesse of life, and by which we may avoid
sin whensoever we are moved there unto. Christ also has freed us from the
tyranny of the devil and captivity of Hell, because he has procured us
grace, by which when the devil by him self, or the world or the flesh
provoke us, we may resist, maugre all the force of hell. Christ also has
satisfied for our sins, not because his passion without any cooperation on
our part does suffice, for so, as is proved, the gate were opened unto all
iniquity, but because his passion had obtained grace for us, with out which
we could not satisfy for the least venial sin, and by which, if we
cooperate with it in paenaunce, fasting, almesdeeds, prayer, and works of
paenaunce, we may satisfye for all our sins, and all the pains dew unto
our sins. So that Christ has redeemed us from the servitude and heavy yoke
of the law, and yet we must keep the law, and now especially, because
the heaviness thereof is taken away by Christ his grace: Christ has freed us
from the servitude of sin, and yet we must avoid sin, and now
especially, because Christ's grace has given force to arise by paenaunce from
our former sinful life, Psalm. (...).
and to walk in the way of his commandments, and nevvnes of life: Christ
also has delivered us from the tyranny of the devil, because he has given
us grace to resist him; wherefore we must not yield unto him, but now
especially we must stand against him: Christ also has satisfied for us, and
yet we must satisfy, and now especially because he has given us grace by
which we may do paenaunce for sin, and satisfy for the pain. For although
that Christ has paid the price of our redemption, yet would he have us to
apply it by our cooperation not only in faith (for so he should open the
gapp to all vice) but in poenaunce, in observation of the commandments, and
receiving of the Sacraments. Wherefore our redeemer him self who freed us
from the yoke of the law, yet commands us (...) Keep the law if we mean
to enter into life; Mat. 19.
and although he has satisfied for or sins, Lue. vle.
yet he commands his Apostles to preach penance unto us as necessary for
remission and satisfaction of our sins. And if he had redeemed us in that
manner vvch the Ghospellers imagine, and had set us at that liberty, that noe
law can bind us, nor noe sin hurt us, and that noe good works nor
satisfaction, nor any other cooperation besides faith, can be required on our
part, then had he been a most absurd redeemer (as I have all ready proved)
and had rather tumbled us down into the depthe of sin and damnation, then
redeemed us.

The third Chapter shows how by their doctrine they make Christ no Redemer
at all.

Well did our blessed savior compare heretics unto Wolves vvrapped and
invested in sheepe-skinnes, Mat. 7.
whose manner has all vvayes been under praetence of religion, to utter
blasphemy, and then to mean and intend the vvorst, when they speak fairest.
What I pray you is so common in our ghospellers mouths, as that Christ only
is our Redeemer, and sole mediator? under which pretense they ^onde^ne all
honor given unto sain^^es, and abandon all prayer and intercessi in valhich is
made unto them, as iniuriouse to Christ and his title of a Redeemer. In which
truly they seem not vnlik to Judas, who would needs Kiss Christ when he
meant to betray him, and me thinks (and what I think I shall prove anon) in
this point they resemble the Jews which invested Christ like a King, called
him King, and adored him as King, yet in deed derided him as a fool. For so
these men call Christ the Redeemer, and rather then they will not seem to
mean so, they take from the Saints, the mother, and friends of Christ, all
secondarie mediation and intercession, and will seem to be so zealous of
Christ's honor that they will have none honored but him; and yet in deed
under this fair show, they carry false hearts, and even then vvhem they call
him and adore him as a Redeemer, they rob him and despoile him of that
honorable title. Lut. in com. Gal. fol. 298.
Luther in his commentaries upon the second Chapter to the Galathians says
plainly that, Christ apprehended by faith is Christian justice for whom God
reputeth us just. l. 3 Inst. c. 3.. 2.
Calvin also subscribeth that our justice consists in the imputation of
Christ's justice unto us. And because this justice is extrinsecall and is not
inhaerent in us, they say that though for Christ's sake we be reputed just,
yet the holiest that is, is a greevouse sinner, and all his works are worthy
nothing else but damnation, which doctrine herafter diverse times, and
especially in the seventh book shall be related. hence it is also that they say
that our sins are only covered with christ's justice vvch is imputed unto
us, but are not taken away nor extinquished. This they explicate by a
similitude: for (say they) as if a man look thorovghe redd glass, all seems
redd, be it black or white, so God beholding us through Christ's justice
reputeth us just though in deed we be sinners. About in the first chap.
And this Calvin in his preface of his Institutions to the King of France
avoucheth not to derogate from christ but to make much for his honor, for
what (says he) is to Christ more honorable the^ to acknovvledge our selves
despoiled of all virtue that of (...) we may be clothed, that is, reputed
(...) for his justice which is imputed unto us. But let us see how
honorable this is to Christ. I will not deny but that it is honorable to
Christ and expedient for (...), to acknovvledge that of our selves with out
Christ's grace we are sinners and ca do little else but sin, Th. 1.2.q.109.
but to say that notvvithstanding Christ's grace vvh^^^ he has bestovved on
his just, and is ready to bestow on all repe^taunt sinners, (...) still
sinners, and only reputed (...) for Christ's justice which is by faith
apprehended and by God imputed unto us, is most dishonorable to Christ. For if
we have no other justice then Christ's justice which is imputed unto us, then
have we no internal sanctity in us, then are we not truly sanctified, then
are we still sinners be we never so just. Calvin and Luther, and all the
Lutheranes, and Caluinists have no other answer to this then concedo totum: I
grant all. Are we then still truly sinners and not truly just? then was
the first Adame more potent in malice, then the second in grace and sanctity:
for he made us truly sinners, Christ could not make us truly just. Then was
Saint Paul deceived who says that Christ's grace exceeded Adams sime. Romans
5.
Are we still sinners and not truly sanctified? then has not Christ verily
redeemed us from the servitude of sin, Io. 8.
for whosoever is in sin, is a slave to sin. If we be not redeemed from
sin, then are we not freed from the tyranny of Satan, whose only title is
sin, by which he domineereth over us. And seeing that hell follovveth sin
as a just punishment for such a fault, then are we still captives and
prisoners of Hell, and Christ is noe Redemer, who has nether redeemed us
from sin, nor hell, nor damnation. The same ghospellers affirm that by sin
our nature is so weakened, that not vvithstanding Christ's grace, we can not
resist any temptation of the flesh or devil, that we can not possibly
fulfill the law and commandments, that we can not do any good work,
but must needs sin in all our actions, as shall appear by their doctrine and
their words in the seuenthe book. which if it be true, then are we not by
Christ freed from ye devils tyranny, who still so tyranniseth over us, that
we can resist none of his tentations; then are we still slaves to our own
concupiscence and sensuality, whose assaults we can not vvithstande; then
are we bondemen of sin which so ouerruleth us that we can do no other
thing but sin, then are we not delivered from Hell and damnation which God
has provided against sin and sinners. And so these fayre-spoken Christians
which call Christ the sole Mediator and only Redeemer, make him noe Redeemer
at all.

The fourth chapter shows how by their doctrine they make Christ no
spiritual Physician.

GOD created man in good plight, sound, vvholle and immortal, bestovving on
him atree of life, whose fruit should have preserved him from diseases,
distemperaturs, and death of body, and indevving him with original justice
which if he had Kept, had kept him and preserved him in perpetual health of
soul. But he not knovving how to use such felicity, by a surfeit which he
took of the forbidden fruit, distempered his body with mortality, whence
proceed diseases, infirmites, and death it self; and cast him self at one
time into noe fewer then four diseases of the soul, which divines commonly
call vulnera animae the vvounds of the soul, which reside also in four
parts and faculties of the soul. Th. (...). 2. q. 85. art. 3.
The understanding whose object is truth, and whose perfection is knowledge,
was obscured with ignorance; the will whose mark at which she aymeth, is
Good, and whose, perfection is love, was infected with malice. The
irascible part whose obiecte is difficulty, and whose glory is victory
over difficulties, was weakened with infirmity; and the co^cupiscible part
whose object was moderate delight, and whose felicity was contentment in
the same, was galled with the itching, and ill pleasing sore of
concupiscence. And Adame was the man of vvho^ we took this infectio^,
unhappy to him self, and unlucky to us, who poisoning him self infected us,
and ronning him self thorough, vvou^ded us. For when this unhappy vvight
descended from Jerusalem to Hierico, Luc. 10.
that is from Paradise the place of peace and pleasure, unto this vale of
misery and changeable world as mutable as the Moon (which the word Hierico
imports) he fell into the hands of thieves, Th. supra ^eda.
I mean the devils, who despoiled him of his garment and coat of innocence
and all supernatural habites and graces, and vvounded him even in natural
perfection and faculty, which before by original justice was much confirmed
and perfited, and gave him the four vvounds before mentioned, Luc. 10.
yet so, that they left him half a live; not living the supernatural life of
grace because sin had bereued him of it, but yet living a natural life
because he had lost noe natural perfection, though he was weakened and
vvounded also in that, because he lost original justice vvch gave noe small
force and vigor even unto nature, Ibidem.
and greater then nature of her self could have had by nature. And vvhilest he
lay thus spoiled and vvounded; the Priest and Leuite passed by him, but gave
him noe helping hand, that is the law and Prophets could tell him the nature
of the disease, Io. ^.
but could give him noe grace to heal it. Wherefore the Samaritane Christ
Jesus (who when he was so called refused not the name) played the part of a
merciful Physician, Io. ^.
and by the oil of his mercy and wine of his blood, vvch he povvred into his
vvounds, recured him. So that if now Hieremie demand of us: Hier. v.
Nunquid resina non est in Galaad aut medicus non est ibi? Is there not rosen in
Galaad or is not there a Physician? We can answer him quickly; yes, yes
Hieremie, in Galaad the Church of Christ we want noe rosen, salues, nor
medicines, for we have seven sacraments which all give grace to heal all
spiritual vvounds; and we have a Physician whose name is Jesus vvch
imports salvation, Luc. ^. Th. ^. p. q. ^.^.
who came not for the vvholle but the sick, not for the just but for ye
sinful, and who in all respects has played all the parts of a good
Physician. Phisitia^s are more in company with ye sick the^ with the
vvholle, Mat. ^.
so was this spiritual Physician, who one while conversed with Pharisees,
another while with Harlotes, Mat. 9.
another while with Publicanes, and always almost with infirm
patientes. Physicians have their medicines, Christ has his saluing sacraments.
Physicians to allure their patients to take the prescribed potions, will taste
of them first them selves; and Christ to make us patiently to drink down the
bitter potion of persecution and adversity which is sovereign for the soul,
first began him self unto us, that we might pledge him the more willingly.
Physicians to recure us do some times lance and cut us, some times they
prescribe us fasting, and some times they let us blood: but this Physician in
this point far exceeds them. for they to diminish the disease will bid us
fast, but will not fast them selves, Christ fasted for us forty days and
nights to recure our surfeit. Mat. 4.
They to ridd us of superfluouse humors or corrupted blood will lance our
flesh or let us blood in a vain, but will not lose one dropp of their own
blood for us, but Christ permitted his own flesh to be cut in his
circuncision, to be torn when he was vvhipped, and to be perced when he
was crucified, and would be let blood even at the heart, to make a potion for
our recovery. other Physicians seek to take away our disease, but will not
take it upon them to ridd us of it: but Christ has taken our sins upon
him to ease and ridd us of them. 1. Fet. 2.
He has taken our ague to him self, to take it from us, not that he has
taken the malice of our sins but the pain of sin upon him, and has
suffered it in his body upon the vvood of the cross. Ibidem.
For as in a corporal ague there is the disease and the pain, and the disease
or agevve is a disemperatour of heat and humors, the pain is not the agevve
but the effect of it, so in the spiritual ague of the soul which is sin,
there is the malice of sin which is the disease, and this Christ could not
take unto him because he was incapable of sin, and there is the pain also
dew unto sin, which is not the agevve but a burning in Purgatory or hell,
if we do not prevent it by other corporal and voluntary pains and
satisfaction. And this Christ took upon him in suffering honger, thirste,
cold, and other pains which we had deserved, yea suffering death that we
might live, and so by taking upon him the pain dew to sin, has recured
the disease of sin, and has rid us of our agevve, by abiding the burning
of the same. And hitherto we and the Ghospellers aggree, for they also will
say that Christ is the Physician of our souls, but yet their doctrine is
clean contrary, and so vvhilest in words and show, they seem to
acknovvledge him our Physician, in doctrine and deed they make him none at all.
see the third. chap. of this book.
For if you remember, Luther and Calvin are of opinion that we have no
inherent and internal justice or sanctity, but are just only by Christ's
own justice, which (say they) makes us reputed just, but not in deed just,
hides our sins but heals them not, and covers our spiritual vvounds but
recureth them not. Which if it be true, then certes is Christ noe true
Phisitia^, who heals not but hides only our sores and diseases. O
bsasphemie, o ingratitude, o injury, o sacrilege covered with a a pretense
of religion. They will seem forsooth to attribute much to Christ, who as
they say has made us just by his own justice vvch he imputes unto us, but
vvhilest they acknovvledge no other but christ's justice imputed to us, they are
enforced to say that christ has not verily sanctified us, nor verily
healed ye spiritual sores and maladies of our soul, but has only covered
the^ and hidden the^ from the sight of God by an imputatio^ of his own
justice, and so he may be a hider and couerer of our vvounds but noe healer,
and no healer, no Physician.

The fifte Chapter shows how they rob Christ of the title of a law
maker.

IF Moses for prescribing laws unto ye Jews, Licurgus unto the
Lacedaemonians, Solon to the Athenians, Romulus to the Romans, Plato to the
Magnefians, Trismegistus unto the Egiptians, and others for giui^g laws unto
their subjects, were so famous and renowned, What honor must it be unto
our savior Christ to have been the author of the Christian law, and the
lavvgiuer unto the Christians? They praescribed laws only unto some certain
people or nation, Christ unto all nations. Their laws had for their scope and
proiecte an external and civil peace, Christ's law aymeth at an inward peace
of the soul in earth, and an aeternall peace in heaven; Their laws forbad
only external sins as theft; murder, adultery, and such like, little
respecting the inward desire and intention, Christ's law restrains even
the inward consent, desire, and dilight. Chris. (...) i^ Act.
Their laws forbad not all vice, nether commanded or counsayled all virtue,
for Platoes laws permitted vviues to be common and other vices also, Licurgus
his laws were corrected as being toe toe rigorous, which thing he took so
heavily and so grievously that he pined him self with abstine^ce: Tertia l.
^^ Apilag.
But Christ's law either commands or counsayleth all virtue not only moral
but also Theological and forbids all vice what soever. Vvherfor David
says that God his law is immaculate converting souls; immaculate, because
it permits no filthe of sin, converting souls, because it induces us to
all manner of virtue. Their laws were full of many superstitions and absurd
errors, for they commanded many Gods to be worshipped, and those beasts and
serpents, Auoust li de Ciuit.
and some of their vvisest, denied gods prouiuidence as Aristotle, (...) mundo.
some his foresight and prescience as Cicero, some made god the soul of the
world, some confined him with in the heavens, some held the soul to be
mortal. But the law of Christ is Praeceptum lucidum illuminans oculos: Psalm.
18.
a lightsome Praecept, illuminating the eyes; that is illuminating our
understanding the eye of the soul with true faith and knowledge, and
dispersing all clouds of ignorance errors and superstition. And no marvel,
because Christ the lavvgiuer was the wisdom of his father, and when he gave
his law he gave his spirit who teaches his Church all verity. I^. 14.
The law of Christ may be reduced to tvvoe heads, to wit things that are
to be believed, and things vvch are to be observed. We believe that there is a
God and him we acknowledge the only God and creator and ruler of all, who
takes accounte of all our actions, and will accordingly herafter revvard us.
And although we believe also that this one God is three in persons, and that
the second parson was incarnate for us, dyed that we might live ever, and
rose again for our Resurrection, which things are out of reasons reach, yet
are not these or any other of the mysteries of our belief against reason, or
vnbe^eeming the divine Majesty, or repugnaunt to Philosophy, as divines do
prove, who can so explicate these mysteries, as nothing shall appear
repugnaunt to reason, and so can answer infidels objections, as that they
shall conclude nothing evidently against us. A^^^ 2. ad Anton l. 10 ciu. c. ^9
Yea Justinius Martyr and saint Austine do shevve how the Platonists and other
Philosophers, taught the like unto many of those articles which Christians
believe. And as concerning those things which are to be observed, to wit the
precepts of good life, they are reduced unto tvvoe, which are the love of God
above all things, and the love of our neighbor as our self: which are most
reasonable, because God is the cheifest good, and so most of all to be beloved,
and our neighbor is like us in nature and ordained to the same end to which
we are, and so to be beloved as our selves. To our neighbor therefore we must
do as we would be done unto, and therefore we must nether kill him, nor
rob him, nor injury him in goods, life, or wife, for we our selves would
not willingly be thus iniuried. And so we are forbidden all sin against
God, and all injury against man: yea we give by our law, to God, that
which is Dew to God, to wit suprem honor because he has supreme
excellency, supreme love because he is the fountain of all goodness, we yield
him gratitude, because he is our best benefactour and redeemer, fear because
he is our lord yea our Judge. To men if they be superiors we give reverence
and obedience and that of conscience, to our aequalls we owe charity, to our
inferiors we condescend by a complying nature. We are forbidden not only to
kill but also to be angry, ^
not only to abstain from adultery and fornication, but also from lasciuiouse
looks, yea desires, we are bidden not only not to offend our friends, but
also to love our enemies. And to induce us to this, the tvvoe things which
contain all common vvelthes in awe, to wit pain and revvard, are proposed
unto us pain in hell, revvard in heaven, pain to fear, revvard to hope for.
Noe law more reasonable then this, none so perfect, which teaches noe
error, permits noe vice, omitteth noe good, but either commaundes, or
counsayls it. And seeing that Christ is the author of this law which
surpasses all laws, greater is his honor and renovme then ever was the
honor of Plato, Licurgus, Romulus, yea Moses or any other. Wherefore the
prophet Esaie recounting other titles of honor dew unto Christ, Isay. 13.
amongst others calls him a lavv-maker: Dominus iudex noster, dominus
legifer noster, dominus Rex noster: The lord is our Judge, The lord is our
lavv-maker, the lord is our King If he be our Lavve-maker he may make laws to
bind us, if he be our judge he may pronounce sentence against the
transgressors, and if he be our King he may punish us, yea if he had called
him only our King, it had been a sufficient argument to prove him a lavv-maker,
because the principal means for a king to rule his subjects are his laws
and ordinances Micheas speaking of the promulgation of Christ's law at
Jerusalem in Penthecoste says, c 4.
That a law shall proceed from Sion and the word of God from Jerusalem. c.
2. c. 4 ^.
The same Prophecy has Esaie in the same words, and adds that Ila^des
shall expecte his law. By which it is plain that Christ is a lavv-maker
who has perscribed laws, and therefore when he gave his Apostles
authority to baptize and preach, Mat. vf^.
he bad them also to teach the Gentiles to keep all those things which he
had commanded. See the first chap of this book.
And yet our ghospellers who brag that they give all to Christ, despoyle
him of this honorable title, and avouch that he was a redeemer only but noe
lavve-make. Luther says plainly that it is the office of the law to
command, (...) ^. Gael. Fol. ^18.
threaten and terrify, but the office of Christ is only to embrace sinners
who have tra^sgressed ye law. Ibidem.
Yea says he: If we make Christ an exactour of the law we confound Christ
and the law, and make him the minister of sin. ^ol. (...).
Wherefore thus he concludes with this exhortation: Quare Chrestum recte
definias, non vt Sophistae and lustitiary, qui faciunt eum nouum legislatorem
qui abrogata veteri lege nouam tulerit; illis Christus est exactor and
tyrannus: Wherefore define thou Christ ae right, not as the Sophists do and
the Iustitiaries (so he calls Catholics because they affirm inherent
justice and auouche that good works are necessary) who make him a new
lavve-maker that has abrogated the old law and enacted a new: to them Christ
is an exactour and a tyrant. How the^ I pray thee would thou have us to
define Christ? Ibidem.
he says that as it is the art of Christians not to care for laws nor to
imagine, that they bynd in conscience, so is it an hard art, which I (says
he) my self can hardly learn; to define Christ after this manner. ^^idem.
But yet this great Logician, at lenght gives us this definition of Christ:
Christus autem definitive non est legislator sed propitiator and saluator: But
Christ definitiuely is not a lavv-maker but ae propitiatour and Savior. By
which doctrine it is plain, that Luther is of opinion, that Christ came not
to terrify us or to exact any law at our hands, but only to embrace the
transgressors, so that they believe only that he is their Redeemer from the
law; which doctrine how it opens the gapp to vice I shall hereafter
declare, See the seue^t^ book.
here I only note that Luther despoyleth Christ of the title of a Lavvmaker,
and avouches that he nether made law nor exacteth any law at our hands,
which how iniuriouse it is to Christ may appear by the comendation which I
have given to Christ and his law. Calvin puts this difference betvvixte
the old and the new law, l ^ Inst. c. 11.. 17.19.
that the old promised grace and glory with this condition if we keep the
commandments, but the new law promises these things absolutely without
that condition. So that Calvin thinks that glory and salvation is promised by
Christ whether we observe the law or not, and consequently he thinks that
no law byndeth us under pain of damnation. Whence it follovveth that Christ
nether exacteth nether prescribes any law under pain of damnation, and so
is no law maker. And the same Calvin after that he had discoursed of
Christian liberty which he says consists in a freedom from all laws,
l. 3. Inst. c. 1^ 3.10.
concludes thus: we conclude that they are exe^pted (he speaks of the
faithful) from all laws. Whence it must needs follovv that Christ is noe
Lavvmaker; for where there is no obligation, there is noe law (as shall be
proved herafter) where noe law, there is noe Lavv-maker, and therefore if
Christ exacteth noe law at our hands and byndes us to none, he can by noe
right have the name of a Lavv-giuer or Lavv-maker. Let the Prophet Esaie
therefore look how he calls Christ our Lavv-maker, c. 33. legifer.
yea let Christ him self correct and amend that saying of his: Mandatum nouum
do vobis vt diligatis inuitem. ^.
I give you a new law and commandment that you love one another: A new
law (says saint Austine) Christ gives us, l ^. cont. ep. par. c. 2.
because although it be old, as being commanded in the old law, yet it is
new, either because Christ has annexed new grace unto it, which in the old
law it had not, or because by this grace annexed, it makes us new creatures
who before were old by sin: l. c. constable. Apost c. 12.
or else (says S. Clement) it is a nevve law because Christ has renewed
it. Let him also remember his office better, which (as Luther and Calvin say)
is not to prescribe or exact laws but to embrace the transgressors. He
forgot therefore his office when he bad us Keept the commandments if we
will enter into life; Mat. 5.
and why he corrected the old law commanding us not only not to kill, but
not to be angry, not only to love our friends, but our enemies also. See, See,
what open injury against the plain text of Scripture, yea and against all
reason also, these men are not a frayed to offer unto Christ in taking from him
the title and office of a Lavvmaker. for if he could make no law, he was
inferior to the meanest Prince in the world, who established, a common
wealth, his Church, but has no authority to command his subjects, who
instituted Sacraments, yet could make noe law to bynd us unto the^, and
therefore when he threatens damnation to them that will not receive his
baptism, 10 ^.
and protests that we shall have noe life unless we eat his flesh and
drink his blood, to. ^.
we may boldly contemn such peremptory commandments, because if Christ
be noe Lavv-maker he could make noe law, and where noe law is, there is
noe obligation, and where is noe obligation all me^ are as free, as they who
are Lordlesse and subject to none.

The sixth Chapter shows how they despoile Christ of the title of an
eternal priest according to the order of Melchisedech.

ALmighty God being highly offended, and justly displeased, that so mean a
creature as man should contemn his commandment, and not care for his
displeasure; it was necessary that a priest should be found out, who by some
pleasing sacrifie should appease this his indignation so justly conceived. And
many priests in deed have assaied by diverse sacrifices to pacify this angry
God, but have all failed of their intended purpose. For nether were they of
that authority as to be Mediators betwixt God and man for such a
reconciliation, nether were their Sacrifices of that worth as to make amends
for so great a fault. Wherefore God by his Prophets complayneth of their
insufficiency, saying that he is full and cloyed with the multitud of their
sacrifices, Isa. 1.
and tells them plainly that if they offer unto him Holocaustes and vows of
Fatlinges he will not look at them. Auio^ 5.
Psalm. 10.
Because, (says David) God is not delighted in such sacrifices. Yea so
insufficient were all the priests of the old law that God by his prophet
Ezechiel threatens that he will put then out of office, c. 34.
and in steed of so many he will give us one Priest, and Pastor, Christ
Jesus, whom he calls his servant David, because as man he descended
lineally from David and in respect of his human nature, Phiilp. ^.
he was gods servant and inferior. This priest Christ Jesus is the high
priest and the only high priest of the new law. For although in the law
of Moses it was necessary to have many high priests, because, Hs^. ^.
(as saint Paul says) their mortality would not permit them to live and
remain always, and because death put them out of office, ^
it was necessary that others should succeed them in the same authority. And
so the first of this rank and line of priests was Aaron (for Moses was
extraordinary) to whom Eleazarus and others succeeded to the number of
fovvrscore and odd: Joseph h. l. 22. Aut. c. 2.
yet in the new law one christ Jesus is sufficient, who though he has
many vicegerentes, which are bishops and priests of the new law, yet has
he noe successors. For noe man succeeds to another, unless the other either
dye, or give over his office; vvherfor seeing that our Savior Christ though he
dyed, yet rose again, never to die again, and never surrendered or gave over his
office, but still offers sacrifice, still baptiseth, still ministers
Sacraments, and rules and governs his Church by his vicars and ministres,
he has noe high priest that succeeds him, but is the sole and only high
priest of the new law, farie exceeding all the Popes, bishops, and preests
that ever were. For his preestly authority (as divines say) was not
grounded upon a caracter which other Priests receue in the Sacrament of
order, but upon hypostaticall union, by which he was the son of God; his
authority exte^ded not it self to Christianes only or them that are baptized,
^. Cor. 5.
as the Popes and Churches authority does who have no jurisdiction over them
that are out of the Church and who never were baptized, but also eue^ unto
infidels whom he commands to receue fay the and the Sacrament of Baptism;
by his preestly power he instituted Sacraments, established a Church and
pastors, and prescribed a monarchical government, which ordona^ces ye Church
obeys but ca^ not alterd: by his authority he could give grace with out
Sacraments as he did to saint Mathevve, Mat. 9. Lu^. 7.
Marie Magdalen and others, vvheras the Pope and bishops and preests of the
Church give noe grace infaillibly but by Sacraments. And this is the priest
who for the dignity of his person, and the valevve of his sacrifice, was the
only priest who could appease gods wrath and indignation. (...)
This priest must needs be hard because the dignity of his person suffers
noe repulse, and the worth of his sacrifice was unspeakable, and he the
same that offered the sacrifice, was the God who was angry and to vvho^ was
offered the sacrifice. The priest was holyer, then the sinner for whom the
sacrifice was offered was malicious, and ye sacrifice was more pleasing to
god, Romans ^.
then the sin displeasing. So pretiouse was the sacrifice that if Christ had
put the sacrifice in one ballau^ce and the sin in ye other it would have
over vvayed sin as a thing of noe weight which notvvithstanding is so heavy
that it vveyeth down to Hell. I^b. 6.
For if every operation of Christ be it never so little because it was (...)
that is the operation of God and man, was of infinite valevve, by reason of
the dignity of the person; what shall we say of that heroical operation of
Christ's passion which was an act of singular charity, Io. 1^. Phil. 2.
couragiouse fortitude, invincible patience, perfect obedience, and sacred
religion, for it was a sacrifice? This priest offered two sacrifices the one
at his last supper unbloody, the other upon the cross bloody, or rather one
and the same sacrifice (in respect of the thing which was offered) after
diverse manners and under diverse forms. For in his last supper he offered his
sacred body and blood after an unbloody manner, on the cross he offere^d the
same after a bloody manner, at his last supper he offered his body, and blood,
under another form, that is under the forms of bread, and wine, on the
cross he offered the same in their own form and likeness. The bloody
sacrifice was but once to be offered, Heb. 7.9.
because it was so precious that one oblation was sufficient. But because it
was offered only as a general cause of all grace and price of our redemption,
it was convenient that this general cause should be determined by more
particular causes, and that this price should be more determinately applied, as
by sacraments, faith, and good works, so by the unbloody sacrifice of the
Mass. Yea because the sacrifice of the cross being bloody, could not be
repeated after Christ's resurrection, he then being impassible and immortal, it
was convenient that an unbloody sacrifice should also be offered continually
in the Church for the worship of God and exercise of religion, which (as I
shall prove in the fourth book) can not stand without a sacrifice. See the
fourth book.
By the bloody sacrifice Christ was a priest and high priest, but nether
according unto the order of Aaron, (because that priest hood by Christ's passion
was abrogated and was confined vvhithin the Tribe of Levy, of which Christ
was not) nether according to Melchisedech, because there was noe similitude
nor aggreement in their sacrifices. Wherefore seeing that our Savior was a
priest according to the order of Melchisedech (for God affirms it with an
oath, Psalm. 8^^. Heb. 7.
and the Prophet David and the Apostle saint Paul avouch it) we must needs
have a sacrifice by which he resembled his sacrifice, and was a priest
according to his order. Heb. ^.7.
And this saint Paul proves at large by diverse co^ueniences which were
betwixt these two preests and their sacrifices. For as Melchisedech was a
King and priest, and a King of Salem that is of peace, so was Christ; As
Melchisedech has nether father nor mother recorded in Scripture, so Christ as
man had no father, and as God no Mother; As Melchisedechs preesthood descended
not by carnal generation, so nether did Christ's Preesthood. As Melchisedechs
preesthood was aeternall, because nether the beginning nor ending is set doovvn
in scripture, so Christ's Preesthood has noe end as David affirms; Psalm.
10^.
As Melchisedechs Preesthood was of higher perfection then the Preesthood of
Aaron (for Melchisedech blessed Abraham and in him the whole Tribe of Levy,
Genesis 100 Heb. ^.
which argues Superiority) so was Christ and his Preesthood far above
Aaron and his Preesthood; lastly as Melchisedech, offered a sacrifice of bread
and wine, so Christ offered his body and blood in his have supper under the
forms and accidents of bread and wine. And this last conuenience, is that for
which Christ especially is said to be according unto the order of
Melchisedech; not that he is of the same order, or that his sacrifice and
Melchisedechs are all one, for Christ his Preesthood and sacrifice, far
excelled his Presthood and his sacrifice, but because there is most
resemblaunce betwixt them and their sacrifices. And this last conuenience
saint Paul expressed not, because the Jews to whom he vvrote were not
capable of so high a Mystery, yet, as the fathers note he insinuated it,
when speaking of Christ whom he had before called Priest and Bishop
according to the order of Melchisedech he added: Heb. ^.
Of vvho^ we have great speech and inexplicable to utter because you are
become vveake to hear. This dignity of an aeternall Priest according unto the
order of Melchisedeche, Psalm 109. Heb. 5.7.
which the Prophet David and the Apostle saint Paul give unto our Savior
Christ, our Ghospellers (who vaunte that they give all unto Christ)
sacrilegiously take from him. For although they grant that Christ offered a
sacrifice on the cross, yet that is not sufficient to make him an aeternall
priest nor according to the order of Melchisedech. And this shall appear most
plainly by this discourse. Betwixt a Priest and sacrifice is a necessary
relation by which one infers the other: for as a father can not be
without a son, nor a master without a servant, Heb. ^.
so nether can a priest be without a sacrifice, because a Preests principal
office is to offer sacrifices to God. And as noe son noe father, noe
servant, noe Master, so noe sacrifice, noe Priest. And as a Priest can not
be without a sacrifice; so nether can an eternal Priest be without an
aeternall sacrifice. Wherefore if Christ never offered other sacrifice then
that of the cross, as our adversaries affirm, then is he not a perpetual
Priest, because he has noe sacrifice which either by him self or by his
ministers is perpetually offerred. To say that the sacrifice of the cross
still remains in effect, because by that we receue grace and redemption, and
from that our sacraments have their efficacy, is not sufficient. For the
effects of this sacrifice are noe sacrifice, and the sacrifice it self is not
perpetual, because it was but once offered, and so that sacrifice is not
sufficient to make Christ an aeternall Priest Much less can it make Christ a
Priest according to the order of Melchisedech, because there is noe
resemblau^ce betwixt their sacrifices. If our adversaries would grant, as
Catholics do, that Christ in his last supper offered him self as a sacrifice
under the form of bread and wine, I could easily see how Christ is an
aeternall Priest according to Melchisedechs order, because that sacrifice is
still offered in the mass by the hands of Christ's ministers, and altogether
resembles Melchisedechs sacrifice; because though it be not bread and wine,
as his was, yet has it the forms of bread and wine, and is unbloody as his
was. But rather then they will grant this (such is their hatred against the
Mass) they will deny, against flat scripture, that Melchisedechs bread and
wine was a sacrifice. I say against flat scripture, Genesis 14.
because in the book of Genesis Moses recounteth unto us how Melchisedech
brought forth bread and wine, because he was a Priest of God the highest,
which reason arguethe that that bringing for the of bread and wine, was an
offering of bread and wine in manner of a sacrifice; for if that bringing
forth was but a profane distribution of bread and wine amongst Abrahames
soldiers, what consequence had been in that saing: he brought forth bread
and wine because he was a Priest? as well might he have said because he
was a painter: and better and more to the purpose should he have said,
because he was a Baker, or an Inkeeper, or a good hovvsekeeper: wherefore
unless we will say that Moses spoke impertinently, we must affirm that his
bread and wine was a sacrifice. And if we will hold Christ to be an
aeternall Priest and that according to Melchisedechs order, we must
acknovvledge that Christ still offerreth a sacrifice in the Church, and that,
under the forms of bread and wine. Wherefore seeing that our adversaries will
acknovvledge noe other sacrifice then that of the cross, they deny Christ to
be an aeternall Priest, and in that they avouch that Christ never offered any
sacrifice under the forms of bread and wine, least they should be enforced to
admit the mass for a sacrifice, they deny him to be a Priest according to
the order of Melchisedech. For allthoughe he aggree with Melchisedech in that
as God, he had noe mother, and as man, he had noe father, as also in that he
was a King and Priest as he was, yet can he not be an aeternall Priest
without an aeternall sacrifice, nether according to Melchisedeches order
unless he have a sacrifice like unto his sacrifice; but both these points
our adversaries deny because they will not admit the mass, ergo
notvvithsta^ding their bragging that they give all to Christ, they rob him
and despoyle him of that gloriouse title of an aeternall Priest according unto
Melchisedeches order, Psalm. 109. Heb. 7.
which saint Paul and King David give unto him, and God him self avouches
and confirms with an oath.

The seventh chapter shows how they make him no Judge of the quick and the
dead.

NOthing more frequent in scripture nor more common in the mouths and hearts
of true Christians, then the vvo aduentes and co^minges of Christ. The first
Aduent he has already performed in all humility, The second he will
perform in all majesty and glory; the cause of the first, was mercy, of
the second, (...) ^.
justice; In the first he was as meek as a lamb, in the second as terrible as
a Lion; The first was to save sinners, the second to condemn them; In the
first he exhorted us to good, and dehorted us from evil, in the second he
will revvard the good, (...) ^.
and punish the evil. of the first aduent prophesied the Prophet Zachary
when he said Behold thy King shall come, unto thee, just, and a Savior,
Poor, and mounted on an ass. Of the second speaks Daniel when he says he
savv, c. 7.
that is forsavv one coming in clovvds liKe the son of man, to whom the
ancient of days gave honor, power and a Kingdom. Of the first speaks
Christ him self when he says God did not send his son to judge the world
but that the world might be saved by him; Io. 3.
Of the second speaks the Prophet and Evangelist saint Ihon when he bidds
us behold Christ coming in clovvdes, Apoc c. ^.
and tells us that every eye shall see him, even they who pricked him, and
that all the tribes of the earth shall bevvayle them selves upon him. Luc 21.
And of this aduent speaks Christ him self who describes his own coming
to Judgment in a terrible form and says that then they shall see the son
of man coming in a clovvd with great power ad majesty. For want of
vvitte to distinguish these tvvoe aduentes, and to apply them to the same
person at diverse times, some imagined that tvvoe diverse persons were to come,
the one called the son of Joseph who they say shall be slain in the battle
of Gog and magog; the other called the son of David, who shall revive again
(as they say) the son of Joseph and shall redeem Israel, Ex Pet. Gal. l. 4.
c. 1. de arcanu fid. Cathol.
and restore the Israelits unto their Kingdom again. Others having their eyes
dasled with the sple^dour of the second aduent, can not see the first vvch is
base and humble, and therefore say (vvch is the common voice of the Jews)
that the Messiah shall come like a temporal King in glory and majesty, and
by force of arms shall restore the Jews to their former glory; and because
they have not as yet seen such a Messiah, they say that he is not yet come,
but still is to be expected. But by the scripturs alleged it is manifest that
one and the self same Christ Jesus shall come, first to save the world and
after to judge the same. Wherefore saint Peter says that Christ commanded
him and his fellovv Apostles to Preach to the People and to bear vvitness that
he it is (to wit who before came to redeem us) who is constituted by God the
Judge of the living and the dead. Act. 10.
Io. 5.
And Christ him self says that God the father Judges none (that is in a
visible manner) but has given all Judgment to his Son. And least that any
should imagine that Christ only as God is judge but not as manne, he adds,
that God the father has given him power to Judge us because he is the son
of man. And saint Paul says that God has appointed a day in which he
will Judge the world by a man whom he has raised from death to life. Act.
1^.
So that the same Christ Jesus; who came first in humble manner to call us by
his grace and to receue us to his mercy, shall come again in glory, to give
us our final sentence. And God the father, and God the holy ghost shall Judge
us as well as God the son, yet he only as man and as an under Judge shall
judge us in a visible manner, and in this sense God the father shall not judge.
This Judge shall give sentence upon all men, 2. Cor. ^.
because as saint Paul says we must all appear before the tribunal and
Iudgement-seate of Christ. This Judge in this Judgment shall exercise the
three principal acts of a Judge, to wit discussion, remuneration, and
condemnation. He shall discuss and examine the cause of every one, and every
circumstaunce of the same, and therefore by the Prophet Joel he says that he
will dispute with us. Joel. ^.
A sore disputation, where the Creator disputes and the creature answers,
vvher God that is offended will be the judge and witness, vvher the judge is of
such insight that he sees farther into the guilties cause, then he him self,
and is so vvatchfull that noe excusing cloking, or hiding, can deceive him, so
just, that noe bribes can corrupt him, so severe, that noe tears at that day
can move him, so resolute in his sentence, that noe repreeue nor appellatio^
ca^ be admitted. This discussion and examination shall be done in a trise,
because it is nothing but a revelation and manifestation unto our consciences,
what every one has done, which shall be so evident, that our consciences
shall accuse and cry guilty, before the judge condemn us. This examination
and discussion the Judge shall use only with Christianes, because their cause
of their condemnation (they being Christians) is not so manifest, but not with
infidels, because in that they want faith, the cause of their condemnation is
evident, and so no discussion shall be necessary, wherefore saint Austine
says: Ad iudicium non veniunt, Sermon. 38. de Sanct. Io. ^.
nee pagani, nec heretici, nec ludei, quia de illis scriptum est, quinon
credit, iam iudicatus est. To Judgment do come nether paganes nor heretics
nor jews because of them it is written: he that believes not is all ready
judged; that is in respect of discussio^ of his cause he is all ready judged
and needs not in the general judgment any other discussion for the cause of
his exclusion from glory, because his infidelity is a cause most evident: yet
(as some divines affirm) for their other sins and for the diversity of
their pains, their cause also shall be discussed, not that god Knovveth it not
without discussion, but because he will make it Known unto the world. The
second office of a judge which christ shall exercise, is called the sentence
of remuneration, which after the discussion of their causes and approbation of
their merits, Mat. 25.
he shall pronounce for the elect in those most confortable words: Venite
benedicti patris mei percipite regnum etc. come you blessed of my father take
possession of the Kingdom which was prepared for you from the beginning of
the world. The third office and action of a judge which Christ shall
exercise, is the sentence of condemnation which after examination of their
crimes, God shall pronounce against wicked Christians and faythless infidels
also, because he that believes not shall be condemned. Mar. 16.
And this sentence shall be pronounced by the mouth of Christ, and with an
audible voice, in those terrible words also which the Evangelist has set
down Ite maledicti in ignem aeternum, etc. Mat. 25.
Go you accursed into ever lasting fire which is praepared for the devil and
his angels. This is the honorable title and office of Christ, which the
ghospellers also confess in words and profess in their Creed, but in their
doctrine they deny, as I shall evidently demonstrate by their opinions and
words which take from Christ the three offices of a judge already alleged.
And first of all to begin with the last act and office which a Judge
exercises, ^. 2. Inst. c. 16.. 18.
to wit condemnation, Calvin says plainly that Christ is our Redeemer and is
not to mount up into his tribunal seat for the condemnation of a faithful
man. Add to this that place of scripture whosoever believes not is already
judged, Io. 3.
And thou shallt see that Calui^ leaves none for Christ to condemn at the
latter day. And truly herin Calvin speaks very conformably to his own
doctrine: See the four^he book and fifte chap.
for he is of opinion that Christ has so redeemed us that no law can bind
us, and no sin can be imputed unto us, vvch if it be so, ye title of a
redeemer and a Judge are repugnaunt, and so if Christ be our redeemer after
this manner, he can not be our Judge. For if our redemption imports a release
from all laws, and such a freedom from sin, that noe sin can be imputed
unto us, then certes Christ can not for any sin condemn us at the latter
day. Secondly they deny all merit, and affirm that all our actions are of them
selves mortal sins seem they never so good: Li^ 2. Inst c. 2.. 9 ^ 3. Inst.
c. ^.. 7. Luth. ^de captiu. Bab^e de bap. and in (...). ^. ad Gal
which is the opinion both of Luther and Calvin, and is commonly received of
all their scholars; by which doctrine they take away the sentence of
remuneration. For if our actions deserve nothing at God his hands, then
although he may frankely bestovv upon his elect what glory it pleases
him, yet can he not be said to remunerate and revvard their works; for vvher
is noe desert, there is noe revvard, and so though Christ may like a liberal
King bestovv glory on them, yet he can not like a Judge by sentence of
remuneration revvard them: and so Christ loses another part of his office.
They affirm also that all our sins are aequall and they scoff at that
distinction of mortal and venial sins, Luth. Calv. sup Mel. in locu tit. de
diserim pe^. mor and ve^.
and in this also Calvin speaks according to his grounds: for he says that
all our actions are vitiouse, because they proceed from a vitiouse nature
corrupted by original sin, whence it follovveth, that all our actions are
alike defiled, because they proceed from the same fountain of corruption.
Which doctrine if it go for true, then does Christ loose the third part of
his office which is is discussion of sins and causes. For where there is
noe distinction betvvixte the crimes and offenses, there can be noe difference
in punishment, and where noe difference is in punishment, the Judge must
pronounce the same sentence and give the same judgment, without all
discussion either of the offenses or the punishments. See the seventh book and
sixt^ chap.
They avouch also that we have noe liberty nor free will in our actions,
whence it follovveth (as I shall demonstrate in the seventh book follovving)
that in our actions is nether virtue nor vice, nether merit nor demerit, and
so Christ in his judgment can exercise none of all the three offices which
are before mentioned. For where is no virtue, nor merit, there can be no
sentence of remuneration and revvard, as is all ready proved, where is noe
vice there can be noe sentence of condemnation, and where is noe virtue nor
vice at all, there can be noe difference of works, either in virtue, or vice,
merit, or demerit, and where it is noe difference of causes, there can be noe
discussion, as is also all ready proved. And so Christ is noe Judge at all.
Epist. 46.
For as saint Austine says, If free will be not, how can God judge the
world? And if we have not free will, why are not brute beasts called to
judgment as well as we, seeing that nothing ca^ excuse their cruelties but
want of free will? See the fifthe book and first chap.
Lastly they are not afraid to auerre that God, and consequenly Christ, is
the author of all our sins, that Judas his treachery and David's adultery
were as much God his work, as saint Paul's conversion, yea Calvin says
that God urges us, eggeth us, and enforces us to sin: which doctrine if it
go for currante, Christ can not justly condemn any, because as Fulgentius
says: l. ad Mon^mum.
Deus non est author eius cuius est vltor: God is not the autour of that of
which he is the revenger, and punisher; and consequently can not justly
punish sinners, if he be author of their sins. For with good reason might
the condemned parsons make exception against his sentence, and stand to it
that by noe reason nor justice God can condemn them for that, in which he
had as much part as they, and to which he urged them yea enforced them. And
so thou see (gentle reader) how these great bosters who brag that they
give all unto Christ, despoile him and rob him of his honorable title of of
Judge of the quick and the dead, which they profess in their creed, but deny
in their doctrine.

The eight Chapter declares how to noe small injury of Christ, they make
every Christian, and faithful man, as good, and as holy, as he him self is.

LVther, Calvin, and all the pack of their adhaerents, as in the seventh book
shall be related, and in part, in the second and third Chapter of this third
book is all ready declared, are of opinion that we are justified and
sanctified by the selfsame justice where with Christ him self is just,
which is inherent in him, and imputed to us, and apprehended by us with the
reaching hand of faith, and so made our own. They are afraid forsooth to
grant inhaerent justice, least they should give us occasion to glory in our
own sanctity, and so to fall into Pelagianisme, which affirms that
Christ's grace is not necessary. But vvhilest they fear where they needed
not, they fear not where they should, but run boldly, and desperately into
an absurd blasphemy. Ex Aug har. ^^. ep. 9^. 20^ (...) l de not. and great. c.
10. and 11.
For Pelagius is not condemned for auouching inherent grace, but for denying
that Christ's grace was necessary, either to the observing of the law, or to
the meriting of eternal glory, or to the ouercoming of tentations, or
avoiding of sin: and for affirming that man by his own free will without
grace might do all these things. Wherefore to grant inherent grace by which
we are justified and sanctified, has no resemblaunce with Pelagianisme;
nether does it give us occasion of pride; for though this grace be in our
souls, yet is it the guifte of God, and an effect of Christ's passion, and so
is his, by guifte and merit, because he gives it, and deserved it for us, and
it is ours only by do nation, and possession. But vvhilest they seek to anoid
Charibdis they fall into Sylla: for if we have noe create and inhaerent
justice, but are just only by Christ's justice imputed unto us, then does it
follovv, first, that so soon as we apprehend Christ's justice as our own,
we are at the very first dashe come to a full point in perfection, and so
perfect that we can proceed noe farther. because Christ's grace is so perfect
that it never increased, but rather as the first Adame was created in perfect
grow the and stature, so he the second Adame, was indevved from the first
moment of his conception, with perfect sanctity, and was even then at his
full pitch and spiritual grow the never increasing either in grace or
knowledge, but only in body, years, and experience. And so if we be just
by his grace imputed unto us, Conc. Vien. Clem ad n^strum de bereticis.
then are we so perfect that as the Beguines and Beguards said, we can be
noe perfecter, and so are all just a like and consequently shall all receue the
same glory as Iouiniane the heretic said; Hier. l. cont, illum.
and shall not differ in glory as stars do, in brightness, 1. Cor. 1^.
as saint Paul avouched. Secondly hence it follovveth that we are all as
just as Christ. For if we be just by his justice, then is his justice and
ours all one, and so we as just as he. They will say, that his justice in
him is inhaerent, to us only it is imputed, and is only so much ours as we
apprehend it by faith, and thersore we and he may be just by one and the
same justice, and yet not just alike. But this will not serve their turn:
for although this may make some difference in the manner of justification, yet
in justice and sanctity it self, we are as just as Christ: because we
are just by his justice vvch faith apprehends; and seeing that faith
apprehends all Christ's justice, all is imputed unto us, and so we are as
just as Christ, or at least reputed as just as he. Ser in Not. Virg.
Let no man then marvel at Martin Luther, for auouching once in the heat of
his sermon, that every Christian is as holy as our blessed lady, nether let him
think that Bucers mouth ran over, in cap 3. in Mat.
when he said that the vilest of the ministry or faithful is better then
S. Ihon Baptist; noe, he must not be scandalized at those bold speeches of
some, In explic. ar. de iustif.
who, as Tapper relates, were not afraid nor ashamed to boste that they
were as grateful to God as Christ him self is. For if we be just by
Christ's justice (which by faith on our part is wholy of us apprehended, and
wholy by God imputed unto us) we either are, or at least are reputed as
just as he, and consequently are as grateful and acceptable unto God as he.
O Luciferian pride, o sacrilege worthy revenge from heaven. For what is this
but to make them selves fellovvmates with Christ, and consequently to make
them selves godds, or him a creature? By Luthers and Caluins leave, the
creature now may compare with the creator, and the redeemed with the
Redeemer, and may boldly say not only as Lucifer did, that he will be like the
highest, but may add to his pride and aspire higher then he, affirming
boldly that he is already as just, as holy, and as good, as Christ, who is
the highest. And thus the reader may see how true it is that these men give
all to Christ, who give so much to them selves, that they will be as good as
he.

The ninthe chapter, shows how they make Christ ignoraunte, not knovving
what belonged to his office, and how thereby they bring the new testament,
and Christian religion in question.

AS the first man Adame, in the first moment of his life, was created no^ a
babe, infant, or vveakling, but a strong and lusty man, as if he had been at
forty or fifty years of age, (for then men at that age were most youthful
and lusty) so was he indevved with all science and knowledge belonging to
his state. For if God gave him from the beginning, a perfect stature and pitch,
and an able body fit for generation, because he was to be the common father,
by whom mankind should he propagated, noe doubt he gave him also a soul
furnished with all natural sciences because he was the first Doctor to
whom mankind was to go to school to learn of him as of a Master the
secrets of nature, the inventions of arts, the knowledge of God, and the
mysteries of faith; nether is this my collection only, it is the common opinion
of divines, which Ecclesiasticus confirms, c. 17.
who noe little extolleth the first Adames knowledge. If the first Adame was
so wise and so ritche in knowledge, what shall we say of the second Adames
knowledge, who was the high priest, and Doctor of the new law, and was
to reveal greater secrets and mysteries to his Church, then the first Adame
should have manifested unto his posterity? ^. Reg. 3.14. Ecclesiast. 1.
Solomon also is famous for his profound wisdom, in so much that holy
Scripture gives him this preeminence, to vvitte, that he was vviser then all
that went before him or came after him, and excelled all that ever were an
Jerusalem, and was more learned then all the Eastern Sages. In so much that
not only the Queen of Saba but others also from all parts of ye world flocked
unto him, to hear him discourse upon the naturs of beasts, trees, and
plants, even from the Cedar, to the Isope. If Solomon, King only of the
Jews, who built only a material Temple for God, was indevved with so rare
knowledge, what shall we think of the second Salomons vvisdome, Christ
Jesus, who was as a spiritual King to rule the vvholle world, and was to
build a Temple and Church for God to dvvell in, noe less then the Christian
world, which was and is far more gloriouse then that of Salomons
building, because the glory of the last Temple, Agg. 2.
was greater then that of the first? And behold says Christ pointing to him
self, more then Solomon here. Mat. 12.
Wherefore divines with one common consent affirm, that our Savior Christ
was enriched with the evident and clear vision of God, by vvch even as man
he savve God face to face, and all his divine attributes, and perfections.
Secondly they say he was endevved with all natural sciences, which are
perfections and ornaments of man's soul. Thirdly they say that he had a
supernatural and infused science, by which se savve clearly the mysteries of
Christian faith, which we beelevve, by which he forsavv all future
things even the day of judgment, and penetrated so the hearts of men, that he
knevv every man's cogitatio^. (...). 11.
And this the Prophet Esaie insinuates, when he says that the spirit of
vvisdome and understanding shall rest upon him, to vvch S. Paul subscribeth
when he calls Christ the treasure house of God his vvisdome. G^l. ^.
And this knowledge Christ obtained not by study and labor, but by infusion
even from the first moment of his conception; and therefore when he was but
twelve years old, and had never been trained up in School or University,
he disputed so learnedly with the Doctors, that they were all astonished at
his vvisdome. Lue. 8^ Io 7.
And noe marvel for he was the vvisdome of his father, and the word of
God, and his human nature was the book in which god his word was as it
were written by Incarnation with an abbreuiation, and so must needs be the
treasure house of God his vvisdome, and as it were the Academie of all
sciences. This is the opinion which Catholics have of their high Priest,
chief Doctor, and master, Christ Jesus. But the ghospellers and new
Christians of this age have nor so honorable an opinion of him, but rather
like proud Disciples they will correct this their Master, Conc. de not.
Domini Hom Dom. 1. post Epiph.
and accuse him of gross ignorance. Luther will stand to it that Christ
knevve not when the day of Judgment was to happen, yea that some times he
was ignoraunte of other matters. Zuinglius, Bucer and Beza are of opinion that
Christ profited in knowledge by little and little and Knevv not yester day,
Iren. l. c. 17. Amb l. 5. de fide c 7. libers in Breu c. 19.
what he knovves to day. Vvherin they imitate the Gnostickes, and Agnoits and
the author of the book of Christ's infancy, which records that Christ
went to Schole and learned his A. B. C. Calvin in his iarring Harmony upon
the Evangelists, Isid l 8 etym. c. 5.
Calu in Har. Luc. 2.
explicating those words of saint Luke: And the child increased and was
comforted in Spirit. says plainly, and repeates it twice or thrice, that
Christ profited not only in apparaunce, but verily and inwardly, in grace and
knowledge, and was ignoraunte also of many things eue^ as other men are,
saving that ignorance in men is a pain of sin and a part of original
sin, in Christ it was not so. Calu. in Har. Mat. 24.
And in the same book he says, that Christ as man knevv not the day of
Judgment, not only because he knevve it not to tell it to others, but also
because he could not inform him self of the same. The like song Calvin
sings in the same Harmony handling that place where Christ is said to have
prayed to his father to free him from the Chalice of his Passion, ^arne. in c.
26. Mat.
if it were possible; for there Calvin often repeats that those words issued
out of Christ's mouth ere he was aware, and that fear and grief did so
perturbate his mind that he knevve not what he said, and therefore corrected
him self by and by. O arroga^cie more then Luciferian. Ps^. 19. (...) 9.
Dares the pot accuse the potter of want of skill? or dares the creature
accuse the Creator of ignorance, and the Christian condemn Christ of
follye, error, and inconsideration. If he be worthy hell that shall say
(fool) to his brother, Mat. ^.
how many helles deserves Calvin that in effect with the same
contumeliouse words, myscalleth Christ him self. But say they, Christ him
self says that he knevv not the day of judgment, Mar. (...)
ergo he was ignoraunte of it. I grant he said so, but his meaning is to
be taken. And the ancient fathers rather, then they would say that Christ
was ignorant, they would seek to interpret those words so as they might
not seem to derogate unto him. Greg. l. 4. ep. (...).
Some therefore said that Christ says that he knovveth not that day,
because he was ignorant of it in his members, Amb. in 19. Luc. Naz orat. 4.
Theol.
others say that he meant only, that he knevv it not by humain knowledge but
yet denied not but that he knevv it by revelation, Hier. Chrystheoph in c. 24.
Mat.
others say that he said he Knevv it not, because it was committed to him in
such secret, that he might not reveal it, and so knevv it not, to reveal it
unto others: Hier in c. 24. Mat.
yea some rather then they would make Christ to be ignorant, avouched that
those words were foisted in by the Arrianes, to prove Christ to be but a
creature, and pure man. Luc. 2.
They object also that saint Luke says that Jesus increased in age, grace,
and vvisdome, before God, and men. But this argument is as easily ansvvered,
for some expound those words thus: Christ increased in age verilye, and
before God and men, but in grace and vvisdome only in outvvard apparaunce and
before men; others say that he increased in grace and wisdom, that is in
actions of grace and vvisdome, because as he came to riper years, so he made
more remonstraunce of his grace, and vvisdome, by meritoriouse operations, and
acts of vvisdome, which were in deed meritoriouse, gracious, and wise, and
were esteemed such before God and me^. But yet they have not done. Either
(says Calvin) Christ knevv that it was possible to escathe death, Call.
Harm. Mar. 14.
or he knevve not. If he Knevve, why doubts he? If he knevve not, then
was he ignoraunte. Thus the devil labors in his members and ministers, to
make the vvisdome of God ignoraunte. To this therefore we must also give an
answer: and that we shall as easily. For Christ knevv that it was
absolutely possible to avoid death and therefore said to his father: all
things are possible to thee: he knevv also that supposing his fathers will
and commandment, Mar. 14.
he was to dye: yet thus he spoke and thus he prayed, to show him self true
man, and to declare that according unto the flesh he feared death, yet
absolutely according to the will of his superior part, he was resolved to
die, as appears, by those words follovving: But not as I will but as thou
vvilt. As if he had said, as I am flesh and blood, and according to natural
affection I fear death as it is repugnaunt to nature, and in this respect I
would feign escape it, but yet because it is thy will (o father) and is
expedient, yea necessary for mankind, I am most vvilling to dye, and therefore
not my will (that is the desire which as I am flesh and blood is common to
me with other men) but thy will be done to which the will of my
superior and reasonable part is always conformable. Which tvvoe vvilles
in Christ are not contrary, because the one fears death as it is contrary to
nature and the sensual part; the other imbraceth death as it is the price of
man's redemption and the object of gods will; nether does the latter will
correct the former, but both are right in their kind. For as death is
against nature, it is to be feared, and as it is the obiecte of fortitude, and
the means of man's redemption, it is to be embraced, and the one shows
Christ to be a man, the other declares the force of grace vvherevvith the
weakness of human nature is corroborated. And so Christ knevv that his
fathers will was that he should suffer, and his will also in the reasonable
part was resolved, but yet to shevve him self a man, according to his
sensual part he said: if it be possible free me from his chalice. Now if
you desire a reason why Christ that under took our mortality, would none of
our ignorance; divines will give you one most evident. Because Christ (say
they) undertook only those imperfectio^s of our nature, vvch either were
necessary to declare him self a man, or to make satisfaction for our sins,
or to give us example; and because obedience, fasting, prayer, humility,
poverty, and such like served for paternes for us to imitate, he was
obedient, he fasted, prayed, humiliated him self, and lived poorly: and
because also honger, thirst, cold, heat, mortality, were necessary to
suffer and to satisfy for us, he was houngrye, thirsty, hot, cold, and
mortal; and lastly, because nothing more declared that he was a man then
fear of death, which manes nature abhors, he feared, and svvet for fear,
not water only, but also blood. But because sin was against the end of
redemption which he proposed to him self, he would none of that, yea he
could not because he was the some of God: and for as much as inordinate
motions of the flesh served nether for example, nor satisfaction, yea were
rather contrary, he also refused them; and because ignorance also is many
times joined with sin, either as the cause, or effect of sin (for
vvhoesoeuer sins, says the Philosopher is ignoraunte and inconsiderate)
yea because this was repugnaunt to the office of a Messiah who was to
instruct the vvholle world in heavenly doctrine, and was not necessary to
declare him self to be man, because fear and other imperfections served for
that purpose sufficiently, yea could not demo^strate him to be man because
angels and devils may be ignorant; he would take noe ignorance upon
him. But let the heretic blaspheme a while, and let him exceed the devil his
father in blasphemy; if Christ were ignoraunte, he was subject also to sin;
because he might have follovved his ignorance. For if the understanding may
err or be inconsiderate, the will which is directed by the understanding
may wander and banger and svverue from reasons rule and Lore, and consequently
also may sin; And so our reformed Christians will make a deformed Christ of
our Messiah, who being him self subject to sin (as he is if he can be
ignorant or in co^siderate) and consequently having need him self of a
redeemer, will yet take upon him to redeem others, and to save others, who
him self needs a Savior. See how basely these men conceive of Christ, who
though they say that they give all unto him, yet do make him an ignoraunte and
inconsiderate man; and yet they the^ selves will be so eagle-eyed that they
ca^ find out all the true meani^gs of Scripture with a private spirit, and
know as well as the beggar his dishe, their own justification and
predestination. But to come nearer to our purpose, and conclusion, if Christ
were ignorant and inconsiderate, then can the truth err, wisdom can be
deciued, and the way can go out of the way for he was the way, the
truth, and the life, and the vvisdome of his father. Io. 14.
If Christ can be ignoraunte, he may be deceived, if he may be deceived he
may deceive, because he may teach according to his error, if he may deceive,
paraduenture he has deceived, and then peradventure his preaching, his
gospel, and whatsoever he has taught of Christian religion, is error, and
deceipte; and so by little, and little, heresy leads to Atheism, and this
their blasphemouse doctrine, ruinethe Christianity. But fie rather upon these
blasphemers, Christ is the vvisdome of his father and so can not be deceived,
he is prima veritas the prime verity, and so can not deceive, and he is summum
bonum cheifest good, yea goodness it self, and so will not deceive, and our
ghospellers are heretics, that is deceived, and deceivers.

The tenth chapter shows how they make Christ a desperate man, who not
only feared the iudgement-seate of his father, but also despaired for the time,
of his own salvation.

THese Reformers have not yet in their opinion, deformed Christ sufficiently,
for not content to have made him an ignoraunte man, they avouch also that he
feared his fathers tribunal, and dispaired of his own salvation, and so they
will make him also a desperate man. Calvin in his Harmony of the ghospells
says that when Christ was in his agony in the garden, In c. 26 Mat. 37. in
fine.
it was not the fear of death only vvch made him sweat blood and water,
but says he: It was the terrible iudgement-seat of God, and the Judge armed
with incomprehensible vengeance which he proposed before his eyes, and on
the other part our sins, which he had taken upon him pressed him with
their weight: so that it was no meruail if this bottomless pit and
horrible confusion of damnation, did so feircely torment him with fear, and
anguish. And a little after: 3^.
death of it self could not so have tormented the soul of the son of God,
had it not been that he perceived that he had to do with the judgment of God.
And again he repeates this his blasphemy, least you should think that it
escaped him unadvisedly: Ibidem.
Vvhe^ce it follovveth that he feared a greater evil then death, which
provoked him to desire to be exempted from death: which was, that proposing
before his eyes the wrath of God, in so much that he presented him self
before his iudgement-seate being charged with the sins of the vvholle
world, it was necessary that he should be affrighted and afraid of the
profound bottomless-pitte of death. And with in some fevv lines after he
says, that this deadly sweat could not proceed but from an unaccustomed and
horrible fear. Yea says he, to think that this agony proceeded only from
fear of death, were to attribute unto Christ a pusillanimitie which we
would condemn in an ordinary man. Here Christian Reader, do not they ears
burn to hear blasphemy so often repeated? and will thy Christian zeal
permit such disgrace to be offered thy redeemer? what Ihon Calvin, did Christ
fear the tribunal seat of his father? then feared he the Judges sentence,
least it should be pronounced against him, then feared he damnation and doubted
whether he should be comprehended in the sentence of venite benedicti, come
ye blessed of my father, Mat. 25.
or Ite maledicti, go you cursed into fire everlasting; then was he in a
perplexity and doubt, whether he should be placed on the right hand with
the elect, or on the left hand with the reprobate; And so the son of God
who came to save others was not sure of his own salvation. Now therefore if
I will show my self a Christian, zealouse of Christ's honor, or careful of
mine own salvation, I must seek to free him from this fear of his fathers
sentence: for if he perish (as Calvin says he feared least he should perish
eternally) the^ must we all perish, because by him only we look for
salvation. The wise man says that at the later day the just shall stand in
great constancy, Sap. 5.
even then when the sentence shall be pronounced, much greater noe doubt shall be
the constancy of Christ Jesus the son of God, of whom all the Saints that
ever were, have borrowed their fortitude and courage. For he being the
natural son of God, knevv full well that his father nether would nor could
deny his sone, and was assured that he who was to sit in judgment and to
pronounce the sentence, could not be him self arraigned. And is it likely that
God who indevved Christ's human nature with all knowledge, and revealed to
him all secrets even hearts cogitations, and the day of dome, which the Angels
know not; would keep this only secret from him, and would not let him
know what should become of him self at the day of his death? The diumes
with one common consent are of opinion that Christ's soul from his conception,
received the bliss and glory which at the day of our particular judgment,
or at our delivery out of Purgatory our souls shall receue, and they say that
to a glorified soul is dew a glorified body, because the glory of the soul
naturally imparts it self unto the body; and that in Christ, it was noe
miracle that his body was so gloriouse in his transfiguration, but rather it
was a miracle that his glorious soul did not make his body also pertaker of
that glory from the beginning; but yet this miracle Christ used that he might
suffer honger, thirst, cold, and other miseries, which he could not have done
in a glorified body. How then was it possible that Christ should fear his
fathers tribunal, and terrible sentence, who was all ready in possession of
the glory of his soul, and was assured that his gloriouse soul should have at
the length, that is after his passion, a glorified body. But says Calvin:
Christ had taken upon him our sins, and therefore might very well fear to
appear before his fathers iudgement-seate. This is his divinity or rather
blasphemy. For if he mean that Christ has so undertaken our sins that he
verily made then his own, what more blasphemy could be utter? for although
Illiricus avouched that God the father so potently imputed our sins to
Christ that he made him a sinner, yet Christian tongues abhor to utter, and
Christian ^ares do burn to hear such blasphemous speeches. For saint Peter,
who says that Christ boar our sins, 1. Pet. ^.
adds with all, that he bare them in his body upon the vvood, to signify
that he took not the malice of our sins upon him (for then he should have
said that he bare our sins in his soul because the soul only is the
subject of sin) but that he suffered the pains dew unto our sins, when
he suffered the death of body; upon the cross. Yea as when one satisfies
for another offense, he takes not the offense upon him, but is content to
abide the punishment to set his friend at liberty, so Christ our Mediator and
Redeemer is said to have taken our sins upon him and to have satisfied for
them, because he has endured the pains which were dew unto them: but as
for our sins, he was not capable of the^, and therefore the same saint Peter
in the same place says that Christ never sinned and that guile or fraud was
never found in his mouth. Wherefore though Christ might fear death and the
torments of the cross, because those he was to suffer for us, yet had he no
caul to fear hell and damnation, because although that punishment was dew
unto our sins, yet was not Christ to suffer it, because his passion was
sufficient as in the next chapter shall be proved. And this I hope will suffice
a reasonable man. But Ihon Calvin still cauillethe and will not be satisfied
with reason. For says he (as is before related) Christ had been very
effeminate, and in cap. 22. Lucae.
if for fear of death only he had svvette blood and water, therefore it was
noe less then hell and damnation, whose fear cast him into such an
extraordinary sweat. See what care Calvin has least Christ should be
counted a covvarde; and yet, vvhilest to find out a sufficient cause of such a
fear, he says that he was a frayed of judgment; he makes him to fear
that which he was sure should never happen, which is the greatest folly in
the world, and argevveth the most effeminate, and covvardly heart that can
be. I answer therefore that the fear of death only, was sufficient to make
him sweat water and blood; for if as Aristotle says abundaunce of blood
and distemperature of body be sufficient to make me^ sometimes to sweat
blood, l. 2. hist animalium c. 19.
well may we conceive how fear of death in Christ (which must needs be
very great partly because he would have it so and for our sakes also, and
partly because he would not imparte any comfort or strength unto his
human nature) might cause such a distem perature in his body, that it being
already extenuate and emptied of other humors, might sweat blood and water:
nether proceeded this from any impote^cie of mind, for he that gives such
courage to his Saints, could have taken the same him self, but he would
permit death and such a death, to do all that such an obiecte could do, and he
would not give any aid unto the inferior part of his soul, where this
passion of fear afflicted him, that he might begin in the garden the
doleful tragedy of his passion, which he acted after wards upon the stage
of his cross. But Calvin has not yet cast all his poison; he says that
Christ not only feared judgment and damnation, but dispaired also of his
Salvation. These are his words which with the other before, I translate out
of his french Harmony: in c 27. Mat. 11.46.
But this see meth absurd that a voice of desperation should escape Christ.
The answer is easy: that although the flesh apprehended damnation yet
faith remained firm in his heart. Where you must note that Calvin having
discoursed upon those words my God my god why have thou for sake^ me: he
says, that this was the greatest agony that Christ ever suffered and the
reason says he was because he was conuented before his fathers tribunal as
culpable and as one that had God his enemy and as a man all ready condemned,
vvher with he was so scarred and affrighted that it had been enoughe to have
svvallovved up all other men an hundred times. So that complaining that he was
abandoned of his father he speaks not of faintness nor in ieste, for (says
he) the vehemency of the grief wrested out of him this complaint, for as he
was presented as a pledge for us, so would he sustain verily the Judgment
of God in our name. And because in these speeches he seemed to avouch that
Christ dispaired as one forlorn and forsaken of his father, he says that yet
his faith remained firm. Is it so Calvin and did Christ as he was man so
fear the iudgment-seate, that he dispaired? Then, either that despair was
deliberate, or sudden and indeliberate. If deliberate then certes did Christ
sin most danmably; for what greater sin is there, then to despair of Gods
mercy? For he that dispaireth either he thinks not God able to save him, or not
vvilling, in the one he does injury to gods omnipotency, in the other he
mispriceth his mercy. If indeliberate, then was Christ inconsiderate and
carried a way with Passion like a beast or vureasonable man, which although
Calvin sticks not to grant (for he says that the vehemency of his agony
wrested out of him fear and despair ere he was aware) yet do all the
fathers and divines in this point stand against him, affirming that never any
passion in Christ prevented reason and consideration. Yea they conceive of
Christ as of one that was so vigilante over his passions, that never any arose
without contideration, and commandment. For when he would show zeal he
commanded a passion of anger to arise, yet in that moderation, as it might
show him to be zealouse and yet nether testie nor furiouse. Likewise when it
pleased him to afflicte his heart with fear and sorrow, he commanded those
passions to arise in that vehemency, which was expedient to iuffer for us,
or to show him self a man, and yet with that moderation that they never
exceeded the golden mean of virtue; and he that could command the vvindes
and tempests to cease, could command his passions down again. And so when
in the garden he feared death, that fear was praeuented and commanded by
reason, and so was deliberate, and yet noe sin because it is natural to
fear death, and if with all the Superior part of the mind be resolute,
and will not for that fear tra^sgresse gods law or offend conscience, it
increases the merit, of martyrdom or suffraunce of death, because it
augmenteth the difficultye. Wherefore divines call Christ's passions,
propassions, because he always praeuented them, and commanded them to
arise, and therefore the Evangelist says not, that Christ was perturbed or
troubled withdraw his passions (as we are) but that he troubled him self. Augu.
tract. ^9. in 10.
In like manner when Christ cried on the crossemy God my God why have thou
forsaken me? that complainte proceeded from the sensual part of his soul
which feared death and the panges thereof, and was not a complaint
indeliberately wrested out by vehemency of greef, as Calvin avouches, but
was deliberate, and yet noe sin, because if the Superior patte be resolute,
it is noe sin though the inferior part fear death as contrary to nature.
Nether was that complainte a desperation of Salvation, for Christ (as before
is declared) was sure of that, but it was a complainte of the sensual part
which complained that it received noe succor from the divinity, but was
left as it were to it self, to suffer fear, greef, and pain for our
Redemption; and yet in that complaint (as I said) was no sin, because death
is a thing to be feared, and the flesh and sensual part naturally feareah
it; only then this fear is a sin, when it makes us offend our conscience,
or to transgress the law of God, which effect it could not have in Christ
because the Superior part of his soul was alvvayes resolved to dye for man's
redemption. Now vvheras Calvin says that Christ dispaired yet retained
faith, I can not see how those tvvoe things can stand together in his
opinion. For if faith be an assurance of present and future justice, yea of
Election and Salvation, See the seventh book, and third chap.
(as Calvin says it is) then if Christ dispayred of Salvation, he lost his
faith, because he lost that assurance, and so by Caluins doctrine, was an
infidelle. Nether will Caluins shifte be sufficient to hold these tvvoe (to
wit assurance and desperation together) for to say, as he sayethe, that this
desperation in Christ was indeliberate and so might stand with faith, is
to uphold one absurdity by another, for it is most absurd to ascribe unto
Christ any inconsiderate, or indeliberate actions: better were it for Calvin
to say as divines commonly say that there was noe faith in Christ, because
faith which is an obscure knowledge, can not stand with the clear vision
of God which Christ had, and vvch gave him a greater assurance of Salvation,
then faith can do. Thus thou see gentle reader how unlikely it is which
Calvin sayethe, that Christ doubted and dispaired of salvation who was the
son of God, blessed in soul from the first moment of his conception, and so
assured of the bliss and glory both of soul and body. But because Calvin
will have it so, let him still stand to it that Christ was arraigned as
guilty at his fathers tribunal, and that he so feared the Judges sentence
that he doubted yea dispaired of salvation. But what shall he gain by this
doctrine? he shall declare him self to be as he is, a sacrilegiouse companion,
who robs Christ of his glory, in uttering such iniuriouse and opprobriouse
speeches, and shall deserve to be hissed out of the Church and school of
Christ, for preaching that doctrine from which Christian ears abhor, and
shall demonstrate him self not to be a sincere Christian, who speaks so
contemptibly of Christ whom he professes to honor and to whom he says
(but how truly who sees not?) that he gives all homage, and glory.

The eleventh Chapter shows how Calvin brings Christ to Hell and the
torments thereof, and so makes him a companion of the damned.

THe sinner when he his once habituated in sin, makes noe scruple or sin,
and when he is plunged in the depthe of sin, he contemns, and is so far
from seeking means to get out of this filthy sink, that having once soyled
him self he cares not to vvallovve him self in filthe, and to add filthiness
to filthiness, and abomination to abomination, without stop, or stay, end,
or measure. So it happens to Ihon Calvin who having begone to blaspheme,
never leaves blaspheming, but adds blasphemy to blasphemy, and still
redoubleth his blasphemies. For not content to have despoiled Christ of many
noble titles, not thinking it a sufficient disgrace to make him an ignoraunte
and desperate man, he now opens his mouth to utter his greatest blasphemy,
and to spitte his greatest spite against him, associating him in punishment
with the deuilles, making him a member of the damned crevve, and an
inhabitaunte of hell it self, and from desperation brings him to hell and
damnation. l. 2. c. 16.. 10.
In his Institutions which T. N. translated into English and Richard Harison
imprinted, in the year of our Lord 1562. having occasion to treat of the
descension of Christ into Hell, he says that Christ is said to have
descended into hell, not that his soul locally descended (for Calvin
acknowledges noe local hell) but because in soul he felt the pains of
hell: for (says he) not only the body of Christ was given to be the price
of our redemption, but there was another greater and more excellent price
paid in this, that in his soul he suffered the terrible torments of a damned
and forsaken man. And a little after, he answers a question which he
supposes may be moved in this manner: Now if a man should ask of me
whether that Christ went down to hell when he prayed to escape that
death; ^ect. 12.
I answer that then was the beginning of it. And seeing that Calvin
acknowledges no other hell then the pains of hell, that is torments of mind
where with the damned are vexed, it follovveth that Christ in the garden
when he feared not only death as Calvin says, but his fathers tribunal
also, began his hell, and when he dispaired (as he says) on the cross, he
entered into the depthe of hell, and so those words: my God, Mat. 2^.
my God why have thou forsaken me? Were the words of a damned man. O
blasphemy, and that of one who will needs be counted a zealous, and a
reformed, and reforming Christian. Thou a Christian Calvin? thou a Jew and
more blasphemouse then a devil. Think thou that Christ redeemed us who
could not save him self? If he suffered hell he was damned, because none
suffer hell but by sentence of damnation, and seeing that out of hell there is
noe redemption, he his still damned and so noe redeemer. But to redouble ye
injury with a flovvte, Calvin will needs seem Christ's greatest friend in
prefering him to hell, for (says he) it had been but a small matter to have
suffered death of body, Sect. 12.
yea that death (says he) would only have redeemed our bodies, but not our
souls; and so to make Christ a complete redeemer of body and soul, he
brings him to hell. Secondly he says that this highly commends Christ's
mercy and charity. And thirdly he says, that this also shevved ye power of
Christ, who not only by death overcame death, but by suffering hell pains
overcame hell also, and by taking the pain which we deserved, acquitted us
of the same. Thus he shroudeth his impiety and blasphemy under the show of
piety and zeal of Christ's honnour, and when he blasphemethe most of all,
he will seem to honor Christ with the title of a complete redeemer, and
to commend his charity, and power. But to the first I answer that Christ by
his death and passion paid a sufficient price and ransom both for soul and
body, Ephesians 5.
and therefore saint Paul says that in Christ we have redemption in his
blood. Col 1.
And again he says that Christ has pacified all by the blood of the cross
both in heaven and earth. ^. Pet. 1.
To whom saint Peter subscribing, avoucheth that we are redeemed not with
gold nor Silver but with the preciouse blood of the immaculate la^be. And
never shall Ihon Calvin find either scripture, or father, that says that
Christ sufferd the pains of hell for our redemption, but rather he shall
find that they attribute our redemption to the passion and pa^ges of death of
Christ's body. And therefore if Calvin will stand to it that Christ's passion
was only able to ransom our bodies but not our souls, he detracteth from the
dignity of Christ's death, and seeing that the scriptures and fathers
acknovvledge noe other price to have been offered for us then Christ's death
and passion, if that were deficient, then according to Calvin, Christ is noe
complete Redeemer. But he presses us with an argument which he counts
insoluble, Supra.
for (says he) he that satisfies for another must pay the debte which he
owes, and sustain the pain, which he deserved, and therefore because we
deserved the pains of hell, and were to suffer them both in soul and body,
it was necessary that Christ in soul should suffer the pains of hell, else
had he bee^ but half a redeemer. But by this argument Christ should have
endured in hell perpetual torments, and so should never have redeemed us,
because he should him self have been a perpetual prisoner; for if Christ
must needs suffer the self same pain which we deserved, then must he
according to Caluins rule have endured a perpetual hell, because that was the
punishment prepared for us, and seeing that eternal punishment never comes to
an end, Christ should never have paid the ransom dew for sin, and so we
should never have been redeemed. Wherefore I say that Christ's passion, to the
sufferaunce of which both Christ's body and soul concurred (for the body by
it self alone can not suffer pain) was a sufficient ransom to redeem both
our souls and our bodies from hell and damnation, and therefore to that only
and not to the pains of hell the scriptures and fathers do attribute our
redemption. See the third book and third chap.
And this (as I have proved already) was a most sufficient price, and so
sufficient, that in that it was the passion and death of him that was God
and man, it was sufficient to have redeemed a thousand worlds, yea the
deuilles and damned also, nether must Calvin be so rigorous as to think that
noe satisfaction can be sufficient, unless it be of the same kind with the
debte which is to be paid, or the harm which is to be repaired; for if
one of Caluins brotherhood had cut of the arm of another brother, would not a
piece of money have made satisfaction for the mayme? or would Calvin have
exacted arm for arm? And if one had ovvght Calvin an hundred crowns would
not he have been content to have taken the worth or more then the worth in
corn, sheep, or such like, but needs must have crown for crown, as
though there were noe other law but lex talionis? or if satisfaction for
these debtes and losses may be made by other paymentes which are of aequall
valevve, then might Christ by sufferinge death which was of infinite price
and valevve, make a full satisfaction for the pains of hell; and yet never
feel the pains thereof. And in deed it was not convenient that Christ should
suffer the pains of hell. For first those pains are of their nature
perpetuaell and so if Christ had once permitted those torments to afflicte his
soul, he should never have been eased of the same. Secondly it had been
dishonorable unto Christ to be fellow mate with the damned: Act. (...)
and although saint Peter says that God raised him from death to life the
sorrovves of hell being dissolved, yet he means not thereby that Christ once
suffered ye sorrows of hell, but either that he loosed us from the sorrows of
hell, or that he acquitte him self from them, because he never was
tormented with them. Thirdly to have suffered these pains had been to noe
purpose, because that the pains of hell are not satisfactorie, and therefore
after that the damned have endured them many millio^s of years, they are never
the nearer an end of their misery. Now as concerning Christ's charity, that
was sufficiently declared in that he suffered death for us. ^o. 15.
For noe man has greater charity then to die for this freende, and especially
for his enemies. and this also extolleth Christ's power most highly, who by
death overcame death, yea sin also, and damnation. But my hand is weary
and my pen seems unwilling to yield any more ink to a longer discourse upon
these vnchristiane, yea diabolical blasphemies, and I doubt not but the
Readers ears do burn all ready to have hard so much of the^. Out of this
doctrine peradventure proceeded, that blasphemouse speech of one who (as
Surius reported) was not afraid to say that Christ was damned in hell: Anno
1^27.
And for this, as it is very probable, God permitted Ihon Calvin to dye so
desperately. Bolsee in vita Caluini. Geneb. li. 4. Cron.
For he that avouched Christ to have dispayred and to have suffered hel-lpaynes,
at the hour of his death him self dispayted, and seemed even then to begine
his hell, because the^ he cursed the day that ever he set pen to paper
(which we also may curse) and leaving to call upon Christ at his death
whom in his life he had so dishonored, he called upon the devil whose
instrument and servant he had been, and unto him rendered his miserable soul,
which had deserved as many helles; as were and are the souls which were,
and still are, by his doctrine deceived.

The tvvelueth chapter shows that the Ghospellers can abide nothing, which
is, or has been belonging unto Christ, which is the last sign that they
are noe sincere Christians.

IT is a common saying usual in every man's mouth, and yet not so common as
true: Love me love my dog: which not only the common voice allows, but
also experience and reason approves. for such is the nature of love and
friendship, that as it tra^sformeth one friend into another, and makes us to
accounte of our friend as another our self, so does it engender in us an
affection unto our freinde his freindes, kinsmen, alliance, servants, and
whatsoever belongs unto him, or is beloved of him. And the reason is
manifest: for if friendship be of that nature, that is makes one soul as it
were in tvvoe bodies, and causethe us to esteem of our friend as another our
self, then as we first love our selves, and then others that are linked unto
us, so we must love our friend as our self, and then his alliance for his
sake, and we must tender his life, his goods, and commodities as our own.
Wherefore we read that Damon and Pithias, did strive earnestly and co^tende
most lovingly who should die for the other. For as the soul by affection is
more where it loves then where it lives, so Damon thought him self to live
better in Pithias then in him self, and therefore to save him self in Pithias,
he desired to die in him self. And he that loved Pithias life as his own,
would have affected Pithias freindes and would for his sake have tendered his
goods as his own. we read that David and Ionathas were such loving
freindes, that their souls vvero glevved together; ^, Reg. ^^.
which love of David toward Ionathas could not be stayed in Ionathas his
person, but for his sake extended it self to his house and family. King
Pharao who extolled and loved higly Joseph the Patriarch, Exodus 45. and 47.
loved not him alone, but for his sake entertained Jacob his father, and all
his brethren. For this is the nature and law of frendshipp: love me love
mine. Wherefore we see by experience how when we love a friend sincerly,
we love for his sake his freindes also, and alliance, yea his servants,
yea his dog, yea his ringe, and image, and whatsoever has been dear to
him or appertaining unto him. And least that any should think that friendship
works this effect betvvixte me^ only, I will shevve how charity which
is the friendship which man has with God, has the same properties. For
charity makes us not only the servants of God but his friends also, and in a
golden chain so linketh us unto him, Io. 1^.
that we are as saint Paul says one spirit with him. In so much that
saint Paul said that now he lives not in him self but in Christ, 1. Cor.
6.
into whom by love he was transformed, Gal. 2.
esteeming of Christ as of another him self, in whom he thought he lived
better then in him self. And therefore he tendered Christ his honor above his
own commodity, and would rather die as in deed he did, then Christ should
sustain any dishonor, and rather then he would deny him or forsake him, he
denied him self and neglected his own life. The like effect this love has
ever wrought in the hearts of the Martyrs of the Church, who not only
desired to die for Christ, as Damon did for Pithias, but dyed in deed, and
suffered most exquisite torments, least he should sustain the least loss and
damage in his honor. And certes they that for love of Christ tendered his
honor more then their own lives, did noe doubt affect and reverence for his
sake his mother, his friends, his image, his cross, and what soever has
been belonging unto him; for love is of this nature that it extends it self
not only to our friend, but for his sake it te^dereth his honor, affects his
alliance and freindes, yea his servant; and for his sake esteems of his
image, ringe, and whatsoever has been apperteining unto him. Wherefore the
greatest lovers and freindes that ever Christ had, to vvitte the Martyrs who
dyed fot him, and the first Christians who first received his law, and
professed his name, did so love him that for his sake they respected with
reverence his cross, his image, his word, his sacraments, his mother, his
Apostles, his servants, yea their images and relics also. L^^. ^.
The Angel Gabriel for the honor he ovved unto his master Christ Jesus,
speaks unto our blessed lady with great reverence and respect, because she
was to be his mother, knovving that he who honors the son, must respect
the mother. Saint Ihon the Evangelist whom love made so bold as to repose him
self in Christ's bosom, had noe doubt a great respect unto his mother who
was commended unto him, and therefore some historiographers write that he
carried her with him unto his bishopri^ke of Ephesus. Saint Ignatius vvriting
to saint Ihon the Evangelist, says that he was desirouse to see our lady of
vvho^ Christ was borne. S. Dionisius Areopagita desired to see the body of
her, which gave the beginning of life to him who was the way the verity
and life it self. Let us now compare these ancient Christians with our nevve
reformers, and if to love our friends alliance, be an evident sign of love
toward him, and hatred of them, must needs argevv no good meaning to him, let
us gather by the affection which these me^ show toward Christ's freindes,
what zeal and affection they beat to his person. And to begin with the
mother of God, because she is next in dignity unto God, and as near as the
mother can be to the son, let us see how reverently they speak of this
worthy creature. Luther says that the monks for vvomens sakes, Postilla
not. Mari^.
have extolled the virgin to much, and placed her above the Angels: Post Dom
^. Quadr.
and he is angry with the woman in the gospel for calling the womb of
this virgin blessed: Ser not Ma. ria.
Yea says he every ministers yoke-fellovve may be as good as she, saving
that she cannot be the mother of God as she was. in Harm. Io. 2.
Calvin says that when she put Christ in mind of want of wine at the
mariadge, she kept not herself with in her bounds, and another time when
Christ said which is my mother and who are my brethern? Herm. Mat. 12.
He carped (says Calvin) at Mary's importunity, who preposterousely went
about to interrupte his preaching. Yea he also finds fault with Papists
for using those words of the devout woman in the Gospel blessed be the
womb which bare thee because (sayethe he) the vvoma^ was checked for so
saying. Harm ^ Lu^. ^^.
Oecolampadius condemns her of ambition when she told her son at the
mariadge, that wine was vva^ting. in Io 2. Antid c. ^. Luc.
Brentius says that when she with Christ's Kinsfolks, came to speak with
Christ, she shevved her self uncivil, and exceeded the bounds of public
honesty, and therefore by Christ was put to public shame. H^. 19. Lu^. L^^.
etiam post Dom. post Epiph.
The same Brentius says that when she had lost Christ she fell into these
cogitations: If this were the Messiah how happens it that he is disobedient
to his parents, and so closely steals a way from them? how is he the
Messiah and autour of foelicitie, Hom. 17. in Lu^.
by whom as yet we never had good fortune? And when (says he) this virgin
and the disciples savv that Christ was condemned to so shameful a death,
then were they scandalized, and then appeared their vain cogitations and
impiouse hearts. ^pud Ganis. l. 3. c. 12.
Ioannes Agricola suspects her maydenly honesty and makes the Angel to speak
like a lascivious vvoer unto her and as one that went about to entise her:
thus he makes him to speak: all Hayle most gratiouse lady whose company all
men do desire. And think you (says he) what it is to see a trimne young man
all alone with amayd in a chamber close shut up, and using svveet words and
not obscurely insinuating by words and gesturs how much he desired. O
lascivious companion that could conceue so beastly of the company of an Angel,
who is chaste by nature, and of a virgin who was as free from lust by
grace, as an Angel by nature. If now the proverb be true as reason and
experience teaches it to be most true: love me love mine: then Judge gentle
reader by the respect vvch these men bear to Christ's mother, Calu li. ^^ Inst
c. 12.. 1 2. l. 2. c. 20.
what their reverence and affection is which they bear to her son. Besides
this it is a common opinion of theirs that noe honor or religious respect is
to be, given unto the mother of God, in Post not. Mariae and post Annunciat.
or the saints of heaven. And Luther seems much to envy at the honor which
is given to our lady, saing, (but with a lie) that papists make her a
goddess, and run more unto her then unto Christ, expecting more grace and
favor of her then of him. Melancthon says that it is plain that amongst
papists the blessed virgin is succeeded in Christ's place, Ap^l. conf.
and that all call upon her and repose confidence in her, as though Christ
were noe propitiatour, but only a Judge and a revenger. In which as he lies
lovvdly, so he plainly bevvrayeth the envy which he conceiueth against this
virgins honor. Harm. c. 2. ^^.
Calvin complayneth that we adorn this virgin with the spoils taken from
her son, and that we think her not honored enough unless she be made a
goddess. As for other saints they so revile them and that with such bitter
scoffs and flovvtes, that herin I admire the patience of the divine Majesty
which holds his reue^ging hand. Calvin rayles at all the saints both of
the old and new law: l. 1. Inst c. 14.. 11.
he calls Abraham a worshipper of Idols and exaggerateth diverse sins of
Sara and Rebecca, in cap. 32. Exo.
he accuse the Moses the mildest and meekest man that was in his time, l. 3.
Inst c 20.. 27. derefor. Ecclesia.
of arrogancy and pride. The Saints of the new law he calls longeared
creaturs who can hear so far of: he nick names them by contempt, deadmen,
shadows, visards, monsters, beasts* wherein he follovveth the stepps of his
father Vviclephe who called the Saints Scurras principis: ^^ Th. Wal. ^o. ^
tit. 12. c. 108.
the Princes Iesters. And one Quintine a libertine is so foul mouthed that
when he names saint Paul he calls him the broken vessel, on Call. cont.
libert. c. 9.
saint Ihon he terms the foolish younker, saint Matthew, the usurer,
saint Peter, the denyer. They take also from all Saints the honor which is
given them by intercession and suits made unto them. Erasmus to make the way
for them, Dial. peregrinationi^e
makes the blessed Virgin to say that she likes well of Luthers doctrine
which teaches that Saints are not to be prayed unto, for now (thus he makes
her speak) I may be quiet where as before all came to me as though my son
were still a babe. Ser uat. virg
Luther says that he esteems noe more of the virgins prayers then of
another Christian; l. cont. Wal.
yea he denies all invocation of Saints: so does Calvin also in many places
of his institutions. l. 1. ^. 14.. 12. l. 3. c. 20.. 20. Roding l cot. Schol*
Jesuit.
And one William Roding in a book or libel which he made against the
schools of Jesuits, (for their teaching and bringing up of youth especially
is disliked of heretics) bringes in the blessed virgin speaking in this
manner: Leave of this saluting me, and in saluting me to honor me, leave of
worshipping of Saints and those that are dead, we detest thy salutations and
prayers: where thou art, what thou do, or whether thou be a live or
dead, we know not, and we care not; so far are we from hearing thy
prayers. Call. l de ref. mag. cent 4. c. 6. col^ 36.
As for images and relics of Christ, his mother, and his saints, they
detest them: and therefore Luther wishes that all relikes were buried in the
earth: Ser. de Cruce.
yea their breaking and defacing of images, and their burning of relics,
argevveth their mind and opinion in these matters sufficiently. Ex Cocl l. 3.
hist. Hussit.
Vvherin they imitate Hierome of Prague who pulled down the Crucifix and
defiled and abused it, and yet retained Vviclephs picture crowned with a
diadem; for so these men think the best place of their house not good
enoughe for Luthers and Caluins pictures, and yet deface and defile the images
of Christ, his mother, and his Saints. But they say that this they do for
pure love and honor toward Christ, who should be highly iniuried, if any
but he should be honored, Deuteronomy 6. Mat. 4. 1. Tim. 1.
and they have a vvarrant for the same out of gods own word: Thou shall adore
thy lord god and him only thou shallt serve. And again: To God only honourand
glory. But yet because scripture can not be contrary to reason, and much less
to it self, they should have sought means to have expounded those words,
rather then to have fallen into these gross absurdities: for the same God who
commands to adore and serve him only, commands us to honor our parents
and to serve our masters. And reason teachethe us that if we honor and love
God we must respect his friends and those that he respects, for the proverb
must needs be true, Love me love mine, because it is grounded in reason and the
very nature of friendship. Wherefore I answer that God is aiealouse God, and
therefore will have suprem honor and affection given unto him self only,
because he only has supreme soueranitie, (which only the alleged places do
prove) but if it be lavvfull to make this argument; God only must have supreme
honor ergo saints must have none at all; It may also be as well inferred that
nether our parents, nor our Princes must be honored, or affected. Let
therefore the reformers call to mind, that to excellency and dignity honor
is dew, and therefore seeing that there are three kinds of excellencies, well
have the divines distinguished three kind of honors or worships. The first
excellency is increate and supreme, which is proper to God, and therefore to
him is dew supreme honor which is called Latria, and to give this honor to
any creature is idolatry. The second is called moral or civil excellency,
which consists in authority, moral virtue, and learning, or such like, and
to this is dew a civil honor which we give to Princes, and superiors and
morall-honest men, and learned men: for authority, virtue, and learning, are
to be respected. The third excellency is supernatural which consistethe in
grace sanctity, and glory, and to this is dew a religiouse honor: yet
because this excellency is infinitely inferior to gods excellency, we must
give unto it a religious, but yet a far inferior honor. And with this
honor our blessed lady, saint Ihon Baptiste, saint Peter, saint Paul, and
other Saints vvhilest they lived deserved to be respected, and sithence that
their sanctity is noe less in heaven then it was in earth, they are noe less
after death to be honored then they were living. And therefore as Civil
honor given to Princes, learned, and moral men, derogateth not to Gods honor
because it is inferior, so nether does this religiouse honor, because it is
inferior. But Calvin says that religious honor is only dew to God. This
he affirms but he can not prove it, and therefore I deny it, and will prove
the contrary. For religion is a virtue which gives to god supreme
vvorshippe, and to Saints, and holy things, inferior honor, and so
respects every one in his kind. To God this virtue gives a supreme honor
called Latria, to the Saints an inferior honor called Dulia to the blessed
virgin because she far excellethe the other Saints, it gives an honor
inferior to Latria but superior to Dulia, which divines call Hyperdulia.
And I would demand of Calvin, if Saint Ihon Baptiste were in earth,
whether he would honor him or not for his sanctity? If he say he
would, then I ask of him, what honor he would give him? not Supreme
honor: because that is dew to God, not Civil honor; because that is given
to moral virtue only, authority, and learning. What honor then shall saint
Ihon Baptiste have for his Sanctity? certainly either an inferior religious
honor called Dulia or none at all. And if Calvin would honor him in earth,
and religiously also for his sanctity; why fears he to give him that honor
in heaven, sithence that his soul (which is the proper subject of sanctity)
is noe less living there, then it was here, and is indevved with noe less
sanctity in heaven then is was in earth, and besides that, is also there
enriched with glory, which it had not here? Now if Calvin will say that
at least images and relics are not to be honored, because in them is none of
these three excellenties before mentioned: I will tell him that although none
of these excellencies be formally in images or relics, yet because these are
appertainning unto them who are honored, they may and must also be
something respected and reverenced (but with a far inferior respect) and
that for their sakes to whom they apperteined. For as the Prince and
Superior has only the civil excellency, and yet not he only, but for his
sake, his image, his chair of estate, his ringe, and after his death, his dead
body also is to be respected, but yet not with that honor where with his
own person is honored, so if God and his saints may be honored with
religious honor, then for God his sake, his image may be respected, and for
Christ's sake his name, his, word, his Sacraments, his cross, nails and
other things belonging unto him, and for the Saints sake, their images,
bodies, bones, clothes, and such like, may and must be religiously honored,
yet with an inferior honor. And the reason is first because in these things
also by a certain participation and representation, we behold in some sort
their excellency to whom they pertain, and therefore we respect them for
their sakes. Secondly the nature of friendship will have it so, that if we
honor and love any, we must respect for his sake all belonging unto him, even
unto his dog. But Calvin will say that greater would be the honor of
Christ, if we gave all honor to him, and none at all to his saints; which
he affirms and I with more reason do deny. For as then I honor and love
my Prince best when I so respect him, that I honor and love not him only,
but for his sake his alliance, his friends, his officers, his servants his
image, yea his ringe: so do I honor and love Christ most, when for his sake
I respect and honor his mother, his officers, the Apostles, his freindes, the
saints, yea his cross and image. And as Princes take it for a dis honor to
have their officers, servant, and images abused, and count it an honor to be
honored not only in them selves, but also in their adherentes; so no doubt
Christ accountes the honor done to Saints (because it is given them for his
sake and because they are his friends and servant) as given to him self, and
can not but conceive him self to be highly dishonored, when his Saints, yea
his mother, are reviled, and his Cross and Images are defaced and defiled.
Wherefore let not the reformers call us idolatours, Vvl at (...) tris (...).
least they bewray their ignorance. For idolatry is to give supreme honor
dew to God, unto his creaturs, as it is treason to give suprem civil honor
dew to the Prince, unto any of his subjects; but as it is noe treason nor
injury, but rather honor to the Prince, to honor his officers and servant
with an inferior honor for his sake, so is it noe idolatry but religion, to
honor the Saints of God with an inferior honor, for their Masters sake. And
if Saints may be honored, we may make intercession unto them, because it is
an honor to Princes retainers to have suits made unto them. And this may be
done also without dishonor to Christ, because to him we give what is
dew, to vvitte the title of a Redeemer, and chief advocate, mediator, and
intercessour, and we acknovvledge Saints as secondarie mediators and
intercessours, whom we desire for the credit which they have with Christ
greater then we have, to make intercession to him for our necessities. And so
we pray otherwise to Christ, otherwise to Saints, to him we pray as to
our supreme advocate, to them as to seco^darie mediators, who have noe access
to God but by him; to him we pray as unto him that bestows grace, health
and such there benefits on us, to them we pray not to bestow those
benefits, but to pray to him to bestow them on us. And if some times we
desire our Lady, and other Saints to send us health or to give us grace, our
meaning is noe other, then to desire them to procure of Christ these benefits
for us, by their prayer and intercession. But Saints says Calvin ca^ not
hear us so far of; I grant they can not naturally nor by corporal ears,
for as yet they have none at all, but yet I say that by revelation, God who
revealed many future things to his Prophets, reuealeth also unto Saints all
things which are belonginge unto them, amongst which are the prayers which
are made unto them; and I avouch with the divines and holy fathers, that as
they see God face to face, so in him they see and know even our cogitations,
prayers, and whatsoever is belonging unto them. Wherefore I may justly suspect
our Reformers sincerity to Christ, who can abide nether his mother, nor his
Saints, nor his cross, nor image, nor any thing belonging unto him: because
ye nature of friendship is such, that if they love and honor him they must love
and honor his friends and servant. Genesis 9.29. Number. 220 Ios 3. ^. Reg. 1^. ^.
Reg. 30
Here I could demonstrate out of scripture the honor dew to saints, because
scripture avouches that Abraham, Loath, Balaam, and Iosue worshipped Angels,
that Abdias honored Elias, and that the sons of the prophets reuere^tly
respected Elizeus; who now are much more worthy honor then they were in
this mortal life and may accept of it as it well now without prejudice to
Christ's honor, as then. Prayer to Saints I could prove out of Gods own
mouth, for when he said, Hi^^. (...)
that if Moses and Samuel should stand before him (to wit to make
intercession for the people) yet his soul would not be with that people, he
gives us leave to suppose that they may pray for the people that vision also
of Judas Machabeus in which he savve Onias and Hieremie, 2. Ma^^. (...).
then not living, yet praying for him and his army; does argue that Saints
pray for us, and consequently that we may pray unto them. Apoe. 5.
and this saint Ihon confirms by another vision in which he savve the
twenty four Seniours prostrated before the throne of God having every one
harpes and golden vialls full of odours, which are (says saint Ihon) the
prayers of Saints. Tob. 12.
Yea the Angel Raphael says that he offered up Tobias his prayers unto God:
and another Angel prays for the people as Zachary witnesses in the
beginning of his Prophecy, Zach. 1.
the like example of prayer to an Angel we read in Osee. Osce 12.
And why have we angels which are called our Gardians (as Christ him self
says we have) but to protect and pray for us? Mat. 1. See Genesis 48. Job 5
19. Exodus 32. Apoc. 8.
And seeing that the souls of the blessed, are immortal as Angels are, see God
face to face as they do, and are indevved with glory as they are, they also
can hear our prayers, 1. Reg. 7. Job vlt. Rom ^5. Ephesians. 6. 1. These. 3. 2.
These. 3. Col. 4. Heb. 13. Iac. 5.
as well as Angels, and so are to be prayed unto as well as they. We have
many examples also of the prayers of Saints in this life, and seeing that the
souls of dead Saints are living and have eyes and ears of soul to see our
necessities and to hear our petitions, why may we not pray to them and that
also without injury to Christ, Exodus 2^. Number. 22.
as well as to the living Saints? Now that their Images and Relics may be
worshipped, Cen. (...). Act 3.2. Reg 6. Heb. 9.
it is as manifest in the tvvoe Cherubins placed by the Arc, in the brazen
serpent, in the translation of Jacobs and Joseph's bones, and the reverent and
devout burial of saint Stephen. Yea the respect vvhhich was borne toward
the Arc, Manna, the Tables of the law, and Aarons rod, which were
religiously Kept in the Arc argues no less. But the a fore said reason
grounded in the nature of friendship which saves love me and love mine, honor
me and honor mine even to my servant and image, and the absurdity which
follovveth contempt of Saints, Images, and Relics, though we lay aside
Scriptures, fathers, tradition, history, and all monumentes, is an argument
sufficient for the proof of the worship, and respect which is dew unto
them. And to make it more manifest, I will propose an example, which shall
lay open unto the vevv of any reasonable man, the absurdity which follovveth
contempt of these things and the traiterouse meaning unto Christ, which it
implies. Put the case that some one in Ingland of his Majesty's subjects
should profess great loyalty, love, and honor unto him, yet could not abide
to hear a good word of his gloriouse mother, yea would revile her, and
miscall her, but under this pretense that his Majesty is now to have all the
honor, and that noe honor can be given to the mother, but so much is taken
from the son. Suppose he should pass by his lord chauncelour, and
Treasurer, without mouinge capp, and appear before his honorable counsel
without bowing of body, or bending of knee, and being demanded whether his
capp wet not nailed to his head, or whether his knee vvanted not a iointe, he
should answer them, that his cappe is nailed to all but his Majesty, and his
knee is stiff to all but his own good self: Suppose also he should despise
his favorites, and hate them as much as he affects them, protesting that he
only loves his Majesty, to vvho^ he gives so much of his affection, that he
has none left for his friends or vvelvvillers. Suppose that when he enteteth
into the chamber of presence he should make no more reverence to his Chair,
the^ to an alehovvse benche; Suppose that whensoever he meets with his
Graces picture, he should deface and defile it, and should cast into the fire
what soever he finds that has been used by him, and all under this
pretense that he gives all respect unto his own person, and will not give
any at all to any thing else, be it never so near, or so dear unto him,
least he should seem to part stakes, and not to give all honor and affection
to his Highness: Suppose also that he should stopp all suits which are made
unto his Chauncelour, Treasurer, Counsailours, and other offices, avouching
that such suitors are traitors to his Majesty, who in that they go not to
him immediately, do seem not to put that confidence in him, which his
goodness requires, but rather do imagine that either he is not able of him
self, or else not so vvilling, as able: would you take this man to be a
loyal subject? or would you not, (not with standing all these his goodly
pretenses and solemn protestatious) suspecte his sincerity? and might you not
justly fear, least after contempt of all that are belonging unto his
Majesty, he would lay violent hands upon his own person? Truly I doubt not
but that such a one would quickly be arested, and apprehended for a traitor.
The like case is betvvixte Christ Jesus, and these new reformers, and
zelatours. They profess all honor, duty, and affection to Christ, but they
revile his mother, and will have no honor given unto her, least that in
honoring the mother they should dishonor the son. They bear noe respect
unto Christ's cheifest officers the Apostles, to whom he committed his Church
at his departure. They favor not at all the friends and fauorits of Christ,
the saints, and angels; and this they say they do for fear least they
should incur Christ's disfavor, in favoring them whom he him self did
favor. When they meet with the image of Christ or of his mother, or
friends, they deface and defile it; When they see the cross of Christ they
swell at ye very sight of it, as if they were possessed, and can noe more
abide it, then can the devil, who because he hates Christ can not brook
his cross. If they should hit upon any bone of Christ's friends, they would
spurn at it, and if any relic of Christ, or his mother, or his Apostles,
and other saints, should be in their way, if a dunghill were not nere hand,
they would cast it into the fire; All suits and requests, which are made to
the Mother of God, or any saint, officer, or friend of Christ, they forbid
and condemn as iniuriouse to Christ, as though (say they) Christ were not
able or vvilling enough of him self, but that the way must be made by
mediators and intercessours. These are their goodly pretenses, but what little
sign of true meaning toward Christ thereby is shevved, the law of friendship
shall determine, which tells us, that it we love our freinde we must love
his alliance, friends, and all appertaining unto him even unto his dog. And
if in the other case of that bragging subject who prete^ds great honor to
his Majesty, sentence would be pronounced against him as against a traitor,
because although he profess great love and honor toward him, yet he
declares the contrary in the contempt of his mother, friends, and officers, I
see not bovv any indifferent Judge can condemn him for a traitor to his
Majesty, unless he pronounce these men also traitors unto Christ his person,
because where the case is like, and the cause the same, and only the persons
different, if the sentence be not the same, the judge is partial, and an
accepter of persons.

THE FOVRTH BOOK
CONTAINS A General survey of their Religion and worship of God, in which
it is proved that they have either noe Religion at all, or a graceless religion.

The first Capter shows how Priests and religion ever went together, and
that the reformers have noe Priests, and consequently no religion.

THE old law being abrogated as able only to show the way, but not to give
force to walk in the same, to command, but not to give grace to obey; the
old Sacraments being antiquated and abolishep, as signs only which
represented grace, but could not effectuate it; the old Priests also by good
consequence were turned out of office, as able only to judge betvvixte
corporal lepresies, and to absolve from legal irregularities; because the
law, sacraments, and sacrifices, being abolished, there was noe use of the
Preests who were ordained only for one of these three offices, that is to
preach and interpret the law, to minister sacraments, or to offer sacrifice.
And in lieu of the old law, a new law by Christ being established, which
was written not with the fingers of an Angel as the old was, Exodus ^^.
but of the holy ghost, and not in stones as that was but in the hearts of
men; new sacraments also being instituted not only to signify grace but also
to sanctify, nevve Preests of necessity were to be appointed, to interpret
this law, and to minister these sacraments; because law religion, and
Priests, ever went together, Heb. 9.
and therefore as saint Paul says the one being altered the other was to
be changed. Three laws there are by which God has ruled his people, to
wit the law of nature, the law written and the law of grace; in all
which, See the first book and sint chapter.
as I have declared in the last chapter of the first book, were Priests,
and they also diverse, according to the diversity of laws. Wherefore if
Christ has planted a Church, and in it established a law and religion,
certainly he has also appointed a succession of Priests, because they ever
go together, and have such a connection, that the one can not stand without
the other. For if there be noe Preests to offer sacrifice, and to minister
sacraments, and to interpret the law, no show or face of religion can
remain, and as well may a Kingdom florishe without a Prince, or magistrate,
In the first book, and sixth chap.
as religion without Preests, and bishops. Wherefore, as I have proved before,
in the law of nature the first begotten of every family was a Preeste, and
in the law written, the tribe of Levy was deputed, and dedicated unto
Preesthod. Ios l. 2. cont. App.
In which tribe there were inferior Preests so many that David was feign to
divide them into twenty four ranks, which also contained a great number.
There were also Leuits who had inferior offices. And there were high
Priests which succeeded, one after another death, to the number of four
score and odd, ^os. li. 22. Aut. c. 2.
and the last high Preestvvas Finasius, who lived until the City of
Jerusalem with the Temple, was beseeged and ruined by Titus and Vespasian.
These Priests and Levites loosing their office with the abrogation of the old
law; Christ Jesus who gave us a nevve law, appointed a new Preesthood,
of which he him self was the first Priest, and the principal, and the only
high Priest, to whom no man succeeds in the same authority: and therefore
saint Paul puts a difference herin betvvixte the old and the nevve law,
that in the old law many high Priests who succeeded one another were
necessary because one dying, another was of necessity to succeed, least the
Church should, want an high Priest, but in the new law there is but one
high Preeste Christ Jesus, and he is sufficient, because though he dyed,
yet he rose again, and never gave over the office, but still offers
sacrifice, and still ministers sacraments, See the third book, and six^ chap.
by the hands of his vnder-Preestes. So that he only is the high Priest of the
new law, and none but he, because no man succeeds him in the same
authority.

But here the adversary vvil insulte, and say unto me that I have affirmed
that vvch he desired; for if Christ be the only high priest of the new
law, what need we any Popes, Bishops, and Preests? Thus he argues, but
vvth how little reason a blind man may see? For as it is no good argument, to
say that now in Ingland, and Scotland, and Ireland, can be but one King at
once, therefore there must be noe viceroyes, nor Deputies, nor Chauncelours,
nor Treasures, nor Dukes, nor Noble men, who are the Princes Officers, and
Princes in their kind, and vicegerentes also, some in more ample some in less
ample manner; so it is noe good argument to say that Christ is the only high
Priest of the nevve law, Ergo there are noe other Preelts but he, for he may
have many vicegerentes, who also are true Predsts in their Kind. And so the
Pope may be his supreme Vicare in earth, and other Bishops and Preests may be
inferior Vicars and Preests also, subordinate in jurisdiction unto the Pope.
Yea seeing that the high Priest Christ Jesus has vvithdravvne his visible
presence from the Church, and executes not visibly and immediately by him
self his preestly function, it was necessary that to his visible Church, he
should leave a visible succession of Preests who should rule and minister
under him and for him in his absence, not as his successors, but as his
vicegerents and ministers; for as noe Priest noe Church, so noe visible Priest
noe visible Church, Wherefore when Christ was to bid his Church fare well,
he instituted his Apostles Precsts, Mat 26.
giving them authority to consecrate, 10 20. 10.21.
and to offer sacrifie, and after his resurrection giving them power also to
absolve from sins, and appointing Peter as the high Priest and Vicare under
him self; Ies^. 22. Can. 2.
which to deny were not only to co^tradicte the Council of Trent (which
defines that in the place alleged Christ made the Apostles Preefts) but also
to contemn and condemn the vvholle School of ancient interpretours* yea the
vvholle Christian world, who have so interpreted the places alleged. This
Preestly function the Apostles in their time did exercisein preaching,
teaching, baptising, confirming, and offerring Sacrifice also, vvch is the
proper function of a Priest. Yea their Disciples did the same? Act. 1^.
for S. Luke says that they ministered unto our Lord, that is sacrificed as
the Greek word (...) signifies, and as Erasmus him self trassateth, yea as
ye manner of speech also imports. For if they had only preached or ministered
Sacraments, well might they have been said to have ministered to the People,
but not so properly, unto our lord, unless they had offered sacrifice which is
proper to him. Saint Paul says that Timothy was ordained bishop by
imposition of hands of the Presbiterie, 1. Tim. 4. (...). 2. Tim. (...). in c.
5^. Isa.
that is, a company of bishops, and he affirms that he him self imposed his
hands upon him; which imposition of hands is in greek called (...), and as
S. Hierome vvitnessethe signifiethe giving of holy orders. Tit. (...).
The same saint Paul vvriting unto Titus, says that he left him at Creta
that he should constitute and ordain Preests in every city. (...).
The same saint Paul with Barnabas, Act. 10.
ordained to the people Preests in every Church, by imposition of hands, as the
greek word (...) imports. Act. 20.
The same saint Paul, as saint Luke reports sent to Ephesus and called the
elders of the Church, that is Preests for to them he said Look to your
selves and unto your flock. 1. Tim (...).
And of Preests he speaks when he says: Preests which do rule well, are
worthy double honou; Iae^. 5.
And again: Against a Priest receive no accusation. Of Preests also speaks
Saint James when he says: If any be diseased among you let them call for
the Preests of the Church. And because our ghospellers see that by these
places it is manifest that in the Apostles times Preests were ordained, they
are enforced (for other wise they could not co^ceale this from the People) to
translate elders for Priests, (...). Presbiter. Prestre. Prete. Priest.
notvvithstanding that the greek word, yea the Latin, french and Italian,
sounds as much as Priest in Inglish. Of Bishops, Priests, and deacons we
have mention in the canons of the Apostles, Canon. Apo. Cone. N^ic.
and the council of Nice; And Ignatius bishop of Antioch and scholar of saint
Paul, in in diverse of his Epistles speaks of the same. Ignat. cp. ad Ephesians.
In his Epistles to the Ephesians this is his admonition: Endeavor my dearest
to be subject to the bishop, cp. ad Tral.
Preests and deacons, because he that obeys them, obeys Christ who
appointed them. And again in another Epistle he gives the reason why we
should obey them: For what (says he) is a bishop but one who is above all
principality, and is as much (as a man can be) an imitatour of Christ? What
is Preesthood but an holy company, counsaylours, and assistents to the bishop?
What are Deacons but imitatours of Angels who exhibit a pure and harmeless
ministry, as saint Stephen did to saint James, Timothy and Line unto Paul,
Anacletus and Clemens unto Peter? Ep. ad Antioch.
And in another place he reckeneth almost all ye inferior orders of the
Clergy: I salute Subdeacons, Lectors, Singers, Ianitours, Exorcistes: And so
forth. By which it is plain, that in the Church of Christ even from the
beginning, there was a Clergy of Bishops, Preests, and inferior ministers
and that the Church and they even from the beginning, went together, and by
later vvriters and histories it is most manifest, that preesthood was an order
which ever flourished in the Church of Christ, ruled also in it and vpholded
it. And truly religion, and preesthood, are so inseparately united, that the
very paganes as they practiced superstition and idolatry instead of religion,
so did they devise a kind of Clergy and order of Preests, to rule their
Church in spiritual matters, to offer their sacrifices, and to minister their
Sacraments, as in the pagane writers is mostmanifest to be seen. Now that
there is noe true Preesthood amongst the ghospellers, they them selves do
confess and I shall also prove it; but first let us take their own
confession. L. de abrog. Missa. l. ad Pragenses de Instit. ministris.
Luther says plainly that all are preests a like, and that Christians are not
ordained but borne Preests in baptism: Only (says he) this is the
difference, that to avoid confusion, the execution of preestly authority is
committed to some only. And this is the opinion of all the reformers even in
England, who as they acknovvledge noe proper and true sacrifices) but only
improper, such as prayer is, and a contrite heart; so they acknovvledge no^
other Preests, the^ those who offer prayer and thanksgiving, and such like
improper sacrifices unto God. And because all may offer such sacrifices, all
with them are preests a like. And so the minister is no more Priest then the
minstrell, only the minister by election or by the Princes lettre, has the
execution of this preestly function committed unto him. whence it follovveth
that there is noe Hierarchy by their opinion amongst them, nor distinction of
the state of Clergy and laity in order, dignity, and power, but only in
execution. Wherefore seeing that all are not true and proper Preests, there is no
true Preesthod amongst them. This they grant, and by their proof and
argument, by which they prove all to be Preests alike, they declare their
meaning. for their principal proof is taken out of saint Peter and saint
Ihon, (...). Pat. 2. Ap^s. (...);
who say that Christ has made us all a holy nation a Royal Preesthood and
preests to God his father; which words argue only that we are
metaphorical and improper Preests, who in that we are to offer unto God
upon the Altar of our soul, praise, thanksgiving, prayer, contrition, and
such like virtues, do in some forte resemble true Preests who offer true
sacrifices upon true altars: but as our souls are not true Altars, nor our
virtues true sacrifices, so are not all true priests. And therefore S. Peter as
he calls us Preests so he calls us Kings, living stones, and spiritual
houses: and therefore as we are not all proper and true Kings, as we are
not all true stones and houses, so are we not all true Preests. And seeing
that by this their opinion we are all Preests a like, there is noe true
pre^s^hood amongst them by their opinion, and so noe Churthe nor religion. For
all though there is in Christ's Church true presthood distinct from the state of
the laity, in caracter, order, consecration, and power, as I have already
proved, yet in their opinion there is none, and so amongst them by their own
confession, is noe religion. Because to uphold religion, not only improper
Preests (such as ever were all the faithful) are required, but also proper
Preests, such as differed in state from the rest of the multitude, and offered
true sacrifices, were ever in every law necessary, and true Priests and
true religion as yet ever went together. And truly as they teach so it is
amongst the^; for in their Church there ca^ be noe true preests nor
preesthood, as I will in a word or tvvoe demonstrate. And first of all if
they have any true priests amongst them, let them shevve us a succession of
them from the Apostles, else can they not prove them to be true preests,
Ephesians. 4.
for if Christ ordained his Apostles priests and in them began the goodly
order and rank of preests, which by succession he would alvvayes have to
co^tinevv in his Church for the upholding of religion in the same, then certes
they are no true preests who can not derive their pedigree fron the Apostles
as Catholic preests can do, but bastard and apish ministers, who carry the
name and coat of Preests, and arrogate unto them selves that office, but are
no more Preests in deed, then are their minstrells and cobblers. Secondly who
in gods name laid hands upon them? What Bishops ordained them? not Catholic
bishops I am sure, and they them selves will think it noe credit to retch
their pedigree from them: not their own bishops; because before Luther and
Calvin who were no bishops them selves, never any Superintendente of their
sect, was seen, felt or hard of: and before Luther and calvin, there could
be noe lutheranes nor Caluinists, much less Lutherane, and Caluinisticall
Superintendents. Wherefore in the beginning of their new religion they were
enforced to make Superintendentes and ministers of our Apostating Preests such
as Parker, Grindal, Sands, Horn, and many others were, who were thought
paste fit to make such superintendents and ministers on, without any other
moulding or knedding. And where they vvanted Apostataes who were consecrated
after the Catholic manner, they took lay men of their own, of which some
were base artificers, and without any other consecration or ordination then
the Princes or the superintendents letters, (who them selves were no bishops)
they made them ministers and Bit-sheeps with as fevv ceremonies, and less
solennitie, then they make their Aldermen yea constables and cryers of the
market. And from this stock proceeds all the rabble of their ministers who
are no more Preests then they were that made them. l. ^raes^. Vltra med.
The like ordination and institution of ministers Tertulian records to have
been practiced by the heretics of his time: Their ordinations (says he) are
light, rash, inconstaunte; one while they make ministers of Neophits, another
while of lay men and those who are tied to the world, another while of our
Apostataes, that they may bind them unto them by glory, whom they can not by
verity: Wherefore one Bishop they have to day, another to mor^vv, to day he
is made a Deacon who to morovve is Reader, to day he is a priest, who to
morovv is a layman, for to lay men they inioyne preestly functio^s. If then
they have noe Preests, they have none who has authority to minister
sacraments, to offer sacrifice, and to preach unto the people, and so can have
noe religion, because Preests and religion must ever go together. Thus saint
Hierom rejects and refuteth the sect of Luciferians: (...). Lucif.
Hilarious (says he) who was the head of the Luciferians, when being a
Deacon he departed from the Church, and he alone which his companions (as he
thinks) became the only company and Church of the world, can nether
consecrate the Euchariste, having nether Bishops, nor preests, nether can he
give baptism without the Euchariste (For then Baptism, ye Euchariste, and
Confirmation, were given together) and now he being dead, his sect and
Church is dead with him, because he being but a Deacon could ordanie noe
Clerk to succeed him, and that is noe Church which has noe priest. Thus he
argued against the Luciferians, and the same argument do I make against all the
new sects of this age: you have noe true preests by your own doctrine,
nether in deed can you have any, because all your ministers were ordained
without order, that is without consecration and imposition of Bishops hands,
and they have their authority from them, who being lay men could nether have
it them selves nor give it to others, and seeing that religion and preests of
necessity did ever go together, as is all ready proved, you having noe true
Preests can have noe true religion, and so your preachings, bishopping, and
supping, or communicating, and your administrations of other sacraments
(Baptism only excepted which in necessity lay men yea women may minister)
are noe more acts of religion then if the same were done by players upon
the stage, because you have noe more preestly authority then they have, and so
have noe true religio^amo^gest you, but only an apish imitation, and a
Stage Play of religion.

The second Chapter proves that religion can not stand without a true
sacrifice, and that the reformers have no true religion, because they have noe
Sacrifice.

MAN being composed of soul and body, is to serve his Creator vvth both, and
therefore must not only believe with heart, but must profess also his belief
with tou^gue, and must not only praise god in spirit, but must use his mouth
also as a tro^pet to sound out this praise; nether must he pray with soul
o^lie butvvith lip. pes also, and he ought not only to humble his mind in
prayer, but to bow and bend his knee and body also, and he is not only to
mind and mean well, but he must also do well, Mas. ^.
to glorify his father which is in heaven, and to edify his brother in
earth. Which thing is so deeply imprinted in the mynds of men, that there
were never any either religious or superstitious, whose inward devotion did
not break forth into some outvvarde signs or ceremonies, by which was
manifested outwardly and by some action or gesture of the body, what was in
vvardly conceived and concealed in the mind. And amongst all the external
vvorshipps and outvvard signs of inward devotion and religion, sacrifice was
ever counted the principal, which therefore as Saint Austine notes, l. 10.
cin. ^. 4.
was never offered but either unto God or to some creature, vvch was esteemed
of as God. And therefore all nations of what religion soever they were have
ever used to offer sacrifice, as though they thought that they gave not unto
their God his right honor and worship, unless they should offer unto him one
sacrifice or other. l. (...)
Pliny reports that the people of Sabea offered as sacrifices unto their
Gods all manner of spices but myrhe, vvher with that country abounds; others
have offered fruits and herbs of the earth, others brute beasts, others have
sacrificed children and men unto their Gods, vvherin though many superstitions
and abominable idolatries were committed, yet thereby appears that noesooner
the heart of man is possessed with religion, true, or false, but it thinks
of one sacrifice or other. aduers^^ Colotem.
In so much that Plutarke says that a man shall sooner hitte upon cities
without wales, houses, Kings, laws, coins, Schools, and Theaters, then
without Temples and Sacrifices? l. quod non patest suauiter viui secundu^ Epis.
and therefore (says he) Epicure, who in deed served noe other god the^ his
belly, and consequently had no other Church then his Kitching, noe other
Preests then his cooks, and no other sacrifices then his dishes, offered
notvvithstanding sacrifice unto the Gods, for feat of the multitude. And as
these because they had the light of nature offered sacrifices, but because they
vva^ted light of faith offered them to false Gods, and with much
superstition: so the true worshippers of God who were indevved with the
true light of faith offered sacrifice unto the true God. In the first book,
and last chap.
Adam as I have already proved was a priest and therefore did noe doubt offer
sacrifice to appease Gods wrath conceived against his fault, although the
Scripture makes no mention of it. Genesis 4.
Abel^^s the Scripture witnesses, being a P^^^st, was not content to bear a
heart full of reverence unto God, but to make manifest the inward religion of
his mind, he killed the first borne and fattest of his flock, and offered
them to God as a sacrifice, and God respected Abel and his oblatio^s. Noe also
so soon as ye Fludde was fallen, builded an Altar unto God and upon it he
sacrificed and offered holocausts and burnt-offerings of the clean beasts,
Genesis 8.17.
and fowls which he had preserved from the furiouse waves of that
universal deluge. See the first book, last chap.
The like did Abrahame, Melchisedech, Job and many other Patriarchs, and true
servant of God who lived under the law of nature, as is also in the place
alleged, proved and dedeclared. In the law written the use of offering
sacrifice was more frequent, and the sacrifices, and the ceremonies,
vvhervvith they were to be offered, were determined by Gods own mouth, as
appears by the book of Leuiticus and other parts of scripture. And for this
purpose especially God commanded Solomon to build that stately Temple and
would have noe sacrifice offered but there, which is the cause why the
jews since the destruction of their Temple, though thy exercise other acts
of their religion, yet in no place dare they offer sacrifie. Wherefore in the
new law also, if Christ has planted a Church, and in this Church,
religion, then has he also amongst the offices of religion, instituted a
sacrifice. And this in part the Ghospellers will not let to confess, Isa.
53.10.10. Ephesians. 5.
for they grant that Christ offered his own self upon the Altar of the
cross as a sacrifice unto his father, which was the complement of all the
old sacrifices, the verity of all those shadows, and the price of our
redemption. But yet because this sacrifice is not sufficient to uphold
religion and the worship of God, either they must show us some other
sacrifice, or else they can not maintain any true religion. For first I have
proved that religion can not stand without a sacrifice; wherefore seeing that
the sacrifice of the cross is paste, and never to be reiterated, another
sacrifice is necessary for the continuance of religion. Nether will it
suffice for an answer, to say that the effects and virtue of the sacrifice of
the Cross remain, for these effects are noe sacrifices, but only graces
which by virtue of the sacrifice of the cross are bestovved upon us. Much
less can it serve for a good answer to say that Christ still in heaven
presents unto his father the sacrifice of the cross; for that presentation
is not a true, nor a new oblation of a sacrifice, and if it were yet because
it is in heaven, it is not sufficient to uphold religion in earth, because a
visible Church and visible worship of God in earth, requires a visible
sacrifice in earth. L. 10. cont. Faust. c. 11.
Seco^ndly as S. Austine says never as yet did any society co^sorte together
in one religion but by practice and use of the same visible signs, and
Sacraments, and therefore seeing that sacrifice is the proper, and principal
sign of the homage, vvch we give to God (because it was never offered but to
God or at least to that creature which was esteemed as God) it is impossible
that this visible religion and worship should co^tinevve without a sacrifice
and visible sacrifice also, that to the oblatio^ of it the people may meet
together. And seeing that ye sacrifice of the cross is noe more visible, and is
not to be reiterated, nether is a visible sign at the vvch the people may
meet together to worship thereby almighty God uniformly and externally; that
is not sufficient to uphold religion in the Church of Christ. for as religion
began with visible sacrifices and changed with change of sacrifices
(which is the cause why the Prophets when they complain of the fall of
religion they complain also of the fall of Sacrifices) so does it co^tinevv
with sacrifices, 2. Par. 13. Dan ^. and 12
and can not stand without a Sacrifice. For as in Ingland where kneeling is
a proper worship dew unto the Prince, it is not sufficient by cappe or cursye
to show your duty, because these ceremonies are given to every noble man or
gentleman, yea to all those also who bear any sway in the common vvelthe,
and therefore to deny his majesty that homage, were to despoile him of his
honor: so to take a way sacrifice which hitherto has been offered unto
God, and never unto any but such as were esteemed gods, were to rob God of
his principal and proper worship, and consequently to ruin feligion; which
as it principally respects God as his proper worship, so can it not stand
with out the same. And why, I pray, you should we fear to grant a
sacrifice in the new Law? because (say they) Christ abrogated all sacrifices.
True, I grant he abrogated all the old sacrifices, because they were but
shadows, and figures of future things, and therefore the son Christ Jesus
rising in the horizonte of the new havv, and the light of the verities
appearinge, the dark figures, and obscure shadows, were to give place, but
yet this is no argument to prove that he has not instituted a new sacrifice
in the new law: for so he abrogated all the old Sacraments, as circumcision
which was a sacrament only and noe sacrifice, and yet as saint Austine
sayethe, l. 19. contra Faust. c. 15.
he has prescribed new Sacraments for the new law, Greater in virtue,
better for profit, easier in use, and fewer in number. They will say
peradventure that the old sacrifices being abrogated, it is sufficient now to
vvorshippe God in Spirit or at least by praise, thanksgiving, and such other
virtuous offices. But then I must tell them that because still we are composed
of soul and body, it is not sufficient that we honor God in spirit only,
and because the Church is a visible congregation it must have a visible
sacrifice nether are the external acts of virtue sufficient, because they (as
is proved) are noe true sacrifices but only metaphorical and improper, and
therefore as hitherto and in all laws, besides those improper sacrifices it
was necessary for the maintenance of religion to have some proper
sacrifices, such as Abel, Noe and others did offer, so in the new law
besides the metaphorical Sacrifices of prayer, thanksgiving, contrite hearts
and such like, we must have some proper sacrifice, because that and religion
ever goes together. And if we have no sacrifice it follovveth that the Jews
honored God more then we do, because they offered unto him sacrifice which
is the greatest honor that can be given, and therefore was all vvayes
reserved for God. A sacrifice then is necessary in the new law; and what
more likely to be this sacrifice then the Sacrifice of the mass? Melchisedech
and his sacrifice were figures of Christ and his sacrifice, as before is
proved; wherefore seeing that there is no likeness betvvixte Melchisedeches
sacrifice and the sacrifice of the cross, we must find some other in the
new law which does more resemble it; and what more can resemble it then
the Sacrifice of the Mass, which though it be not bread and wine, yet has
it the accidents and outvvard show of bread and wine. ^. 12.
Daniel prophesying of the hauock of religion which Anti-Christe shall make,
affirms that he shall take a way the daily sacrifice: And what Sacrifice I
pray you? not the sacrifice of the cross because that is past and which is
done can not be undone, not improper sacrifices of prayer contrite hearts
and such like, because he speaks of one sacrifice, they are many, and of a
proper and public sacrifice, they are improper and metaphorical. He speaks
therefore of some public sacrifice which for fear of persequution shall not
be offered any more in public manner but very secretly and not so commonly as
it was wont to be. This sacrifice is proved with Christ's preesthood in
the third book.
And what other sacrifice is there in the Church for Anti-Christe to take a
way, then that of the mass? Let the ghospellers name us it, if there be, or
ever were any other. Malachie the prophet or rather God by the mouth of his
prophet, ^
sayethe that he is weary of the Jews sacrtfices, that his will is not
amongst them, and that henceforth he will receive no guiftes that is noe
sacrifice which is offered by their hands, but (says he) From the rising
of the son to the setting of the same, my name shall be great amongst the
gentiles, and in every place shall be offered unto me a clean oblation. And
what oblation or sacrifice is that? Not the Jewish facrifice; because he
says this facrifice shall be offered among the gentiles, yea he protests
that he is weary of all Jewish sacrifices. Not the idolatricall sacrifices of
the gentiles, because he would never have called them clean sacrifices,
nether can they besaied truly to be offered unto him, but rather unto the
devil. Not improper sacrifices of prayer, thanks giving, and good works;
because he compares sacrifice with sacrifice; and so promising a new
sacrifice instead of the old, as hereiecteth proper sacrifices, so must he in
licu of them, provide another proper sacrifice, which in the dignity of a
sacrifice surpasses them all. Yea by this clean sacrifice according unto the
reformers opinion, it is impossible that he should mean prayer, thanksgiving,
or such like good works because the best of these sacrifices, in their
opinion, See the (...) books.
are so unclean that they are mortal sins, and abominable in the sight of
God. Nether can he mean the sacrifices which Job and others offered amongst
the gentiles, because he speaks of one sacrifice, those were many, and could
be noe cleaner then those of the jews, yea those were oftered but in fevv
places, and so can not be the facrifice which Malachie says shall be offered
in every place even from the East to the west. He speaks therefore of a
Sacrifice which in the new law shall be a most clean and pleasing
sacrifice, and which in all the parts of the Christian world shall be offered
unto God. And what such sacrifice can the reformers name, but the sacrifice of
the mass? What other oblation was ever counted a sacrifice in the Church?
what other sacrifice is offered every where, but the sacrifice of the mass,
which is a most clean sacrifice not only in respect of the out ward form,
which is unbloody, but also in respect of the most chaste, pure, and
virginal flesh and blood of Christ vvch it contains? Mat 26. Luc. 22. Mar
14. ^. Cor 11. (...).
And this is the Sacrifice which Christ offered at his last supper, when
taking bread and wine in to his hands he blessed them, and by blessing,
turning them into his sacred body and blood, he told his disciples that it was
his body and blood which he gauefor them. In which words he can mean noe
other thing then the sacrifice of his body and blood, which he offered under
the forms of bread and wine. For to gloss those words as Calvin does (as
though Christ had said: this is my body: that is, this is a figure of my
body which shall be given for you,) is very violent and repugnaunt to the
text, because the greek text uses the presentence which is given for you,
which is povvred out for you: (...).
And therefore vnderstandethe some thing which even then was given for them.
And seeing that Caluins bread and figure, could only be said to be given to
them, but not for them, that which then he gave for them, was his body and
blood, which under the form of bread and wine he offered for them. And seeing
that he bad his Apostles to do as he had done, that is to offer the same
sacrifice which he did, for so much the Latin word (facite) in that place
and with such circumstances imports; It must needs follow, that he
commanded the Apostles, and in them their successors, to offer Sacrifice, and
the same sacrifice vvch he offered for his Apostles at his last supper,
which is the sacrifice of the mass. This verity I could prove more largely
by other circumstances of this place, especially according to the greek, and I
could allege that place of saint Paul, where he compares table to table,?
1. Cor. 10.
that is altar to altar saying that we can not be pertakers of the table of
our lord and of the devil: that is we can not participate of that which is
offered on the altars of the gentiles, and of that also which is offered on the
Christians altar, and out of this place I could prove that in saint Paul's
time there was some thing offered on the Christians altars, which he
opposes to that which was offered on the paganes altars. Hier. ep ad
Marcellam. Aug. l 16 cit c. 22 lib. ^ cont ^^uersarium egis. c. 10 Damase l. 4.
de fice c. 14. Theoph in c 5 Heb* Arnob in Psalm. 109.
I could also press our adversaries and oppress then with the authority and
multitude of fathers who all acknovvledge that Christ at his last supper
offered a sacrifice of his own body and blood under the form of bread and
wine, and that thereby he was a priest according to the order of Melchisedech:
but this verity I have partly proved already in proving Christ to be an
aeternall Priest according to the order of Melchisedech, partly I shall
herafter prove when in the last book upon occasion I shall demonstrate the
real presence of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament of the Altar; and
as for ye fathers authority, it were but lost labor to allege it for any
proof of this verity, l. de abrog. Missa.
because Luther has already debarred us from such proofs, and will tell
us plai^ly that they are not to be credited in this matter, because they were
but me^. And Calvin also will tell me, l ^ Instit c. ^^.. 10.
that seeing that this supper is the supper of the lord, there is noe reason
why we should be moved with any authority of men or prescription of
years. Wherefore let them carry away the bucklers, let them be credited before
practice of the Church which as yet always offered sacrifice, before
reason which tells us that religion can not stand without a sacrifice,
Mat. ^6. Luc 22. Mar. 4. 1. Cor. 11.
before the plain text of scripture which in plain words affirms that
Christ gave his body and povvred out his bood at his last supper for his
disciples, which words can importe noe less then a sacrifice, before all
fathers also because they were but men and our reformers as it seems are
godds: let the^ gain the gole and get the victory in this controversy;
what shall they game thereby? truly only this: that amongst them is noe
religion. For if they have noe sacrifice, as they confess that they have not,
and in deed they have not; and if sacrifice, as being the principal office of
religion and proper unto God, as is proved, is so necessarily required, that
without it regilgio^ can in no wise be supported; the conclusion to vv^hich
my former discourse drives, must needs follow, to wit that the reformers
have noe religion, because noe sacrifice, noe reilgio^: And seeing that in the
Catholic and Romain Church only is found a sacrifice like to Melchisedechs,
and correspondent to that of which Daniel and Malachie have fortold as the
Sacrifice of the new law, and the same which Christ offered at his last
supper, and commanded to be offered by his Apostles and their successors, it
follovvethe that the Catholic Church is the true Church of Christ, and that
in it only is practiced true faith and true religion.

The third Chapter shows how the reformers amongst them have rejected all
the Sacraments, and so can have noe religion, because Sacraments and religion
ever go to together.

IT is a common opinion amongst the holy fathers and divines that since the
fall of Adam, Sacraments were alvvayes necessary, partly to declare man's
duty toward God, and partly for ma^s own instruction. For first man being
composed of soul and body, was to serve God not only with inward
affections, but also by outvvard and visible signs. Secondly because he was
to receive grace from Christ against the malady of sin into which he was
fallen, he was also to profess his faith in Christ from whom this grace
proceeds, and to acknovvledge it as desce^ding from his passion, by visible
signs and figures; such as Abels sacrifice, and Circumcision were in the law
of nature, and such as the Paschal lamb, and other sacraments were in the
law of Moses, and such as baptism, and the sacrament of the Altar are in
the law of grace. Thirdly because he had offended God by use of corporal
things, it was convenient that by corporal and sensible Sacraments, and by
the religious use of the same, he should restore God his honor which sin
had taken from him, and make him satisfaction by such things as he had done
him injury. For man's behalf also Sacraments since Adames sin were alvvayes
requisite. Genesis 3.
For first, because man's sin proceeded of pride, and a desire to be like
to God in knowledge of good and evil, it was convenient for man's humiliation
that he should be set to Schole, Prou. 6.
to learn not only of the Ante, diligence, and of other brute beasts, other
virtues, but also of these senseles creatures, such as Sacraments are, his
faith and religion. Wherefore as the Paschall lamb brought the Jews into a
grateful remembrance of their delivery and passage from Egipte, and
Circumcision did put the^ in mind of a spiritual Circumcision: Romans 6.
So Baptism sets before our eyes the burial and Resurrection of Christ.
For when the infant is dipped into the water we think of Christ's
burial, and when he is lifted up a new creature regenerated to a nevve
life, we call to mind the resurrection, by which Christ is risen to a new
and an immortal life. And in the Sacred Euchariste which by the forms of
bread represents the body of Christ, and by the accidents of wine, the
blood of Christ aparte, Mat. 26.
we commemorate the death and Passion of Christ. Secondly as man by sin
had preferred the creature before the Creator, so was it meet and convenient,
that he should as it were beg grace and seek his salvation by the means of
these sensibles signs and Sacraments, which are far inferior unto him in
nature. Lastly as by abuse of corporal creatures he had vvounded his soul by
sin, so was it expediente that by use of the same, his diseases and
spiritual sores should be recured: And so it was most requisite that Christ
in the new law should institute se^sible signs and Sacraments. ^i. 19.
cont. ^eust. c. 10.
And therefore saint Austine says that as yet never any society could join
in one religion and worship of God, but by the use of the same Sacraments. In
which point the reformers aggree with us, for they all avouch (Suenkfeldius
only excepted and some other Libertines) that Sacraments are necessary, but
in the number they vary not only from the Catholics but also from one another.
The Catholic Church has ever used seven sacraments, which are, Baptism,
Confirmation, the Sacramen-of the Altar, Penance, Order, Mariadge, and
Extreme unction. ^. p q. 65. a. ^.
Which number saint Thomas the divine proves by a very pregnaunte reason, or
rather similitude, which is betvvixte the corporal and spiritual life of
man. For in our corporal life, seven things are required to which are
correspo^dent seven sacraments in the spiritual life of man. In a corporal
life first is necessary generation, which gives the first being and essence:
and to this is answerable Baptism, which regenerateth us again unto a new
life and spiritual being of a Christian, by which we are new creatures,
borne of water and the Spirit, unto a new life. Io 1. l. de Bapt.
Wherefore Tertulian callethe Christians spiritual fishes, because though they
have their corporal life from earth by carnal generation, yet their
spiritual life and being, like fishes they receive from the water, by
spiritual regeneration. Secondly in a corporal life is necessary
augmentation by which the little infant (for all beginnings are little)
waxes, grows, and gains dew proportion, quantity and strengh, by
which he is able to exercise operations and actions belonging to corporal
life, as to eat, drink, talk, walk, labor, to defend him self, and to
assault his enemy; And to this is correspondent the Sacrament of Confirmation
which perfiteth us in the spiritual life received in Baptism (vvch is the
cause why some fathers say that before this Sacrament we are not perfect
Christians) and gives us force to defend this our spiritual life by
confessing our faith before the persequutor, which faith is the ground of
spiritual life. Thirdly because this corporal life of ours fades and
diminishethe continuaily (for every hour we lose some part of our
substance, partly by reason of the conflicte of the contrary elements which
consume us vvhilest in us they strive one against another, partly by reason of
the continual combat which is betvvixte natural heat and moisture, which
is as it were the tallovve of our light and life) we stand in need of
nurriture and nutrition, which restores that substance which is daily lost,
and so prolongeth our life: And to this in our spiritual life answers the
Sacrament of the Altar, Ioh 6.
which containing in it the body and blood of Christ (who calls him self
living bread and says that his flesh his truly meat and his blood truly
dri^ke) nourishethe the soul spiritually and conserueth our spiritual life
here, Io. 6.
and prepares us to an immortal life in heaven. Fourthly man having a mortal
life subject to sickness and diseases vvch partly come by disorder in diet,
partly by extrinsecall operation of the Stars, air, and weather, to which
our bodies are subject, partly do proceed from the complexion and
co^stitution of man's body which is composed of contraries; it was necessary
for preservation of corporal life that God should provide us of Physicians and
corporal Physic, which restores us to health after sickness: In like manner
our spiritual life which is grace, in this life being not so stable but that
it may be lost many times by mortal sin; and our health being not as yet
so confirmed, but that we may fall into as many diseases, as by our free
will we may commit sins, it was not only expedient but also necessary,
that Christ our spiritual Physician should provide us of Physic, and of a
general salve, and medicin, against all the sores and maladies of our soul.
And this is the Sacrament of Penance, which is a remedy against sin
committed after baptism, and which by the Preeste our spiritual Physician,
is to be applied unto us. For to him as being successor unto the Apostles,
Christ gave this power and authority when he said unto his Apostles:
Whose sins you forgive are for given. Io. 20.
Wherefore saint Chrysostom says that the Preests of ye new law have
power not only to give sentence whether we be infected with the leprie of
sin or not (which authority only the old Pre^sts of the old law had
concerning the corporal lepresie) but also to cure, l. ^. de sa^^rd.
cleanse, and purge this leprie. Fifthly when man is recured, often times there
remain the relics of his disease, which keep him lovv a great while, and
therefore he yet needs Physic nor so much healing as confirming, and
perfiting health, which consists in some confortatiues or restauratiues.
The like happens unto man after that by the Sacrament of penance he is
recured; for after that, he still has a kind of weakness and infirmity,
and evil habits and inclinations, yea little diseases also such as venial
sins are: And therefore against these Relics of his disease, Christ has
provided him the Sacrament of Extreme unction, which is given at the hour of
death to purge us clean from all relics of our diseases, to recure the
corporal infirmity if it be expedient for our salvation, and to prepare us
to a better health of the next life, vvhih is immortality. And these five
things are requisite in a corporal and spiritual life, for every man in
particular, but besides them, tvvoe things also are necessary for the
co^munitie. The first is conjunction of man and woman, without which mankind
can nether be propagated nor preserved, and to make this conjunction lavvfull,
matrimony was ever necessary. And to this in the new law which is a law
of grace, the Sacrament of matrimony answers very fittely, which before
Christ, was a civil contracte but noe Sacrament, as now it is. Ephesians. 5.
For now as saint Paul says, it is a great sacrament in that it signifies
the conjunction of Christ with his Church by Incarnation and grace, and
gives grace unto the married by which they may love one another as Christ
did his Church, and bear the burdens of vvedlocke more easily. The second
thing is constitution of Princes, governors, or magistrates to rule this
human society, which matrimonye has propagated. For if the confused
multitude were left to it self, and had not some head to govern it, it
would be like a shipp without a Pilot, or a body without a head, which by
mutual dissenssion and disorder would soon ruinate it self. To this is
answerable the sacrament of order by which Bishops and Preests are ordained
to minister sacraments, to offer sacrifice, to teach, preach, and instruct,
and by laws and censures to govern this multitude, and to direct it in
those things, which concern good life, spiritual peace, and religion here,
and life cuerlasting herafter. These seven Sacraments are those seven pillars,
which as the wise man says, Prou. 9.
vvisdome it self Christ Jesus has made to supporte the huge palace of his
Church. And the seven times sprinkling of the blood of the calfe, Leuit. 4.
prefigured these seven sacraments, in which the blood of Christ is as it
were seven times sprinkled, because it gives them their force, virtue, and
efficacy. ^. Reg. 5.
Yea Naamans seven vvashings were a figure of the same sacraments, in which
the soul of man is seven times vvashed, and so freed from the lepresie of
sin. But these are but congruences (says our adversary) let us see the
plain word of God for seven Sacraments else were are not to admit them. I
grant that these are not plain demonstrations, because as Divines say
matters of fact can not be demonstrated, but yet are they better arguments,
then they can bring for their lesser number of sacraments. I could allege
also fathers for every one of the Sacraments before named: but they will say
that fathers are men. And are not our adversaries also men? yes say they, but
we praeferre the word of God before men's traditions. But then I ask of them
what express word of God they have against these men? The fathers auouche
seven Sacraments, where read they in scripture that there are but tvvoe, or
three? We have noe such number expressly named (say they) but we gather by
good co^seque^ce out of scripture that there are but tvvoe or three. Do you
so? And did not the fathers out of scripture also deduce seven Sacraments? For
although they never say thar there are just seven, yet sometimes they name
one, sometimes tvvoe, sometimes more, and many of them amongst them have given
testimony for every one of the seven sacraments in particular, Scholastici in
4. did. 2.
and none deny seven. Yea for these 500 years all the divines have defended
seven sacraments, who also never mentioned this number as any new article of
belief, but accepting it from their forfathers, sought by argument to defend
it, and by scriptures also to confirm it. Con. Flor. in decreto. Trid. sess.
7. can. 1.
Yea the Councels of Florence and Trent have avouched the same number, and
thought them selves backed herin by authority of scripture. But they were all
deceued says our adversary. Were thy so? And how can you vvarraunte us
that you in denying seven sacraments are not deceived? If you say that you
deduce your tvvoe or three Sacraments out of Scripture, they will say that
they also out of Scripture deduce their seven? And so the question is not
whether that Scriptures or fathers are to be believed, but whether the
Church, Counsels and fathers, Who prove seven Sacraments out of scripture,
are to be credited in the exposition of Scripture, or rather your new
biblists who began to study but yester day, and never studied so many
days as they have done days and nights, who also nether for gravity nor
sanctity, nether for wit nor learning, were worthy to carry their books
after them. But least our adversary triu^phe that we can not prove our
sacraments out of scripture I will bring Scriptures for every one of the^.
But first I must aggree with them upon certain conditions. for first of all
they must not exact of me to pro ue that these seven are expressly called
by the name of Sacrament: for so they can not prove their two or three
sacraments, Ephesians. 5.
because matrimony only (which they deny to be a sacrament) is expressly
called a sacrament. Secondly they must not demand of me any place of
Scripture vvch says that there are seven Sacraments, because they can allege
noe such place which says that there are not seven, or that there are but
tvvoe or three. And the reason is because scripture uses to treat of many
things, but not always to number them; For Scripture relates Christ's
miracles, and yet numbers them not, and it settes down many articles of
faith, as the Trinity, Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and
many others, yet never sets down any certain number. They must be
content then that I deduce by as good consequence out of Scripture that there
are seven Sacraments, as they can gather their tvvoe or three Sacraments. And
this I can do, and if this I do, I shall refute all their opinions of vvch
some hold one, some tvvoe, some three, some four only, and all conspire in
the denial of seven. But before I do this, I must suppose which they will
grant, and cannot deny, unless they will deny all sacraments, that to prove
seven sacraments out of Scripture, shall be sufficient if I can find in
scripture either in express terms, or by good deductio^, an external rite,
commandment or Institution, and a promise of grace in every one of the seven
Sacraments aforementioned: for thus our adversaries prove their Sacraments, and
because they imagine that some of these conditions requisite to a sacrament, are
deficient in some of the seven, they deny them to be sacraments. ^.18.
Wherefore in the Apology of their confession these words are to be seen:
If we call Sacraments, rites, which have a commandment from God, and to
which is annexed a promise of grace, it is easy to judge which are properly
sacraments. And a little after by this rule they gather that Baptism, the
supper, and Penance are sacraments. To begin therefore with baptism; the
external rite we gather out of the third of saint Ihon, and the last of
saint Matthevve, which is water and washing, the commandment and
Institution is proved out of these words unless a man be regenerated of
water and the holy spirit: Io. 3.
The promise of grace which is annexed to this Sacrament, the last chapter of
saint Matthevve proposes in those words: he who believes and shall be
baptized, Mar. 16.
shall be saved. And to go on with the Sacrament of the Altar, the external
rite of this sacrament is bread and wine, or the forms of bread and wine:
The institution and commandment is contained in those words: Mat. 26.1. Cor.
15.
Dee this in commemorat^n of me. The promise of grace we gather out of
saint Ihon he who eats this bread shall live for ever. Io. ^.
In Confirmation also we find an external rite, which is imposition of
hands, by which the Apostles, and Apostles and Bishops only, used after
Baptism, to give the holy ghost: Act ^ 19. Dionis. l. (...). Hier^p. 3. c. 2*
Tert l. de res. ^arnis. and lib, de baptis Cip l^. ep. 12^ Aug. l 2. co^t. lit
Pre. ^. (...)
The promise of grace appearethe by the performaunce, because all they upon
whom the Apostles laid their hands, receued the holy ghost, and
consequently grace. The institution and commandment we may well presume to
have proceeded from Christ; because Apostles can not institute Sacraments,
nor cause any external ceremony to give the holy ghost infallibly, and they
would never have presumed such a thing, without a commandment from Christ
their master. Wherefore saint Austine speaking of this sacrament says in
plain terms, Supr^^
that the Sacrament of Chrisme, is to be numbered amongst the sacred signs,
even as Baptism is. The same conditions of a sacrament, are easily to be found
also in the sacrament of Confession: Io. ^^.
for Christ says unto his Apostles and in them to all their successors:
Whose sins you shall forgive, are forgiven them, and whose sins you shall
retain, are retained. In which words he gives authority to Preests as his
under Judges, to absolve from sins and to deteine sins, and because the
Priest can not absolve unless the penitente confess his sins, Amb l. 1. de
p^n ca 7. Aug l. 5 de Bapt c. 20.
and the penitent can not know that he is absolved, unless the Priest
pronounce some audible sentence, we gather that the external rite of this
sacrament is an audible absolution, and confession; the promise of grace is
found also in this Sacrament most evidently; because Christ promises that
whose sins the Priest forgiueth shall be forgiven, and seeing that sins can
not be forgiven without grace, if the priest can forgive sins, he can also
give grace by this sacrament. The institution and commandment is contained in
the same words because Priests have commission from Christ to absolve from
sins, and to hold and deteine our sins, and consequently sinners who must
reco^cile them selves to God must do it by confession to the Priest, else can
not he absolve, for noe judge can give sentence without knowledge of the
cause, and otherwise he can not be said to deteine our sins, for if he de
teine our sins we ca^ not be loosed but by his absolution, and seeing that
all sinners must seek to free the^ selves from the bands and bondage of
sin, they must come to the Priest, who only under God, binds, and
loses. In the Sacrament of Order we find also an external rite, to wit
impositio^ of hands, 1 Timothy 4, 2. Tim. 1.
which in Greek is called (...), which as saint Hierome says sig^^neth
ordination of Clerks. in c ^8. Isa.
The commandment and institution we gather thus: Supra.
saint Paul bids Timothee not to neglecte the grace which he had received by
imposition of hands, wherefore saint Paul Knevve that infallibly that
external rite gave grace: but it could not give grace if Christ had not
instituted it to that end, and S. Paul would not have praesumed to have used
it to that end if Christ had not commanded and instituted it, Aug l. ^. co^t.
ep. Parn c 13. l ^. de bap c. 1.
ergo this external rite was instituted and commanded. The promise of grace
we gatther by the performaunce, because saint Paul says that Timothy had
received grace by imposition of hands. Ephesians. 5.
That matrimony also is a Sacrament saint Paul will witness, who because
this seemed most unlike a sacrament or holy sign, callethe it a great
Sacrament, because it signifies the conjunction of Christ with his Church.
As if he had said; Matrimony to a worldly eye may seem to have little
sanctity or mystery in it, but I say that in this respect that it signifies
the Marriage of Christ with his Church, it is a sacrament and a great
sacrament. The external rite of this sacrament is the contracte which by
words or signs is made betvvixte man and wife, and therefore S. Chrysostom
and S. Hierome upon this place affirm that saint Paul called this
contracte, a great Sacrament: The Institution we have in Christ's own
words: Mat. 19.
what God has conioined let not man separate: The promise of grace thus we
gather: because Christ has made this sacrament indissoluble, and
consequently he must give grace by it tobeare the burden of perpetual
vvedlocke easily, else had ye law of matrimony pressed more heavily ye
necks of Christians the^ ye law of the Jews, because they in case of
fornication might leave their old wife and take a new, and so shake of the
burden. Secondly S. Paul says that this Sacrament signifies ye Marriage of
Christ with his Church, which Marriage was made not only by Incarnation but
also by grace, and therefore the Church is called Christ's loving spouse, ^.
G^r. 10.
and saint Paul bids men to love their vviues as Christ loved his Church;
wherefore unless we vvil say that matrimony is an idle sign, we must
say that it has a promise of grace annexed, by which man and wife may
love one another, and bear also more easily the heavy burden of Marriage.
Wherefore saint Austine says: in the marriages of Christians, l. de beno
coniug c 19 vide c^^am cap. 24.
the sanctity of the Sacrament is of more value then the frutefullues of the
womb. Last of all, that Extreme unction is also a Sacrament, it is plain by
the words of saint James: cap 5.
Is any sick amongst you? let him bring in the Preests of the Church and let
them pray upon him, anointing him with oil in the name of our Lord, and the
prayer of faith shall save the sick-man, and our lord shall alleuiate him, and
if he be in sins they shall be forgiven him. In which words who sees not
the external rite, to wit prayer, that is the form of words used in this
Sacrament, and the anointing with oil. The promise is alleuiation and
forgiueness of sins, which are never remitted without grace. The
institution and commandment is easily deduced: because an Apostle who may
promulgate and minister Sacraments, but not institute them, would never have
so bodly promised forgiveness of sins by an external rite and ceremony, had
he not been assured that Christ had instituted it to that effect. Wherefore
saint Bernard in the life of saint Malachias affirms that he anointed a
woman knovving that in this Sacrament sins are forgiven. Ber in vita Ma!
Inno entius ep 1. ad Decentium. c. ^.
And thus much for proof of seven Sacraments. Now let us see what
sacraments the reformers have. Luther very peremptorily avouches that he
must deny seven Sacraments and allow of three only for the time, l. de cap.
Bab.
he says for the time, because he was not sure how long he should remain
in that mind. And what are those three Sacraments which for a time he is
content to allow us; Baptism (says he) penance, and bread. Zuinglius
allovves also of three, but not ye same vvch his Master Luther admits, l.
de vera and falsa rel c. de inatr. l. 4. Inst. c. 19.. 31.
which are baptism, the supper, and matrimony. Calvin admits also three
Sacraments, but not the same which Zuinglius grauntethe, Baptism, the
Supper, and ordination. Mel. in locis.
Melancton is more liberal for he affordethe us four, to wit, Baptism, the
supper, penance, and order. The softer Lutheranes in their conuenticle at
lipsia, allowed of seven Sacraments, l. 20. hist. an. ^8.
for so Sledan the Historiographer, relates. Out of this diversity of
opinions I gather, first that they have amongst them denied allmoste all the
sacraments and so can have noe religion or a uery graceless religion, because
religion and sacraments ever went together. Secondly I gather that if any man
will forsake the Catholic Church and her belief of seven Sacraments, that
he has no moral nor probable assurance of any Sacraments, for seeing that
he has noe more reason to credit Luther when he said once that there was
but one sacrament, l. de cap. Ba^. initio.
another time that there were but tvvoe Sacraments, in fine.
then when he admitted three for the time, he is not to credit him at all. And
seeing that he ca^ allege noe more for him self the^ others (that is scripture
interpreted as he pleasethe;) and they noe more then he, noe man can have just
cause to believe any of them, and so if he leave the Catholic Church, he may
doubt of all the Sacraments. Lastly seeing that the reformers can not bring
express scripture for any of the Sacraments but Matrimony, which not with
standing almost all of them deny, and seeing that by deduction (as I have
declared) we may gather out of scripture as probably seven Sacraments, as
one, if the reformers leave the authority of the Church and fathers, and
trust only to their own vvittes in gathering by deduction, and consequence,
their Sacraments out of scripture; then as one distrusteth another deduction,
so may he distrust his own, and so they have noe certainty of any
sacraments at all, and consequently have noe probable assurance of their
religion, because sacrametes and religion go together; which Luther him self
will confess, l. de not. Eccl.
who affirms that consent in doctrine of the Sacraments, is a note of the
true Church and religion.

The fourth Chapter shows of what little importance they make the
Sacraments to be.

THe reformers as by the sormer chapter appears, are very sparing in their
Sacraments, some and the most of them not affording us above tvvoe or three;
but these also they seem to grant us with an evil will, because they so
detracte from their dignity, and attribute so little unto them, that they might
as well with Sue^kfeldius have denied these also; because as good never a
whit as never the better. For they deny with common voice that Sacraments
give grace or effectuate any iotte of sanctification in our souls. To what
purpose the^ serve they, or what necessity was there of them? Melancthon
says that they serve for badges to distinguis he us from Infidels; l. de loc
c. de signi^.
but for this effect we needed no sacraments at all, because the yellow capp
of the Jew in Rome, or some noble man's cognisaunce would have been more
fitting for this purpose. For seeing that Baptism according to Melancthons
opinion gives no caracter, after the child is vvashed in baptism, and the
water dried up, what sign remains I pray you to distinguish a Christian
from an infidel? And will not profession of our faith which is noe
sacrament, distinguishe us better? l de vera. and falsa rel c de sacramentis.
Zuinglius makes Sacraments no better then soldiers marks, by which they
are admitted and distinguished, but this is refuted by the same argument by
which we have rejected Melancthons badges. l. capt. Bab. c. de bap. c. vl.
Luther graunts a little more unto Sacraments; for he says that Sacraments
are external signs, ordained to no other purpose then to stir up faith
which only justifies, and therefore when he and his Lutheranes sometimes say
that sacraments do sanctify us, and that baptism does regenerate us, they
mean not as Catholics do that Sacraments immediately give us grace, but
only that that they stir up faith which sanctifies: wherefore sometimes they
call sacraments pictures which put us in mind of Christ and his passion.
But then it follovveth that they who have pictures of Christ or his passion,
or books of the same subject, stand in need of noe sacraments, because
these things are more apt to stir up faith then sacraments. Secondly
Baptism is to noe purpose in children, because it can not stir up their
faith at all, who have noe use of reason at all. This so presses Luther that
it had made him an Anabaptiste, had he not had a shifte in store which also is
a very poor one. l. cont. Cocle^^.
he says therefore that infantes at the time of baptism have use of reason,
and that they understand what baptism signifies, and so believe also in
Christ? And this he proves by the example of saint ^hon Baptist who
reioised and acknowledged Christ in his mothers womb; Luc. 1.
but by the same argument he might have proved that all asses can speak,
because Balaams Ass by miracle once spoke to the Prophet. Number. 22.
for as it was a priuiledg that saint Ihon had use of reason in his mothers
womb, so was it that Balaams Ass did speak, and therefore if this be a good
argument: Saint John had use of reason when he was an infant Ergo all
children have: this also is a good argument; Balaams Ass could speak ergo all
asses can speak. At least wise by this argument of Luther we May experience
in him, What an ass can speak, and is not ashamed to utter. And truly if
children at that age were as wise as Luther will make them, we must
condemn them of heinous sacriledg, Aug ep. 57.
who by their crying and by the resistaunce which such little onesca^ make,
show how vnvvillingly and with what little respect they receive this
sacrament. l 4. Inst c 14.. 1.5.14.
Calvin says that Sacraments are but Seals which outwardly sign the
grace which we receue by the promises of God, and therefore he says flatly
that Sacraments give noe grace,.. 23.22.
and that the Sacraments of the new law are noe better in this respect
then were the Sacraments of the old law. 1 Cor ^.
Yea he adds that as saint Paul said that Circumcision is nothing, so he
might have said, that baptism in this respect is nothing worth. And their
reasons why they vvil give no virtue unto Sacraments are tvvoe especially.
First say they if we grant that Sacraments give grace, then follovveth it
that we must put our trust in Sacraments, and seek for salvation else
where, then at the hands of Christ, which can not but derogate much from
the passion and person of Christ. But this reason seems to have little
reason. For as the sick patiente principally after God, puttes his trust in
his Physician, yet expects health also by the medicines which he
prescribes, and so puttes his trust in the Physician as in the principal
cause of his health, and in the medicines as in the isntrumental causes, and
yet does noe injury to the Physician, yea rather in allowing of his medicines
does him great honor: so may we put our hope and confidence principally in
Christ as our spiritual Physician, and yet hope also for health by the
means of his Sacraments as by his medicines and isntrumental causes of
spiritual health. Secondly they are of opinion as shall be herafter related and
refuted, that only faith iustifiethe: wherefore they must consequently say
that sacraments give noe grace, for if they did give grace, they should also
justify and sanctify, and so only fayeth should not justify. And so
follovving this doctrine some of them say that Sacraments are only badges to
make us known Christianes, others say they only stir up faith, others
make them seals and signs of former justice, and all deny that they
sanctify us. Against all these opinions might suffice that place of saint
Paul, Gal. 4.
where to put a difference betvvixte our Sacraments, and the old, he calls
the old naked elements that is bare figures and of noe force nor virtue to
give grace. but we want not many other places of Scripture which may also
prove this verity. Io. ^.
Saint Ihon sayethe that if a man be not regenerated of water and the holy
ghost, he can not enter into heaven, ergo not only the holy ghost but water
also regeneratethe, and consequently not only the holy ghost as a principal
Agente, but also the water as an instrume^te, works grace in us by which
we are regenerated. Io. 4.
The Sacrament of the altar Christ him self calls true meat which gives
life and nourishes. The Sacrament of Penance remitteth sins, Io. ^^.
because Christ gives power to his Apostles and in them to their successors
to remitte sins by the sentence of absolution. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Tim ^. c. 8.19.
And saint Paul will witness that Order gives grace to Priests, and the
Acts of the Apostles avouch, that the Apostles when they confirmed the first
Christians, Act. 8.19.
gave the holy ghost by imposition of hands. The like proofs I could bring
and have before brought in the former chapter for the other Sacraments. But
be it so that Sacraments give noe grace, then does it follow that they are
to noe purpose, because other things we have more fit to distinguishe
Christians from Infidells, and to stir up faith, which are by our
adversaries opinion, the only effects of Sacraments, and so it follovveth
that if Sacraments give no grace, that they are of noe virtue and altogether
superfluouse, and so as good it were to have no Sacraments as Sacraments,
because as good never a vvhitt as never the better, and noe Sacraments noe
religion, because as before, Sacraments and religion ever went together.

The fifte Chapter shows how in effect the reformers take away from us
those fevve Sacraments which they seem to allow of.

OUR Reformers are so liber all as to afforde us tvvoe Sacraments, to wit
Baptism and the Eucharist or the sacrament of the Altar vvch they call the
Supper, for though some of them allow us also Order, and some, Penance, yet
in these Sacraments as is before declared, they do not aggree. But yet if we
consider the estimation which they make of these tvvoe Sacraments which all
of them allow us, we shall see that herin we are not much beholding unto
them. And as concerning baptism, in Synop. Col. c. 17.
Luther is of opinion that no form of words is necessary, yea he thinks it
sufficient, if you baptize the child in the name of the lord. And being
demanded once whether it was lavvfull to baptize in milk or bear, he
ansvvered that any liquour that is apt to bathe or wash, is sufficient; And
so you see how he takes a way the matter and form of baptism, or at least
brings them both in doubt. And as touchi^g the usual form of words Calvin
iumpeth with him in the same opinion, l. 4. Inst. c. 17.
and adds that such forms of words are meare magical charms and
enchauntementes: Brentius says that if the minister after that the Creed is
read, say only, In this faith I was he thee depart in peace, it will serve
well enough. in c. 26. Mat.
And Bucere denies that words are necessary in the Eucharistie, and would
say no doubt the same in baptism. The same Luther as is before related, is of
opinion that actual faith even in children is necessary, and that
Sacraments have no other effect then to stir up this faith, wherefore
seeing that Baptism ca not stir up childrens faith, because they have no
knowledge of the signification of such mysteries, it must needs follovv that
to Baptize children is but laterem lauare to vvash a tile, and to loose labor.
Calvin also is nether a frayed nor a shamed to say, l. 4. Inst. c. 17. 17.
that saint Ihon Baptistes washing was as good as Christ's baptism. Act. 19.
And yet saint Paul rebaptized them with Christ's baptism whom saint
Ihon before had baptized; which argued his baptism of insufficiency, and
proves Christ's baptism to be of more perfection, which suplyed that which
was vvanting in saint Ihons baptism. The same Calvin says that in
necessity vvome^ may not baptize, 22.
and that if the child die without baptism, he may be saved if either he be
predestined, or be the child of faithful parents, yea he says that fevv
do mark how much harm that doctrine has done, which teaches that
Baptism is necessary unto salvation. And if you urge him with those words
of our Savior unless a man be borne agame of water and the holy ghost etc.
Io 3.
he will father gloss the text most grossly, then yield unto you that
baptism is necessary to salvation. l. ^ Inst. c. 16 17.18.
The meaning is not (says he) that material water is necessary, but this is
the sense: unless a man be borne again of the holy ghost, which like water
vvasheth, he can not enter into heaven. And so by this exposition water is not
necessary, only the regeneration and washing of the spirit is necessary, and
this Baptism according to Caluins opinion, children may have without water,
even in their mothers vvo^be, if they be predestinate, or children of faithful
parents. This is Caluins doctrine, I say Caluins, for it is his singular
opinion contrary to the opinion of the Church and all the ancient fathers and
counsels, yea contrary to scripture it self. For scripture tells us plainly
that we are all borne children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. Romans 5.
and that we all sinned in Adam and consequently are conceued and borne in
orignall sin, Job. 3.
wherefore Job who was predestinate curses the day of his nativity and
night of his conception, Psalm. ^^.
and David not only prede stinate but borne also of saithfull parents
confessethe that he is conceived in sins that is in original sin, for the
he brevve word signifies sin in the singular number, which not with
standing the Translatour translated sins, because original sin is the
root of all sins. Genesis 13.
And vvher as Calvin alleges the blessing of God to Abrahame and all his seed
and posterity, that serves only to bevvraye his ignorance. For first after
that God had made that promise, yet he commanded Circumcision and threatened
that those that had it not, should peris he. And so although Calvin were of
Abraham's seed and his parents also, yet do the it not follow that he shall be
partaker of that benediction without baptism. secondly that promise and
benediction is now to be understood, carnally, or spiritually; if carnally,
the^ are none but jews capable of the benediction, because they enly are the
carnal children of Abrahame, and so Calvin has noe part in it at all. If
spiritually then they only are partakers of the benediction, who as saint
Paul sayet^e, Rem. ^.
do imitate the faith and works of Abrahame, Gal ^^
wherefore seeing that children even of faithful parents do in no wise
imitate either Abrahames faith or works, they can not be pertakers of his
benediction until they be baptized, and so by receuing the Sacrament of fay
the, do in some sort imitate Abrahames faith. And if Calvin say that at least
by predestination children may be saved without baptism, he shall but
discover herin how blockishe a divine he is. For none are predestinare but by
the passion and merits of Christ, Io. ^.
which first are applied by baptism and not without baptism at least in
desire, and therefore Christ threateneth damnation to all that are not
baptized. Wherefore although all children that are predestinate shall be saved,
yet not without baptism, and they which dye without baptism as by Christ's
own sentence they are excluded from heaven, so are they not predestinate. But
let us see more of Caluins doctrine, not tofollow it, but to bevvare of it, not
to embrace, Suprae. 16.
it but to detest it. The same man affirmethe that the reprobate, or the
children of infidels not predestinate, are not to be baptized least baptism
be contaminated and be made a false seal, because (says he (baptism is a
seal of former justice, and therefore if defiled infidels be baptized, the
water is contaminated, Ibid.
and the seal is falsified. He adds that the children of the faithful or
the predestinate, need not baptism as a necessary means unto salvation, and
therefore if they dye without it they may be saved. Yet (says he) baptism
is not to be contemned, because it is commanded as a ceremony to incorporate
us members of the Church. Now put all this together, to wit that Baptism is
noe better then saint Ihons washing, that it is not necessary for the
predestinate, o^ children of faithful parents, because they may be saved
without it, and that it can not be ministered unto the children of infidelles,
least it be contaminated; and it follovveth evidently that Baptism is not
necessary, yea that it is superfluouse, because to the children of the
faithful and the predestinate is not necessary, and to the children of the
faith-lesse (not with standing that Christ's bad his Apostles to baptize all
nations which then were infidels) it is not be given; Mat. vl^.
then is there noe necessary use of baptism, because it seruethe to noe other
purpose, but to scale former justice, which sealing is not necessary, because
salvation is sure enoughe without it, or to bring us into the Church by an
external ceremony, vvch is altogether need less, because if it be omitted,
children if they be of faithful parents, or predestinate are sanctified in
their mothers womb, and so before God are members of the Church and capable of
salvation, before, and without baptism. And thus baptism is gone. Novvv as
concerning the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, l. ^onf. Lusheri.
Luther seems very liberal in this point, affirming that Christ's body is
really and substantially in this Sacrament not by consecration but by
vbiquitie. For he is of opinion that as Christ's body is united to the
divinity, so it is in every place where the divinity is, and consequently in
the bread and wine. But vvhilest Luther thinks to fill our mouths in giving
us bread with Christ's flesh, he takes away all true eating of Christ's
body, and drinking of his blood. For eating is a conveighaunce of meat from
the mouth into the stomach, and therefore if Christ's body be every where
with the divinity, it can not be eaten, because is was before in the
stomach and every where, and so can not be conveyghed by eating into the
stomach, because conveighaunce imports a motion of a thing to some place
where before it was not, Calvin gives us a bare figure and an empty sign,
auouching that Christ has given us a figure of his body, which in
substance is but common bread, yet because Christ has made it a sign and
figure of his body, it is called Christ's body, as Caesar's image is called
Caesar. Which opinion of Calvin makes Christ a niggard, and his sacrament
of little or not importance. For Christ although he made a great shevve of a
magnificall supper, yet according to Calvin, his supper was not only inferior
to Assuerus his banquet, but also to the meanest that ever was. This supper
Christ would have to be praefigured by the heavenly manna, Exodus 16.
vvher with he fed the Jews in the deserte, Io 6 Sap 6. Psalm. 77.
by the paschal lamb which the Jews were commanded to eat in
remembrance of their deliverance out of Aegipte, Exodus 12.
Genesis 14.
by Melchisedeches sacrifice and diverse others: he would also have it
fortold by Malachie the Prophet, Mal. 2.
saying that a clean oblation shall be offered unto him every where; by the
patriarch Jacob who fortold that the Messiah should wash his stole, Genesis 49.
that is his humane nature with which the divinity was clothed in the blood
of grapes, that is in his own blood which he called the blood of grapes,
because it was to be vealed under the forms of wine; 6 Mac.
which is called in scripture the blood of the grape. He would inuit also
all the world to this banquer, exhorting them to eat the bread and to drink
the wine which he has mingled for them, Prou. 9.
he made this banquet also a little before his death for a farevvell to his
louinge and beloved spouse the Church, and yet after all this ostentation,
after this solemn inuitation, notvvithstanding also that the time of
farevvell, the dignity of Christ's person, and the preemine^ce of the nevve
law above the old, required a most sumptuouse banquet, when the supper
was prepared, it proved but bread and wine, and after all this boste, the
guestes who were bidden, had noe roste at all, but only an odor and smell of
good cheer, that is a bare sign and figure of Christ's body and blood. Io. 6.
And vvheras Christ promised a tvvelue-monethe before that he would give
them another manner of meat and more excellent then manna was; for (says
he) notvvithstanding that your forfathers were fedd with ma^na yet they dyed,
but who soever eats of the bread which I shall give, shall live for ever;
yet if we believe Calvin, he performed nothing less. For if Christ's bread
be but common bread in substance, and only a sign of Christ's flesh which
is the true food, Ibidem.
then was not only manna, but the Paschal lamb also far more pretiouse then
the bread of Christ. For the Paschall lamb was flesh, Christ's banquet is
but bread and wine in substance, and as this is a figure of Christ, so was
that and a more apt figure. Manna also was made by Angels hands, and in the
air, Christ's bread or rather Caluins cake, was molded and baked by men's
hands, and in no better place, then the backhovvse; ma^na had all tastes and
delights, Sap. ^.
Christ's bread if it be noe better then Calvin makes it, has but one taste
and that not very delicate. And as Calvin says that Christ's bread is a
sign and figure of Christ, so was manna also, as Christ's bread stirs up
faith because it is a sign, so was manna as fit for that purpose, because
it was a sign, and as good a sign, because it signified the same thing,
which gives perfection unto both signs. Wherefore unless this Sacrament
conteyne Christ's body and blood in another manner then the sign contains
the thing which it signifies, Christ's banquet is no better, yea it is not
so good as manna was, and so the verity shall be inferior to the figure. But
Calvin says that this Sacrament is not a bare figure but such as brings
with it the body and blood of Christ: and if he did mean as he speaks, I
would not dispute with him but would shake hands with him as with a
Catholic. l. 4. Inst. c 1^.. 11.
These are his words: I say therefore that in the mystery of the Supper by the
signs of bread and wine, Christ is truly delivered, yea and his body and his
blood. And a little before those words he gives the reason;. 10.
because (says he) Christ's words: This is my body, are so plain, that
unless a man will call God a deceuer, he can never be so bold as to say that
he sets before us an empty sign. And yet again he repeateth this his
assertion:. 32.
In his holy Supper Christ commands me under the signs of bread and wine to
eat his body and drink his blood, and I nothing doubt but that both he does
truly deliver them, and I do receue them. And least you should think that he
talks only of eating and receuing Christ spiritually by faith, Eodem cap...
6.
he has prevented you by saying, that he means really, Hom. 60.61. ad pop.
and he alleges Saint Chrysostom who says that Christ mingles his
substance with ours in this Sacrament not only by faith, but also in very
deed. What think you now of this man? is he not a Catholic? do the he not
really avouch the real presence? But if you unmask this vvilye fellow, you
shall see a wolf under a sheep skin. for the same Calvin in the same
chapter in plain words tells you, Sect. 20.21.22
that Christ is not really in this Sacrament nor any where else out of
heaven, but yet (says he) the bread and wine is called the body and blood of
Christ by a figure, which calls the sign by the name of the thing it
self, as the Arc or rock, may be called Christ because it was a figure of
Christ. What means he then when he says that with the sign we receue
the body and blood of Christ verily? His meaning is, Sect. 16.
that although Christ's substance be as far from this Sacrament, as heaven
is from earth, yet because this sign stirs up faith, and faith
apprehends Christ, by this sign, and with it we receue the body and blood
of Christ. But here Calvin seems to go from him self, Supra.
for as you have hard he said before that we eat not Christ only by faith,
but also in very deed; yet to save him self from co^tradiction, he has
devised a subtle distinction: Sect. 5.
I grant (says he) that there be that in one word define, that to eat the
body of Christ, and to drink his blood, is nothing else but to believe in
Christ, but I say that the flesh of Christ is eaten by believing, because by
faith it is made ours. So that Calvin is of opinion that this Sacrament is but
a sign and contains not really the body and blood of Christ, but yet
because this sign stirs up faith which apprehends Christ's body, we
receue verily the body and blood of Christ with this sign, and by it,
because faith apprehending Christ, unites him unto us and makes him verily
our own. This is Caluins opinion. Out of which let us take as granted that
Christ's body and blood is not really contained in the Sacrament, and
consequently that this sacrament is no better yea nor so good as manna was,
which was as good a sign of Christ, as this Sacrament is, if this co^teine
not Christ really, and was as apt to stir up faith. Secondly let us prove
that if Christ be not really in this Sacrament, that faith can not really
unite him unto us, and consequently that in, and by this Sacrament, we can in
noe wise really be pertakers of Christ's body, and blood. For proof vvherof
I demand of Calnin how faith can really conioine us with Christ? either
this faith really plucketh Christ out of heaven, which Calvin nether can
say, because faith is but an apprehension, nether will say, because he
says that Christ's body since his asce^sion was never out of heaven: or else
it really lifts us up to heaven, which is against experience, and so can not
really unite Christ unto us, because it nether bringethe him really unto us,
nor us unto him. And so in believing in Christ by faith which is but an
apprehension of the understanding, we do noe more really eat the body of
Christ, then does the hongrye man his dinner, when he apprehends, and
desires it, but can not have it. And so Caluins boste is greater then his
roste, and his promise is more ample then his performau^ce, and Christ's supper
is but a bare sign, and noe roste at all, but only a savor and sign of good
cheer, and our eating is noe real eating, but only a naked apprehension. And
seeing that preaching, and pictures, can better stir up faith then bread and
wine can do, this Sacrament of Christ is altogether needless, because as
good never a whit as never the better. And so my intended conclusion
follovveth to vvitte, that amongst our reformers there is noe religion
because, five or six, of seven Sacraments they have quite taken away, and the
other in which all of them aggree, to wit baptism and the Eucharist, they
have so disgraced and defaced, that they are to little purpose, and so they have
no religion, because noe Sacraments noe religion.

The Sixte Chapter shows that according to their doctrine they can have no
prayer, and consequently noe religion.

ONe of the greatest benefits which God has bestovved on man is prayer, by
which man has access unto God, and the creature is admitted unto the
speech of his Creator, in Psalm. 75.
and flesh and blood conuerseth familiarly with the divinity; for as saint
Austine sayethe, when we read scriptures which are the word of God, then
god speaks to us, but when we occupy our selves in prayer, the^ do we
speak familiarly unto God; which is so great a thing that Angels dare not do
it, without covering their faces with their immortal wings, blushing to
appear before such Majesty, and tre^bling to speak to a Prince so mighty.
Prayer is honorable to God, honorable also and profitable to our selves, it
is honorable to God because it is an act of religion, by which we
prostrate even our souls and spirits unto God, acknovvledging him the supreme
essence, fountain, and autour of all goodness, and our selves his needy and
naked creatures, who have nothing of our selves, yea nothing not from him, not
so much as our our selves, because he gave us our selves, and being for
nothing, and of nothing. It is honorable to our selves, first because it
aequalizeth us with Angels making us Queresters of their chapel, where by
prayer we join voices with them, in praising God as they do, and praying
unto him. Secondly because it procures familiare conversation with God,
which is so honorable a thing, and so rayseth us in state and dignity, as
almost nothing more. Orat. 1. de orando D^^.
For as saint Chrysostom sayethe if it be such an honor to converse
familiarly with Caesar, that such me^ though other wise never so base and
poor, can not vvhilest they are in this credit with him, be any more either
base or poor: how can they who in prayer co^uerse daily and familiarly
with the divine majesty, be of base or lovv condition? It is profitable also
unto us because by it we obtain at gods hands what is expedient for us.
For god is the Source and fountain of all goodness, and perfection,
sufficient of him self, and with in him self, needing not in any thing the
help of any. Psalm. 15.
To whom when we have given all the praises, and offered all the Hecatombes
and sacrifices in the world, we have not abettered his state or his person,
and when we have reviled him and blasphemed him to the vttermoste of our
malice, we have not made him a iotte the worse; but man in that he is a
creature is depe^dent of his Creator, noe less, yea more, then the rivers of
the fountain, the branches of the tree, or the son beams of the Son: who
of him self has nothing, yea is nothing, but is to live by begging and
praying. And well he may so obtain those things which he wants. For if
any Prince would promise his subject, that what soever he asks he should
obtein, might not that subject think that Prince very bountiful, and him
self a most happy subject? Thus God deals with us; Mat. 7.
he biddes us ask and we shall have; and seeing that God is so faithful that
he can as soon deny him self as go from his word, because his word is
him self, he can not, not perform, what soever he promises: and seeing that
prayer is the thing by which man obteineth at God his hand what soever he
justly desirethe, what an inestimable gemme and preciouse pearl is prayer,
which procures our hearts desires in all things, because it is the price of
all? And if we some times pray, and obtain not, either it is because our
prayer is not such as it ought to be, or that the thing which we pray for is
not convenient for us. For if he that prays, believes that God can help
him, and hopethe also that he will help him, if he him self who prayethe,
or he for whom he prays, be not odiouse to god by reason of sin, If he
pray with humility, and without a doubting mind, if he adioine to his
prayer attention, to his attention, devotion, and to both, perseueraunce, and
if the thing for which he prays be necessary or expediente, (for other
wise God is a greater benefactour in denying then granting our petition) the^
certainly, such is the virtue of prayer, that what we ask we have, and
what we pray for, we obtain. Prayer certs is better then the Philosophers
stone, although that were of that virtue which it is feigned to be of: for
that as fools have fained was able to turn all into gold, but prayer turns
all to our good be it gold orsiluer, riches or poverty, health or sickness,
grace or glory. Yea it is better then Fortunatus hatte is fained to have
been, because that procured all vvishes good or badde indifferently, but
prayer then only obteineth what we vvishe for, when our vvishes are
expedient or convenient for us. Besides this unspeakable virtue which prayer
has, to obtain what we ask for, it satisfies for sin also, especially
when it is joined with alms deeds and fasting, To^. 1^.
which are the wings of prayer, by which it soreth speedily even to the
throne of God: it meriteth glory as other good works do, and that more
especially also, in that it is a prayer; it gives us great confidence also if
it be frequent and usual, because as before I have said, prayer causethe
familiarity, and familiarity imboldenethe, and boldness breeds confidence.
It is a great motive also unto humility, and peradventure you shall not find
a greater, because it puts us always in mind that we are but beggars. And
lastly (if I may say so of prayers commodities which are without end) it
makes us to fall out of love with this deceitefull world, because it makes us
to converse in heaven, and admits us to familiarity with God and his
Angels. In the Church triumphaunt prayer is used, because the Saints and
Angels pray to God for us, In the Church militaunte prayer also is practiced,
as shall be proved, only in hell and hellish Synagogues prayer is abandoned.
Wherefore in the law of nature, as they used sacrifice, so did they also
practice prayer, and although Enos be called the first of them who by prayer,
most especially and frequently called upon God, yet no doubt Adame and Eve
amongst other acts of penance, omitted not prayer as one of the best
dispositions unto reconciliation with allmighnie God. Abel their son also as
he was religious in his Sacrifices so was he not sloth-full in prayer. Noe
also taught his posterity prayer, Genesis 2^.
Abrahame was much given to prayer, Isaac his son in his diligence in prayer
and meditation also declared him self vvhorthilie to have been the son of
such a father. Psalm. 11^.
David prayed seven times a day, and rose at mid night often times, shortning
his sleep to lengthen his prayer: Dan. ^.
and Daniel three times a day, called upon his God. By prayer Moses made the
Sea to divide it self and procured victory to the Israelits so long as in
prayer he held up his hands, Exodus 1^.
yea by prayer he obtained pardon often times for the people and bound as it
were the hands of the omnipotent. 1. Reg. 1.
By prayer Anne the wife of Helcane obtained Samuel, 4. Reg. 2^. T^b. 12. 1.
Reg. 1^.
Ezechias by prayer prolonged his life fifteen years, Tobias by the same
exercise was restored to his sight, Elias after a great drought by prayer
obtained rain. Mat. 1^. Luc. ^.
In the new law Christ our high Priest prayed oftentimes all the night
long, Mat. 2^.
and a little before his departure out of this world, he prayed three times in
the garden; yea he him self taught us the prayer which in Inglish we call
our lords prayer. Mat. 6.
And no soener was Christ departed, but his Apostles and disciples assembled
them selves together, and in prayer atte^ded the holy ghostes descension. Act.
^^.
Saint Peter and saint Ihon ascended into the temple to pray. Act 1. Clem.
Romans
Saint Peter furrovved his face with the ^^reames of tears, which trickled
yea streamed from his eyes in prayer. Saint Bartholomew is said to have
prayed on his knees an hundred times in the day and as often in the night.
Saint James his knees by prayer became as hard as camels knees. Whose
examples the first Christians after the Apostles, Bar to. 2. an 100. l. 10 ep
97^ Tert Apol. c. 2.
follovving, met together daily at prayer, even before they had Churches, in so
much that Traiane the Emperor was feign to forbid such flocking together. And
Pliny Prefect of this Emperor, informed him of the assemblies of Christianes
to prayer before day. To be brief, the Ecclesiastical histories are full of
the Churches, and monasteries which have been builded for prayer, and speak
almost of nothing else but of Christianes prayer, Hiero. ep. ad Eustoch. Athan.
l. de virg. Basi 37 Cl^m. l. ^. Constable. c. 4.
Masses, liturgies, canonical hours, as nocturnes, lauds, the prime hour
of prayer, third, sixte, ninthe hour, Euensong, and complete; yea so is
prayer divided in diverse Churches and monasteries, Tho. Vvald. to. ^
desacra^^ntal. c. 24.
that in every vigill of the night in one place or other, pravers and praises
aresonge unto God; yea seeing that our Church is dispersed through out the
world, and that the hour which is to one country, one, to another is
tvvoe, to another, is three a clock, and so forth, there is noe hour in the
day or night in which prayer is not exercised publickely in the Church. So
that well may the Catholic Church be called the house of God, Isa 16. Luc 1^.
because it is the house prayer. Now let us see how like unto this house of
God, which is the house of prayer, our Reformers Sinagogue is. In most
places they have no prayer at all on vvorking days, and on holy days (which
now they have brought to a less number because they celebrate fevve Saints
days) they spend all the time that they are in the Church, in yelling out a
Geneua Psalm, to which they add a Sermon; and generally in Ingland now
adays, you shall find fevve that use any private prayer in their Chambers,
but as dogs go to their Kennell, so theye go to bed, and so they rise in
the morning, shaking or stretching them selves, but never bowing knee, noe nor
opening mouth nor heart in prayer. In so much that when one of our Catholic
Preests in his Inn in London was found by the chamberlain Kneeling by his
bed side to say his devotions, proclamation was by and by made, that he was
a Preeste and a traitor (for then in Ingland they were all one) as if their
own consciences had accused them, that prayer is noe sign of a man of their
religion. And truly this conte^pte of prayer amongst them is not to be blamed
by their preachers, because it is most conformable to their doctrine. For
first they say that prayer meriteth no revvard at Gods hands. Call. l. ^. Inst.
c. ^0. Melanct. tit. de procat.
Secondly they avouch that it can not make the least satisfaction, for the
least sin in the world. Why then should we wear our hose out in the
knees with praying, if prayer nether satisfies, nor meriteth any thing at
Gods hands? Truly if we wear our hose out in the Knees, we lose more then
we get, See the seventh book.
if this doctrine be true. Thirdly Calvin avouches that the justifying faith
is a firm and full assurance that we are elect and just by Christ's
justice; and seeing that faith is a necessary disposition to prayer (for as
saint Paul says) how shall they pray and call upon him, R^m. 1^.
in whom they believe not?) it follovveth that before we settle our selves to
prayer, we must firmly believe that we are just and that our sins are
forgiven. Whence I gather these conclusions. The first is that in vain the
faithful man prayethe for justification or remission of sins, because before
he prays, his sins are forgiven, and he is justified, or else his full
assured faith is a lying, and deceiptfull faith. The second is that noe
faithful man can pray for justification or remission of sins, unless he
will be an infidel and forsake his faith by praying. For he is bound by
Calvin to believe assuredly that his sins are forgiven, because this is his
justifying faith, and if he stagger or doubt he is an infidel, because he
has not the right faith; whence it follovvethe that in praying for
remission of sins, he loses faith, because in that he prays, he
shevvethe that he has not that assurance; for who will pray for that
which he is assured of already? Or if he pray it is an argument that either
he thinks that he has not the thing for which he prayethe, or that he
doubts thereof, or that he fearethe, of vvch every one is sufficient to make
a man an infidel in Caluins opinion, because they despoile him of that assured
faith. The third conclusion is, that he cannot pray at all for remission of
sins, would he never so feign even with loss of his faith. For as if I be
in good health, and assure my self of the same, I ca^ not pray for health,
though I may pray for co^tinuau^ce of it, so if before I pray, I be assured
that my sins be forgiven, though I may with lips, yet with heart I ca^
not pray that God would forgive me; and if I could, in vain should I pray
for that, vvch I have already. The fourth is that no faithful man can pray
for eternal bliss in heaven: for if before I pray I must have faith (as
saint Paul says that I must) and if faith be a full assurance that I am
not only just, Romans 1^.
but also elected, and chosen to be one of the Citizens of heaven, I can not
with heart pray that I may be received into heaven. Well I may pray that
speedily God will take me to him, and his glory, because I am not sure
when shall be the time at which he will call me, but to pray absolutely
to be admitted unto God his glory and Kingdom, I can not possibly, because
by Caluins faith, I am already assured of this kingdom and glory. I^^. ^.
But Calvin will obiecte against us that saint James biddes us to pray in
faith and confidence, nothing doubting or staggering. I grant him therefore
that we must believe that God can help, and hope also that he will help,
and so we must not pray doubting, but yet we may and must pray betvvixte
fear and hope. For if I hope not, but despair of obteyning, I have no cause
to pray, and if I doubt of Gods mercy, I do him injury, yet if I be cock
sure, I can not pray, and therefore I must fear the vvorste and yer pray for
the best: ^ee the soue^th book.
Moreover Calvin tells us that the justifying faith assurethe us not only of
present, but also of future justice, that is, acertainethe us not only that
we are now at this present just, but also that we shall persevere unto the
end: whence it follovveth that we can not pray to God for perseueraunce in
grace, or that he will so assiste us, that noe tentation of the devil,
insurrection of the flesh, or allurement of the world, give us the foil or
fall; See the same book.
because by faith we are assured of our standing. He avouches also that
sin has so weakened man's nature that he can not with all the grace that
Christ has given, resist any tentation. Whence ensevveth also, that he can
not pray, not to be led into tentatio^, that is not to be permitted to yield
to any tentation, because he is assured by Caluins doctrine, that he cannot but
yield if he once be tempted. And although these two last points seem
contradictorie, because the one sayethe that a faithful man can not fall from
justice, the other says that he can not but yield to sin and tentation,
which is the fall of the soul: yet Calvin has away to avoid this
contradiction, because (says he) though a faithful man yield to tentation,
yet God imputes not it as sin, because he is faithful. and so says he a
faithful man is assured that he can not fall; and then say I that I am
assured that he can not pray that he may stand, and not fall by tentation.
He is also of opinion that the best works of a just man are so unclean that
they are mortal sins: vvch if it be true; then can we not pray that Gods
name be hallowed and sanctified in us, that is in our works, because nether
in us, nor in our actions, All these opinions of Calvin see in the seventh
book.
is any one iotte of true sanctity. He denies also free will and all
voluntary cooperatio^ with Gods will and grace, And so we can not pray that
gods will be done in us, for such a prayer argues some dependence of gods
will on ours, which so would have us to do well, as it will leave it in
our power to resist the will and grace of God. And if Calvin obiecte those
words of Scripture: Romans 9.
who resists his will? I will answer that noe man can resist gods will
when he will absolutely have it fulfilled and independently of us, but yet
we may resist gods will when he wills dependently of our vvilles, Mat.
2^.
else would he not have said how often would I have gathered thee as a
hen gatherethe her chickins together, and thou would not. Now put all
this together and you shall see that the Pater noster or our lords prayer, must
be cut out of the Catechism, and blotted out of the gospel: for although
that Christ taught his Apostles that prayer, yet according to Caluins doctrine
noe faithful man, that is, noe Caluiniste, can in conscience recite that
prayer. And so either Christ is deceived or Calvin teaches false doctrine; but
Calvin will swear that he teaches the truth and that he is sure that a
faithful man is sure of his justice, remission of sins, and election; and
therefore you know what follovveth. But least you think that I do injury
to Calvin in affirming that he takes a way the lords prayer, as unlawful
and quite repugnaunte to Christian faith, I will prove it manifestly and by
no other argument, then by calling to mind that which is already said. In
the first petition of our lords prayer we desire that his name be hallowed
in us, which is a prayer clean opposite to Caluins opinion, which teaches
that there is noe sanctity in us or our works, and so holding his opinion,
we must omit the first petition. In the second, we pray that his Kingdom may
come and that we may be receued into it, which petition we can not make from
our heart, if before we pray, we are assured by faith, that we are
elect and predestinate to that kingdom. The third is that Gods will be
done in earth as in heaven: which petition also according to Calvin is
frivolous, for if we cooperate not with God by our free will, in vain do
we pray that his will be done in earth, because that argues some
dependence of Gods will one ours, as is before demonstrated. The fourth is
that God would give us our daily bread that is all those benefits either of
Nature or Grace vvch are belonging either to soul or body: which petition
also can not stand with Caluinsfaithe; because if faith assurethe me of
present and future justice, yea and of glory also, then I can not pray either
for justification, or remission of sins, or perseueraunce in grace, or final
glory, because noe man can pray for that which he is assured of as is
before declared. And so we can only pray for health, riches, fair
weather, or such like corporal benefits; yea if it be true that all these
things come by fatal necessity (as Calvin must say that they do) because
he affirms that Gods foresight and decree imposes a necessity upon all
things, l. 1. Inst. c 2^.. ^.
and consequently on these things also because he foreseethe and decreethe
these things no less then he does men's actions; then in vain also do we
pray for health, or vvelthe, or fair vveather, because these things of
necessity shalbe^ or not be whether we will or not, and as vain it is to
pray for health or vvelthe, as for the son rising which of necessity
rises whether we pray or not. The fifte petition demands that God would
forgive us our trespasses and offenses, vvch as is before proved we can not
pray for, without loss of our faith, which, if it be right, assures us
without all doubt that thy are already forgiven. The sixte and seventh are
that God would not permit us to fall into temptation, and by tentation, but
rather will deliver us from all evil especially of sin: which petition also
is vain yea impossible if Caluins faith be true. For if by faith I be
assured of future justice, I can not pray with heart that God will assiste
me that I fall not from justice, because I am (as Calvin says) full well
assured that I shall not fall, and so I can no more pray, that I may not fall
by tentation, then that the heavens may not fall upon me, being as sure of
the one, as the other. And so the Lords prayer can not stand if Caluins
doctrine do go for curra^t; and seeing that this prayer was made by Christ,
if we will follow Calvin we must forsake Christ, and for as much as
this prayer contains in a brief sum, and method, all things which we
are to prayer for, if sin and other evils befall us of necessity (as Calvin
says they do) in vain do we pray to be delivered from all evil. And if
by Caluins doctrine we can not say this prayer, which is a Compendium of all
prayers and petitions, we can not pray at all, and so noe prayer can be used
in Caluins Church according to Caluins doctrine. Wherefore I marvel not that
so little prayer is practiced amongst them, I vvonder not that thy build noe
nevve churches, but pull down the old which were builded for prayer; rather
I marvel that they sometimes exhort me^ to prayer seeing that their doctrine
and prayer can not stand together. And I like better of Luther and of his
plain dealing in this matter, for he having once pronounced sentence that
faith only justifies, affirms consequently that prayer is not necessary,
Ser de Dom. 4. Aduent. edit. an. 1525.
these a^ his words: Every heart how much the more perfect knowledge (he
meanethe the knowledge of faith) it has of it self, so much more ready is
the way for God unto it, although in the mean time a man should drink
nothing but malmesey and walk upon roses, and never pray one word. And so
if Calvin would deal as plainly as Luther does, as he aggreeth with him in
the premises to wit that only faith suffices, so should he also aggree
with him in the conclusion, which is, that prayer is not necessary. But it is
time now that I also come to my conclusion, to wit that amongst our
reformers is noe religion, because by their doctrine they can have no prayer:
which conclusion if the premises be called to mind does follow easily, and
evidently. Because prayer in all laws was ever necessary to the upholding
of religion, as I have proved by inductio^, and the reason also is, because it
is one of the most principal acts of religion, by which we acknovvledge
Gods soueraintie, and our own baseness and beggerie; but amongst the
reformers noe prayer, not so much as the lords prayer, can be used, as is also
proved, ergo amongst them there is noe religion: because prayer and religion
must of necessity go together: And so our reformers have no service to use in
their Churches but only a sermon; which also I see not to what purpose it is
amongst them if men have noe free will; for then as well may their ministers
preach to a flock of sheep as to a Church full of faithful people, because
these have noe more free will (if we believe Calvin) then they have, and so
are as absurdely exhorted by a Sermon as they. And if Calvin would laugh at a
Minister that should persuade sheep and asses to abstine^ce, labor, and such
like, we may laughe at him and his ministers, when by a labored sermon, they
go about to persuade us to virtue, or to dissuade us from vice, who have noe
mote free will to follovv such persuasions, then sheep or Asses have.

THE FIFTE BOOK
CONTAINS ASVRVEY of their doctrine concerning God, in which it is declared,
how impiouse the Reformers are, and how injurious their doctrine is unto the
divine Majesty.

The first Chapter shows how they make God the autour of all sin and
wickedness.

SImon Magus the first Archeretike of fame, was the first man that ever durst
open his mouth to the vtteraunce of this blasphemy, but he had noe sooner
broken the yse, but by and by Florinus, Blastus, Tert. l praesc. ^. 31.
Cerdo^, Marcion, and Manicheus, with open mouth, and common voice, applauded
to his blasphemy, aggreing with him that God is the autour of all sin and
evil. Yet because this doctrine seemed to offensive to Christian ears, they
devised a kind of moderation, to make their doctrine more sailable. Wherefore
Simon Magus said that God was the autour of sin, not that he immediately
moves us to sin, but because he has given us such a nature which of
necessity sins, and so by a certain consequence, he said God was the
autour of sin. Cerdon and Manicheus also were ashamed to father sin upon
the good God, and therefore they affirmed, that there were tvvoe Gods, the one
good, the other bad, and that the evil God was the autour of sin, and evil.
But Calvin and his followers (as it is easier to add then to inuente) have
far exceeded and excelled them in malice, auouching that God immediately
and directely, is the autour of all wickedness, which Simo^ Magus durst not
say, yea that ye good and the only God works and effectuateth this malice,
vvch those ancient heretics were ashamed to say. These are Caluins words
or rather blasphemies: l. 4. Inst. c. 28.. 6.
God not only forseeth man's sins, but also has created him of determinate
purpose to that end. And a little after; God not only permits sin but
wills it.. ^.
yea says he: It is not likely that man by him self by the only permission
of God, without any ordinance, brought destruction to him self. l. ^. c 1^..
4.
And therefore, when Absalon abused his fathers vviues, it was Gods will
(says he) so to punish David's adultery, l. 2. s. 4.. 2. ^ 4. Ibidem.
and God commanded him to do it to that end. Again he says that God
blindethe and hardnethe the reprobate not only by not illuminating them nor
mollifying them by grace, but because he stirs up their vvilles: And not
only suffers sinners, but bovveth and turns their hearts. So that according
to Caluins opinion God not only forseeth that we will sin, but ordeynethe
us to sin, not only permits us to sin, but wills and commands, yea
bovveth our hearts to sin. And least you should think, that at least God
has no part in those sins, to which the Devil and wicked men provoke us,
or that the injuries, which they do us, proceed not at all from him, he
avouches that Satan and evil men in these evil offices, are but the
instruments of God, and that God settes them on, and is the principal agent
and autour. l. 1. ^. 17.. ^.
I grant (says he) that thieves and murderers and other evil doers are the
instruments of Gods providence, c. 17.. 2.3. ^. 2.6.4. sect;. 2
whom the Lord does use to execute those judgments which he has him
self determined. Yea he says that what our enemy mischeuously do the
against us, he does as suffered and sent by God; And he is not afraid to say
that God armeth as well the devil as all wicked me^ against us: And that
Sennacherib was an axe and instrument of God directed and driven by his hand
to cut. Sect. 6.
Finally sayethe he: Sect. 6.
the unclean spirit is called the spirit of the Lord, because he answers
his commandment and power, being rather his instrument in doing, then an
autour of him self. By which speeches who sees not that Calvin makes God a
greater Patron of sin, then the devil, because the devil is but his
instrument and minister in all the evil he does, God is the principal Agent
and commander. The like saying has Melancthon, who avouches that David's
adultery and Judas treachery, were as much the work of God, as saint
Paul's vocation. In c. 1. ep. Romans
The like has Beza and diverse others whose blasphemies I list noe more to
relate, then Christian ears desire to hear. Much more honorably does the
Catholic Church speak of the divine majesty, which auerreth that God is
the author of the pain of sin, because in that is noe sin, but justice,
but not of the malice of sin: which confesses that God permits all
sins that are, because he will not force men's liberty, yea suffers also
the devil and his ministers to provoke us to sin, but nether wills, nor
commands them so to do; which teaches also that God is so the author of
an essence and goodness, that he concurreth with our will to the substance
of the act of sin, but has no part in the malice of the sin: And
where scripture seems to say that God is the autour of evil or commands
evil men, or says that the wicked are his instruments; the Catholic
Church says that this is to be understood by permission only. Yea this
Church teaches us that God never uses evil persons as instruments moved by
him to sin, but only permit the them to sin, and after wards uses this
their sin, either to the just punishment of others, or to the glory of his
servants, whose patience by evil persons is tried, or to a greater
repentance of the sinner, who being fallen into such abominination, thinks
of a greater repentance, as Mary Magdalen did. And certainly it is as evident
that God can not be the autour of sin, as that he can not but be God. For
first of all God is of a good nature and goodness it self, and therefore as
evil fruits can not proceed from a good tree, because they are contrary to
the good nature and disposition of the tree, Mat. 7.
so from so good a nature as God is, who is summum bonum and goodness it self,
we must not look for so evil fruits as sins are, in which is no goodness
at all; and therefore to say that he is the autour of sin, is to make him an
evil God, and of a malicious nature, as Cerdon and Manicheus did, and so no
God at all: for God and good must of necessity go together. Secondly sin is
as opposite to Gods goodness as falsehood is to his verity, but God can not lie
nor authorize a lie because he is the first verttie, ergo he ca^ not be the
autour of sin, because he is the cheifest goodness: or if such goodness can do
evil, such verity and truth may lie, and so the scriptures loose their
credit: For if God can lie peradventure in scriptures he has lied; and so to
say that God can be the autour of sin, is to say consequently that he may
be the autour of lies, vvch is to open the gap to Atheistes and misprisets of
scriptures. For as well may be move the vvriters of Scriptures to write lies,
as he may move them to sin and wickedness. Thirdly if God be autour of sin,
Psalm. 11^.
then by his will which is the cause of all things he works sin, which
if it be so, then sin is according to gods will, and so noe sin: because
that which is according to the Princes will, can nether displease his will,
nor impeach his commandment, and consequently is nether offense nor
preuarication, fourthly every error is a svveruing from the rule which is
prescribed, and therefore the artificer banguereth when he works not
according to his platform, or idea, and the singer erreth when he sings not
according to his Gammot, and the writer scribleth, when he follows not his
example, and the subject transgresses, when he lives not according to the
Princes law, and the moral man offends, when he follovveth not reason,
which is the lore, rule, and square of all his actions. And because all these
workers are distinct from their rule, they may svverue from the same and so
commit a fault in their art, but God (says saint Thomas) is to him self a
rule, Th. 1. p. q. 63. ^^. 1. in Cor.
and follovveth noe other law or rule then his aeternall reason and law,
which is him self, and so can noe more sin (which is to svverue from his
reason) the^ he can deny him self, or go from him self. Lastly sin is an
auersion from God, and an offense which highly displeases him, and so by
consequence, if god could sin; he should as it were turn him self from
him self, and be auerted from him self, and displeased with him self, and
so he should be so far from endevving others with felicity, that he should
want it him self, and live in a continual misery, as he must needs do,
who has an auersion from him self, and is displeased with him self. But
Calvin says that although God be the autour of sin, yet he is noe sinner,
because he works it for a good end. l. 2. s. 4. sect. 2
As for example (says he) of the same sin which the Chaldees committed in
unjustly afflicting Job, God was the autour, Satan was the autour, and the
will of man was the author; but because God was the autour of it for 2 good
end, to wit, for the exercising of Jobs patience, he sinned not in that
actio^, but did well and justly in the same action in which they sinned, and
transgressed. But this will not serve for an answer, for first if god may
be the autour of sin to exercise the patience of the just, or to chastise
the wicked, he may also be the autour of a lie, for the punishment of sinners,
and so Scriptures must lose their credit, because peradventure they are lies
which God has put in the toungue and pen of Mo^yses, the Prophets, and the
Eua^gelists for a good end; that is to show his justice in the Jews and
ge^tils, whom, for a just punishment he has seduced, and deceived with a
false written law, because they would not follow the law of nature,
which he had graven in their hearts. Secondly to make a sinner, it is
sufficient if he be the autour of sin, and* good end or intention will not
excuse when the means and election are naught. Wherefore if God be the autour
of sin he sins whatsoever his intention be, and if a good inte^tion may
excuse, it may also excuse us, and so a man may steal to help his pare^tes,
or to offer Sacrifice and oblations of his theftes unto God, and yet god
condemns such offerings and saint Paul says plainly that evil things are
not to be done that good thereby may happen. Romans ^.
But now it is more then time to dravve necro our conclusion, and therefore out
of Caluins blasphemies I will deduce these illations. The first is that such
men if they had lived in Platoes time (who by law banished those that would
father their sins upon God) they should not have been permitted to have
lived in any city or common vvelthe; l. 2. de Repub.
and if that learned Jew Philo had been appointed their judge, l. de. Agricult.
he would have adjudged them to be stoned to death. Secondly I gather herby
that these men are not led by the Spirit of God, and that their doctrine can
not be of God, because it is unlikely, yea impossible, that the spirit of god
should dictate such doctrine, which is so injurious to God and so opposite to
his goodness; rather this doctrine is like to proceed from him who said that
he would be a lyi^g spirit in the mouths of all false Prophets. 1 Reg 22. 2.
Para. 1^.
Thirdly I gather what little credit is to be given unto them in other matters,
who banger so grossly in this opinion which the light of reason argues of
falsitie, and is as evidently false, as is is evident that there is a God.

The second Chapter shows how their doctrine makes God not only a sinner,
but also the only sinner.

IT is the opinion of Ihon Calvin and of the Caluinists also, l 3. Inst. c.
21.. 4.
that God is not only the author of sin, but that his will and power also
does so domineere over the will of a sinner, that he can not resist Gods
motion, which eggeth and urges him to sin, but must of necessity sin.
Yea, Sect. (...).
I (says Calvin) will not doubt to confess, simply with Austine (he would
have said without Austine because he has no such thing in the place, l de
Genesis ad lit. c. 15.
which he alleges) that the will of God is a necessity of things, and that
what he wills, must of necessity come to pass. Sithence then God wills
all our sins, as Calvin has in the former chapter confessed, it follovvethe
that we of necessity sin, because Gods will is a necessity of things. He
affirm the also (as is already declared in the last chapter) that the devil
in soliciting and tempting us, is the instrument of God, and the executour of
his will and determination, and consequently it is Gods will that he should
tempte us, and seeing that as Calvin says his will is a necessity of things,
it follovveth also that the devil of necessity, tempts us. Out of which
premises follovveth evidently my intended conclusion, to wit that God only is
the sinner. For if God so forcebly moves the devil by his own vvil and
ordinance that the devil can not chose but tempte us, and if the will of God
do the so ouerrule and press the will of man, that when God will have him
sin (as Calvin says he will) he can not resist, it must needs follow
that God is the only sinner, and that man and the devil are to be excused. For
as Calvin affirmethe God is the author of all sins, and consequently is a
sinner, because his good intention can not excuse him, as is all ready proved
in the last chapter, nether can he allege necessity for an excuse, because
there is none which bovveth his will by force, but he him self most frankely
and freely wills and works our sins: and seeing that the devil as Gods
instrument is violently, or at least necessarily moved to tempte us, he can not
sin, because he can not justly be blamed, for that which he could not
avoid; and for as much as man's will is compelled to sin by the ouerruling
will of God, he also for the same reason can not sin, and so God is the only
sinner, and man and the devil are innocents, vvorthily to be excused, and in
no wise to be counted sinners.

The third Chapter shows how their doctrine which affirms that the
commandments are impossible, makes God an unreasonable Prince.

IT is a common Maxim amongst the ghospellers that the commandments of God
are impossible, and that a man can as soon touch the heavens with his finger,
as fulfill the least commandment. Luther says that when the Scripture
uses these words or the like: l. de serve arbitrio.
If thou vvilte keep the commandments; or keep the commandments, God
deals with us as the mother dalyeth with her infant. For as she calls
her child to her, not in earnest, because she knovveth well that he can not
walk, but to make him to see his own imbecilitie, and to shevve his desire
to ^ome unto her, so when God biddes us keep the commandments, according
to Luther, he iesteth with us, and biddes us observe the law, not because
that he thinks we are able, but because he will make us know our own
impotencie, and yet to shevve our good will and desire to keep his laws, if
we were able. But this is a strange jesting and dalying, vvnen god will
command us things impossible to make us know our insufficiency, and yet
will damn us eternally if we observe not these his commandments. l. 2.
Inst. c. 7. fact. 2.
Calvin says plainly that the law is impossible, and therefore was never
fullfilled by any; and he gives a reason, because (says he) it is hindered by
the ordinance and decree of God that it shall not be fulfilled. And if you
obiecte that christ said unto the young man: Mat. 19. Calu in har. ibidem.
If thou vvilte enter into life keep the commandments: Calvin will
answer that Christ said so, not that he thought he could keep them, but
because he would repress his pride in proposing a thing which he could not
do. As if Calvin should vaunte that he is a nevve Apostle, and one should
say unto him to repress his vanity, if thou be an Apostle, work I pray
thee some miracles, for proof of thy Apostleship, which he can not do. And
if you again replye that the young man said that her had observed the
co^maundeme^ts from his you the. Calvin will be so bold as to tell him that he
lied, Ibidem.
which Christ him self would not say, though he knevve better or at
least as well as Calvin, how truly he avouched that he had kept the
commandments: c. 1^,
and saint Mark says that our Savior loved him which is at least some
argument that Calvin rather lies in saying that he lied, because Christ
loves nether lies nor liars: Sap. 18.
Because to God is odious the impious and his impiety. I could here use many
arguments to prove that the commandments are not impossible. And might
begin with the old testament and prove that the Jews were able to keep
the commandments, and consequently that much more Christians are able,
because that on them God best^ovveth his grace more liberally. For after that
God had given unto that people the law and Decalogue he in diverse places
tells them that he commands them not to do more then they are able. Exodus
20.
Deuteronomy. 30.
The commandment (says God) which this day I command thee is not above
thee not placed far from thee, not in heaven not beyond sea, that thou
may pretend an excuse: but my speech is very near thee, in thy mouth, in
thy heart that thou may do it. To this subscribeth our Savior Christ the
lavvegiuer of the new law, Mat. 19.
telling us that if we will enter into life, we must keep the
commandments. And least we should excuse our selves by a pretense that his
commandments are impossible, Mat. 11.
he preuenteth us saying, that his yoke is svveet and his burden light. And
saint Ihon his loui^g and beloved disciple avouches that his commandments
are not heavy. l. Io. 5.
Now if the commandments be impossible then are they as far out of our
reach and power, as if they were in heaven or beyond sea, then are they not
near us, then are they not so at hand, that God may say, that they are in our
mouth, and heart to do and full fill them: For what is farther of then that
which is clean out of our reach and power? If the law be impossible,
then it is not a light burden: For what can be more heavy, then that which
we can not bear at all. But to me this only argument seems sufficient to
stop Caluins mouth; that if the commandment were impossible, God should
be the most unreasonable Prince in the world. Nether ca^ that suffice vvch
Calvin alleges, to wit that although the commandments be impossible, yet
God had reason to command them to shevve us our infirmity, and to provoke us
to shevve our vvilling mind to do what we can: this I say will not
suffice to excuse God from being vnreasonble, because at least in that over
plus which exceeds our force and power, he shows him self
unreasonable. as for example if the King would command a creeple to follow
him, though thereby he might make him see his own impotencie and give him
occasion by his motion of his body, to declare his desire to follow, yet if
he commau^de him in deed to follow, he is very unreasonable. Or if Calvin
will say that God will seem only to command us, because he would make us
to see our imbecillitie and to do what we can at least to shevve our desire;
then follovveth it that there are noe commandments, because God does not
verily command them but seems only to command, to make us see our own
infirmity, and to shevve our desire. Or if Calvin will not be so bold as to
deny all commandments, then must he grant that God is unreasonable, in
commanding us more then we are able to perform. As for example if the
master would command his servant not only to run but also to fly on his
arraund, and for a shorter cut to leap over a river, over which he ca^
scarsely see; would you not think him unreasonable and quite beside him
self? The like does almighty God if we believe Calvin; for he commands
us to love him above all and our neighbor as our selves, he biddes us not to
steal, not to kill, yea not to covet our neighbors wife or goods, which is
as if he should command us to fly or to move mountains, or to leap over
the sea: because these things in Caluins opinion, are noe more impossible,
then are the commaundamentes, and therefore in these commandments God
shows him self as vnreaso^able, as he should do in the other. Yea if once
we grant that god may command impossibilities; then is there noe reason
why brute bealles may not be commanded not to kill one another, not to live
of spoil, to fast somes times, and to honor yea love their Creator; because
God commands man to do these things, who yet is noe more able to do the^,
then beasts are. And if beasts could speak and would tell almighty God
that he has noe reason to command them to do these things because they are
not in their power, then may men make the same exception, and accuse their
Creator as a Prince most unreasonable, who commands them to excute those
laws which they noe more can fulfill then oxen, and asses can do. And if
god will condemn them as guilty of offense, for not obeying his
commaundment, they may answer with saint Christostome: Hom 16 in ep. Heb.
Si impotentes nos fecit and deinde imperat, culpa eius est: If he has made us
impotent (as Calvin says he has because by his decree and ordinance he
hinders us) or at least if we be already by Adams sin made impotent,
Supra l. 2. Instis. c. 7. sect. 5.
And yet he commands us, the fault is his, and not ours if we transgress
his commandment.

The fourth Chapter shows how the former doctrine makes God a most cruel
tyrant.

CErdon that infamous heretic, Ex Ter. l. prasc c. 51.
and diverse of his folovvers, reading in the old testament, what severity in
that law God had sometimes used, and not considering that the enormitie of
sin is such that it deserves not only temporal, but also aeternal death,
and imagining that such severity could not proceed from the good God, who is
goodness it self (as though God were merciful, and not just also) they
affirmed that there were tvvoe gods the one good, the other cruel ye one the
autour of the old testament, the other of the new, the one Creator only of
superior substaunces, the other of this inferior world. Against these men
saint Austine vvrote a book entitled. Against the adversary of the law and
Prophets, in vvch he proves that in the nevve law God has shevved as
great severity, to wit in the death of Ananias, Act. 3. Mat. 2^ and 5.
and Saphita, in and threatening aeternal danation (vvch passes all temporal
punishment) against those that shall not give alms, and not only against those
that shall kill, but also against them that shall be angry, and shall call
contumeliously their brother fool. Whence it follovveth that one and the
self same god is severe and svveete, just and merciful. And good reason, for
as the king must not only be gentle but just also, and therefore the Aegiptians
Hierogliffe of a king, was a be, whose honey signifies the sweetness
which ought to be in a Prince, and his stinge imports, that he must be
with all severe, and just also, where mercy and fair means will not
serve: so God the king of kings offers his grace most frankelye and
bestows benefits on us bountifully, and many times vvinketh at our
defaultes and expects patiently amendment and repentance; but if we
contemn his benefittes and abuse his patience, then does he lay it on
severely upon us, because as he is good so is he just, and must be just,
else were he not God. And although some, respecting only the shortenesse of
the pleasure which they have taken in sin, think it hard to be punished
eternally for a mome^taire pleasure; yet if they consider what it is to
offend so great a Majesty, and how when we sin, we do in affection
desire eternally to persevere in that sin, and pleasure or commodity, l. 4.
dial. c. 44.
we will think with saint Gregoire that it is good reason that the sinner
who has sinned in his eternity, should be punished in gods aeternitie? Yea
if Princes for a momentarie transgression may justly punish their subjects
with perpetual exile and death it self which of it self is perpetual,
because a resurrection is not natural, why may not God iustelie punish us
with eternal pains, for our te^porall faults, especially seeing that they
vvch dye in mortal sin, never think of repentance, but remain perpetually
obstinate in their malice, and so may justly be perpetually punished,
because sin as long as it remains, is worthy pain, and therefore if it
remain for ever it may justly be punished for ever and ever? But although it
be so that there are not tvvoe gods as Cerdon said, the one meek and mylde,
the other cruel and Churlishe; and although the self same God, and the good
and the onlygod, be and must be, because he is God, merciful and just, and
consequently gentle and severe without all cruelty, because justice is noe
cruelty; yet if we will avouch Luthers and Caluins doctrine for current, we
must of necessity confess, that God is the cruellest tyraunte that ever was
or can be. For they affirm as we have related in the former Chapter, that
God commaundethe us things altogetherimpossible; and they can not deny but
that for transgressing these commaundeme^ts, the wicked are tormented in hell
perpetually (for Christ bidds the^ go accursed in to everlasting fire, Mat.
2^.
who clothed him not in his members when he was in them naked, and who
fed him not when in them he was houngrie) which if it be so, then is God
most cruel and barbarouse. Luther once well perceued, that this consequence,
to wit that God is cruel, follovved evidently out of their permises, to wit
that the commandments are impossible; and what think you does he
answer to it, or how does he free gods goodness from cruelty? he says
that by light of nature and grace, l. de seruo arbitrio.
it is vnsoluble, how God damneth him who can not choose but sin and
transgress, and (here says he) both the light of nature and grace do tell
us, that the fault is in God only and not in miserable man: but by the light
of glory (which the blessed enjoy) Gods justice herein is manifested, which
now seemethe injustice. Ibidem.
Yea (sayethe he) Gods justice in this point is now incomprehensible. So
that Luther says that now nether by light of nature nor of grace, that is
faith, (for so I think is his meaning in his obscure distinction) we can
excuse God from injustice and cruelty, who commands things impossible
which we can not perform, and yet punishes us aeternally. And truly if it
be so as they say, that God commands impossibilities and yet punishes and
damneth the transgressors, then not only by the light of nature, and grace,
but by all light and reason in the world, it is manifest that god is most
cruel and tyrannical. For if that master be cruel and barbarouse, who
commands his servant that is lame to run or leap, and because he does
not so, beats him black and blevve, breaks his bones, and in fine kills
him also, the^ certes God him self who commaundes us impossibilities, and
for not doing them, does not only punish us temporally, but also damneth us
perpetually, and condemns us to those aeternall flames of hell where we
shall ever feel the panges of death and yet never dye, where we shall
always be dying and never dead, vvher after millio^s of years of
imprisonme^te and torment, we shall be never a whit the nearer an end of our
misery; he I say must needs be most cruel and inhumaine, more barbarouse
then any Scithian, and so tyrannical, that in respect of him, Nero, Domitian,
and Dionisius, were no tyraunts but Clement Princes.

The fifte chapter makes it manifest, that the reformers pull the true God out
of his throne, and place an Idol in the same, of their own imagination.

TErtulian that ancient and learned writer when he was best disposed (that
is when he was a Catholic and a writer against heretics, in defense of
the Catholic and Romain Church and religion) was of opinion that all heresies
are idolatries, and all heretics idolatours. Which opinion though at the
first blushe, it may seem to rigorous, yea erroneous, yet if it be well
vvayed and considered, it may very truly be verified of the heretics of his
time, and of this our unhappy age, and in some sort of all heretics what
soever. But before we come to the proof of this his opinion, we will
first set it down in his own words, which are these: l. praesc. c. 4^.
Either they feign another God to the Creator (as the Marcionistes did) or if
they confess the only Creator, they declare him otherwise then in deed he
is; so every error concerning God is in some forte a variatio^ of a kind of
idolatry. By vvch appears, that in his opinion every Heresy is a kind of
idolatry. And truly there is noe Heresy but either directly or indirectly it
denies ye true God. For either it denies some thing in God, and then it
directly denies God, or it denies some thing which pertains unto God, and
so indirectly and by a certain consequeace, it takes away the true God. As
for example the Marcionites affirmed that God was cruel and that the good God
was not Creator of this inferior world which contains the four
elements and all those things which are compounded of them; and seeing that
there is no such God who is cruel, or who is not the Creator of the vvholle
world, they denied the true God and confessed an Idol of their own
imagination. In like manner the Aria^s denied that God the father had a Son
coequall and consubsta^tiall unto him, and seeing that the true god is one god,
which is the father the son and the holy ghost, the Arrians in denying the
second person to be God coequall with the father, denied the true God,
because the true God is not distinct in nature from God the son, and they
adored an Idol of their own imagination, that is a God who has noe son,
or not coequall and co^substantiall unto him. Ser. 3. and 4. sent. Arianos
Wherefore Athanasius complains that the Arrians under pretense of religion,
had brought in idolatry, and aba^doned baptism which can not be equally
ministered in the name of the father the son and the holy ghost, if those
three persons be not all equal in deity and dignity. Other heretics there
were which held noe error concerning the divinity or any divine person,
and so could not be said, directely to deny the true God, but yet indirectly
they denied him by denying some verity which has a connection with him. As
for example, Nouatianus, who said that there was noe remedy against sin
after baptism, directly only denied the Sacrament of penance, but yet
indirectly and by a certain consequence he denied God, because it is not a
true God which will not accept of penance after baptism, and therefore
seeing that he confessed only such a god, he adored a false God, and so was
an idolatour. Nestorius also who said that in Christ beside the divine
person, there was also an human person, and consequently tvvoe persons,
directly denied the unity of Christ's person, and affirmed tvvoe persons in
Christ; but indirectly he denied Christ and consequently God, because
Christ is God and man in one and the self same person, and therefore he
adoring a Christ consisting of tvvoe persons, adored a false Christ, and
consequently a false God, and so was an idolatour. 22. q. 2. a. 2. ad (...) l.
9. m^t.
S. Thomas gives the reason of this: because (says he, and he alleges
Aristotle for more authority) God is a thing infinite in perfection, yet so
simple and deuoide of composition, that in him is noe distinction but of
persons, which also are one indivisible God, and therefore as an indivisible
point is altogether touched, or not at all, because it has no parts, so our
understanding either rightly attaineth unto the knowledge of God, or not at
all, and if it err in one perfection of God it erreth in all, because all is
one. And so if an heretic denies any thing of god, he denies all. But
although all heretics are in some forte idolatours, yet I will not deny but
that there is a difference betvvixte them, and paganes. For these men deny the
true God in express terms and adore some creature for God, as Jupiter, or the
planetes, or some such like, but heretics only affirm some thing of God,
which implies a denial of the true God, yet they profess in words,
religion unto the true God. Now therefore if all heretics be in some forte
Idolatours; then certainly the heretics of this time are especially
idolatours. For they (as is already proved) say that God is the autour of
sin, and their doctrine implies that he is of a bad nature, unreasonable,
and cruel, wherefore seeing that there is noe such God, they confess and adore
not a true God but an idol of their own conceipte and fiction, and so are
idolatours, who pull the true God, which is a good God, not cruel, nor
unreasonable, nor no autour of sin, out of his throne, and place therein a
false God, and an idol of their imagination.

THE SIXTE BOOK
CONTEYNETH A SVRuey of their doctrine concerning princes authority and their
laws, in vvch it is proved, that the doctrine of the reformers despoileth
princes of authority, and brings their laws in contempt.

The first Chapter shows how in that they say that noe Prince can bynd a
man in conscience to obey his law and commandment, they despoile princes of
authority and superiority and give the subjects good leave to rebel and
reuolte.

WE see by experience, Eccl. 13.
and holy scripture teaches, that like of nature do easily forte them selves
together. Sheep do flock to one fold, dear meet together in one park, bees
in one swarm, and fowls of one fether do fly together, and fishes of one
squame, do svvime together. And the reason may be, because like of nature are
like in conditions, and so do more easily symbolize and aggree together; and
one alone has no help but of him self, and therefore for mutual aid and
comfort, they accompanye them selves with others. But amongst all living
creatures man especially is civil and compaignable, and therefore is called
animal sociabile a sociable creature. For first man is apt to language, by
which he desires to express his mind to others, and therefore if he will
have any use of his tongue and faculty of speaking, he must live in company.
Secondly man especially is disciplinable, desirouse to learn of others, and by
discoursing and devising, to know what other men think and conceue. For as
he is vvilling to imparte his own conceits, so is he desirous to be pertaker
of the knowledge and cogitation of others, which his desire he can not
satisfy unless he repair to company. Thirdly man only emo^gest all living
creatures is apt to friendship, that is to love and to be beloved, and because
love comes by sight, and sure friendship is not gotten but by much familiarity,
and long experience, he can not attain to this also, but in company and
society. Lastly man only is borne naked, vvher as other living creatures
garments, do grow with the^, destitute of all weapons of defense, vvher as
the bull has his horn, the bucke his head, the horse his hoof, the bore his
tuske, and every one has one vveapon or other to defend and offend. Wherefore
seeing that man is so destitute, that being alone be wants many commodities,
he must fly to society vvher one helps another, and because every country
bears not all things, one country must trasique with another and hence
proceeds society. Wherefore noe soener were men created, but they assembled
them selves together, first in families, then in towns and cities, and after
wards as their number increased, in common weals and Kingdoms. And although
the Poets feign that Orpheus was the first who with his melodious tunes
called men together, yet certain it is that even from the beginning men lived
in society, induced thereunto by no other Orpheus, then Nature, and God the
autour of nature. Now as the natural body of man as it is framed by God and
nature of diverse members united together, so it has from God and Nature
authority to defend it self against all that shall unjustly seek to molest
or injury the same: so the civil body of a society of men be it a common
vvelthe or King dome receives from God and nature authority and power to
conserve it self in society, and to vvithstand all foreinets who shall
injuriously invade it. For if nature did not give men authority to defend and
present them selves in society, in vain, yea not in vain only, but also
perniciously and to man's great prejudice, had God and nature inclined him to
live in company. Wherefore all societies lavvfully assembled, have from God
and nature, power and authority to rule and defend them selves, and because
the confused multitude is unfit to govern, because it is bellua multorum
capitum, a beast of many heads, wavering, inconstaunte, and mutinouse (yea
hard it is for the multitude to meet alvvayes together to determine upon
state-matters, and when they are met they can as hardly aggree) i^ was
necessary that this multitude should have authority, to choose some head o^
heads, by which this civil body might be directed, Romans 13. Vic^relec de
potest civilly.
ruled, and defended. Henc^ it is that divines yea scriptures affirm, that all
lavvfull authority which Princes and superiors have over others, is o^ God;
because it proceeds from the peoples election, who as they were by God and
nature inclined to live in society, so they received authority to rule, and
defend them selves, which because they could not do by them selves, they
received also authority from God and nature to appointe rulers and governors;
and so all lavvfull governors are appointed by God, by means of election, and
therefore they who resist them, resist gods ordinance. Rom (...).
And although now for the most part Princes come to autohritie by
succession, yet the origin also of this proceeds from election, because the
people, to auoyed inco^ueniences which might happen, if after the death of
their Prince, they should be to seek for another, were content when they did
choose the first Prince, that all his lavvfull heirs, should after him succed
in the same authority. Now if the Prince have not authority to commau^d, and
bind his subjects also in conscience to obey his commandment, then in vain
is he head and Prince of the people, because if he command and yet the
subjects may choose whether they will obey or not, then noe order can be
established, and as good noe head at all as such a head. Wherefore holy
Scripture tells us that Princes may command and subjects in conscience must
obey, Mat. 22.
and give to Caesar what is devvoo Caesar. Rom 13.
Saint Paul says that every soul must be subject to higher powers: and
he gives the reason, because says he there is noe power but of God, and
therefore they who resist power, resist Gods ordinance and purchase to them
selves damnation. Ibide^^.
Yea says he: of necessity be you subject not only for displeasure, but
also for conscience. And after wards he bidds us to pay tributes, and
subsidies unto Princes, because they are the ministers of God appointed by him.
Saint Peter also bidds us to be subject to every human creature for God, ^.
Pet. 2.
that is to every magistrate and te^porall superior; whom he callethhumaine
creatures, because their authority is in te^porall and humain things. And
therefore he adds as it were to specify what he means by the humain
creature: whether it be to the King, as excelling, or to Rulers sent from him
etc. Yea he bids us obey not only gentle and courteouse masters, but even
those also which are hard to please. And this obedience these Apostles
command us to give to Princesalthough they be infidels, if otherwise they be
lavvfull, for when the Apostles vvrote, there were noe Christian Princes, and
faith is not necessary to jurisdiction, nether is authority lost by the only
loss of faith. But yet this must be understood, when Princes command with
in the limits and sphere of their jurisdiction; for otherwise, if they
command us any thing against God or conscience, we must answer them as the
Apostles ansvvered the Jews, Act. 4.
we must obey God before men. Because Princes are appointed by God, and so can
command nothing, which is against God or if they do, we must obey the
supreme Prince before the in^eriour, and the King before his viceroy. E^ E^s^^.
Wherefore saint Policarpe although he refused to obey the Proconsul who
commanded him to do that which was against God, religion, and conscience,
yet he said: We are taught to give to principalities and Potestates ordained
by God, that honor which is dew to them, and not hurtefull to us. This being
so the^ that Princes have authority to command, and to bind also in
conscience, to obedience, and that from God whose ministers they are and by
whom (as the wise man says) Kings do reign and the law makers decerne
what is just; Pr^^. (...):
it remains that we examine our adversaries doctrine in this point, that
we may see what they give to superiority, authority, and higher powers.
But peradventure some will think that this is a vain examination, because
they are so far from suspicion of detracting from Princes authority, that
rather they seem to grant them to much. Luther affirms that Bishops and
Prelates are subject to the Emperor even in Ecclesiastical causes, A^. (...).
and that Ecclesiastical jurisdiction is derived from the temporal. And when
Catholics in Ingland refuse to go to the Church, because profession is made
there of a religion contrary to theirs, the reformers urge nothing so much as
that we must obey Princes, and their injunctions. But this they do only when
Ecclesiastical power calls them to an accounte, or when the Princes laws
do fauorize their doctrine: for then they flatter Princes, and prefer their
authority before the Church: not because in hatte they reverence their
authority, but because by their power, they would establish their heresy.
So Arius by the means of Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia, first in sinuated him
self to Co^stantia the Sifter of Constantine the great: Ruff. l. 1. ^. 11.
and by him he gets audience of Constantine him self, and by flattery and
dissimulation be procures a commandment from the Emperor to Athanasius, to
receue him again into the Church. And afterward he crept by this means into
credit with Constantius the Ariane Emperor and son to Constantine, by
whom he banished Catholic bishops, called many councels, and propagated his
heresy, in so much that saint Hierome says Ari^^ vt orbem deciperet, Ep. ad
Ctesiph
forerem principis ante decepit Arius that he might deceue the world first
deceived the fister of the Prince. They curried favor also with lulia^ the
Apostata and they offered their service, ^heod. l. 4. c. 3.
to Iouinian the Emperor, but he would none of their proferd service,
knovving that they used to ^latter Princes for promotion of their heresies. So
that one Themistius a Philoso^her was wont to say, that heretics adore the
Purple, not God, and are as mutable as Euripus. Luther backed also by the Duke
of Saxony contemned the Popes legate who sought to reclaim him, and preached
confidently those heresies vvch otherwise he durst not have done, and
perseuered obstinately in the^ also which other wise peradventure he would
not have done. Prafat. In^^. ad Reg. Ga^*
Calvin sought by a flattering epistle to procure favor and credit with the
king of France, and our Inglish Protestauntes by the favor of our late Prince
whose guiftes of nature they abused, got credit amongst the people, and
graced heresy with her royal crown. And to win this favor they will
not stick to flatter Princes, yea to adore them and to give them higher Titles
and greater power, then ever God bestovved upon them. In king Edward's time
when the state favored them, they acknowledged him Supreme head not only in
temporal but also in Ecclesiastical causes. In Queen Mary's time because
that Princesl was not for them, the^ women could not govern; but in Queen
Elizabeth's time because they had insinuated them selves into her Protection,
then women might govern as well as men; and so they are the best
temporizers in the world. But if you mark their proceedings, or dect^^ne, you
shall see that they honor not authority, but love their heresies, which if
Princes will not like, then they conte^ne and despise all authority, and
will not let to make a mutiny, and stirie up the subjects to rebellion. to. ^
p st du^ Edista Caesarea.
Luther exhorts the Germans not to take arms against the Turk because the
Turk for policy, consa^le, integrity and moderation excels all (...)
Princes. And in the same place he called the Emperor Charles the fif^e, a
ro^^^ and frail carcass. And in his book again^ the king of Ingland he
calls him all ^^naught, l. cont Reg. Angl. l de potesta^^ seculari.
by the name of block head, s^^le, and so forth. In another book he not
only inueigheth agaiust Princely a^thoritie, but he also calls them foole^
knaves, tyrauntes. In another bookevv he vvrote against the tvvoe edicts of
(...) Emperor, he calls the Princes of the Empire fools, madmen, furiouse,
te^^ times worse then the Turk. Sur. an. 1^2^.
Of vvh^^ doctrine and example Thomas Muns^^ taking hold, with an hundred
thousa^ Rustickes troubled all German, and one Franconie he destroyed tvvoe
h^dred nyntie three monasteries. The l^ therane Princes also armed with this
(...) ample of Luther, took arms against the Emperor, and thereby were the
cause that the Turk surprised many holds, Sur 1530. and ^^66.
and strong fortes of the Christians. And what stirs the Caluinistes and
other sects have made in France, Scotland, and the low countries, all the
world knovveth, and Flaunders to this day ^eeleth. And truly this contempt of
lavvfull Princes, this disloyalty and rebell^on, is altogether according to
their doctrine. o. ^.
Luther in his commente upon the first Epistle of saint Peter says plainly
that he will not be copelled nor bound to obey any profane magistrate,
because he will not loose his liberty, which is to be freed in conscience
from all Princes authority: yet he says he will obey them freely and
frankely, but not of any obligation. And afterward explicating those words;
honor the King: he says that if the Pope as a temporal Prince should
command any to vvear a friars hood, to shave his crown, or to fast certain
days (as Luther did before his apostasy) that he should obey him, but yet of
free choice, as a temporal Prince (which yet I doubt whether Luther would
do (but says he) if he command the in the name of God, under pain of
excommunication and mortal sin: Tum dicas, bona verba, sitis mihi propitius
domine Papa, equidem quod ma^datis nultus fecero. The^ say, Be good in your
office, be good unto us Sir Pope, what you command I will not do. And he
gives you a reason in the next words: To higher powers it behooves us to be
subject so long as they bind not our consciences. So that Luther is of
opinion that though we must for order sake obey Princes and magistrates, yet
we are free in conscience, and can not in conscience under pain of sin be
bound by any temporal or Ecclesiastical authority. l. 3. c. 19. 14.
Calvin subscribeth to him in all points touching this matter, for he having
made a long discourse about Christian liberty, concludethe in this manner:
We conclude that they are exempted from all power of men. l. ^ c. 10 5.
And least that this saying might seem to have escaped him unadvisedly, in the
next book he repeateth it again diverse times: Our consciences have not to
do with men but God only. And again: ^.
Paul in no wise suffers faithful consciences to be brought into bondage of
men. Yet Calvin in the same places fearing to displease Princes, exhorts us
to do as they shall command us, not of any obligation, because Christ
(says he) has freed us from all the laws of men, but of free choice and
liberty, not for conscience, but for common peace. In which words he is
clean opposite to saint Paul, Rom 1^.
who says that of necessity we must be subject not only for fear of
displeasure, but for conscience. Out of this doctrine I infer as a most
evident conclusion, that in vain Princes have authority over their subjects,
for if the subject may choose whether he will obey or no, then the prince
may command and he may answer, that as he is not bound to obey because
by Christian liberty he his freed from all men's laws, so he will not at
this time obey, and so in vain shall the Prince command. Secondly I
conclude out of Luthers and Caluins premises, that there are noe Princes nor
Superiors over Christians, and consequently that all Christian Princes are
usurpers, because they challenge Superiority and authority over Christians,
which in deed they have not, and will needs be Princes and superiors, who
are but private men. For if they can not so command us as to bynd us to
obedience, then are we not subject to them, and consequently they are noe
Superiors; and although we may obey them of free choice, yet that makes
the^ not our Superiors, because so we may obey our equal and inferior if
we will, yet because he cannot bind us in conscience to obey, he has not
authority over us, and we in that we are free are not subject unto him.
Which that it may the more plainly appear, we must note that a Superior and
a subject are correlatiues, as are the father and the son, the master, and
the servant, because as the father is the sons father, and the master the
servants master, so a Superior is the subjects superior. And as noe son
no father, noe servant, noe master, so noe subject noe Superior, because
correlatiues are of that nature that one infers another, and one can not be
without another. Wherefore if all Christians be set at such liberty that they
are not bound in conscience to obey any Princes laws then are they not
subject unto them, but as free as he that has noe Master; and seeing that
where is noe subject, there can not be any Superior, it follovvethe, that if
Princes can not bind us to obey them, we are no subjects, they noe
superiors. Is not this gentle reader to contemn and deny all authority and
Superiority? And consequently, is not this to open the gappe and gate unto all
mutiny and rebellion? For when the subjects are taught that by Christ and
Christian faith they are freed in conscience from men and men's authority, if
the Prince command, they may deny obedience, if he exact tributes, taxes and
subsidies, they may Choose whether they will pay a penny, and if they like not
his government, they may by rebellion free the^ selves from him, to whom in
conscience and before God they are not subject, because they are free men,
who in that they are free can acknovvledge no Master. Who will now blame
the subjects in France, Flanders and Germany, for making rebellion? They did
but according to their doctrine, and in refusing to obey men, they did but use
that freedom which Christ has given them, which is to be subject to none.
Yea who now can do otherwise then to commend rebels for rebellion, and
discommend all loyal subjects? Because in disobeing and rebelling they show
them selves to be free men and acknovvledge Christ their Redeemer, and in
obeying, they make them selves subject to men, they use not their liberty,
and they do injury to Christ, as though he had not redeemed the^ from all
servitude of men. If Princes considered well this doctrine, they would be so
far from favoring these nevve Christians, that they would banish them their
countries. For what assurance has a Prince of subjects so persuaded? or
how can he but allvayes stand in fear of their rebellion; who by their
religion are vvarra^ted that they can not sin in rebellion, because they are
not bound in conscience to obey any human authority.

The second chapter shows how by their precedent doctrine, Judges and
tribunal seats are brought in contempt.

AS the Moral virtue Justice was ever highly esteemed as the strength of all
common vvelthes, so Judges who are the ministers of justice (whose office is
to condemn the nocent and absolve the innocente) were ever had in such
reverence, that their sentence was counted an oracle, and their seat and
tribunal where they used to pronounce sentence was respected as a sacred
place. Wherefore in Scripture it self Judges are called Gods because like
little Gods, Psalm. ^1.
under God they give sentence as his under Judges, and if the sentence be
just, then what they adiudge in earth, God ratifieth in heaven. This
honorable conceit of Judges and Tribunalls the doctrine of our reformers
alleged, diminishes very much, yea it brings them into plain co^tempte and
condemns them all of Tyranny and open injustice. For if Princes have no
authority as by the doctrine of these nouellauntes I have proved that they
have not, then can they give none unto their Judges, and consequently nether
the Prince nor the Judge has authority to give sentence or to punish any
malefactors, because if they have no authority they are but private men. For
although private men may vim vi repellere, repelle force by force, and stand
in their own defense, that is ward a blow when it is offered, and strike
rather then be stricken, yea kille rather then be killed, because this is but
to defend them selves, and to repelle injury: yet after that the injury is
receued, and quite paste, they can not them selves requite ye evil received,
with a like evil, because that were not to defend, but to revenge them
selves, which God has reserved to him self, and to them to whom he has
given authority, and will not in any wise that private me^ be their own
Judges and reuengers, because that were to open the gappe to all outrages,
much less will he permit them to punish them who have done injuries unto
others: wherefore if Princes have noe authority to command as in the last
chapter by this new doctrine I have proved that they have not, the^ are they
private men, and so can nether revenge their own nor others injuries, and
consequently unjustly they condemn malefactors to prison, to death, and other
pains and penalties. And truly if it be true which Luther and Calvin and
their followers also affirm, that noe man can bind us in conscience by law
and commandment, yea if it be good doctrine, which is their doctrine, as in
the next book shall be related, Chap. ^.
that by Christ and Christian faith we are freed from all obligation of
divine laws also, then the malefactor has great scope given him to avoid
the Judges sentence although the offense be manifest. For suppose the Judge
condemn him for transgression of the Princes law, he may confess the
fault, and contemn the sentence. And first he may say that his sentence can
not bind him in conscience to accept of it, because by Christ he is made a
free man, subject in conscience nether to man, nor man's law nor sentence.
Secondly he may confess that he has done contrary to the kings law, and
yet plead, not guilty; alleging that the Princes law can not bind him in
conscience, because he is exempted by Christ from all human laws and
commandments; And then he may say that where noe law byndes in
conscience, there is noe obligation, where noe obligation, there is noe sin,
and so he may confess the fact and yet plead not guilty, because he
sinned not; and he may also refuse the punishment by sentence decred, because
where noe sin is, there noe pain is due. Or if the Judge condemn him for
breakinge Gods law in stealing, murdering, or such like, he may confess
like wise the fact, and yet deny the fault, because he is so free, that
God his law also can not bind him, and seeing that where noe obligation is,
there can be noe fault (because every sin is against some bond or
obligation) he may claim absolution from the pain by the title of
innocence, because where no sin is, there no pain can be dew. Yea
although he confess that he have sinned (which yet he need not) in
transgressing Gods law, yet he may escape the sentence by appeal. For he
may say I confess the fault for which I am condemned, but I refuse to
stand to your sentence, I appeal to God, let him punish me if he will
(which I know not how he can do justly if I be free from his laws in
conscience) but of your sentence I will not accept, and if you urge me with
conscience and allege that I am bound in conscience to stand to your
arbitrament, because you are appointed to do justice, I challenge Christian
freedom by which I am so free that in conscience I am not bound to man's
law, nor sentence. And if this will not serve to free him from the sentence
(as I see noe reasou why it should not serve) then he may defend him self
by other opinions of the nevve reformers. He may say that by Luthers and
Caluins opinions which are the Patriarchs of the reformed Church, See the
next book, chap. 6.
he is taught that he has noe free will, nor choice in any action vvch
he does whether it be good or badde, and that therefore the judge is
unreasonable, cruel, and barbarous, in condemning him for theft, murder, or
adoultrie, which was not in his power to auoyed. And as justly might he
condemn him for not flyinge at the Kings commandment as for not absteining
from murder when either by anger or desire of money he was moved thereunto. He
might allege also for his defense, that God moved him unto those offenses
which he committed and so forcibly also, that he could not resist him, In
the fifte book, chap. 1.
for this is Caluins opinion as before is declared, yea he might say and have
Calvin also for his author, that God was the author and principal agent of
the theft or murder, for which he is condemned, and that therefore by good
consequence he can not justly be condemned for that in which God has more
patte then he has, and to which he moved him so forcibly that he could not
resist. What is this then (gentle reader) but to condemn all Judges and
tribunal seats, to stop the Judges mouth from pronounncing any sentence,
and to loose the bridle unto all malefactors? who may commit what outrage
they will because there is no tribunal which can justly condemn them, and
no sentence can be pronounced against them which they may not avoid by Luthers
and Caluins doctrine.

The third Chapter shows how the former doctrine brings all Princes
lavvet in contempt

A Kingdom is commonly called a body, not natural but civil and political,
whose head is the King, whose eyes are the Kings counsaylers, whose body
and members are the people, and whose soul is the law. For as the natural
body of man so soon as the soul has left it, loses all vital operation,
becomes gaste, ugly, and deformed, devoide of color and beauty, and
subject to dissolution of all the members by putrefaction: So the body of a
Kingdom destitute of law has noe reasonable action or motion, because it
wants the rule of the law, which squareth out all such operations, it
loosethe all beauty, because it wants law to set down an uniform
order, which is the beauty of all common vvelthes, and it tends to a
dissolution of all the parts and members, because it is destitute of law
which is the soul and sinevve which unites and knitteth these diverse
parts together. Wherefore Plato said that if men vvete lavvlesse and
destitute of laws, l. 9 deleg.
they would little differ from brute beasts; and the reason is because as I
have said, without laws there would be noe reasonable operations nor
order amongst men, by which especially a society of men differs from a
heard of beasts. And because the old and ancient sages knevv well how much
it imported to have laws in a common vvelthe, they devised means to move the
people to a great and high co^ceite of laws, that they might the more
willingly embrace them, and more diligently put them in execution. Zoroastes
who prescribed laws to the Bactrianes and Persians, made Oromasis the autour
of them, Trismegistus who gave laws to the Aegiptians, said that a God
enacted them, Minos, of vvho^ the people of Crete received their laws, told
them that Jupiter was the inuentour of them, Charondas, to bring the
Carthaginians to a reverent conceit of his laws, avouched that he was
taught them by Saturnus, Licurgus who ruled the Lacedaemonians fathered his
laws vvher with he ruled them upon Appollo, Solon who devised laws for
the Athenians affirmed that they proceeded from Mineruas brain, Plato who set
down laws for the Sicilians and Magnesians protested that Jupiter and
Appollo had inspired him. Moses who promulgated the law unto the Jews told
them that God was the autour of them, as in deed he was, and shevved them a
table in which an Angels hand had written them. And christ Jesus the
author of the nevve law protested that he was sent by his father, and that
the law and doctrine which he preaching was not his, but his fathers who
sent him. And truly good reason had they to imprinte in their subjects minds
a reverent conceit of laws, because nothing is more sovereign, nothing more
necessary in a common wealth, then law. Laws are certain conclusions of
the ae^ernall law of God and nature, they are like sinnevves which bind and
knitte the subjects together, they are the life and soul of this civil body,
they are rules and squares of human actions, they are bridles and curbes of
human appetites, they are dumme Magistrates, vvch look to good orders, they
teach the subjects their duty, keep them in awe and order, maintein peace,
uphold justice, revenge injuries, defend the innocent, chastise the nocent,
praeserue good subjects from receiving evil, and hinder the bad from offering
evil; without the vvch noe discipline can be kept, no good order observed,
noe peace established, no justice maintained. Now let us see what esteem
the reformers make of laws and what good counsel their doctrine affords
us, to excite and stir us up to the observation of laws. l. 4 Inst (...). 5.
Calvin pronounces thus: the laws of men whether they be made by the
Magistrate, or by the Church, although they be necessary to be kept, yet
therefore do they not by them selves bind in conscience.. 2^.
And for an example he affirms, that the Apostles nether did nor could make
any law in their first Council, Act. 15.
but only promulga^ed the liberty that Christ had given: and added, not as a
law that bynds but as an admonition,. 27.
that of charity to their vveake brethren they should absteyne from things
offered to Idols, from strangled and from blood. And after wards again he
repeateth that although it be necessary for government to have laws humain
and Ecclesiastical in the Church,. ^^.
yet they must not be thought to bind us in conscience. So that Calvin is of
opinion that although the laws of the Church, and of Princes, and
magistrates, ought to be kept for order sake, or for fear of offense and
scandale, yet they bind us not in conscience. And he gives the reason: l. 5.
c. ^^. (...). 10.
because (says he) If we once grant that men can bind our consciences by
their will and law, Christ loses the thank of his so great liberality,
(to wit in redeeming us from the bondage of the law) and our consciences
their profit: The same is Luthers opinion as is related before in the first
Chapter of this book. I will not stand now to refute this paradox, partly
because I have proved all ready in the place last mentioned, that we are bound
in conscience to obey all lavvfull superiors, and consequently that their
laws do bind our consciences partelye because the absurd sequel of this
doctrine which by and by shall appear, sufficiently confuteth it: nether
will I repeat which I have already declared, to wit that obligation of
laws is nothing repugnant to Christian liberty, because we are not
therefore said to be freed from the yoke of the law because the law
binds us not, but because we have received grace from Christ to fulfill
the law and so it can no more tyrannize over us in commanding more then we
are able to perform: I will therefore dravve to wards my conclusion which is
that the alleged doctrine of Calvin brings all laws in contempt and
loses the bridle to all malefactors. And first of all I must tell Ihon
Calvin that in denying laws to bind in conscience he takes a way all
laws, because it is the essence of a law to be able to bind the subject,
and in this only it differs from counsale exhortation and admonition.
Secondly Calvin by this doctrine abrogateth all promises and contractes even of
matrimony which are particular laws. And therefore if to say that laws
bind in conscience be to despoile Christ of the honor of a redeemer, and
man of Christian liberty, then is it also injurious to Christ and man's
liberty, to be bound in conscience to keep promises, and to observe
contractes, even with vviues. Thirdly the commandment also of parents and
masters are particular laws, and consequently we are not bound in
conscience to obey our masters, or pare^tos, and so one of the ten
commandments must be blotted out, because if we be not bound to obey
our parents, which is one of the cheefeste honors which we can give them,
we are not bound to honor our parents. Yea by this doctrine it follovveth
that the ten commandments bind us not in conscience: which though our
adversaries will not stick to grant, as we shall see in the next book,
yet who seethe not with what absurdity? Lastly at the least, which yet is
not the least absurdity, this doctrine brings all laws in contempt: for
as the vvilde and unbroken colte little cares if you should tie him with
hears or threedes, because he knovveth that such ba^des are not of force to
hold him, so when men are once persuaded that laws of Princes bind them not
in conscience, they will make little scrouple to tra^sgresse them, and so
laws are brought into contempt. And although fear of the penalty or
punishment which the law lays on them, may make them sometimes to keep
them for fear of punishment, Yet when they can escape the ministers of
justice eyes, or hands, or avoid by subtle shifte or open force the pain of
the law, they will make noe scruple of transgressing the law; for why
should they make conscience of that which touches not conscience. But Calvin
will say that they ought not* vvithstanding to keep laws for order sake
and for avoiding of offense. But the^ I ask Calvin what he means when he
says that they ought to keep the law? either he means by those words
an obligation in conscience under pain of sin, and then it follovveth
(which Calvin will not grant) that laws bind in conscience: or else he
means only a congruitie or decency, and then it follovveth still that laws
are brought in contempt. For if once a man be persuaded that it is only
convenient but not necessary to keep the law, he needs to make no
scruple to transgress the law, because the transgression is no sin but
only an incongruitie. And so if this doctrine be true men will not care a
straw for the Princes laws. Rebelliouse subjects, mutinous soldiers,
stubborn children, crooked servants, may be disobediente by authority,
because no law, nor commandment can bind them in conscience to loyal
obedience. And then laws lose their force, authority is not to be esteemed,
rebellion and mutini^ are allowed, the gappe is open to all malefactors, all
outrages are lavvfull, because where noe law binds, noe sin can be
committed, noe man is subject, every man is lavvlesse and as free as the
king, subject to noe law nor authority of God or man. What security has
a Prince amongst such lavvless subjects? how can he choose but fear reuolte
and rebellion of those, who are persuaded by religion, that noe law can
bind them in conscience to order and obedience? Is this religion like to be
of God which is so opposite to human authority which is of God; yea which
also despoileth God of all authority to command his creatures? If our noble
Prince and grave Counsaylours in Ingland considered well this doctrine, then
certes the first Parliament they called, should be to banishe this lavvless and
licentiouse religion, which brings laws in conte^pte, Princes in danger,
and opens the gapp to all outrages of malefactors.

The fourth chapter shows how according to their doctrine noe Prince can
rely on his subjects, no subjects on their Prince, nor on fellovv-subiects,
and consequently all Society, and civil conversation is taken away.

MAn, as I have already upon another occasion declared, is of nature bente and
inclined unto company and conversation in some Society or other; where if he
be a Superior he rules, if he be an inferior he is ruled and learneth to
co^ply with his fellow subjects. And of these three parts consists civil
conversation. For if the Prince rule not as he should do, or the inferior
obey not his superior or comply not with his fellovv subject as he ought to
do, government degenerateth into tyranny, obedience, turns to rebellion,
and conversation to civil dissension. These three parts are maintained by one
thing, which is trust or confidence in one another. for seeing that the
Prince can not do all alone because he must expecte aid and assistaunce of his
subjects, he shall never rule well unless he may rely upon the fidelity
and correspondence of his subjects. And if the subject put not a confidence in
his Superior as in one that tendreth the common good of all, and particular of
every one, he will never obey vvilli^gly nor rely on him securely, but shall
ever live in fear and distrust of him. And if one subject trust not another,
every one shall live in suspicion of another, and so men's words will be taken
but for vvinde, promises co^tractes, and bargains will not hold assuredly,
friendship breaks, familiarity decaieth, and conversation is ruined. For who
will make bargains, or strike a league of friendship, or familiarity, with
the^, on whose secrecy, fidelity, and other correspondence he has not any
probable assurance, because he puts no trust nor confidence in them; rather
has he cause to fly all company and like a (...), and hater of men, to live
in vvoods and wilderness, then in towns, cities, and societies. Now if the
reformers doctrine, which teaches that laws bind not in conscience, may
go for curra^t, the three parts of civil conversation are taken away, and so
Societies must break up, and every one must live alone like an Anachorite or
Heremite, because in company is noe security, where according to this
doctrine, nether the Prince can rely on his subjects, nor they on him, nor one
subject on another. And to begin with the Prince what confidence can he put
in his subjects who are persuaded in religion, that nether his laws can
bind them to obedience, nor the law of God or nature hinder them from
rebellion, mutiny, or other outrages? has he not just cause thus to
discourse vvvith him self? This people is persuaded by religion that no law
byndeth them in conscience, and consequently they make no scrouple nor
conscience of Rebellion, for where noe law byndeth in conscience, there no
conscience is to be made: I must therefore stand continually on my guard and
rely upon no subiets fidelity. And how shall I stand on my guard, when even
my guard according to Caluins opinion, is bound by no law, to be true and
faithful unto me. And so he shall live alvvayes in fear of his subjects. And
on the otherside, what confidence can the subjects have in their Prince? For
if noe law bind him in conscience, he having all in his own hands, may use
what extorsion and tyranny he pleases. For what should vvithold him from
it? fear of god? God can not justly punish where noe laws bind in
conscience, and so he is not be feared? conscience? Vvher no law byndes,
conscience needs to make noe scruple. Why then is not all lavvfull for ye
Prince which he likes? And so the subject shall ever have his Superior in
suspicion. And what good fellowship, amity, or conversation can there be
amongst the subjects, who must needs by this doctrine live in a continual
fear and distruste of one another, because no man is bound to keep touch and
correspondence with another? For if laws bynd not, promises and contractes,
not only in lending and borrovving, buying and selling, but also in marying,
are not of force to bynd our consciences, because they are but particular
laws: or if they are more forcible in bynding then laws, then according to
Calvin, Christ is noe perfect Redeemer, because he has not freed us from the
bondage of promises, and bargains, which not with standing are noe laws of
Princes, but particular laws of particular men, made betvvixte man and man
for more assured conversation. And so the wife may justly fear least her
husband when he is weary of her, or likes better of another, may shake her
of and divorce him self from her. For why may he not? If laws of Princes
bind not in conscience, then the contracte of matrimony, which is but a
particular law, can take noe hold of conscience, and so by the liberty which
Calvin gives him, which is to be free in conscience from all laws, he may
leave his wife when, and as often as he will, and as often may he take
another. And if his wife complain that he keeps not promise with her; he
may answer her easily, that if he be not bound in conscience to keep Gods
law, he is not bound to keep the law of matrimony, which is but a
particular law. And if she replve that god also commands us to keep this
particular law and contracte, he may tell her that he confesses it to be
true, but Calvin has assured him that Christ has freed him in conscience
from all obligation of all laws, whether they be human or divine, and so
he is not bound to keep the law of matrimony, and therefore chalenging his
liberty, he may leave his wife as lavvfully, and as freely, as if he had
never made her promise, because noe law, much more noe promise, is able to
bind in conscience. In like manner let merchauntes who use to lend money or to
sell of trust and credit, look better about them, the^ hither to they have
done. For if noe laws bind in conscience, then contractes also bind not,
and so their debtors may challenge the liberty which Calvin has given them,
which is not to be bound in conscience to pay them a penye. We must
henceforthe also take heed not only of known thieves and murderers, but of
them also that go for honest men, yea even of our necrest and dearest friends,
for what should vvith-hold them from doing us a mischief, if noe law nether
of God, nor man, nor nature, bynd them in conscience? And so the pare^tes may
distruste their children, and the children their parents, because according to
Caluins opinion, the one is not bound to the other nether by the law of God
nor nature. The husband must live always in jealousy of his wife, and she
of him, because the law of matrimony according to this opinion, bynds not
one party in conscience, to keep touch with the other. And so by this
doctrine noe man in any thing can trust on rely or another, but all must live
in fear jealousy and suspicion of others, and so they must forsake societies
and fly to mountains, and trust rather to beasts whom nature vvithholdeth
from injuries, then unto men whom according to Caluins doctrine, noe law
and consequently noe conscience stays or with holds from Mischeef. By this
let the reader take a scantling of this doctrine, and tell me whether it be
like to be of God which is so opposite to all society which his of God.

THE SEVENTH BOOK
CONTAINS A SVRuey of the new doctrine concerning manners, in which it is
declared how by diverse of their opinions they open the gappe unto all vice.

The first Chapter shows how the reformers take away hope of heaven and
fear of hell, and consequently open the gapp to all vice.

TVVOE things there are vvch as firm and constaunte pillars do uphold and
sustain all common vvelthes from falling, and praeserue well ordered
societies from dissoluing; to wit, hope of revvard, and fear of punishment.
Hope like a spur pricketh forvvard, fear like a bridle restrains, hope
eggeth onvvard unto virtue, fear pulls back from vice, hope incites us to
observe the law, fear makes us fear to tra^sgresse the law. Wherefore
Solon the grave lavv-giuer, was wont to say, that pain and revvard are the
things, which keep all Societies in awe. And well in deed might he say,
so, for take away hope of revvard, and men will be slothful and sluggish in
the exercise of virtue, and laudable actions, and take away fear of
punishment, and the evil disposed will be as for ward in attempting of theftes,
murders, treasons, treacheries, and whatsoever villainies. These tvvoe things
so necessary in a common wealth, Christ would not have to be vvanting in
his Church, which is the best ordered common wealth that ever was on earth,
and therefore he proposes unto us a heaven to hope for, and an hell to fear;
the one to stir us up to all virtuous actions, the other to deter us from
all wicked attempts. For although virtue (as the Philosopher says) be so
amiable and so beseeming ma^s reasonable nature, that if there were noe heaven
nor noe other revvard of virtue, but virtue, yet we should embrace it for it
self, and live chastely for the love of chastity, justly for the love of
justice, and temperately for the love of temperancie; and although vice be a
thing so detestable, filthy, Th. 1.2.^. (...) art. 2.
abominable, and repugnant to the reasonable part of man, that if there were
noe hell nor punishment for it, yet we should detest it for it self, and fly
it for the dishonestie which it implies: yet on the one side, because virtue
is repugnaunte to sensuality and placed amidde many difficulties, like a rose
amongst thorns, man would never long live virtuously, if there were no
other revvard for virtuous actions, then virtues honesty; and on the other
side vice is so pleasing to sensuality, and so suitable to our corrupt nature,
that if there were no other punishment to deter men from it then the
dishonestie, which is joined with it, fevv or none would fly and eschevve
it. Wherefore God has proposed a heaven to allure us to virtue, and a hell
to deter and scarre us from vice: Mat. 2^.
Come (says Christ to the good, whose revvard is heaven) ye blessed of my
father enjoy the Kingdom praepared for you from the beginning of the world.
Ibidem.
And in terrible words he thundreth out the sentence against the reprobate
whose punishment is the fire of hell: depart from me ye accursed into
everlasting fire which is praepared for the devil and his angels. And that
this heaven and the hope of it may the more forcibly move to good life and
observation of the commandments, the holy Scripture settes it forth with
all the gloriouse titles in the world, and even with the names of those
things which men most desire: If you desire life, heaven is called aeternall
life. Io. 6 and 1^. Apoc 4. Sap ^^. Apoc. 22.
If you covet rest, heaven is a repose after labor. If light be grateful,
heaven is a perpetual light shining in the faces of the Saints. Luc. 12.
If mariadge like you, Psalm. 25.
heaven is a perpetual mariadge. If pleasure please you, heaven is a river of
pleasure. If banqueting be thy desire, heaven is a Supper and a great supper,
Liic. 14.
where with Angels we shall by fruition and clear vision satiate our
selves in feeding upon the divinity: If home be grateful unto the, heaven is
thy country, Psalm. 13^.
from vvhe^ce according to thy soul thou fetchest thy race and origin, and
whether thou trauelest so long as in this world thou live, vvch is but a
way or Inn, noe home nor ma^sio^ place. If a Paradise vhose name imports a
place of all honest pleasure and felicity delights, heaven is called so,
Lu^. 2^.
and was by christ him self promised to ye good thief by no other name.
Breefly if thou desire a revvard of all thy pains and trauells, Mat. 2^.
heaven is the common wage of all Gods servants, a gole to run at, 1. Cor.
9.
and a crown to fight for. In like manner to make us to refrain from sin
for fear of hell, Vide Bell. (...) l. 4. de Christo. c. 10. and Auihorem
Resolut. Angl. l. 1. p. 1.
holy Scripture gives hell very terrible names, and paints it forth in
terrible forms. It is called in Greek and Latin by names which signify a
low and deep place under the ground, in Hebrevve by a name which signifies
a great goulfe. The Prophet Malachie calls it a furnace, c. 11 14.
for the kindling of which the wicked must be the straw and fevvel. Apoc.
14.21.
S. Ihon calls it the lake of Gods ire, because ye anger of God is as it were
all gathered to that place, and there especially is manifested in those
exceeding torments, yea he terms it also a standing poole replenished with
fire and Brimston. Christ him self gives it the name of outvvard Darkeness
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teath. Mat. 22.
Job says that in that place is noe order but sempiternall horror. (...)
And why does scripture so lively set forth these two things, heaven and
hell, but because God the autour of scripture, would have us hope for the one
and fear the other, knovving that nothing bears greater sway in ye rule
and good discipline of a common vvelthe, then hope of revvard and fear of
punishment. For if the hope of temporal honors, fame, and riches gives
such courage to the hearts of men, that they will run thoroughe fire and
water for the attaining of the same; how shall the hope of heaven and the
immortal crowns which there are laid up for us in store, incite us and
egg us for ward unto all laudable actions. If Mutius could have the courage
to hold his hand in the fire for hope of temporal renown and glory for
such fortitude: what fires and waters, heat and cold, shall not a Christian
armed with hope of heaven, be able to endure courageously? Shall the
soldier run thoroughe the pikes and pass by the cannon mouth, for hope of
a spoil or victory, and shall not Christians devour all difficulties for
hope of heaven? And look how much hope eggeth for ward to laudable actions,
so much and no less does fear restrain us from evil, and is no less
necessary to bridle the licentiouse, then hope to animate the virtuous.
Wherefore the ancients so esteemed fear that the city of Spartha made it a
God and dedicated a Temple unto it, as to the preserver of their common
vvelthe. But because there are diverse kinds of fear it shall be necessary to
distinguish them, that we may see which is that fear which is so
commendable. First therefore there is a worldly and humain fear, which is
conceued for some temporal evil, or human respect. and this sometimes is
good and sometimes also bad. As for example, if for fear of the princes
displeasure or torment, or death which he threatenethe we offend God in
transgressing his law, or doing against our conscience, this fear is evil and
no less evil then the sin of which it is the cause. Mat. 2^. c. ^0.
This fear made saint Peter to deny his master: which also our Savior
forbids saying: fear not them who kill the body, that is offend not God
for fear of them that can only kill the body, but rather fear God who can
cast both body and soul into the fire of hell. But if for fear of the
magistrate we abstain from sin, this fear is not evil, and therefore S.
Paul bidds us fear the magistrate, Romans 15.
because (sayethe he) not without cause he caryeth the svvord, because he is
the minister of God. Th. 2. ^. q. 1^
The second fear is called a reuerentiall fear which proceeds from a high
conceit of the divine majesty, Psalm. 12.
and remains (as David says) and that for ever also, even in the blessed.
For although they be assured that they shall never suffer any evil and
therefore fear no evil at Gods hands; yet when they behold the sovereign
Majesty of God, who punishes the damned, and could annihilatethe blessed if
he would, they conceue a great reverence, which is called reuerentiall
fear, much like as children who are assured that their father will not touch
them, yet conceue a reuerentiall fear at the very sight of him especially if
they see him sharp and severe with his servants. The third fear is called
filial or childrens fear, which makes us afraid to sin, not for fear of
punishment, but for fear of offending, and this fear they have who though
they were sure never to suffer punishment, nether in this life nor the next,
yet would not commit a sin because it is an offense of God: which fear is
called filial, because good children are afraid to do any thing which shall
offend their parents, though they were sure they should not be punished. Of
which fear saint Austin discoursing says, in Psalm. 113.
that otherwise does the adulteress fear her husband, otherwise the chaste
Spouse: she fears least he come and punish, but the other fears least he
be offended and forsake her. The fourth is called servile fear which makes
us to abstain from sin for fear of hell and damnation: which is called
servile, because it is proper to servants to do their duty for fear of
punishment, and this fear in express terms the reformers condemn as I shall
relate: the other fears their doctrine disallovveth. But least I may seem to
charge them with more then they say, I will make them speak in their own
words their opinion of hope and fear. l. ^ Inst. c. 15. ^.
And first of Hope Calvin says plainly, that God is not delighted with that
obedience which the hope of revvard in heaven beats out of us: in Antid.
sess. 6. Can. ^^.
for God says he, louethe a cheerful giver and forbids any thing to be
given as it were of heaviness or necessity. So that according to Calvin, it
is sin to give alms or to fulfill the commandments for hope of revvard in
heaven. But Caluins reason is as bad as his doctrine. For he proue^h it to be
unlawful to be obedient to God for hope of revvard, because that is to give
God his dew with heaviness: and yet we see that hope is so far from
making us to do things heavily, and with an evil will, that it encourages
us, and pricketh us forvvard with a vvilling mind, as is all ready proved and
experience may witness. And as for fear of hell, ^. ^. aepud Roff and ser.
3. p^^nitent.
Luther co^demnes it even unto hell, saying that it makes a man an hypocrite
and a greater sinner. And as concerning the other kinds of fear, their
doctrine in a manner abolisheth them all. They affirm as is before mentioned
that noe laws bind in conscience: whence follow these conclusions. First
that nether Princes nor Judges have authority to condemn us to any pain, as
is before proved, because where noe law byndes noe prince can justly punish
the transgression. And so human fear is taken away. Secondly this doctrine
abolisheth all filial fear: for vvher no law byndes in conscience, noe sin
can be committed, and so we need not to fear theftes and murders for fear
of offending God, because where noe sin is, no offense is to be feared.
Reuerentiall fear also they abandone, because as is before proved, in denying
laws to bind they take away all authority even from God, and where noe
authority is, no reverence is dew. As for servile fear, they condemn it in
express terms. And Luthers words we have hard already: let us hear
also Calvin speak. l. 3. Inct. c. 24 6.7.8.
He affirmethe that a sinner can not be just, unless he believe assuredly
that he is elect, praedestinate and undoubtedly to be saved: whence
follovveth that noe man must fear hell, yea that noe man can fear hell, and
retain his faith. For if he be by faith cocke-sure of Salvation, he can
not fear hell and damnation, because he is as assured of escaping hell as of
attaining heaven, and noe man can fear that evil which he is assured to
escape. As for example noe man fears least the heavens fall upon him. Or if
Calvin fear hell, he loses his faith, because he is not assured to escape
hell and to attain to heaven. And because Calvin savve well enoughe that
fear of hell is taken away by this his doctrine: 2.
he checketh saint Gregory the great, saying that he teaches pestilently
when he says in a certain homely; that we know only our calling but are
uncertain of our election: Hom. 38. in Mat. euang.
vvherby (says Calvin) he moves all men to fear and trembling; because we
know what we be to day, but what we shall be we know not. Luther also
as he holds the same opinion of assurednes of salvation, so he biddes us to
take heed least we fear hell or judgment, because that were to loose our
faith. These are his words: Wherefore if thou be a sinner as verily we all
are, in to. 2. Col. ^d Gal.
do not propose unto thy self Christ as a ludge in a rayn-bovve, for then
thou vvilte be a frayed and despair, but apprehend the definition of Christ,
that he is noe exactour of the law, but a propitiaiour. So that Luther
thinks that Christ will exact noe law at the hands of a faithful man
and therefore he needs not to fear hell, in which transgressors of the
law are punished. Wherefore as they take away all hope of revvard, so they
take away all fear and especially the fear of hell, which is the greatest
bridle that is, to restrain men from sin. But first I will ask the^ why
scripture sets forth heaven and hell with suches names and titles if it
be a sin to hope for the one, or to fear the other? Truly if it be sin,
the^ has God in setting forth heaven and hell so lively, laid baytes to
catch us, and to allure us to sin. And why then does scripture in so many
places command us to hope and to fear? And how are those tvvoe things
unlawful, which are so necessary in all common vvelthes? Why may the
plovvghman travel all the day in hope of his wage, the husbandman sovve his
seed in hope of a harvest, the soldier follow the vvarres in hope of a
spoil, and yet a Christian man may not fulfill the commandments in hope
of a revvard in heaven? For if it be lavvfull to hope for heaven, why it is
not lavvfull also to give alms in hope of heaven, as David inclined his heart
to keep the law for revvard and retributio^? Psalm 118.
They answer that we must serve God purely for his love and glory, but not
for revvard. True, that must be the principal end, but yet thence it
follovveth not, but that we may also serve for revvard, as for a secondarie
end and motive. But say they, he that serves for revvard, would not serve
god if revvard were not, which argues an evil mind. I answer that allmen
are not so affectcted. And if hope of heaven be of that force as to move the^
to keep the law, why may it not also be sufficient to move them to lay
aside that evil affection, which is also against the law? In like manner if
I may lavvfully fear death and other euilles of the body, why may I not
fear hell which is the greatest punishment that is both of soul and body?
and if I may fearre hell why may I not abstain from sin or fulfill the
law, for fearre of hell? They say, the reason is, because he that
fullfilleth the law for fear of hell, would sin with all his heart if
hell were not. be it so: yet this arguethe fear to be good rather then
evil, because it is a cause why we abstain at least from the out ward act
of sin, and if the mind be evil disposed, that proceeds not from the
fear of hell, but from an evil disposition. Yea if fear of hell be
sufficient to keep us from the act of sin, it is sufficient also to
restrain us from the evil desire of the mind, because against that also hell
is prepared. And in this is a plain difference betvvixte fear of hell and
temporal punishments: because Princes by te^porall pains punish only the
outvvarde act, of which only they can judge; and therefore the thief may
abstain from theft for fear of hanging, and yet have an inward desire to
steal: but God punishes in hell not only the outvvard act, but also the
inward affection and desire of sin, and therefore, if fear of hell keep a
man from theft, it will restrain him also from the desire. And consequently
fear of hell can not be ill, but rather good, which is no cause of ill, but
rather a cause why we abstain from evil. and although some peradventure
yea and without peradventure would sin and neglegcte the commandments if
hope of heaven and fear of hell were not, yet that is noe argument that there
in they sin, if they have noe presentil affection or consent to sin; For so
many would sin if they should live longer, or if they had this or that
occasion, or if God gave them not this and that grace, and yet, that they
would sin, is noe sin, if they have noe present affection or desire to
sin. Yea this is an argument that hope of heaven and fear of hell are very
laudable and good, because they are bridles to restrain men from sinning.
Wherefore to dravve near a conclusion, which is that our Reformers in taking
away hope of heaven and fear of hell, open the gappe to all vice: I report
me unto the indifferente reader how the Church is like to flourishe in
virtue without hope of heaven, and fear of hell, seeing that as is proved, noe
common vvelthe can enjoy temporal and civil peace and discipline without
them. Takeavvay hope of heaven, and take away prayer, alms deeds, erecting
of Churches, founding of Colleges and hospitalles; then fasting and penance,
works of justice, mercy and charity, will decay; in brief men will be
negligent and slothful in all exercise of virtue and observation of the
law. For who will run that sees no gole? who will fight that hopes for
no victory? who will work that looks for noe revvard. I know that the
very love of God, yea of virtue should move us to good, but yet so dull we
are, and so backwards, that these motives little move us, and so natural unto
us, it is to be moved with hope of revvard, that if men hoped not for heaven,
fevv would strive to over come their passions, and the difficulty in exercise
of virtue, and observation of the commandments. Like wise if fear be the
keeper, praeseruer, and conseruer of all common vvelthes, how shall we
imagine that the Church of God can stand without it? I grant that sin is
so foul a thing that even for the hatred of sin, we should abandone
sin, but seeing that sin is so aggreable to our corrupt nature, and never
appears in the own likeness, but is always masked and disguised with a
show of commodity, pleasure or profit; fevve there are who would abstain
from sin for the turpitude thereof and dishonestie which it implyethe. For
what should restrain a man from sin? shame of the world? I suppose he
has a secret place. Fear of temporal punishment, I suppose the fault be
unknown? Fear of God? Who will fear God that fears not the hell, which
he has prepared? Wherefore if notvvithstanding the hope of heaven and fear
of hell (which for all Caluins heresy possesses the hearts of most men) yet
so fevv live uprightly and so many go avvrye, what would they do, if hope of
heaven, and fear of hell were quite rooted out of their minds? Truly the
narrovv path of virtue would be ouergrovvne with weeds, for want of
treading, and the broad way of vice would become so smothe, that none would
embrace virtue, all would tumble headlonge into the depthe of vice, and
pleasure: and so the way to virtue would be hedged up, and the gate and way
to vice would always lie open, heaven would be a place inaccessible, and
hell our common home.

The second Chapter shows how in teaching that only faith justifies they
open the gapp to all vice.

SAtan the common enemy of mankind, knovving how easily he might entise and
allure us to sin (to which thing his malliciouse mind is always bente
and inclined) if he could persuade the world, that only faith suffices for
man's justification, has long since gone about to beat this doctrine into
our heads, and to bevvitch our understandings with it. And because he
knovveth that when he speaks in is own person and likeness he finds little
audience he has gone about and that even in the Apostles time, by certain of
his ministers who went under the name of Christians, to intrude upon us
this his pestilent doctrine. 2. Pet. 3.
For they not understanding (as saint Peter says) what saint Paul said,
would make him speak as fools make belles to sound, to wit as they
imagined, and so avouched that only faith was sufficient to justification and
salvation, and that saint Paul so warranted us. l. de fide and ^peribus.
Wherefore saint Austine affirms that saint Peter, saint Ihon; and saint
James, and saint Jude also, vvrote their Epistles to refell and refute this
heresy, and to expound saint Paul's meaning. After these companions, Simon
Magus embraced the same opinion, and after him Eunomius, who bragged that the
faith which they preached was sufficient to save their followers, what
sins soever they committed. This damnable heresy long since dead in the
minds of men, and buried also in hell, Luther not by miracle but meare madness,
has called to life again: ar. 10.1^. l de Christiana liberate. com. in c. 2.
Gal.
who in diverse places affirms that only faith justifies, before, and
without charity and good works. And because he savv that in thus saying, he
seemed to open the gappe to all wickedness, he adds another heresy, to wit,
that true faith and good works can not be severed, and therefore (says he)
although only faith justify, yet that argues not that good works are not
necessary, because a true faith always brings with it good works. l. 3.
c. 14.. 1^. c. 1^.. 8.
Calvin joins with Luther in this opinion, affirming that faith only
justifies, and that good works are only signs and effects of this faith.
Yea Luther and he both, avouch as shall be afterward declared, that good
works are so far from justifying, that they are all mortal sins, and by
faith only obtain this favor of God, as not to be reputed nor imputed to
the faithful man. And this faith (says Calvin) justifies not as a work of
ours, because whatsoever proceeds from our corrupt nature he counts sin,
but as it is an instrument by which we apprehend Christ's justice, and so
apply it to our selves, and make it so our own, that noe since is imputed
unto us.. ^.
These are his words: The power of justifying, which faith has, consists
not in the worthiness of the work: our justification stands upon the only
mercy of God, and the deserving or merit of Christ, which justification
when faith takes hold on, it is said to justify. So that faith also
according to Calvin, is a sin, because it is a kind of work of ours, yet
it justifies, because it apprehends Christ's justice, and so by a sin as
by an instrument which apprehends Christ's justice, we are made or rather
reputed just. But before I come to infer my intended conclusion out of this
doctrine, I vvilbee so bold as to ask them, where they read in Scripture that
only faith justifies? Romans ^.
Saint Paul (say they) affirms that a man is justified by faith; True, but
he says not by only faith, nether does any place of Scripture avouch so
mnch. Wherefore Luther seeing that this place was not plain enoughe to prove,
that only faith justifies; in his German translation, he foysted in (only)
into the text, making saint Paul to say: we think a man to be justified
by faith only. And being warned of this his corruption of scripture by a
certain friend of his, In Resp ad duos art. ad amicum. Ex Bell to. ^. l. ^. de
iustif. c. 16.
he ansvvered that that was the meaning: vvherin yet he shevved him self a
false translatour whose office is to translate faithfully as the words lie,
and not as he would have them interpreted, for that is the office of an
interpretour; and if this be lavvfull for Luther, hereriques have scope enoughe
to make scriptures speak as they will imagine that they should speak. But
Luther will say that saint Paul says that a man is justified by fayeth,
and not by the works of the law, which is all one as if he had said,
that a man is justified by faith only, and not by good works. But to this I
answer that if saint Paul had said, that a man is just by faith and not
by works, adding noe more, then Luther had had some argument, but he says
not so, but only, that a man is just by faites and not by the works of the
law, excluding only the Judicial sacraments and ceremonies, which he
calls works of the law. and when in other places he excludes works,
he meanethe the self same works, Romans 4. Gal. 2.3.
or else those works which proceed not from faith and grace, such as were
the works of the gentiles. Nether is faith said to justify, because that
only justifies, but because it is the beginning, and ground work of
justification, or because it concurreth to justification, or because by that
faith which justifies, is understood, not a naked faith, but a faith
joined with charity and good works, such as saint Paul speaks of, when
vvriting to the Galathians, he excludes the works of the law, Gal. ^.
saying that in Christ Jesus nether Circumcision is of any vvorth, nor the
Prepuce, but faith which works by charity. Wherefore saint Paul is so
far from thinking that only faith justifies, that he avouches that if he
had all the faith in the world and so great a faith that he could move
mountains, 1. Cor. 33.
yet if he had not charity he were nothing. And if Luther and Calvin
because scripture sometimes says that faith justifies, will therefore
infer, that faith only justifies; then because scripture says that by hope
we are saved and that blessed is the man that hops in God, Romans ^. Psalm. 83.
I will infer that only hope justifies; and because scripture also
affirms that the man is happy that fears our lord, Psalm 111.
I will conclude that fear only justifies. Or if they will answer that
hope and fear are said to justify and to make man happy, because they
concur to justification and happiness, the same I will say of faith, to wit
that it is said to justify, not because it only justifies, but because with
charity it concurres to our justification. For to charity also is attributed
our justification, and more then unto faith. For as Christ told saint Marie
Magdalen, that her fayeth had saved her, so he said that many sins were
forgiven her because she loved much: Lue. ^.
and Scripture attributes those effects to charity which are necessarily
linked with justification. As for example, Mat. 22. Romans 11. Col. ^. 1. Tim. ^.
charity is called the fullnes of the law, the end of the law, the
observation of the law, and the bond or knot of perfection. Charity also is
said to make us children of God, ^. 10 ^. Romans 3.1. Pet. ^. 1. 10.4.
by it the holy ghost is said to be diffused in our hearts; charity is said
to hide and cover our sins, and to make God to dvvell in our hearts. Saint
Ihon pronounces boldly that who loves his brother by charity is in the
light, 1. 10.^.
and that we are translated from the darkness, that is of sin, to the
light, that is of justification, because we love our brethren: Ibidem. c 3.
c. 4.
yea he says that vvhoesoeuer loves not remains in death. And again
every one that loves is borne of God. By which it is plain that either
charity is always joined with the grace of justification (as S. Th ^. 2.
q. 210. ^. 1. and ^.
Thomas says) or that it is all one with the said grace, S^^t. 2. d. 26.
Our. ibidem.
as others say, and so is the formal cause of justification; and then faith
only concurrethe as a disposition, as hope also and fear do. At least hence
it follovveth that only faith justifies not, because he that has not
Charity as saint Ihon says remains in death, and if a man have all the
faith in the world (as saint Paul says) without charity he is so far
from being just that he is nothing and no body. Supra.
Now vvheras they say that faith only justifies, but not without charity
and good works, because it can not be without them, it is another absurd
heresy. ^. Cor. ^^.
For saint Paul when he says, that if he had all the faith in the world,
and yet have no charity, he is nothing, supposes that faith may be
separated from charity. (...). 2.
And S. James supposing that it may be without good works, says that,
faith without good works is dead, and diverse parables as of the corn, Mat.
1^. ibidem. Mat. 22.25.
and cockle in the same barn, of good, and bad fishes in the same net, of
good, and bad gestes at the same supper, yea of the sheep, and goats also,
argevve that men may be in the Church by faith, and yet be badde Christians
for want of charity and good works which the good Christians have. Yea
reason teaches that it is one thing to believe and to know our duty by
faith, and another thing to do our duty. Yea if there were no other
argument, then the evil life of Lutheranes and Caluinistes, who brag that
they have true faith, and yet live most viciously, it would convince them
that faith (if there be any in them) may be severed from good works, and
joined with evil. But to come to a conclusion, if faith only justify then it
follovveth that the gappe is opened unto all vice and villainy. For when they
come to the definition of this faith which only justifies, Supra.
they say that it is an assurau^ce by which we are fully persuaded that
Christ's justice is ours, by vvch faith, also they say, Christ's justice is so
applied unto us, that it is ours and couerethe our sins, and makes us appear
just in the sight of God. Out of which doctrine I deduce this argument. If
faith only justify then if we retain that faith, though we commit all
the villainies in the world, they can not hurt us, because so long as we
hold that faith we are just, and so the gappe is opened to all vice. For if
a man be once persuaded, that faith only iustifiethe, and that this faith is
noe other thing but an apprehension that Christ's justice is ours, if he
persuade him self that Christ's justice is his (as he must, because Calvin
and Luther affirm that every man must believe so if he will be a Christian)
then needs he only care to retain that faith and apprehension. For if that
only justify, then retaining that, he is assured that he is still just,
though he commit all the sins in the world, and so by this doctrine he
has good leave to sin. And for more confirmation of this argument it must
be noted, that Luther and Calvin affirm that Christ's justice is the justice
of all men, and that if all men be not just by it, the reason is because by
faith they do not apprehend it, if then the greatest sinner in the world do
upon a sudden apprehend that Christ's justice is his then is, he justified
without any other paenaunce from all his former sins, and if he hold fast
this apprehension he need not care for amendment of life, but he may lance
into a Sea of sin and iniquity, and never fear drowning, because vvhilest
he apprehends Christ's justice to be his, he is just in the sight of God
even then when he is in the act of sin, Comment 2. (...) c. 2. Gal.
and so as Luther says, he need not respect what he him self has done
or does, but what Christ has done, because says Luther, faith
respects not what I have done, what I have sinned, what I have deserved,
but what Christ has done and deserved: vv^h is to loose the bridle to all
vice. Because if we respect only what Christ has done, we need not
care what we our selves do. Wherefore although Luther some times for very
shame of the world, affirms that good works are necessary, and that true
faith can not be without them, yet because he seethe that in thus saying he
speaks with noe consequence; sometimes he grants in plain words the
conclusion which I have inferred, to wit that if faith only justifies, good
works are not necessary, and evil works are not to be feared: in c. 2.
Call.
These are his words which shall be my conclusion: Sola fides Christi
necessaria est ad salutem, cetera omnia liberrima, neque praecepta amplius
neque prohibita: Only the faith of Christ (to wit that Christ's justice is
ours) is necessary unto salvation, all other things are most free, nether
commanded, any more, nor prohibited. So that if a man believe that Christ's
justice is his, he needs not to care for fulfilling the commandments,
because nothing is commanded, nether need he to fear fornications,
adulteries, murders, and such like treacheries, for none of all these villainies
are forbidden him. But let the indifferent reader be judge weather this
doctrine be of God or the devil, which so fauourethe sin which God
forbids and the devil allows, and whether that this faith of theirs be
like to be our justification, which loses the bridle to all licentiouse
living.

The third Chapter shows how Calvin and Luther in assuring men by an
assured faith of election, remission of sins, justice, and perueraunce in the
same, loose the bridle unto all iniquity.

ALl is not gold that glisters as the common proverb will witness, and all
is not true that seems true, as the Philosopher does tell us, because
(says he) many falsities many times are more plausible and probable, then
truths and verities. And not to go far for an example; to say with Luther
and Calvin that by faith we are assured of our Salvation, and acertained
that Christ's justice is ours, and that consequently what soever our own life
be, we may boldly rely on him as Children on their father crying Abba Pater,
because by his justice and not by our own, we must look for salvation; has
a goodly show and luster, and seems a doctrine most piouse and plausible,
but who so well examineth the same shall find that this is the doctrine
especially which lulleth men a sleep in all impiety, and like poppie-seed or
cold poison, casts them into such a deep and dead Lethargy, that they hear
noe clamours, and feel noe remorses of conscience. Martin Luther in a certain
book which he made of the works of the first commandment, prefers
faith as the principal worship of God, and defines it to be an assured
confidence, and confident assurance, by which we are assured that we are
just. And in another place thus he pronounces: Comment in c. 2. Gal.
Creed eum tibi fore salutem and misericordiam, and ita erit sine dubio:
^eleeue that Christ will be thy salvation and mercy, and so it shall be
undoubtedly. See what a compendious and near way to heaven Luther has
found out. If you be clogged with all the sins in the world, be^eeue that
you are just (which is easy to do) and that you shall be saved, and then
vndoubtely, Luthers soul for yours, you shall be saved; and because so long as
you believe that you are just, you are in deed just, you can not be damned
so long as you can believe, how ill soever you live in the mea^ time. l. de
captiuit. Babil.
Wherefore the same Luther avouches that a Christian man is so ritche and on
so sure a ground, that he can not damn him self though he would, unless
he will not believe; and what must he believe? that he is just, or that he
shall be saved. These are his words Tam dives est homo Christianus vt s^
damnare non poterit quantumuis velit, nisi sola incredulita te. So rithe is a
Christian man that he can not damn him self though he would, but only by
incredulity. And what is the incredulity which only damneth him? Not
incredulity of the Incarnation, Trinity, Passion, or Resurrection; but of his
own Salvation. So that live he how ill soever he will, and be he never so
incredulous in the articles of his belief, yet if he believe that he shall be
saved, it shall be so* And believe he the mysteries of our faith never so
firmly, live he never so regularly, yet if he fear his own Salvation he
shall be damned, because only this assured faith of salvation saves, and only
want of this faith damneth, if Luther may be believed. Calvin in this
doctrine subscribeth to Luther and shakes hands very freindly, these are his
words We shall have a perfect definition of faither we say that it is a
steadfast and assured knowledge of Gods will toward us. l. 3. Inst. c. 2.. 7.
And this only assured knowledge of Salvation and gods good will toward us,
he calls the i^stifying faith:. 9.
for (says he) the ungodly may believe that there is a God, and th^^ the
History of the ghospel or other parts of Scripture are true,. 10.
But this is but an image or shadovv of faith, not worthy the name of faith;.
16.
but there is none truly faithful but he that being persuaded with a sound
assurednes that God is his merciful and loving father, does promise him self
all things upon trust of Gods goodness.. 1^.
And although (says Calvin) we see Gods good will toward us a far of,
yet with so sure light, that we know we are not deceived. At lenghte to
make the matter yet more sure, he concludes that we are not only sure of
present justice and favor, but also of future, and so are sure that we
shall not be damned. These are his words. Ibidem.
It is against order to limit the assurednes of faith to a moment of time,
whose property is to pass beyond the spaces of this life, and to extend
farther to immortality to come. So that according to Calvin, believe you the
Trinity, Incarnation, Passion, death and Resurrection of Christ never so
firmly, yet if you believe not undoubtedly that you are just and shall
remain just to the end, that God not only for the present time favors you,
but also will favor you to the end, you can not be saved: and if you believe
only that you are just, and shall remain just and at length shall be also
undoubtedly saved, Caluins soul for yours, you can not be damned. And how can
Calvin assure him self or us, that we are just and shall be just? has he
had any special revelation? noe. but says he I am warranted out of
Scripture that Christ's justice is ours, and so if I will believe undoubtedly
that it is mine, and will be mine, ^. ^r.
then ame I sure that I am just, and shall be just, and can not fall so long
as I keep this standing. Against this fantastical faith of theirs, I might
bring many arguments, but that, as in other matters, so in this, I covet to
be short. First if this faith of theirs be so necessary, how comes it to
pass that Christ never exacted it of them whom he cured? For it is an
opinion of some fathers and divines, that whom soever Christ cured in body, he
healed also and justified in soul. When he^ cured the blind men that came
unto him, Mat. 9.
he exacted faith of them, and asked them whether they believed; what? not
whether they believed that they were just or elect, but whether they
believed, that he could restore the^ to sight. If this stedfest faith and
assuredness of our own salvation be so necessary, how came the publicane
to be a just man, who was so far from assuring him self of Gods favor,
Lu^. 1^.
and his own justice, that he durst not look up to heaven. And yet he
returned home just, and the pharisee who gloried like a Thrasonicall
Caluinist in his own justice, and assured him self that he was not a sinner
as the Publicane and other men are, was condemned and rejected. If this
undoubted faith of our own salvation be so necessary to salvation, surely
the Apostles were much over seen, who inculcated so often the faith of the
Incarnation, Resurrection, Act. 1.2.3. ^. 8.10.13.17.
and such other mysteries, which is but an image and shadovve (as Calvin
says) of the true faith, and make no mention of that which is the only
justifying faith, and all in all; never exacting of their auditors to believe
that they are just and elect, but only to believe that Christ is God and
man, that he dyed, that he rose again, and such like. Truly either this
faith is not necessary, or they were very negligent and incircumspecte, who
never mentioned the same, and yet so often inculcate the faith of the
mysteries of our faith, which is but a shadovve of the true faith, and is
not sufficient to salvation without Caluins assured faith. Like wise when
they made a Creed as a brief abridgement, of all which was necessary to be
believed, where was their mind and memory, who omitted Caluins article of
assuredness of our salvation, and election, which is so necessary to be
believed, that the faith of other articles is but a shadovve in comparison of
this? If Calvin say that this his article is included in the article of
remission of sins, he is much deceived: because in that article we only
believe that in the Church is remission of sins, but that Caluins sins or
any of our sins in particular are forgiven, is not there expressed. Now if
scriptures and the Apostles had only omitted, this assured faith which Calvin
says is so necessary, it were sufficient to make us not so assured of
Caluins doctrine: for if it were necessary, it is not like that the Apostles,
whose preachings, trauelles, life and death, were ordained to the salvation
of others, would have omitted that which only saves, and without which noe
other faith or works can possibly save us. But scripture not only omitteth
assured faith of our own justice and salvation, but also condemns it, and
exhortes us to fear of our own state and salvation, and therefore assures us
as much that this faith of Calvin is false, as Calvin assures it to be
necessary. Calvin says that by faith we are assured of Gods good will
tovvardsvs, Scripture faith that a man can not tell whether he be worthy
hatred or love: Calvin sayetht hat a just man is sure that he is just: Job ^.
Job says although I be simple, that is just, yet this my soul shall not
know and S. Paul says that although his conscience accuse him not of any
sin yet in that he is not justified, to wit before his own eyes, Psalm. 1^.
because he knevve he might have secret sins from which David desired to be
cleansed. Calvin says that a man may besure and consequently secure of the
forgiveness of his sins; Eccl. ^.
and yet Scripture bidds us not to be without fear of our sins forgiven. or
as the Greek text has, of the forgiveness or propitiation of our sins.
Calvin says that a man may be assured not only of present but also of future
favor and justice; Eccl. ^.
and yet scripture says that a man knovves not what will be, his end, because
all are reserved as uncertain for the time to come. Calvin says that a
faithful man must not fear to fall, but rather assure him self that he shall
keep his ground and standing; Romans 11.
and yet saint Paul speaking to a faithful man says: thou stand by
faith, think not highly but fear, Philipp. 2.
and thou that stand (says he) take heed least thou fall. And again, he
bidds us work our salvation with fear and trembling. So that either we
must leave Calvin, or renounce scripture, because they are contrary, and
stand in plain terms one against another. Nether is this doctrine opposite
only to scripture, but also to reason. For first there are many corners in a
man's conscience, which we seeldom or never look into: For as Hieremie
says, C. 17.
the heart of man is unsearchable, and lies open only to God. how then can
Calvin by faith be assured that his sins are forgiven, that he is just and
elect? or if he know, god only is not the searcher of hearts. And if there be
many corners in man's heart, to which the heart it self is not privy,
peradventure after all our seeking, some sin may lurk in a corner vvch we
know not of. Secondly by Caluins own confession, we must believe nothing but
what we find in scripture, and where fyndes he, that Calvin is just, or
that his sins are forgiven? If he find it not, he rashly believes it. If
he says that Christ is our redemption and propitiation: I answer that so
he is the redemption and propitiation of all, and yet paganes and infidels and
many of the reprebate are not just, and therefore must not believe assuredly
that they are just or elect, and if they should they should believe that
which is not so. Christ therefore is our propitiation, because he has paid
by his passion a sufficient price for our justification and redemption, but yet
if that price by faith in Christ, together with hope, charity, Sacraments,
and observation of the law (for all these are commanded) be not applied to
us, we are never a whit the better. Thirdly suppose only Caluins faith by
which he believes Christ's justice to be his (which not with standing is
already refuted) were sufficient to apply this propitiation; Supra.
yet for as much as Calvin says that good works do necessarily follow a
found faith, I demand of him whether that he and his have not just cause to
doubt, or at least to fear their own justice, and faith also, whose evil
deeds are so many, and so manifest. Fourthly every one of them says he is
assured that he is just and shall be saved, and yet some of them are deceived,
because some of them have contrary faithes, and some of the same faith are
damned, why then may not Calvin also fear least he be deceued, seeing that
Christ's dyed for all, and yet all are not just nor elect, though they assure
then selves of the same. Lastly this doctrine opens the gapp to all manner of
vice and wickedness. For if it be sufficient to justification to believe
undoubtedly that I am just, or that Christ's justice, is mine, then does it
follovv that as after I have sinned I may apprehend Christ's justice to be
mine, and my self to be justified by the same, so when I am moved to sin
by the devil or my own concupiscence, yea even then when I am in the act
of sin, I may apprehend that though there is noe goodness in me of mine
own, yet Christ's justice is mine, of which, if even in the act of sin, I
assure my self, I may assure my self also, that noe sin can hurt me,
because that assurau^ce justifies me. And so ye fornicatour may thus
discourse with him self. I confess (o Lord) that there is no goodness in me,
and that this act to which I am now tempted is a sin, but Christ's
justice is mine if I will apprehend it so, am I am just if I will believe
so, and from this faith, I will never be dissuaded, but will hold it fast
even in the act of sin, and so I need not fear this sin, because if I
hold fast by this faith, noe sin can hurt me, because by this faith I me
justified. And so the way is open to all vice and wickedness, because if a man
will believe that he is just, and hold fast by this faith, noe sin can
hurt him, because that assurance of justice does justify him.

The fourth chapter shows how in saying that faith makes no sin to be
imputed to a faithful man, they give good leave to all faithful men, to
commit all sin and wickedness.

THe reformers are of opinion as anon I shall relate in the next chapter, that
all our works are sins, in which least they may seem to contradicte them
selves (for they say also that true faith can not be separated from good
works which seems to allow of all the works of a faithful man) they
have found out this way to escape a contradiction. True, say they, all the
works even of faithful men are sins, and yet true it is that faith can
not be separated from good works, because faith makes God to impute nothing
as sin, but rather to esteem of all the actions of a faithful man as good
and laudable. Wherefore Luther in a certain sermon uttered these words, Vbi
fides est, Ser. super Si^ Deus dilexit
nullum peccatum nocere potest: Vvher faith is, noe sin can hurt. And so
(says he) a Christian man is so ri^ch that he can not damn him self but
only by incredulity. Sup. l. de capt.
l. 3. Inst. c. 14. sect. 17 etc. 1^. sect. 8.
Calvin also says plainly that all just and faithful men's works are of
them selves sins, but are by faith reputed as good. Which doctrine if it be
true then needs not a faithful man fear any sin be it never so great,
because God will never impute it unto him, and consequently it shall never be
brought to examination at the later day, nor punished in hell, because God
imputes it not as sin, and consequently makes no reckening of it. Psalm. 50.
Wherefore David who was a faithful man, in vain cried God mercy for his
adoultrie and murder, because if he was faithful (as certes he was) those
sins could not be imputed as sins unto him. And so if Christians will
hold fast by Caluins faith and believe that Christ's justice is theirs, they
shall not need to fear either theftes or adulteries, because Luther and Calvin
have given them a vvarraunte sealed and signed with their own hands, that
if they hold their faith, noe sin can hurt them because it is not imputed
unto the^. And why then make we scrouple any longer of sin? let every man
if this doctrine be true, follovv his hco^cupisce^ces; For although he
commit all the sins which either the devil puttes into his mind, or the fles
he and world suggestethe, he is assured that they can not hurt him, biause
they are not imputed.

The fifte Chapter shows how the reformers avouch that all our actions are
of them selves mortal sins, and how this doctrine loses the bridle to all
vice.

VVoe be to them (says God) who affirm bad, to be good, and good to be
euib: Isai. 5.
which curse must needs light upon our ghospellers, who condemn the just
man's good deeds as mortal sins, and accounte the faithful man's evil deeds
as good and honest, or at least as such, that are not reputed evil, but rather
good. in c vlt. ad Gal.
Luther says that the best works which infidels do, are sins, these are
his words: Whosoever out of Christ works, prays, suffers; does
work, pray and suffer in vain: because what soever is not of faith, is
sin. And in his co^futation of Latomus reason, thus he speaks: Omne opus
bonum peccatu^ est nisi ignoscat Dei misericordea: every good work is a
sin, unless Gods mercy forgive it. And in the same place, he says that
God pardons it, in that he imputes it not to the faithful. And a little before
that, he says that saint Paul never did good work in his life, and that
the best which ever he did, was a sin, though God imputed it not to him,
because he was faithful. And yet again before that, he says that even our
justice is uncleanness, and all our good works are sins. Likewise in one of
his propositions collected and condemned by the famous university of Paris, he
has these very words: Omnes virtutes morales, and scientiae speculatiuae, non
sunt verae virtutes and scientiae, sed peccata and errores: all moral virtues
and speculatiue sciences, are not true virtues and sciences, but sins and
errors. Ihon Calvin although he will seem to make a difference betwixt the
moral virtues, l. 3. c. 14.. 2.
and vices of the heathens, (for otherwise (says he) if these be confounded,
there shall remain no order in the common wealth) and although he calls the
paganes moral works the guiftes of God, yet presently after, either
forgetting or correcting his former speeches, he says plainly that they are
no more to be counted virtues then those vices which are wont to deceue by
reason of nerenes and likeness to virtue. Sect. ^.
And he pronounces this sentence against Scipio, Cato, and other moral men
amongst the Romans; to wit, that all their moral virtues were vices. Then
he sets down this general conclusion as a final sentence from which no
man must appeal; Sect. 4.
whatsoever man thinks, purposethe, or does before he be reconciled unto God
by faith, is accursed, and not only of no value to rightuousues, but of
certain deserving to damnation. And he gives this reason: because forsooth,
our nature by original sin is so corrupted and soked in the poison of sin,
Sect. 5. and l. 3. c. ^ in fine.
that it can breath out nothing but corruption and therefore (says he) oil
shall sooner be vvrounge out of a stone, then any good work from us. l 3 c
14 sect. 7.9.11.
Yea the same sentence he pronounces not only against the sinful, but also
the just and faithful Christian; to wit, that no good proceeds from either
of them, but that the best work which the iustest man does, deserves shame
and damnation. The reason and ground of this their doctrine is because they
think that original sin has so defaced our nature, that it has blotted
out the image of God, bereaved us of free will, inclined our nature wholy to
sin, unabled it to virtue, in so much that what soever proceeds from this
infected nature, is filthy, abominable, and odiouse in the sight of God. But
thus they first of all do mighty injury unto man's nature, which by this
doctrine is rather brutis he then reasonable. For if man's understanding be so
metamorphized, that all his science and knowledge either speculatiue or
practical is error and deceipte, as Luther says, I see not why man should
be counted reasonable, more then a brute beast. And if he be wholy bente
to sensuality and sin, and has noe inclination to virtue, noe povvver nor
faculty to do the least act of virtue, or to resist the least tentation,
then is his nature noe more noble then the nature of a beast, because he is
altogether sensual as a beast is, and no more inclined to virtue or able to do
a virtuous action then an ox or an ass. And so the old definition by which
philosophers use to define man must be corrected, because they define a man to
be animal rationale a reasonable creature: which definition by this doctrine
aggreeth noe more to a man then to a beast, because man is as unable to the
works and operations of reason as a beast is, and so is noe more man but a
beast by Caluins definition. Secondly this doctrine condemns all Philosophers
and Philosophy, which teach us, that in the most vicious man that is, there
are some inclinations and seeds of virtue, which is the cause that the most
wicked man that is, loves virtue at least in others, has a remorse of
conscience when he has done evil, blusheth at his evil deeds as not
beseeming his nature, and some times does some good work or other: for you
shall hardly find a man given to all vice, and inclined to noe virtue. from
hence proceeded the moral works of the Romans, for which saint Austine
says almighty God bestovved on the^, l. 5 cin. c. 15.
so ample en empire, and honored them with so many victories, hence proceeded
also the laws of Licurgus, Solon, Plato, and the rest, and all the motall
precepts and virtues, of the ancientes. from hence also proceed the
speculatiue sciences of natural Philosophy, Metaphysike, Mathematique,
Astrology, and such like: which to condemn of error, as Luther does, is
meare madness: against whom I will use the same argument, vvch Philosophers
used against the Academikes who denied all science: either Luther knovveth that
all speculatiue and practical sciences are errors, or he knovveth not: if
he know not, he is rash to deny sciences, if he know, the^ in denying
science he grau^teth science. And although I will not deny but that the
virtues of paganes are many times vice, because their end or scope is often
times vain glory, or else some other evil circu^staunce is annexed. Yet to
say that all their actions are of necessity sins, is to make man no man, as
I have proved. I will grant also that sinners good works, as prayer, alms
deeds, and such like, are opera mortua dead works, as divines say, because
in that they proceed not from ye life of grace, they are not condignely
meritoriouse, yet they may be morally good, and if they proceed from a good
intention, and motion of God which is called grace preuenie^t, and vvch is
never vvanting, they dispose a man to penance and penance disposes to
justification. Wherefore although Nabuchodonosor was in mortal sin, Dan 4.
yet Daniel counsayled him to redeem his sins by alms deeds, which
counsel he would never have given, if to give alms, had been a mortal
sin. Thirdly this is to condemn Scripture yea and God him self, who forbid
certain actions as evil, and counsel and command others as good: which is
absurdely done if all be sins and evil actions. Fourthly, hence it
follovveth that all sins are aequall: because if our actions be evil because
they proceed from an evil and corrupted nature, they must be (at least in
this respect) equally evil, eue^ as the fruits of a crabbe tree are of like
sovvernes, because they proceed from the same tree, and take their sovvernes
from the same sap. Lastly thus the gappe is open unto all vice. For if what
soever man does is sin, then if he be tempted to fornication, to what
purpose should he refrain? For if he resist the temptation, he must do it
either by chastising his body, or by prayer, or by a contrary resolution of the
mind and will, which if it be sin also, he auoydeth one sin by
another, and so might as well have yielded to the temptation: And if he he
have another man's wife in keeping, or his lands, or goods in possession, he
can not get out of this sin but by restoring, because the sin is not
forgiven unless the thing which is vvro^gfully holden be restored, and yet
to what purpose should he restore, if restoring also be a sin, as it must
be, if all our actions be sins? truly he has little reason, because in
restoring he auoydeth not sin, but changes one sin for another. Yea if
this doctrine may take place, the Prince may as well use oppression of his
subjects as bounty and magnificence; subjects may as well rebel as obey;
soldiers need not to fear murder, pillage, Luxury; courtiours need not to
make scrouple of vanity, flattery, dissimulation, ambition; merchaunres need
not to forbear usury, nor vn^uste selling and buying? Judges may take ^ribes,
and pronounce partial sentences; and the Jury may as well give wrong, as
right informations; the ritche may as well bestovv blows, as alms on the
poor, and beggars may as well steal, as ^egge: because as these are sins
so are the contrary virtues, Supra.
which are no more virtues (as Calvin says) then are those vice vvch for
their likeness and show of virtue d^g^ for virtues; And so no man shall need
to make bones of any sin, because some thing he must do, and whatsoever he
do the, is sin, and when he thinks that he does best, his doings
deserve no less then aeternal damnation. But they will say that although all
actions be sins, yet God imputes not all as sins, and therefore we must do
almes-deedes and abstain from injuries, because God imputes these as sins,
but not the other. Thus they say, but yet thus they take not a way the
absurdity. For yet it follovveth that an infidel may do what he will, and
make no more scrouple of one action then of another, because God imputes all
his actions as they are, that is sins, and vices. And if the faithful and
just man's actions be all sins, either God must impute all as sins, or none
at all, because all are a like, nether has God any reason to repute his alms
deeds as good works, rather then his theftes, if those be sins and
deserve damnation as well as these. whence it follovveth that we must put
no difference betvvixte our actions, but may a^ freely and as boldly, adventure
upon theftes and murders, as any works o^ charity, justice, mercy, or any
other virtue.

The Sixte Chapter shows how they deny free will and so also open the
gappe to sin.

SAint Austine says that it is a thing so commonly received that man has
free will, Ep. 11. l. de duabus animabus c. 1.
and that he is not to be blamed for that which is not in his power, that the
Shepherds sing it on the mountains, Poets in theaters, the unlearned in
Circles, the learned in libraries, masters in Schools, Bishops in sacred
places, and mankind throughout the world. Aug. l (...). ciu. c. 19.
And Cicero thought it would be counted such a paradox to deny free will,
that he chose rather to deny Gods prescience vvch seemed repugnaunte to it,
then to deny free will which was so commonly receued. And so says saint
Austine, he was injurious to God, least he should be injurious to the common
vvelthe, which could not stand without free will. And yet the Stoikes
denied free will as witnesses saint Austine, l. 5. ciu (...). Aug ser ^^.
and after them Simon Magus, Manicheus, and Vviclephe, and last of all our late
Reformers, a badde brood of as bad breeders; Luther therefore vvriting against
Erasmus and against free will also which Erasmus had proved both learnedly
and eloquently entitleth his book, Lut. l de ser ^o arbitrio.
of Servile Arbitrament, in which book he disputes with all might and
maine against free will, and to set before our eyes more plainly our servile
condition, he calls man's will a Hackney, upon which if gods spirit
chance to sit and settle it self, it goes necessarily that way to which
the spirit spurreth it, but if the devil bestride this hackney, it runs
whether Satan urges it, and has noe power either to resist the one, or the
other. And a little after he says that frevvill is a divine name which
aggreeth only to God, but not to man; yea in another place he says that
free will in man is a title only and name without the thing it self. c. 8.
Calvin in this point aggreeth with Luther. For he in his first book of
institutio^s, c. 15. sect. 8.
grauntes that Adam had free will before his fall (which I see not how he
can grant, l. 3. c. 34.
because he says that Gods providence and predestination takes away
frevvill, yea that Adams first sin was committed by the inevitable decree of
God) but after his fall, he in him self, and we in him, Iost free will: and
therefore Calvin rebukes the Philosophers, who aver that man has free
will, and that else all difference betvvixte vice and virtue is taken a way,
for (says he) they say true if they take man before his fall. c. 2.
And in his second book having given a sharp ce^sure and sentence against
both Philosophers and fathers, because they absolutely affirm that man has
free will, these give free will his part together with the grace of God; he
vvisbeth that this name free will should no more bespoken of, c. 2. sect. (...).
and he would vvish others if they would ask his counsel to forbear it
also, least that thereby they take occasion of pride, and of a proud conceit of
their own force? And so if vvishers might be vvoulders, we should nether have
free will nor the name of free will. By which it is plain that Calvin
absolutely denies free will, as Luther and melancthon once did, although
after ward they granted it in external and civil actions, as buying and
selling, talking and vvalking, and such like; but in moral actions of vice and
virtue, yea in supernatural actions, to which the grace of God is necessary,
as the love of God, connersion, and repentance of a sinner, they grant noe
free will nor choice at all. The which opinion is so absurd, that by this a
man may see what credit is to be given them in greater matters, and higher
mysteries, who have erred so grossly in a matter so evident, that not only
reason, but also experience proves it. For first we deliberate and consulte
concerning some actions and not others; as whether we shall take Physic or not, and yet we co^sulte not whether we shall dye or not, fly or not, and
suck like; which is a sign that the former actions are in our power, else as
well might we consulte whether we should fly or not in the a ire, when
by ronning or riding we can not escape our enemy. And why have Princes their
counsailers to consulte and deliberate, if all things follow the Sway of
necessity? We command also our servants or subjects to run or go, but
not to fly, or to stay the course of the son, because those actions are in
their power, not these. We exhort me^ also to leave this vice, to follow
that virtue, and we counsel the sick to take this not that medicine,
because all these things are in his power and free choice, and yet we
exhort him not to put a way his agevve, to be sick noe more, and if we
would, he would count us but fools for our labors, because these things
are not in his choice. We are also wary in our actions and heed-full, least
we err or banger, which argues that we may do ill or well, and
consequently are not enforced by necessity either to the one or the other. We
are angrye also with our subjects for doing certain things, and they
marvel not; and yet if we would be angrye with them for not moving a
mountain, or not carrying a greater burden they a man is able to bear, they
would think us mad if we be but angry. We are angrye with our selves
also, and blame and repent our selves, for over shooting our selves in words,
for making an evil bargain, for eating or drinking to much, for stealing, or
such like actions, which is a sign that we might have done other wise,
else I demand a reason why we repent not our selves that we did not soar
up into the air when our enemy pursued us, or the thief robbed us? we
praise and disprayse men for virtuous or vicious actions, as for liberality,
and nigardnes, and yet we praise them not for growing and vvaxing tall and
big, nether do we disprayse them for little stature, or for not putinge
forth their limbs. And why, but because those things are in their power,
these are not, and therefore worthy nether praise nor dispraise? we ask also
and enquire of men, why they did this, why they did not that? As God asked
Cain why his countenance was fallen? Genesis (...)
Which argues that they might have done other wise. Or if Calvin will say
that we make inquiry of necessary things; then let him demand of the Lion
why he roareth, of the ass why he brayeth, of the sheep why he bleateth,
and of ye sick man why he will be sick, and the blind man why he sees
not? But to leave experience (which commonly is called the mistress of
fools, because it teaches even fools to be vviser, and might persuade
Luther and Calvin also that man has free will, were they not worse then
fools, and as vvitlesse in this point as mad men) I will demonstrate the same
by reason also. And first of al I demand, why rewards are proposed not
only by Princes, but by God also for them that embrace virtuous and heroical
actions? Certes, noe God a mercy to him that does well, if he could not do
otherwise. And why do they prescribe punishme^tes against transgressors of
their laws, if there be noe free will? Certainly he that necessarily is
evil, is rather worthy compassion then pain or punishment. Or why do God
and Princes set down laws and precepts, for their subjects to observe?
If they have noe free will, they may as well prescribe laws to sheep that
they grase not upon other men's grounds, or to horses that they break not
their masters Hedges to run into their neighbors corn, or wolves that they
vvorrye not the innocent lambs, or to foxes that they live not upon the
spoil of the Poulterers hens and capons? Why are not mad men punished for the
evil words, vvch they speak, or evil deeds which they do in their
madness, seeing that thy have as much free will as men have, when their
vvittes are freshest? Secondly man is endevved which reason to understand not
only what the end is, but also what are the means to attain unto the same;
he sees, that there are many particular ends to which he may apply him
self: he sees also many means to attain unto the end which he proposes
unto him self; as if he propose health he perceues, that this he may attain
either by purging, or letting blood, or exercise, or diet. And seeing that the
will follovvethe the understanding which is her eye, and without which she
is blind, and can nether love nor hate, nether desire nor fear, it must needs
follow, that as the understanding proposes many means, and apprehends
none of them in particular necessary, (because if one be not used another
will serve) so the will has freedom to use which means she will,
because the understanding judges none in particular necessary, and therefore
by preiudicate opinion enforces her to none. And in this may be seen a
difference betvvixte men and brute beasts, because though they change their
imaginations and imagine one while water to be convenient, another while
meat, yet that which they first apprehend caryeth a way their appetites by a
svvaye of necessity. Lastly there was never yet any nation so barbarouse
which confessed not virtue to be in some of our actions, vice in others; and
therefore they praise the one and dispraise the other; and yet if we have noe
free will it must needs follow, that there is noe more vice and virtue in
our actions, then in operations of beasts, as I shall in another chapter prove
most manisestly. But they will say (as commonly they say when they know. not
what to say) that in reasons may be sophistry and deceit, and that therefore
against all the experience and reason alleged for free will, we must
believe the holy word of Scripture, which rejects free will. Is it so?
and are scriptures contrary to reason? I will not deny but scripture teaches
many things above reason, but that it teaches any thing against reason, is
most untrue. For as grace perfiteth nature in eleuating it to a higher being,
and to more heroical actions then of it self it can attain unto, and in noe
wise destroys it; so scripture which is the book of faith, leads reason
farther then of her self she could go, but induces her not to any thing
which is against reason, for so God which is the autour of reason and faith,
in ruinating reason by faith and scripture, should deny him self, because he
should be contrary to him self. Yea if Scripture should deny free will, it
should be contrary to it self, because it gives as plain testimony for it,
as for any thing. Eccl. 6.1^.
does not Ecclesiasticus affirm that God from the beginning created man and
left him in the hand of his own counsel? does he not say in the same
place, if thou vvilt keep the commandments they shall keep thee? does he
not again inculcate free will unto us saying: God has set before thee water
and fire, to which thou vvilte put thy hand? To what end does God say to
man if thou vvilte, if man have noe free will? were it not ridiculous if one
should say to a blind ma that can not see; if thou vvilte, look and thou
shalt find; or to a lame man, if thou vvilte follow me, thou shall not
lose thy pains? Is. c. 1. ^. 30.
The like words to ye former has Esaie the Prophet: If you will and shall
hear me, you shall eat the goods of the earth. Ang again: this says our
Lord God of Israel, if you return and cesse from sin you shall be saved.
The like speeches uses almighty God by his Prophet Hieremie: c. 15.
If thou vvilt be converted, I will convert thee, And how often does
scripture exhort and command us to convert our selves to God? Ezech. 18.33.
Which were ridiculously spoken, if it were not in our free will by the
assistaunce of Gods grace to turn unto God. Mat. 19.
And in the new Testament says Christ: if thou vvilte enter into life Keep
the commandments. And again he complains with tears of Hierusalems
ingratitude saying: Mat. 23.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem how often would I have gathered thee as a hen
gathers her chickins under her wings, and thou would not? What man in
his vvittes would speak thus unless he thought that Jerusalem had free
will? else might Jerusalem have ansvvered Christ in this manner. Why
complainest thou so pitifully of my slouthe and ingratitude? Know not thou
that I can not? why say thou to me, and thou would not, knovving that I
have noe will, and that thine only is the will, mine is servile necessity?
So that it is manifest by experience, reason, and scripture, that man has
free will. And seeing that there is no page of scripture, but it conteinethe
either commandment, or counsel, or exhortation, or some one or other of the
signs of free will, which are before alleged, I may be bold to say that
there is noe page in holy Scripture out of which may not evidently be deduced
a pregnaunte proof and argument for free will. Wherefore although some fevv
places are in Scripture, which, till they be well understood, may seem to
disprove free will, yet rather should the heretic confess his vva^t of skill
to interpret those places, then to deny free will vvch all scripture almost,
so evidently avouches. l. Cor. 12.
Let the^ not therefore obiecte that God works all in us, that man's way is
not in man: Ier. 10.
that it is not of the vviller nor of the ronner but of God that takes mercy
on us: Rom 9.
that God calls and knocks at the door of our soul: Ephesians. 5.
that God the father draws us; For I can easily answer and have all the
sfathers and divines to back me in it, Io. 6.
that God only operateth in us by his antecede^t grace, but we also by virtue
of it cooperate unto his motion: that man's way, that is the way of Salvation
is not in man's power in respect of the beginning, because God only puttes us
in the way by his vocation and praecedent grace, but yet by virtue of this
grace it is in our power to walk in this way; that it is God only that
begi^neth all good wills and courses, but supposing his precedent grace, we
also will and run, but not we only but his grace with us and we with it:
That God only calls and knocks by his praeuenient grace, but we also by
consent do open the door unto him; that God the father draws by his motions,
but sweetly without violence, by persuasion and allurement, not by
co^pulsion. But to labor no farther in so evident and plain a matter; by a
great absurdity which follovveth this doctrine, I will demonstrate it to be
absurd, because one absurdity follovveth another. If man have no free will all
vice and wickedness must go for current, and no man must endeavor to avoid
sin, because he has no power to avoid it. Be it then that Master Minister
dehorte me from vice with all the Rhetoric which he has, let him lay
before mine eyes the filthiness of sin, the dishonestie which it implies,
the offense of God the scandale of my neighbor which follovveth it, thereby to
dissuade me from it; yet if I have no freevvil nor power to avoid sin, I may
answer him that his persuasions are but lippe-labour which he might as well
use to a beast as to a man; For, what I shall do, that of neceffitie I shall
do; and as he disuadeth me from vice, so the pleasure or temporal profit
which vice brings, does so allure me, and the devil so urges me, that I can
not resist, because I have no free will, but must behave my self passiuely,
permitting concupiscence and the devil to work in me what they will,
because I have no power to resist them. For as a man that is persuaded that
he has noe force to resist his enemy, or the Ministers of justice, lays
down his arms and weapons, and permits them to do their pleasure,
knovving that resistaunce is vain, when will he nill he, their pleasure must
be done; so when a man is persuaded that he has no free will nor power to
avoid sin, he must yield him self as a slave to all vice, and when he
feels the temptation he must yield presently, and acknovvledge his own
impotencie. And if any man rebuke him for his sins, or if God herafter at the
day of Judgment accuse him or condemn him, he has an excuse ready for such
an accusation, and a trick in store to avoid such a condemnation, to wit,
that he could do no otherwise, because he had no free will. And so he may
commit what sins he will and no man, yea not God him self can justly find
fault with him, unless they first find a fault in Luthers and Caluins
doctrine, which teaches him that he can not do otherwise.

The seventh Chapter proves that the reformers in auouching the laws and
commandments of God to be impossible, give occasion also of all impiety.

I Shall not need to dvvell long on this point, nor to use any long
discourse to come unto my intended conclusion, because I have already in the
fifte book set down Luthers and Caluins words in which they affirm the
commandments to be impossible, vvher also I have disproued this doctrine and
proved the contrary, to wit that man has power with the grace of God to
fulfill his commandments, only now out of those premises as in that book
I inferred God to be unreasonable by Luthers and Caluins doctrine, so now
out of the same I will conclude, that the gappe is opened to all vice and
wickedness. For if a man be once persuaded, that he can not fulfill the
commandment of keeping the Sabboth-daye, if desire of gain, or lacre move
him to servile works and labors, he will easily be persuaded to labor,
who is already persuaded that he can not keep the Sabothe, as he should
do. And if he once give credit to Calvin that he can not observe the law,
which forbids him to covet his neighbors wife or goods, if he be
tempted or moved with such obiectes, he will never urge him self to
vvithstand such temptations, because he is persuaded that he can not fulfill
this law, but must needs transgress it, and not only covet and desire, but
also inordinatelye use his neighbors wife and usurp his goods also, when
soever they cross the way of his desire. Breefely seeing that there is noe
sin, but it is a transgression of one law or other, he that is persuaded
that he can not fulfill any law of God (as all Lutheranes and Caluinistes
are) is persuaded also that he can avoid noe sin, and consequently if any
sin move or allure him either by profit or pleasure which it implies, he
can not, being so persuaded, endeavor to vvithstande the temptation, because
that were to shevve him self able to resist sin and to fulfill the
command mentes, and consequently to condemn Ihon Caluins doctrine. And
although in so doing he opens the gappe to all manner of iniquity, yet
therein he shows him self a true Caluiniste, who being persuaded by
religion and conscience that he has nether force nor will to resist any
sin, or to fulfill any commandment, must not, yea can not without offense
of conscience and hazard of faith, go about to fulfill any law, for so
though not in words, yet in fact and deed, he should deny his religion.

The eight Chapter shows how in affirming that Christ has freed us from
all laws, they loose the bridle to all vice.

THe reformers, as is recounted partly in the third book and second chapter,
partly in the fifte chapter of the same book, are of opinion that Christ
was noe lavvgiuer, but rather that he came to free us from all laws: which
doctrine although I have in the former places alleged, yet to ease the
reader, it shall not be amiss here also to set down the samedoctrine in
other their own words. in cap. 4. Gal.
Luther in a comment of his on holy scriptur, often times inculcateth that by
Christ we are so freed from all laws that none of them can bynd us, or
touch us in conscience. These are his words: Discat igitur pius legem and
Christum duo contraria esse prorsus incompatibilia: praesente Christo lex mullo
modo dominari debet sed cedere debet e conscientia and relinquere cubil^ (quod
angustius est, quam vt duos capere possit) soli Christo: Let therefore the godly
man learn to know that Christ and the law are tvvoe contraries altogether
incompatible: Christ being present, the law must in no wise rule, but must
depart from conscience, and leave the bed (which is to narrovv for tvvoe) to
Christ alone. Where you see that he makes Christ and all laws even his
own laws so contrary, that if Christ stand, noe law can stand, nor have
any force over conscience. in c. 2. Gal.
And in another place of the same comment, thus he defines: quatenus est
Christianus, est supra omnem legem: as he is a Christian, or in that he is a
Christian, he is above all law. And yet again in another work of his, l. de
liberta^^ Christiana.
he speaks more boldly and plainly: nullo opere, nulla lege homini
Christiano opus est, cum per fidem sit liber ab omnilege: for a Christian no
law nor work is needful, seeing that by faith he is free from all law.
Supra, and l. 2. Inst. c. 2.. ^.14.
The same opinion holds Ihon Calvin as in the former and many other places is
plainly to be seen. By which doctrine although they will seem to make
Christ a more perfect redeemer as before is noted, yet in deed they make him a
favorer and patron of all vice and wickedness. For if we be freed from all
obligation of laws, then do they noe more bind us then laws abrogated: if
they bind not in conscience, then noe man is bound in conscience to observe
them: If he be not bound in conscience to observe them, then he sins not in
transgressing them no more then in doing contrary to a law which is
abrogated, because every sin is against the obligation of one law or other,
yea then he transgresses not, because where is noe obligation there can be no
transgression. If it be no sin to transgress laws (as Luther and Calvin
say that to a Christian such transgressions are not imputed as sins) then
need not any Christian make any scrouple of any action by what law soever it
be forbidden, and so he may as freely steal as give alms, and as boldly he
may follovv his lust and sensuality, as live chastely, and moderate his
appetites; for where noe law byndethe in conscience all is lavvfull that
likes, and so the gappe is open to all manner of vice.

The ninth Chapter proves that in affirming God to be the autour of sin, the
Reformers open the gappe to all vice.

I Have already related the blasphemies of our new Christians against the
goodness of God, and I have demonstrated that they are senseles, absurd, and
impious, in making God the autour of our sins, whose mercy pardons, and
whose justice punishethe sins, but can not work, or commit the least sin
without prejudice of his goodness and deity also, which is goodness it
self. So that now I will suppose for my premises that they are of that
opinion, and I will deducefor my intended conclusion, that this doctrine
loses the bridle unto all iniquity. For if a man be once persuaded as all
Caluinistes are, that God is the autour and worker of his sins, what is
there remaining to restrain and vvith-hold him from sin? he may and will
easily discourse thus with him self, when soever the devil urges, or the
flesh allurethe, or the world intiseth him to sin. This act to which I am
tempted and which commonly is called a sin, is the work of God as well as
mine, and more his then mine, because as my oracle, (that is Ihon Calvin)
tells me, he works it in me, and urges me unto it. Why then should I
either be a frayed or ashamed to do that which God not only does with me, but
also so forcibly moves me unto it, that (as M. Calvin tells me) I can not
possibly resist him? Ame I better then he? or can any sin be so vglye, as
not to beseem me which beseems him, who is goodness it self? But
peradventure God dispenses with him self but not with me, and therefore
will not have me to sin. Will he not? Why then does he urge and egg me
to sin? where I am urged, certes I am willed, and willed by him by whom
I am urged. Yea if sin be the work of God (as it is unless Calvin lie)
then is it the effect of his will (for as David says he does all by his
will, and as divines say his power is his will) and so I in sining shall do
his pleasure and conform my self to his will. Let us sin then freely, we
do but Gods will, and let us not make scruple of that, of which he is the
vviller and worker, let us not blushe at the turpitude of sin of which God
him self is not ashamed, nether let us fear offense where we do our
masters will and pleasure, rather let us persuade our selves that all sins
are lavvfull and pleasing to God, because they are the works of his will,
and consequently according to his will. But fie rather upon this impious and
licentious doctrine, God forbids sin by his law, and therefore would not
have it done, and he punishes sin most seuerily, and therefore is no autour
of it, and he is goodness it self and deuoide of a^^ malice, and therefore
ca^ not work sin, which is deuoid of all goodness, and nothing but malice.

The tenthe Chapter by many points of their doctrine proves that they take
away all vice and virtue from men's actions, and so give them leave to sin,
and to do what they will.

IT is a thing so manifest that virtue and vice, honesty and dishonestie, is
to be found in the actions of man, that there was never any people so
barbarous or vitiouse, which has not commended many of men's actions, and
has not dispraised many others, and blushed at them even in them selves, as
not beseeming man's nature, which as it is reasonable, so it should be ruled by
reason. Wherefore to certain actions, honors and rewards have been
proposed, and to others severe punishments and chastisments. The vvisest of
the Ge^tils whose reason by sin and superstition was least obscured, were
of opinion that some actions were sins, and offenses of God, and that others
were grateful and pleasing unto him. For they knevv that God the autour of
nature, as he had ordained all things to their end, and given them faculties
to exercise those actions, which should bring them to their end; so he has
ordained man unto his end, which is to live virtuously, and by virtuous life
so to serve God here, that he may enjoy him herafter: and therefore he has
endevved him with reason by which he may know virtue from vice, and good
from evil, and a will also to execute that which reason shall command; so
that when he lives according to reason he follovvethe his nature, and Gods
ordinance, and exercise the those actions which beseem his reasonable nature,
and are pleasing unto God, and when he sollovveth sensuality and leaves
reason, the^ does he that which is not beseeming his nature, then does he
break Gods ordinance, and svverue from the end to which he is ordained, and
consequentlye sins and offends God. l. 1. Eth. c. 8.
Wherefore Aristotle says that wise and virtuous men which live according
to reason are most dear unto God. Ex Clement. Alex orat. hortator ad gentes.
in Phaedone.
Plato affirms that God is the revenger of sin and dishonestie, and in
another place he distinguishes three kinds and states of men: The first of
those that live virtuously, and they says he, are sent to the happy Ilancls,
which we would call heaven: the second state is of them who commit lesser
faults, which we would call venial sins, and such says he are
purged for a time, (the same do Catholics say of the^ that die out of mortal
sin yet are defiled so with venial sins that they need some purging in
Purgatory) and then with the first sort, are admitted to the happy Ila^ds.
The last are they which commit enormous and heinous crimes, and such says
Plato are tormented perpetually, because their pains do them noe good, which
is as much to say, as Catholics say of the^, who for greater offenses of
which they repent not before death, are condemned to a praemunire and
perpetual imprisonment in hell. By which it may appear that not only
Christianes but also paganes and those that want the light of fayeth, have
yet by light of reason espied vice in some of our actions, and virtue in other
some, and have deemed those worthy punishment, these worthy some revvard. And
yet if we give credit to our nevve Christianes, we must acknovvledge noe
more virtue or vice in the actions, of men the^ in the operations of brutish
and unreasonable creaturs. For first if it be true which Luther and Calvin
teach us, that noe laws ca^ bind a Christian, then does it follow that a
Christian can not sin and consequently, that there can be noe vice in any of
his actions. For vvher noe law byndeth there is noe law, where no law
is, there is noe transgression of law, where is no transgression, noe sin
can be, because every sin is a transgression of one law or other. Romans 7.
Wherefore S. Paul says that without law sin is dead and of noemallice.
8. 10. s.
And S. Ihon says that whosoever sins commits iniquity, and that
sin is iniquity, that is transgression, for so the Greek word (...) which
he uses, imports, and therefore the Grecianes commonly call sin by the
self same name. And although some actions which are of them selves cuill,
are not sins because the lavveforbiddeth them, but therefore are by the law
forbidden because of them selves they are sins, yet certain it is that there
is noe sin but it is forbidden, either by the law of God, or of nature, or of
man, and therefore well might saint Austine say, l. 2. de pee. mer. c. 16.
that noe sin should be, if noe law did forbid it. Romans 2.
And although saint Paul says that the gentiles sinned without a law,
and therefore shall be punished without a law, yet he excludes only a
written law such as the Jews had, and without that (sayethe he) the
ge^tils do sin, but yet not without all law, for at least they
transgressed the law of nature, otherwise they could not have sinned,
because every sin is against one law or other; and so if noe law bynd us
in conscience, noe sin at all can be found in our actions, be they never so
crossing and contratie to reason. Secondly they deny free will and
consequently they take away all vice and virtue. For if when I do that action
which is counted a sin I have noe free will, then I can do no otherwise,
if I can do noe otherwise, I am not to be blamed for that, which I could
not auoyed, but rather to be pityed that I am so constrained. And if when I
pray to God or give alms to the poor I can do no otherwise, (as I can not if
I have noe free will) I am not pravse worth, because noe God a mercy to
him that does well vnavvares, or weather he will or not. Wherefore we
commend those most which do well freely and of their own choice, and
where we see men by fear or co^pulsion are driven to well doing, we
commend them the less, by how much greater was the constrainte; which is a
sign that free choice, more or less, is necessary to the making of a
virtuous action. Thirdly they say that God imputes no sin unto a faithful
man, whence it follovveth that there is noe sin in their actions, or that
God is deceived, or is noe right esteemer of things; but this they will not
say and therefore must avouch that there is noe sin in Christians actions.
Fourthly although herin they speak not with that consequence which might
have been expected of men of reason, they affirm that all our actions even
those that go for best, are of them selves mortal sins, which deserve no
better revvard the^ eternal damnation; which if it be true, thence must needs
follow, that there is not any virtue in our actions, because where vice is,
virtue can not be: and so virtue which proceeds not but ex integra causa,
from an intier cause, is clean taken away. Fiftely they affirm that God is
the autour of all our sins, and seeing that his will is his power, by which
he causes all things, sin is according to his will: yea they affirm that
he moves us and eggeth us to sin, which is a sign that he will have us
sin. If sin then he according to God his will, it can not offend him, but
rather please him, because the we are pleased when things do fall out
according to our will and desire; and seeing that where noe offense is there
can be noe sin, it follovvethe, that if God be the author of sin, then
sin is noe sin at all. Out of these opinions I gather that nether sin nor
virtue is remaining in men's actions, and consequently if this doctrine be
true, noe man needs to fear sin or to care for virtue, because this word,
virtue, is but a word which has no thing ansvvereable unto it, and this
name, sin, is but a bullibagge or bugbeare, devised and invented to scarre
fools with all, because according to the new religion, there is noe more
sin in the actions of men, then of brutishe beasts.

The eleuenthe Chapter shows how they take away all conscience and so also
open the gappe to all vice.

SO careful is our heavenly father, least we should commit any sin, that he
has provided, not one, or tvvoe, but many and sundry means to restayne us
from it, as being the only thing which displeases him, and preiudiceth us. He
has engraven in our hearts a law of nature and reason, which dictateth unto
us what is good and what is evil, and commands us to embrace the one, and
to avoid the other; Romans 2.
by reason of which law the Gentiles (as saint Paul says) could not plead
ignorance for an excuse for their sins, because they had a law written in
their hearts, by which they might have squared their actions and directed
their lives according unto reason, and with in the bounds of nature. To this
law before Christ's coming, he added a written law for our better direction
in the way of virtue, not only natural, but also supernatural. And when
the fullnes of time, that is the time of Christ and the nevve law, was come,
he gave us another law more perfect, then the old, which therefore leads
us to greater perfection. And because laws are mute, vvch can not speak nor
interpret them selves, and if they be not put in execution they are easily
contemned; he has appointed interpretours, such as are our Pastors and
Doctors, to expound this law unto us, and Magistrates also to see it put in
exceutio^, and to punish the transgressors. But least that we should take
our liberty in sinning, when we can avoid the rigor of the law, and the
eye of the Magistrate; he has lodged in our bosoms, a severe Judge and
monitour, called conscience, which keeps us in awe, and makes us fear to
sin, even then, when secrecy promises security. ^. 2. in c. 2. To.
Wherefore Origin calls conscience a correctour and correcting spirit,
because it punishes and amendeth our faults and disorders, yea he calls it
also a Pedagogue and Schoolmaster, because it instructs us and teaches us
our duties, and keeps us in no less awe then does the Schoolmaster his
Scholars. ex Th. ^. p. q. 71.4.18.
S. Damascen calls conscience the eye of the soul, because it lays all our
actions open unto the view of the soul, and rules our vvholle life, as the
eye does the body. This conscience like a law tells us what in every
particular circumstau^ce is lavvfull, what unlawful; like a witness it
accuses us, and brings in evidence against us; like a Judge it condemns us
as guilty when we have committed a fault, and declares us innocent of the
fact, when we have not done it; and like an executioner or minister of
justice, it tormenteth us, and lays upon us our dew pain and punishment.
That conscience is a law we easily perceue and daily experience in our
selves. For when natural reason and our Synderesis tells us, that vice is to
be eschevved, and that fornication is a vice, conscience concludes ergo thou
may not commit it: and if not vvithsta^ding consciences prohibition, we do
commit the same, we do against conscience, and transgress the law of
conscience, which alvvayes in particular does dictate unto us, what is to be
embraced, and what is to be eschevved. When the lascivious man is moved unto
lust, conscience like a law forbids him, and when the thief is tempted
unto theft, conscience says he must not commit it, because he must not do
that to another, which he would not have done to him self. And if a friend
leave a jewel with his friend, to which none but they tvvoe are privy,
conscience will urge him to restitution, and command him to restore that, to
which the Princes law can not compelle him because it meddles nor with
secrers. And so conscience is a law, and so rigorous a law, that it
admits noe excuse, noe cloak, nor dispensation. It is a witness also,
which accuses us even of our secret sins, and works of darkness, and
proves us guilty before the divine tribunal. And whether thou be in bed or
at board, at home or abroad, in company or alone, it still cries against thee,
guilty And if thou seek by silence to put this vvitness to silence, or by
stopping the ears of thy soul, not to give ear unto him, he will always
busse in thy ears, that which thou would not hear, and will so plainly
conuicte thee, that thou can not deny the fault. Genesis 3.
When Adam and Eve had eaten of the forbidden fruit, before God accused them
or took notice of the matter, their own conscience accused them, and so
plainly convicted the^, that they went and hid their heads in a bushe for
shame. Genesis 4.
Cain also their vntovvard son, had no soener made oblatio^ of his niggardly
sacrifice, but conscience accused him, and brought in such evidence against
him, that he changed contenaunce like a guilty person, and hounge down his
head like a sheep-biter. And he had noe soener butchered his innocent brother
Abel, Genesis 4.
but Abells blood cried vengeance against him; And think you that conscience
held his peace? noe noe, this witness cried out so shrilly against him, that
he cried peccaui and acknovvledge his fault to be so great, that Gods mercy
was not able to forgive it. Likewise the brethern of Joseph after that they
had most traitorously sold him, and with a bloody coat had covered all the
matter, and cleared them selves also before their father; yet still,
(especially when any adversity crossed them) their conscience accused them,
Genesis 42.44.
and made them to confess, that justly their disignements were crossed for
the unkind part which they had played with their brother. So that the old
proverb herin is verified; conscientia mill testes, conscience is a thousand
vvitnesses. Nether is conscience a law and witness only, it is a ludge also,
which condemns us if we be guilty, and absolueth us also, if we be
innocent and guiltles. Cain you see hangs down his head like a condemned man
and confesses the sentence Just, only his error was that he appealed not
from the tribunal of conscience, to the high Judge God him self who would
have shevved mercy if he had not dispayred of mercy. Conscience condemned
Manas^es David Marie Magdalen and all those paenitent sinners which scripture
has recorded, Psalm. 50. Luc. 7.
and that with such evidence, that they confessed the^ selves guilty and the
sentence just. And we see by experience, that when we seek to excuse and
flatter out selves, conscience will not be flattred, but like an incorrupt
Judge pronou^ceth sentence against us, even they when before Princes tribunals
we be freed and absolved. Conscience having pronounced sentence like a
Judge, executes the sentence and punishes us like an executioner, and
minister of Justice, causing in our minds, vvher the sin was contrived and
conceived, a certain remorse and worm of conscience, whose gnavving
tormenteth us. So that when the soul has conceived sin and borne it also,
and brought it to light by external action, far otherwise does this impious
impe torment her, then does the little infant the woman great with child.
For the woman conceueth with pleasure, and though she bear with pain, yet
after that she is delivered and brought to bed, she reioiceth, and withdraw so
ioifull a heart, that she forgets her pains in bearing. But the soul,
though in co^ceiuing sin, she find some pleasure, yet not without some
murmuring and grudging of conscience, and when she is delivered of this
bastardly Impe, then begins her torment. Mat. 27.
Judas was so inwardly vexed and tormented after he had conceived and
contrived his treason against his loving and Innocent Master, that for an ease
he went and hou^ge him self, counting that a less punishment then the
torment of conscience. And true it is which the scripture sayethe: Semper
praesumit saeua, Sap. 17.
perturbata conscientia: a troubled conscience always imagines cruel and
terrible things. True it is also which Saint Austine affirms, l. 1. conf.
c. 12.
that every incordinate mind is a pain unto it self. And true it is vvch
Iuuenal the Poet says, Prima est haec vltio, quod se
Iudice, nemo nocens, absoluitur.
The guilties first torment, is this
That never he absolved is Satyr. 13.

If he him self pronounce sentence
Which is decreed by conscience.
But to go no farther, experience will witness that conscience will never let
a sinner be quiet, till by penance he has rid him self of his sin, but
waking it tormenteth him with remorse, sleeping with fearful dreams; and
wheresoever he goes, it puts hell before his eyes, and the severe Judgment
of God, the abomination of the sin, and the greatness of the offense. For as
the drounken man, drinks at the first with pleasure, but when he is drounke,
his head aches, his stomach is oppressed, and all his body is distempered, so
although in the committing of the sin we take some pleasure, yet when the
sin is committed, we feel the smarte. And as the adulterer, thief, or
murderer, after that the fact is committed, has always the severe laws
and punishementes before his eyes, and fears the rumor of the people, and
censure of the Judge, thinks every man that looks on him, ready to arrest
him, and where me^ are not, is a frayed of trees, bushes and shadows, so a
man whose conscience condemns him of sin, fears his own shadovve and the
darkness of the night, imagines that in every thunder clappe God leueleth at
him, that every old house by which he passes, or into which he enters,
staieth to make a fall on him, and surmiseth that in every bush, one lies in
wait to kill him. Sir Thom. More in his life.
King Richard the third may bear witness of the torments vvher with
conscience uses to afflicte all transgressors, for he after that he had
most unkindly and traiterouhy butchered his innocent Nephevves, whom, he
should have protected, was alvvayes so troubled in mind, that after that
fact, he looked like a madman, some times laying his hand on his dagger,
some times starting, some times soodainly looking back, as if he would
ward some deadly blow, which always seemed prepared for him. Besides
all this, sin always breeds a worm in conscience, which is fedd by
sin, and never leaves griping and gnavving, till sin which is this
worms food, by penance is taken away, that so the gnavving worm may die
for want of food, and conscience receue ease, and be freed from such a
torment. Now contrariwise if conscience find us guiltless, she absolueth
us like a Judge by sentence, and clears us even then, when men condemn us,
and declaring inwardly our innocence before God and our own soul,
recreateth the mind and feasteth it with a banquet of contentment, according
unto that saying: Securamens judge conuiuium: Prou. 15.
a mind without care is a continual banquet. This Peace follovveth a good
conscience, vvch like a good judge declares us before God not guilty. ^. Io. ^.
So saint Ihon says that if our heart) that is our conscience) reprehend us
not, 2. Cor. 1.
we have a great confidence in God. And saint Paul says that our glory is
the testimony of our conscience. For although men think evil of us and
condemn us as guilty, yet if conscience clear us, that is our contentment of
mind, and glory before God. l. come. Secu^d. Man c. 1.
Wherefore saint Austine bids the to think what thou vvilt of Austine,
only (says he) let not my conscience accuse me before God. By which good
offices of conscience it appears most manifestly, what a sway conscience
bears in the rule and ordering of man's life, and actions. The Prince and
magistrate rules only the outvvard man, punishes only our external actions,
because of them only he is able to judge, but conscience governs both the
outvvard and in ward man, iudgethe of our inward actions, condemns them and
corrects the^ most severely as is allaeady declared. So that he that take the
away conscience out of the world, opens a vvider gapp to all vice and
disorder, then if he should put all Princes and magistrates out of office, and
take the svvorde from them, because these being taken away, yet conscience
being left, we should have some guide and stay of our moral life, but if
conscience be aba^doned then have we noe ruler nor governor of our inward
man, yea nor of the outvvard man, when either secrecy promises security, or
power dares vvarraunt us to go harmeles. And this the heathen Philosophers
could see, yea could not but see: in so much that Cicero says: Orat. pr^
Milon^.
magna vis est conscientiae in vtra^que partem vt neque timeant qui nihil
commiserunt, and panam semper ante oculos versari putent qui peccauerunt: great
force has conscience in both parts (that is in good and evil life) in so much
that they fear not who have committed no fault, and they who have offended,
have always the punisheme^t before their eyes. l. 2. de leg^^.
And in an other place he proves by experience how necessary conscience is
to restrain us from sin. For (says he) take away conscience and what
will he do in the dark that fears nothing but the witness or Judge? What
will he do in the desert, when he meets with a man laden with gold, and
weaker then him self? Truly if conscience be taken away, we will never
make scruple of secret sins, no nor of public transgressions, if either by
power or bribe we can escape the penalties of the law. If conscience be
once banished the world, bargains will seeldom hold, and promises will as
seeldom be kept, chastity vvil always be in danger, rich, and treasurs
will not be secure, Princes lives will be sub^et to hazard, false dealing
will be rife in buying and selling, th^eues, cooseners, cutpurses and
conicatches have good leave and liberty to exercise their arts, and the gappe
will ly open unto all vice. How perniciouse then unto virtue and how
favorable unto vice is our Reformers doctrine which (as I shall euide^tlye
prove, and therefore breefly, because evidently) despoilethe the world of
conscience more necessary to man's life then the son it self. They say as is
already related, that to a faithful man and true Christian, God imputes no
sin: why then should a Christian make conscience of sin which if it be
not imputed either is no sin at all or else not to be ca^ed for? They avouch
that since Adams fall man never had free will and liberty, and seeing that
vvher noe liberty is no sin can be (for no man deserves evil for that
which he could not avoid) it follovvethe that whosoever is persuaded (as all
must be by their opinion) that he has no free will, must make nether
conscience, nor scruple of any sin. They affirm also that by Christ we
are freed from all obligation of laws, in so much that noe law can bind or
touch our conscience; we need not then make scrouple of any transgression or
sin, which in that it is sin is against ye obligation of one law or
other, because where no law byndeth there is no obligation, where noe
obligation, is noe breach or transgression can be found, and where no
transgressio^, there is no sin, and where noe sin is, no conscience of
sin is to be made. It is an article also of fay the amongst them or at least
a thing necessary to be believed, that the commandments are ampossible.
who then vvilbee so mad as to make conscience for not full filling the law
which is impossible to be full-filled? as well truly may the prisonner make
a conscience that he goes not to the Church or sernson on an holy day when
he is fast, chained to a block in prison, and the doors are fast locked and
bolted. Because it is as impossible (if Calvin lie not) to keep the
commandments, as for that prisonner to go to the Church. They are of opinion
that God is the autour of all our sins as well, yea more then we or
selves, because he is the principal cause we are only his instruments;
which if it be true, noe man needs to be so scrupulous as to make bones
of that, of which God him self makes no conscience? And if conscience be
taken a way, the law, witness, Judge and Executioner is taken a way;
and so good leave is given to play what evil parts we will, if either we
can by secrecy avoid the magistrates eye, or by violence and force resist his
power, for then, conscience being taken a way, nothing is remaining to keep
us in awe.

The tvvelueth Chapter shows how they open the gapp to pride.

I Have already declared how the Reformers by many points of their doctrine
open the gapp to all vice in general, now it shall not be amiss to show,
how they fauourize some vices especially and in particular. And first I will
begin with pride, because that was the first sin and the first cause of
all sins, ^^^li. 10.
because the devil sinned before man, and his first sin was swelling pride,
by which he coueted to be as great, and as high in perfection as the
highest. Yea many are of opinion that Adams first sin also was pride, which
moved him to eat of the forbidden fruit maugre the commandment of God,
imagining that so, (for so the devil had promised) he should become like
unto God in knovving good and evil. And this is the cause why proud men
especially are called the children of the devil, because by pride they
especially ressemble him. Wherefore that doctrine which stirs up a proud
co^ceipte in us, ca^ not be of God, because it moves to pride which is of
the devil; and therefore if I shall prove that our reformers doctrine puffs up
with pride all those which follow it, I shall prove it not to be of God
but of the devil. For although pride be a common disease of all heretics (for
who so prefers his own judgment before the vvholle Church as all
heretics do in that they are heretics, must needs condemn him self of an
extraordinary pride) yet some heretics by some points of their doctrine,
have given more especial cause of this sin of pride. The Gnostikes were of
opinion that as gold though cast into the mire, never loses his native
color and perfection, so a just man, such as they counted them selves, Ex
Iren. l. 10 c. 1.
can never be soyled, never loose his perfection in what actions soever he
intermedleth him self, though in adulteries and fornications. Which doctrine
moved them to such a conceit of the^ selves, that they thought them selves to
know al things and to be so perfect, that noe sin could contaminate them.
Ex Anth l. c. de poenit. c. ^.
The like was the pride of the Nouatia^s who therefore called them selves,
pure, and clean. And to omit the pride of Arius, Nestorius, chap. 5.
Luther, and Calvin which in the first book I have set down, let us see
how their doctrine puffs me^ up with pride. They are of opinion, as is
already related, that we are just by no other justice then Christ's own
justice; which doctrine who soever embraces, he must needs be persuaded
that he is as just as Christ him self, because in his opinion they have
both one and the same justice; which persuasio^ is enough to stir us up to
Luciferia^ pride as is already in another place demonstrated. See the third
book.
They assure their Scholars also that the justifying faith is a full
assura^nce of justice, salvation, and election, as may appear by their own
words which I have in this seventh book already set down, which also
gives great occasion of an insolent pride. For if when we persuade our selves
(as Catholics do) that we are nether sure what now we are before God,
nor what shall become of us hereafter, we have occasion to humiliate our
selves, Phil. 2.
and to work our salvation in fear: then certes he that persuadethe him
self, that he is cockesure of his salvation, has great occasion to become
careless, arrogaunte, hautie, and high-mynded. Greg l. 6. Reg c. 186.
We have an example of a noble vvoeman called Gregoria maid of honor to the
Emperess, vv^oe having conceived highly of saint Gregory's sanctity, vvrote
unto him to imparte unto her a secret, to wit whether her sins were
forgiven or not; but saint Gregory ansvvered her that she demanded of him a
hard and unprofitable question; hard, because his sanct tie was not such as
to deserve a revelation from God of so secret a matter; unprofitable, because
(says he) such a revelation unto you were not expedient: better it is that
you should be ignoraunte of that till the last day, which must always be
feared and suspected, that in the mean time you may vvash away your sins by
tears of contrition. See the first book, ^hap. ^.
They affirm also that every man has a private spirit by which he is sure
which is true scripture, and what is the true meaning thereof: who therefore,
be he man or woman, clarke or cobbler, is supreme Judge of religion, and is
to rely nether on Pope, nor Church, nor Council, for faith and religion.
Which doctrine how high it is able to enhaunce the spirits of men that are
so persuaded, a blind man may see; and this is the very cause why Luther
will judge both of Churches and Counsels and prefer his own judgment
before them all. See the first book, chap. 3.
For although he says only that by scripture he will judge Fathers,
Churches, Apostles, and Angels also, yet seeing that the controversy is not
whether fathers or scriptures are to believed, because they were never
contrary, but rather whether Luther or they better understood the scriptures,
he makes him self, in effect, Judge of Church, Pope, Councelles, Fathers
and Angels; vvherin how bravely he plays the part of Lucifer, it is as
evident as that Luther, and Lucifer begin with a letter.

The thirteenth Chapter shows how their doctrine induces men to idleness,
yea how idleness according their doctrine is the perfection of a Christian life.

ALl creaturs are created to work and labor, and so they must attain unto
their end and perfection, because God and nature has so ordained it. The
angelical spirits like byrds in the springtyme (for heaven is a continual
springtyde) sing praises unto their Creator and attend continually upon the
divine majesty on high, yet so, that they have also an eye unto our affairs
and necessities in this lovver world. For the suprem Angels receue
illuminations from God, which they imparte unto the inferior, which are
always occupied in garding and defending us and menaging our affairs: and
so either mediately or immediately they are administratorij Spiritus, Heb. ^.
administering spirits. The heavens move continually, for the better and more
equal bestovving of their light and influences upon this inferior world. The
Son leaves our hemisphere at night, not to sleep or to rest him self, but to
run another course in the other Hemisphere for the illuminating of those that
are Antipodes unto us, which course being run, he retournes to us in the
morning and so is never idle. The moon every monethe ends her course, and
every star and planet has his task appointed him, which in a certain time
he must accomplish. The earth when he is out of his place moves down ward
to the Center, and when by force he is detained, he shows by his wait
what an inclination he has unto his proper motion: The fire mounteth above
all toward the Concauitie of the Moon which is his natural place: the
water and air take up the middle rooms where and whether they move
continually. Trees, plants, and herbs seem in vvinter to take their rest
after their former labors, and in the spring time they fall to work again,
and first they bring forth leaves, then bloomes and blossoms, and lastly the
svveete fruits of their labors. Brute beasts besides the labors to which by
man they are appointed, have their own proper exercises in which they occupy
them selves. The be is not so big in body as busy in operation, in so much
that when we will describe a laborious man, we say that he is as busy as
a be. These little creaturs what pains take they in gathering their honey, in
making their combs, in disposing and vvorking their honey, and vvhilest some
are vvorking abroad to bring home the matter of honey, some stay at home to
order it, some watch for the security of them that labor, and all are
incensed against the idle drones, and do not only expelle them out of their
company, but punish them also seuerly even unto death it self. Prou 6.
The Ante also of whom the scripture bids the idle parson to learn his
lesson, labors in the summer to make provision for that on which he is to
live in vvinter. So laborious are these little creaturs, that many times they
carry burdens bigger then them selves, Plin l. ^^. c. 1. Horat. l. 1. Satyr. 1.
and that with such diligence, that with passing often times one way, their
little feet do make a pathe to appear even in the flinte. And when amongst
other provision they have brought home their corn to their barnes, they are
not idle after harvest is done, but sometimes they are occupied in nibling
upon the ends of the corn, and grains, least they should grovve a fresh;
and least that the moisture of the earth corrupt their corn, they bring it
forth in a sonnie day to drying, and afterward they carry it again into
their granaries. Birds build their own nestes and fly far and often for
the timber and mortar which is belonging unto the making of such a palace.
Conyes work their burrovves out of the ground, and there is noe creature
which is not deputed to work in one kind or other. And shall we think that
man's felicity consists in idleness? Noe, noe, as the bird is bread to fly
so man is borne to work and labor: Job. ^.
in so much that God appointed Adam his task in Paradise, which was to
labor and till the ground, which labor notvvithstanding should have been
noe pain but rather a pleasure and recreatio^ unto him. For if Cirus king of
the Persians took such delight in gardening, in so much that he cast the
beds and knottes of his own garde^s, set his own herbs and planted,
and pruned also his trees with his own hands; if the Roman dictatours
taken from tillage and husbandry, returned again to the same exercise after,
the time of beari^g office was expired, much more might Adame in the state of
innocence and the garden of pleasure have labored, Perier l. 4. in Gin.
and vvorked for his recreation and pleasure, th^^ God delte with Adam to
signify by this corporal exercise which he appointed him, the task and
labor which is necessary for the soul in the exercise of moral and
supernatural virtue, whose operations are called works. And truly who so
considers the end of man and his felicity, Th. c. 2. q. 3 a. 2. and 4.
which consists in the perpetual vision and contemplation of God, which is
the most noble operation which man has, vvil not meruail that the means to
attain to this end should be good works and operations. Wherefore scripture
all most in every place exhorts us to the observation of the commandments,
to works of charity, justice, mercy, temperaunce, fortitude, patience and
such other works of virtue. And for this cause our life is some times
compared to a warfare in which we must always be fighting, or arming, or
fortifying our selves, or observing the enemy, as soldiers do; somety mes
we are compared to laborers in the vinyard who work for wages, some
times to runners and vvrastlers, who run and strive for a gole, crown, or
revvard. So that our persection also consists in action, labor and
operation. And truly who considers how unworthy a man idleness is, will
never dream that in it should consiste a Christians perfection. For idleness is
the mother of all vice, and the very bane of virtue, and no less pernicious to
man's soul and body also, then it is to the ground of the gardener or husband
man. For as the earth not tilled nor labored, bringes forth nothing but
vveedes, as the tree not pruned bears naught but leaves, and at the length not
so much as leaves; so if by continual exercise of virtue, and good works,
the seed-plotte of our soul be not continually manured and tilled, the seed
of Gods inspirations and inclinations to virtue, which are never vvanting in
our soul, bring for the noe fruit of good works and virtuous actions, but
only the breres, brambles and vveedes of vices do ouergrovv the soul. And as
the poole that stands and moves with noe stream, stinketh, and engendrethe
nothing else but frogs, snakes and serpents, so the soul of man which is
always idle and unoccupied and never moved with the exercise of virtue,
putrifieth in her own corruption, and brings forth nothing but monstrouse
vices. Truly when man is idle he is unarmed and exposed to all danger. Then
the devil takers his time, the flesh aslaultes him, the world molestes him,
and he becomes slave and captive to them all because by operation he makes no
resistaunce. And whereas much hurt has proceeded from idleness, never yet
any exploit or entreprise worthy a man. Hence proceed fornications,
adulteries, robberies, for when the mind is not occupied in good cogitations
it is occupied in evil, because it can not be altogether idle but either it is
well or ill occupied. Wherefore the Poet demaundethe why Aegistus became an
adulterer, and he answers thus. In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat: The
cause is easily to be told: he was an idle person. When a man is idle and
not exercised in virtuous actions, which produce good habits by which our
sensuality is boidled, and our passions are moderated; then the flesh waxes
vvanton, sensuality becomes effeminate, the passions are unruly, and the man
impotent to all virtue. Wherefore Scipio in one thing, was vviser the^ Cato,
because Cato would have had Carthage destroyed, that Rome might enjoy a freer
peace and liberty; but Scipio counted it more profitable for Rome to have
Cathage stand, that Rome might have an enemy to exercise her: which opinion
of Scipio, time proved truest, for when Carthage was afterward ruined, Rome
thinking her self secure, became careless and idle, and the Romans, by
idleness lost their former force and provves, and became altogether effeminate
and impotent, slaves to sensuality, who before hand been Lords of the
world. And yet according to our new reformers doctrine, idleness is the
accomplishment and perfection of moral, and Christian life. For they first of
all will make us to believe that a naked farthe, by which we apprehe^d
Christ's justice to be ours, is that which justifies, and which is
sufficient to salvation, without good works, or observation of the law.
Which if it be true, Christian perfection shall consiste in an abstracted and
idle apprehension of Christ's justice, but in no practice nor exercise of
virtue, in noe labor or good work at all: and so vvheras all other creaturs
attain to their end by action, motion, and labor, man only by idleness, that is
by apprehending only, and doing nothing, shall purchase his felicity. The
artificer shall come to perfection in his art by labor, exercise, and
operation, not of one or tvvoe, but many days, yea of his vvholle life,
because by continual practice he augmenteth his skill; but the art of a
Christian shall require no practice at all, no labor, no vvorking, because
according to this opinion, on only act of faith before a man dies, is
sufficient to justify him from all his former sins, and to make him as just
and as holy as Christ him self, who is the holy of holyes, and so eternal
felicity which is an operation, by which we see God face to face and
enioie our summum bonum, shall be gotten without operation, and we shall
win our gole without running, atcheue our victory without fighting, and
gain our wages without vvorking; that is by an idle faith, which
apprehends only, but does nothing. They teach us also that since Adames fall
our nature is so corrupt, that all our actions even those that go for best,
are mortal, and damnable sins, in so much that you may as well and as
soon, get oil out of a marble stone, as wring one good work from the
nature of man; which if it be true, then certes sleeping and idleness is our
greatest perfection. For if in every act we sin mortally, better were it
to sleep, then to watch and pray, better to sit idle and to do nothing,
then something, because in doing nothing we do no harm, in doing some thing
whatsoever it be, (be it prayer and alms deeds) we sin mortally, and so
idleness is our perfection, because better it is to be idle the^ ill occupied.
Whence follovveth my intended conclusion, to wit, that according to the
reformers doctrine idleness is the perfection of a Christian man's life, and
the best and surest means to attain unto his felicity and to purchasse his
Salvation.

The fourtenth Chapter shows what an enemy the reformers doctrine is to
Chastitic even that which is required betwixt man and wife.

Chastity is a virtue which always has been priced at an high rate, and
valevved as one of the most precious jewels of moral virtues: in so much that
even the heathens, though destitute of the light of faith, beholding the
beauty of this virtue, fell into admiration of it, and from admiration came to
be in love with the same. Lucretia a noble matrone of Rome is famous for this
virtue, who being violently oppressed by Tarquinius Superbus son, took the
matter for such a disgrace, that with her own hands she killed her self,
counting less of death the^ of life joined with such a disgrace. And the
pagane Poets were so blinded with the splendor of this her virtue, that they
could not see the foul fault which she committed in killing her self. (...)
c. 19.
For as Saint Austine says if it was noe dishonestie to be oppressed
vnvvillingly, it was noe justice to punish her self with death, who had
not been dishonest. The vestal virgins also were much admired for this virtue,
or at least for a show of the same, and seuerly were they punished when
professing chastity, they lived loosely, Liu dec. 1 ^ 8. Dec. 3. ^ 3.
which yet they did so seeldome, that when such a fault happened, the year
was counted v^nluckie, and the city of Rome was purged, and the Gods
appeased with extraordinary sacrifices. Ex Gorg in (...) pro Hell.
The law of Areopagus punished no less him, that by importunity entised,
then him that enforced, because the first abused both soul and body, the
second the bedy only. By which it may well appear of what value this virtue
is, because the devil as by paganes he desired to be honored as a God in
their Sacrifices, (...) would he be served of them by his vestals, as God is
by his virgins. But not only paganes have esteemed of Chastity, for brute
beasts also, although they be not capable of true virtue, Epiph. her. 7
have affected an image of this virtue. The Lioness permits the Lion but
once, and once to propagate her Kind, and once only to keep Chastity so much
as may be without injury to her Kind. Aelian l 14. ^ c. 35. Plin. l. 10. c.
^0.
The bird called Porphyrion will sort her self with no more mates then one,
and so abhors vvomanish dishonestie, that if she see the wife commit
adultery, Cirilles.
she will bewray it to the husband by hanging her self. Yea if this byrd
perceue any maid to play the naughtie-packe or harlot, she will pine her self
away to death. The like is the nature of the Turtle, who when her mate is
dead, mourns in solitary places, and never will admit any other to her
company, much less will she play any false play vvhilest her mate lives,
Carm. (...) Visg.
and foe (says saint Gregory Nazianzene) she gives us to understand, at
what a price virginity is to be valevved. l. ^ c. 1^
The Storke is such a lover of chastity, that (as Aelian reports) when on a
time a certain woman of the city Ceres in Thessalia was false to her husband
in being to familiare with her man, this bird so abhorred the fact that she
pulled out the adulterers eyes. Georg. Picto rius villinganus med. and
Palladius.
Bees also are so delighted with chastity that besides that they conceue
without carnal copulation, they will not stay in their hiues, if their keeper
be blasphemous, slouenlyke, greasy, unchaste, or impur of body. And in our
selves be we never so given to Luxury, we experience how nature
reuerenceth as it were this virtue of chastity. Aug l. 14. ^iu. c. 1^.
For who is so impudent, that is not ashamed of his own lusts, and therefore
every one desires darkness, or obscurity and secrecy to hide them, even
then when he takes but his lavvfull pleasure with his wife. c. 19. Th.
2.2. q. (...). a. 1.
And why says S. Austine are we more ashamed of our lusts, then other
vices or passions? The reason is (says he) because the rebellion of the
flesh, is far different from other vices and passions, because these we
can when we will especially if we add force to our will, repress and
moderate, but the flesh has gotten, (since Adams fall) such an hand over
the spirit, and will, that though we may deny consent unto her lusts and
desires, yet we can not quite repress them, be we as holy and perfect as
saint Paul was; And this makes the spirit ashamed, to take so foul a foil
of the flesh, which as she is inferior to the spirit, so should she be at
the spirits beck and commandment. l. 1 Offi^.
Out of these premises Cicero gathers this conclusion, to wit, that seeing
man is ashamed of pleasure, it is an argument, that it is unworthy the
excellency of man's nature, and I will add another conclusion, which is
this, that if lust and corporal pleasure be a thing to blushe at, then
chastity which is an abstinence from pleasure, is a virtue most honorable,
gracing, and beseeming ma^s nature. And allthough in the beginning of the
world, when mankind was not yet fully propagated, and again after Noes flud
when it was all most ruinated, God commanded matrimony, yet did he even
then by many signs and tokens, but after ward, more especially, commend also
chastity as a virtue most commendable. Genesis 2.
For although he him self made the marriage betwixt Adam and Eve, and badde
them increase and multiply, yet he created them of virgins earth, which as
yet had not lost her integrity, and he preserved them virgins so long as they
Kept their innocence; and so virginity, and innocence, were companions in
paradise, and the use of matrimony began with misery. And if antiquity may
procure credit, virginity must take the precedence of matrimony, because the
woman is a virgin before a wife, and a maid before a mother. Yea although
both in ye law of nature, and in the law written, the greatest part
embraced matrimony, and fevv then did settle their cogitations upon
virginity, partly because men were as yet carnal and imperfecte, partly
because mankind was not fully propagated, partly because the Messiah was not
yet borne, and therefore every one desired to mary, hoping that the Messiah
might chance to descend from their race (vvch was the cause why barrennes
was then so ignominious) yet even then virginity had her followers, and
well vvillers. Abel, the first Priest we read of after Adam, and the first
martyr, was a virgin, Helias, Helizeus, Hieremie, and saint Ihon Baptist, as
the scripture insinuates, and saint Hierom affirms, l. 1. cont. Iou.
were all chaste and undefiled virgins. The high priest of Moses law,
although he might marry (because that people was carnal and their sacrifices
were carnal and so required no virgin-preests) yet he was commanded to mary
a virgin, and to abstain from her also when he was to sacrifice. But in the
new law, which brought more grace and greater perfection with it, and
therefore is called the fullnes of time, virgins were more frequent. For after
that the author of this law Christ Jesus was borne a virgin of a virgin
mother, then all the world seemed to be inamoured with virginity. The
Apostles which were Christ's first Preests, and Bishops, were either virgins,
or lived chaste like virgins, after preesthood. Saint Philip had four
daughters, which lived and dyed virgins. Act. 2^.
S. Mathevve the Apostle in Aethiopia instituted an angelical college of
virgins, Eusebius l. 3. ^o 30.
to which he appointed Iphegenia ye Kings da^ghter for the Abbess, In vita
cius.
vvch after wards cost him his life, but got him the crown of martydome. I
de vit. contempt.
Philo the levve makes mention of diverse societies, which in the primative
Church lived chastely. Apol 2.
Justinius martyr affirms, that noe people was so given unto chastity, as
were the Christians of his time, when (as he says) both men and women
kept virginity to the end, and carried it with them to their grave, yea to
heaven, for a jewel. The like report gives Tertullian of the Christians of
his time, S. Ignatius, Apol. c. 9.
Ep. ad^hilad.
saint Paul's scholar in one of his epi^^les, Saluteth a College of virgins,
and a society of widow, Ep ad Haron^
and when he was going to martvrdome, the cogitation of his death, and the
lions which were to devour him, could not put them out of his mind, but even
then he commended them to his Deacon and successors, as the precious Jewels
of Christ. Ruff. l. 1 c. 8. Theod. l. 1.^.1^.
Ruffinus also and other Historiographers in commendation of Queen Helena
Constantines mother, and our country woman, tells how when she came to
Jerusalem, she that was the Emperess of the world, vouchsaffed to serve the
virgins at table, as a waiting maid. l. 4. vitae Co^st ^. 28.
And Eusebius puttes it amongst the praises of Constintine her son, that he
carried always a great respect to virgins, persuading him self, that God him
self, dvvelled in such chaste minds. Nether ca^ our Reformers answer with
any probability, that this was the abuse and corruption of that time, because
it was the use and custom of the prime Christians, in whose memories the
life, works, words, and examples of Christ, and his Apostles, were
freeshe, and in whose hearts, the blood of Christ as yet was vvarme. And if
this were an abuse, holy scripture is the cause of it, which in many places
commends Chastity, and virginity. (...)
The Prophere Isaie or rather God by his mouth, biddes Eunuchs that is,
chaste virgins, not to co^plain that they have noe posterity in which their
name may continue, for says he, I will give them a place in my house and
a better name, then they could have in sons and daughters, for I will give
them an aeternall name which shall never perish. Vvher he can not mean
Ennuches by nature, because he has no reason to promise more to them then to
others, because their chastity is forced, but he must needs be understood
of those Eunuchs, of which Christ spoake, Mat. ^^.
when he said, that there are some, that have gelded them selves, that is
have deprived them ^elues of corporal pleasures by free election. Saint Paul
also avouches, Cor. 7^.
that it is good not to touch a vvoeman, And again he counsayleth them that
are free from a wife not to seek a vvrfe. Ibidem.
Yea says he I would have all like my self, that is chaste and continent,
as all the Interpretours expound. And allthough (says he) I have noe law,
yet I counsel all to be virgins: Ibidem.
Yea reason also gives chastity the preccde^ce of matrimony: For first as I
have said already, in that we are ashamed of all carnal copulatio^, even of
that which by marriage is made lavvfull, it is an argument that Chastity is
more beseeming the nature of man. Secondly, man is reasonable and sensual,
spiritual, and carnal, by reason of his compound nature, and by the
reasonable part, he aggreeth with angels, by the sensual part with
beasts; and seeing that the reasonable part, is the best and noblest portion
in him, abstinence from corporal pleasures makes him most like to him self,
yea to Angels, because by that he lives a reasonable life, yea and
Angelical, and more then Angelical, who in flesh, and blood, lives
chastely like an Angel. Thirdly our goods are divided into three parts, to
wit the goods of fortune, vvch are riches, honors, offices, and such like;
the goods of the body, which are health, and pleasure; the goods of the
mind, which are virtues, and our own vvilles, and desires: if then it be a
thing highly pleasing God, when by voluntary poverty, or almesdeedes, we
despoile our selves of our goods of fortune, for his sake, or his members the
poor; if it pleases him also, when by obedience we resign our vvilles and
desires, which are the goods of our mind, into the hands of our Superiors,
and consequently into the hands of God, from whom they have their authority;
why shall it not be laudable to vveane our selves, eue^ in the flovvre of our
years, from those goods of the body, which are called pleasures, but yet so
are goods and pleasures of the body, that commonly they do the soul the
greatest domages and displeasures. Lastly if to use moderation in eating and
drinking, be a virtue called temperaunce, why shall not a moderation in
pleasurs of the flesh and sensuality, (which we call chastity) be
esteemed also as a virtue? But our Epicurs will say, that a moderation in
pleasurs is good, but yet as it is unlawful to absteyne altogether from
meare, so is it a sin to renounce all pleasurs of the body. To this we have
an easy answer, to wit, that the first abstinence is unlawful, because it
kills the body which can not live without meat, but the second is
lavvfull and laudable, because corporal pleasures are not necessary for the
bodies maintenance, and commonly are prejudicial to the soul, and sometimes
to the body also. But yet they have not done, it is against nature as they
say, and prejudicial to mankind to live chastely. I answer that chastity
is against the nature of the flesh and sensuality, by which we aggree with
beasts, but it is most beseeming our reasonable nature, which is the
principal part of man, and so is absolutely aggreable unto man, because the
reasonable portion is that, which makes him a man. And although if all men
should live chaste it vvoulde be prejudicial to mankind, yet for some to be
chaste, it is not any wise derogating; and we need not fear least all men be
chaste, because it is not a thing so easy, but is an hard and heroical
virtue, whose difficulty deterreth the most part of men. Such an objection
Vigilantius once made, Hier l. ^. contra Vigil.
If all be virgins (said he) mariadges shall not be, children shall not cry
in cradles, and mankind shall perish. But saint Hierom a^svvereshe him: rara
est virtus, nec a pluribus appetitur: virtue is rare, and not desired of many,
and so it is not be feared least all be virgins. Now therefore it being proved,
that virginity and chastity is laudable, and more beseeming man, then
matrimony, because it is agreeable to man as he is reasonable, it remains
that we declare how our adversaries by their doctrine, do misprice this
virtue. But first it shall not be a miss to distinguishe three kinds of
chastity, that so it may appear the better what enemies, they are unto all
the three kinds. The first chastity is never to have experienced carnal
pleasurs, which is called virginity. The second, is to have experienced them
in matrimony, but never after, and this is widow chastity. The third is a
moderate use of these pleasurs in matrimony, betwixt man and wife. The last
is lavvfull and honest, because as matrimony is lavvfull so is the use of it,
and consequently, lavvfull also is the delight v. hich follovveth this use. The
second is more perfect, because it absteynes at least from future pleasurs.
The first is perfectest of all, because it is an abstinence, from all carnal
pleasure. To come therefore more near our purpose, let us see what is the
conceit of our reformers concerning this goodly virtue. Luther seems to be of
Rabbi Salomons opinion, in c. 9. Genesis
who condemned all those as guilty of homicide, who endeavored not to begett
children: because he labors by all means for multiplicatio^; and to make
matrimony more frequent, and to give sensuality a greater scope, he takes
away all impediments, and obstacles, which the Church had laid in the way
of sensuality, partly for the love she has of chastity, partly for the
greater honor and decency of matrimony. And first to begin with consan
guinitie, to. ^. ser. de Mat Wiste^h. 1^22. l de cap Bab. c. ae matrim.
he permits and admits matrimony betwixt Sisters and brothers children,
betvvixte the son and Mother in law, yea (says he) if the wife can do it
secretly, she may ly with her husbands brother, if she experience, that she
can have no issue by him. In brief he takes away all impedime^ts of
consanguinitie, which are not set down in the old law. In affinity, he
makethe very fevve impediments: for (says he) a man may mary with his wife's
sister, with his wife's mothers daughter, with the daughter of his wife's
uncle, with any cousin germans of his wife's cousins. In spiritual
cognation, which is contracted by baptism, he acknowledges no impediment at
all, but allows of marriage even betwixt the Godfather, and God-daughter.
In adoption also he finds as fevve impedime^ts, permitting the father to
marye with his adopted daughter. Infidelity, with this man of faith, is noe
obstacle, for (says he) it is as lavvfull to mary with a Turk, or Jew, as
to eat and drink with them. Vovv of virginity is noe hinderaunce with him,
and therefore he being a Friar married a Nonne. The like is his opinion of
preesthood. And thus he makes the way broader to all sensuality and
consequently to hell it self. l. 4. Inst. c. 1 ^^.
Calvin in part subscribeth to Luther in this point, for he misliketh much
that the Church has made spiritual cognation an impediment, and has made more
restraintes from mariadge then either Moses or the Policy of many countries
have ever dreamed on. And thus they give greater liberty to marriage, and
endeavor by all means to bring virginity, which is the noblest and
worthiest kind of chastity into disgrace. And this noe doubt is the cause,
why Luther and all the pack of the reformers so highly esteem, and praise
matrimony, coldly comme^ding, yea by odious comparisons injuriously despising
virginity. Luther says that virginity only in this, S^rm. cit. de matrins
to. ^^ in 1. Cor. ^.
excels matrimony, that it is not combred with cares, and troubles, which
are incident unto marriage, and thersore is a less hindraunce to preaching and
prayer, but as for merit before God he says, that matrimony is as good as
virginity: yea so was this man's mind sotted upon mariadge, that he was
not ashamed to say, that matrimonium est velut aurum, Ibidem.
status vero spiritualis veluti stercus: matrimony is like gold but the
spiritual state of life is like an homly thing. See how carnal this man of
God is, how sensual he is and beastly, that takes upon him to reform the
world, and avouches him self the only man that has the spirit of God. See
how opposite Luther is to S. Paul, he counsayles virginity as better, then
Matrimony, Luther says it is no better the^ an homly thing, where with it
had been better that his mouth had been filled, then that he should have
uttered such beastly doctrine. But he will say that it is not virginity,
which with so foul a mouth he thus mispriceth, but the vow of
virginity, which is astate of life, but if virginity be good, lavvfull, and
commendable, why may not a man vow that life vvch he may laudably lead, Ps.
75. Ecc. ^.
especially seeing that Scriptures allow of vows, and command them to
keep them that make them. In propositio nibus de bigamia 62, 6^. ^^.
Secondly Luther avouches that if one wife will not content our sensuality,
we may have mo then one, at once, for (say the he) this was permitted in
the old law, and in the nevve I find it left indifferent, nether forbidden
nor commanded. And seeing the vvomans sensuality is as hardly satisfied as the
man's, she also by the same reason may have many husbands at once (which was
never permitted to the Jews) and seeing that noe just number can be set
down (for if tvvoe vviues content one man, three will not satisfy another)
it follovveth that a man have a tot quot of vviues and so may contend with
Solomon in the number of concubines. Thirdly this spiritual father permits
diuorsemenor in many cases, not only in bed or cohabitation, but also even in
the bond of marriage, and allows of them who not only separate them selves
from the company of their vviues or husbands, Luth l. de captiu Bab c. de
matrim.
but who also take others in their places. In which poit Calvin and all the
nevve confreerie aggreethe. Call l 4. Inst. c 19.. 37.
And first in case of fornication they all affirm that the party innocent may
marry another, not vvithstanding that Christ says, What God has conioined
let not man separate, and again: Mat. 17. Mar 10. 1. Cor. 7.
whosoever shall dimisse his wife and shall marrye another, commits
aduoutrie upon her. And saint Paul not in his own, but in Gods name
commands, that the wife leave not her husband, and if ^he leave him he
biddes her remain unmarried, or to be reconciled to her husband. And therefore
seeing that Scripture can not be contrary to scripture, when Christ said:
Vhosoeuer dimisseth his wife, but for fornication, Mat. 1^.
and shall marrye another does commit aduoutrie: the sense is not, that in case
of fornication a man may take an other wife, but only that he may leave his
wife, and therefore (says our Savior) if he leave her (which he may not do
but in case of fornication) and marry another, he commits aduoutrie,
whence it follovveth not that for fornication he may both leave and marie an
other, for saint Paul says plainly that if the wife leave her husband she
must remain unmarried. Luther yet adds another case in which the husband
may take another wife, l. cap. Bab. c. 6. de Matr^.
that is when the first wife will be gadding, and will not stay with her
husband, in which case (says he) I see noe reason why the man may not take
another. So that if the wife of stubbernesse, or the man, for some long
journey which he has to make, will leave home for a time, the other party
according to Luther, is not bound to stay the others cominge, but may take
another. To this he adds yet another case, for he saiethe that vviues are
some times so crabbed, Co. ^. ser. 5. Matr.
that although they see there husbands fall into aduouteries, yet they will
not seek to give them satisfaction; And in this case (says he) the husband
may say: Si tu nolueras, alia volet, Si domina nolit adueniat ancilla: If thou
vvilt not, another will: if the mistress will not, let the maid come.
Fourthly he yet findethe out another case in vvch the man may leave the old
wife, and mary a nevve; to wit, if the wife solicit him to sin, Luth.
com. in ^. Cor. 7.
or be litigious, and so he may upon such occasions take ten nevve vviues
one after another. And least he may seem to speak without reason, he
yeldeth this reason: neminem enim vult Deus in incontinentiae discrimen esse
coniectum. For God will not have any man to be cast into danger of
incontinencie. So that because according to this man's doctrine, a man can not
live chaste without a wife, if one wife will leave her husband or be
stubborn, or litigiouse, or give not satisfaction, the husband may take
another, as often as he will, least for vva^te of a wife he should be
incontinent. in c. 19. Mat.
Wherefore Bucer speaking conformably to this doctrine avouches, that as often
as the wife seems nor fit for the man's purpose, he may take another, and
she so often as she is weary of one husband, may take another. And good
reason also if Luthers and Caluins doctrine be true: for if man has no free
will, he has noe force to resist the assaults of the flesh if he be
tempted, and seeing that he is not sure how long he shall be without a
temptation, to make all sure, if one wife satisfy not his lust, he must take
another, least he cast him self into danger of incontinencie. Ser. cit. de
Matr.
Lastly Luther affirms that man is so bent and prone unto lust, that he can
no more be without a woman, then it is in his power not to be a man: these
are his words: Vt non est in meis viribus situm, vt vir non sim, tam no^ est
etiam mei iuris vt absque muliere sim. Rursum vt in tua potestate non est vt
foemina non sis, sic neque in te est vt absque viro degas: As it is not in my
power, not to be a man, so is it not in my power to be without a woman:
again as it is not in thy power not to be a vvoma^, so is it not in thy power
to live without a man. Which doctrine if it be true, then every one must
marry, and so virginity and widow chastity is exiled the world, crelse
he must take a queen, and so honesty is gone. For if it be as impossible for
a man to live without a woman, or for a woman to be without a man, as for
a man not to be a man, or a woman not to be a vvoma^, the^ must the case
often times happen, that the man must needs take a queen, or that the vvoma^
must needs, have a man besides her husband. For first if the man or wife be
long from home, seeing that nether party can live any time without a mate, it
follovvethe that the woman must use the help of her man or some other, and
the man must use his maid as Luther says, or some other ma^s wife, maid, or
daughter; else Luthers and Caluins doctrine is false, which teaches that aman
can not live without a vvoma^ nor a woman without a man. If they answer
that he may live some time without a woman, then say I, that it is not as
impossible to be without a woman, as not to be a man, because in no time is
it possible for a man not to be a man. And I suppose that a temptation may
happen as well in an hour as in a year: what then shall the party tempted
do? if he resist, Luther and Caluins doctrine is false, if he can not
resist, then if he can not marrye (as many times there is some time required
to get a wife) he must needs have a Queen. Whence it follovveth, that not
only merchaunt ventures, must take heed how they go from home, but noblemen
also must not adventure to go so much as a hunting, unless they lock up
their vviues, or take them with them. Hence it follovveth also that when the
wife is sick, especially any time, or when she lies in, the man may take
a nevve wife, if he be tempted to lust. For if he be tempted he can not
absolutely overcome that temptation, ergo he must have a woman, but in these
cases his wife will not serve his turn, ergo he must have another wife; and
if he can not get a wife, he must have a queen: And this also in this case
of such a great necessity, must be lavvfull for him, because noe man sins
in that which he can not avoid, nether is he to be blamed but rather pitied
for doing that, to which necessity compelled him. And seeing the woman in
this point is as frail yea frayler the^ the man, being the weaker sex, she
may as often take a nevve husband, as the man a wife. Which doctrine what a
vvide gate it opens to all dishonestie I leave it to the gentle readers
judgment. Wherefore very well do the a certain frenchman in a book of his,
Las Acts du Synod de a saint Reformation.
that treats of the Synod holden by the reformers at Monpeliar, bring in a
woman deputed for the femal sex of the Reformed, complaining of this doctrine
of Luther and Calvin, vvch holds that we have noe power to live chaste, nor
no force nor free will to resist the violence of the flesh: for (says she)
if we have noe force nor free will to resist our own fleshes temptations,
it follovveth that we and our daugthers are all Queanes, and our husbands
cuckoldes, and not only cuckoldes but horemasters. For if the flesh assault us
(says she) when our husbands are abroad, or if when they are at home we
take a greater liking of another man, either we can resist the temptation, or
we can not? If we can, then have we force and free will, which is
contrary to that which Luther and Calvin teach us: if we can not resist,
then are we all Queanes, and our husbands cuckoldes, which is the greatest
disgrace to our sex that can be. Wherefore she demau^deth that this doctrine
may be changed; else the vvomanis he sex is defamed. For either the woman to
shevve her self a Caluiniste or Lutherane, must yield to the temptation
acknovvledgi^g her weakness, or if she resist, she does not like a
Caluinist, and so either she must deny her self to be a Caluiniste, or
confess her self a Queen. But I am ashamed to deduce any more of these
beastly conseque^ces out of these foul premises of Lutheranisme and
Caluinisme, and peradventure I have offended the reader, in raking in these
dunghilles and have injured my pen, and paper, in fovvling that, and blurring
this, with so filthy ordures; yet as it is good to set forth virtue, to
allure men unto it, so is it not amiss to lay open the filthe of vice and
heresy, to make men detest it. This I am sure was my intention and proiecte,
and I hope, yea I persuade my self, that I have brought to pass my intended
purpose. For what man of a chaste and honest mind, can herarter allow of
this doctrine as the pure, immaculate, and chaste word of God, from which
proceed and follow so beastly co^sequences, or who can think the tree
good that bears so bad fruits? Yea what wise man can be persuaded, that the
autours of this doctrine were me^ of God, indevved with his spirit, that
have noe taste of things belonging to the spirit, such as Chastity, and
virginity are, in which we follow the spirit, not the flesh, and rese^ble
Angels, not carnal men; But apply them selves wholy to the fleshes
desires, and therefore have taken a way all impediments, vvhervvith the Church
in favor of virginity, and for the decency of matrimony, had crossed the
way of sensuality, and have given liberty to have many vviues at once, and
to take a nevve, as aften as the old displeases, or is not present, and when
a wife can not be gotten, by their doctrine they permit every one that will
to take a Queen. Wherefore I marvel not that their clergy is so dissolute,
that vviuing and revviuing, and chopping and changing of vviues, is so rife
amongst them; nether is it staung unto me, where as amongst Catholics we
have ever seen many thousaundes of societies that have professed virginity,
that amongst the reformers you shall find noe such, but in lieu of them,
Colleges of married ministers filled with their brattes, because such flovvers
as virginity and Chastity are, grow not upon such dunghilles, and such
precious margarites are not to be cast before such filthy hogs.

The fifteenth Chapter proves that the reformers doctrine holds a sinner so
fast in sin that after that he is once fallen, he can not rise again.

We have see^ in the former Chapters of this book, how easily the
reformers doctrine leads unto all vice in general, and diverse also in
particular; now if it did show as easy a way unto penance and
justification, as unto sin and iniquity, and did as speedilye help us out
of the mire, as it thrustes us in, it should make some recompense, but I intend
to prove that as their doctrine tumblethe men headlong into the depth of sin,
so it holds them captives with an impossibility of rising up again, and so
is worthy double detestation. And how shall I prove this conclusion, which
seems such a paradox? Truly very easily and that without running far for
an argument. If you remember they are of opinion that the only way for a
sinner to arise up again after he is fallen by sin, is to believe assuredly
without all doubt or staggering, that he is just, and elect, and that
Christ's justice is his; vvch if I ptoue to be impossible for a sinner to
believe, shall prove also that by their doctrine, it is impossible for a sinner
to be justified or to arise from the low fall of sin to the high and
eminent state of grace. To prove this I will only suppose one principle and
Maxim of Philosophy, to wit that truth and verity, or at least some
probable apparau^ce thereof is, the obiecte at vvch our understanding aymeth,
and that therefore, as the will, can not embrace any obiecte unless it be
good, or at least have some apparaunce of good (for noe man can like of evil as
evil) so the understanding can not yield her assent to any thing, unless it
be a verity or have at least some probable shevv^ of verity. And this is the
cause why we can not believe and say with heart, that black is white, or
that a known falsitie is a verity, as I have declared in my Epistle to the
reader more at large. Out of these premises I gather this conclusion: that it
is impossible for a sinner, to frame on a sudden this assent, that he is
just, and consequently, if this be the only way for a sinner to rise unto
justification, it is impossible for him after he is fallen by sin, to rise
again by justification, and so where the tree falls, there it must lie. For
as it is impossible for a sick manne (if he be in his vvittes) to believe
verily that he is vvholle, unless he see some alteration in him self, and
find some ease of his disease, so is it as impossible for a sinner who is
spirituallie sick, yea dead, upon a sudden to believe (especially so
assuredly as Calvin will have him) that he is just, whole, and sound, and
fully recovered of his spiritual disease, unless he see some alteration in
him self before he frame so firm an assent. For I will ask of Calvin when
he commethe fresh from this vilanie, what moves him to this assent and
belief that he is just, and elect? has he a revelation? or have every one
of his followers whom he will have to believe the same, any illumination
from God by which they are acertained? he must needs say noe, because they
experience in them selves that they have no such evidence: find they any
contrition, or love of God, or have they any inherent grace in them, which
has altered them and made them of sinners, just, and holy? They will say
noe, for then faith should not justify, but that which goes before this
faith. And this they must needs say, because faith is the first goodness in
us, and with them it is the first and only thing which justifies; yea in
their opinion, contrition which is inherrent in us, can not be our
Justification, because they say that there is noe inherent grace nor justice.
And if before this faith of theirs, God should by infusion of grace justify
them, yet unless they had a revelation, they could not, especially with such
assurance believe it, because the understanding can not give assent without
some apparaunce of truth. They will say that Christ's justice is theirs, so
that they will apprehend it by faith, and so they are just by that justice if
they will believe so. but nether will this shifte serve their turn. For
before they believe this, Christ's justice must be theirs, and by it they must
be just, because that is the obiecte of their belief, and the understanding
must see it to be so, before she believe so; wherefore seeing that before
this faith of theirs, Christ's justice is not theirs, and they also are not
yet just, it follovvethe that they can not, so long as they are in their
vvittes believe that they are just, because this verity must appear to the
understanding before she can believe it; and therefore if before faith they
be not just, they can never believe so. For as the sick man must be vvholle
and sound before he can believe that he is so, because it is not in his
power to believe that which is not, or which at least appears not, so a
sinner can not on a sudden (unless he have some reason for it) believe
assurdly that he is just. And therefore if this assured faith be necessary to
arise after our fall taken by sin, it is impossible to rise again, after that
we are fallen. And to make the matter yet more plain; as if the only remedy
for a sick man to recover his health, were to believe that he is well, it
were impossible for him to recover, because vvhilest his disease remains,
he can not believe that he is recovered, having noe reason to think so, but
rather the contrary; so if the only means for a sinner to recover, be to
believe in the midst of his sins, that he is just, it is impossible for
him to recover, because he can not with heart think so, having no reason for
it, but rather to the contrary. Hence I gather tvvoe things to be noted.
First that if a sinner be justified by believing that he is just, then is he
justified by a lying faith, because he be leeueth that which is not; and if
you say that so soon as he has believed so, he shall be so; that is not
sufficient, for yet it follovveth that he believes that he is just before
he is just, because justice follovveth faith, and so he is justified by a
false, and lying faith. The second thing which I note, is how maliciously
and yet how covertly the devil by his members seeks our damnation. For not
content, by their doctrine to have induced us to all sin, he takes a way
the means of rising again from the state of sin, denying penance to be
necessary, yea affirming in Luther that contrition is a mortal sin, and
auouching in Luther and Calvin both, Supra.
yea and in all their Scholars, that the only means for a sinner to be
justified, is to beeleeue without all staggering, and with all possible
assurance, that his sins are forgiven; which belief being impossible, as
is already proved (because it is not in the understandings power to believe
white to be black, or that a man is just when noe probability of it
appears) it follovveth that when a sinner is fallen, it is impossible for
him to rise again, because it is as impossible for him to believe that he is
just before he see some apparaunce of the same, as for a sick man to believe
that he is recovered and well at ease, when he is in the midst of the
fit of an hoate ageue, or in the panges of death. And so our reformers do
not only tumble us headlong into the very depth of sin, but hold us there in
perpetual duraunce, without hope of liberty, because they require at our
hands an impossibility, which is in the midst of our sins to believe that
we are just, and elect, having no probability of the same, but rather great
evidence to the contrary; which is as impossible for us to believe with
heart, as it is for the sick man to assure him self that he is well, when
he is in the midst of his fit.

THE EIGHT BOOK
CONTAINS A SVRuey of their doctrine which leads unto Atheism and
contempt of religion.

A SHORT PRAEFACE.
IRELAND is famous for that it breeds noe toades, nor venomous serpents, and
Ingland has been of long time esteemed happy, because it has no wolves:
but in steed of wolves, it has been of late years unfortunate for engendring
of a certain monster called Atheists begotten by heresy, which has more
waste and depopulated the country, then all the bears and wolves of the
desert, or monsters of Africa could have done, if they had been all turned
loose into the land. For they could only have made their pray upon the bodies
of men and beasts, but these monsters called Atheistes have made havoc of
men's souls. They could only have disturbed the temporal state and civil
peace, these have ruined Christi^ anitie, and brought religion into co^tempte,
which is the principal bliss of the soul in this life. Of these monsters
there are tvvoe kinds both feirce and cruel, but the one more savage then the
other. The first denies flatly the divinity, and therefore most properly is
called an Atheist, that is without a God. The second confesses God and God
head, but yet is of opinion, that it little skilleth what honor you give him,
or with what worship of religion you serve him: of this kind are our
Machevellians, who square out religion according to state, and make noe more
account of Scripture the^ of Aesops tables, and so that they may live and
establishe a temporal state, care not what religion florishethe; because they
count it but a piece of policy to keep men in awe and order. Against these
monsters I must arm my self, and change my weapons as I channge my
adversary, and by reason only I will confound these, as I have by scriptures,
reason authority, and all manner of arguments refuted heretics. And for as
much as my general drifte and proiecte in all these books is, to make heresy
odiouse, I will shevve also in this last book, how Atheism is engendered
of heresy, that by this viperouse and monstrous brood we may have a greater
guess of the breeder.

The first Chapter declares how certain points of the Reformers doctrine,
open the gapp to a denial of the divine maiestre and his Godhead.

What God is, it is so hard to Know* that nether the light of reason, nor
faith, nor both lights joined together, are able to discover this verity.
Wherefore Trimegisthus being once demanded this obscure question, gave as
obscure an answer; to wit that God is a thing whose center is every
where, and his circle or circumference no where: signifying thereby, that the
least thing in God (if a man may say so of God in vvhem all things are so
great that they are no less then God) is so great that it far surpasses the
sphere of our capacity, much more does the circumference of his infinite
perfection, exceed the compass, and reach of humain wit. Simomdes being asked
the same question, required time to consider, after which time he being
demanded to give his ce^sure, he required longer time: At the length being
urged to make no more delays, he ansvvered only this, that God was such a
thing that the more we consider him, the less we conceue of him, and the
more we conceue of him the less we can say of him. Aristotle the Prince of
Philosophers could only say of God that he is Ensentium, a thing of things,
that is a thing, from which all things proceed, as from the fountain and
first cause of all things, and a thing which is all things, because
eminently (as Divines say) and compe^diously, he contains in him self all
things. Not that in God, they be living, and not living, corruptible, and
incorruptible, great and small, different, and diverse, perfect, and imperfect,
as they are in them selves; because all in God is living, all incorruptible,
all great, increat, and infinite, all one, all perfect without imperfection;
to be brief in God, all is God. For as the cause contains diverse effects
without division and imperfection of the cause, and as the artificers piece of
work, has a more noble being in the artificers Idea and mental platform,
then in it self; so all things are in God, in more eminent manner, then in
them selves; because in him, they are as in their cause, and fountain, yea as
in their idea; and therefore thou ghe in them selves, these creatures, some be
corporal, some be spiritual, yet in God all are spiritual, though in them
selves some be living creaturs, some deuoid of life, Io. ^.
yet in God all are living and life it self, though in them selves they be
create, yet in God they be increat, though in them selves they be imperfecte,
yet in God they be perfect, though in them selves, they be diverse, yet in God
they are all one, though in them selves they be creatures, yet in God they are
God. This the learned scholar of saint Paul Dionisius Areopagita, c. 5. de
diuin^ nominib^.
explicateth by a fit similitude. As the lines (says he) which are
drawn from the Center, are divided from them selves, and diverse in them
selves, but in the Center, they are united in one, without any distinction: so
all creaturs, as they proceed from God, who is the Center and resting place
of all things, are diverse and different, but as they are in god, they are all
one. And as the forsaied lines in the Center, are nothing else but the Center;
so all creatures which are but so many lines drawn from Gods indivisible
nature, in God are God, without all division, and imperfection. But as what
God is we know not, so that there is a God, it is so manifest, that though
the toungue may deny him, the heart can not, if it be not carried a way
with passion, and inconsideration. True it is that Protagoras and Diagoras,
were so godless, as to doubt, yea to deny that there was a God; yet these
men were long since Hissed out of the Schools of all Philosophers, and could
not have denied God in heart, where the light of reason discovers him, had
not some blinding passion over ruled them. And therefore if it were not, that
heresy had countenaunced Atheism, and given it authority to pass amongst
Christians without blushing, yea with honor and credit; I would have
contented my self to have hissed also at these companions, and would never
have gone about to overthrow that by reason, which stands with no reason.
But least that the authority and svvaye, which atheism now a days bears
in the world, may over rule the vviser, and seem reason enough to the simple,
I will by certain pregnaunt reasons, convince these godless Atheistes, that
there is a god, and a divine power? And first of all this world seems to me
to be a book, in which we may read this verity. For, as the book which
we read (if we understand the words) teaches us the verity or science
which it co^teineth, so if we read with diligence the book of this
world, in which every creature is a word, we shall by it learn, that
there is a God. To. 1.
For as S. Paul says, the invisible things of God (that is his divine
attributes and perfections) are known by those things that are created.
Wherefore that courageous mother in the Machabees, ^. Man. 7.
vvch was as forwards to prefer her sons to Martyrdom, as others would be
to detein them, bids her son to read this book of creaturs, and to look
upon heaven and earth and all which is in the^ contained, and thereby to
learn, that God it was that made them all of nothing. This book saint
Antonie studied, and profited therein so much, that he could confute
Philosophers, and convince a godhead and divinity. Yea these creaturs are not
only so many words in which we may read this verity, but they are also so
many preachers which cry out with a voice most lovvd, and shrill, Psalm. 9^.
and in a language intelligible of all men that God it was that made them and
not they them selves. And so a Godhead is taught us not only by ye university
of Athens, Paris, or Louaine, but also of all the creaturs in the world. For
first I demand of whom this world (vvch Philosophers do call (All) because
it co^teineth all) received his beginning, being, and existence? If thou say
with Epicure or Democritus, that it was made Fortuito causarum, vel atomorum
concursu, by a chauncing co^course of causes, motes, or indivisible bodies;
Task who made these causes and indivisible bodies? If thou answer that a
creatur made the^, I ask again who made that creature, and so at lengtht I
will bring thee to a thing exempt from creation, which created all things,
and this I call God. If thou say that the world framed it self, I must
needs tell thee that that is impossible: because nothing can operate or work,
before it has a being because as the Philosopher says prius est esse, quam
agere: And so if the world made it self, it was before it self, which
implies, a contradiction. If thou say that it was nether framed by it self,
nor by any other cause, but was ever of it self, without any making, then
thou make the world a God, and so vvhilest thou seek to deny a God, thou
grauntest a God. For if it be of it self, it is indepe^dent of any other, and
so has a necessary being which ever was and ever shall be; because if it be
of it self, it can not by any cause be brought from nothing to some thing,
and so ever was of necessity, nether can it be brought from some thing to
nothing, and so ever shall be, and that of necessity. If it have a necessary
and independent being, it has an infinite essence, because it is not limited
by any, and so exceeds the bounds of a creature; and therefore if the
world was of it self, it is a God: which perfection not vvithsta^ding it
can not have, because the worlds material substance, mutabilitie,
visibilitie, and determinate quantity, arguethe a creatur, not a God, who is
immaterial, invisible, and infinite in his immensitie. Who the^ was it that
created this goodly palace and so huge a building as is this world? Not it
self, as is proved, not any Angel, or other creature, because creation of
nothing, argues infinite power, and where is infinite power, there is an
infinite essence, and so God only was he that could create it. And if thou
vvilt obstinately defend, that an Angel, or some other creature created it; I
will thus argevve against thee. either that creature which thou imaginest to
have created the world, was of it self, or it was created of another? If
it was of it self, it was God, and so thou grauntest, which I endeavor to
wrest from thee by force of argument; if it was created of another creature,
I ask who created that other, and so at the length I will lead thee to the
first cause, which created all, and was created of none, which is the God
whom we seek for.

Secondly not only the vvholle world but also every part of it, will make a
plain remonstraunce of a Godhead. And to begin with man, who though he be
a little world, yet is but a part of the great world; who I pray you was
it, that gave the first man his being? We see by experience that men breed
not as flies and worms do of the corruption of other living creatures,
nether do they spring out of the earth like herbs or toadstooles, as Julius
Caesar said of the first inhabitauntes of England, nether are they begotten of
beasts of another kind, as mules, and chickins are, but rather as we see by
experience, man only begets man, and of no other living creatur, no not of
an Angel, can he be begotten. Who then was it that gave the first man his
being? of him self, man could not be, because then had he been a God; of
another man he could not be begotten, because no man could be before the
first man, no other creature could beget him, as is already proved, ergo some
thing that was no creature created him. And what is that but God?

Another part of the world, and that the most noble, is an angel: And who I
pray you created those spirits and immateriall substa^ces? One Angel could not
beget another, because that would argewe the^ to be material substa^ces, and
corruptible creaturs, and so no spirits: To say that men can produce Angels,
or that any other creature extant could do the same, is far less probable,
because they are the highest creatures in perfection, and so could not be
produced of their inferiors. It follovveth therefore that some cause not
included within the rank of creaturs, created them: and what can that be
but the Creator. l. 12. met. c. 9. s. l. 1. de cas^ c. 9.
To deny all Angels and spirits, is against Philosophy, and all the best
Philosophers. For Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers, affirms, that the
heavens are not moved by their own proper forms, and faculties, but by
Angels, which he calls intelligences. In Plyt. ad Tyrannum, and in Sympo.
sio Zenoc l. de morte Mercur, in Pyma^. dro.
Plato and the Platonists make often mention both of good an evil Angels. So
does Plutarche also, and diverse others, and who has not read of Socrates
familiare, which was called demonium, that is a good or evil spirit. Yea
experience proves that there are devils, which are spirits and differ only
from the good Angels, in malice. For if we behold the strange effects
which are to be seen in those vvch we call possessed persons, we can not
with any probability ascribe all to a melancholic humor: for those
pullinges, and conuulsions, strange motions, and operations, can not proceed
from any humor or natural and material cause. Because we see them some
times lifted up from the ground, some times they hovvle like dogs, some times
they yell like wolves, some times they tell secrets, and speak in strange
languages. The manifold and strange operations of witches, their meetinges
and voyages which they make in the air, the strange apparitions, which all
the world talks of, and therefore can not lie (because the voice of the
people is the voice of God) demonstrateth that there are angels and immaterial
spirits. And seeing that these creaturs can nether produce one another, nor be
produced of any create cause, we must needs confess a God and an increated
spirit, who created them. The like proof for a divine power the heavens do
also yield us, for seeing that noe creature, nor second cause, could create
those huge and incorruptible bodies, we must needs confess a God and first
cause, who extended and framed them. Thirdly the goodly order and disposition
of things which we see, argues a nature of intelligence not contained
within the rank of creaturs, which rules, guidethe and directs all, and
appoints every creatur his task, and place. We see how the Elements are
disposed of, and appointed every one to his natutall place. The fire as most
noble and of a most light and aspiring nature, takes the highest place, the
air and water take ye middle room, because they participate of tvvoe
extremes, the one aggreeing with the fire in heat and ligthnesse, the other
with the earth in cold and heauynes: And the earth being of a heavy and
lumpish nature, is vvorthilie thrust down to the lowest place. We see how
the heavens and planets move in order, and distinguishe the times and seasons,
never altering their course since they were created, in so much that by their
uniform motion the Astrologers can tell most certainly, the time, yea minute
of the chaung of the moon, of the sons setting, and rising, and of the
sons and moons Eclipses. We see the order and diversity of parts and
members in plants, beasts, and men, which are so furnished of all parts and
faculties belonging unto nature, that there is noe part vvanting, none
superfluouse not so much as a vein, sinevv, or little bone, as we see by
experience when we want the least of them. The eyes are placed in the head,
which is also made to turn about, that we may look about us, and therefore
are called the guides of the body. The ears are the organes of discipline,
because by them we hear what others say, without the which man's life
were noe life at all, because it should be deuoid of conversation. The nose
smells a far of, all odours which are good or bad for the bodies health,
and besides it is the trompet of the voice. The sense of feeling is dispersed
through out all parts of the body, whose office is to feel whatsoever
approaches or touches the body, thereby to fly it, if it be hurtefull as fire
is, or to take commodity of it, if it be convenient. The mouth receueth the
sustenaunce and meare, which is necessary for the body, the toungue besides
that it is the instrument of speaking, and the interpretour of the mind, is to
taste this meat and to judge of it before it pass any farther, which
judgment being given, the throat svvallovveth it down; The sto make
boyleth and disgesteth it, the liver makes blood of it, ye veins co^ueighe
this blood to all parts of the body, and nothing there is not necessary or
expedient, not so much as the guts whose office as it is base, because they
are as it were the sinkes of the Kitchen to pass the filthe and excrementes,
so is it so necessary, that otherwise the body would be poisoned and
infected. Tell me now, o godless Atheist, who it is that has set down
this order? who is he that so rulethe the motion of the heavens, that they
move at the same time from East to west and backwards again, and one within
another, and one more slovvly then another, and yet so, that they hinder not
one another? Who has established a perpetual peace amongst the four
elements, which yet by reason of their contrary qualities, are of a iarring
nature. And who has so placed them as they may best aggree? for the air
aggreethe with the fire in heat, and therefore is placed next unto him: the
water in moisture aggreeth with the air, and in cold with the earth, and
therefore is lodged betvvixte them, vvheras if the water were placed next the
fire, and the air next unto the earth, they would make war continually one
upon another, and never would be satisfied without the ruin of one
another, because they disagree in both qualities, the fire being hoate and
dry, the water cold and most, the air hot and moist, and the earth cold
and dry. Who has so ordered the parts of the bodies of living and moving
creaturs, as they may best serve their turns, and by their proportion and
disposition be the greatest ornament. Who sorteth all beasts with their
kind, and places them in rooms fittest for their nature; some in the water,
as fishes, some in the air, as birds, some on the earth as beasts and
plants, some in the fire, as the Crekit and Salamandre. Who sets the
plants and herbs, and gives them a root as a mouth, to receive their
conueniente nourriture, and veins to conueighe it eue^ from the root, to the
highest bovves yea leaves and fruits; and gives to every one of them a seed, or
some other thing in steed of seed, by which they propagate them selves and
retain a posterity? Who I pray thee, o ungodly Impe) considering this goodly
order and disposition, who I pray thee beholding this goodly Palace of God
and men, I mean the world, in which is all this furniture, provision, order,
and disposition, will not think of an artificer of intelligence, who
builded it, and of a hovvs-keper most wise and provident, who rules and
disposes of all in the same? Thou vvilt say with Epicure, and such
graceless, godless, and vvitlesse companions, that all this goodly order
happened by a chance, and that by the like chance, this goodlye palace with
all the parts and workmanship thereof, was framed and effectuated. By
chance, say thou (o man) or rather no man, but some monster of mankind?
Considerest thou well what it is, which thou auerrest to have been
effectuated by chance? The printer, shall never be able to set his printe by
casting his letters together at all adventures; the painter by a careless
casting of his colors upon a clothe or table, shall never dravve his intended
picture; The mason by throvving of stones one at another, shall never build
his goodly palace; And can thou think that all this goodly order, which is
set down in the world, that this curiouse piece of work of the world,
at which men and Angels stand astonished, was framed and established by
chance meddlie? If thou should enter into a vvestminster-Halle, a Non-Such,
or Royal exchange in Ingland, into a Louver in Paris, or a Scurial in Spain,
where thou should see stately building, aspiringe turrets, lofty roofes,
witty conueighau^ce of Rooms, and chambers, and orderly disposition of
windows, pillars, chimnies; would thou, or could thou imagine these
artificial works and buildinges, to have been wrought by a chauncing
flight of stones from the Quarrie; and not rather by the art and skill of some
ingenious Artificer? And can thou entering into the sumptuouse building and
palace of the world, whose pauement, is the earth, paued with so ritche
stones, and metalls, and rushed with the greenes of all herbs and plants;
whose foundation is the ce^ter, which stays all; whose roof are the
heavens, siled so ritchely, with so many bright and glittering stars; whose
wales are the same heavens, which do not only cover but also compass all
aboat; whose diverse rooms and lodgings, are the four elements, in which
diverse creaturs according to their diverse naturs, are diversely lodged; whole
indvveller and inhabitaunt is man, who under God also is Lord over all; whose
prouisio^s and moueables, are the goods and fruits of the sea and land,
laid up in store for man's provision: Who I say entering into this Princely
palace, so well ordered and governed, can imagine all this to proceed from
chance, and not rather from an intelligent Artificer, who works these
wonders and miracles of nature, and a provident prince who governs and
rules all so vvisely, and like a pilot sits at the stern, guiding and
directing the course of this world, and of every creaturs actions. l. 2. de
natura de^rum.
For as Cicero that famous Orator, and Philosopher avouches, nothing is so
open and so evident, when we look upon the heavens, and the celestial
bodies, as that there is some divine power of most excellent understanding, by
whom these things, as they were first framed, so are they still conserved
and governed.

Fourthly against these vvitlesse Atheistes, the very brute beasts shall argue
for their Creatoure, whose operations are so vvittye and agreeable to the end,
which is to them by God and nature prescribed, as if thy had discourse, and
were indevved with reason. They fear those things which are contrary to
their good, and distinguishe the good from badd, as if they had the science, of
good and badde. The sheep, yea the young lamb, eue^ at the first, discerns
the wolf from the dog, and quaketh at the very sight of him, although he
differs little from the dog which he ferreth not. The chicken can put a
difference betvvixe the kite and the Peacocke, and fears that, little caring
for this, although in body bigger; The birds fear the sparavv havvke, the
ducke the faucon, and do tremble at the very noise of their belle, and yet they
care not for ye svva^ne, nor Crane, though in body many times bigger. Who
teaches them thus to discern their enemies, who puts in the^ such a fear
of that, which in deed is to be feared? Thou vvilt say, the instincte of
nature, but who put such an instincte in them, by which they fly their
foes, as if they had reason, but he that is the autour of nature and reason?
Who teaches brute beasts, in a medovve or garden, where there are so many
herbs one like another, to choose the good, and to refuse the badd, and so
coningly, as if they were Physicians, or herbistes, and knevve the naturs of
simples? in so much that vvher as men, many times are poisoned in taking one
drugg, or herb, for another; such an errourneuer happens amongst them. We
see how artificially birds do build their nestes, vvherin they make such a
defense against the vveather, that no mason can correct their work. The
spider spinneth the thread out of his own substance, which afterward he
vveaueth so artificially, that he makes a formal net, which also he
places in those places, vvher flies are likest to pass. And he like a
byrd-catcher, lies lurking in a corner of the same, without any motion; but
no sooner does the fly touch his net, but he perceueth, and no soene^ is
the pray taken, but he with all spee^ makes have unto it. I have already
described the trauelles of the Antes in making their harvest, In the seue^t^
book.
and carrying in their corn, and how they eat the end of it, least it grow
in the earth, and bring it forth to dryinge in a sounye day, least moisture
corrupt it. And I have in part described the common vvelthe of bees, which is
so well ordered, that a statist and common vvelth-man, may learn policy and
government, of them. The Hare what slighte vs^th she to escape the hounds,
how many leapes makes she, how many bi-vvayes takes she, and if she come
near a water she will pass it, if near a heard of Catell, she enters
amongst the^, to deceue the hounds, and to make then loose the sent. How
subtle and crastie the Fox is, I report me to Huntsmen; and what devises he
uses to attain to his pray, fevve there are which know not. On a time (as a
man of credit told me who was an eye witness) the Fox espying duckes in
a river, devised this stratagem to deceue them. he takes a bushe of fern,
which he caryeth in his mouth to the water, and puts it in to the
water, far above them, least he should be espied, and above the stream
also, that it might descend down unto the^, and pass also thorovve them;
and this he did twice, or thrice. The duckes suspecting nothing, let the
fern pass by them; at the length the fox him self come the svviming down
the stream, with a ferne-bushe in his mouth, and that so covertly, that
nothing appeared above the water, but the bushe; the duckes suspercting no
more deceit, then was before, and imaging that it was but aferne-bushe
which came down the stream, never fled for the matter, because they feared
nothing; but when the Fox came a mo^gest them, he shevved him self to be a
fox, for leaving the bushe, he snatche* the at a ducke, and changes his
bushe for the same. Hence I deduce this argugument: These creaturs are
vvitlesse and deuoid of reason, and yet do they proceed in their actions most
vvittilie and reasonably, as if they had discourse and reason, and some times
they show more vvitte in their actions, then do men them selves, who are
reasonable and discoursing creaturs. And seeing that so orderly and so
reasonable actions, can not proceed from any reason, which is in the^, because
they are unreasonable, I do infer that there is some one of reason above all
these creaturs, who thus directs and gouernethe their actions. Nether will
i^ suffice to say, that they do all this by the instinct of nature, which is
nothing else but a natural inclination; because seeing that this natural
instincte is no reason, and yet directs them so reasonably, it must needs
preceed from one of reason, who could imprinte in them such an
inclinatition, vvch being no reason, does direct them notvvithsta^ding, and
govern the^ in their actions, as if they had reason. Wherefore as when thou
see the arrow fly directly to ye mark, thou strait vvayes imaginest an
Archer, though thou see him not, because so direct a motion, could not
proceed from the arrow, had not the Archer, who is indevved with reason,
given it his direction, and imprinted in it a force also, which carries it
directly to ye white, at which he aimed: So when thou see unreasonable
creaturs to proceed in their actions so vvittilie, and so orderly, thou must
think of some one of intelligence, who has imprinted in them a natural
instincte, which directs them in their actions, as if they had reason.

Fifthly, what soever is in this world, either it is of it self, or of
another. If of it self, then is it God, because, as be fore is proved, to be
indepe^dent, is to have a necessary and infinite essence, vvch is no other
thing the^ God. If it be of another, I ask of whom is that other? If of
another, I ask again of whom depends that other; and so at le^gthe I
will bring thee to a thing, of a vvch all things are depe^ding and that is
depe^ding of none; vvch is the God we seek for. To this argument may be
reduced that argument of Aristotle by vvch he prouethe the first Moouer, 2. p.
q. 2. a 3.
which S. Thomas also uses. what soever (says Aristotle) is moved, is
moved by another. The inferior creaturs are moved by the heavens, and their
influe^ces, which reach even to the bovvelles of the earth, where by virtue
of them, gold and silver are engendered, the inferior heavens are moved by the
first heaven, which is called primum mobile, because all the other heavens
follow the sway of that. The first heaven then, either it moves it self, or
it is moved of another? it can not move it self, because it is a creature, and
so as in essence and being, so in motion and operation, it depends of
another; If it be moved of an other, then I demand, whether that moves of
it self, or by the motion of another? if you say of another, I ask again
whether that is moved by it self, 2. Met.
or by another? And so either we must ascend in infinitum (which is
impossible) because an infinite distaunce can never be passed, and so the
inferior cause which receives virtue from the Superior, should never be
able to move, because it should expecte an infinite time, to receive motion
from a Superior cause, whose motion must pass through infinite inferior
causes, before it come to the lowest; or else at leng the we must stay in a
supreme cause, which moves all, and it self is moved of none. And what is
that, but God?

Sixthly I will bring a moral argument, which also co^uinceth this verity.
It is the opinion even of the Paganes, to which the light of reason has
induced them, that there is vice and virtue in our actions, and that the one
deserves punishment the other revvard, as in the last book is related; and
seeing that in this life, nether vice has his dew punishment (because the
vitiouse live in prosperity and enjoy most commonly the felicity of this
life in more ample manner then the virtuous) nor virtue her revvard, because
the virtuous are misprised; it follovveth that there is another life, in vvch
God, who has an equal providence over all, shall give to every actio^ his
just and dew reward.

Seventhly (as Cicero says) never any nation, was so barbarouse, Supra.
whom the light of reason, indevved not with an opinion of God, or Gods; yea
even the A theistes, them selves, if they fall into any extremity, are forced
by nature to cry, and call upon a God. For if a man by shipwreck were in
danger of drowning, then so long as he sees human means to save him, he
will snatch at a cord which is cast unto him, or he will reach for a board,
or seek to get hold of a boat, rock, or tree, to help him self by; and if
he be an Atheist, then so long as these means fail not, he seeks for no
other, but if he perceue, that by no creaturs help, he can be helped, then be
he Christian or Pagane, Jew or Atheist, he thinks upon some higher power,
and when all creaturs forsake him, and his own force will no more serve him,
nature bidds him to seek farther, and to demand that help of the Creator,
which no creature can yield him.

Lastly the greatest sinners that are, who would with all their hearts that
there vv^r no God, that they might sin the more freely, in ye midst of their
vices, and pleasures, have many times remorses of conscience, and fear even
naturally, by naturs instincte and instruction, some divine power, that will
call the^ to an accounte. hence proceed their melanch olike moods, by day, and
fearful dreams, by night, as in the former book, and in the Chapter of
conscience, may appear. And truly we see that nothing has so much force in
ye rule of men's actions, and direction of their life, as the cogitation of a
divine majesty, to whom they must yield and render a stricte and strait
accounte. For thus some times the greatest sinners are enforced to discourse. I
let the bridle loose to all vice and pleasure, I bridle noe passions, I
refrain from noe injustice, when by iniuring others, I can profit my self: I
live according as I will, and as freely as he that has no master, and if there
were no divinity, to whom I am to yield an accounte for every actio^, I
might take my hearts ease amidst all my pleasurs: but if there be a God, as I
fear there is, and as me think there is (for else why does this cogitatio^ of
a divinity so often cross the vvayes of my pleasurs?) then have I cause to
look to my actions, and to make my accounte, before hand, least I be taken in
the Lurch. But what if there be no God? then had I less cause to care. But
because peradventure there is a God, in the midst of my pleasure, I have not
my hearts desire, and full repose. Many other arguments I could allege for a
divine power; but these are sufficient, and these are the principal. Who
desires more, let him read saint Thomas in his first part of his
Theological Sum, and in his work which he vvroteagainst the gentiles, as
also Granado in the beginning of his Catechism, and the English resolution;
and he shall find that we all say the same allmoste insubstaunce, yet varye
in the manner, and in some reasons also and additions. Now let us dravve
nearer to our conclusion, and intended purpose, which is to shevve how our
reformers doctrine leads us unto the denial of a Godhead. Which I will do
breefly and yet so plainlye, as the reader shall confess, that to have used
more words in a matter so plain, had been prolixitie, and superfluity. See
the fifte book.
If you remember they are not afraid to avouch that God is the autour of all
sin and vvick ednesse, that he has ordained us to sin from all
aeternitie, that we sin not only by his permission, but also by his will
and commandment, yea that he urges us and compels us to sin; whence
it follovveth that he is of a malicious nature, bent to all evil, because so
badd fruits can not proceed from a good tree; he co^maundes us also under
pain of damnation to refrain from all sin and vice, vvch notvvithstanding
by the reformers doctrine we ca^ not do, because we have no free vvil; and
if we sin and dye in sin, be punishes us with a perpetual and hellishe
fire, for that fault vvch we could not avoid, and in vvch he him self,
had as much part as we our selves: whence it follovveth that he is not only
mallicious, but cruel also and tyrannical, as upon another occasion, is
before demonstrated. If a Christian be once persuaded that this doctrine is
true, he will easily be induced, to think as Atheistes do, that there is no
God at all. For seeing that the common conceit of God hitherto, has been very
honorable, every one deeming that which is most perfect, best, and most
amiable, to be God; men will more easily be persuaded with Diagoras and
Protagoras, that there is no God at all, then that he is of so badde, cruel,
and malicious a nature.

The second Chapter shows how the new religion by the same doctrine
ruineth all religion and worship of God.

REligion is a moral virtue, and one of the principal virtues of that kind,
whose office is to offer unto God suprem honor, homage, and worship, as unto
the highest: which although she have not the divinity for her immediate
object, as the Theological virtues have, yet comes she as near as may be,
because she has the worship of this divinity, for her object and attends
upon the divinity so faithfully, that no sooner is a God acknowledged, but
religion adoreth him, and yields him his homage for a tribute. Wherefore ever
since there was a reasonable creature, able to know God, the world was never
without religion. In paradise our first parents worshipped a God for the
time, and if that state had conrinued, there should have been a public
practice of religion, and that by sacrifice also, as some divines do imagine.
Suarez. 3. p. de sacrificio Missae.
And what worship of God by sacrifices, and sacraments was used in the
law of nature, and of Moses I have already declared. Yea never as yet was
there any nation, Supra.
who acknowledged a divinity, but it also worshipped the same with some
kind of religion. For men easily perceived, that to majesty, power, and
excellency, honor was a dew tribute, and by good consequence, that to
supreme majesty, power and excellency, was dew also supreme homage and
religion. Which is the cause as Liuie reports, l. (...)
that Rome was no sooner builte, but a religion also was established, and
temples dedicated unto the Gods. l. 1. c. 1.
For which devotion, Valerius Maximus commends the Romans, saying, that
they thought nothing was to be preferred before religion, but that rather as
the Gods were esteemed above their Senators, Dictatours, and Emperors, so
religion should take place before their civil laws and customs. Of which
opinion Plato also shows him self to have been, who in his work which
he made of laws, decreed some for government and policy, l. 4*
others for religion, and these he counted the principal and fundamental
laws: well knovving that to be true, l. 1. de nature deorum.
which Cicero after him observed, that if once piety and religion to wards
God, be taken a way, fidelity and justice amongst men, can not long
continue. And Plutarch affirms that you shall sooner find a city without
coin, wales, laws, and learni^g, the^ without temples and worship of
Gods. And although this religion of the paganes, was no religion but
superstition, yet this superstition proceeded, by abuse, from a natural
inclination, which man has to worship and honor a God. Because
superstition and religion do only differ in this, that superstition either
vvorshippeth a false God, or at least gives not a right honor unto the true
God, but religion vvorshippethe the true God, and not with a vain and
fantastical, but with a true, sincere, and reasonable worship. So that man
by nature is inclined to religion, only he fails either in the thing which is
to be worshipped, or in the manner of worship; and therefore if a man be of
any discourse able to know, that there is a God, you shall not need to persuade
him that God is to be worshipped, only in this he shall need your help, what
is this God, and with what worship and religion he is to be served. And
herin consists the principal point of the controversy which to this day
even from the beginning, has troubled the world, and the greatest vvittes
of the world, to wit, with vhat worship and religion God is to be served,
for although all allmoste aggree in this that God, is religiously to be
honored and respected, as the diversity of religions which possess the
world, will testify; yet in the other point, to wit with what religion he
is to be reverenced, men are as diverse, as there are diverse religions in the
world. Wherefore here might I take occasion to refure the religion of the
Jews, paganes, and heretics by many arguments, and by as many arguments I
could demonstrate the Catholic and Roman, faith and worship of God, to
be the only true religion, which I have done in my commentaries upon Secunda
Secundae, but this were a thing to long and beside my purpose, which was
only to make general a survey and examination of the nevve religion, wherefore
that I leave to others, and peradventure to some other book, which, if this
be well accepted, I may herafter set forth: only here, in a word or tvvoe,
I will direct the reader to certain places of this Survey, in vvch upon
occasion I have disproued the nevve religion, and established the old, by
pregnaunte reason. For first of all my first book demonstrateth that we can
not admit nether them nor their religion, for good and lavvfull, unless we
bind our selves by the same reason to receue all heretics and heresies that
ever were hertofore, or shall be herafter; yea in the fifte chapter of the
said book I have proved the Catholic religion to be the only religion,
because it is conformable to that which was so straungely planted by the
Apostles, and in the same place I have proved manifestly that the reformers
have noe probable means or motives to induce a reasonable man to be of their
profession. In the second book I have declared how the marks of heretics
aggree unto them, and that therefore they must be taken for heretics, and their
doctrine for heresy, if Arianisme or any other such like doctrine be justly
so to be censured. In the third book I declare how their doctrine
disgracethe Christ, and so can not be Christian religion, and in the books
follovvi^g I shevve how it repugneth to civil state and policy, how
iniuriouse it is to God, how it opens the gap unto all vice and Atheism,
and so can not be of God. Yea in the fourth book I prove that they have no
religion, because they have noe priests nor sacrifices nor prayer, and
scarsely any sacraments, notvvithstanding that these things and religion ever
went together. Secondly in the alleged fifte chapter I have compared our
ancient pastors of whom we receued our religion, with their nevve ministers
of whom they received theirs, and I have proved that our pastors in all
points are to be preferred, and consequently our religion. Thirdly in the
second book and fifte Chapter, I prove that once Christian religion was
planted in the world, and Pastors were appointed. I have proved also that
this religion and these Pastors are never to be changed, and that
consequently, that now is the true Church and religion, which can derive it
self by a continual succession from the first pastors and the first faith
that was planted and practiced; I have proved also that the reformers have not
this succession, and that Catholics have, whence it follovveth evidently that
their religion is not the true Christian religion, and that ours is the true
and only religion. In the Sixte Chapter I prove that in Christ's Church and
religion is peace and unity in faith and doctrine, which Christ at his
departure bequeathed to his Church, and I have demo^strated that this peace and
unity is not to be found amongst the reformers, but only amongst Catholics,
and consequently that the Catholic religion is the only Christian religion. In
the Seuenthe chapter I prove that the religion of true Christianes is noe
particular sect, but catholic and universal, and one, and the same in all
countries and ages, and seeing that only the Catholic religion has this
property, it follovveth that that is the true Christian religion. So that I
shall not need to use any other argument, to prove that the Catholic religion
only, is the true religion and worship of God. It remains therefore only,
that I now declare how the reformers open the gappe to a certain kind of
Atheism, which is irreligiositie and co^tempte of all religion, and because
this conclusion is often times to be inferred out of other points of their
doctrine in the Chapters follovvinge, I content my self in this Chapter with
their doctrine alleged in the former Chapter, and out of that only I will
deduce my intended conclusion, which I may do with as much brevity as
facility. For if God be the autour of all sin, then if we may gather
what the tree is by the fruit, he is of a malicious nature as is before
proved: and if he command us impossibilities and punish us with Hell fire
for not fullfilling them, then is he unreasonable, cruel, and barbarous. And
if we once make this conceit of God (as we must needs) if we believe the
adversaries opinion, then must our hearts of necessity be cold in religion,
and worship of God. For who can be induced to worship, love, and honor
such a God in whom is nothing which is amiable, nothing worthy honor? well
may we fear him for his cruelty, but love him, and honor him from the
heart we can not. And so religion fallethe.

The third Chapter shows that in contempt of the Churches authority they
bring all religion in contempt.

IT is a maxim and almost an article of faith receued amongst the reformers,
that the true Church which once was, has erred grosselye, and in no lesser
matters then faith, justification, merit, freevvil, works, satisfaction,
purgatory, prayer to Saints, worship of images, number and virtue of
Sacraments, Sacrifice, and such like. Yea they confess that the Romain Church
was once the true Church, but thy add with all that afterward it erred
grossly and fell sovvlye, and now of the Church of Christ, is become the
Synagogue of the devil. This is the cause why when we urge the authority
of the ancient and present Church, for the proof of the real presence, free
will, prayer to saints, and sacrifice of the Mass, they answer us that the
Church, was but a congregation of men, which has erred in these and other
matters. And therefore Luther cares not for a thousand Churches, and Calvin,
Beza, and others despise all the Councelles, and ancient fathers, as appearethe
by their words which are related in the first book, and the third, and
fourth chapter. So that upon the bare authority of the Church they will not
hang their faith, as they say, least they hang their souls, because the
Church as it may be deceued, so it may deceue. I demand of the^ therefore
what assurance they have of scripture, and by what means they come to ye
knowledge of it? A Catholic would say that he beleeuethe these books to
be the word of god, because the Catholic Church, which is it the pillar of
truth, which by the son of God was promised a spirit which should teach
her all verity, 10.14.15. l. ont epist fund c. ^.
has cuer so beleened and defined. Wherefore saint Austine says that he
would not believe the ghospel unless the Churches authority m^ued him; not
that the Church makes scriptures, or gives them their truth and verity (for
that they have of God who was the indighter of them) but because we can not
know which is Scripture, which is not, but by the voice of the Church, to
which only in this matter the ancient fathers were wont to harken, as
Ireneus, l. 2 c 2 3. 4. l pr^esc. de expos. Symb. l. 2 c 1. 46. l. 4. c 11.
Tertulian, saint Hierom, Leo the first, and d^uers others, of whom
Nicephorus makes mention. Wherefore the first Toletane Council, in the one and
tvventith cano^, accurseth the^ who accept of any other Scriptures the^ those
which the Catholic Church receives. He would allege for an argument
that Christemade Peter, and his successor the Pope, supreme pastor of the
Church, and commanded him to feed his sheep; lo. 2.
and seeing that a principal office of the shepherd, is to show them such
pasturs as are most holsom for them; it pertains to the ^uprem Pastoure of
the Church, to tell us infallibly, which are the true scriptures: for when
he declares vvch are the true Scripturs he shows us our pasture, and the
place vvher we are to graze, and when he expoundethe them, he feedethe us.
And seeing that the Pope of Rome is this Pastor (as is proved in the last
chapter of the first book) it follovveth that we must receue, that for
scripture which he allows of as scripture. He would allege also the
antiquity of scriptures for a proof of their sincerity; l. 2. cont. Ap. (...)
prabar. Euangel in Apolog c 19. 20. 24.
because Moses who was the writer of a great part of the old testament (as
Josephus, Tertulian, and Eusebius affirm) by many handred years, was more
ancient then all the vvrit^rs of the Romans and Grecians also: vvch therefore
deserve great credit and reverence, 1 Tuse.
because as Cicero says in his Tusculane questions, to Antiquity noe less
is dew. He would confirm this argument by another of no less efficacy,
to wit that these books have been conserved so many thousand years, not
vvithsta^ding so many captiuities of the Jews, and persecutions of the
Christians, which argues that God who was the Author of them, had a
special care of them, and a vigilant eye unto them, as unto his own word and
vvriting. He might allege also the co^formitie of those book, which were
indighted of diverse, and at diverse times, and yet have in them no
contrarieties, and were translated out of Hebrew into Latin by 70
Interpretours, ^nstin. orat. paroen. ad ge^^^^.
diuersely disposed, who yet not vvithstanding so aggreed, as if all their
tra^slations had been copied out of one; For which causes even the Gentiles and
Paganes them selves, have borne great respect unto these writings, not daring
to mingle them with their profane writings, because (as Josephus and
Eusebius affirm) some that have attempted it, l ^^. Aut. c. 1. ^. l. ^.
praepar^. ^.
by the divine and secret power, have been very sharply and seuerly
punished: all vvch is vvarra^ted by history and tradition. This a Catholic
would say with great applause and no less probability, for the authority
of scripture, But what would, or what could our reformers say? would they
say with the Catholic, that they believe them to be holy scripture, because
the Church says so? ^^ Host^. l. 3. ^^nt. Brent.
Luther in deed says that he in this point beleeuethe the Church and Pope,
and good reason has he: because of vvho^ did he receue the scriptures when
he began first to preach his new doctrine, but of the Roman Church, who
cuer had the custody of them, even since the time of the Apostles? And how
could he know that the ghospel of the Nazarens, of saint Barnabas, Eusebius. l.
^. c. 25.
and saint Thomas, were not as rrue scripture as the ghospel of saint
Matthevve, and other Evangelists, but that the Romain Church allowed of
these, and not of those? For this cause some of them do say, that in this
point they must needs believe the Pope, and Romain Church, because they ca^ not
in deed have any probable knowledge of Scripture, but by this means, as shall
appear by the refutatio^ of all other means which they can feign or imagine.
But I will be so bold as to take this means from the^, and then I will ask
them, how they know that the nevve and old testament are not mere fables,
and fictio^s as the Atheistes say that they are? For they are of opinion, that
the Roman Church may deceue, and be deceeued, and therefore they will not
believe her for the number of canonical books, nor for the meaning of
scripture; how then can they credit her when she defines that the old and
nevve testament are holy scripture? her authority is one and the same in the
affirmation of this, and of other thiges; if the^ they believe her not in those
things, they ca^ not believe her in this. For as if the Astrologer say that
to morrow shall be rain, and that with in three months there shall be
rain, I ca^ not believe this to be true for his assertion, unless I also
believe that, because his authority is the same, and yet I may believe rather
that within three months we shall hauerayne, the^ that to morrow we
shall have rain, because that in it self is more likely: so if we believe
one thing which the Romain Church affirmethe, and not another, we believe
not any thing because she says so, but either for the probalitie of the
thing or for some other reason which pleasethe us. Wherefore seeing that out
reformers believe not the Romain Church in all points, it must need follow,
that they can not believe that the old and nevve testament are holy scriptures
because she says so, but for some other imaginations vvch they have, for if
they belecued this because she says so, they would believe other things
also which she auouchethe, because her authority being the same, deserves
the same credit in the one, and in the other. But let us suppose that they
believe that the old and new testament are holy scripture because the Romai^
Church says so, yet because they affirm that the Roman Church may lie,
and has also lied loudly in many importaunt matters; it follovveth that they
have herby no assurance of Scripture, because as the Church, in their opinion,
has erred in other things, so may she in this, and if she may, peradventure
she has erred, and so they have no assurance of scripture. They will say
peraduentur that they are assured by tradition from time out of mind, unto
this present, that those books are holy Scripture, because our forfathers
ever esteemed them so. But nether can this be a sufficient vvarrauut, because
they are wont to say, that all things necessary to be believed, are
contained in scripture, and that therefore they will believe no traditions. And
if they believe that these books are holy scripture, because by tradition so
it is delivered unto them, why do they not believe the real presence, and the
Sacrifice of the Mass? Why contemn they, the Fast of lent, Images, holy
water, the sign of the cross, and such like, which we have by the same
tradition, by which we have the scriptures. Yea seeing that Tradition is
nothing else but an opinion or custom of the Church, not written in holy
vvritte, but yet delivered by the hands of the Church from time to time, and
from Christians to Christians, even unto the last age, and Christians; if the
Church can err, she may allow, of evil traditions and so traditions also may
be erroneous, and consequently can be noe sufficient vvarrant unto the
Reformers, for the authority of holy scripture. They will say peradventure,
that they believe most voices, and therefore seeing that all the world allows
these books for holy scripture, they will join with them in this opinion,
because ye voice of ye people, is the voice of God. but nether can this voice
assure the^* for either they understand by this common voice, the voice of the
vvholle world, or the voice of the Christian world, if they mean ye voice of
the vvholle world, the^ have they more voices against them, then for them,
because the greatest part of the world was ever Pagane; if they mean the
Christian world, then in deed the most voices are for Scripture, because the
Catholic Church which allows of scripture, was, is, and shall be, the
greatest part of Christianity; but because they say that this Church may
err, they can have no assurance of scripture by this voice. They will say
peradventure that they belceue that sc^ipture is the word of God, because
their own Church, which is the true Church, affirms it to be so. But
nether will this shifte serve their turn. Because first of all they ca^ not
prove their Church to be the true Church, not their Pastors to be the true
Pastors. Because their Church has not the marks of the true Church, having
nether succession from the Church planted by the Apostles, which should make
it Apostolic, nether having ever possessed the greatest part of the known
world, vvch should make it Catholic, and being so far from being, one, that
it is divided into contrary sects, and so far also from being holy, that it
leads to all vice and Atheism, yea having all the Marks of heresy, as my
second book demonstrateth: As for their pastors, they can not prove their
mission, as also is proved. But if I should grant them that their Church is
the true Church, yet by their Churches vvarraunt, they can have no assurance
of Scripture, because they are of opinion that the true Church may err, and
consequently their Church also may err, and if it may err in other things,
it may err in this, and if it may err in this, peradventure it has erred in
this, and so they have no assurance of Scripture. Wherefore laying a side the
Churches authority, as insufficient* in their opinion, I demand what
assurance they have of scripture? They can not allege Scripture to prove
scripture, because no part of scripture affirms that the books called
Scripture, are the word of God, dictated and indighted by his spirit. And if
Scripture did affirm it self to be holy Scripture, yet were not that a
sufficient vvarraunt, for as I may doubt whether ye books called Scripture be
the word of God, so may I doubt of that testimony which scripture gives of
her self, unless by some other means I be assured, that these writings
are the word of God. They will say peraduen^ that the very majesty of the
phrase of Scripture, and the divine matters, and mysteries which it
conteinethe, do argue, that it is the word of God. But this answer is also
insufficie^t; because to a worldly man or Profane Philosopher, the style of
Scripture seems base and barbarous, and the mysteries seem to be nothing
else but dreams and imaginations, the histories seem tales, and the matters
seem either follies or impossibilities; and so they would seem unto us also,
were it not that we have a reverent conceit of them, because we believe
them to be the word of God. Wherefore Julian the Apostata, Celsus,
Porphirius, Apion, and others, contemned scriptures, both for the Phrase and
matter, and esteemed no more of them, then we do of Aesops fables. They may
answer me peradventure (and now I know not what else they can answer)
that the spirit assurethe them that these books and no other; are the holy
Scripture. But against this spirit; I have disputed at large in the ^rst book
and third Chapter, and so I might refer the reformer, and the reader unto my
arguments, vvher with in the before said place, I have refuted this
fantastical spirit; yet to ease them both of that labor, I will in a
word reiecte this answer, by rejecting this spirit. I will ask of him
that thinks him self most deeplye inspired, why be believes this his own
private spirit, rather then the common spirit of the Church? especially seeing
that it is more like that God vvil more amplye communicate his spirit to his
Church then to a private man; and if the Church may be deceued (as they say
she may) not with standing that Christ promised her a spirit which should
teach her all verity; Io. 14.15.
why may not every private man doubt at least, least his own private
Spirit be a lying and deceiving spirit? he answers that his spirit assures
him, that it is a true spirit. But how does it assure him? by what reasons,
miracles, or revelations? by no such means (says he it does assure me) but
yet I am sure. Why art thou sure? if nether for reasons, nor miracles, nor
revelations; then art thou sure only because thou think thy self sure. And
so did Suenlkfeldius think him self sure of a right spirit, when he denied
all scriptures, and would be ruled only by the inward spirit, and yet he
for all his suernes, was deceued, and consequently so may thou be, though
thou think thy self assured. And do not all heretics think then selves to
be inspired with the right spirit? As they therefore are deceued, So may
thou be, unless thou have some certain rule and Judge, such as the Church
is, to acertaine thee of thy spirit. If now some infidel or atheist would
deny the old and nevve testament to be holy scripture, how would thou
convince them? what a Catholic could say for the proof of scripture, I have
already declared, I demand therefore what thou who take upon the to be a
reformed Christian, could allege for the authority of Scripture? Would
thou allege the Churches definition or tradition, or common consent? he
would say, Tushe, tell me not of Church, Tradition, Fathers, Councels, all
these by your own confession may err and have erred in other as great
matters as this, and therefore this can be no sufficient vvarraunt. Would
thou say that scripture gives testimony of her self that she is Scripture?
he vvoulde ask thee vvheare, and thou should not be able to quote the
place, and if thou could, yet he would say that Scripture is not to be
believed in her own cause, and that as he doubts of scripture, so he
doubts, whether it be Scripture, vvch affirmethe these books to be
Scriptur. Would thou say that the phrase of scripture argues it to be god
his own word? He would tell thee that he will shevve thee as good phrases
in Tullie, Liuie, and other profane vvriters. And if thou should say that
thy spirit assures thee, that these books are of Gods own indighting, he
would laughe at thee, and tell thee that Suenkfeldius by his spirit denied all
scripture, and that he has no more assurance of thy spirit then of his. Yea
he will come upon thee withdraw the common spirit of the Romain Church, and
tell thee, that if that spirit may deceue, as thou say it may, much more
may thy private spirit deceue thee, and all that will be so mad as to believe
thee. And so if thou contemn the authority of the Romain Church, thou shallt
be able to assure him no more of Scripture, then of a Robin Hoods tale. If the
Churches authority then be rejected as insufficient, we have no probable
assurance of scripture, and so we may justly doubt least it be but some
Apocriphal vvriting, vvch has hitherto been called the word of God, to keep
fools in awe. And if we may doubt of the books of Scripture we may as
justly doubt of the conte^tes, and so the mysteries of the Trinity, and
incarnation, Christ's life, doctrine, Passion, death and resurrection, may be
called in question, and so Christian religion falls; and seeing that after an
Apostasy from Christianity, we have noe reason to embrace Turcisnie, or the
Judicial ceremonies; much less the superstitions of Paganes, and Idolatours,
adevve all religion, and vvelcome Atheism. And thus thou see, gentle reader,
how contempt of Scriptur must needs follovv the contempt of the Churches
authority, which being laid a side, we have not so much as probable
assurance of Scripture or Christian religion. Wherefore let us hold fast
with the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, and let us never link
our selves in religion with the reformers, who like Chammes contemn their
mother the Church, least we be enforced to shake hands with Atheistes,
whose friendship we can not refuse, if we break amity and league with
the Roman Church, as is most evidently demonstrated.

The fourth Chapter shows that in admitting some books of Scripture and
rejecting others, they open the gapp to contempt of all Scripture and religion.

We say commonly that a liar had need to have a good memory; for otherwise
he being always ready to speak, not as the truth requires, but as he may
best for the present serve his own turn, will be in danger to contradict
him self, and to varye in his own tale. for want of which memory, the
reformers do often eat their words, and go from that which before they
stood unto. And amongst many other examples, this may serve for one, that they
will needs receue scripture at the Romain Churches hand, and for this point
account her authority sufficient, but their memory is so short, that
forgetting them selves, they will not accept of the number of the books of
scripture which she has delivered unto them; although they have not any
other vvarrau^t of Scripture, then they have of the number of the books of
Scripture; which is the Romain Churches authority. I must therefore desire
them better to remember them selves; For if the Roman Church be of
sufficient credit, to vvarraunt us of Scripture, why is not her authority a
sufficient vvarraunt also, for the number of the books of Scripture. Or if
she may err in the number of the books of scripture, she may err also in
scripture, and so if they would remember them selves better, and tubbe their
brows harder, they would see plainly, that either they should take all, or
none, of her, because her authority is as sufficient (being one and the same)
to vvarraunt us for the number of the books of Scripture, as for scripture. If
they believe then that there is scripture, because she sayethe so, they must
believe that there are so many books of scriptures, because she also says
so; her word being as good for the one as for the other. But as they are
liars so are they forgetful, and therefore so contrary in their tale, that
they will say that they believe her in that, but not in this, vvher as rather
it follovvethe, that they believe her nether in the one nor in the other; but
only do give credit to their private spirit and imaginations, affirming that
to be scripture, which they imagine, and those books only to be scripture,
which their spirit likes of. Wherefore Luther affirms that the book of Job
is but a tale, in ser. con. tit. de libris vet. and noui test.
devised to set forth an example of patience before our eyes; he iesteth at
the autour of Ecclesiastes, saying that he wants boots and spurs, and
therefore rides in his sockes, as he did when he was a friar. Praef. in nouum
Test.
Yea he spares not the nevve testament, affirming that he likes not of the
common opinion, which allows of four ghospelles: and he adds, that
saint Ihons, is the only true and principal ghospel: whence it follovveth
that the other three are not authentical. For if they were, then were all
four of equal authority, Prafat. in Heb.
and so saint Ihons ghospel were not the principal. he denies that the
epistle to the Hebrews is Apostolical, the like is his ce^sure of the epistle
of Jude, and James. Praefat. li. 1. Inst c. 11.. 8 l 2 c. 5.. 18. l. ^ c. 5..
8. Ant. s^ss. 1^.
Calvin rejects the books of wisdom, of Ecclesiasticus, of Judith, of the
machabees, of Tobie. And why? truly for no other reason, then that these
books seem most contrary to diverse points of their doctrine. For other wise,
seeing that they can not discern scripture from other vvritings, but by the
ce^sure of the Romain Church, as is proved in the last Chapter, they have noe
reason to receue some books on her word, and not all, seeing that she gives
the same testimony of all. But give an Atheist this advantage, and what will
he say? he will tell the Reformers, that he seethe no other vvarraunt
which they have for the epistle to the Romans, then for the epistle to the
Hebrews, and the epistle of saint James: nor for saint Ihons ghospel, more
then for the other three^ nor for Genesis, more then the first and second book
of the Machabies, Tobie, Judith, and Job; and that therefore if the reformers
deny these, he will deny all the other, because if the Romain Churches
vvarrant (for they have no other vvarrant as in the former Chapter is proved)
be not sufficient for some of these books, it can be no sufficient vvarra^t
for any. And so he will say, that you may as well deny all scripture, as
some books of scripture; or if you vvillnot, he will deny it for you, and
ground him self in your own doctrine. And he will yet go farther, and
auouche; that if he may doubt of Scripture, (as why not, because there is no
other vvarraunt for it but the Roman Churches word?) he will doubt also
of the contents of Scripture, and so he will call in question Moses,
Christ, the Apostles, the Trinity, the Incarnation, the Passion of Christ
and Resurrection, and all the mysteries of Christian religion. Wherefore as you
credit the Romain Church for scripture, so give her credit for the number of
the books esscripture, because her word and vvarraunt is as good for this, as
for that; or if you will not believe her in this, you can have no assurance
of any part of Scripture, and so you may bring all into question; whence
follovveth contempt of all religion, as is before proved.

The fifte Chapter proves that their dissension in religion, opens the gap
to contempt of all religion.

NOthing is of more force the^ religion, which keeps us in awe, bridleth
our appetites, rules our actions, governs our life, and inculcateth unto us
our duty toward God and man. And if there were noe other argument, then the
example of so many thousand martyrs, who have endured so exquisite torments
and so horrible deaths, rather then they would deny their religion; it were
sufficient to bear witness for religion, that it is of greater force, then
all the violence of the tyrauntes, then all their engiues, and instruments of
cruelty, yea then death it self. But so the force of a river is great, and so
great, that sometimes it ouer-throvveth houses, and bridges, and beats
down all which sta^dethe in the way of his stream; but yet divide it into
many little brooks, and a child will resist his force. Even so religion is
of great force and efficacy, and bears a great svvaye in the life of man;
but yet if it be divided into diverse sects, it loses force and vigor, and
vvheras, vvhilest it remains united, See the second book chap. 6.
it will not be resisted, when it is divided it is easilic contemned. I have
already described the iarres, and dissensions of the Reformers in matters of
religion, and by this mark I have descried them to be heretics; now let us
see what an advantage, this their dissension, gives to an Atheist, and what
a vvide gap it opens unto Atheism. An Atheist out of these their diversities
of opinions, may easily dravv this discourse. I see, says he (or at least
he may say) diverse sects and opinions diverse Synagogues, and religions,
diverse conuenticles, and congregations, amongst you: which as they have
diuersnames, so profess they diverse doctrines, and follow diverse Authors.
And some of them are called Lutheranes, some Caluinistes, which are by a
subdiuision parted into soft and rigorous Lutheranes, and into Protestants,
and Puritans, others are called Zuinglians, others Bezites, others
Anabaptists, others Libertines, others Brovvnistes, others Martinistes, others
are of the family of love, others of the damned crevve. And although all
these aggree against the Roman, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, yet they
disagree amongst them selves, and although they hold many, and those also
contrary opinions, yet they all use one argument to prove their opinions, to
wit Scripture sensed by their private spirit. And so, will this Atheist say,
if I believe one of these sects, I must believe all, because they allege one
proof for their religion; but seeing that I can not believe all, because they
teach contrarieties, least I do any partial wrong in preferring one before
another, all having the same reason; I will believe none of of them all, nor
none of their opinions. And seeing that they condemn the Catholic and Romain
religion, for a fardell of superstitions (which not vvithsta^ding was ever
counted the true Christian religion even by the Paganes them selves, who
therefore persequuted it) and have noe reason to bind me to any of their
religions, unless I will be bound to an impossibility, that is to be of all
their religions, and nether can, nether will, with any reason persuade me to
be either Turk, or Jew; I may by authority be of noe religion. And thus
Atheism must needs follovv division in religion, and contempt of the Roman
Church.

The sixte Chapter shows how their want of a visible head; giuethe a great
advantage, to Atheistes, and such as mock at all religion.

IN the first book, and last chapter, I have declared at large, how
necessary a visible head is in all societies, and especially in the Church of
Christ, and I have also demonstrated, that there is no such visible head in
the Synagogue of the reformers; whence I have inferred, that amongst them, it
is lavvfull for every heretic, to preach what doctrine he will, and no man
shall co^trolle him. Now I am to deduce another conclusion, to wit, that
thus also the gate and gapp is opened unto Atheistes, and godless, and
irreligious persons: which I can do easily, and will do in a word. For if a
visible head be vvanting, every man may preach and embrace what religion he
will (as in the alleged place I have proved) and seeing that, if this head be
vvanting, there is noe certainty for any religion, but only the private
spirit, and bare scripture, which are altogether uncertain, In the first
book, chapter 2.3.
as before is proved, it will follovv that a man shall have no more reason to
embrace one religion the^ another, yea he shall have noe probable reason to
induce him to any religion at all, and consequentlye he may take good leave to
be of no religion. And thus he may argue in form and figure. If there be no
visible head to determine by authority what religion is to be embraced, every
man may be of what religion he will, and no man can controlle him, and so I
also may use my liberty in choosing my religion, as well as another. And seeing
that if the authority of a visible head be laid a side, I have no more reason
to be of one religion then another (because all religions, allege the same
reason which is no reason, to wit, bare scripture sensed by the private
spirit) and I can not possibly be of all, because they be contrary to one
another; I may by good reason refuse to be of any religion, and noe man can
controlle me for it, if there be no visible head, who can prove that he
has authority to determine of religion. And so he that forsakes the
Catholic Church, where only this visible head is to be found, has leave
and license to be of what religion he will, yea to be of no religion at
all, because leaving that he has noe more reason to be of one religion then
another, because he has no other reason then bare scripture sensed by a
private spirit, which is not sufficient, as is proved in my first book and
third chapter; yea leaving the Catholic Church, he can not have any probable
reason to induce him to any of these new religions, as I have proved in my
first book, and fifte chapter, and seeing that God nether can, nor will
command him to be of a religion, for which he sees no reason, nor motive
which is sufficient to induce a reasonable man, as in the same place is
proved, he may with reason, after he has left the Catholic Church,
join with Atheistes who are of noe religion.

The seventh Chapter shows how the Reformers in denial of the real
praesence, do ruin Christian religion, and call all the other mysteries of
faith in question.

SAcrifice is a thing so highly pleasing, and acceptable unto God, that he
will have none to be pertakers with him in such honor, but reserueth it as
an homage dew only to him self, and proper to a divine majesty. 1. Reg. 15.
Yet obedience is more grateful unto him, then all the Hecatombs and
Sacrifices in the world: because by sacrifice we consecrate unto his service
the lives and substance of brute beasts, but by obedience, we make a
burnt-offering, and Holocaust of our own souls, resigning our desires and
vvilles, yea our own selves, wholy unto his will and pleasure. But vvhilest
this obedience rests in the will, though it be very meritorious, yet has
it not the full complement of perfection, because so long as the will has
reason to persuade her, the less thanks she deserves for obeying: but when
this virtue reachethe to the understanding, and makes reason, against sense
and above reason, to yield to more then reason can reach unto, then has this
virtue the topp of her perfection. But this perfection she has not of her
self, because of her self, she can only submit the will unto the
commandment of the Superior, but she is feign to borrow so much of the
Theological virtue, called Faith, whose property is, to make the very
understanding to stoop, and without any reason to yield to things, for
which there is noe reason, because they are above reason. Many such things
there are in Christian faith which seem to sense senseless, to reason
unreasonable, and to human faith incredible, and (as far as man's reason
can see) even to divine power impossible. Amongst the which, three are the
most principal, and to humain reason, most incredible, to wit the Trinity,
in vvch we believe that three are one, that is that three persons are one
God; The incarnation, in vvch we co^fess that tvvoe are one, that is tvvoe
natures in Christ, the one divine, the other human, are one and the same
person; the blessed sacrament of the altar, in which we acknovvledge that
bread and wine, by the virtue of Christ's word, are changed into his body
and blood, and that one body is not only in one, but in diverse places, at one
and the self same time? But as these three, are the hardest to conceue of all
the mysteries of Christian faith, so has our blessed Savior given us more
plain and evident testimonies of them in his holy vvritte, then of any other
which are more easily to be conceued. For the blessed Trinity, what more
pregnaunt proofs can we desire, then we have in saint Matthew? Going
therefore teach you all nations in the name of the father, cap. vlt.
and of the son, and of the holy ghost. Where the ancient fathers note that
three are named, to signify three distinct persons, and yet Christ bids
his Apostles to baptize, in the name, not names of these three, to signify
that these three are one God. And that the father is God every leaf almost of
Scripture does testify; that ye son is God, many places most manifestlye do
bear witness, Romans 1.9. Tit. 2.3. Judah 2. Mat. 1^. Act. ^.
and testimony. That the holy ghost is God, S. Peter averreth, who having
demanded of Ananias the reason why he would lie unto the holy ghost,
avouches, that he lied not to me^ but to God. wherefore S. Paul says that
we are the temple of the holy ghost? and seeing that to God only temples are
erected, if we be his temple he is our God. now that these three are one
God, saint Ihon will acertaine us, for (says he) three there are which give
testimony in heaven, the father, the word, I. Io. 5.
and the holy ghost, and these three are one. No less pregnaunte proofs does
holy writ afforde us, for the incarnation, in vvch mystery we confess one
divine person, Christ Jesus, to be true God and man. And first let the
father speak for his son. Mat. 3.
This is my beloved son in whom I have taken great pleasure. Secondly let
the disciple speak for his master: cap. 18.
thou art the son of the living God. Let another disciple, and no other then
he whom Jesus loved, because he loved, tell us his opinion in this point:
Io. ^.
he says that in the beginning was the word and that the word was with
God, yea was God. and after wards he says, that this word was made
flesh that is became man. Let Christ him self be credited also in this
matter, because he is the truth: when the Jews told him that he had not
yet 50. Io. 8.
years of age, and therefore could not see Abrahame: he ansvvered that he was
before Abraham, and yet the same Christ is called by saint Mathevve, Mat. 1.
the son of Abrahame, which must needs argue tvvoe natures in one person of
Christ, the one divine, in respect of which he was before Abraham, the
other human, by which he was after Abrahame, as the son is after the
father: and so the self same person, is God and man; and that man Jesus that
lived in earth and conuersed amongst us, is the natural son of God, and the
word of God, is the word Incarnate, who in respect of his divinity was
before Abrahame, but in respect of his humain nature, was long after him.
Now as concerning the third mystery, if I bring not as plain text for it,
as can be brought for the others, I will yield the bucklers, and grant the
victory, unto my adversary. But to avoid multitude of allegations, I will
make choice of tvvoe places only, vvch seem to me to be ye plainest. And the
first shall be taken out of the Sixth of saint Ihon, Io. 6.
which Chapter although of some it be expounded only of Spiritual eating of
Christ, yet by the common consent of Interpretours, it speaks not only of a
spiritual, but also of a Sacramental, and real eating, as shall be made
most manifest. For first our savior Christ, to dispose them to a firm
belief of this mystery, made such a multiplication and increase of five
barley loaves and two fishes, that he fed and filled about five thousand
persons therewith, and that so sufficiently, that the fragmentes of the banquet
were as much as the vvholle feast. For if he could make so much of a little,
why can he not turn bread and wine into his body? and if he could
without diminution of the feast, satisfy so many, why may he not feed us
all with his body; without division or diminution of the same? And if after
that five thousand had eaten their fill of the loaves and fishes, the
fragmentes and relics, vvch they left, were as much as the feast with
vvch they were filled, why should it seem impossible, that Christ's body
should be eaten of us, and yet remain in the pix, or Altar, or that after,
that the communicantes have receued it, the Relics which they leave, should
remain still as great as the vvholle banquet was? Secondly after that this
miracle was wrought, because there was a great aggreeme^r, betvvixte it, and
the blessed Sacrament, thus he takes the occasion to discourse with them of
it, and to induce them to the belief of the same. Amen Ame^ I say to you, you
seek me not because You have seen signs, but because you did eat of the
loaves, and were filled; so svvet a taste had that miraculous banquet, and such
contentme^t it gave, though of it self it was mean, that they follovved him
for the good cheer he made them. but says Christ work not the meat that
perishes, but that which endures to life everlasting, which the son of
man will give you. They ansvvered, what shall we do, that we may work
the works of God? This is the work of God (says Christ) that you believe
in him, vvho^ he has sent. What sign (said they) do thou, for which
we should believe thee? Our fathers did eat manna in the desert; and God gave
them bread from heaven to eat. Here Christ begins to close with them, and
to enter in to his intended discourse of the blessed sacrament. True (says
Christ) but Moses gave you not that bread, but my father only has the giving
of bread from heaven. Lord (said they) give us alvvayes this bread. Jesus
ansvvered, I am the bread of life. At vvch the Jews murmured, because they
understood him not. And yet most fitly is he called the bread of life: for
first in Scripture all that nourishes is called bread: wherefore seeing that
Christ is the food of our soul, well is he called bread, and not
whatsoever bread, but the bread of life, to distinguish him from common bread.
Secondly in scriptures when one thing is changed into another, that into
which the change is made, takes the name of the thing changed. So the
serpent into which Aarons rodd was changed is called a rod, Exodus 7.
because it was made of a rod; wherefore because bread was to be changed
into Christ's body and blood, well is he called bread. Thirdly because his
body was to be covered, with the forms of bread, it is called bread because
it has the shevve and form of bread, Genesis 49.
and for this cause his blood is called, wine, and the blood of the grape,
because it was to be invested as it were, with the accidents of wine in
the same blessed Sacrament. But not vvithstanding the Jews murmuration,
Christ will not eat his word, but again he repeateth it; I am the bread
of life, your fathers did eat manna in the desert, and they dyed; this is the
bread that descended from heaven, that if a man eat of it he dye not. And I
(says he) ame this living bread that came from heaven, of which he that
eats shall live for ever, and the bread that I will give, is my fels he for
the life of the world. Now he speaks his mind plainly, and so plainly
that he compares the figure, with the verity manna with his bread of the
blessed Sacrament, and gives the preminence to the verity; for (says he)
your fathers did eat of manna and yet dyed, but my ma^na is a more sovereign
viande, because who soever eats of it shall live for ever. Now if it be
true that the blessed Euchariste, is only a sign of Christ and his body and
blood; then I demand of our adversaries with what shevve of truth Christ
could prefer it before manna? Why should Christ's bread give life rather
then manna, seeing that manna signified Christ, who is this bread, as well as
the Eucharist? Yea unless the Euchariste contein Christ's flesh and blood
really, manna must needs take the precedence in dignity, as it has in
antiquity. For first manna was better in substance, Sap. 16. Psalm. 77. See
the fourth book chap. 6.
as being made by Angels hands, and in the air, having also all tastes, as is
before declared, and so in substance manna, is more excellent. In figure and
signification, manna is as good, if not better, for if the Eucharist co^tein
not really Christ's body and blood, it is but a sign and consequently noe
better then manna, because it signified the same Christ, and so was as noble
a sign, and it was more apt to signify, and so was a fitter figure. for as
Manna, was framed by Angels hands, Ex 16. Joan. 6.
and never passed the heat of the fire; so Christ our bread of life, was
framed by the king of Angels fingers, without all help of man, and was
baked in the oven of the Virgins womb, without all heat of concupiscence. As
when God rayned down Manna, the Jews cried Manhu, that is what is this? So
when Christ promised his Manna, the Capharnaites murmured. That Manna was
given to the Jews in the desert, this to Christians in the wilderness of
this world only, for in the next world, I mean in heaven, our only home and
land of promise, we shall not feed any more of Christ's body by eating or
communicating, but we shall taste of ye sweetness of his divinity by
fruitio^. That Ma^na was white, but yet was no common bread, and it was
like a coriander seed, but yet was not of any such substance. and this Manna
in externe form and color, seems bread, but in deed is the body of
Christ: That when it was measured was found to be of one measure, in all
the gatherers hands, and this Manna although some have great hosts some little
ones, although some receue vvholle hosts, some but a piece, some many hosts,
some one only, yet when by faith it is measured; we find as much in the
little host, as in the great, as much in the vvholle host, as in the piece,
and as much in fevve, yea in one, Sap. 16.
as in many. That manna had all tastes, and those most delicate, according to
the eaters desire; but this it had not of the own nature, but of God, who
gave it such a supernatural virtue; So has this Manna also, because it
tastes to our souls, according to our devotion, and desire, and though it
be but flesh, yet it feeds the soul, not by the own virtue, for to the
soul, flesh of it self non pr^dest quicquam, profits nothing, but by a
supernatural virtue, which it receueth by the straung conjunction, which it
has with the divinity, even as the hoate iron burns, but not as iron, but
as it is united to the fire. And seeing that such conuenience, and aggreement,
can not be found betvvixte bare bread, and Christ's body, it follovveth, that
if the Eucharist be but bread in substance, that Manna was a better sign
then it, and so the figure shall excel the verity, and the shadovv shall
surpass the body, and the promise the performaunce. But let us go on. After
that our Savior had told the jews, that he was the bread of life which
descended from heaven, and gives life everlasting, which manna could not do;
because it only extinquished honger, and prolonged life for a time; the Jews
murmured once again, and grombled at the matter, yea, as the text says, they
strove amongst them selves saying, how can he give us his flesh to eat? But
Christ will not go from his former words, rather now he threatens, that
unless they cate his flesh, and drink his blood, they shall have no life in
them. And he inculcateth again, and again, that his flesh is meat in deed, and
that his blood is drink in deed; that he that cateth him shall live by him;
that his bread, is the bread that came down from heaven; and so for the.
Vherfore, now, many of his disciples begin to stagger, saying, that this is a
hard speech not to be endured. But yet Christ for all this their scandal^,
changes not his tune nor tenor of words. Only because he knevv, that the
matter was hard and high, of which he spoke, he seeks to induce them to
believe this mystery, by another of as great difficulty. does this, says
he, scandalize you, that I say you must eat my flesh and drink my blood? if
then you shall see me ascend, from whence I am descended, you will much more
be scandalized. but yet to take away as much scandal as I can, and to ease
your understanding as much as the mystery vvherof I talk, will permit; It is
the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, Aug tract. 7.10.
the words which I have spoken unto you be spirit, and life. That is, you
must not conceue any horror in that I tell you that you must eat my flesh,
for you must not imagine, that I will give it you ravve, or roasted, as the
meat which comes from the shambles or kitchen, I vvil give it you after a
spiritual manner, hiding it from your eyes, under the veale of a Sacrament,
Ibidem.
and in this spiritual manner it shall profit you, for as for that carnal
manner in which you do imagine, that I will give you my flesh, that profits
nothing. Or if you think it impossible that flesh should give life, it is not
flesh only that can do it, because flesh only profits nothing, but it is the
spirit of the divinity and flesh united to this spirit that quickneth; Ibidem.
for (as saint Austine says) if flesh could profit nothing, Verbum caro no^
fieret vt habitaret in nobis, the word would not have been made flesh to
dvvell amongst us, So that Christ means that they must eat his flesh, not
only in a figure (for so they had eaten it in the paschall lamb) nor only by
faith (for so their for fathers and all that ever believed in Christ had
eaten Christ, and therefore at this eating they could not have been
scandalized) but he speaks, of a real eating, though in a spiritual and
sacramental manner; and so the Jews even after the explication mentioned,
understood him, and therefore still they murmured; yea after this (as the text
says) many of his disciples went back and now they vvalked not with him.
Blessed Savior, thou that ca^mest not to deceue, but to save souls, if thou
have any easier meaning then that is, in which these men do take thee, tell it
them out of hand, to help their understanding. If thou meanest only an eating
of thee in a figure, or by faith only, as Calvin and Zuinglius do interpret
thee, do but say so, and thou shall take away from these men, all cause of
scandale, and murmuration: because they are well accustomed to figures whose
vvholle law was figurative, and they ca^ easily conceue how thy may eat
thee spiritually by faith, because that is only to believe in Christ and the
Messiah, which thy disciples that stagger at these thy words, do already
believe, and all their forfathers have long since believed. But Christ will
give them no such easy answer: which argevveth that he spoake nether of
figurative eating only, nor of spiritual eating only, but of real eating of
his flesh, though in a spiritual manner. What then ansvverethe our blessed
Savior unto these afflicted people, nothing at all more, then which already
he has ansvvered, but rather now he turns to the twelve Apostles,
saying. What will you therefore depart? As if he had said: I have told you
a high mystery, at which many murmr, many are scandalized, and for vvch
many have left me also, but I have no other thing to say, faith is here
required, without which none can come to me or my father, none can believe
this mystery: but, they that will not captiuate their understanding to the
obedience of faith, let them go; but will you my twelve who are used to my
parables and mysteries, be gone also? Saint Peter answers for all twelve,
(not knovvi^g Judas infidelity, whom not vvithstanding Christ calls, a
devil for the same) Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of
eternal life. Out of this discourse I gather tvvoe things for my purpose.
first that the Jews understood Christ, not of a figurative, or spiritual
eating by faith, because such eating could not have scandalized them, who
were accustomed to spiritual eating, nether would such meats have gone
against their stomach, because figurative dishes, were their ordinary fare.
Secondly I gather that Christ meant not figurative or spiritual eating only,
but sacramental and real eating. For if he had meant so, he noe doubt
would have explicated him self, to take away all occasion of offense and
scandal, which they conceued, because they understood him of real eating, as
is proved; or if Calvin will needs have it, that Christ meant only figurative
and spiritual eating, he must needs say with all, that christ was most
cruel, and peremptory, and that he endeavored rather to deceue souls, then
to save them, and to blind them rather the^ to illuminate them: who, though
he perceived that they understood him of his flesh, which scandalized them,
yet would not vouchsafe, to tell them that he meant only a figurative, and
spiritual eating; that so with a word he might have taken a way the
scandal, taught them the truth, and given the deceued souls, satisfaction.

My second argument, Mat. 26. Mar. 14. Lu^. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
shall be deduced out of the words of our Savior, which he used, in the
institution of this Sacrament; This is my body: this is my blood: or, this is
the Chalice of my blood. What could he have said more plainly? Tell me,
Calvin, if Christ would have given us to understand, that he meant to give
us no bare figure, but his true body, what playner words could he have used?
he might have said (says Calvin) This is my true body. but might not yet
Calvin have used his ordinary gloss and have said, that he meant only to
say that it is the true figure of his body, or the figure of his true body?
And I demand of Calvin, whether Christ was able to turn bread in to his
body, as before he had turned water into wine, and multiplied the loaves and
fishes? If he say he could not, Io 2. Io. 6.
I ask why? If he answer, because it seems impossible; I must needs
tell him, that he takes much upon him, in confining God his power within
the narrovv compass of his shalovv head; as though God could do just as much
as Calvin can conceue, but no more. All the ancient fathers, though they could
not conceue this mystery, yet because Christ calls that which was in his
hands, his body, do confess that Christ was able to do it, because they
knevv he could do more then they could conceue. And why could he not do
this as well as he has done the like? speak Calvin, and tell us where
lies the difficulty, which makes thee with Judas and the Capharnaites, to
think that Christ can not give us his body reallye? either thy reason is
because he can not turn bread into a man's body: and why I pray the can he
not as well turn one thing into another, as create a thing of nothing? Why
can he not turn bread into his body, and wine into his blood, Io. 2. Exodus 2.
Psalm. 77. Exodus 7.
who turned water into wine, a rod into a serpent, and a serpent into a
rod, and a rock into water. Yea he that turned water into blood, can he
not turn wine into blood? Or else the reason is, because a man's body can not
be in so little a room, as is a little host or a little piece of the same: And
why can he not make a great body to be in a little room, as he can make
tvvoe bodies, by penetration, Mat. 1.2. Mar. 16. Lu. 24.
to be in one room, without enlarging the place; which he did when by
penetration he issued out of the virgins womb, without breaking her virginal
closett, and when he came out of his grave, without removing the stone,
entered into his disciples, the door being shut, and passed thoroughe all the
heavens in his Ascension, without division of those incorruptible bodies? or
else ye reason is, because one body ca^ not be in diverse places: And why
may not one body, be in diverse places, as well as diverse bodies by
penetration were in one place in his nativity, and resurrection, in his
entrance into the house, where his disciples were, and in his ascension
into heaven, and above all the heavens? Breefly it is noe more repugnaunt, for
a body to be in a little room or in diverse places at once, then for a man's
body to stand vpirght upon the water and not to sink, Mat. 14.4. Reg. 6.
as Christ's and saint Peter's bodies did, or for a heavy body to ascend in the
water as the head of a hatcher did? nether is it more impossible for a body to
occupy more place then the own quantity is, then for a body to live a
longer age then nature will afforde, and yet Exechias lived longer, and Elias
and Henoch are as yet living. But Calvin will say that it is noe more
necessary to understand Christ really in these words this is my body, then
in diverse others, in which he says I am the door, I am the vine or in
those, Christ was the rock, or in those, behold the lamb of God. But by
Caluins leave there is much more reason, why we should understand Christ
really in those word, This is my body, then in the other words alleged.
For when Christ said. This is my body, he made his last will and
testament, at which time men speak plain, and not in parables or figures,
least that the heirs should take occasion to vvrangle, and to sevve each other
in the law, about the meaning of ^he will. He spoake also those words ^o
his Apostles, Luc. 8.
to whom he used not ^o speak in parables but in plain words, or if he
chanced to speak obscure^y to them, Mat. 14.15. Io. 16.
they used to desire him to explicate him self, which here they did not, or
else some one of the Evangelists would have explicated this figurative
speech, as they used in other matters to do; yea when Christ spoake these
words, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, and blessed the bread which he
never did, but some great miracle follovved, as appears by the miracle of the
multiplication of loaves and fishes, Io. 6.
and such like; which argevveth some real chaung in the substance of bread;
which can be no other the^ transubstatiation, the very words, this is my
body, importing no less. secondly he said in the present-te^se this is my
body which is given for you: (...).
This is my blood which is shedd for you. For so the great text teaches us,
which addition also argues some thing, that then was offered for them, and
seeing that bread and wine, could only be offered to them, but not for them,
nor for remission of their sins; it follovveth that Christ then, made an
oblation and sacrifice unbloody, of his body and blood, as is before, upon
another occasion, proved. which saint 1. Cor ^^. (...).
Paul confirms saying that Christ said This is my body which for you is
broken (for so the greek word signifies) to signify that Christ's body
was really under the accidents of bread and wine, else it could not laue
been said, to have been broken in respect of the accidents of bread, which
are broken: wherefore saint Chrysostom said, that Christ who would suffer
no bones to be broken on the cross, was broken in the Sacrament. Thirdly if
Christ had given them but bare bread, or a bare sign of his body, he would
never have added this is my body which is given for you, because that argues
a real giving of his real body, and thetfore when he said I am the vine,
he added not, who suffered on the cross, nor any such like words: and
although pointing to the image of Caesar; we say sometimes behold Caesar, or,
this is Caesar, yet not so aptly can we say of the image, this is Caesar, that
overcame Pompey, because that addition argevveth Caesar in person. Fourthly
when we speak metaphorically, we name and express the thing; so Christ
expressed him self, when he said I am a vine, so saint Paul named him
expressly, when he said, Christ was a rock, so saint Ihon pointed at
him, when he said behold the lamb of God, and seeing that Christ remaining
Christ, can not be truly a vine, a rock, or a lamb; we easily perceue
that such speeches are to be taken metaphorically. And so if Christ had
said, this bread is my body, we must have understood him figuratively, and
metaphorically, because bread remaining bread, can not be really his body: but
for as much as Christ said only, in confuso, confusedly, this is my body,
we must understand him really, and so the sense of these words must be:
this vvch I have in my hands, is truly, and really my body. Lastly the greek
text in saint Luke is sufficient to demonstrate this verity, c. 22.
where speaking of the chalice he has these words, (...). By which it is
plain that the pronoune (which) is referred unto the chalice, vvch in the
greek, is of the neutergender, as also the pronovvn (which) is. And so this
is the sense of those words: This is the chalice the new testament in my
blood which chalice is shed for you. Where the continent is taken for the
contained, for the material chalice or cupp, can not be shed, and seeing that
wine can not be said to be shed for us, it must needs follovv that
Christ's blood was in the chalice, because that only was shed for us. Which
text is so plain, In Annot.
that Beza confesses, that it must needs be translated quod pro vobis
funditur, which chalice is shed for you, if we will follovv the Grammatical
construction, yet because thus he makes an argument against him self, he
translateth it qui pro vobis funditur, which blood is shed for you, saying
that thus it should be, and that either the Evangelist made a sollecisme, or
that the text is corrupted. But in the one he is very saucie to correct the
Evangelist, in the other he lies, because all the greek copies, have it as I
have set it down. By this, it is manifest, that as Christ promised, that he
would give his body and blood to be eaten and dronken really, as is proved in
the first argument, so he gave really his body and blood to his Apostles, at
his last supper, under the forms and accidents of bread and wine. And so the
text and letter of Scripture is plain for the real presence; and that the
letter is to be understood really, as it sounds, and not metaphorically,
tropically, or figuratively, I have proved by many conjectures, and not only
coniecturs, but by a plain discourse of Christ with his disciples, in the
first argument, and by many circumstances and evident signs in the second
argument. Yet because every man must be believed in his Art, especially when
there is no suspicion of partiality, I will prove the meaning of Christ's
words to be real and literal, and not figurative or spiritual only, by
the authority of the ancient fathers, whose art and profession was to
interpret scriptures, in which also they were so couning, that for the same,
they are as famous amongst Christians, as Aristotle for Philosophy or Cicero
for eloquence, Homer, Virgil, and Ovid, for Poetry, Liuie and Salust for
history; who also can not be suspected to favor partiallie one side, rather
then another, because they are more ancient the^ either the Catholics or the
Reformers of this time. And having these me^ on my side I will not fear to
shevve my self in the feeld against all the reformers in the world, because
having them on my side I shall have many more to fight for me, then against
me. And as having the^ on my side, I may take courage, so my adversaries if
they had any forheade, would be ashamed, so fevve, to stand in feeld against
so many, so young vpstartes against so ancient Captains (who most of them
have vanquished one Archheritike and sectmaster or other, by their learned
writings) so unlearned against so learned, so vicious against so renowned
Saints, and so light ministers against so grave Pastors, and Prelates. But
because a Chapter is not a feeld large, and spaciours enoughe, to muster all
these souldious of Christ together, I will only bring forth a fevve of
them, and those that speak most plainly, and consequently do strike most
forcibly: and for the others I will refer the Reader to Cardinal Bellarmine,
Suarez, Gregorius de Valentia, and others, who have brought them all into the
feeld, and placed every one of them in his rank, and station, that is, in the
time, and age, in which he lived. And because all these fathers, either
expressly do interpret the words, before said, This is my body, or at least
do ground them selves upon them, or allude unto them; their sayings may well
serve for interpretations of the text alleged. Ignatius, saint Paul's
Scholar, has these words: Ep. ad Romans
non gaudeo corruptibili nutrimento, panem Dei volo, panem caelestem, qui est
caro Christi and Filij Dei viui, and potum volo sanguinem eius: I rejoice not
in corruptible nutriment, I will have the bread of God (he alludeth to
Christ's words in saint Ihon, Io. 6.
where he calls him self bread) the heavenly bread, which is the flesh of
Christ and the son of the liuiug God, and I will have the drink vvch is
his blood. To which words, Calvin can not shape any reasonable answer,
unless he use much violence, in wresting the text: for he calls the
Euchariste incorruptible nurriment, Caluins Supper is as corruptible as bread,
he calls it the bread of God and bread celestial, alluding to Christ's
words, Io. 61
who of his own flesh and not of common bread, pronounced those words I am the living bread, which descended from heaven, Caluins bread has no
higher source and origin from which it is descended, then the backhovvse or
oven; This bread he calls the flesh of Christ the Son of God, and this
drink he avouches to be the blood of Christ, vvheras Caluins bread and
wine, is but bread and wine, or to make the most that may be of it, is but
a sign of the flesh and blood of Christ, but in deed it is noe sign nor
sacrament at all, because Christ instituted, that bread for a sign and
sacrament, which is consecrated by a consecrated Priest, which consecration
Caluins bread has not, because his ministers are no Priests as I have
demonstrated. See ye fourth book chap. ^^
But because Calvin might by a violent gloss, affirm that Ignatius calls
the Eucharist, incorruptible meat, celestial, and the bread of God, because it
is a sign of Christ's flesh, which is incorruptible, and celestial, and the
bread of God! I will bring places, that can admit noe glossing. And first
of all I will bring some fathers, who say that this Sacrament is not a bare
figure, but is the true flesh of Christ. Saint Chrysostom, that golden Mouth
of the Church of Christ, stops Caluins mouth, with these words:
Semetipsum nobis commiscet and non fide tantum, Ho. 61. ad pop.
verum and reipsa nos suum corpus efficit; he does mingle him self with us,
and not only by faith, but also in very deed he makes us his body. Calvin
sayethe that we eat Christ only by faith, and consequently that his
substance, is not really united to our substance, because according to his
opinion, they are distante as far as heaven and earth, but saint Chrysostom
says, that Christ's substance in this Sacrament is mingled with ours, not
only by faith, but also in very deed, ergo in very deed, Christ's body is in
the sacrament, and by means of the sacrament, in the receuers also, and
communicantes. Theophilactus vvriting upon the sixte of saint Ihon speaks,
Theoph. in c. 6.10.
if it be possible, more plainly: Attend autem quod panis qui a nobis in
mysterijs manducatur, non est tantum figuratio quaedam carnis Domini, sed est
ipsa caro Domini: Mark, that the bread which is eaten of us in the mysteries,
is not a figuration (that is an expression or figure) of the flesh of our Lord,
but it is the very flesh of our Lord. how is it possible for the greatest
Papist that is, to speak more plainly? Hilarious speaks as plainly, as if he
strove, who should speak most plainly: De veritate carnis, l. ^. Trin.
and sanguinis non est relictus ambigendi locus, nunc enim and ipsius Domini
professione, and fide nostra, vere caro est and vere sanguis est: Of the
verity of the flesh and blood, there is no place left to doubt, for now,
both by our Lords profession, and by our faith, it is truly flesh and truly
blood. Where the words, verity, and truly are clean opposite to Caluins
figures, and spiritual ma^ducation. Secondly the fathers admire how Christ's
body remaining in heaven, is not vvithstanding receued of us in the blessed
Sacrament. Saint Chrysostom as a man astonished, exclameth in this sort. O
miraculum o Dei benignitatem, l. 3. de Sa^erd.
qui cum Patre sursum sedet, in illo ipso temporis momento omnium manibus
contrectatur: O Miracle, o Gods benignity, he that sits above with his
father, in that very moment (that is in time of Consecration and Communion) is
handled in every ones hands. Now if Christ be only in the Sacrament as in a
sign or figure, what miracle is there here, worthy such an exclamation? For
so Christ is only really and in his own person, in heaven, and in earth he
is but as in his Image, and consequently it is no greater a miracle, then that
the King at the same time should be really in his chamber of presence, and yet
figurately in as many other places as he has coins or images. Yea this
miracle the vintner makes daily, whose wine is really in the cave or Celler,
and at the same time in the Iuiebushe which is without the Celler, because in
it, the wine is as in a sign. Saint Austine vvondreth, how Christ carried
him self in his own hands when he said this is my body; Cano. 1. in Ps. 33.
which is no vvonder if the Sacrament be but a figure and sign of him, for so
he caryeth him self, who caryeth his own image. Thirdly the fathers compare
this sacrament with strange and miraculous mutations. Li 4. c. 34. Cat. 4.5
l. de ^js qui initia^. (...). 9. and su(...) Iren l. 3. c. 12. Ab. l. 4. de see
c. 4.9.
Ireneus and Cirillus compare it with the Incarnation, saint Ambrose
co^pares, it with the creation of the world, and the Nativity of Christ of
the Virgin Mother. The same Ireneus, and saint Ambrose, liken it to the
conversion of the rodd into a serpent, of water into blood, and of the rock
into water, which strange mutations, were wrought by Moses in Aegipte and
in the desert. Which comparisons were very foolish, if the bread and wine,
had no other mutatio^, then that of bare bread and wine, they are made a
sign; and as well might they compare an Iuie-bush unto the same mutatio^s,
because ye Iuie-bushe, when it is hanged before the Inn, of no sign, is made
a sign. Fourthly as in these alleged co^uersions and mutatio^s, the before
named fathers, make recourse unto Gods omnipote^cie, so do they in the mutatio^
of this Sacrament, prouinge that it was possible, because God is omnipotent.
Saint Ambrose says; li. de ijs qui initia^tur c. 9.
he that of nothing could make something, can he not turn one thing, Cipr.
ser de Coena Domini.
into another? And saint Ciprian says, that by the omnipotency of the
word, the bread is made flesh. And were not these fathers mad, to endeavor
to explicate by so hard examples, how God his omnipotency was able to
change bread into Christ's body, and wine into his blood, if the mutation
were figurative only, seeing that the vintener without omnipotency, can do
the like, in making an Iuie-bush, of no sign, a sign? Fistly they admire
herin our saviors great charity and bounty, who is so liberal, as to feast
and feed us, with his own flesh, and blood. Ho 45. in 10.
What shepherd (says saint Chrysostom) feeds his sheep with his own
blood? And what say I, Shepherd? many mothers there are, which will not
bestovv their milk upon their suckling babes, but rather do put them forth
to nourcing, but Christ deals not so niggardly, but rather feeds us with
his own flesh and blood, and mingleth his substance with ours. Now if
Christ has given us, only a bare sign of his flesh and blood, I see no such
extraordinary love and charity; at least herin he shows no more, yea not
so much charity, as he shevved to the Jews, to whom he gave manna from
heaven in their extremity, which was a more noble substance, and a better
figure then Caluins bread is. Lastly the fathers note for a strange thing,
that Christ is eaten of us in the blessed sacrament, and yet nether divided,
in vita apud Sur.
nor diminished, nor consumed. This saint Andrew told Aegeas the Proconsul
for a great miracle. I (says he) do offer daily unto the omnipotent God, the
Immaculate lamb, of whom when all the people have eaten, the lamb remains
vvholle, and intiere. Ser de Coena Domini. Hom 2. de Verb. Apost.
Saint Cipriane calls this sacrament, inconsumptibilem cibum, meat
inconsumptible. Saint Austine speaking of this Sacrament, and of the
murmuration of the Jews who imagined that they should tear Christ's flesh
with their teeth, says thus: sicreficeris, vt non deficiat vnde reficeris:
so thou art refreshed, that it is not deficient, of which thou art refreshed.
And the reason is, because Christ's body is glorious, and is receued vvholle of
every one and so is not divided, and when the forms of bread and wine
perish, Christ's body leaves them, and though one man receueth Christ's body
vvholle, yet there is never the less for another, for he also receueth it
vvholle, nether in this is there any greater difficulty, then that 5000. Io. 6.
men should be fedd with five barley, loaves, and tvoe fishes, and yet the
relics, to be as great or more, the^ was the feast. now if Christ be not
really present in this Sacrament, but only as in a sign and figure, it is no
more marvel, that he is not consumed, then that the Kings picture should
be burnt or broken, and he receue no harm; and if we eat him only
spiritually by faith, what vvonder is it, that his substance is not divided,
seeing that faith has no teeth to rent or tear him. I could add to these
fathers, who as I have proved in the first book ener went with the Church,
Chap. 4.
the practice of the Christian world, l. 1. de Eucharist. c 20.
which for reverence of this Sacrament (as Cardinal Allen notes) has
builded so goodly Churches, errected so stately Aultars, prepared so ritche
vessels, of gold and silver, to contein this Sacrament, has carried it in
Procession, and adored it; which honor and homage, Christians would never
have given it, had they thought that it were but bread and wine, or a bare
sign, or figure of Christ's, body. So that if ever there were any truth in
the Church, this of the real presence, is a truth, because the Scriptures are
as plain for it, as for any other mysteries of our faith, the fathers aggree
in the exposition of the scripture for the real presence, as they do in the
exposition of scriptures against the Arrians for the defense of the Trinity,
or against the Nestorians or Eutichians, for the Incarnation; the practice of
the ancient Church, argues noe less, miracles, unless all books even
lately Printed lie, were always as frequent for this mystery, as for any,
the consent of all Christians conspireth in this article as well as in the
Trinity, and this the paganes knevv full well, In Apol. c. 5.7. Pamel ibid.
Eusebius. l 5 c. 1
who therefore called us Anthropophagos and Infanticidas as vvitnessethe
Tertulian. And so if we have any truth of any article of our faith, this is
an assured verity: and if ever there were any heresy, Caluins opinion, which
denies this real presence, is an heresy, because the autours of this opinion,
were ever noted for heretics, as Berengarius, Vvicleph, and others before
them; and their followers had particular names, as the Arians have, they were
condemned by Councels, and by that Church which was commonly called
Christian, and they have all other marks, of heretics, set down in the
second book, as will easily, appear, by application of the^, unto Calvin,
and his followers. When this opinion was taught, the world vvondred at it,
and the Pastors and fathers of the Church, vvrote against it, and they
alleged as plain scripture against this heresy, as ever they did against
Arianisme. And so, if ever there were any heresy in the world, the denial
of the real presence is an heresy. Confer now (gentle reader) the
testimonies which Catholics have for the real presence, with those which
the reformers allege against it, and tell me where is likest to be the
truth? Catholics have plainer scripture for it, then they have against it,
the fathers also who are interpretours of scripture, stand for it, the
reformers stand against it. Which are to be believed, think thou? Whether
all the fathers, or all the Reformers, yea or every one of the Reformers,
because they aggree not, and every one will be supreme Judge, by his private
spirit? They will say scripture must be believed before ffathers. but this is
not the question; for scripturs are plainer, for the real presence, then those
are, which the reformers bring against it, And fathers bring scripturs to
prove it, as well as they do to disprove it; so that the question is, whether
the fathers are liker to understand the scripturs rightly, rather then the
reformers, yea, rather the^ any one of the reformers, in particular. But to
dravv to my intended conclusion, out of all this discourse I gather, that we
have as plain scripture for the real presence of Christ's body and blood in
the blessed Sacrament, as we have for the blessed Trinity, and we are as
sure of the real meaning of the textes, which are alleged for the real
presence, as of them, which were used for proof of the Trinity or
Incarnation; because the text is as plain, and the Interpretours as many and
as plain also, the circunstances also of the text make as much for the real
presence, as for those other tvoe mysteries; The real presence is no more
impossible, nor incredible, to man's conceit, then those mysteries are, yea
those are of greater difficulty. Why then do the reformers deny the Real
presence, rather then the Trinity or Incarnation? If we have as good proofs
for this as for those verities, we can not believe those, but we must
believe this, or if these testimonies be not sufficient for the reale
presence, they are not sufficient for those verities, and so if not with
standing plain text, circunstances of the text, Interpretours of the text,
and practice of the Church, we deny the real presence, or doubt of it; we
must necessarily doubt of the Trinity and Incarnation, and call them, and all
the other mysteries of Christian faith in question, for which we have no
greater, nor no other proof, because one proof is for all; and as good for
the Euchariste, as for any. And if all the mysteries of christian faith be
called in question, then seeing that we have no reason to join with Turck or
Jew in their Religion, we may bid adevv to all Religion, and sort our
selves with Atheistes, who are of no Religion.

FINIS.
Errors in Printing.
Imyliethe, for implies. page 3. line 25. hie for he. pa. 3. lin. 29. to for
do pa. 10. li. 9. oner for over: pa. 24. li 12. veary for very: pa. 18. li.
28. branisicke for braynsicke pa. 27. li. 6. show for shevve pa 36 li. 4.
veale for veil page 36. li. 8. thy for they pa. 61. li. 6. Hugo for Richardus,
page 114 in the marg. they for then page 129. li. 9. they for thy page 247. l.
4. it is self, for it self 155. li. 31. biourrouinge for borrovvinge pa. 175.
lin. 8. some for son pa. 198. li. 29. larned for learned 240. li. 19. fovv
for four pa. 240 li. 28. fellovved for follovved pa. 252. li. 23. ruled reason
for ruled by reason pa. 253. li. 15. bodily for boldlye: pa. 259. li. 31. vvoo
for two 294. li. 17. demo^strate for be demo^strated: pa 299 li. 27. this for
his 337. li. 20. there for other pa. 354. li. 13. as it well for as well. pa.
355. li. 20 havv for law page 382. li. 10. is not for it is not: pa. 422. li.
29. prauers for prayers pa. 436. li. 28. am for and pa. 346. li. 16. I me for I
am pa. 546. li. 22 they for then page 588. lin 18. boidled for bridled 606. li.
29. farthe for faith page 607. lin. 20. staunge for strange page 632. li. 16.
this for his pa. 635 li. 4. great for greek pa. 727. li 23. laue for have pa.
728. li. 6.

words omitted page. 158. line 2. which come in after the second word of
the same line

Feind. So it happens to the Heretic the

THE TABLE.
A
SAint Peter and the rest of the Apostles sent extraordinarily. page 8. they
prove their mission by their works. page 22.

Antiquity in all kinds of arts always reverenced. p. 91.

The Arrogancy of heretics in this age. p. 92.

An admonition to Atheists. p. 112.

S. Ambrose his words to Valentinian the Emperor concerning his office. p.
147.

Infallible arguments to prove the stabilitie of the Catholic or Roman
Church. p. 198. 202.

The agreement and consent in opinions that is in the Catholic Church p. 214.
that the same can not but proceed of God. p. 218.

Arius condemned for an heretic by the council of Nice consisting of three
hundred and 18. Bishops p 237.

The two aduents of Christ. p. 294.

Adame endevved with all natural sciences. 308.

The diverse affections of the superior and inferior patte of the soul in
respect of the same thing. p. 328. how they wear both in Christ in
respect of his passion, without sin. ibid.

The reason of the abrogation of the old sacrifices and sacraments. p. 382.

No moral or probable assurance of any sacraments at all amongst the
reformers. p. 409.

The Arian heresy. 32.

No probable assurance of scriptures, if the Roman Church be rejected.
679. vsq 688.

Two kinds of Atheistes. 640.

Authority, how it is gotten. 118.

Authority of the Fathers and the new preachers compared. 93.

The Sacrament of the Aultare. 223. 703.

B
Baptism is of no force, and to noe purpose according to Caluins doctrine. 422.

The prodigious beginning of heretics 17.

Nothing in our belief against reason allthoughe above reason p. 276.

What manner of belief or confidence is required in prayer p. 440.

Beza his presumption in correctinge an Evangelist 720.

Diverse bitter blasphemies where with most spitefully Luther, Calvin and a
rabble of other miscreants bark at the blessed virgin. 343.

That the Catholic Church never made breach out of any other Church, as
always heretics have. 163.

C
THe success Calvin had in his pretended miracle. p. 25. his small accounte
of fathers. 88. marked in the back not for his goodness. 121. his herodian
death. ibid. his assertions injurious to Christ, to which in some sort
suscribe vvhytaker and Jewel. p. 249. his lewd distinction betvvixte the
old and nevve law. 281. his absurd blasphemy. 304. his execrable doctrine
concerning God. 303. he take the from Christ the title of a Judge. 300. he
makethe him a desperate man. 325. he bringethe him to hell and make the him a
compagnion of the damned 332. his miserable end. 338. he make the God a
greater Patron of sin then the devil is. 450. His iustifyinge faith takes
away prayer under penaltye of becominge an infidel. 439. His opinions of
iustifyinge faith. 442. of sin ibid. of good works. 442. of free will
ibid. which makes the Pater noster, or our lords prayer to be needles, yea
pernicious to faith. 443. His opinion of the number of Sacraments. 408. of
what small importau^ce he makes them. 413.

The good alteration that Catholic religion works in those which sincerely
embrace it. ^23.

That in sundry perfections Catholics excel the reformers. p. 120 vsq. ad.
124.

The effect of true Charity. 341.

Christ him self sent. p: 4. he prouethe his mission by his works. 22. the
reason why he instituted a succession of Pastors in his Church. 16. in what
sense he is said to have been the Priest, the sacrifice, and the God to whom
the sacrifice, was offered. pa. 251. how he is said to have satisfied for
our sins, notvvithstanding that sanctification, is required at our hands.
page 261. that he played all the parts of a spiritual Physician q: 271. he
has no successor allthoughe many vicegerentes. page 285. 364. How his sole
supreme authority over the Church, consistethe with the necessity of a
visible, head here in earth. page 365. Christ did not suffer the pains of
hell as Calvin most impiously contendeth that he did. 337.

The reason why the Church only should Judge of scriptures deduced even from
the do^ctrine of the reformers. p. 44. why it is called apostolical. 190.

Diverse heretical opinions about the fall of the Church. 198. a difference
betvvixte Scripture and the Churches definitions. 43.

The true Church can not be invisible. p. 206. it is not confined as
heretical sects are. 231.

A Contention betvvixte the Jews and Samaritanes resemblinge very well the
controuersye betvvixte Catholics and heretics. 129.

The conuenience that the Church of God should have a visible head^. 133.
vsq. ad. 136.

The diverse offices of conscience with the great svvaye it bears in all our
actions. 58. the reformers take it away. 544.

The Contrariety of Caluins assertions, and the Scriptures. 594.

In what manner our Cooperation in diverse kinds is required notvvithstanding
the sufficiency of Christ's passion. p. 263.

The first Council called in Jerusalem by the Apostles. 189.

Proofs of a creation. 648.

D
The deceit that heretics use by places of scripture, no sufficient vvarrant
of sound doctrine to allege bare scripture for it. 37.

Diverse secrette derogations by Luther from Christ whereby he seems to pull
at the divinity it self. 24.

After what manner the Devil do the seek to imitate Christ by heretics. 30.

The difference of scholershipp, life and conversation, betvvixte the planters
of Catholic religion and the first brochers of heresy. 121.

The difference betvvixte an heretic and a Schismatike. 175.

An apparent difference betvvixte sin and the pain of sin. 173.

The difficulty amongst the reformers to call any kind of councelle. 154.
the likelihoode of disagreement amongst them. ibid. no vvaraunt to rely upon
their sentence supposinge agreement. 152.

The manner of discussion or examination at the day of Judgment. 298.

From whence desperation proceeds. 326.

The ruin that proceeds of dissension. 212.

Dissension arguethe heretics to be the sinagogue of Satan. 219.

The deep dissimulation of the reformers and their traiterous meaning to
Christ him self made manifest by an example. 357.

The manifold divisions and sects of the late reformers. 221. the same
acknowledged by many of them. 224.

The reason why all the Doctors and Pastors of the Church can not err. 100.

E
Epiphanius very fitly comparethe heretics to vipers of diverse kinds. 224.

Erasmus how he likes of Luthers doctrine. 246.

Diverse Examples out of the old and new testament for prayer to saints. 355.
for religions respect to relics and images. 356.

The Euchariste and real presence proved. 223. 703. The denial of it, calls
all the mysteries of faith in doubt. ibid.

The Eutichian heresy. 32

Examples of pride and self love in heretics. 66.

The Excellency of Christ's preisthood above all others, and how it
differs from them. 286.

A triple Exposition of that place of saint Ihon exierunt ex nobis. applied to
the first or chief heretics of every sect. 156.

Who are said to be sent by Extraordinary mission. 8. why the fore said
mission is to be proved by miracles ibid.

F
A comparinge of ancient fathers with the late reformers and nevve bible
clerks. 93. the difference betwixt them. ibid. 121.

How the reformers cut them selves from the Church by refusing fathers. 94.

The force of religion. 113.

In what sense faith is said not to have increased from the beginning, or no
nevve things to have been defined by counsels. 170. the same expressed by a
similitude. 170.

The reason why faith admits no novelty. 171.

One obstinate error in a matter of faith depriuethe a man of all infused
faith. 180.

Ma^s feticitie in Paradise wherein it co^sisted. 253.

The force of true amity and frendshippe. 339.

How disciplinable fear and hope make men in every well ordered common
wealth. 514. the reformers take them both away. 516. four kinds of
fear ibid.

Faith only does not justify. 532. it may be separated from good works.
530. Luthers false dealinge in this point as appears in his Germane
translation. 528.

Manifest proofs for free will. 561. vsq. ad 566.

G
The reason that we may suspect the Gospellers for false prophets. 25. why
they translate elders for Priests. 368.

By what means God delivered religion in the law, of nature in the law
written, and in the law of grace. 105. he wills not sin but only
permiteth it. 452.

Good before bad in all kinds. 165. proofs of a God head 646.

The nature of goodness 229. proofs that God is not the author of sin. 453.

The Gospellers take from Christ the title of an eternal Priest. 291. they
deny him to be a Priest according to the order of Melchisedech. 293.

The Gospell^rs especially Calvin blasphemously derogate from Christ
knowledge, accusing him of ignorance in many things. 311. they make God the
only sinner. 457. they make him an unreasonable prince. 462. they make him a
most cruel tyrant 465 in their opinion he might as well exact the
observation of the law of beasts as of men 464.

H
The manner of refuti^g heresies before councils. 237.

Heretics urged to shevve scripture for their extraordinary mission. 18 their
absurd answer, urged to shevve their succession. 11. how heretics may be
termed parricides. 8^. theenes. 3^. how they imitate Aesops crovv. 33. how
they are compared by Epiphanius to vipers of diverse ky^des^ 224. by others to
the Cadmean brethern. 225. to Sa^psons fo^es. ibid to vvaspes by Tertullian.
ibid. Why heretics covet to decide all things by the bare letter of
scripture. 35. Many evident demonstrations that if ever were any heretics the
reformers are also heretics. 184 vsq. ad 186.

The reason why heretics seem to give so much to temporal princes. 483. The
gross absurdity of heretics in denying all kind of honor to Saints. 348.
of what small virtue and efficacy heretics make sacraments to be. 410.
their 2. reasons that they attribute so little force to them, refuted and
rejected. 413. their erroneous and impious opinion of the form of words used
in sacraments. 427.

S. Hierome recurreth to the Pope of Rome in a doubt concerning the holy
Trinity. 143.

Hierome of pragues beastly behavior to a crucifix 347.

S. Hilarious his counsel to a perplexed man in religion. 226.

Three ki^des of honor according to three kinds of excellency. 349. which
is dew to God only and which to saints. ibid.

The reason why we give a religious honor to saints, bodies, images. and
relics. 351. By the honor given to saints God is honored, and more them if
we honored him alone. 352.

I
Idleness the perfection of a Christian life according to the reformers. 607.

Idolatry what it is. 353.

What kind of imperfections Christ undertook in our nature. 315. why he
refused ignorance. 316.

The congruitie of the Incarnation of the second person. 255.

The inconvenience that follovveth relyinge upon bare scripture or the naked
letter. 40.

The great inconvenience that vvoulde follovv in the Church for defect of a
visible head. 151. 156.

Three great inconveniences if Christ should have suffered the pains of hell,
as Calvin diabolically contendeth that he did. 337.

The institution of Preesthoode and Preestly function. 366.

Certain interpretations of places impiouslie alleged, of heretics to prove
Christ ignoraut. 313.

That there is no sufficient Judge of controversies in religion in England or
any other Church of the reformers. 145. vsq. ad 148.

The large and supreme jurisdiction of the Popes of Rome according to the
which they have always practiced. 142.

Imputed Justice does not really heal the soul or sanctify it. 274. The
heretics imputed Justice admits no augmentation or increase. 305. it
makethe every man as just as Christ himself.

K
Christ's Knowledge. 309. Adams Knowledge. 308. Salomons Knowledge. 308.

L
How agreeable labor is unto man. 603.

The succession of government in the Church even in the law of nature. 138.

Recourse had to the high Priest concerning, all difficulties in religion in
the law written. 139.

The law of grace requires a visible head. 140 the excellency thereof aloue
all others 275. it consists in believing and obseruinge. 276.

To say that the laws and commandments of God be impossible, gives
occasion to all impie-570 the like does, to say that Christ has freed us
from all laws 572.

The liberty that Luther and Calvin give all faythefull men to sin. 547.
that they give all men leave to sin in saying that all our actions are
mortal sins. 549.

By what Likelyhoode sentence would pass of the Catholic part if the
matter were put to the hearing of any indifferent person. 130.

Luthers presu^p^ions and proud words against all fathers with his raylinge
terms, against king Henry. 8.24.86. his attempt with the success in
dispossessinge of a devil. 25. He accusethe the council holden at Jerusalem
of e^rour. 297. his reprochefull words against the council of Nice. 198.
against saint James his Epistles. ibid. His little flock and invisible Church
disproued 202. he despoilethe Christ of the title of a law maker. 280. he
rejects prayer. 446. the opposition that is betvvixte his doctrine and S.
Paul's. 623. betwixt his and our saviors 635. Luther admitterhe a plurality
of vviues at once. 624. his four cases wherein as he sayethe it is lavvfull
for a man to leave his old wife and (...) take a nevve. 625. his notorious
infamous lyse (...) death 122. his opinion of sacraments. 408. of Baptism,
vvherin he thinks no form of words necessary. 4.6. the reason why a man
is more ashamed of his lusts then other vices and Passions. 61^.

He thinks no form of words necessary. 41

M
Two manner of missions concerning preachers. 7.

Extraordinary mission require the extraordinary signs and confirmations.
20. two vvayes Christ proved his mission. 106.

Marcious heresy concerning the creation of the world. 30.

Mark^s of heretics: to make a breaehe out of the Church. 159. novelty. 166.
a particular name from their sectmaster. 172. a renouation almost of all old
heresies. 179. want of succession. 188. dissension in doctrine. 208. to be of
a particulet sect. 228. to be condemned for an heretic by the Cath. Church.
236. many others. 241. all with in their several places above noted are
seuereally proved to agree to the reformers of this time.

Men's to induce men to religion. 115. a mean to distinguishe the true
Church from a bastard and heretical synagogue. 191.

The manner of refuting heresies before the time that general counsels could
be called. 237.

The different manner of prayer to Christ and to his Saints. 354.

Melancthon covertly detracteth from Christ. 247.

Man's misery and servitude after sin. 254.

Calvin could work no miracles p. 25.

N
The nature of goodness. 229.

The Nestorian heresy 32.

The general and ancient name of Christians and Catholics argues the true
Catholic religion. 177.

Novelty a mark of heretics. 166.

What the name Catholic imports. 231.

The number of prelates present at the council of Trent. 240.

The necessity of a visible head over the Church here in earth. 365.

The railing speeches and odious names that heretics especially Calvin with
great contempt use against all Saints. 346. their reproche-full usage of
relics and Saints pictures. 347.

O
The order that was taken to reclaim Luther. 240. the manner of proceeding
against his obstinacy. ibid. his heresy condemned by the council of Trent.
240.

The Catholic opinion of justification, and with what reason it is affirmed.
261.

The just occasion we have to suspect the reformers sincerity toward
Christ. 355.

The distinction of holy orders, and the manner of giuinge them proved out of
the scriptures. 367

The ancient opinion for the number of seven sacraments. 399.

The diversities of opinions amongst the reformers them selves for the number
of the Sacraments. 408. their erroneous opinion for the form of words used
in sacraments. 427.

The Epicures vvitles opinion concerning the origin of the world. 654.

An objection of our voluptuous heretics against chastity. 619. the same
ansvvered. ibid. the object of religion. 661.

P
Intolerable pride in heretics. 73. 66.

The probability of the Catholic religion. 102.

Saint Peter's commission and preeminence above the rest. 142.

Pelagius his heresy. 182.

A property of heretics which saint Austine obseruethe. 199.

The different manner of prayer to Christ and to his Saints. 354.

The peace and agreement that is in the Catholic Church. 214. 228. that the
same must needs proceed of God. 218.

The superabundant price of our redemption. 156.

Christ's passions or rather propassions. 327.

The change of preesthood with the change of the law. 364.

The conjunction or inseparabilitie of preisthood and religion. 363. 369.

Plain proofs both by scripture and reason for the sacrifice of the mass.
384. 389.

Predestination. 420.

The excellency of prayer 430. the continual practice of it in the Church.
437. the contempt of it conformable to the reformers doctrine. 438. prayer to
Saints 355.

Why the Pope can not err in defining scriptures and their exposition. 155.
677.

Precepts of good life reduced to tvvoe heads. 277.

Parricide aggreing to heretics 81.

R
The truth and evidence of the Catholic Religion. 105.

The reason why the Church relyethe upon the Popes sentence as infallible.
155. that a visible head in the Church is necessary. 144. the reason of the
daily sacrifice in the Church. 288. why Christ is said to be a priest after
the order of Melchisedech. 289. the reason that we may suspect heretics,
for false Prophets. 25 why we give a religious honor to saints and their
relics. 341. why we make intercession. 353.

The liberty of rebellion that Luther and Calvin give to all their followers.
485.

Recourse had to the high Priest about all difficulties of religion in the
law written. 139.

The certainty that the reformers are heretics. 172. nothing can excuse them
from heresy but Apostasy. 187. their absurd doctrine of ^us^^^cation with
their pernicious co^sequences which they infer upon the same. 258. their
doctrine how injurious it is to Christ and Christian religion. 633. 260. vsq
ad. 267. 318. to all civil government. 490. vsq. ad. 534. how it openethe
the gapp to all vice and sensuality 547. vsq. ad. 598. 621. vsq. ad. 727. it
take the 579. away all speculatiue sciences and moral virtues. 550. all
conscience. 594. it directlye tends to atheism. 666. it bringethe into
contempt all scriptures and religion. 674. 689. vsq ad. 696.

The proud conceits that the reformers have of their sanctirie. 206. they
affirm that all our actions good and bad are mortal sins. 300. that all
sins are equal. 301. that we have no liberty nor free will in our
actions. ibid. that God is the autour of all sins. 302.

The liberty of rebellion that Luther and Calvin give to all their follows.
485.

The reformers upon necessity believe in some things the Pope and Roman
Church. 679 they take away in effect all sacraments. 12. 16. Examples out of
scriptures for religious respect to relics and images. 356.

S
The custom of offringe sacrifice even by the Apostles them selves. 367.

The necessity of a daily sacrifice in the new law for the upholding of
true religion. 379. of a visible sacrifice hear in earth. 360. of a proper
sacrifice not metaphorical. 383

Examples of selfloue and pride in heretics. 66.

The conuenience or rather necessity of corporal and sensible Sacraments 391.
the proof of them seuerallye out of scripture. 398. 402. the reformers have no
Sacraments at all. 416.

The only service of our heretics, a sermon. 447. that also absurd according
to their doctrine ibid.

The difficulty of vndersta^dig scriptures. 49.57. the bare letter without
the true sense no scripture. 40. the reason thereof. 45. how the scripture is
said to be dependent of the Chut-che. 44. 676. Arguments against the private
Spirit 53. 65. Selffeloue a common disease to all heretics. 65.

Thet insufficiency of resolving all by a private Spirit in matters of
religion. 75. vsq. 80.

The force of Succession in Preisthoode. 193. two shifts of heretics
disproued touching Succession. 196.

The Lords Supper according to Luther can not be eaten. 422. Caluins doctrine
makes it a niggardlie Super. 424.

T
Tertullian complayneth of heretics in his time. 374.

The reason that God can not give testimony of an v^^truthe by miracles. 106.

Proofs of the blessed Trinity. 700.

V
Valentinus his heresy. 30.

The Lutherane vbiquetaries take away Christ's divinity. 248.

The commendation of virginity. 614.

The right understanding of certain places of the scripture which seem to
impeach the freedom of the will. 167.

W
William Rodings foolish fiction which he invented to derogate from the
blessed virgin 347.

A vvoemans complaint of Caluins doctrine as derogating to their sex. 690.

The four wounds which we received in our soul by sin. 269.

Z
Zuinglius rejects fathers. 87.

His opinion of the number of Sacraments. 408.

Excuse this Table; I was enforced to commit the making of it to a freinde,
who also had not leisure to make it exactely.


