A TREATISE OF THE HIERARCHY AND DIVERSE ORDERS OF THE CHVRCH AGAINST THE
ANARCHIE OF CALVIN.

Composed by MATTHEW KELLISON, Doctor of Divinity, and.

Are all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Doctors? etc.

1. Cor. 12. v. 28. And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other
some Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors to the consummation of the
Saints, unto the work of the ministry, etc.

Ephesians. 4. v. 11. Printed at Doway by GERARD PINCHON, at the sign of Coleyn,
1629.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE TO THE CATHOLIQVES OF ENGLAND.
RENOWNED CATHOLIQVES.
1. True it is which the wise man Prou. cap. 21. verse. 30.
auerreth, that, there is no wisdom, there is no prudence, there is no
counsel against our Lord. For as no creature can resist his power, so none can
ouer-reache his wisdom. Pharao by all his policy and power could not
extinguish the Israelites, but Exodus c. 1. v. 12.
the more he oppressed them, the more they multiplied. Why? God stood for them.
Herod could not kill Christ, though to be sure of him he killed Matt. c. 2. v.
16.
all the litleones in and about Bethleem. Why? the divinity was with him and
in him. Saul could never ruin David. Why? God was with David and had forsaken
Saul. There was made a long strife (says 2. Reg. c. 3. v. 1.
holy Scripture) between the house of Saul and the house of David; David
always prospering, and alweies stronger then him self, but the house of Saul
decreasing daily.

2. You (o constant Catholics) are the house and family of David, that is,
the true Church of Christ the son of David. Your adversaries, that is, the
Sectaries of this time, are the family of Saul, forsaken of God (as Saul
was) for their disobedience to his Church. Betwixt these two families there
has been a long strife in our country of England, both chalenging the
kingdom and Church of Christ: But David (Christ) in you his mystical body,
the Church, has ever profpered and increased, maugre all the rigor of
persecution; The synagogue of the sectaries still decreasing and every day
lesser in credit and number, though to extinguish you, she used all the Engines
of cruelty. You may say therefore with Justinius Martyr: Justin dial. cont.
Triphon.
Quo magis in nos saeuitur, tanto plures in Christum, fide^ profitentur: The
more cruelty is used against us, the more profess their faith in Christ. You
may tell them with Tertullian Tertulin Apolog. cap. 45.
Plures efficimur quoties a vobis metimur: We are multiplied so often as by
you we are mowed: You may glory with saint Leo Leo ser. 1. de Natali Apost.
that your Church is not diminished by Persequution, but angmented, and that
always your field is clad with richer, and more abundant store af corn,
whilst every grain that falls by persecution does arise multiplied. The
more you seem to loose by martyrdom, the more you gain, many rising for one,
because Tertul. in Apol. c. 45.
the blood of Martyrs, is the seed of Christians. And so in you, David (Christ)
always prospers and increases.

3. And this your persequntors cannot deny, it being evident to the eye. For
they see that notwithstanding their confiscations, confinings, Seizings,
imprisonments, deaths (which you have heretofore endured, and yet some times
endure) you are more increased and multiplied. Tertullian said to the
persecutors of his time: Tert. in Apologet. cap. 37.
Externi sumus, and vestra omnia impleuimus vrbes, Iusulas, castella,
municipia, conciliabula, castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, Palatia, Seratum,
forum: sola vobis reliquimus templa: We are Externes, and have filled all your
places, cities, Islands, castles Towns, Counsel ^owses, camps, tribes,
bands, palaces, Senate, market place: only we have left the Temples to your
selves. You may say the like to your persequutors: we are externes to you,
not in country, but in Church and faith, and notwithstanding all your policy
and power by which you have endeavored to extirpate us; we are so
multiplied, that we may be found in your court, in your parliament, in your
universities, amongst your nobility, amid your magistrates, yea ministers (if
we regard their hearts) and in the thick of your armies: no city, no town,
no village, no Parish, no Prison scarce ca^ you find where Catholics are not
found, as your officers and Poursuiuantes can assure you: only in your
Churches and at your service (which our consciences cannot brook) we appear
not. So that if I could wish well to Protestant religion, or ill to ours, I
would counsaille them (as things stand now in England) to surcease from
persecution, it having alvvaies increased our number and glory, and lessened
and obscured theirs.

4. And assure your selves (Worthy Catholics) so long as they who are your
Pastors feed their Sheep not them selves: So long as they who are your Mat.
c. 5. v. 13.
salt, be not them selves unseasoned in faith and ma^ners: So long as they
who are your Mat. c. 5. v. 15.
light, be not them selves endarkened by works of darkness: So long as they
who are your guides, run not themselves astraie: So long as they who are
your heads and eyes, direct well their own actions: And so long as you obey
your Pastors, follow the direction of your heads and guides, refuse not
their seasoning salt, and shut not your eyes against their light: So long as
both they and you stick to God and his Church (as you do) and provoke not his
ire and indignatio by evil life: So long you will increase and prosper: So
long God will protect you, and either ease you of this heavy yoke of
persequution under which you have so long groned, or he will give you force
and patience to bear it: So long as you are constant in your faith and upright
in your lines; So long shall you (as Achior Iudit. c. 5. v. 16.
told Holophernes in behalf of the Jews) without bow or arrowe, and without
shield and sword, defeat all that shall fight against you, because God whose
cause you sustain, will by his grace fight in you and for you: Iudit. c. 5.
v. 24.
But as Achior also said, if there be any iniquity in you, tradens tradet
vos, delivering, God will deliver you into the hands of your enemies; and by
persequution which should have hardened you, you will break in the hardening,
by persecution which should have purged and purified you, you will be consumed,
and by this fire which should declare you current gold, you will be found to be
counterfeit. And you who hitherto never encountered with your enemies but you
conquered them, never grappled with them but you borded them, never fought with
them but you foiled them; will be forced either to forsake the field with shame,
or to yield your selves prisoners to a base servitude. Your own sins will
add force to your enemies, by which they will ouermatche you, who else could
not match you. For, as saint Hierom Hiere. ep. ad Helioderum Epise.
says, Nostris peccatis barbari fortes sunt, nostris vitijs Romanus superatur
exercitus: By our sins the Barbarous grow strong, by our vices the Roman
army (that is we, called Romans for our correspondence with Rome in matters of
faith) is over come: Even as our Brittannie (according to that which Gildas
Gildas lib. de excid. Britan.
writes) was ouerunne and wasted by the Pictes and Scotts, fortified against
it by the sins of the people, and especially of the clergy. But as for your
lives they have hitherto been so exemplar, and, as I hope, still are, that
foreign nations have and do admire your piety toward God, constancy in
Religion, purity in life, and Matt. c. 5. v. 17.
Seeing your good works have glorified your father which is in heaven.

5. Above all I commend unto you charity, which where it reigns, makes all
of Astor. c. 4. v. 32.
one heart and soul. This is the coat and liuerie by which Christ will have
his servants to be known saying, Joan. c. 13. v. 35.
In this all men shall know, that you are my disciples, if you have love one to
another. By which liuerie the ancient Christians were so well known, that as
Tertullian records, the Pagans pointing at Christians, used to say: Tertul.
in Apologet. c. 39.
Vide vt inuicem se diligant, and pro alterutro mori parati sunt: Behold how
they love one another, and how read^e they are to die for one another. And what
your charity hitherto has been toward God, your sufferances for his cause
will witness, and what your charity to your neighbors has been, our
prisons, and poor Catholics, yea our Seminaries by you relieved, will give
ample restimonie.

6. Only you must take heed least at any time it may be said to you, as
saint John in his Apocalypse was commanded to write to the Angel, that is,
to the Bishop of Ephesus; Apoca. c. 2. a v. 1.
I know thy works and labor, and thy patience, and that thou can not bear
evil men, and have tried them which say themselves to be Apostles and are not,
and have found them liars, and thou have patience and have borne for my name,
and have not fainted. But I have against thee a few things, because thou have
left thy first charity: That is, thy first fervor of charity: For if he had
quite lost charity, he would not so much have praised him for his zele,
patience, sufferings and good works, which are nothing or of no 1. Cor. 13.
vvorth without charity. Take heed, I say, (most Zealous Catholics) least
at any time you give occasion to saint John to say to you: I know the great
patience and constancy you have showed in your long persecution, in which you
have never fainted, nor lost courage. I know your zele against heresy, your
love toward heretics, for whose conversion you daily hazard your selves:
But I have a few things against you (take heed, I say, that he have no cause
to say so) for that although you have not lost charity, yet you have left
your former fervor of charity, as in time even the most perfect do, if they
take not heed; beginnings being commonly feruerours, proceedings vvaxing cold.
And this loss, not of charity, but offormer fervor only, may make way to
disagrements amongst you, which though they argue not charity to be
extinguished, yet they may argue it to be cooled and remiss.

7. The Romans so long as they waged war abroad against other countries,
got always the victory, and so enlarged their Empire: But when they fell
to civil wars and turned their forces against themselves, they ruined them
selves by the same forces, by which they had subdued others. And you (most
pious Catholics) so long as you, and your leaders were united, you were an
army invincible, and all the power and policy of your enemies; yea all the
forces of Matt. c. 16. v. 18.
Hell could never prevail against you: but if your leaders, and you with them
should ever be divided, an handful of men would defeat you; because every
Kingdom divided against it self, shall be made desolate, Luc. c. 11. v. 17.
and they that Galat. c. 5. v. 25.
bite and eat one another, will be consumed by one another. So long as your
workmen the secular and regular Priests concurred so in all peace and concord
that there was heard Reg. c. 6. v. 7.
no noise of the hammer of contention in the building of your Jerusalem (your
little Church of England) so long the work went on prosperously and was reared
higher and higher daily, and even to the height we see; and if the workmen
still join their labors peaceably, your building will in time be finished to
the salvation of many, and to the great joy of the whole Church militant, yea
Lnc. c. ^^. v. 10.
Triumphant. But if the workmen in steed of helping should hinder one
another, if what one builds another should pulle down: This so much desired
building (although for it so many prayers have been made, so many sacrifices
have been offered, so many lives have been sacrificed, so much blood has been
shed) will never be accomplished.

8. Wherefore (Dearest Catholics) although (to use Tertullia^s Tertul. lib.
8. ad Martyrs in initio.
words which he spoke to the designed martyrs) non sum tantus vt vos alloquar:
I am not so great, nor of that worth, as to speak unto you, whom your
suffera^ces for Christ, have inobled and exalted above the Angels, who can
only love God, but cannot suffer for him, as to you it is given: Philip. c. 1.
v. 29.
Yet give love leave to speak, which fears no offense where it loves: If
you should disagree amongst your selves, what 1. Tim. c. 3. v. 7.
testimony, what Justification would it procure of them, who are without (the
Church?) 1. Tim. c. 5. v. 14.
What occasion would thereby be given to the adversary, to speak evil of you.
O be you all of one mind, lovers of fraternity, 1. Pet. c. 3. v. 8.
not rendering evil for evil, not curse for curse, but contrariewise, blessing
for unto this you are called, that in that which they (your adversaries) speak
ill of you, they may be confounded.

9. You have all the same faith and hope: as one faith therefore linketh your
understandings, so let one charity couple your wills. You participate all of
the same Sauroments, you 1. Cor. c. 10. v. 17
eat of one bread: You suffer the same, of the same, and for the same; The
same persequution, of the same adversaries, for the same cause. And you,
Reverend Priests, (under which title I comprehend you all, be you secular or
regular) are of diverse orders, but of one Hierarchy: You are di^ers members
but of the same Romans c. 12. v. 1. Cor. ca 12. verse. 27.
body, the Church: You are of diverse professions but which all profess one
faith: and you are sent by the same authority, to do the same functions, and
for the same end, and that most noble, the conversion of souls. Amongst so
many motives and allurements to concord, what place can there be for discord?

10. God the good seeds man has sowed peace in your field, Matthew. c. 13. v. 28.
let not at any time the common enemy (whom Christ calls the Enemy man,
over sow coccle of discord* least it be demanded of you; Whence then has it
this coccle? Matt. c. 13. v. 27.
and answer be made to your consusion, the enemy man, the Devil, when you and
your pastors slepte or were to careless, came and ouer-sowed it. Follow
therefore Tertullians counsel: Tertul. lib. ad Martyrs.
Non illi tam been sit in suo regno vt vos committat, sed inueniat vos pace
munitos and concordia armatos, pax vestra bellum est illi: Do him not the
pleasure in his kingdom as to let him set you one against another: but let him
find you fortified with peace, armed with concord; your peace is war to him.

11. Christ your head is the Isa. c. 9. verse. 6.
Prince of peace, he is your true Melchisedech Hebr. c. 7. v. 1.
and Rex Salem, that is Prince of peace, yea he is Ephesians. c. 2. v. 14.
your peace who has made both one. He by the blood of his cross has pacified
the things in earth and the things in heaven. He before his departure out of
this world bequeathed Joan. c. 14. v. 27.
his peace unto us; let us embrace it. He sent his Apostles as his legates to
denounce Colos. c. 1. v. 20.
peace. And you who are Priests are their Successors and are sent to
reconcilie heretics and Schismatiques to the Church and so to make peace. You
are Isa. c. 33. v. 7.
Angeli pacis, the Angels of peace; and how Isa. ca. 52. v. 7.
beautiful are the feet of him who euangelizeth peace. You are the peace
makers in Gods Church; and how happy are Matt. c. 5. v.
the peace makers? You therefore to who^ is given 2. Cor. c. 5. v. 10.
Ministerium reconciliationis, the ministry of reconciliation, endeavor to
make and conserve peace amongst Catholics. And, Quae pacis sunt sectemur
Romans c. 14. v. 19.
etc. The things that are of peace let us pursue, and the things that are of
edifiyng one toward another, let us keep. And let us be of one mind one toward
another. Not minding high things, but consenting to the humble, let us not be
wise in our own conceit, let us render to no man evil for evil providing good
things, not only before God, Romans c. 12. v. 16.
but also before all men. If it may be, as much as in you, having peace with
all men. If therefore (I use still S. Paul's Philip. c. 2. v. 1.
words knovving that you vvil respect them) there be any, consolation in
Christ, any solace of charity, if any society of spirit, if any bowels of
communication fulfill my joy (see how he desired peace) that you be of one
meaning, having the same charity, of one mind, agreeing in one. Nothing by
contention, neither by vain glory, but in humility, each counting other
better then themselves, every one not considering the things that are their
own, but those that are other men's.

12. The Apostle 1. Cor. c. 12. v. 12
observes that in the natural body of man, God and nature has made one
member so to depend of another, as that one cannot well subsist without
another; and this (says the Apostle) is done: 1. Cor. c. 12. v. 25.
Vt non sit schisma in corpore, that there might be no schism in the body,
that is, no opposition of one member against another, one needing the help of
another: but rather that natural charity (as there is) that if one member
suffer any thing, all the members suffer with it, and as it were condole with
it, being as sensible of its evil, as of their own harm or hurt; and
therefore if one part of the body be ill affected, the eye looks to it, the
feet run for it, the hands apply the remedy; all the humors run to the
sore with intention to help, though contrary to their meaning they often
times increase the evil. The like mutual dependence Christ would have in his
mystical body the Church, and therefore has so ordered the members and
orders of the Church, that all depend one of another, and one order needs the
help of another, for that neither can the inferior 1. Cor. c. 12. v. 26.
clergy subsist without the Bishop, nor the laity without the clergy, nor
one order of the clergy without another, and the whole body of the Church
stands in need of them all, either as of essential members, or as of helps
and ornaments. And so one order must honor and love another; the regulars must
honor Secular Priests who (as as we shall see in this book) are by the
divine Institution governors of the Church, saint Paul 1. Cor. c. 12. v. 28.
uses the word gubernationes, gouernements, and the seculars must honor the
Regulars as helps; saint Paul says opitulations; that so there may be no
schism in Christ's mystical body.

13. But you must not only be in league and peace one with another, but also,
and especially with your Head Pastor and Bishop. For if the Head cannot say
to the feet, 1. Cor. c. 11. v. 21.
you are not necessary for me, much less can the feet and inferior members
say to the Head, We have no need of you; For that the Head, as it is the
principal part, so it is the most necessary; because if some inferior
member be cut of, that only perishes; but if the Head, the whole body
dies. And therefore as the serpent exposes his whole body to save his
Head, knovving if that be saved, although the rest of the body be cut, and
gashed, he shall save his life: and as the members of man will all expose
themselves to ward and fense the head: So you should be all forward to expose
your selves for the defense of your Head the Bishop.

14. When all the members in due order and proportion, are united amongst
themselves, and to their Head, they give a great strengh and luster to the
body, and nothing is more goodly to behold: but if the members be separated
from one another and from the head; as there is no thing more ugly and
deformed then such a body, so it loses shape, and life and strength also, if
it be a living body. And you (much honored Catholics) if you should be thus
divided (as God forbid) what shape, what beauty, what force, what life
would there remain in you? you would be as a goodly tree dismembered or
lopped; you would be like a goodly Palace whose roof and walls are fallen;
you would be like an army dissolved, or a Kingdom in which all are out of
order.

15. The Bishop is your spiritual Prince, yea princeps pastorum, Prince of
pastors, as saint Ignatius Ignat. ep. ad Smyrneuses.
styles him; honor and respect him. He is your spiritual father, yea as S.
Epiphanius Epiph. haer, 57.
calls him, he is Patrum generator, father of fathers; because as the Priest
by Baptism as by a spiritual regeneration begets children; so the Bishop by
the Sacrament of order, which he only can minister, begets and ordains
Priests who are the spiritual fathers of the people: love him as children
should do their father. He is your Pastor, you his Ast. c. 20. v. 28.
flock wherein the Holy Ghost has placed him to rule: He is your Hebr. c.
13. v. 7.
Prelate who has such a charge of your souls, that if any of you miscarrie
through his default, he must answer soul for soul, not one for one, but one
for every one: observe him and be ye subject to him. For if, as saint Bernard
Bern. l. 3. de consider. ad Eugen. c. 14.
says, it was never heard, that an Angel should say, I will not be subject
to the Archangell, nor that an Archangell should say I will not obaye the
Thrones, then (as he also says) that voice cannot be from Heaven nor of God,
I will not be subject to the Bishop.

16. If you read saint Ignatius Ignat. ep ad Magnes.
Epistle to the Magnesians, you will not permit your selves to be separated
from the Bishop: you will do nothing without him: you will count it a terrible
thing to contradict him: you will in no case murmr against him: you will do
all in concord, the Bishop presiding, and sitting in the place of God: nothing
will be in you that may separate you from him, but you will be made all one with
him, subject to God by him in Christ. But what honor and respect has been
given to Bishops by Kings and Emperors and what is due to him on your part,
in this Treatise you will see.

17. I will not in this my Epistle or in this Treatise entermeddle with your
maine controversy, that being all ready referred to higher powers: only my
love to you all has imboldened me to exhort you to concord with one another
and especially with your Bishop, not only for his respect (whose authority
and dignity requires it) but also for your own cause, whose need demands
it. For without a Bishop you are a flock without a Pastor, a Spiritual
Kingdom without a spiritual King, a family without a good man of the house,
an army without a General or leader: you sail in Peeters ship amidst the
surging waves, storms and tempests without a Pilot, you travel without a
guide: you are a body without a head, to whom you cannot say 1. Cor. c. 12.
v. 21
we have no need of you. For that you stade in need of a Bishop for many
causes.

18. Without a Bishop you can be no particular Church, because according to
saint Cyprians Cypr. ep. 69. ad Florin.
definition, the Church is Sacerdoti plebs adimata, and Pastorisuo grex
adhaerens: The people united to the Priest (Bishop) and the flock adhering to
the Pastor. Without a Bishop you can be no perfect Christians, Confirmation,
(which ordinarily you cannot have without a Bishop) being the Sacrament which
makes you men in a spiritual life, and which, as S. Thomas of Aquin D. Tho.
3. p. q. 65. a. 1. in Corp.
affirms, gives you your manly stature and full pitch and grough. Without a
Bishop you cannot have so infalliblie Ast. c. i. verse.
virtutem ex alto, force from above, to wit, that special and abundant grace
to profess your faith in time of persecution with an undaunted courage,
confirmation being the ordinary means by which it is given, and for want of
which Sacrament Nouatus fell, as Eusebius. lib. 6. hist. c 33. alios 34.
Eusebius has remarked, and as perchance many in our country have fallen.
For although a man may have sufficient grace to profess his faith and to die
for it without this Sacrament, as diverse in our country and in our late
persequution have done, yet this. Sacrament being the ordinary means by which
this grace is given, it is to be feared least in a whole country and in an
hoate persequution, some, perchance many, may fall for want of it,
especially when, if they will, they may have it. But of these points, and of
the necessity of Bishops even in time of persequ^tion; and how therefore they
were successively ordained in all Seas and Churches; and how by all Zealous
Catholics they have ever been desired with hazard of their lives, never
refused by any, and how in England a Bishop can be no more offensive to the
King or state, or to our Protestant Bishops then a secular or Regular Priest;
nor in any wise more preiudicious to the lay Catholics temporal estate, or
to the Religious privileges, in some chapters of this Treatise is at large
declared: where also is shevved, that to refuse a Bishop for fear of
persequution, is to refuse a pilot when the ship is tossed, or a Pastor when
the sheep are in danger to be devoured, or a General when the enemy is ready
to give the battle.

19. But you, who are so constant in your faith, so Religious toward God, so
Zealous for his Church, cannot but respect all orders of Gods Church, and
consequently the highest, to wit the order of a Bishop, who in power of
order has none above him, and especially and particularly your own Bishop,
who for his life and learning is without exception; and who neither for
stately pallacies nor rich livings or revenues, nor for any vvordlie honor
or splendou^, which may move some other Bishops, but merely for your
spiritual good, has undertaken this charge by which he every hour
hazardeth for you not only his liberty, but also life it self. Yet least
any order out of inconsideration should conceue less of another, then is
required, and not live in that peace and concord one with another, which
were to be desired: I have compiled this Treatise of the diverse orders of the
Church, that you seeing every order in their proper colors, may love and
honor one another, all the orders of the Church being of God, and all
pertaining to the essence or ornament of the Church, which in regard of her
diverse orders is compared by the Royal Prophet to a Psalm. 44 verse. 10.
Queen in golden raiment compassed with variety. And that when you see the
mutual dependence one order has of another, there 1. Cor. c. 12. v. 25
may be no schism in the body, but that the members together may be careful
for one another.

20. To this my Treatise tends, which if you receue in as good part as I
mean it to you all, it cannot but be grateful to all: I the Author of it,
ame, I confess, a secular Priest (though unworthy) and I glory to be a
member of our English clergy, which has had so many and so learned Priests,
and out of which so many glorious martyrs have proceeded, as (absit verbo
inuidia) it has been a mirror to all the Clergies of Europe. And I am no
Regular, I confess, but I honor all Religious orders confirmed by the Church,
and I esteem him no good Catholic who does not esteem them. I profess but
one order, yet I affect all, and so though I be of one side, yet I side not,
though I be of one party, yet I am not partial. I praise all orders of the
Church, but I dispraise none; I so extolle one order, as I depresse not the
other: I so right one, as I wrong not the other; yea in righting all, I commend
all, because all ^ ever been denied who hazard of their lives, never refused
by any, and how in England a Bishop can be no more offensive to the King or
state, or to our Protestant Bishops then a secular or Regular Priest; nor in
any wise more preiudicious to the lay Catholics temporal estate, or to the
Religious privileges, in some chapters of this Treatise is at large declared:
where also is shevved, that to refuse a Bishop for fear of persequution, is to
refuse a pilot when the ship is tossed, or a Pastor when the sheep are in
danger to be devoured, or a General when the enemy is ready to give the
battle.

19. But you, who are so constant in your faith, so Religious toward ^ order
of a Bishop, who in power of order has none above him, and especially and
particularly your own Bishop, who ro^ his life and learning is without
exception; and who neither for statclie palla^^es nor rich livings or
revenues, nor for any vvordlie honor or splendor, which may move some other
Bishops, but merely for your spiritual good, has undertaken this charge by
which he every hour hazardeth for you not only his liberty, but also life
it self. Yet least any order out of inconsideration should conceue less of
another, then is required, and not live in that peace and concord one with
another, are commendable: I say no more of the secular Clergy then the
learned Regulars teach, nor of the regulars which secular Doctors do not
confess: and so neither side can take offense at this Treatise, unless they
first fall out with their own Doctors; all orders, I hope, will be pleased to
see in it their own portraites and praises.

21. If you would take no little pleasure to be brought into a saint Peeters
palace in Rome, or a Louuer in Paris, or an Escuriel in Spain, or a Nonsuch
or such like princely palace in England, and there to see the gorgeous and
Stately biuldings, the rich seelings, variety of chambers and witty
Conueighaunces: If it would much delight you to see the goodly order of the
venerable Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, Cardinals, and other Pastors
and Prelates of the Church assembled in a general council; If you would
admire the order of the Peers, Nobles, States and officers of our noble
Kingdom meeting together in a parliament, all richly clad in their goodly
robes: much more will you admire the diverse orders of the Church militant
passing all those sightes for variety, and order; and you will take in good
part this Treatise, which like unto a Map in a little room, sets them
before your eyes. The Queen of Saba when she saw the House which Solomon had
built, and the meats of his table, 3. Reg. c. 10. v. 5.2. Paralip cap. 9.
and the habitations of his servants, and the orders, of them that served,
she had no longer spirit, so she was astonished. And you (Beloved Catholics)
when you shall see in this Treatise the Hierarchy of the Church which the
second and wiser Solomon has established, and the diversity of orders and
Offices, wherewith it is graced; will much more be rapte with admiration, and
will be astonished to see such variety of so goodly orders, and you will when you
shall see and consider them, praise, commend, love and respect every order in
its kind, and will live in peace and concord one with another, as becomes the
orders of the Hierarchy of the Church militant, which resembles the peaceable
Hierarchies of the Church triumphante of the Angels, and is a lively image
of that prototypon, an imitation of that pattern, and a copy of that
original. This is the project, this is the intention of the book and the
Author: who if in dedicating it unto you, he may seem to have taken more upon
him then perchance he should, or to have presumed more of himself the^ in
deed he is: he desires you to impute it to no sinister intention, which was
far from him, but rather to his love toward you all, and zele to the common
cause, for which he will ever be ready to employ his labors, and to hazard
the remnante of his life; during which he will rest.

Your devoted Servant in Christ JESUS. MATTHEW KELLISON.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED IN THIS TREATISE.
Chap. I. THat there is a Hierarchy of Angels consisting of diverse orders,
and consequently that the Church militant of men in earth, is also a
Hierarchy, it being an Imitation of that. page 1. Cha. II. That in general
there are diverse orders in the Church under one head or souueraigne. page 32.
Chap. III. That there is one visible Monarch and chief Pastor of the Church,
to wit, S. Peeter. page 49. Chap. IIII. That after S. Peeter there was ever a
supreme visible pastor of the Church, who is the Bishop of Rome. page 79.
Chap. V. That besides Peeter and his successor who is the supreme visible and
spiritual Prince of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, there must be diverse
orders and dignities under him. p. 110. Chap. VI. That Bishops are distinct in
Order from Priests and higher in dignity then they. page 151. Chap. VII.
Bishops and Priests are of the higest orders of the Church: and so to be
honored and obeyed. page 188. Chap. VIII. Who in particular belong to the
Hierarchy of the Church. p. 215. Chap. IX. Who of the Hierarchy of the
Church are designed by the divine ordinance to govern the Church, to preach,
and to minister Sacraments. page 232. Chap. X. Of the dignity of Cardinals.
page 263 Chap. XI. Of the state of Religious page 297. Chap. XII. Bishops are
so necessary in the Church of God, that it can not subsist without them. page
337. Chap. XIII. Bishops are so necessary that even in time of persecution
(though it should be greater for the Bishops) the Church may not be governed
without Bishops. page 348. Chap. XIIII. That a particular Country may not
refuse Bishops by reason of persequution. page 372. Chap. XV. To have a Bishop
in England cannot probably increase persecution because it cannot prohablie be
offensive either to the King and state, or to the Protestant Bishops, it being
prejudicial to neither, but rather profitable to the temporal state. page
393.
APPROBATIO.
Libellum hunc cui titulus A Treatise of the Hierarchy and diverse orders of
the Church against the Anarchie of Calvin, ab Eximio Viro ac Magistro N. D.
MATTHAEO KELLISONO concinnatum, Ego EDMVNDVS STRATFORDVS S. Theologiae
Professor, perlegi; nihil^ue in eo ab Ecclesiae fide alienum vel bonis moribus
contrarium deprehendi.

Duaci 3. Maij 1629. ED. STRATFORDVS.

APPROBATIO.
Cum huius libelli author Reuerendus Dominus D. MATTHEVS KELLISONVS S.
Theologiae Doctor (...) Collegij Anglorum Duaceni Praeses mihi sit de fide and
doctrina probe cognitus, atque insuper vider impraecedens testimoni^ alterius
docti Theology professoris and linguae Anglicanae periti quo testatur hoc
opus, cui titulus A Treatise of the Hierarchy etc. Nihil continere ab
Ecclesiae fide alienum aut bonis moribus contrarium, censui ad tollendam
Anarchiam Caluinisticam vtiliter excudiposse.

Actum Duaci die 4. Maij. 1629. GEORGIUS COLVENERIVS, S. Theol. Doctor and
eiusdem regius ordinarius^ue Professor, Collegiatae Ecclesiae S. Petri
Praepositus, Academiae Duacensis Cancellarius, and librorum Censor.

THE FIRST CHAPTER. THAT THERE IS A Hierarchy of Angels consisting of diverse
orders, and consequently that the Church militant of men in earth, is also a
Hierarchy, it being an Imitation of that.
IT is the opinion of that great Doctor and Prince of Divines Saint Thomas of
Aquin S. Tho 1. part. q. 50. art. 4. and alibi.
that the Angels are so different in nature and perfection that there are not
tvvoe of one sort and kind (as there are of men and other creatures) but that
every one is distinguished in nature and office from every one, All Angels
are of d^uers natures.
eue^ from the highest to the lowest. Which his opinion is generally received
of all Thomists Caietanus and Nazarius ibidem.
who for their number and learning bear noe little svvaye in the Schools, and
are no little esteemed in the Church of God.

2. Angels are more i^^^umber then all corporal substaces.
The same Doctor (...). 1. p. 9.50. are. 3. b. 2. contra. gent. c. 92. F^^rar.
ibidem.
is also of opinion, that the Angels are far more in Number then are all the
Species or kinds of all the corporal creatures in the world, that is, more
then the celestial bodies, then the simple bodies which we call the four
elements; yea then all the mixte bodies composed of them, be they inanimate or
animated, living or not living, as beasts, plants, herbs, metalles, and the
like: which his opinion all his followers do embrace as constantly as they
do the former. This is proved by autro^i^e.


3. And this he proves out of S. Dionysius Areopagita S. Paul's Scholar De
coeloste Hierarch. cap. 14.
who says, that there are many armies of the blessed Angels which pass all
our figures and numbers by which we count and calculate corporal things.
Which opinion in diners places of Scripture is insinuated: as in sob Job. 25
where Baldad Suhites says. Nunquid est numerus militum eius? Is there any
number of his soldiers? that is, of his Angels, as S. Gregory Greg. lib. 17.
moral. cap. 17.
expounds. And in the Psalms Ps. 67.
where the Royal Prophet says: The Chariot of God is ten thousand fold,
thousands of them that reioce: our Lord in them. where S. Hierom Hiero. ib. in
com.
by these numbers understands the numbers in the spiritual army of the
Angels. Daniel Daniel. c. 7. ver. 10
also says thousands of thousands ministered to him and ten thousand hundred
thousands assisted him. Which numbers signify the almost innumerable numbers
of Angels who attend on the divine Majesty, as Dionysius S. Dionys and S.
Grigorius. v^t supra.
and S. Gregory do auerre. Christ also by a great certain number,
insinuated a far greater number of Angels, when he bad Peeter put up his
sword and said Matthew. 26. verse 53
Anputa^ quia non possum rogare Patrem meum etc. Think thou that I cannot
ask my father and he will give me presen^lie more then twelve legions of
Angels? which twelve legions amount to 72000. Angels. Saint Paul Hebr. 12.
ver. 22
also says that we are come to the company of many thousands of Angels.
S. John like wise in his Apocalypse Apa^. (...). 1^.
hard the voice of thousands of thousands of Angels. S. Bernardine of Sienna
S. Bernardin. tor^^o. 4. ser. 49.
says that the Angels exceed in number the stars of the heaven, and the
sands of the Sea. But at least, according to the common opinion of divines,
they do eexceed omnes species rerum corporalium, all the kinds of corporal
creatures.

4. This S. The same is proved also by reason.
Thomas S. Thomas 1. p. and 2. contra gentes; voi supra.
proves by this reason. The more perfect creatures, which are principal
parts of this universe, are then others, the more they exceed them in
quantity: But the Angels, who are such parts, exceed in perfection of
nature all other God his creatures. Ergo they exceed them also in quantity:
not in quantity of extension (for of that they are not capable, they being
immateriall and spiritual substances) Ergo in quantity of discretion and
number. The first and Mayor proposition may be proved by Induction. For as the
water is perfecter the^ the earth and therefore is placed above it, so it is,
or should be greater, were it not by the divine providence coarcted and
lessened, that so the earth might be a fit place of habitation for men and
beasts; and a more apt soil and garden plotte for plants and herbs: As
the air, as it is perfecter in nature then the water, so it is placed higher
and is of greater quantity: As the fire, as it is of a nobler nature then the
air, so it is seated in a higher room, and is also of greater extent: As the
higher sphere of the heavens, as it is perfecter, so it is greater then the
lower sphere, even from the lowest to the highest; So consequently the
Angels, as they are perfecter then all this corporal world composed of
corruptible and Incorruptible bodies; so they are greater then they all are,
not in quantity of extension (for the reason alleged) but in quantity of
discretion and number of which they are capable; and cousequentlie they are
more in number then all the kinds of creatures and bodies incorruptible or
corruptible which are under them in degree of perfection.

5. A goodly order a mong the Angels.
Now if we put these twoe Assertions together; first that there are not twoe
Angels of one kind and perfection, but that they are all distinct one from
another, as a man is from a Lion, an Eagle from a Swanne, a Cedar tree from a
Pinetree, a Rose from a Lilly, and gold from Silver; Secondly that all these
diverse Angels are more in number then all corporal substances, corruptible
and incorruptible, we shall find a goodly order S. Thomas 1. p. q. 108.
and a great subordination of the lowest Angel to him next above him, and of
him to the next above him, and so to the highest.

6. Order is the beauty of the world.
Aristotele Aristot. 12. met. s. 52.
says that, order is the good and the beauty of the world: and therefore he
who considers the order and disposition of creatures, as how the four
elements are appointed every one to his natural place and home; how the
fire, as most noble, has the high est place under the heavens; how the air
and water take the middle rooms, as participating of twoe extremes, the air
aggreeing with the fire in heat and lightness, the water with the earth in
couldnes and heaviness; and how the earth being of a lumpish nature, is
worthily thurst down to the Center or lowest place: If he consider the order
of the heavens one above another, and those moving so orderly, that they
hinder not one another; he cannot but fall in love with the beauty of this
corporal world, because order is the beauty of the world, and out of this
beauty he cannot but gather how much greater is the beauty of God the
Architect of this so well ordered piece of work. It is a goodly thing also to
behold an army rannged in battle array, Order is the beauty of an Army and
a kingedome.
a Kingdom or Society well governed and disposed. But what a goodly sight
were it, if it could be seen by sight, to see that Angelical world, that so
well ordered spiritual kingdom that heavenly Hierarchy, in which there is
one principal Angel Monarch under God of all, and under him millions of
Angels different in nature, office and degree, and so one above another from
the lowest to the highest.

7. The beauty of a garden, kingedome and Army by reason of great variety.
If you should enter into a garden where were abounda^ce of flowers, and yet
not twoe of the same sort, but all different in nature, smell, proprieties and
colors, as but one rose, one lilly, one Gillieflower, one violette, one
Mariegold, how would it recreate and ravish your sight? If you should see a
kingdom very populous in which yet, as, there is but one king, so there
should be but one Duke, one Earl, one Marquis, one Baron, one Baronnette, one
Knight, one Esquire, one Gentleman, one Yeoman, and so in a most populous
kingdom but one of one degree: how would you be taken with the view of such a
kingdom? If there were an army consisting of a Million of Soldiers, and yet
in it, as but one General, The Hierarchy of Angels is such a garden
kingedome, army.
so but one Lieutenant, one Captain, one Seargea^t, one Corporal; what order,
and consequently what strenght, would there be in such an Army! The
Hierarchy of the Angels is such (...) garden, such a kingdom, such an
Army. It is terribilis vt Castrorum a^es ordinata. Cont. c. 6. verse. 9.
Terrible as the Army of a Camp set in array. In it you shall see nothing,
but Chores castrorum. Cont. c. 7. verse. 1.
The co^mpagnies of Camps.

8. A description of the Hierarchy of Angels.
This populous society of the Angels is called a Hierarchy which is sacer
principatus, A sacred principallitie, as the Greek words (...) and (...) do
importe. This Hierarchy in respect of God the Souueraigne Prince makes but
one, Vid. ^. Thom. 1 p q. 108. art. 1. in corp.
not only within it self, but also with men who all are subjects to one
supreme Prince God: but if it be considered as it is a multitude, so it is not
only a distinct society from men, but also in it self, by reason of the
diverse sorts and diverse government of the Angels, it makes three
Hierarchies and nine orders, as we shall see.

9. Three Hierarchies and nine orders of Angels.
To a Hierarchy there is required one Prince and diverse orders under him, and
to a distinct Hierarchy is appertaining a distinct Prince in his kind, and
distinct orders and distinct manner of Government. Wherefore because men are
distinct subjects, from Angels and are other wise governed by God then Angels,
they make a distinct Hierarchy from Angels: And because, the Angels
themselves are not governed all together in the same manner (for that the
supreme Angels receive illuminations immediately from God, the middle
Angels from the supreme Angels, the lowest Angels from the middle)
therefore there are three Hierarchies; S. Tho. 1. p. 108. art. 1. and 2. in 2.
d. 9. q. 1. ar. 3. lib. 3. contra gent. c. 80. Ferr. ibidem.
and for as much as in every Hierarchy there are the supreme, middle, and low
orders, in every Hierarchy there are three orders, and so in all nine.

10. Three Hierarchicall functions illumination, purgation, and perfection.
In the first Hierarchy are the orders of Seraphins, Cherubins and Thrones: in
the second are the orders of Dominations, Virtues and Powers: in the third are
Principalities, Archangels and Angels. Among these not only the Superior
Hierarchy governs the inferior, but also the superior order the inferior
order, yea every Superior Angel directs and illuminateth his inferior.
This government consists in three offices, to wit, in Illuminating, Vid. S.
Dionys. de caelest. Hierarch. c. 6. part. 3.
Purging, and Perfecting. For when the superior Angel manifests some hidden
verity to his inferior, he illuminateth him according to that of saint
Paul: Ephesians. cap. 5. ver. 13.
Omne quod manifestatur lumen est. All that is manifested, is light: and by
manifesting the truth, purges him from the ignorance of it, and so also
perfecteth him in knowledge.

11. The offices of every Hierarchy and order together with their names are
declared by sundry writers.
To particularize more distinctlie the offices of every Hierarchy and order
as saint Gregory S. Gregor. hom 34. in Euang. de ^^dem re^g^t S. Th. 1. ^. q
108. a. 5. and 6.3. con^^gent. c. 8 (...) 2. (...) 4.
does to whom I refer the Reader, and to tell what their names of Seraphins,
Cherubins and the rest do importe (by which names their offices are
discovered) would require a longer discourse then one Chapter, or my intended
brevity would permit: It being sufficient for my purpose, to have showed in
general, that among the Angels there be Hierarchies and orders, that so I
may also show that the Church militant on earth consisting of men, is
established and governed according to the form and order of the Church
triumphant of Angels in heaven, and that this Ecclesiasticale Hierarchy
resembles and represents that, as its pattern or platform.

12. One supreme prince amon^^the Angels.
This Angelical kingdom consisting of three Hierarchies and nine orders, is
governed, by one Supreme Angel, who is sovereign Prince under God of all
those celestial spirits. This Prince in the opinion of saint Thomas of Aquin
S. Tho. 1. (...). 63. art. 7. in corp.
yea and of diverse fathers and Divines as of Tertulli^n Tertul. lib. 2. co^^.
Marc.
, saint Gregory, S. Gregor. lib 4. mor. c. 13. alias 12. and lib. 9 c. 2.
saint Chrysostom S. Chry sost. hom. de Adam, and Eua. The reason why the
highest Angel is most like to have first sinned.
and others, was Lucifer; who as they think was supreme Angel of all; who yet
by his exorbitat pride took such a fall as from heaven he tumbled to the low
and deep pit of hell. And saint Thomas S. Tho. 1. p. q. 63. ar. 7. vbi supra.
gives the reason why we should think that the highest Angel, rather then
any other was the first that fell by sin, because, says he, although in
respect of the pronesse and proclinitie to sin, it might be thought that the
lowest Angel sinned first, yet in respect of the motive of sin, which was
the Angels proper excellency which puffed him up, it seems rather that the
highest Angel was the first that sinned, for that he had the highest
perfection, and so the greatest motive to pride, which all ways waits on
perfection, and therefore sooner creeps into College and Religious houses
then into rural cottages, who have little to be proud of. To which I add, that
the highest Angel was more potent t^ draw others into his faction, then a
lower.

13. Wherefore saint Gregory S. Gregorius lib. 32. c. 24.
applies those words which Job it his fortieth chap. speaks of Behemoth the
great Fish: He is the beginning of the ways of God, Lucifer his eminency,
beauty and persectio^ above other Angels proved by diverse figures.
Unto Lucifer, who, he says, is the beginning of the ways of God, that is,
of God his actions, by which, as di^ines say, he does exire ad extra, go
forth of him self, quia nimirum cum cuncta creans ageret, hunc primum
condidit, quem reliquis Angelis eminentiorem fecit: Because when God creating
all, did operate, he created this Lucifer first, whom he made more eminent then
the other Angels. And in the same Chapter, to show the eminency of Lucifer
above all the other Angels, he accommodateth those words of Ezechiel
Ezcechiel. c. 31. Cedri non fuerunt altiores illo in paradiso Dei etc.
which are literallie mea^t of Assure, unto Lucifer: The Cedars were not Higher
then he in the Paradise of God, the fur trees matched not his top and the
Plane trees were not equal to his boughs. No tree of the Paradise of God was
likened to him and to his beauty. For who can be understood in Cedars,
firretrees and planetrees, but those armies of Celestial virtues of high
tallenesse, planted in the Green of eternal joy, which though they were
created high (in perfection) yet they were not preferred nor equalized to this
high Angel. This tree, Angel, (says saint Gregory) had as many thick
boughs, as he had under him legions of the supernall Spirits. And then he
concludes: Who therefore sinning was condemned without remission, because he
was created great without comparison. To show this his greatenes he yet
alleges another place out of Ezechiel, Ezechiel c. 28. Tu signa culum
similitudinis plenus sapientia and perfectus decore.
which though it litterallie speaks of the King of Tire, yet is it by him
applied to Lucifer: Thou art the signet of similitude full of wisdom and
perfect of beauty. And continuing Grego. lib. 33 cap. 25.
the same praise of Lucifer, he compares him to Behemoth, adorned with nine
precious stones Sardius, Topazius, the Iaspar, Chrysolytus, onix, Berillus, the
Sapphire, the Carbuncle, and the Emerald: Saying: Nouem dixit genera lapidum,
quia nimirum nouem sunt ordines Angelorum; He said nine kind of stones because
there are nine orders of Angels; With which Lucifer is described to be cladd
and covered, because he is clearer and brighter by the^ whilst he is compared
unto them. Tatianus in orat. contra ge^t.
This is also the opinion of (g) Tatianus Scholar to Justinius Martyr, who
says that, Angelus ille primogenitus, in daemonem mutatus est. That first
begotten Angel (that first Angel in dignity) was turned into a Devil.

14. Lucifer's pride: which was his fall.
But this goodly creature by an ouerweening conceit of him self, exalted him
self above him self, and said in his heart, as the King of Babylon said:
Isa. ca. 14. verse. 13.
I will ascend into heaven, above the stars of God will I exalte my throne, I
will ascend above the height of the Clouds, I will be like to the highest. But
o proud heart how high aspirest thou? and yet how low also do thou fall?
Quomodo cecidisti de coelo Lucifer, qni mane oriebaris Isai ca. 14. verse. 12
Lucifer his creation sin and fall dispatched in three instants.
? How art thou fallen from heaven, Lucifer, which did rise in the morning?
Pride was thy fall, and of the fairest Angel has made thee the fowlest
fiende. He rose like a glorious sun in the morning and first instant S. Tho.
1. p. q. 63. art. 6. and alij ibid.
of his creation glittering more then the sun in his natural and
supernatural orname^tes above all the Angels in heaven: But in the second
instant he would rise so high that he would have been as high as God him self,
and therefore in the third instant his glory was Ecclipsed, and he cast out of
heaven as low as hell it self.

15. But how then? After Lucifer his fall, Michael succeeded in the primacie
over all the Angels.
has this celestial common wealth been a kingdom without a king, and a
body without a head? no no; God their creator by his irreuocable sentence
condemned and cast Lucifer head long to hell, but he constituted Michael a
Seraphin, the next unto Lucifer in all perfection, Monarch of that celestial
monarchy, and Prince of all that Spiritual kingdom. Whereby the way we may
observe, that if God, although he was supreme Prince of the Angels and all
creatures, yet would use second causes, and give the Angels a Prince of their
own kind to rule them under him self: much more should Christ, though he be
still supreme Pastor of the Church militant, give us Peeter and his successors
for our Chief visible Pastors, we especially being a visible church and so
standing in need of a visible chief Pastor.

16. Michael is prince ou^r all the Angels in the opinion of many.
Some of the fathers and Divines are of opinion that Michael is only an
Archangel of the last Hierarchy, and so not Prince of all the Angels; but
others do think that Michael was the next in perfection to Lucifer, and so was
worthily constituted Prince of them all, as well for that he was above them
in natural perfection, as for that he with his spiritual troops resisted
Lucifer in defense of God his creator, saying as his name imports: Qui^
sicut Deus? who like to God? and fought the first battle that ever was
fought, and got the first victory. This saint John Apoc. c. 12. verse. 7. and
9.
insinuates in his Apocalypse when he says Michael and his Angels, did
make warn with the Dragon: For in the same place he opposes unto him, the
Devil and his Angels; But by the Devil and his Angels, we understand
Lucifer the Prince of the Devils, Ergo, by Michael and his Angels, we
understand the Prince of the good Angels. This also Dan^el Daniel c. 1. verse.
12
seems to confirm, when he says: In tempore autem illo consurget Michael
Princeps magnus qui stat pro filijs populi tui. In that time shall arise
Michael the great Prince, who stands for the sons of thy people. And again
Daniel. cap. 10. verse. 13.
: Et ecce Michael vnus de principibus primis venit in adiutorium meum: Behold
Michael one of the first Princes came to help me: In which words a modern
writer says there is an Hebraisme, by which vnus signifies primus the
first, as when it is said. Genes. c. 1. verse. 5.
Et factum est vespere and mane dies vnus, that is primus: evening and morning
that made one day, that is, the first day: and so says he Michael is called,
vnus de Principibus primis, that is, the first of the first Princes. But how
soever (for I vvil not stand on this interpretation) S. Laurentius Iustinianes
Laur. Justinian. sermon. de S. Mich.
says, sanctis spiritibus praelatus est Michael, sicut Lucifer mal^s. Saint
Michael is constituted over the holy Spirits as Lucifer is over the evil
spirits. S. Basil S. Basil. homil. de Ang.
qui dignitate and honoribus praelatus es omnibus spiritibus supernis, tibi,
inquam, suppl^co. To thee o Michael Captain of the first Spirits who in
dignity and honors art preferred before all the supernall Spirits, to thee, I
say, I supplicate. Pantaleon Pantal. Homil. de S. Mich. apud Lippoman.
the Deacon: Primum locum obtinet inter millia mill and decies millia myriades
Angelorum and proxime and citra vll^m sluporem canit ter sanctum and
admirabilem hymnum Michael, qui est maxima and clarissima stella clarissimi
ordinis. Michael who is the greatest and clearest star of the brightest
order, has the first place among a thousand thousands and ten thousand
millions of Angels, and nearest and without any astonishment does sing that
thrice holy and admirable hymn. And although he be commonly called Michael
the Archangell, The reason wherefore S. Michael is called an Archang.
yet that may be, because he was sent to do the office of an Archangell, as
Gabriel was, who yet according to some fathers and Divines was of the supreme
order of Seraphins: or else he is called Archangell, not because he is one of
the last Hierarchy, but because he is chief of all the Angels. To be
brefe, the Church in her office (s) seems to acknovvledge S. Michael to be
the Prince of all the Angels, S. Michael heretofore protector of the
synagogue, now of the Church.
in that by her he is styled, Praepositus Paradisi, primas caelestis,
praepositus animabus suscipiendis. Which Church also acknowledges Michael, as
to have been chief protector of the Jews until God forsook them, so now to
be her Principal protector after God and his blessed Mother, and therefore in
her Litanies she places him next unto her.

17. The Hierarchy of Angels is a pattern of the Church militant.
This nuch I thought good to say of the Hierarchy of the Angels, that so I
might lay a ground and firm foundation for the Hierarchy of the Church
milita^t on earth, which our blessed Savior founded and established according
to the form of that triumphant Church of the Angels. For seeing that (as the
Apostle Hebr.'c. 12. verse 18. and 22.
auerreth) we are not come to a palpable mount (of Sina) and an accessible
fire and whirlewinde: at which the Jews trembled; but we are come (in hope)
to mount Sion and the City of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem, and the
assembly of many thousands of Angels: It was convenient that the Church
militant, should be ordered and governed according to the Church triumphant of
Angels. And indeed S. John Apoc. c. 21. verse. 1.
in his Apocalypse savve the holy City, the new Jerusalem descending from
heaven, that is, the Church militant, (as some understand this place) which is
said to descend from heaven because it is governed after the form and manner
of the Hierarchy of Angels; according to which interpretation S. Thomas of
Aquin S. Tho. lib. 4. contra gent. c. 76. nu. 4. Ferrar. ibidem.
says: Ecclesia militans ex triumphante Ecclesia per similitudinem deriuatur;
vnde and Ioannes in Apocalypsi, vidit Jerusalem descendentem de caelo, and
Moysi dictum est, quod faceret omnia secundum exemplar in monte monstratum: The
Church militant is derived by similitude from the Triumphant Church: Whereupon
saint John in his Apocalypse saw Jerusalem descending from heaven: and to
Moses it was said, Exodus c. 25. verse. 40.
that he should make all according to the example which was showed him in the
mount. And saint Gregory S. Gregor. lib 4. Indict. 13. ep. 52. cap. 96.
having said that the Angels are not equal, but are distinguished into
diverse orders, proves also, that to keep us in peace, order and obedience,
there should be diverse orders and prelacies in the Church. And Saint Ignatius
S. Ignat. in ep. ad Trail.
Patriarche of Antioche and the third of that Sea after S. Peeter, compares
the Hierarchy of the Church militant to the triumphant Church of Angels
saying: Quid enim est Episcopus nisi qui principatum omnium and potestatem
super omnes obtinet, vt obtinere homo potest; qui est pro viribus Christi Dei
imitator? Quid vero Presbyterium nisi Collegium sacrum, consiliarij and
Confessores Episcopi? Quid item Diaconi, nisi Imitatores Angelicarum virtutum
and ministrantes ministerium purum and immaculatum vt Sanctus Stephanus B.
Iacobo, and Timotheus ac Linus Paulo, and Anacletus atque Clemens Petro. Qui
ergo his inobediens fuerit, Atheus and impius omnino fuerit, and Christum
improbans, and eius ordinationem imminuens. For what is a Bishop, but one who
has a principality and power over all, as much as a man can have? who is
according to his forces an Imitator of Christ God. And what is the
Presbytery, but an holy College, counsailors and confessors of the Bishop?
What also are Deacons, but Imitatours of the Angellicall virtues, and
ministering a pure and immaculate ministry, as saint Stephen did to blessed
James, and Timothy and Linus to Paul, and Anacletus and Clement to Peeter.
He therefore that shallbe disobedient to these men, he shallbe an Atheist and
altogether impious, and one that disprooueth Christ, and diminishes his
ordinance. And saint Bernard S. Bernard. lib. 3. de consider. ad Eugeniu^.
speaking of the order and Hierarchy of the Church, which he says is
perturbed, when Abbots are subtracted from the Bishops Jurisdiction, Bishops
from the Archbishops, and Archbishops from the Patriarchs or Primates, speak's
to Eugenius in these words. Nec vilem reputes formam hanc, quia in terra est,
exe^plar habet e coelo. Nor would I have thee repute this form (of the Church
consisting of Bishops, Archbishops and Patriarchs) as vile, because it is in
earth; it has itts pattern from heaven; for neither can the son, (who
planted this Church in earth) do any thing, but that which he has seen his
father do, especially seeing to him in Moses it was said: see thou do
all things according to the pattern that was showed thee in the Mount. He had
seen that (Pattern) who said: I saw the Holy City Jerusalem, new
descending from heaven, prepared of God. For I think it spoaken by reason of
the similitude. For as there the Seraphins and Cherubins and all the rest of
the Angels and Archa^gelles are ordained under one Head, God: So here also
in earth under one Chief Bishop, Primates, or Patriarchs, Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, or Abbots and the rest in this manner.

18. But as I said, The conclusion of this chapter, with the contents of the
others ensuing.
it shall suffice to have proved that in the Triumphant Churh of the Angels
there are Hierarchies and orders, that so it may the more easily be proved,
that there is a Hierarchy of diverse orders in the Church militant in earth;
this being a Copy taken out of that. And because to the making up of a
Hierarchy there is required, besides one supreme Prince, diverse orders and
degrees, I shall show in the ensuing Chapters, first in general that there
are distinct orders in the Church: Secondly I shall prove that there is one
supreme Pastor and visible head in the Church answerable to the spiritual
Chief Prince of the Angels: Thirdly I shall demonstrate that under this
supreme visible head there are diverse orders of Patriarchs, Primates,
Archishops, Bishops, Priests, Deacons and other ministers, which do
correspond to the diverse orders of Angels.

THE II. CHAPTER. That in general there are diverse orders in the Church under
one head or sovereign.
1. Noe prop^r priesthoo^e, according to Luther and Calvin.
LVther the Patriarch of the new Church, and father of the new gospel, that
he might preach what pleased him, and yet not be controlled by Pope, Bishop,
Pastors or any Ecclesiastical Prelate, denies all proper and special
Priesthood; yea the Sacrament of Order, and consequently all order and
superiority in the Church. But least I might be thought to belie him (as he
has done many, even of the ancient fathers, and the sacred penmen of holy
Scripture) I shall quote the places and cause him also to speak in his own
words. In an Epistle Luth. ep. ad senate. Pragensem.
to the Senate of Prague thus he pronunceth, ex Tripode: Sacerdos in nouo
Testamento non fit, sed nascitur; non or dinatur, sed creavur: nascitur autem
in Baptismo, suntque prorsus omnes Christiani Sacerdotes. The Priest in the new
Testament is not made, but is borne so; he is not ordained, but created; and he
is borne (Priest) in Baptism, and all are Priests a like. Yet Luther will
grant that all Christians are not to exercise the office, but they who are
chosen by the multitude or Magistrate. And in another book Lib. de Capt. Bab.
cap. de ordine.
he denies order to be a Sacrament. Sacramentu^ ordinis (says he) Ecclesia
Christi ignorant, inuentumque est ab Ecclesia Papae. The Sacrament of Order the
Church of Christ knovvet not, and it is invented by the Church of the Pope.
And again: Aduersus artic. Louan.
Ordo non es^ Sacramentum, sed of ficium and vocatio ministrorum, qui ad
Ecclesiae gubernationen vocantur: Order is no sacrament, but (...) office and a
vocation of ministers vvh^ are called to the government of the Church Calvin
Call. l. 3. inst. c. 4. nu. 4.
seems to iumpe with him in the same opinion: Omnia sacerdotia (says he) ad
Christum translata sunt, in eo completa and finita. A^ eum igitur vnum ius omne
and honor sacerdotalis translatus est. All Priesthood are tra^sferred to
Christ, in him they an finished and ended, to him alone therefo^^ all Priests
right and honor is translated

2. Luther and Calvin by taking away Priesthood, take away. Order also.
Out of Luthers opinion it follows, that in the Church there is no order, but
all are Priests alike; and seeing that all are not true priests, there are no
true priests, nor orders in the Church. The same absurdity follows also out
of Caluins words: for if in the new law there is no priest but Christ, no
Priest hood but in Christ, then there are no bishops, nor priests, nor other
ministers distinct from the laity by the divine ordinance, and consequently
all are equal, and so no order in the Church (order importinge inequality of
degrees) but all confusion, for that a multitude without order is no well
ordered but a confused multitude: and consequently there must be by these
men's opinion no monarchy, nor Hierarchy in the Church. Conformablie to
these principles of Luther and Calvin, The confused Church of Luther and Calvin.
the Reformers in France, Holland and other countries where Calvin reigns,
make ministers of lay men, and will not call them priests or Bishops: and
although in England there be Bishops and Pastors in name; yet in deed and
verity they are not, for that they have no Sacrament of order by their own
confession, and they have neither lawful vocation nor true ordination, as has
been often objected to them and was never yet well answered. So that what
Tertullian Tertullian. lib. pr^sc. c. 41.
once said of the heretics of his time: Ordinationes eor^m temerariae, leaves,
inconstantes nunc neophytos conlocant, nunc saeculo obsorictos, nunc Apostatas
nostros, vt glori^ eos obligent, quos veritate non possunt: nusquam melius
proficitur quam in castri^ rebellium, vbi ipsum esse illie, promeren est.
I^aque ali^s hodie Episcopas, cras a lius, hodie Diaconus, qui cras lector,
hodie Presbyter, qui eras laicus. Nam and l^i^is Sacerdotalia munera iniungunt:
Their ordinations are rash, light, inconstant, how they place Neophites (in
Ecclesiastical offices) now those that are tied to the world, now Apostatas
from us, that they may bind them to them by glory, whom they cannot by
verity. No where is promotion gotten better, then in the tents of the
enemy, where only to be, is to deserve. Therefore one to day is Bishop, to
morrovve another, to day a Deacon, to morrovve a Reader, to day a Priese, to
morrovve a lay man: for even to lay men they enioine Priestlie offices. But
in this Chapter I shall prove plainly, but yet in general only, that there
are distinct orders and degrees in the Church, and so a Hierarchy.

3. For first in the Synagogue which was a figure of the Church, the Tribe of
Leui was deputed by God to furnish it with Governors and Rulers of diverse
degrees, Diverse orders proved in the Church by diverse degrees in the Synagogue.
out of which Tribe their high Priest and other inferior Priests and Levites
were chosen; Nune. c. 3. and 4.
who for their greater grace and honor were consecrated Exodus c. 28. and 29.
with certain ceremonies. And the high Priest (who^ Anacletus Anaclet pap.
ep. 2.
Pope calls Episcopus Bishop) had certain offices and functions common to
him and other Priests, The high priest's Office.
but some proper Deuteron. c. 7. verse. 12. Hebr. c. 9. verse. 7.
to him self only. For first he only entered once a year into the Sanctuary
so expiation of the people sins and Immundicities contracted all the year. A
degree of Inferior priests.
Secondly he consecrated the priests and Levites. Thirdly (...) was supreme
visible Judge who pronounced sentence in controversy of the law and
ceremonies, from which there was no appeal. Last lie he being invested in the
Ephod and Rationale, demanded resolutions from God in doubtful matters.
Besides this one high Priest, there were many other Priests, and those of no
low degree nor reputation, who did minister by turns in the Temple, as
Scripture Lue. c. 1. verse. 8.
witnesses, and Josephus Joseph. lib. 5. antiquit. c. 11.
records: and both the high Priest and the inferior Priests descended from
Aaron, and his two sons Eleazar and Ithamar, his other two sons Nadad and
Abiu being consumed by fire Leuitic. c. 10. verse. 1. Number. c. 3.
for using profane fire in sacrifices, whereas they should have taken holy
fire from the Altar. Besides these Priests there were Levites, which were also
of the Tribe of Leui, but not of the family of Aaron who though they were not
Priests yet they had offices, A degree of Levites.
first about the Tabernacle, and after in the Temple, and were in great
estimation and in great number, being divided into the families Number. 3. and 1.
paral. c. 26
of the Catharites, Gersonites and Merarites. The priests were in so great a
number, that Josephus Joseph. lib. 2. cont. App.
says there were four Tribes of priests of which Tribes every one
contained above 5000. who in their days appointed ministered in the Temple.
These distinct orders of Priests and Levites were to the Synagogue such an
honor and gave such a luster unto it, that (as Josephus Joseph. lib. 11.
Antiq. c. vltimo.
writes) when Alexander the Great came with a full purpose to besiege
Jerusalem, and the High priest Iaddus, admonished by God in his sleep
accompanied with all his Priests and Levites, went out of the City to meet
him, and to receive him: The high Priest adorned with his Stole of hyacinthe
about his neck and his tyara on his head and his lamina aurea plate of gold,
in which the name of God was engraven, the other Priests and Levites in great
troops, all cladd in their goodly robes; this majesty struck such a
reverence into Alexander, who yet made the world to quake, that he desisted
from his intention of besieging and sackinge the City and was so far from
sackinge it; that contrary wise adoringe the high Priest, and the name of God
engraven in the plate of gold above mentioned, and reuerencing all that
Priestlie Hierarchy he entered peaceably into Jerusalem with them, and there
offered sacrifice, and was glad to see Daniels Danie. c. 8. verse. 21.
prophecy, which fortold that a Grecia^ which he interpreted to be him self,
should subiugate the Empire of the Persia^s.

4. If there were such a goodly order of dignities in the Hierarchy of the
Synagogue, much more eminent orders ought there to be in the Church of Christ,
by how much the body exceeds the shadow; verity the figure; and this
priesthood, that. And therefore saint Hierome S. Hi^ron. ep. ad Euagriu^.
says: Quod Aaron and filij eius atque Leuitae in templo fuerunt, h^^ sibi
Episcopi and presbyteri and Diaconi vendicent in Ecclesia. What Aaron and his
sons and the Levites were in the Temple, that may the Bishops and Priests
and Deaco^s challenge to themselves in the Church.

5. The second proote of the Hierarc^ie of the Church.
Secondly this distinction of orders and degrees may be proved by the things
to which the Church in holy Scripture is compared. It is compared to a man's
body, which has a head and eyes and many members, which also have diverse
functions: 1. Cor. 12. verse. 17. and 19.
And, says S. Paul, if the whole body were the eye, where is the hearing?
If the whole body were the hearing, where is the smelling? And if all were
one member, where were the body? The Church compared to a man's body.
where saint Paul compares the Church to a man's body in which are diverse
members, as the head, eyes, and the rest which have diverse functions. And to
show the distinction of members and their distinct offices in the Church, as
there is in a man's body, he adds: 1. Cor. 12. verse. 28.
And some verily God has set in the Church, first Apostles; Seco^dlie
Prophets; thirdly Doctors etc. And then he demands: Are all Apostles? are all
Prophets? are all Doctors? confronting as it were Luther and Calvin, who say
that there are noe Priests, or that all are Priests alike, whence it
follows, that all are heads, all eyes, all Apostles, all Doctors, and so no
distinction of members or orders.

6. The Church compared to a city, an army, a family, a kingdom a ship.
The Church is also compared to a City, Matt. c. 5. verse. 15.
in which is a Mayor, Aldermen and other officers to govern, and inferior
Citisens to be governed: It is compared to an Army Cant. c. 6. verse. 3.
in which is a General, Captains, Lieutenants, Seargeants, Corporalls and
common souldiars: It is compared to a family Matt. c. 24. verse. 25.
in which is the Pater familias the goodman of the house, his wife, his
Children and servants: It is compared to a Kingdom Matthew. c. 13. verse. 24.
Luc. cap. 1. verse. 33. Dan. c. 2. verse. 44.
in which besides the king, are Dukes, Countes, Marquises, Vicountes, Barons,
Knights and diverse officers and Magistrates, who differing in dignity office
and degree one from an other and from the co^munaltie, do add unto the common
wealth no less luster then strength, by which it may prevent Civil wars at
home, and resist foreign invasions from abroad: saint Anaclete Anacl. ep. 1.
and saint Clement Cleme^s ep. 4. ad Iac.
compare the Church to a Ship, which saileth in the sea of this world, tossed
with the winds of persecutions and tentations, whose shipwright is God, whose
governor is Christ, and under him his Vicaire; he that rules the deck or
forepart of the ship is the Bishop, whose shipman or mariner is the Priest,
whose dispensers are Deacons, whose souldiars are the rest of Christians.

7. And shall we think that the Kingdom of Christ his Church, (which in
holy Scripture is often times Mat. c. 13. verse. 2^.31.44.45.46.
styled the kingdom of heaven, and which was founded by him, who to estabish a
well ordered kingedome, wanted no power being the powerful arm of his father;
nor wisdom being the treasury of Gods wisdom it self) wants these
degrees and orders? No no it wants not this luster, and strength which diverse
degrees and dignities give unto a kingdom, it especially being not whatsoever
kingdom, but a kingdom, of no less extent then the world is, which bears
rule from sea to sea, Psalm. 2. and 71.
and which is, the Hille of God that fills the whole earth Dan. c. 2. verse.
^ 35.
which is of such durance and continuation, that where as those mighty
Empires of the Chaldeans, Persians, Grecians and Romans have had an end this
kingdom shall continue for ever according to that of Daniel: Danae. 2. verse.
44.
But in the days of those Kingdoms (aforenamed) the God of heaven shall raise
up a Kingdom, that shall not be dissipated for ever, and his Kingdom shall
not be delivered up to an other people, and it shall break in pieces, and
shall consume all those (Kingdoms above mentioned) and it self shall stand
for ^uer: which the Angel confirms (...) saint Luke Luc. (...) 1. verse. 33.
saying: Et regni eius ^on erit finis: And of his Kingdom there shall be be no
end.

8. Out of this I argue thus: A Kingdom is a multitude ordered and disposed by
diverse dignities and degrees under one sovereign Prince, as is already
shevved: But the Church is a Kingdom and the perfectest Kingdom that ever
was, as is proved, Ergo the Church is not a congregation or multitude in which
all are equal (as Luther and Calvin Luther. and Calvin. vbi supra.
seem to say) but an ordered common wealth, in which are diverse orders and
degrees of Christians, whereof some govern, some are governed; and amongst
those that govern, one is subordinate to another, as in a Kingdom, and all
are subject to one sovereign Prince, who commands all. For this cause
Christ's garment which is his Church, is Polymita Genesis c. 37. verse. 3.
of diverse colors, by reason of the diverse orders, but it is also Inconsutilis
Joan. c. 19. verse. 23.
by reason of her one supreme visible Pastor, one government, one faith, one
Hierarchy* For the same cause the Church (...) compared Psalm. 44. verse. 10.
to a Queen in vestit^ deaurato circundata varietate: in gold^ raiment
compassed with variety: In golden raiment; because by persecution she and her
faith has been trye^ and purified, as gold in the fie^ compassed with
variety, by reason of he diverse states, orders and degrees.

8. Having proved in genera^ that in the Church there are diuer orders under
one supreme Prin^ and Pastor; The conclusion of this chapter with the contents
of the ensuinge.
it remains that prove in particular, first that in the Church there is one
supreme visible P^ stour; then that there are diverse orders and degrees under
this visible Pastor, ^s there are diverse states under one King, for that, as
we have seen in the first Chapter, This is necessary to a Hierarchy.

THE III. CHAPTER. That there is one visible Monarch and chief Pastor of the
Church, to wit, S. Peter.
1. Nature pleads for a Monarchy which is in a man his body in his soul,
in the world.
NAture and natural reason seem to plead for a Monarchy in which one
sovereign swayeth all, against Arislocratie, in which diverse Potentats, and
Democratie, in which the people hy their magistrates do command. For nature
tells us, that in man's body there is a kind of Monarchy, in which the
head is Monarch that rules the rest of the members: and that in man's soul
aso is a Monarchy of which the understanding is prince, who rules all the
inferior powers, and appeaseth unruly and mutinous passions when they rebel
against reason. Nature shows this world to be governed by Monarchy and to
have one God, not many for its Monarch, who rules all the creatures and
parts thereof. which saint Athanasius Ath^n. orat. contra Idolat.
proves by the uniform government, consent, order, and union of all the
parts of the world: Whereas if there were many Gods and governors there
could not be this harmony, nor this order, but rather confusion.

2. Monarchy among the Angels, the heavens, and planetis.
We have seen in the former chapter how the Angelical world is a Hierarchy
ruled and governed by one supreme Angel, who as he is more perfect in nature
then all the rest; so he is by nature Prince and Monarch of all the rest. We
see that among these celestial spheres and incorruptible bodies, there is one
Monarch, one Primum mobile, who makes all the inferior globes to follow his
motion. One sun (the eye of the world) domineereth among the Planetts, who
sitting in the midst of them illuminateth them all and directs them.

3. A mona^chie at first among men and other creatures deuoide of reason.
All creatures seem to affecte a Monarchy: for that men at first lived in
families under one goodman of the house; afterward these families joined in
one city under one Mayor, and diverse cities under one king. Even creatures
deuoyde of reason aim at this government. Rex vnus est apibus (says S.
Cyprian) Cypr. de Idoloru^ vanitate.
and dux vnus in gregibus; in armentis rector vnus: multo magis mundi v^u^est
rector: Bees have one king, in flocks there is one leader, in heardes of
beasts one heard's man. The like has saint Hierome: Hieron. ep. ad Ru^^^cum.
Etiam a^imalia (says he) and ferarum greges ductores sequ^ntur suos. In
apibus principes sunt. Crues vnum sequuntur ordine litterato. Even brute
beasts and flocks of wildebeastes do follow their leaders. Amongst bees
there are princes; Cranes follow one Crane in form of a letter. Thus nature
pleads for a Monarchy; natural reason also challenges the same.

4. Natural reason stands for a Monarchy. The first reason.
For first that is the best government which best maintains peace, unity and
co^corde amongst the subjects: but one governor better maintains unity
then many. Ergo Monarchy in which one supreme Monarch bears rule, is the
best government. The Mayor or first proposition: That is the best government
which best maintains unity, is euidente: because unity among the subjects
is the end which government should intend; and the thing which conserueth not
only societies but also all other things. For there is no Ens which is not
Vnum; and there is nothing that loses unity, but it falls to nullitie,
and consequently by ceasinge to be One thing, it proves Nothing. Hence it
is, as Boethius Boethius lib. 3. de consola. pros. 11.
and saint Thomas of Aquine S. Tho. 1. p q. 103. art. 3.
observe, that all things resist as much as they can disunion, they being
conserved by unity or union. Wherefore we see how all living creatures abhor
death because it is a separation or disunion which brings destruction. All
things r^sist disunion.
These Doctors say further that this diuisibilitie proceeds in creatures
from a defect of nature in the^, and therefore perfect creatures, The reason
why an Angel and man's soul are incorruptible.
as Angels and a man's soul (which though as a part is imperfect, yet as
immateriall is the perfectest creature next unto an Angel) as they are
perfecter then other creatures, so they are not subject to division, or
disunion; and so are incorruptible: because all corruption is division or
separation of the soul from the body or the matter from the form, or of one
part from another. All corruption proceeds from division.
Wherefore being that unity and Concord is that which conserueth Societies;
yea all things; and discord that which dissolueth and ruineth them; that
government must be best which best conserueth societies, and that best
conserueth societies which best conserueth unity and concord in them. The
Minor or second proposition, to wit, that one governor better maintains
unity among the subjects then many, is as easily proved: because this peace
and concord imports an vnio^ not only betwixt the subjects among them
selves, but also with their prince or chief governor (for if they be divided
among themselves it is dissension; if from their head, rebellion) which peace
and concord one man better maintains then many. Because when many govern,
they cannot make peace among their subjects unless they first agree among
themselves. For if one command one thing, and another the contrary or another
thing; some will obey one, some another; and so division will be caused, no peace
or union. But one governor can more easily agree with himself, then many
can with one another: Ergo a Monarche or one governor, is apter to maintain
unity among the subjects then many; and consequently Monarchy in which
one governs is the best government.

5. The second reason why Monarchy is the best government.
Secondly that Head or superior of a community is most apt to make peace
among his subjects which has most unity in himself; because the unity of
the subjects proceeds from him as the effect from the cause: But in one
chief governor there is greater unity, then in many governors; because in
one is unity, in many can be only union: Mayor autem est vnitas quam vnio:
Greater in unity then union: Ergo one is more apt to conserve peace and union
among the subjects, The third reason why Monarchy is the best government.
then many.

6. Thirdly when the subjects are to obey many governors, there are two
difficulties: one in them that obey; and this is also in Monarchy, in which
all obey one: the other in the^ that command; and this is greater, when many
command the^ when one commands, because it is harder for many commanders
to agree among themselves every one of them desiring that his own proiecte
and judgment ouersvvaye the others: much easier is it for one to agree with
himself. Ergo the government of one is better the^ the gouernmente of many.

7. The fourth reason why Monarchy is the best government.
Fourthlie I may prove this by an argument like to that which Aristotle
Aristo^eles lib. 2. pol. c. 2.
uses to disprooue Plato's common wealth; who would have all things
common; as lands, possessions, goods and the like: which Aristotle
disprooueth thus: As when the Lord or master has many servants belonging
to one office, he is not the better served, but the worse; because one
seruante puts of the work or business to an other, and thinks it less
belonging to him, because it belongs also to another: So (says Aristotle)
if lands, possessions, and all were common, all would be neglected; because
every one would neglecte that which he thinks another may, will, or should
look unto. But (says Aristotle) when possessions are divided, and every
one has his own proper house and lands appropriated to himself only; then
he will look diligently to them, partly because he knovveth that none else
will, partly because they are his own. For (as the same philosopher Aristo.
vbi supra. Quod multorum commune est, in ^o minime adhibetur diligentia.
says) of that which is common there is little care and diligence. For that
men take care of that which is their own. The like argument I make for
Monarchy against Aristocracie ad Democracie. When there are many Princes,
Leaders, and Governors of the common wealth, then e^erie one would putt of the
care of it to another, and would say, it appertains as well to another, as
to me, let him then lay to his helping hand, as well as I, and so betwixt
them the common wealth would be neglected: whereas when there is but one
Governor (as there is but one chief in Monarchy) then he takes care of the
common wealth as belonging properly to himself: and so trusts not any
other with the principal chardge, every one loving and looking to that which
is his own. An answer to an objection against Monarchical Government.


8. By this it is evident that Monarchy in which one is chief, is the best
government. For albeit it may be objected that: Plus vident oculi quam oculus:
More is seen by many eyes then by one eye, and that one man cannot bear so
great a charge as a kingdom. Yet it is easily answered, that Monarchy
requires not that the king only should do all, but one lie that he should
be chief: and therefore Monarchy admits, yea requires inferior Princes,
counsailours, and other Magistrates to assiste the king and to bear the burden
and charge with him, though ever dependentlie of him.

9. In the Church must be the best Government.
We having then demonstrated that Monarchical Government, in which one head
or Prince has principal command is the best; no Christian can doubt but
that this gouernmente is established in the Church. For who can think but that
the Church of God, which is more worthy and excellent, then all the kingdoms
and Empires that ever were, which is the City, house and family of God;
which is the ark of Noah, out of which is no salvation; which is the
terrestrial paradise, in which the second Adam was framed; which though it be
seated on earth is called the kingdom of heaven; which has in her Pastors
the power to bind and loose in heaven, and earth; which has the keys, by
which she can by her Pastors open and shut heaven; which is the spouse of
Christ purchased by his blood, so that she may say unto him as Sephora said
to Moses Exod^ c. 4. verse. 24.
Sponsus sanguinum tu mihi es: A bloody spouse thou art to me: Shall we
think that this kingdom establisseed so by Christ that the gates of hell
should not prevail against it, Matt. c. 16. verse. 19.
so founded by Christ who wanted no wisdom nor will to choose; nor power to
effectuate what he had chosen, has not the best gouernmente; and consequently
a Monarchical gouernmente, in which one Prince bears rule, and has the
chief command?

10. One visible head in the Church besides. Christ.
And if our adversaries answer that they confess one supreme head and Monarch
of the Church, Christ JESUS; it is not sufficient. For although Christ be
still our high priest and supreme Pastor; yet he since his Ascension living
not visiblie amongst us; a visible kingdom (as the Church is) requires a
visible king and supreme Pastor to rule her in a visible manner: Especially
seeing that the Hierarchy of the Angels (by which as by a pattern, the
Church was formed) though it be an invisible kingdom; yet besides god the king
of kings, has a supreme Angel for her prince and chief governor under god.
And that Christ left saint Peeter; and after saint Peeter, the Bishop of Rome,
as a chief and visible Pastor, to rule and govern under him, I shall prove
most cleerelie.

11. S. Peter's supremacy proved firist.
And first I will begin with saint Peeter: for whose supremacy over the Church
and under Christ this shall be my first argument. Our B. Savior before his
death promised unto saint Peeter for that his so worthy confession: Tues
Christus filius Dei viui: Matthew. c. 16. verse. 16.
Thou art Christ the son of the living God; that he would make him the
foundation and rock of his Church, sainge Etego di^o tibi, quia tues Petrus
and super nanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: And I say unto thee that thou
art Peeter, and upon this rock I will build my Church. By those words: And
upon this rock, Christ cannot mean him self; for although he be the only
principal rock and foundation 1. Cor. 3.
on which Peeter the secondarie rock relyeth, yet Christ in those words
cannot mean him self, but only Peeter: first because he says in the
future tense, By the Rock, cannot here be understood any but ^ee* ter.
Aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: I will build my Church, which must be understood of
Peeter, on whom as yet he had not founded his Church, not of him self, because
on him self the Church was already built. Secondly by these words Upon this
rock, Christ can neither mean himself nor Peeter's faith or confession; as
our Noue^listes would have it, that so they might exclude Peeter: but only he
must mean Peeter; because these words, And upon this rock are to be referred
to one spoaken of immediately before, as the very tenor of the words does
importe. But Christ spoake before neither of himself, nor of Peeter's faith,
or confession, but of Peeter. Ergo to Christ or Pee^ers faith these words
cannot be referred, but to Peeter only. And therefore as when he said
immediately before, Thou art Peeter he mente not himself, nor Peeter's faith,
or confession, but Peeter; so when he says immediately after And upon this
rock, he cannot mean him self nor Peeter's faith or confession, but peeter's
person only. And if we consider in what language Christ spoake, to wit, in
Chaldee or Syriake, it is yet more evident that by the Rock, peeter's person
is understood. Because in that language Christ said: Thou art Cephas, and
upon this Cephas I will build my Church: Which is as much to say; thou art a
rock (for Cephas signifies a rock) and upon this rock, I will build my
Churh.

12. An objection out of some fathers answered.
And although saint Hilarie Hilarious lib. 6. Trinitat.
S. Ambrose Amb. 2. c. Ephe.
S. Augustine Tract. 10. and 20. in loan.
S. Cyrill Cyril. lib. 4. Trinit.
S. Chrysostom. Chrysostom. hom. 53. in Matthew.
do seem to understand Christ or Peeter's faith and confession: yet when they
say Christ is the rock, they exclude not S. Peeter; but only mean that
peeter is so a rock, that he relyeth on a more principal fundation, Christ.
And therefore S. Leo Leo. sermon. 3. Assumpt. sua ad Pontif.
makes Christ to speak to S. Peeter thus: Quia tu es Petrus, id est, cum ego
sim inuiolabilis Petra, ego lapis augularis, ego fundamentum, tamen tu quoque
petra es, quia mea virtute solidaris vt quae mihi potestate sunt propria, sint
tibi mecum participatione communia. Because thou art Peeter, that is, whereas I
am one inviolable rock, I the corner stone, I the foundation, yet thou also
art a rock, because thou art made solid by my virtue, that so those things
which are proper to me by power may be common to thee with me by
participation. And when those fathers say that by this Rock is understood
Peeter's faith or confession, they take not his faith or confession a part
from him, but as joined with him and inherent in him. And so they exclude not
Peeter, but will have him to be the Rock; though by his infallible faith and
confession, which was never wanting in him after he was made the Rock of the
Church, or in his successors. Wherefore the same authors do expresselie call
Peeter the Rock and foundation of the Church. Saint Hilarie S. Hilarious in
Mattha. cap. 16.
thus exclameth: O in nuncupatione noui nominis felix Ecclesiae fundamentum,
dignaque aedificatione illius petra, quae inferni leges and Tartari portas and
omnia mortis claustra dissolueret: O in the nu^cupatio^ of a new name the
happy foundation of the Church, and a rock worthy the buildinge of that
which should dissolve the infernal laws and the gates of hell and all the
grottes of death. Saint Ambrose in the hymn at the I audes of Sunday, cited by
Saint Austin, S. Ambros. in hymno citat. ab Aug. l. 1. Retract. cap. 21.
speaking of the Cock which calls us up in the morning says; Hoc, ipsa
Petra Ecclesiae, Canente, culpam diluit: whilst the cock sings the Rock of
the Church (Peeter) did wash away his sin, by his tears of contrition. S.
Ambrose says: Peeter for the soliditie of the devotion of the Church; is
called a rock, as our lord says: Thou art peeter and upon this rock etc.
Saint Austin S. August. ser. 1^. de Sa^ctrs.
says: Recte igitur Ecclesia natalem sedis illius colit, quam Apostolus pro
Ecclesiarum salute suscepit, dicente Domino: Tues Petrus, and super hanc petram
aedif^ abo Ecclesiam meam. Petrum itaque fundamentum Ecclesiae Dominus
nominauit. Et ideo digne fundamentum hoc Ecclesia colit; supra quod aedificij
Ecclesiasti^i altitudo consurgit. Rightly therefore does the Church worship
the Feast of that seat which the Apostle (Peeter) for the safety of the
Churches did undertake; our lord saying: thou art Peeter, and upon this Rock
will I build my Church. Our lord therefore nominated Peeter the foundation of
the Church. And therefore worthily does the Church worship this foundation
upon which rises the height of the Ecclesiastical building. Saint Cyrillus
speaks as planielie: Cyril. Joan. 1.
Tues Simon filius Ionaei ^tu vo^aberis Cephas, vocabulo ipso commode
significans quod in eo tamquam in ^^et a lapideque firmissimo suam esset
aedificaturus Ecclesiam. Thou art Simon the son of Iona, thou shall be called
Cephas, signifyinge fittlie by the word that in him as in a rock and a firm
stone he was to build his Church. S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 4. de verb.
Isa. and hom. 3. in cai. Matt
calls him the Base of the Church, and the foundation of the Church. Out of
this place I argue thus: Christ promised that on Peeter as on a rock and
foundation he would build his Church; and seeing that in a mystical body, a
foundation or head is all one, it follows that Christ promised to saint
Peeter, that he should be head, and chief visible Pastor and spiritual
prince of his Church. I demand then whether Christ was as good as his word
or no? If he was not; then he is not verity it self, which can neither
deceive, nor be deceived: If he was; then Peeter is head and supreme visible
Pastor of the Church.

13. The second proof of S. Peeter's supremacy.
My second argument shall be taken out of the 21. chapter of saint John: where
(as I shall prove) Christ performed what in the former place he promised, and
made Peeter actual head, and chief visible Pastor of the Church: for there
he said unto saint Peeter: Simon of John love thou me more then these?
Peeter answers: yea lord, thou know, that I love thee. Christ says
unto him: Feed my lambs. And Christ asking the same question the second time,
He bids Peeter feed his lambs. And asking the same the third time, He
bids him, Feed his sheep. Whereis to be noted first, that Christ asked,
Peeter whether he loved him more then the rest; which argued that Christ meant
to give to Peeter greater authority then to the rest. For if he had intended
to give him no more authority the^ to the rest; it had been sufficient to
have asked whether he loved, not ^hether more the^ the rest. Seco^dlie Christ
saying to Peeter in presence of the rest: Feed my lambs, Feed my sheep, and
that also without limitation; gives authority to Peeter to to feed all his
sheep; and consequently he constituteth peeter pastor of all his sheep;
even the Apostles there present. And therefore saint Bernard S. Bernardus lib.
3. de consid. ad Eugen.
brings in Christ speaking to S. Peeter in these words: Si me amas Petre
pasce oues meas. qua? illius vel illius populos ciuitatis ^^^regionis aut ^e^te
regni? oues omnes meas inquit: Cui non planum non designasse omnes? nihil
excipit vbi distinguitur nihil. If thou love me, Peeeer feed my sheep: Which
sheep? The people of this or that city, region or kingdom? all my sheep, he
says: To whom is it not plain, that he designed not some, but assigned all?
He excepteth nothing where nothing is distinguished. Where is to be noted that
the word (Pas^e, Feed) when it is referred to reasonable creatures (as here
it is) signifies to govern and rule by power and authority. For which
cause kings are called pastors. Homer Iliad. B.
calls Agamemnon (...) pastor of the people. So the tribes of Israel told
David: Lib. 2. Reg. c. 5. verse. 2.
Dixit Dominus ad te: Tu pasces populum meum Israel: and tu eris dux super
Israel. Our lord said to thee: Thou shall feed my people of Israel: and thou
shall be prince or captain over Israel. In this sense God promised by his
prophet Ezechiel: Ezech. 34. verse. 23.
Suscitabo super eos pastorem vnu^, qui pascat eos, seruum meum David ipse
pascet eos and ipse erit eis in pastorem. I will raise up over them one
pastor, who shall feed them, that is, goruerne them, my seruante David, that
is, the son of David, (for David was dead before Ezechiel lived,) he shall
feed the^, and he shall be their pastor: And so when Christ said to Peeter:
Feed my sheep: He gave him authority, not only to feed his sheep by
preachinge the word of God, and ministering Sacraments; but also to govern
the^ by laws, to restrain them by excommunications, and and other Gensures.
And therefore in the same place of Saint John, as the Euangeliste used the
Greek word (...) which signifies to Feed, so he used the word (...)
which signifies also to govern.

14. What S. Peeter might have demanded of the rest of the Apostles.
So that if Saint Peeter after that he had received this charge and authority
over his sheep should have demanded of the rest of the Apostle are you the
sheep of Christ? they could not have denied it, unless they would have denied
them selves to be Christians, all Christians being the sheep of Christ. And
the^ Peeter might hau^ subsumed: If you be the sheep of Christ, you are my
sheep, because Christ without distinction committed all his sheep to me. And
if ^ou be my sheep, I am your pastor, ^^d superior: Because as sheep is a
name of subjection, so Pastor is a name of superiority. And if I be your
Pastor, who are also Pastors; I am Pastor Pastorum: Pastor of Pastors, and
so pastor of you and your sheep, and consequently of all the Church.

15. VVerefore Dionysius Areopagita 'Dionys. de diui. nom. cap. 3.
calls Peeter Supremum Decus and ^^^iquissimum Theologorum Columen. The
supreme honor and most ancient pillar of divines. Hippolytus Hip. pol. orat.
de consum. mundi.
thus extolleth him: Princeps Petrus fidei petra, quem beatum iudicauit
Christus D^us noster; ille Doctor Ecclesiae, ille pri^^us dis^ipulorum; ille
qui regni claues h^^et. Peeter the Prince, the ro^ke of faith, whom Christ our
God judged to be blessed; he the Doctor of the Church, the first of the
disciples; he that has the keys of the kingdom of heaven. Epiphanius. Epiph.
hares. 51.
honors him whith the Title of Captain of the Apostles. S. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom. ho. 55. in Matthew.
calls him the mouth Prin^e and Head of the Apostles. Isidorus Pelusiota
Isidor. c. 142.
calls him So dalitij Apostolici Choryphaeus: The chief^ of the Apostolical
sodalitie. Saint Cyprian says; Cypr. cp. 40.
Cathedra vna supe Petrum voce Domini fundata. Ore chain founded upon Peeter by
the voice of on lord. And again Cypr. lib. de virtute Ecciesiae.
Primatus Pet^ datur vt Cathedra vna monstretur. The primacie is given to
Peeter, that one chain may be showed. Saint Ambrose Ambr. in cap. de Gal.
thus pronounces: Soli Petro grat^ primatus inter Apostolos est concessa.
(...) only Peeter the grace of primacie among the Apostles is granted. To
him subscribeth saint Hierome: Hiero. lib. 1. aduersus ouinianu^.
Propt^ reainter duodecim vnus eligitur, vt cap^te constituto schismatis
tollatur occasion Therefore amongst twelve one is chosen, that (...) head being
chosen, the occasion of schism away be taken a way. Saint Austin Auga. q. 75.
vet. and noui Testam. Tract. 56. in Joan. lib. 2. de baptism.
^^sum constituit caput eorum, vt pastor ^^sset gregis Dominici: Him (Peeter)
he ^onstituted head of them (the Apostles) that he might be pastor of our
lords flock. The like he has in many other places. Saint Leo the Great: Leo
sermon. 3. de anniuers. assumpt. sua.
Vnus de toto mundo Petrus eligitur ^ui and vniuersarum gentium vocationi and
^^nnibus Apostolis, cunctisque Ecclesiae ^atribus praeponitur. One Peeter is
chosen out of all the world who might be set over and have charge over the
vocation of all nations, and all the Apostles, and all the fathers of the
Church.

16. By this is plain that there is as evident proof for saint Peeter's
supremacy as there is for the sacred Trinity: for that we have the plane text
of Scripture, and interpretation of fathers. And I might add Counsels (but
that I desire to be short) for Peeters supremacy: And we can have no more
proof or Authority for the Blessed Trinity. So that our adversaries must
believe both, or else I will say that they believe neither fide diuina. Because
to the same authority there can be no credit given in one of its Assertions,
unless it be given unto all. And therefore Luther Luthe. in assert. art. 25.
was to bold to sai^ against scriptures and fathers, that all the Apostles
were equal to peeter. And Calvin Calui. lib. 4. instit. c. 6. number. 7.
as bold as he, when he says: Peeter was equal, no^ superior; fellow, not
lord of the resto the Apostles. I conclude therefore that there is one
Sovereign and supreme visible pastor of the Hierarchy of the Church under
Christ, which is saint P^^ter.

THE IIII. CHAPTER. That after S. Peeter there was ever a supreme visible
pastor of the Church, who is the Bishop of Rome.
1. But our Adversaries will say, be it that Peeter was supreme head under
Christ of the Church for his time; it is not necessary he should have a
Successor; because this supremacy might be a special privilege granted to
Peeter in recompe^se of his rare confession Matt. cap. 16. verse. 17.
of Christ's divinity; or if he must have a Successor, why should the Bishop
of Rome make claim to this dignity more then the Bishop of Jerusalem,
Antioche, or Alexandria: seeing that holy scripture makes no mention of any
successor to Peeter, much less of the Bishop of Rome. I shall therefore
prove in this chapter that the Bishop of Rome is the lawful successor to
saint Peeter, and that therefore there is still, and ever shall be a supreme
spiritual Prince and Pastor of this Ecclesiastical Hierarchy; as there is
of the Celestial.

2. S. Peeter must have a successor. The first proof.
And first out of holy scripture I gather that Peeter must have: Successor in
his primacie over the whole Church; And thus I gather it, and prove it. First
because, a^ we have proved, Christ made S. Peeter ordinary pastor over all
the Church, and even the Apostle them selves; and so in him Christ* instituted
a succession of supreme Pastors: for that an Ordinarit must have others to
succeed hi^^ in the same authority: And in the consists the difference
betwixt an Ordinary and a delegate, as all Lawiers and divines confess,
wherefore a king who is ordinary of his kingdom, a Bishop because he is
ordinary of his Diocese, a pastor for that he is ordinary of his Parish,
must have successors; who in that they are chosen to these places have the
authority which their Predecessors had, without any especial new grant.
Hence is it that the Apostles (as we shall see hereafter) because the
authority which they had over all the Church (though dependentlie of Peeter)
was extraordinary, granted only for their time, and for the speedier
conversion of the world and propagation of the Church, had no successors in
that ^^ thoritie: but in their Bishopricites and particular seats they had
successors; as to S. James succeeded in the Bishopric of Jerusalem S.
Simeon, to him Iustus: As to S. Mark in Alexandria succeeded Anianus: As in
Antioch to S. Peeter succeeded Euodius, to him S. Ignatius, to him Heron. etc.
But S. Peeter because he was ordinary pastor of all the whole Church was to
have a Successor in that his ample authority and Jurisdiction. The second
proof for the same.


3. Secondly Christ commanded S. Peeter to seed all his sheep without
limitation, and consequently not only his sheep then present, but also
which were to be. But Peeter could not in person feed the sheep which were to
be after his death; Ergo by his successors. Wherefore saint Leo S. Leo ser. 3.
de Anniuers. Assump.
Pope and first of that name says that Peeter still feeds Christ's sheep
and in an other place Ser. 2. de Anniuers.
he says. His it aque mouis, dilecttssimi, rationabili obsequio celebratur
hodierna festiuitas, vt in persona humilitatis meae ille intelligatur, ille
honoretur, in quo and omnium Pastorum solicitudo cum commendatarum sibi ouium
custodia perseuerat, and cuius etiam dignitas in indigno haerede non deficit:
By these means therefore, my most beloved, by reasonable obedience this
present festiuitie is celebrated, that in the person of my humility he be
understood, he honored, in whom both the solicitude of all pastors with the
sheep commended unto him, does persouer, and whose dignity also in an
vnwhorthie heir (sucessour) does not fail.

4. The third proof for the same.
Thirdly Christ appointed Peeter head of his Apostles and of al Christians,
to govern them by his supreme authority, and so to govern them, as to
prevent all schisms and dissentions: But the Church after S. Peeters death,
had as much need of such a supreme visible Pastor to govern her as she had
in saint Peeters time; yea had more need of such a Pastor, Christians being
multiplied in greater numbers after Peeters death, then they were before; and
charity and zeal waxing more cold, and heretics also (which in the Apostles
time durst not so freely open their mouths,) after their deaths, as Eusebius
Eusebius. lib. 3. hist. cap. 32.
writes entering into the Church thick and three fold, and preaching their
heresies more boldly and with more open mouth: Ergo after S. Peeter,
Successors were necessary.

5. The fourth proof of the same.
Fourthlie Christ instituted one visible fold and that perpetual that is, to
the end of the world; Ergo he instituted a perpetual visible Pastor to feed
and govern this flock: But Peeter in person could not be always Pastor unto
this fold, he after some years dying: Ergo he must have a perpetual successor
least the visible fold and flock should be without a visible Pastor.
Conformablie to this, Christ says: Joan. cap 10. verse. 16.
Other sheep I have which are not of this fold (insinuating the Gentiles, which
after his death weere to be added to his fold) them also I must bring, and they
shall hear my voice, and there shall be made one fold and one Pastor: but the
fold which is the Church is one visible fold, and perpetual: Ergo it must have
one visible Pastor, and him perpetual: That Pastor cannot be Christ only;
for that he is now no more visible (though he be still the same invisible
Passour) nor Peeter only; because he dyed: Ergo Peeters successor: otherwise
after Peeter we should not have one visible fold and one visible Pastor. This
successor to S. Peeter is not the Bishop of Antioch, not of Alexand ia, not of
Jerusalem not of Constantinople.


6. So that I have evidently deduced out of Scripture that Peeter by Christ's
institution must needs have a successor. I demand now who that was or is?
not the Bishop of Antioche; for that Peeter left that seat before his death:
and Antioche never claimed the first seat, nor was the Patriarche of Antioche
ever called saint Peeters successor: Yea of the three Patriarchall seats
Anuel. ep. 3. ex Conc. Nicen. can. 6. Chalced. act. 16. Leo ep. 53. and 83.
Gregor. ep. 57.
of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioche, that of Antioche had but the third place of
dignity: Not the Bishop of Alexa^drid, for although that seat had the second
place as being founded by saint Mark in the name of saint Peeter (of whom Rome
Alexandria and Antioche have their dignity of Patriarchall seats) yet it had
but the second place; and never claimed the first: Nor was the Patriarche of
Alexandria ever called saint Peeters successor: Not of Jerusalem; for that
Peeter never fixed his seat there; nay that for five hundred years had not
the true power and dignity of the fourth Patriarchall seat; for that it was
subject to Caesarea which was its Metropolitan Church, as may appear by the
Council of Nice Cone. Nisen. can. 7. Hieron. ep. ad Pammach.
where it is decreed that the Bishop of Jerusalem shall have the fourth place,
but with this condition that he shall not be exempted from his Metropolitan
Bishop of Caesarea. Not the Bishop of Constantinople: For that he was no
Patriarch of Constantinople at the time of the Council of Nice, nor could he
be, because Constantinople at that time had no Patriarch, neither was it then
called Constantinople but Bizantium, and a By za^tine Patriarch was never
heard of. And although in the first Council of Constatinople, and after in
the Council of Chalcedon the Bishop of that City endeavored by all means to
be called Patriarch, and to have the next place of dignity after the Bishop of
Rome; Yet he never obtained his desire (S. Leo Leo ep. ad Anatolium Binnius in
notis op. 3. Anacleti to. 1. Coneil. Bell. l. 1. de Pont. Romans c. 24. Conc.
Later. 3. can. 5.
and others resisting him) till in the time of Justinian the Emperor, and
after the year of our lord five hundred, partly by the favor, of the
Emperor, partly by the permission of the Bishop of Rome, he obtained not
only to be Patriarch, but also to be the second in dignity, who was the last
in standing; but never was he equalized to the Bishop of Rome: much less
proferred before him. And therefore the Bishop of Rome has ever carried him
self (as he was) as his and all the Patriarchis Superior. Vid. Bell. l. 2. de
Romans Pont. c. 18
And Nicholas Pope and first of that name in his Epistle to Michael the
Emperor reckeneth eight Patriarchs of Constantinople deposed by the Bishop of
Rome, which ar^ueth his superiority over them, and their subjection to him.
Whence (...) conclude, that the Bishop of Rome, where saint Peeter lived and
died Bishop, is the successor of Peeter, not only as he was Bishop of Rome;
but also as he was Bishop and pastor of the whole Church.

7. The reason why the Bishop of Rome is S. Peeter's successor
And the reason is for that (as I have proved) Peeter must have a successout
even in the universal charge of the Church; and so Peeter never transferring
his seat from Rome, but dying Bishop of Rome and electing the Bishop of Rome
for his successor elevated that seat to the universal Bishopric of the
world; and made the Bishopric of Rome and of the world all one, even as when
a Bishopric is elevated to the dignity of an Archbishopricke (as now Paris
is, which formerlie was but a Bishopric they are not two Bishoprics but one
elevated.

8. An objection against the Bis^op of Rome being 8. Peeter's successor
answered.
But some will say, be it tha^ Peeter by Christ his ordinance m^^ have a
successor; yet it followed not that his successor should hau^ any particular
Church, but one^^ the universal Church for his seat as S. Peeter as first
had, till he fix^^ his seat first at Antioche and the^ at Rome: and therefore
after Petters dath the Church might ha^ chosen a successor to Peeter, wh^
should have been the vniuersa^ Bishop of the universal Church but no
particular Bishop of an particular seat or city, and so^ more Bishop of Rome
then any other particular City: I answer that this might have been, as the
^rgument proves: For out of ^cripture we can only deduce, that (...)
succession must be to Peeter; but that the Roman Bishop should (...) his
successor, we cannot prove out of Scripture; only the fact of Peeter who
there dyed and lost the Bishop of Rome his successor, and Tradition, and the
the ancient fathers and councelles do assure us that he is Peeters lawful
successor both in the Bishopric of Rome, and in the Bishopric of the
world. For Peeter in his life time was as truly Bishop of Rome, as saint
James the Just was of Jerusalem; and he electing the Bishop of Rome to
succeed him in (...) Bishopric of Rome and the whole Church, and this by Gods
will and commandment, he only is his lawful successor. Wherefore Vid.
Bellarm. l. 2. de To. pont. c. 12
saint Anacletus, saint Marcellus, saint Athanasius, and others whom anon I
shall rehearse, say that Peeter dyed at Rome by Christ^ commandment and
founded the Roman Church, and made it hea^ of the universal Church.

9. This supposes Peeter to ha^^ been af Rome and to have liue^ and dyed
Bishop of Rome; which though Illyricus Illyr. l. 10. de primatu Papae.
and others o^ the new Church deny; yet it is (...) evident that Peeter was at
Rom^ that Calvin Calu. l. 4. Inst. c. 6. nu. 17.
says he will no^ deny it Propter Scriptorum consensu^ For the consent of
writers: That S. Peeter was at Rome, is proved.
only (...) cannot believe that he was Bishop of Rome, especially for any
lon^ time. But first that saint Peeter w^^ at Rome, he himself testifies who
in the end of his first Epist^ 1. Pet. c. 5. v^r. 13.
says: salutat vos Ecclesia quae est in Babilone coelecta: The Church which
(...) in Babylon coelected saluteth you: Where by Babylon he understands ^ome
as it then was pagan and persequuted Christians; as do witness Eusebius
Eusebius lib. 2. c. 15.
and saint Hierom S. Hie. lib. de viris Illustribus in Marce.
. And in this sense saint John al^^^ in his Apocalipse, Apoc. cap. 17. verse. 5.
That S. Peeter dyed at Rome is proved.
calls Rome Babylon. Secondly that saint Peeter dyed at Rome, Eusebius
Eusebius. lib. 2. c. 35.
also speaking of Nero, witnesses (...) these words: Et Paulum quidem capite
in ipsa Vrbe Roma, Petrum vero Crucis patibulo condemnat: and Paul he
^ondemned in the city of Rome it self to be beheaded, Peeter to be
crucified. And he adds, that it is superfluous to seek further testimony of
this seeing that the most shining monuments do testify it to this day: Yet he
cites also for this the testimony of Caius and Dionysius Corinthius. And S.
Chrysostom. Chrysostom. hom. 32. in ep. Romans
says that the Martyrdomes and bodies of S. Peeter and saint Paul make Rome
more resplendent, then the stars do the heavens. That S. Peeter dyed at Rome
Bishop is proved.
Thirdly that he dyed at Rome, Bishop of Rome (which Calvin fears to grant,
least he should be forced to grant, that the Bishop of Rome is saint Peeters
successor) it is as evident out of the same Eusebius and generally out of the
Counsels and fathers. Eusebius Eus^bias. in Chron. anno 44.
auerreth it in these words: Petrus natione Galilaeus Christianorum Pontifex
primus, cum primum Antiochenam fundasset Ecclesiam, Romam proficiscitur, vbi
Euangelium praedicans viginti quinque annis eiusdom vrbis Episcopus perseuerat:
Peeter bynation a Galilaean, the first Bishop of the Christians when first he
had founded the Church of Antioche, goes to Rome where preaching the Gospel
twentiefiue years he perseuered Bishop of the same City.

10. And as Cardinal Bellarmin Bell. l. 2^ de Romans Po^t. c. 12.
well observes, Saint Marcellus Marcel. ep. ad Autioch.
Pope, Saint Ambrose, Ambr. orat. cont. Aux.
and S. Athanasius Atha. in Apolog. pro fuga.
affirm that S. Peeter by our lords commandment went to Rome, to suffer there
death for Christ; and therefore it is not improbable that Christ bad him
there fix his seat and establish his successor. Certes Nicholas Nich. cap.
omnes did. 22.
Pope the second of that name in his Epistle to those of Milan, fears not to
say: Illam vero sedem (Romanam) solus ille fundauit, and supra petram fidei mox
nascentis crexit, quia Beato aeternae vitae Clauigero, terreni simul and
caelestis Imperij iura concessit: But that seat (of Rome) only he founded,
and reared upon the rock of faith, which by and by sprunge up, who granted to
the Blessed Keybearer of eternal life the rights of the terrene and heaue^l^e
Empire. And immediately after, he thus proceeds: Non ergo quaelibet terrena
sententia, sed illud verbu^, per quod constructum estcaelum and terra, per quod
denique omnia condita sunt elementa, Romanam fundauit Ecclesiam. Illius certe
pniuilegio fungitur, illius authoritate fulcitur, vnde non dubium quin quisquis
cuilibet Ecclesiae ius suum detrahit, iniustitiam facit. Qui autem Romanae
Ecclesiae priuilegium ab ipso Summo omnium Ecclesiarum capite traditum auferre
conatur, hic proculdubio in haeresim labitur: Not every terrene sentence
therefore, but that word, by which heaven and earth were created, by which, to
be brief, all the elements were made, founded the Roman Church. It truly
uses his privilege, it is underpropped by his authority, wherefore no doubt
but that whosoever detracteth from any Church her right, does injustice. But
he that seeks to take from the Roman Church the privilege given her from the
head of Churches, he without doubt falls into heresy. And S. Anaclete:
Anacl. ep. 3. c. 3. and refertur cap. sacrosancta Romana d^ 22.
Sacrosancta Romana and Apostolica Ecclesia non ab Apostolis sed ab ipso Domino
Saluatore nostro primatum obtinuit, and eminentiam potestatis super vniuersas
Ecclesias ac totum Christiani populi gregem assecuta est, si^ut ipse B. Petro
Apostolo dixit: Tues Petrus and super hancpetra^ etc. The sacred Roman and
Apostolical Church not from the Apostles, but from our lord and savior
himself obtained the primacie, and has gotten the eminency of power over all
Churches and over the whole flock of the Christian people. And again says
he: Prima ergo seeds est coelesti beneficio Romana Ecclesia: Therefore the
first seat by the heavenly benefit is the Roman Church. By which it is
plain, that these holy and ancient fathers were of opinion, that the Seat of
Rome was founded by Christ himself; and consequently that by Christ his
ordinance S. Peeter elevated that Church to have authority over all the rest
of the Churches; and elected the Bishop of Rome for his successor; and that
the Roman Bishop has his authority immediately from Christ him self. The
Roman Bishop has his autor^^e from Christ.
For although the Electours which heretofore were the clergy of Rome and
neighbor Bishops, and now are the Cardinals, design the person of him, that
is to be Pope; yet they give him no Jurisdiction, but after they have designed
and elected his person, Christ from above gives him power and jurisdiction
over them and all the Church as the fathers alleged do expresslie a^^rme. And
the reason is because his power being not only supernatural but also greater
the^ any power the Cardinales, or the whole Church taken as distinct from him,
The reason wherefore the Electours of the Pope, design only the person, but
give no authority.
has (it being a supremacy over all the Prelates and members of the Church,
and having also annexed an Infallibility in defining Controversies concerning
faith, which power his Electours have not) can not be given by them, but only
by Christ himself.

11. Out of all this I argue thus: The Bishop of Rome is Peeter's successor
our Savior Christ in appointing and creating Peeter supreme visible Pastor
over all the Church, as I have proved, he has instituted also a successor to
succeed him in authority over all the Church, as is also proved; and him he
instituted successor whom the Church by the Electours do choose; and to him
thus chosen, he him self gives authority, as even now I declared: But the
Bishop of Rome, even from S. Peeter was chosen to succeed S. Peeter in the
charge of the whole Church, as fathers, Counsels and all antiquity does
testify, and as may sufficiently appear by that which is said: Ergo he
only is Peeters successor over all the Church and has his authority not
from men, but from Christ himself.

12. Conformablie to this Optatus Mileuitanus Optatus Mileuit. sets down
the succession of Bisnops of Rome from S. Peeter to Syricius. lib. 2. cont.
Parmen.
(one highly esteemed by saint Augustine and S. Hierome) not only affirms
that the Bishop of Rome is Peeters successor, but also sets down his
successors even to Syricius who was Bishop of Rome in Optatus his time. Igitur
(says he) negare non potes, scire te in Vrbe Roma Petro primo Cathedram
Episcopalem esse collocatam etc. Therefore thou can not deny that thou
know that the Episcopal chair was given first to Peeter in the city of
Rome, in which satte the head of all the Apostles, Peeter, whence also he was
called Cephas: In which one chair, unity of all might be kept. And a little
after: Vt iam schismaticus and peccator esset qui contra singularem Cathedram
alteram collocaret. Ergo cathedra vnica est etc. that now he should be a
schismatique and sinner who should place another chair against this singular
chair. Therefore the chair is one, which is the first of the dowries, in
which Peeter satte first, to whom succeeded Linus, to Linus Clemens, to Clemens
Anacletus, to Anacletus Euaristus, to Euaristus Sixtus, to Sixtus Telesphorus,
to Telesphorus Higinus, to Higinus Anicetus, to Anicetus Pius, to Pius Soter,
to Soter Eleutherius, to Eleutherius Victor, to Victor Zepherinus, to
Zepherinus Calixtus, to Calixtus Vrbanus, to Vrbanus Pontianus, to Pontianus
Antherus, to Antherus Fabianus, to Fabianus Cornelius, to Cornelius Lucius, to
Lucius Stephanus, to Stephanus Sixtus, to Sixtus Dionysius, to Dionysius
Foelix, to Foelix Eutychianus, to Eutychianus Caius, to Caius Marcellinus, to
Marcellinus Marcellus, to Marcellus Eusebius, to Eusebius Miltiades, to
Miltiades Syluester, to Syluester Marcus, to Marcus Julius, to Julius Liberius,
to Liberius Damasus, to Damasus Syricius, who now reigns, who is ours: with
whom and us all the world concordeth in our Communion of society by commerce
of lettres called formatae. Thus he. And we can show the like succession even
to Vrbanus Octauus who now happily sits at the stern of S. Peeters ship.

13 And we may say to our Reformers of this time, as Optatus said immediately
after Optatus vbi supra.
to the Donatists: Vestrae Cathedrae vos originem reddite, qui vohis vultis
Sanctam Ecclesiam vindicare: Show us the origin of your chair, who will
challenge to your selves the hol^e Church. But our Reformers can show no
succession of their Bishops either in the Chair of Rome, or any other chair
either of the Greek or Western Church. In England they can go no higher then
Granmer; for that all the Bishops in Canterbury Chair, even from S. Austin
the Monk the first that satte in that chair, were ours, not theirs. So Saint
Ireneus Iren. lib. 3. c. 3.
reckeneth the Bishops of Rome as S. Peeters Successors in the Chair of the
universal Church from saint Peeter to Eleutherius; saint Austin unto
Anastasius. And by this succession Ireneus says we confound all heretics:
saint Austin Augutom. 2. ep. 165. lib. cont. ep. fundam. c. 4.
says that this succession houldeth him in the Catholicque Roman Church. And
this succession Tertullian Tertullian. lib. praescriptio.
who calls saint Clement Bishop of Rome. Peeters successor, demands of
all Heretics, knowing that they cannot show it.

14. But although enough has been said to prove the Bishop of Rome Peeters
successor; yet let us he are what the mellifluous saint Bernard Bern. lib. 3.
de consider. ^d Eugen.
said to Pope Eugenius, who had been his Monk and scholar, and then was
Bishop of Rome. But because he is long, I will cite him in English: Go to, let
us search yet more diligentlle, who thou art, whose person thou bear for
the time in the Church of God. Who art thou? The great Priest, the chiefest
Bishop. Thou art Prince of the Bishops, thou art heir to the Apostles. Thou
art in primacie Abel, in government Noe, in Patriarchship Abraham, in order
Melchisedech, in dignity Aaron, in Authority Moses, in office of judge
Samuel, in power Peeter, in unction Christ. Thou art he to whom (in Peeter)
the Keys were given, the sheep committed. There are others indeed that are
porters of heaven and Pastors of flocks; but thou so much the more
gloriously, by how much the more differentlie thou have inherited above others
both names. They have flocks assigned to the^, sever all, to several; to thee
all flocks are committed, one to one, Neither art thou pastor only of the
sheep, but also of all the pastors, thou alone art Pastor of all. Thou
demandest how I prove this; out of the word of our Lord. For to whom, I say
not of the Bishops, but even of the Apostles, so absolutely and without
dinstinction, were all the sheep committed? If thou love me, Peeter, feed
my sheep Io. ca. 21. verse. 17.
which? the people of that or that city? of that nation or Kingdom? my
sheep, says he. Who sees not plainly that he designed not some certain,
who assigned all; nothing excepted where nothing is distinguisshed. And a little
after continuing his speech to the same Pope Eugenius, he concludes in these
words: To be brief, James who seemed to be a pillar of the Church was content
with Jerusalem only, yielding to Peeter the whole world; the brother of
our Lord yields, who else can thurst him self into P^e^ers prerogative?
Therefore according to thy Canons others are called into part of the
solicitude, thou to the fulness of power: others power is restrained
within certain limits, thine extended even to them who have charge over
others. Can not thou, when there is cause, shut heaven to a Bishop, depose
him from his Bishopric, and deliver him up to Satan? Thus saint Bernard.

15. Acts of the B. of Rome, in which he carried himself as supreme Pastor.
And truly the Bishop of Rome has ever even from saint Peeter carried
himself as universal and chief Pastor. For he has deposed even Patriarchs
and Bishops; and confirmed the election of others; he has called general
Councelles and presided in them; he has at the petition of general Councelles
confirmed their decrees; he has prescribed laws to the whole Church; he has
appointed Bishops out of the Diocese of Rome, even in Greece it self; he has
given authority to others to preach the gospel in all countries; To him
appellatio^s have bee^ made from all parts; he has written lettres of command
to all Bishops, to Kings and Emperors; and he has excommunicated, deposed and
absolved them: all which argues him ever to have exercised the power of an
universal Bishop over all the Church and Prelates of the Church; and
consequently he is S. Peeters successor, and Christ's Vicaire, as Constantine
Did. 96. cap. Constaninus.
the great styles saint Peeter, to whom he is successor.

16. Wherefore if the Pope should demand of all the Bishops, An argument
proouinge the Bishop of Rome to be above all Bishops.
Primates or Patriarchs of the Church, either residing in their own seats,
or assembled in a General Counsel, whether they be the sheep of Christ; they
could not deny it unless they should deny themselves to be Christians. And then
the Pope might subsume: If you be the sheep of Christ, you are Peeters sheep,
for that Christ committed all his sheep without any restriction unto saint
Peeter: If you be Peeters sheep, you are my sheep, for that I am Peeters
lawful successor: If you be my sheep I am your Pastor; and if your Pastor,
your Superior.

17. Away then with our Reformers who will have all equal, all Priests alike,
and consequently no supreme Pastor. Away with Spalatensis his equality of
Bishops; the Bishop of Rome is their Prince and Pastor. For as the Church is
one visible fold so it has one visible chief Pastor; as it is one visible
Kingdom, so it has one spiritual and visible Monarche: as it is one
mystical and visible body, so it has one visible head, not Christ only,
because he is now invisible; and therefore saint Paul 1. Cor. c. 12. verse. 21.
compares the Church to a body whose head can not say to the feet I need
you not, as Christ can, the visible head the Pope cannot: It is one visible
family, and so has one paterfamilias, and good man of the house: it is one
visible army terrible as an army of a ca^pe set in array and so must have
one visible general to lead and command; It is one Hierarchy instituted
according to that of the Angels, and so it has (at is proved) one supreme
Pastor under Christ as that has one supreme Prince under God.

THE V. CHAPTER. That besides Peeter and his successor who is the supreme
visible and spiritual Prince of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, there must be
diverse orders and dignities under him.
1. I Having showed in the first chapter that To the making up of a Hierarchy
two things are essentiallie required, to wit, one supreme Prince, and under him
diverse orders and dignities, both which are found in the Hierarchy of
Angels, as in that Chapter is declared at large: and having proved in the
second Chapter that In the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of the Church,
Conformablie to the caelestiall, there are in General diverse orders under one
head and supreme visible Pastor; and having demonstrated in the third Chapter,
that S. Peeter was in his time the supreme visible Pastor of the Church under
Christ; and in the fourth Chapter that the Bishop of Rome is his lavvfull
successor and chief Pastor after him: It remanieth that in this fifth chapter
I make manifest unto my Reader more particularly then I did in the second
chapter the orders and degrees of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy of the Church
of Christ.

2. What was the Hierarchy of the Synagogue we have seen, and how it consisted
of the high Priest and the inferior Priests and Levites we have declared; In
the Church, first we have our Moses also Christ JESUS; for as Moses was the
first and highest Priest of the Jews according to that of the Psalm: Psa. 98
verse. 6.
Moses and Aaron in sacerdotibus eius: Moses and Aaron in his Priests, and
did the office of the highest Priest in consecrating Aaron and his sons:
Exodus 29.
for which cause he is called by saint Gregory Nazianzen Nazia. orat. 22.
Sacerdos Sacerdotum: Priest of Priests: Christ compared with Moses Ps. 109.
Hebr. 5.
so was Christ highest Priest of the new law according to Melchisedech, and he
consecrated Peeter and the rest of the Apostles. As Moses consecrated Aaron
and his sons; yet had none to succeed him in his Priesthood, all the
succession being to Aaron and his children; so Christ consecrated the Apostles,
but had no successor; only Peeter and the Apostles have successors; As by
Moses the old law was promulgated; so the new law by Christ was enacted: As
Moses by many miracles freed the Israelites from the captivity of Pharao; so
Christ by many more fteed his people from the thraldom of the diuil: As Moses
like a Prince, Duke, and General, led the Israelites through the deserte
toward the land of promise, for which cause Philo Philo. lib. 3. de vita
Moysis.
styles him king, legislatour, Prophet and high Priest. Haec fuit vita
obitusque Moysis Regis, legislatoris, vatis and Pontificis: So Christ leads
us by his law and grace through the desert of this life to heaven the land of
the living, where all God his promises are fulfilled. Secondly we have our
Aaron and high visible Priest Peeter and his successors; under them we have
our Bishops and inferior Priests: we have our Levites, Deacons and other
ministers as the Synagogue had theirs wherefore David says: Psalm. 44. verse.
17.
Pro patribus tuis nati sunt tibi filij: constitues eos principes super
omnemterram: For thy fathers, there are borne sons to thee: thou shall make
the^ Princes over all the earth: For the high Priest and other Priests of the
old law which were thy Fathers (o Synagogue) there are Sons borne to thee,
the Apostles; and for thy fathers which were the Apostles, who begat thee in
Christ (o Church of Christ) there are borne Bishops and Priests to thee. And
therefore the Apostle says: 1. Cor. 12. verse. 28.
Et quosdam quidem posu^ Deus in Ecclesia primum Apostolos, secundo Prophetas,
tertio Doctores, etc. And some verily God has set in the Church, first
Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Doctors. Behold diverse degrees and
orders in the Church. And therefore the same Apostle immediately after adds:
Numquid omnes Apostoli? numquid omnes Prophetae? etc. Are all Apostles? are all
Prophets? etc. As if he had said; no; because there are diverse degrees, ordres
and offices in the Church, as there are diverse members in the body, which have
diverse offices; amongst which not withstanding is great concord and mutual
communication, and participation. Again the same Apostle says Ephe. 4. verse.
11.
And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and
other some Doctors and Pastors: behold here also distinct orders in the
Church: for by Apostles as saint Chrysostom Chrysin cap. 4. ad Ephesians.
expounds he means those only, who were sent to preach over all the world,
though they were Bishops also; by Pastors and Doctors he understands Bishops
and Priests, who were not sent over all the world, but were tied to some certain
Cities and determinate places.

3. The Hieratchie of the Church in the Apostles time.
And whilst the Apostles lived, this was the Hierarchy, these were the ordres
of the Church. The first man in dignity and chief pastor was saint Peeter,
as I have above demonstrated: next to him were the Apostles, who were his
sheep, as above is proved and so subject unto him; yet because they were
Apostles, as well as he, they were in some sort equal unto him. Which
equality Christ granted unto them only for the better and more speedy
plantation and propagation of the faith, and conversion of the world.

4. The Apostles and S. Peeters authority compared.
For first as Peeter by the assistance of the holy ghost, was so confirmed in
grace that he could not sin mortallie, so they as commonly divines do teach:
Secondly as Peeter could not err in preaching or defining matters of faith,
for that Christ said: Lucae. cap. 22. verse. 32.
Rogaui pro te vt non deficiat fides tua: I have prayed for thee that thy faith
fail not: So neither could the rest of the Apostles, for whom also Christ
prayed to his father to give them the Holy Ghost. And this was requisite at
that time, for that the Apostles dividing them selves into diverse countries,
and these far distant by sea and Land, that so they might make the speedier
and more universal conquest of the world, if thus dispersed they would have
erred in defining the ^ayth, they should have deceived many with them, and yet
being distant from Peeter their head and Superior they could not by him have
been corrected. And besides because then it was not so well known amongst the
new converted Christians that Peeter was the had of the Apostles, if any of
them had erred the new Christians would have been scandalized, and could not
have known whom to follow; and therefore it was necessary then that none of
the Apostles could err in doctrine of faith and manners, but this
infallibility of preaching true doctrine is not now necessary in Bishops
their Successors, for that they may be directed and corrected by Peeters
Successor the Bishop of Rome.

5. Secondly as Peeter had authority every where to preach, and minister
Sacraments, to absol^ from sins, to excommunicate, t^ make Ecclesiastical
laws, to gi^^ Indulgences and the like in all pa^tes of the world: so every
one (...) the Apostles could exercise this a^thoritie in all places where the
came, but with a subordination (...) Peeter, who could send them to this
Country and to that. And if in matter of fact any of them erred (for in
matter of faith they could not) he could judge and correct them; and some say
he could suspend or limit their ample Jurisdiction, as he savv cause; others
say he could not, because they were not delegated by him, but by Christ, and
had their Jurisdiction immediately from him, and not from Peeter. And although
they might make particular Ecclesiastical laws in every place where they
converted Infidels to the Christian faith, which yet Peeter might have
abrogated if they could have been indonuenient for place and time; yet they
could not have made General laws to bind the whole Church, that
appertaining properly to Peeter, and for that it would derogate to the
monarchy of the Church, and would breed confusion, if diverse should enact
diverse general laws.

6. Thirdly though every one of the Apostles had authority over all the
persons of the Church, yet not over one another; much less over Peeter: but he
had authority also over them.

7. Fourthlie this universal authority, in the Apostles was extraordinary
both in respect of him that gave the authority, which was Christ, whereas,
Peeter being the chief pastor, it should have other wise been given by him;
as also in respect of the extent and largeness of their Jurisdiction, which
should have been limited to particular places, as the Jurisdiction of Bishops
is. But Peeters universal authority was ordinary in both respects. For as in
the creation of the world it was no miracle that God immediately by himself
alone should creat the first creatures, (nature then requiring it) but
afterward the course of nature required that he should use the second causes
to work, and so to let a man generate a man, and a lion a lion, and fire
fire, and therefore now would be a miracle and above the course of nature if
God should create a man, beast, or plant immediately: So it was no
extraordinary thing but necessary that at first Christ should elect and
constitute his vicegerent Peeter, though now if Christ should elect his Vicair
immediately, and not by the Clergy, it would be extraordinary and as it were
miraculous, though now also Christ immediately gives Peeters successor his
authority as is above declared: even as now although God uses man as a second
cause to generate man, and to dispose to the creation of man's soul, yet God
only creates and infuseth the soul. Likewise Peeters authority in respect
of its extente was ordinary, he being constituted ordinary Pastor of the
universal Church, as above is proved. And hence it is that the Bishop of Rome
is pastor over the whole Church, because he succeeds to Peeter, as Ordinary
Pastor of the said Church. But because the universal Jurisdiction of the
Apostles was extraordinary and delegate, therefore Bishops (who are their
successors) do not succeed them in that ample Jurisdiction. If any of the
Apostles lived after Peeter he was subject to Peeters successor
Out of which it follows that if after Peeters death any of the Apostles
should be living, they should be subordinate to Peeters successor even as they
were to Peeter, only they should exceed Peeters successor in this, that they
could make Canonical Scripture, whereas the Bishop of Rome can only approve
it, and define which is scripture, which is not, and what is the true meaning
of it, and what is not.

8. By this it will easily appear that the first in dignity and authority
of the Churches Hierarchy are the twelve Apostles prefigured (as Justinius
Justin. in dialog. cont. Tryphonem:
says) by the 12. belles that hung at the high Priests vestement. The next to
them are Bishops, who succeed to the Apostles: and next to them are Priests who
succeed to the seauentie two disciples, as Anacletus Anaclet. Ep. 3.
affirms. Because though Bishops have not authority over all the Church, as
the Apostles had, nor the gift of miracles as they had; yet they succeed them
in the power of order, by which they can ordain Ministers and confirm, as
they did: and as the Apostles were the first in dignity after Christ, so they
are the first after Christ his Vicair the Bishop of Rome. And although the
seaue^tie two disciples were not Priests (for as we read in the Acts Act. c.
^. verse. 6.
of the Apostles, Philip and Stephen and the other 5. Deacons who were of the
seauentie two, were ordained Deacons by the Apostles) yet because as the 72.
disciples were next to the Apostles, so Priests are next in rank and place
of dignity to the Bishops they are said to succeed the 72. disciples.

9. To Bishops the Apostles said Act. c. 20. verse. 28.
attendite vobis and vniuerso gregi. Take heed to your selves and the whole
flock, wherein the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his own blood. By which it is plain, that
Bishops are instituted by the holy Ghost and divine ordinance. And where the
Apostle in the places alleged 1. Cor. c. 12. and ad Ephesians. 4.
to the Corinthians and Ephesians says, Christ gave some Apostles some
Doctors etc. Saint Chrysostom by Doctors and Pastors understands Bishops.
Which places also argue the dignity of Bishops to be no human invention, but
the divine ordinance. So when the Apostle says unto Timothee 1. Timoth. c.
4. verse. 14.
Noli negligere gratiam, quae data est cibiper prophetiam cum impositione
manuum Presby^terij: Neglect not the grace which is given unto thee by
prophecy with imposition of the hands of priesthood: By prophecy he does not
signify that by it (as by a rite or instrument) grace was given, but only,
that by prophecy, that is, by revelation saint Paul knevv Timothy to be fit
to receive the grace of ordination which was done with imposition of hands
of the priesthood, that is, (as saint Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Theophilact and
others expound) of a company of Bishops: Three Bishops are necessary to make
Bishop.
for says S. Chrysostom he could not be ordained Bishop, as he was, by
priests. And therefore divines say that to make a Bishop, three Bishops are
necessary unless necessity excuse. And this they prove out of Anacletus
who was ordained by saint Peeter, and who in his second Epistle Anaclet. ep.
2. c. 1.
says that saint James the first Bishop of Jerusalem who was called,
Just, and was the brother, that is, the consir^ of our Lord and Savior, a
Petro I^cobo and Ioam^ Apostolis ordinatus est: h^ was ordained by Peeter,
James mayor, and Ihon Apostles: which (says he) example was given; that a
Bishop should not be ordained by fewer then three Bishops. And that three
Bishops are necessary by the divine praecept and Institution to ordain one
Bishop, it may appear by that in the beginning of his Epistle he says, he
will answer breeflie, prout Dominus tribuit and vt a B. Petro Apostolorum
principe instructi sumus, a quo and Presbyter ordinatus sum: as our lord
gives, and as we are instructed by Blessed Peeter the Prince of the Apostles
of whom also I was ordained Priest. The same affirms Pope Anicere Anicet. ep.
vnica ad Episc. Gallia.
alleging the former words, and Damasus Damas. ep. 4. c. 2. Conc. Nie. c. 3.
and refert. ^. Episcopi in omnibus. d. 64. Council. Carthag. 2. can. 12. and
refertur cap. placet omnibus. Council. Arclae. ^. can. ^.
also with the second council of Nice, and the second of Carthage, and first of
Arles do auerre the fame: yet in case of necessity one Bishop suffices.

10. Likewise when saint Paul Tit. c. 1. verse. 5.
writing, to Titus says: Huius reigratia reliqui te Cretae, vt ea quae desunt
corrigas and constituas per civitates presbyteros etc. For this cause I left
the in Crete, that thou should reform the things that are wanting and
should ordain Priests by Cities. Where for the word Priests in Greek is
(...) presbyteros which in the Apostles time was a name given to Bishops as
well as to Priests. And that here he means Bishops appears as well because
presently after he says, a Bishop must be without crime, as also for that he
tells him he left him in Crete that he should ordain priests by Cities;
because in every great city, as near as might be, the Apostles ordained a
Bishop and but one in a City; Priests were appointed to other lesser places.
Episcopi autem (says Anacletus) Anacl. ep. 3.
non in castelli^ aut modicis ciuitatibus debent constitui; sed Presbyteri per
castella aut modicas civitates atque villas debent ab Episcopis ordinari and
poni: But Bishops not in Castles or little walled towns or little cities must
be constituted, but Priests must by the Bishop be placed in castles little
cities and towns; and he gives by and by the reason: Ne vilescat nomen
Episcopi: least the name of a Bishop should be little esteemeed. And when Paulus
and Barnabas constituted by cities Act. c. 14. verse. 22.
Presbyteros, they constituted Bishops.

11. And amongst Bishops there are diverse degrees, not of order, but
Jurisdiction. For that S. Peeter, who was Bishop of the whole Church, Diverse
degrees of Bishops in Jurisdiction only.
was made by Christ head of all the Apostles; the Apostles were higher in
dignity then Timothy and Titus, who were made Bishops by saint Paul: yea then
all other Bishops, and amongst Bishops not Apostles, there are also degrees.
And first Primates or Patriarchs which (as Anacletus says) were in his time
but three; as in deed a long time after they were no more. The first
Patriarchall seat says he, is the Roman Church, where saint Peeter dyed
Bishop: The second is Alexandria consecrated by Mark in the name of saint
Peeter: Pataiarches who were three at the first; after four principal.
The Third is of Antioche, honorable (says he) for the name of Peeter, who
there satre seven years: The fourth in time is the Church of Constantinople;
which yet afterward was made by the Bishop of Rome, at the entreatie of the
Emperor, the second in dignity, as above we have seen. After these great
Patriarchs there were other lesser Patriarchs, now called Primates,
Archbishops.
as of Lions, of Canterbury, and such like. After them are Archbishops who
have diverse Bishops for their suffragans: and after them are Bishops who are
lower in dignity and Jurisdiction then all the former. Bishop^.
For Patriarchs and Primates have Jurisdiction over diverse Countries;
Archbishops over diverse cities and Bishops; Bishops are principally over one
city, as London, Winchester, etc. And under Bishops are Priests, Priests.
who have less Jurisdiction then the Bishop; because the Bishop has
Jurisdiction over his diocese which contains many parishes; the Priest, if
he be Pastor, has authority only in his Parish: and the Bishop can reserve
causes from the Priest and pastor, and is his Judge and can excommunicate him.

12. But if we consider the degrees, not of Jurisdiction but of order, then in
all Bishops there is but one order, But one degree of Order amongst Bishops.
for that the poorest Bishop is as good a Bishop as the Archbishop, Patriarch,
yea and Pope himself, and has as great power of order as they, for that he
can ordain and confirm as well as they: and therefore Anacletus Anacl. ep. 3.
says: Episcoporum autem vnus est ordo: Of Bishops there is one order. And S.
Ignatius Ignat. ep. ad Smyrn.
says that a Bishop is princeps Sacerdotum: Prince of Priests: and that as
there is nothing in the commonwealth greater then the King, so there is nothing
in the Church greater then the Bishop.

13. The office of a Bishop.
The Bishops office is to offer sacrifice, to remitte sins, to ordain
Priests and other Ministers of the Church, to confirm, to Judge, consecrate
Churches, altars, chalices, vestements, and to these all his other offices may
be reduced.

14. After Bishops are Priests whose first office is to offer the dreadful
sacrifice of he body and blood of Christ, The office of a Priest.
which is so proper to them, that it cannot be performed of any, who is not
Priest truly ordained and consecrated, which power Christ gave to the
Apostles and in them to all Priests at his last supper, when he gave them his
sacred body and blood, and said unto the^: Luc. c. 22.1. Cor. c. 11.
Hoc facite in meam commemoratiouem: Do you this for a commemoration of me.
For then as the Council of Trente Conc. Trident. sess. 22. c. 1.
defines, Christ made the Apostles Priests, and gave them power to consecrate
and to offer the holy sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ under the
forms of bread and wine, as Christ their highest Priest had done before them:
and the same power which he gave to them, he gave in like manner to all
Priests their Successors in Priesthood, as saint Denis, Diony. de Eccles.
Hierarch. c. 3.
saint Ireneus, Iren. lib. 4. c. 12.
S. Cyprian, Cypri. ep. ad Cecil.
S. Chrysostom, Chrysostom. hom. 17. in ep. Heb.
S. Amb^ose, Ambro. in Psalm. 38 etc. 1. Heb.
and others affirm. The second office of a Priest is to absolve from sins,
which power was given to the Apostles and to all Priests (who in Priesthood
succeed them) after Christ his resurrection, when as he said: Joan. c. 20.
verse. 23.
Quorum remiseritis peccata, etc. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are
forgiven: and whose you shall retain they are retained. Which office Priests
now exercise in the Sacrament of Penance, as S. Cyprian Cypr. sermon. de Laps.
S. Chrysostom, Chry. sost. lib. 3. de sacerd.
S. Hierom, Hieron. in c. 16. Matt. and in cap. 10. Eccles.
saint Cyrille, Cyril. lib. 2. in Leuit.
saint Austine, Romans c. 13. verse. 4.
and other ancient Fathers do witness.

15. And if we compare these powers, the first is the greatest, because by
it the Priest has power in corpus Christi natural, as deuines say: The power
to consecrate is greater then the power to remit sins.
that is to consecrate the natural body of Christ, and by transubstantiating
bread into his body and wine into his blood (which the Priest does by the
force of Christ's own words) to make both reallie present on the Altar, as they
are reallie present under the forms of bread and wine. The second power though
greater then any Angel in heaven has, for to whom of the Angels was it
ever said; whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them? yet it is
lesser then the former because by this the Priest has power only over the
mystical body of the Church by absoluing her members from their sins or by
retayning them: The dignity of a Priest.
And therefore as the mystical body of Christ is less in dignity then his
natural body which is infinitlie dignified by its union with the divinity; so
the power te remitte sins is lesser then the power to consecrate the body
and blood of Christ. And these two powers declare how great the dignity of a
Priest is and how he is to be esteemed and honored. The dignity of a Priest.
Other lesser offices the Priest has as to, baptize, to minister Sacraments,
to preach, and to bless diverse creatures; though without a special privilege
he cannot bless vestements, nor Altarchothes, nor Altars, nor Churches nor
Chalices. But of Priests I shall say more in the next chapter.

16. Deacons.
After Priests follow Deacons, so called of the Greek word (...) which
signifies in his first acception Minister, as (...) signifies any ministry.
And in this large signification S. Paul Romans c. 13. verse. 4.
calls Kings and secular princes or Magistrates God his minister in Greek
(...). So he calls Romans c. 15. ver. 8.
Christ Minister circumcisionis: minister of circumcision, because he executed
his office of Messiah first toward the Jews circumcised, in Greek (...). So
he bids 2. Tim. c. 4. ver. 14
Timothy fulfill his ministry: in Greek (...): and yet then Timothy was a
Bishop: and therefore saint Paul bids 1. Tim. c. 4. verse. 5.
him not to neglect the grace which was given him with the impositio^ of hands
by the Priesthood, that is, by a company of Bishops who ordained him Bishop,
as above we have proved. Deaconship an holy order.
But by use of scripture and custom of the Church, (...) Diaconus signifies
not whatsoever minister, but him who assisteth the Bishop or Priest. This order
of Deacon is an holy order and degree next to Priesthood, instituted by Christ,
and a Sacrament of order, as commonly divines do auerre; whence it is that the
Apostle when he mentions Bishops and Priests he mentions also Deacons as
when he says 1. Tim. c. 3. verse. 2. and 8.
It behooves a Bishop to be irreprehensible, the hush and of one wife (that is,
who has had but one wife and is not Bigamus) sober, wise etc. Where under the
name of Bishops are understood Priests, who also must have these qualities. He
adds; Diaconos similiter pudicos etc. Deacons in like manner chaste etc. And
to the Philippians: Phil. c. 1. verse. 2.
Cum Episcopis and Diaconibus, with the Bishops and Deacons. And again: let
Deacons be the husbands of one wife: Where in in the name (Deacons) some
interpreters think that subdeacons are understood. The first office of Deacons
was to have care of the poor and widows, and to this office seven (where of
saint Stephen was the first) were elected, with imposition of hands. And many
Divines think that in this place they were ordained, and received the holy
order of Deacons, and that then they were not elected only to have care of
the poor, but also to assist at the Altar: For that not only faithful and
industrious men, who had been sufficient to have care of the poor and widows,
but also men full of the holy Ghost were chosen. Which argues them to be
chose^ to a more sacred function, that is, to assist at the altar, and
therefore Stephen is said Actor. c. 6. verse. 8.
to be full of the holy Ghost, and to have disputed of the law so learnedlie
and Zelouslie, that they could not resist him; Philip preached the gospel to
the Samaritans, Astor. 8.
and the Eunuche; and therefore is graced with the title of Evangelist. Act. 21.
And all the rest, saving Nicolaus, were of the like sanctity, as the
Martyrologes on their days do testify of the^. Who therefore can think with
any reason, that so rare men should be elected only to a profane office,
such as the office of a Steward is? And what needed it, that such men should
be ordained with prayer and imposition of hands as Bishops are, had they been
ordained only to a profane office and not to a sacred function? Other
deuines say that in the sixth of the Acts they were elected as only
prefectes over the tables of the widovves and poor, and after were ordained
to the sacred function of assisting at the Altar: But it little skilleth when
they were ordained to the Altar, so they were ordained, as all Catholics do
confess: yet the reasons alleged seem to prove that at that time (either a
little before or after) they were elected to have charge of the poor and
vviddovves, they were also ordained to assist at the Altar. And therefore the
Fathers and counsels Greek and Latin, alleged by Coccius Coccius tom. 2 lib.
8. ar. 3.
speak of Deacons as sacred ministers, who assist at the Altar. The Offices of
a deacon.
The first office then of a Deacon, and that principal is to assist the Bishop
or Priest at the Altar. Wherefore saint Ignatius Bishop of Antioche Ignatius
ep. ad Tral.
in his Epistle ad Trallianos (which saint Hierom in his Catalogue approves as
his) writes thus of Deacons: Quid sunt Diaconi nisi Imitatores Angelicarum
virtutum ei ministrantes ministerium purum and immaculatum; vt S. Stephanus
Beato Iacobo, and Timotheus ac Linus Paulo, and Anacletus atque Clemens Petro.
The second office was not to consecrate but to minister the holy Chalice unto
the Communicantes, as witnesses saint Cyprian Cypr. sermon. de lap.
and as saint Ambrose, Ambr. lib. Offie. cap. 41.
saint Leo S. Leo sermon. de S. Laurent.
and saint Austine Augu. sermon. 37. de diuersis.
affirm of saint Laurence; yea to distribute to those that were present, and
to carry to those that were absent, the sacred host, as saint Hierom, or
whosoever was author of the Epistle of the Paschal Candle, and the fourth
Council of Carthage Conc. Carthag. 4. can. 38.
in which saint Austin was present, do auerre. The Third is to minister bread
and wine to the Priest, as the Missall and Pontifical do teach us. The fourth
to preach to the people or rather to catechize the^ in the absence of the
Bishop and Priest, a^ Philip the Deacon preached to the Samaritans. Act. cap. 8.
So saint Gregor^^ Greg. ep. 44.
and saint Austin Augnst. ser. 4. de B. Stephan^.
do assure v^ And therefore Deacons are ordained by the book of the
ghospelles, which is given unto them. The fifth is to assist the Bishop when he
preaches, and at other times: and therefore Anacletus Anaclet. ep. 1.
and Euaristus Euarist. ep. ad Episc. Africa.
call Deacons the eyes of the Bishop. The seven Deacons which were chosen in
the vj. of the Acts represe^t the seven spirits which assist before the throne
Tobiae. 12. Apoc. 1. and 4.
as the Deacons assist before the Altar, as some expound.

17. Next to Deacons is the order of Subdeacons, Subdeacons their order is a
Sacrament.
which order was also instituted (as divines do commonly teach) by Christ,
and is an holy order: and therefore to it, not to the inferior orders, is
annexed chastity. Of Subdeacons, as of sacred ministers, who therefore are
bound to chastity, there is honorable mention in the writings of ancient
fathers and Councels, as the reader may see in Iudocus Coccius Coccius. tom. 2.
lib. 8. art. 4.
at large. I will only allege two or three places; and to omit saint
Clement; Clem. lib. 3. constable. Apost. c. 11. lib. 8. c. 21.22. ep. 2. ad Jacob.
S. Ignatius, Ignatius ep. ad Antioch.
Saluto (says he) presbyterorum Collegium, saluto sacros Diaconos, saluto
Hypodiaconos etc. I salute the College of Priests, I salute the sacred
Deacons, I salute the subdeacons. Eusebius Eusebius lib. 6. ^. 33.
also speaking of Nouatus the Heretic says: Is ergo qui Euangelium
vendicabat, nesciebat in Ecclesia Catholica vnum Episcopum esse debere, vbi
videbat esse, presbyteros quadraginta and sex, Diaconos septem, subdiaconos
septem etc. he therefore who challenged the Gospel to him, knew not that in
the Catholic Church there must be one Bishop where he saw fort^^ and six
priests, seven Deacons, seven Subdea ons etc. Saint Athanasius Athanasius ep.
ad solit. vit. agentes.
tells how the Arrians took away violently Eutychius his subdeacon who
served the Church well and whipped him to death. Sozomenus Soz. lib 4. hist. c.
2.
makes mention of Martyrius subdeacon; Anacletus Anaclet. vbi supra.
mentions Deacons and Subdeacons, who are to assist the Bishop in solemn
feasts. S. Cyprian S. Cyprian ep. 24.
says that he made Saturus Lector; and Optatus subdeacon. The Roman Synod
Synod^ Roman. c. 7.
under S. Syluester decrees thus: Let the Priest to the Bishop, the Deacon to
the Priest, the Subdeacon to the Deacon, the Acolyte to the Subdeacon, the
Exorciste to the Acolyte the Lector or Reader to the Exorciste, the Ostiarius
to the Reader show obedience and humility, as well in public, as in the
Church. The fourth Council of Carthage Council. Carthag. 4. c. 5.
tells how a Subdeacon must be ordained. S. Leo S. Leo ep. 48. c. 4.
the first, Subdiaconis carnale connubium non conceditur: carnal marriage is
not granted to Subdeacons: so sacred this order was esteemed. Saint Gregory
in many places, S. Greg^r ep. 44. and 54.
makes mention of Subdeacons and of the other orders. The office of the
subdeacons is to minister at mass to the Deacon, The office of a Subdeacon.
and to prepare the things which he must give to the Bishop or Priest, to sing
the Epistle, etc.

18. Besides these greater Orders, to wit, Priesthood, in which is included the
order of a Bishop, who is Summus Sacerdos: High and chief Priest, the order of
Deacon, and Subdeacon, there are four lesser orders; to wit, of an Accolite,
of an Exorcist, of a Lector or Reader, and of an Ostiarius, who had in ancie^te
time charge of the Church door, to keep out infidels and excommunicated persons
and to let in the faithful only and those who are not excommunicated: Which
four lesser orders if they be Sacraments of Order, as the other are (as saint
Thomas o^ Aquin S. Tho. in 4. d. 24. qu. 2 ar. 2. q. 3. and ^lij ibidem.
and diverse divines affirm) then is the Hierarchy of the Church, consisting
in these seven orders, wholly instituted and ordained by Christ; because he
only, not the Church, can institute Sacraments. But if the four lesser
Orders be not Sacraments, but only orders and degrees instituted by the
Church for decency, and for the better performing of the functions in the
Hierarchy of the Church, as others say; Magist. in 4. did. 24. c^p. s^ptimus
ordo. Dur. ibid. Caiet. to. 1. opuse. tract. 11.
then the Hierarchy of the Church is partly of Christ's, partly of the
Churches institution. As for the Clericall tonsure called Prima tonsura, that
is only a disposition to other orders, no order; because it gives a man no
special degree in the temple or Ecclesiastical state; but only is a
general disposition to all orders by which a Clearke is distinguished, from
the Lay, but has no degree in the Clergy.

19. Which opinion so ever go for true (for here I intend not to dispute the
matter, but to leave it to the schools) there is ancient mention of these four
lesser orders not only by Isidorus Isidor. lib. 2. Offic. Eccles.
Rabanus Raba. lib. de institu. Clericor. c. 12.
Alcuinus, Alcuinus lib. de divine. officijs. c. 35.
Stephanus Eduensis, Steph. Eduens. lib. de Sa. cram. Altar.
but also by saint Ignatius Ignat. ep. ad Antioch.
who saluteth subdeacons Lectors, Priests of the Church, and Exorcists.
Eusebius in the place above quoted mentions Acolytes Lectors and porters.
Saint Cyprian Cypr. ep. 15.24.55.78.
also in diverse Epistles mentions one or other of them. The Roman synod, as
we have seen above, rehearses all the seven orders. The fourth Council of
Carthage Con^. Carth. 4. can. 2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.
under Anastasius Pope, at which saint Austine was present, sets down the
manner, how a Bishop, Priest, Deacon, Subdeacon, Acolyte, Exorcist, Lector, and
Ostiarius, are to be ordained.

20. Saint Thomas of Aquin D. Tho. in 4. d. 24. q. 4.
shows how these seven orders are answerable to the graces which divines call
Gratias gratis datas, and which saint Paul reckeneth in his first Epistle to
the Corinthians. 1. Cor. c. 12.
For says he Sermo scientiae the word of wisdom, aggreeth to the Bishop
which is he that ordains all and illuminateth all: The 7. orders compared to
the graces.
The word of knowledge to the Priest, who must have the key of knowledge:
faith to the Deacons, who sings and preatheth the gospel; and in like
manner he applies the rest. Yea (says he) some distinguish these orders
according to the celestial orders which do purge, illuminate, and perfect.
Saint Bonauenture Bon. in 4. d. 24 qu. 2. Scotus ibid. Gerso^ in compend. cap.
de Sacr. ord.
distinguishes these orders another way, Scotus and Gerson other ways and all
very pertinentlie.

21. In these orders consists the Hierarchy of the Church, and in the orders
of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons, it consists by the Divine
ordinance, and Institution; in the other four at least by the Institution of
the Apostles or the Church, which even from the Apostles has practiced these
lesser orders, as the Council of Trent assures us, and as may undoubtedly
appear by the Counsels and ancient fathers alleged. Wherefore the same
Council Conc. Trid. sess. 23. cap. 2.
defines that the Hierarchy of the Church, established by the divine
ordinance, consists in Bishops, Priests, and other ministers: where by other
Ministers, Deacons and Subdeacons seem at least to be understood. These be
the words of the Council Conc. Trid. sess. 23. can. 6.
with which I will end this chapter: Si quis dixerit in Ecclesia Catholica non
esse Hierarchiam diuina ordinatione institutam que constat ex Episcopis and
presbyteris and ministris: Anathema sit: If any shall say that there is not in
the Cathelique Church a Hierarchy instituted by the divine ordinance, which
consists of Bishops, Priests and ministers let him be accursed.

THE VI. CHAPTER. That Bishops are distinct in Order from Priests and higher
in dignity then they.
1. BY that which is already said, it may easily be seen, that the Bishop
and Priest are the highest orders and degrees in our Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy: wherefore because the more distinction there is in orders the more
the Hierarchy is graced, as in the first chapter we have seen by the
Hierarchy of Angels, in which there are not two of one degree; I shall show in
this chapter that the order of a Bishop is distinct from the order of a Priest;
that so I may the more illustrate and embellish this our Hierarchy, by how
much it has greater distinction of Orders.

2. Aerius and some other heretics, to ruin our Hierarchy, which cannot
stand without distinction of orders, have sought to confound them and to make
them all one. I will not deny but that in the Apostles time, when there were
few Bishops and Priests, they went by one name (...) in Greek, Presbyteri in
Latin, Priests in English, as appears by many places of holy scripture which
above we have related. For where saint Paul 1. Tim. c. 4. verse. 14.
exhorts Timothy not to neglect the grace which is given him by imposition
of hands of priesthood; by priesthood he understands a co^pagnie of Bishops,
as the Greek interpreters Chrysostom. Oecumen. Theoph.
expound it. And when he says Tit. c. c. 1. verse. 5.
that he left Titus in Creete to ordain Priests by Cities, by Priests he
means Bishops as saint Hierom Hier^nymus.
expounds and as above is declared. So saint Peeter by Seniours to which in
Greek is answerable (...), understands Bishops, as appears by the words
following 1. Petr. c. 5. verse. ^.
Pascite qui in vobis est gregem Dei: prouidentes etc. Feed the flock of God
which is amongst you, providing not by constraint etc. Where for the word
Prouidentes Providing, the Greek, text has (...) of which comes the word
^piscopus Bishop so the name Presbiter and Senior is taken in other places 2.
and 3. epist. Joan. 1. ^etr. vlt. Act. 15. and 20.
for a Bishop. But although in the Apostles age the Bishop and Priest were
called by one name; yet Bishops, ever since their first institution, Bishops
and Priests had one name but a distinct power.
were distinguished from Priests in power and digintie, and therein ever had
the precedence and superiority over them: and therefore some times even holy
scripture does appropriate the name (...) Presbyter, Priest, unto Priests, as
they are distinguished from Bishops. As when saint Paul 1. Timoth. c 5. verse.
15.
says: Aduersus Presbyterum accusationem noli accipere nisi sub duobus a^t
tribus testibus: Against a Priest receive not accusation, but under two or
three witnesses: he charge Timothy a Bishop not to receive to easily
accusation against a Priest; which argues that he speaks of a Priest, whose
Judge the Bishop is; which is a sign that the Priest is inferior to the
Bishop. And when S. James Jacob. c. 5. verse. 14.
says: Is any man sick among you? let him bring in the Priests of the
Church, and let them pray over him etc. He means Priests, not Bishops; For
that in one Church there never were many Bishops (as we have showed above)
though under one Bishop and in one Church there were many Priests.

True it is, that Aerius, Aerius made a Bishop and Priest all one.
that infamous heretic, because he could not himself attain to the dignity
of a Bishop, as he desired, affirmed that a Bishop and a Priest were all one,
as Epiphanius Epiph. haeres. 75.
and S. Austine Augustine. lib. de haeres. hers. 53.
do testify. To him subscribeth John Calvin Calvin. lib. 4. institut. ca. 4.
number. 1.
in his Institutions; who therefore in Geneua and France where he domineereth,
has no Bishops to govern, but a consistory of Ministers; which government,
our Puritans also do affect to bring into our English new Church, though the
Prince has ever resisted them.

4. The fathers and divines make a Bishop and Priest distinct.
But the common opinion of ancient Fathers and divines is, that a Bishop is of
an higher rank in the Church of God then a Priest, and is superior to him in
degree ad dignity by the divine ordinance and institution. Sanctus Ignatius
Igna. ep. ad Smyrnons.
calls the Bishop Prince of Priests: Ergo he is his Superior, and therefore
he charge Deacons to be subject to Priests, and Priests to Bishops. Saint
Ambrose Ambr. in 1. Timoth. 3.
observes that saint Paul writing to Timothy, after the Bishop adds
immediately the Deacon, not mentioning the Priest: Post Episcopum, Diaconi
ordinem subijcit: Quare? nisi quia Episcopi and Presbyteri vna ordinatio est,
vterque enim Sacerdos est. Sed Episcopus primus est, vt omnis Episcopus
Presbyter sit, non tamen omnis Presbyter Episcopus: After the Bishop he adds
next the order of a Deacon. Why? but because there is one ordination of the
Bishop and Priest, for both are Priests; but the Bishop is first; so that
every Bishop is a Priest, but not every Priest a Bishop. Where he says that
there is one ordination of both in respect of Priesthood; For that both are
Priests, but yet he grants that the Bishop is first and chief, to wit, as
Bishop, and so insinuates another ordination by which he is Primus First, and
above the Priest. Damasus Da. masc. ep. 4.
also when he says: Hoc solummodo Chorepiscopis concedatur vt inter
sacerdotes locum habea^t etc. Let this only he granted to the Chorepiscopi
that they have place amongst the Priests, and that they content themselves with
the ministry of Priests, and not meddle with Episcopal functions; insinuates
enough that the Chorepiscopi and Priests are of an inferior rank and degree,
then Bishops are. S. Austine Aug. ep ad ^iero^.
in one of his epistles to saint Hierom: Quamquam secundum honorum vocabula,
quae iam Eccles^e vsus obtinuit. Episcopatus Presbyterio mayor sit; tamen in
multis rebus Augustinus Hieronymo minor est etc. Although according to the
names of honor, which now the use of the Church has obtained, the order of a
Bishop be greater, then the order of a Priest; yet in many things Austine
(though a Bishop) is less then Hierom. This the Council of Tre^t Conc. ^rid.
sess. 23. cap. 4.
has defined in express words saying Proinde Sacrosancta Synodus declarat,
praeter caeteros Ecclesiasticos gradus, Episcopos qui in Apostoloru^ locum
successerunt, ad hunc Hierarchicum ordinem praecipue pertinere, and positos
(sicut Apostolus ait) a Spiritu Sancto regere Ecclesiam Dei, eosque Presbyteris
superiores esse: Wherefore the Sacred Synod declares that, besides other
Ecclesiastical orders, Bishops, who have succeeded into the place of the
Apostles do appertain principally to the Hierarchicall order, and are placed
(as the Apostle says) by the Holy Ghost to rule the Church of God, and that
they are superior to Priests. And again the same Council Sess. 23. can. 7.
thus pronounces: Si quis dixerit Episcopos Presbyteris non esse Superiores,
vel non habere potestate^ cofirmandivel ordinandi, vel eam quam habent, illis
esse cum Presbyteris communem: anathema sit. If any shall say that Bishops are
not Superior to Priests or have not power to confirm or ordain, or that
power, which they have, is common to Priests with them, let him be accursed.
The Bishop exceeds the Priest in power of ordro first.


5. And if we look into the power both of order and Jurisdiction, we shall
see that in both the Bishop takes precedence of the Priest: The Bishop
exceeds and excels the Priest in power of order: First because he can
consecrate Priests and other ministers of the Church, as may be gathered out of
diverse places by me already alleged out of saint Paul. 1. Tim. 3. and 5. Tit.
1.
And when saint Paul charge Timothy Not to receive accusation against a
Priest, but under two or three witnesses, he insinuates planelie, that a
Bishop, as Timothy was, is Judge and consequently superior to the Priests.
Dionysius Areopagita Dionys. l. eccl. Hier. c. 5.
says that the Priest is ordained by Imposition of hands of the Bishop.
Saint Hierom says Hiero. in cap. 59.
that ordination which the Grecians call (...) is fulfilled not only by
prayer of the voice, but also by imposition of hands. The fourth Council of
Carthage Cone. Carth. 4. can. 3.
says that the Priest is ordained Episcopo eum benedicente, and manum super
caput eius tenente: The Bishop blessing him and holding is hand over him. The
same Council gives the reason why the Bishop only imposes his hands upon a
Deacon when he is ordained, but when the Priest is ordained, not only the
Bishop but the Priests also, lay there hands on him; because he is their
fellow Priest.

6. Secondly.
Secondly the Bishop with two other Bishops can ordain Bishops. For as
Ana^letus Anacl. ep. 1. cit.
says, and the Canons of the Apostles Canon Apost. can. 1. and 2.
have declared, three Bishops are necessary to the making of one Bishop, as S.
James styled the Just, the first Bishop of Jerusalem, was ordained by saint
Peeter, saint James Mayor and S. Ihon. And this is evidently deduced out of
that place of saint Paul, already alleged: 1. Tim^t. c. 4. verse. 14.
Noli negligere gratiam: do not neglect the grace which is given thee by
prophecy with imposition of hands of priesthood, that is, of a company of
Bishops, as the Greek fathers Chrysostom. Oecum^n. Theophyl. ibidem.
especially do expound. Which argues a superiority in degree of the Bishop
over the Priest; For that one Bishop can ordain a Priest, but three are
necessary to consecrate a Bishop; though in case of necessity one Bishop by
commission from the Pope (as some divines teach) may consecrate a Bishop. And
therefore S. Epiphanius Ephiph. haer. 75.
disputing against Aerius, who made no difference beetwixt the Bishop and
Priest says: Dicere ipsum Episcopum and presbyterum aequalem esse, quomodo
erit possibile? Bishops generate fathers, Priests spiritual c^ildren.
Episcoporum enim ordo Patrum generator, Patres enim generant Ecclesiae:
presbyterorum vero non potens generare Patres, per lauacri generationem generat
filios Ec^lesie, non tamen patres etc. To say that the Bishop and Priest are
equal, how shall it be possible, for the order of Bishops is a begetter of
fathers, but the order of Priests not able to beget fathers (that is, Priests
and Bishops) begets to the Church by the Lauatorie of Baptism children, but
not fathers etc.

7. Thirdly the Bishop ministers confirmation: the Priest does not. The grace
of Confir*
Thirdly the Bishop can minister the Sacrament of Confirmation by which he
gives the holy Ghost, and herewith a special grace, by which the confirmed
receives force to confess the name of Christ, and to profess his faith,
maugre the threatenings of the persecutour, and in no wise for shame or fear to
omit this profession; and therefore is signed in the forehead, and anointed
also, to signify that he is enrolled amongst the spiritual soldiars of
Christ, and receueth his military mark and lyuerie, to signify that under
the colors of Christ he is to fight spirituallie against all persecutions in
defense of his faith. And this the simple Priest cannot do, but only the
Bishop. Hence it is that although saint Philip converted and baptized the
Samaritans, Act. c. 8.
yet he attempted not to confirm them; but saint Peeter and saint John
Apostles and Bishops were sent to impose hands on them (which imposition was
Confirmation) and thereby gave the^ the holy Ghost. Where venerable Bede Beda.
says that if Philip had been an Apostle or Bishop he might have confirmed
them, but this, says he, is reserved to Bishops. Saint Cyprian, Cypr. ep. 73.
ad Iubatanu^.
says that they who by Philip were baptized in Samaria, ought not to be
baptized any more, but only that which wanted was done by Peeter and John, to
wit, that by prayer made for them and Imposition of hands, the holy ghost
might be powered upon them. Which now also (says he) is done with us, that
they which in the Church are baptized may be signed with our Lords seal.
Saint Denis Dion. l. de Eccl. Hier.
says that the Priests did present the baptized to the Bishop, that he might
sign them diuino and Deifico vaguento: with the divine and Deificall
oyntement. And again we read Act. c. 19. verse. 5.
that when saint Paul came to Ephesus and found some baptized only by saint
John the Baptist his baptism, the Scripture insinuates that they were
baptized by some other, but yet expresslie says that faint Paul imposed
hands on them and that so the holy ghost descended upon them. The ancient
fathers relying on these scriptures, have ever taught, that the Sacrament of
Confirmation is to be ministered only by the Bishop, which has also ever been
the practice of the Church. So do saint Clement, Clem. l. 3. constit. c. 15.
Eusebius Pope Easeb. ep. 3. ad Episc. Tusciae.
Melchiades Pope, Melch. ep. ad Episcopos Hispan.
Innocent the first Pope Innocent. 1. ep. ad decent. cap. 3.
Leo the first Pope, Leo ep. 88
saint Cypria^, Cypr. ep. 79. ad Iub.
saint Hierom, Hiero. in Dial.
saint Austin Aug. l. 15. Trin. c. 26.
and others teach, and lastly the Council of Florence Conc. Flor. in Decret.
and of Trent Conc. Trid. Sess. 23. c. 4. can. 7.
have defined that the proper and ordinary minister of the Sacrament of
Confirmation is a Bishop. And the reason is, because by this Sacrament we are
made perfect Christians receuing by it our full pitche and growgh and so it is
to be ministered by him only who is: Summus Sacerdos: An high and most perfect
Priest, as the Bishop is.

8. True it is that if you compare the power of order, by which the Priest can
consecrate the body and blood of Christ and remitte sins, The reason way a
Bishop only confirms.
with the power the Bishop has to consecrat Priests and other ministers, and
to confirm the baptized, The Priests power is greater then the Bishops proper
power. The reason.
that the Priests power is greater, then is that which is proper to the
Bishop; because the Bishop by the power to ordain ministers has only power
over corpus Christi mysticu^, as divines say, that is, over the Church; but
the Priest by the power to consecrate the body and blood of Christ has power
over Corpus Christi natural, The Priest by the power to consecrate the body
and blood of Christ, has.
the natural body of Christ, in that he by Christ his own words conuerteth
bread into Christ's body and wine into his blood, and makes them both
reallie present under the form of bread and wine. Mat. 26.
And for this reason the power the Priest has to remitte sins, is lesser
then the power, he has to consecrate; For that by the power to consecrate,
The Priests power to consecrate is greater then his power to remit sins. The
reason.
he has power Super corpus Christi natural, Over the natural body of
Christ, as is declared: But by the power he has to remitte sins, he has
only power Super corpus Christi mysticum: Over the mystical body of
Christ, which is his Church. And therefore by how much the natural body of
Christ (Deified as it were and ineffablie dignified by the union it has with
the divinity) excels the mystical body of Christ the Church; by so much
the power the Priest has over Christ his natural body, surpasses the
power which he has over the mystical body of Christ. Yet the Bishop is
absolutely greater then the Priest. The reason.


9. But yet for all this, the Bishop is absolutely greater in power and
dignity then the Priest, because in that he is a Bishop, he is Summus
Sacerdos: An high Priest, and so as the Superlatiue supposes the Positive, so
a Bishop supposes a Priest, and consequently has the power of a Priest and
more, to wit, his own proper power. And hence it is that a Priest may validlie
(though not lavvfullie) be made a Priest Per saltum (as divines say) though
before he be not a Deacon; None can be Bishop who is not first a Priest. The
reason.
because a Priest is not a perfect or high Deacon, but of a disparate order, to
which the order of a Deacon is not essentialie subordinate. But a Bishop is
essentiallie an high Priest, and so the order of Priesthood is essentiallie
subordinate to the order of a Bishop, and consequently a man can neither
lavvfullie nor validlie be ordained Bishop, unless he be first a Priest, it
implying as much to be Summus Sacerdos before Sacerdos, as the Superlatiue
degree implies to be before the Positive.

10. Secondly a Bishop exceeds the Priest in power of Jurisdiction, the
Bishop being the Priests Judge and 1 Timothy c. 5. verse. 19.
the Priest being to stand at his tribunal for sentence: The Bishop can
excommunicate, as saint Paul 1. Cor. c. 5. verse. 5
excommunicated the incestuous, the Priest cannot; The Bishop has Jurisdiction
over a Diocese, the Priest only over a Parish: The Bishop can give
Indulgences, the Priest cannot; the Bishop has his deciding voice in
Councelles, the Priest has not; The Bishop can reserve cases from the Priest,
the Priest cannot from him: The Bishop can consecrate Churches, Altars,
Chalices and can bless vestements, the Priest, though he can bless other
things, yet these he cannot without a special grant or privilege.

11. A question Weather the Bishop has jurisdiction immedialie from Christ or
the Pope.
But whether the Bishop excelle the Priest in power of Jurisdiction by the
immediate grant of Christ, or by the grant of the supreme Bishop, the Bishop
of Rome, it is disputed amongst divines probably on both sides. Some say the
Bishop has Jurisdiction immediately from Christ; so mayor in 4. d. 17. q. 2
Victor. Relect. 2. de pot. Eccl. q. 2. Petrus Soto lec. 5. de Confess. So tus
in 4. d. 18. q. 4. a 1. and d. 20. qu. 1. a. 5. Vasqto. 3. in 3. Par. disp.
240. c. 4. The first proof.
Some of them are of opinion that the Bishop and Priest have their Jurisdiction
and power to absolve, to excommunicate and the like, immediately from Christ,
when they are ordained: and these doctors would say that the Bishops power of
Jurisdiction is greater by the divine grant and institution, then is the
Jurisdiction of the Priest. This they prove first out of Scripture; as where
Christ says, Matt. cap. 18. verse. 10.
to all the Apostles, whose Successors Bishops are: Que^nnque alligaueritis
superterram, erunt ligata and in caelo. Et quaecunque solueritis super terram,
erunt soluta and in caelo: What soever you shall bynd upon earth, shall be
bound also in heaven: And what soever you shall loose upon earth shall be loosed
also in heaven. In which words as he promised before the power of bynding and
loosing to saint Peeter Matt. c. 16. verse. 19.
principally, as to an ordinary chief Pastor of the Church, so now he
promises an universal power to all the Apostles over all the Church: but
which in them was extraordinary, yet requisite for the first planting of the
Church and faith, as above is declared. So Christ immediately gives power to
the Apostles and in them to all Bishops and Priests to absolve from sins,
saying: Joan. c. 20. verse. 23.
Quorum remiseritis peccata etc. Whose sins you shall forgive, they are
for^iuen them: and whose you shall retain, they are retained. But to bynd and
loose, to absolve from sins, and to retain them are acts of Jurisdiction:
Ergo (say they) Jurisdiction of Bishops and Priests proceeds immediately from
Christ. The 2. proof.
This also they prove because the Priest in his ordination has authority
given by his order to remitte sins: As the form of words in his ordination
imports: Frgo he has power from Christ by his ordination, and not from the
Church or Pope. This they confirm also, The 3. proof.
for that the Priest cannot say, I absolve thee in the name of the Pope, or
Church, or by authority from them, which yet (as it seems) he might say if
his authority proceeded from them. And if you object, An objection against
this opinion is answered.
why then cannot a Bishop excommunicate them, who are not of his diocese, he
having Jurisdiction from Christ who limited him to no place? Why cannot a
Pastor absolve those from sins, who are of another Parish, he having from
Christ authority to absolve without limitation to any place or person? Why
cannot every Simplex Sacerdos, that is, who has no care of souls committed
to him, absolve every one that will confess his sins unto him, seeing to him
it is said in his ordination: Accipe spiritum Sanctum: quorum remiseritis
peccata remittuntur eis etc. Receive the holy ghost, whose sins you shall
forgive they are forgiven them. To this they answer, that although all Bishops
and Priests receive their Jurisdiction in respect of the active power which it
implies, immediately from Christ in their ordination, yet they cannot
exercise it, unless by the Pope, subjects be given them and applied to them, as
they are to the Bishop in his Diocese, and to the Pastor in his Parish, but
not out of it; and so (say they) if a Bishop excommunicate or absolve one, who
is not of his Diocese his excommunication and absolution is inualid, not for
want of any active power of Jurisdiction, but for want of matter or subjects on
whom it may be exercised. And for the same reason a Priest cannot absolve any
from mortal sin (for from venial every Priest can absolve) who are not of
his Parish, or otherwise by the Pope, or some under him are not assigned for
his subjects. For (says Dominicus Sotus) Sotus supra. in 4. d. 18. cit.
as, although a man have a key fit and apt of it self to open a lock, yet it
cannot open it unless it be applied: So although a Bishop or Priest have the
Key of Iurifdiction; yet he cannot exercise it but on them who are applied as
subjects unto him.

12. Other diumes say Bishops and Priests have Jurisdiction from the Pope. So
it seems S. Thom. holds 2.2. qu. 39. a. 3. Caiet. to. 1. Opusc. Trac. 1. c.
2. Turrecr. in sum. l. 2. c. ^4. Couar. Reg. peocatum. 2. p.. 9. nu. 6. Suar.
to. 4. disp. 25. sect. 1. nu. 10.
Other divines say that Bishops and Priests have power of Jurisdiction
immediately from the Pope, and that by those words which are spoken to Priests
in their ordination: Accipe Spiritum Sanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata
remittuntur eis etc. Receive the holy Ghost; whose sins you shall forgive
etc. They receive only Potestatem ordinis, Power of order, which is not
sufficient to excommunicate or absolve, till the Bishop have Jurisdiction from
the Pope, and the Priest from the Bishop, or some other who can give
Jurisdiction. For although (say they) the Pope receives Jurisdiction over all
the Church immediately from Christ, (he having no other superior from whom to
receive it; and the Cardinals only designing his person, The Pope has his
Jurisdiction from Christ.
Christ giving him his Jurisdiction, as above we have seen, yet Bishops and
Priests (as these Doctors do think) receive only power of order from Christ
by means of their consecration; but their Jurisdiction they receive from the
Pope, or some other that under him gives Jurisdiction, and in more or less
ample manner, as he shall Judge most fitting. Wherefore as the Episcopal
caracter and order requires more Jurisdiction then does the caracter of the
Priest, so the Pope gives ordinarily more Jurisdiction to the Bishop then to
the Priest or Pastor. Order and Jurisdiction may be separated.
And that these powers of order and Jurisdiction are distinct, and may be
separated, appears (say they) in that the Pope may be Pope in respect of
Jurisdiction over all the Church by his election only and before he be
consecrated Bishop, yea or Priest; and some * So says the Pentisicall in the
beginning of Cousec^ation of the Pope. So ^etrus Moroneus and others were
elected Pope. vid Pontisical. ibidem.
have been elected Popes before they were consecrated Bishops yea Priests, or
Deacons, and even then before they were consecrated Bishops or Priests, they
had all power of Jurisdiction over the Church to define controversies in faith,
to make general laws, to excommunicate, What the Pope and Bishop may do
before they be conseciated.
to call Councelles and to define in them, to give Indulgences and to give
Jurisdiction to Bishops: but they could not consecrate Bishops or ordain
Priests, before they were consecrated Bishops themselves, nor absolve from
sins in the court of conscience before they were Priests, nor confirm till
they were consecrated Bishops, these acts being acts of order not
Jurisdiction. So contrariwise a Bishop or Pastor after he is consecrated
Bishop or ordained Priest may renounce his Bishopric, or Pastourship, and so
remain true Bishop or Priest in respect of his caracter and order without all
Jurisdiction, and whatsoever they shall attempt in that kind, will be inualid and
of no force.

13. This their opinion they prove out of some fathers as S. Gregory Cap.
Decrato. 2. q. 6.
where he says that the Roman Church vices suas ita alijs impertiuit
Ecclesijs vt in partem sintvocate sollicitudinis, non in plenitudinem
potestatis: Has so imparted to other Churches her authority, that they are
called into part of the care, and solicitude, not into the fulness of power.
And saint Leo S. Leo ep. 87. ad Epis Vien. did 29. cap. Ita Dominus.
says that Christ from saint Peeter Tanquam a quodam capite: As from a
certain head, has diffused his guiftes into all the body of the Church. They
allege also reason grounded in experience for this their opinion; for (say
they) the Pope some times deposes Bishops and depriueth them of all
Jurisdiction, which he could not do if this Jurisdiction were given immediately
by Christ, and not by him self.

14. But whether of these opinions we admit (as both are probable) it is all
one for my purpose; for that at least co^plete Jurisdiction, or the lawful and
valid use of it, is from the Pope. For be it that the Bishop and Priest have
their Jurisdiction in respect of the active power from Christ immediately and
by ordination, as the Doctors of the first opinion do hold; yet they grant
that the Bishop and Priest cannot validlie exercise this their power of
Jurisdiction unless the Pope, who at first divided Dioceses and Parishes,
assign unto the Bishop his Diocese to the Priest his Parish, on whom he may
exercise this his Jurisdiction; for else they are not his subjects; And if the
Pope deprive the Bishop of his Bishopric, or the Pastor of his Pastourship,
he consequently depriueth them of subjects; and so though still they have the
power of Jurisdiction, and cannot (as these Doctors auerre) be deprived by the
Pope of it, they holding it from Christ immediately, yet because the Pope
depriueth them of their subjects, neither the Bishop nor Pastor can exercise
with validity this their Jurisdiction.

15. Out of all this we may gather first, that as all Priests are equal in
their power of order, so are all Bishop in theirs, and only the difference
betwixt Bishops (as the Pope, the Patriarch or Primate, the Archbishop and
Bishop) is in honor and Jurisdiction, All Bishops equal in power of order: so
all Priests equal in priesthood.
not in power of order; in which the Bishop is as great as the Archishop,
Patriarch and Pope; even as the Priest in his order of Priesthood is as great
as they all, neither the Bishop nor Archbishop nor Patriarch nor Pope being in.
Priesthood greater then he.

16. The Bishop is superior in power of Jurisdiction.
Secondly that Bishops though equal amongst them selves in power of order,
are superior to Priests, as well in power of order as Jurisdiction as I have
already proved out of scripture, and by co^paring their powers together.

S. Hierom seems to favor Aerius, but do^^ not.
17. I know that saint Hierom Hier^n. in p. ad Tit. ep. ad Euagrium
is all aged by some as a favorer at least in part of Aerius his opinion,
who, as above we have seen, makes the Priest and Bishop all one. And they
allege saint Hieroms own words in his commentaries upon the Epistle to Titus,
and in his explication of these words: Huius rei gratia reliqui te Cretae: For
this cause I left thee in Crete. For there he says: Idem est Presbyter qui
Episcopus. And in an Epistle to Euagrius which begins; Legimus in Isaia:
where after he has proved that in the Apostles time a Priest and Bishop had
one name, and thence infers that they are all one, he adds: Quod autem
postea vnns electus est qui caeteris praeponeretur in schismatis remedium
factum: But that after wards one was elected to be set above the rest, it was
done for a remedy against schism. For (says he) At Alexandria from saint
Mark the Evangelist to Heraclas and Dionysius Bishops, the Priests placed in
an higher degree one elected from amongst them, whom they called Bishop. As if
an army make an Emperor, or Deacons do choose one amongst them whom they
know to be industrious, and call him Archdeacon: for what does the Bishop
(ordination excepted (which the Priest may not do. Thus he. By which words he
seems to auerre that the Bishop had not at the first superiority over the
Priest, but that afterward to avoid occasion of schism, the Priests chose one
from amongst them and nominated him Bishop. Which his manner of speech may
argue that Bishops are not greater then Priests by Christ's institution, but by
the Church or Pastors election, and that otherwise in order they are all one,
and differ only in dignity or Jurisdiction.

18. Wherefore some divines Vasquez.
do grant that saint Hierom was of this opinion, yet did not iumpe with Aerius
the Heretic: for that Aerius denied all just and lawful distinction, and
said that the Church iniustlie had elevated the Bishop above the Priest; but
saint Hierom at least confesses that justly and not without good reason the
Church or Pastors placed the Bishop above the Priest in dignity and office.

19. S. Hierom defended.
Yet other divines to whom subscribeth Baronius Baron. to. 1. Annal.
do interpret saint Hierom more favorably; and say, that saint Hierom
denies not but that Bishops by their caracter and order received in their
ordination from Christ, are greater then Priests; for that in the same Epistle
to Euagrius he says of Bishops: Quid facit (excepta ordinatione Episcopus
quod presbyter non faciat? What does the Bishop, (ordination excepted) which
the Priest may not do. Where he grants that the Bishop can ordain
ministers of the Church which the Priest cannot. And in the same Epistle
speaking of Bishops, he says: Caeterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt:
But all of them are successors of the Apostles; but the Apostles as they were
made Priests at the last supper Mat. 26.
and in the 20. of Saint John, Joan. 20.
as above we have showed, so they were made Bishops immediately by Christ: And
therefore Bishops are not made by men, but by Christ immediately by the
ministry of three Bishops. And in his Dialogue against the Luciferia^s:
Hicronymus in. Dial. contra Luciferianos.
But if thou demand (says he) Quare in Ecclesia Baptizatus etc. Why he that
is Baptized in the Church receives not the holy ghost but by the hands of the
Bishop? learn that this observation descends from that anthoritie that after
the Assension of our Lord, the holy ghost descended upon the Apostles.
Wherefore these divines (to whom I rather subscribe for honor of saint Hierom)
do think that saint Hierom only means in his former words alleged out of
his Epistle to Euagrius, S. Hierom explicated
that Bishops and Priests are all one in Priesthood, and in the time of the
Apostles had one name, and that then Priests by the practice and custom of the
Church did sit in Council with the Bishop, and did with them by common
counsel govern the Church; though after, when the number of Bishops and
Priests increased, Priests were no more admitted to this dignity, but the
Bishop took on him the superiority which he had by his order, and
principally governed the Church by him self. The Bishop and Priest make two
eminent orders.
By this Chapter then it is evident that The Bishop and Priest are distinct in
order and degree, and that consequently they make two eminent orders in the
Hierarchy of the Church.

THE VII. CHAPTER. Bishops and Priests are of the highest orders of the Church:
and so to be honored and obeyed.
1. OVt of that which has been said in the precede^t chapters it follows
evidently, that the Bishop in power and dignity of order takes the highest
room and dignity in the Church of God. The Bishop as high in the power of
Order as the primate and Pope. The Pope highest in Jurisdiction and dignity:
For although the Archbishop and Primate be above him in power of Jurisdiction
and Ecclesiastical dignity, yet in the order and power of Bishop, he is as
high as any of them, even as the Pope himself. True it is, that the Pope is
head of the Church, and Pastor Pastorum, Pastor of the Bishops themselves, (as
above I have demonstrated) yet this superiority is in Jurisdiction, The acts
and offices of the Pope.
by which he can prescribe laws to the whole Church; can call councelles, and
define and decree with infallibility controversies of faith: by which he may
create and inthronise Bishops out of his Diocese; and depose them again; by
which he can excommunicate the^; by which he may canonise saints, give
Indulgences, send preachers into pagane countries, erect new Bishoprics,
suspend, dispense, reserve cases even from Bishops etc. Yet all this
superiority is only in power of Jurisdiction, which in him is supreme: but in
the power of order, the Bishop can validlie do as much as he, for that he may
ordain Priests, and confirm the baptized as well as he; The Bishop by power
of order can validlie do all the Pope can do in that kind.
and although if he shall suspend the Bishop from these offices, as he may, the
Bishop shall sin in doing them: yet if he ordain or confirm, what he does
shall be valide, these his functio^s proceeding from his character and power of
order, which (as we have seen above) he holds and receives immediately from
Christ, and not from the Pope or any humane power. And therefore in degree of
order the poorest Bishop is as great as the richest and greatest Patriarche;
yea as the Pope himself, there being but one order of a Bishop, in which all
are equale amongst themselves, and superior to Priests, much more to the
laity, be they Princes or Monarchs.

2. Two Co^clusions.
Whence I may deduce two conclusions; the one that the Bishop is to be honored
of all, even of Monarchs, and Emperors: the second that he is also to be
hu^blie obeyed of all his subjects. The first proved, first by Fathers.
The first conclusion I prove first out of the testimony of holy fathers:
secondly out of the respect Emperors and Princes have borne unto them.
Amongst the fathers let Saint Ignatius Ignat. ep. ad Smynenses.
Bishop and martyr, and one of the most ancient as being the third Bishop of
Antioche after S. Peeter speak first: Honora (says he) Deum vt omnium
authorem, and Dominum, etc. Honor God as the author and lord of all; the
Bishop as the Prince of Priests, bearing the image of God: of God indeed, by
his principality, but of Christ by his Priesthood. And next to him we must
honor the king, for neither is any better or chiefer then God, or equale to
him in any thing, nor is there any thing in the Church of God greater them the
Bishop, who sacrifices to God for the health and salvation of the world, nor
is any equal amongst Princes to the King, who procures peace and justice
amongst the subjects. And then he adds: Omnia igitur vestra decenti ordine
perficiantur in Christo; Laici Diaconis subijciantur, Diaconi Presbyteris,
Presbyteri Episcopo, Episcopus Christo, sicut ipse patri: Let therefore all
your things be done in decent order in Christ. And how o holy Bishop, shall
that be? Thus says he; Let the lay people be subject to the Deacons, the
Deacons to the Priests, the Priests to the Bishop, the Bishop to Christ, as
he to his father. Where you se, that he will have the Bishop honored next to
Christ, None in heaven or earth greater then the Bishop in power of order.
as he places him in dignity next to Christ. And in deed in regard of his
power of order there is none in earth or heaven, (be he an Archangel, nay a
Cherubin or Seraphin) that is above the Bishop. For which of the Angels has
the power over the natural body of Christ, as the Priest has (as above we
have seen?) who of the Angels has that power over the mystical body of
Christ, the Church which he has in ordaining the Churches ministers, in
confirming her children and feeding and governing her, as he has? For cui
Angelorum dictum est, pascite, qui in vobis est, gregem Dei? 1. Pet. c. 5.
verse. 2.
To which of the Angels was it ever said, feed the flock of God that is
among you? To Bishops it was said. Actoru^ c. 20. verse. 28.
To whom of the Angels was it ever said; Attendite vobis and vniuerso gregi,
in quo vos Spiritus Sanctus posuit Episcopos regere Ecclesiam Dei, quam
acquisiuit sanguine suo: Take heed to your selves and to the whole flock,
wherein the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church of God,
which he purchased with his own blood: To Bishops it was said. The same holy
father in the same epistle says, that who honors the Bishop, shall be
honored of God, and who dishonors him, shall be dishonored of God. And in
his epistle to the Trallians: S. Ignatius ^p. ad Trall.
Quid aliud est Episcopus, quam is, qui omni principatu and potestate superior
est? What else is a Bishop, but he, that is superior to all principality and
power? And again ep. ad Philadelp.
in his epistle to the Philadelphians: Boni sunt Sacerdotes, and sermonis
ministri, melior autem est pontifex, cui credita sunt sancta sauctorum, cui
soli commissa sunt se. reta Dei: Pri^stes are Good, and ministers of the world,
but better is the Bishop, to whom are committed the holies of holies, to whom
only the secrets of God are committed.

3. S. Ambrose Ambr. de dignitate secerdatali c. 2.
comes not behind saint Ignatius in extolling episcopal dignity: Honor and
sublimitas Episcopalis nullis poterit comparationibus adaequari. Si regum
fulgori compares, and principum diademati, long erit inferius, quasi plumbi
metallam ad auri fulgorem compares; quippe cum videas regum colla and principum
submitti genibus sacerdotum, exosculatis eorum dextris orationibus eorum se
credunt communiri: The episcopal hononr and sublimitie cannot be equalized by
any comparisons. If thou compare it to the splendor of Kings and the diadem
of Princes, it shall be much less, as if thou should compare the metal of
lead to the luster of Gold; for as much as thou see the necks of Kings and
Princes subjected to the knees of Priests, whose right hands they kissing, do
believe that they be protected and defended by their prayers.

4. Saint Chrysostom, Chrysostom. Hom. 4. de verbis I^ saiae.
that torrent of eloquence, speaking of the power and dignity of a Priest, and
especially of the high Priest the Bishop, has these words: Mayor hic
principatus; propterea rexcaput submittit manui sacerdotis and vbique in veteri
scriptura sacerdotes inungebant reges: Greater is this principality and
therefore the king submits his head to the hand of the Priest, and every
where in the old testament Priests did anoint kings. And again; Hom. 5. de
verbis Isaeiae.
Siquide^ sacerdotium principatus est ipso etiam regno venerabilius ac maius
etc. Because the Priesthood (especially of the high Priest and Bishop) is a
principality, and that more venerable and greater then the kingdom it self.
Speak not to me of the purple and diadem and golden robes, these all be but
shadows, and more vain then spring slowers. Speak not to me of these
things, but if thou will se the difference betwixt a king and a Priest
(especially a Bishop) weigh the power given to them both and thou shall see
the Priest sitting much higher in dignity then the king. Much more he has in
that place to this effect.

5. Saint Gregoire Nazianzene. Bishop, in an oration Greg. Naz. orat. 17. ad
pop. timore perculsu^.
he made, converting his speech to the prefects, and even to the Emperor
Valentinian, uses these words: An me libere loquentem aequo animo feretis?
nam vas quoque potestati meae meisque subsellijs lex Christi subijcis, imperiu^
enim ipsi quoque gerimus, add etiam praestantius, and perfectius, nisi vero
aequ^ est spiritum carni fasces submittere, and caelestia terrenis cedere. Sed
non dubito, quin hanc dicendi libertatem (o imperator) in optimam partem
excepturus sis, vtpote sacrimei gregis ouis sacra, magnique pastoris alumna
etc. Will you take in Good part what I shall speak freely? For the law of
Christ does submitt you also unto my benches: For we also bear empire, and I
add also, mere excellent and more perfect: unless it be meet to submit the
spirit to the flesh, and that things celestial should yield to things that be
terrene. But I doubt not (O Emperor) but that thou will take in Good part
this my freedom of speech, as being a holy sheep of my holy flock, brought
up under the great Pastor, etc.

6. Here I intend not to detract from the king; I acknouledge with S. Ignatius
Ignatius supra ep. ad Smyrnen ses.
that there is nothing equal to the king in the common wealth, as there is
nothing in the Church above the Bishop in power of order. I say and
conconfesse with Tertullian: Tertul. li^. aduersus ^capulam.
colimus imperat^rem (regem) sic, quo modo and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit,
vt hominem a Deo secundum, solo Deo minorem: We honor the Emperor (the king)
so, as it is lawful for us, and expedient for him, as a man second to God, and
only less then God: For that in temporal power he has none above him but
God, by whom and under whom only he reigns.

7. The former Conclusion proved secondly by Emprours and Kings.
Secondly how a Bishop is to be honored the kings and Emperors themselves
will testify, who have ever done great homage unto him. Constantine the great,
as Rufinus Ruf^^n l. 1. c. 2. Constantine.
relates, when certain Bishops assembled at the Council of Nice, offered
unto him certain memorialls, in which were complaints and accusations of one
another, he said unto them: Deus vos constituit sacerdotes, and potestatem
vobis dedit de nobis quoque iudicandi etc. God has constituted you Priests,
and has given you power to judge even of us, and therefore we are rightly
judged of you: but you cannot be judged of men. For which cause, do you expect
only God his judgment betwixt you: and your differences and contentions,
whatsoever they be, let them be reserved to the divine examination, for you are
given of God to us as our Gods, and it is not meet that a man should judge
Gods, but he only, of whom it is written: Psalm. 81. verse. 1.
God stood in the assembly of Gods, and in the midst he judges Gods. And
when this Emperor entered into the Council, he so reverenced that grave
assembly and senate of fathers, that he would not sit down, till that they
had entrea ted him.

8. Theodosius.
Theodosius an Emperor also, as Theodorete Theodor. lib. 5. hist. c. 18.
records, so honored saint Ambrose Bishop of Milan, that he accepted with
all submission a public penance prescribed by him, and was content at the
same Bishops commandment to depart out of the chancell, and so sit amongst
the laity.

9. Gainas Theod. l. 5. c. 33.
though an Arian and prefect of the Emperors army, and so potent that the
Emperor feared him, so reverenced saint John Chrysostom bishop and
Patriarche, that when he was sent from the Emperor unto him as Ambassador
into Thracia, where at that time Gainas played the tyrant and rebel; Gainas.
Gainas hearing of his coming, went a good way to meet him, and when he was
come to him, he used all reverence to him, and took the Bishops hands and put
them on his eyes, and made his children kneel down to receive his blessing.
Many other examples I could here allege of the reverence of Emperors and
kings not only to the Pope, but also to inferior Bishops.

10. Valentinian.
Valentinian the Emperor after that Auxentius an Arian Bishops of Milan was
dead, wished the Bishops to choose him to be Bishop of Milan, who by doctrine
and good examples may instruct the people. Theodoret. l. 4. hist. ca. 5. and 6.
Cui nos quoque imperij moderatores nostra subdamus sincere capita, cuiusque
reprehensiones tanquam medicinae curam libenter admittamus: To whom we also
may subject our head, and whose reprchensions we may admit as a cure of
physic: And so they made choice of saint Ambrose.

11. When Valentinian vouchsafed not to rise out of his regal throne to saint
Martin Bishop, Fortunat. l. 3. de vita S. Martini. Sever. Sulpit. l. 2. Dial.
c. 7.
fire suddenly issued out of his chair, and made him not only rise, but
also cast himself prostrate at his feet. And the Emperesse like an other S.
Marie Magdalene could not be persuaded to leave kissing his feet.

12. I otharius king of France prostrated himself before S. Lupus Bishop. Ex
Annalibus Franc.
The kings of Spain when they came to a Council of Bishops used to prostrate
themselves before them. Leo Castrens. Comment. in Isa. c. 49.
Saint Austin Augser. 18 de verbis Apostoli.
insinuates it to have been the custom of Christians to fall at the Bishops
feet, saying: Ad Ecclesiam curris, Episcopum videre cupis, ad eius pedes
volutaris: Thou runnest to the Church, thou desire to se the Bishop, thou
fallest at his feet.

13. In our country we want not examples of respect borne to Bishops not
only by the people, but also by the kings themselves. How king Oswald honored
Bishop Aidan, and how his son and successor king Oswin prostrated himself
at his feet, Venerable Bede Beda lib. 3. c. 3.
has set down for an example to posterity. How much king Ina reave rented S.
Aldelme Bishop, Malmesburie Malmesburie l. 3. de gest is Pont. Angior.
relates. What a reverent respect our kings bore to S. Dunstan Archbishop of
Canterbury, and to Saint Hugh Bishop of Lincoln our chronicles do record. No
country more honored Bishops, then England did, as appears by the goodly
palaces, and the great revenues they had, and by the esteem our kings had of
them, who admitted them for Lords of the Parliament and Peers of the realm,
and some for his privy Counsel, and the Archbishop of Canterbury for chief
of the Counsel, and consecratour of the king. The English people were
heretofore so devoted to their Bishops, that when a Bishop passed by any town
or village they rung their bells, and carried their children in great troops
to be confirmed of him, or to receive his benediction, as appears by one
example in Malmesburie Malmesb l. 3. de Gest is Pontif. Angloru^.
who records, how a devout woman in the thick throng of those that brought
their children to Wilfride Bishop, brought also hers, though dead, to receive
his benediction, hoping thereby to receive her child again living, as in deed
she did. When S. Anselme on a time came to S. Bertins monastery he was
received as Surius Sur. 21 April.
writes, with great joy and honor of the people, Clergy and Monks and for
five days he was detained there, and all that time at the request of some of
the chief of the Town he confirmed great numbers who flocked to him thick and
threefould, having not had a Bishop for diverse years who had ministered that
Sacrament unto them.

14. And shall we now be less zealous for our Bishop, less respectfull unto
him? true it is that the two last Bishops, we have had, have not had those
riches, that splendor, which our Bishops in Catholic time had. But shall we
honor the^ the less for that? do reueneues make a Bishop or rather his
consecration and order? Nay rather we should honor them the more For that it
is not riches, nor wordlie honor that has made them undertake the office and
charge of a Bishop, but meerlie the Catholics good and comfort, for which
they expose even their liberties and lives. And although they have not that
wordlie honor, splendor, and riches, which our ancient Bishops had, yet they
are not inferior to them in degree of order, no nor in learning, life, nor
labor: and therefore are to be honored as much as they were, and to be
provided for according as these times will permit, because. Qui been praesunt
praesbyteri, duplici honor digni habea^tur, as S. Paul says 1. Tim. c. 5.
verse. 17.
the Priests that rule well (that is Bishops, as saint Chrysostom expounds,
and gathers out of the word Praesunt, Rule) let them be esteemed worthy of
double honor, that is, not only of the honor of capp and knee, but of
honorable maintenance also, as saint Thomas of Aquin S. Tho. tom. 2. in
comment. in ep. D. Paul.
expounds. Of the first Ecclesiasticus speaks, when he says: Eccl. c. 4.
verse. 7.
Presbytero humilia animamtuam: To the ancient humble thy soul. Of the second
the wiseman speaks Prou. 3 c. 3. verse. 9.
saying: Honora Dominum de tua substantia; Honor our lord with thy substance,
and give to him of the first of all thy fruits. And of this double honor
those Priests and Bishops are worthy, who, as S. Paul 1. Tim. c. 5. verse. 1
immediately after says: Do labor in the word and doctrine, as our Bishop
and our Priests in England do. For, says he, The scripture says, Deuteronomy. 25.
verse. 4.
Thou shall not moselle the mouth of the ox, that treads out the corn, and
the workman is vvorthie of his hire.

15. The second conclusion proved.
My second conclusion deduced out of the dignity, power, and authority of a
Bishop (which above I have declared) to wit, that to the Bishop is due
obedience from his subjects, I easily prove. For first S. Paul Romans c. 13.
verse. 1.
says; Let every soul be subject to higher powers, for there is no power
but of God: But the Bishop has an higher power, (as above we have seen) for
he has power of order and jurisdiction, Ergo his flock is subject to it, and
must obey it. And this I confirm, for that this the Bishops power is from
Christ, who gives immediately his power of order, and if he gives not
immediately his power of Jurisdiction, as we have alleged some divines that
say so, yet at least he has given to S. Peeter and his Successor authority
to give Jurisdiction to the Bishop, and so this Jurisdiction mediatlie
proceeds from Christ; and therefore seeing that (as the Apostle in the same
place says) Those powers that are, of God are ordained, and that he that
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, it follovveth that the
subject, that resists the Bishops authority, resists God his ordinance,
and so sins.

16. Secondly saint Paul Hebr. c. 13. verse. 17
expresslie commands obedience to Bishops. Obey your prelates and be subject
to them. For they watch, as being to render account for your souls. Where
saint Thomas of Aquin S. Tho. in ep. ad Hebr. loco sit.
notes that the Apostle commands us to be obedient to our prelates,
because, Melior est obedientia quam victima: 1. Reg. c. 15. verse. 22.
Better is obedience then sacrifice: and to reverence them also, and therefore
he adds: Et subiacete eis: And be subject to them. And the reason why he so
strictly and so severely commands obedience is this: because (says he)
they watch, that is, are sollicitous and careful for your souls, as being
(because they are superiors, who have charge of souls) to render account for
them before the just judge; who (as Saint Thomas S. Tho. in c. 13. ad Hebr.
in the same place says) will at the day of judgment demand: Vbi est grex
qui datus est tibi, Hiere. 13.
pecus in^lytum tuum? Quid dices cum visitauerit te? Where is the flock, thy
glorious cattaile, which was given unto thee? What vvilt thou say when he
shall visit thee? Worthily therefore are we commanded to obey and reverence
our prelates, they having charge of our souls, and being to answer soul
for soul.

17. S. Ignatius Ignatius vbi supra ep. nd Smyrn.
therefore (as abone we have seen) commands all to obey the Bishop, as the
Prince of the Priests, bearing the image of God. And in his epistle to the
Magnesians Ignatius in ep: ad Magnes.
he will have us so obseruant and obedient to the Bishop, that we should do
nothing without his advise and Counsel, nor permit our selves to be separated
from our Bishop. And this he thinks to be the only means to keep us in
peace and concord; for if we be separated from the head, who is given us to
procure and conserve unity among the members, we cannot long aggree amongst
our selves. These be his words; And first he he says that it becomes us
Episcopo obedire, and in nullo illi contradicere. Terribile est enim tali
contradicere; non enim hunc qui cernitur etc. It becomes us to obey the
Bishop, and to contradict him in nothing: for it is terrible to contradict such
an one, for he that does so, does not deceive him, (the Bishop) who is seen;
but him, that is invisible, who cannot be deceived of any. For God says to
Samuel 1. Reg. c. ^. verse. 7
they deceived not thee but me; and Moses says: this murmuration is not
against us, but against our lord God. No man (says this holy father) remained
vnchastised, who extolled himself against superiors. And then he tells how
terribilie Dathan and Abiron for murmuring against Moses, and Chore for
resisting Aaron, and Ozias for encroching on the Priests office, and Saul for
disobeying Samuel, were punished: It behooves you therefore (says he) to obey
your superiour^ that you may not only be called, but truth be Christians; if
any call him Bishop, be yet do all without him, to such an one, he that is the
true, first, and only Bishop by nature will say, what do you call me lord,
lord, and do not the things I say? for such seem to me not to be men of good
conscience, but dissemblers, and Personati, such as take on them the persons
they are not. And a little after; I warn you to hasten to do all in concord,
the Bishop presiding and sitting in the place of God. And a little after that.
Nihil sit in vobis quod vos separare possit, sed vnu^ efficiamini cum Episcopo,
Deo subiecti per eum in Christo etc; Let there be nothing that may separate
you, but be ye made one with the Bishop. As therefore our lord (Christ Jesus)
does nothing without his father (for, says he, I can do nothing of my self)
so ye also, neither Priest, nor Dea^on, nor laike without the Bishop must do
any thing. Nor let any thing seem to you aggreable to reason, which is besides
his sentence, for that is wicked and odious to God. And in all his epistles
almost, he inculcateth nothing more then obedience and reverence to the Bishop.

20. You have heard how obedient Theodosius was to saint Ambrose, who did the
public penance he enjoined, and recalled his law, he had made, as saint
Ambrose commanded, and when he was in the Chauncell went out into the body of
the Church to sit amongst the laity, as he prescribed. Our king Ina (as
Malmesburie Malmes. l. 2. de gestis Reg. Angl. c. 2.
reports) honored Aldelm Bishop: Cuius ille praecep^a ^^diebat humiliter,
suscipiebat granditer, adimplebat hilariter; whose commandments he harkened
unto humbly, received amply, fulfilled them cheerfully. Let us then obey our
Bishop, as our lawful Superior, reverence him as lord and spiritual Prince,
love him as our father.

THE VIII. CHAPTER. Who in particular belong to the Hierarchy of the Church.
1. Having proved in the former Chapters, that the Church is a Hierarchy
consisting of diverse orders, of which the orders of Bishop and Priest are the
most principal, who also, as I have proved in the sixth Chapter, are distinct;
it follovveth now that I breeflie declare which in particular are these
orders, and whether all that are of dignity in the Church, be of the
Hierarchy, not only as the laytie is, which is of this Hierarchy, as the
common people are of the Kingdom, but also as they are who bear office and
have an eminent place in the Church.

2. Diversely christians are of the Hierarchy first in respect of order.
To the deciding of which controversy we must distinguish the diverse vvayes
that Christians may be of this Hierarchy. First then if we speak of this
Hierarchy as it imports distinction of degrees in power of order, then only
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons and other inferior ministers, as
Acolytes, Exorcistes, Lectors and Ostiarij are of the Hierarchy; and they
only; because there be no other orders, and consequently no other degrees of
orders then these. And so Cardinales, Patriarchs and Archbishops etc. Unless
they be Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or Subdeaco^s, etc. Are not of the
Hierarchy. And in this sense a Bishop that is only elected Bishop but not
consecrated, is not of the order of Bishops though he have Jurisdiction in the
exterior Court, and if he have none of the orders before named, but only
primam tonsuram, which (as above we said) is no order, but a disposition to
orders, he is not at all of the Hierarchy of order. So religious men though
for their state of life they be eminent in the Church of God; yet be they
Abbots or Prouincialles or Priours, are not, in that quality, of the
Hierarchy, as it consists of diverse orders; but only as they are Priests or
Deacons, etc. Because the names of a Cardinal, Patriarch Archbishop are only
titles of dignity and Jurisdiction, not of order; and the dignity of an Abbot
is a dignity in religion, but no order of the Church, as it consists of
diverse orders in the before said meaning. And, although taking order in the
sense above said, some Abbot may ordain Acolytes and Exorcistes and others of
the lesser orders; yet that he does not as Abbot by any Caracter of a religious
order, but by a privilege which the Pope grants to grace his dignity.

3. A ^^est^^ Wh^^^er all the^^ orders be insti^^^ed by Christ
If you ask me whether these orders be all Sacraments and of the divine
ordinance, or of the Churches Institution, I must answer that of all the seven
orders there is not the like certainty. For, that the orders of a Bishop,
Priest, Deacon, and Subdeacon are Sacraments, and orders instituted by Christ,
it is the common opinion of Divines, who prove it (as we above have proved)
out of holy scripture, Councelles and fathers: but as for the other four
lesser orders some divines say they are sacraments, and consequently are
instituted by Christ, Some say the 4 lesser orders are Sacraments.
and do give grace and imprint in the soul a Caracter. Of this opinion are
many and the grauest and learnedest divines, S. Th. in 4 d. 24. q. 2. a. 1. q.
7. Bon. ar. 2. q. 1. Ric. a. 4. qu. 1. Scotus d. 24. q. vnica Gab. in suppl. q.
4. a. 2. Mayor q. 1. Almain. q. 1. ar. 3.
as saint Thomas of Aquin, Richard de media villa, of Middleton, Saint
Bonauenture, Scotus, Gabriel, Mayor, Almainus and others. And these Doctors
would say that the whole Hierarchy of these seven orders, is of the divine
ordinance.

4. Others say the four lesser orders are no Sacraments, and consequently
give no grace, nor imprint any caracter; but are offices instituted by the
Church, though they be of ancient use and are mentioned by Clemens Romanus, by
Anacletus, S. Ignatius and others, as above we have partly seen. And of this
opinion is the master of sentence, Magist. in 4. a. 24. c. 7.
though he says also that Subdeaconship is of the Churches institution, where
in he co^tradicteth the greatest part of divines; who avouch that the order of
Subdeacon is an order instituted by Christ and a Sacrament, and in this sense
an holy order; though some have said it is not a sacred order; not because it
is not a Sacrament, and in that respect not sacred; but because heretofore the
sacred vow of Chastity was not by the Church annexed to it, as afterward it
was. With the master of sentences other divines do hold as Durand, Dur. d. 24.
q. 2.
Caietan Caiet. to. 1. Opas. Truc. 11.
and others. And these would say that the lesser orders are not ordained and
iustituted immediately by Christ, but by the Church. And therefore, say they,
there has been mutation in these lesser orders: for of the order of an
Acolyte S. Ignatius and S. Clement who reckon other lesser orders make no
mention, which yet after, was an order. And the office of Cantor or Psalmista
(as they say) was ancientlie taken for an order, now it is not so esteemed:
which argues that the Church instituted them as occasion was offered

5. But which so ever opinion go for current, certain it is that the order of
Bishops, Priests, Deacons and Subdeacons are of the divine Institution.
Wherefore the Council of Trent Conc. Trid. sess. 23. can. 6.
thus pronounces: Si quis dixerit in Ecclesia non esse Hierarchiam diuina
ordinatione institutam, A Hierarchy in the Church of Bishops etc.
quae constat ex Episcopis, and Presbyteris, and ministris: Anathema sit: If
any one shall say that there is not in the Church a Hierarchy instituted by
the divine ordinance, which consists of Bishops, Priests and ministers; let
him be accursed. In which words the Council defining that there is a
Hierarchy instituted by the divine ordinance, and which consists of Bishops,
Priests and ministers; by Ministers in the plural number, must needs
understand at least Deacons and Subdeacons. So that this Hierarchy of order,
at least in respect of Bishops, Priests Deacons and Subdeacons is instituted by
Christ, and so cannot be altered, as here after we shall see. And in the same
session it defines Concilium Trid. sess. 23. c. 4.
that Bishops especially do appertain to this Hierarchy.

6. Secondly in respect of Jurisdiction. In poweer of Jurisdiction and
dignity, orders among Bishops.
But if we speak of a Hierarchy as it imports a distinction of degrees in
power of Jurisdiction and dignity, then besides the aforesaid orders there are
others. For in power of Jurisdiction, as we have seen above, there are distinct
degrees amongst Bishops, who in power of order make but one order. Wherefore
Anacletus Anacl. ep. 3.
says. Episcoporu^rero ordo vnus est, licet sint pri^nates etc. The order of
Bishops is one although there be primates and Archbishops and other degrees; to
wit, not in order, but in Jurisdiction. And in this respect there are diverse
orders and degrees amongst Bishops in the Church of God: which make also a
kind of Hierarchy and distinction of degrees not in power of order, but
Jurisdiction and dignity: To wit, Patriarchs or Primates, Archbishops and
Bishops: and heretofore Patriarchs were of the highest rank of Bishops,
Patriarchs bertofore, now Cardinals are next to the Pope in Ecclesiastical
dignity.
and amongst them the Patriarchs of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioche; and
afterward of Constantinople had the precede^ce; after whom followed
Archbishops and Bishops: but now Cardinals, and ever since they were
Counselors to the Pope and his Electours take place of all Patriarchs, How
Cardinals are of the Hierarchy; How religious are of the Hierarchy.
and are in dignity next to the Pope. But these also as Bishops, Priests,
Deacons etc. are of the Hierarchy of the Church, as it consists of diverse
orders, but as Cardinals, Patriarchs, and Archbishops, they are not of the
Hierarchy of the Church, as it consists of diverse orders; because their
degrees are not orders; yet in Jurisdiction and dignity they are emine^t, and
give a great luster and splendor to the Church.

7. Now as touching religious (of whom I shall make honorable mention here
after, as I shall also of Cardinals) they, as Religious, are not of this
Hierarchy as it consists of diverse degrees in power of order or Jurisdiction
over the Church, because as religious, they have no power of order; no nor of
Jurisdiction, but in their own order; though if they be Bishops, as many times
they have been, and are, yea many times have been Archbishops, Primates; Yea
and Popes: then they pertain to the Hierarchy of the Church in both
respects. Yet religious, even as religious, are a great ornament to the
Church, and are in this sense of the Hierarchy of the Church, in that they
are eminent members of the Church, and are ordained to help and assist Bishops
and Pastors in preaching and hearing confessions, as the Pastors shall desire
and need, or as their privileges shall permit them.

8. Twoe sorts of Religious
These as Cardinal Bellarmine Bell. to. 1. l. 1. de monachis c. 1,
has well observed, are of two sorts: some are called Monachi Monks, whose
profession is to live solitarilie in their Monasteries and there separate to
vacare contemplationi, to attend to contemplation, and to the contemplative,
not the Active life. And therefore saint Hierom Hieronymus ep. ad Heliodor.
says: Interpretare vocabulum Monachi, hoc est, tuum: quid facis in turba qui
solus es? Interpret the name of a Monk, that is, thy name; what do thou
amongst the people, who (by profession) art alone? such (says he) are the
Benedictins of Monte Cassino, and others of that order, the Cistercians,
Carthusians, Camaldulenses, and such like. Others by the Institution of their
order do apply the^ selves not only to the contemplative life, but also to
the Active, in ayding Bishops and Pastors by their Preaching and
administration of the Sacraments of Confession, and the Sacrament of the sacred
Euchariste, and these, says he, are not called Monks, but regulars or
Religious. But although Monks by their Institution should keep them selves
with in their Monasteries, and apply them selves only to contemplation and
prayer and singing their office in the Quiere; yet in times of necessity they
also by the Pope have been licensed to go abroad, and to preach to Infidels, as
saint Austine and his fellow Monks preached in our Country and converted it,
and as other Monks have preached to other Countries, and with great fruit
also. But yet all of them are only to help the Bishops and Pastors, and have
no Sacrament or power of order amongst them, as regulers; but only, as such
have Religious titles and offices amongst them selves.

9. Wherefore Saint Francis conmaunded his religious not to preach against the
Bishops will. Reg. S. Francisci. cap. 9.
So saint Xauier, as Tursellinus Turselin. l. 6. de vita S. Xauerij cap. 8.
in his life relates, would not have those of his order to preach, or do the
offices of the Society without license from the Bishop or his Vicaire. These
are Tursellinus his words: Erga Episcopos vero eorumquevicarios Xauerij
veneratio iuxta and obedientia insignis fuit. Nam diuinum in eis numen venerans
ex illorum auctoritate, sua munia obire gestiebat. Eis denique prorsas omnibus
in rebus dicto obediens erat. Idem caeteros e Societate facere iubebat, a
nostris hominibus obedientiae in praepositos Ecclesiastieos prodendum exempl^m
dictitans: But Xauerius his reverence and obedience toward Bishops and their
Vicars was remarkable. For he reuerencing in them the divine power, delighted
to do his functions by their authority. To be brief in all things he was
obedient to them. The same he bad the rest of the Society to do, dictating to
our men a notable example of obedience toward Ecclesiastical Prelates. And a
little after: Eandem obedientiam aduersus praepositos Ecclesiasticos exigeb it a
socijs, vt non conciones haberent ad pop^l^m, non societatis munia obirent,
nisi facta ab Epis^opo aut Vicario potestate. The same obedience to the
Prelates of the Church, he exacted of his fellows, that they should not
preach to the people, nor do any functions of the Society unless they first
have leave of the Bishop. And although he was the Popes Legate, yet in the
Country where he was Legate, he reverenced not only Bishops and their Vicars,
but also Priests, carrying him self rather as a servant to them all then as
the Popes Legate. And in the rules of the mission of tohle of the Society
Regu. la 8 Societatis.
in the seventh rule, they are commanded that so soon as they are entered into
any places where the ordinary resideth, they offer their help and labors
humbly unto him and demand leave modestly of him.

10. And therefore these titles of Patriarchs, Archbishops, Priests and
Pastors are not titles or orders of Religious, as they are religious, but
only of the secular Clergy and Hierarchy of the Church: And these titles of
Abbots, Priours, Prouincialles etc. Though honorable, are not titles or orders
of the Hierarchy of the Church as it imports distinction of orders; but
only of the Religious state and profession Wherefore not only the Wiclefists
and the Lutherans and Caluinists of this time are worthily condemned for
condemnig the Religious orders, as we shall see hereafter but also some others
who have opposed them and accused them as perturbers of the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy; are very much to be blamed, as they were by S. Th. Aquin. Opusc.
19. Bern. Apol. ad Gul. Abbatem. Bonauen.
saint Thomas of Aquin, saint Bonauenture and S. Bernard in their Apologies
they made for their orders. For that by these diverse orders of Religious, the
Hierarchy of the Church is adorned, the Pastors are aided, and the people is
edified and stirred up to devotion: and if any Religious do oppose the
Pastors and Prelates of the Church, or do in any sort molest them or by their
evil life do disedifie the people, it is the fault of those Religious, not of
the Religious orders, which by the ancient Fathers are allowed and highly
commended.

THE IX. CHAPTER. Who of the Hierarchy of the Church are designed by the
divine ordinance to govern the Church, to preach, and to minister Sacraments.
1. AS in a temporal Kingdom (to which above Cap. 2.
we compared the Church) every one is not to rule or govern, to prescribe
laws, to enacte statutes, or to administer Justice (for that would breed
confusion) but only the king principally, and under him his officers, Judges
and magistrates: so in the Church every one is not to arrogate to him self
the government thereof, which consists in making ecclesiastical laws, in
calling cou^cells, in preaching and ministering of Sacraments, but he only qui
vocatur a Deo tanquam Aaron: Heb. c. 5. verse. 4.
Who is called unto it from God as Aaron was.

2. In the old law Deuteronomy. 17. Exodus 28. Nume. 3. Leuit. 8.
not every one of the people was to meddle in matters of the law, in offering
sacrifices and in governing the Synagogue, but only the tribe of Leui, Aaron
and his Children, and their successors Wherefore when Core, Dathan and Abiron
with their followers rose up against Moses and Aaron, and arrogated the
Priesthood unto them selves which pertained only to Aaron and his sons,
saying unto them: Number. 16.
Let it suffice you that all the multitude consists of holy ones, and our
Lord is among them: So Luther and Calvin say all are Priests alike.
why lift you up your selves above the people of our Lord? God punished them
most seuerlie, causing some to be swallowed up by the earth others to be
consumed by fire. And when Ozias King would entermedle in the Priests office to
offer Incense, Azarias the high Priest accompanied with eighty other Priests
resisted him, and said: 2. Pa^al ca. 26. verse. 18.
It is not thy office Ozias, to burn incense to our Lord, but of the Priests,
that is, of the Children of Aaron which are consecrated to this kind of
ministry. And because he obeyed not, God at the same instant marked him with
a leprosy in the forhead.

3. So in the Church of Christ, of which the Synagogue was a figure, not every
one is to entermeddle in the government of the Church, in preaching or
ministering Sacraments, but they only whom Christ our high Priest has
appointed. For as he only founded the Church and purchassed it with his
blood: Act. 20. verse. 28.
So he only is to appoint the governors and ministers of the Church. And who
are they? In a word, they are the Apostles and their Successors; the Apostles
for their time, their Successors after the Apostles time.

4. For if we speak of the administration of the Sacraments, The minister of
Baptism.
we shall find that by Christ's Institution and ordinance, to the Apostles and
Disciples and their Successors Bishops and Priests that charge was committed.
Who were commanded to baptize but the Apostles, Disciples and their
Successors? For to them it was said: Matt. c. 28. verse. 19.
Euntes ergo docete omnes gentes etc. Going therefore teach ye all nations
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the son and of the holy
ghost. Out of which words divines S. Th. 3. p. q. 67.
do gather that the office of baptizing appertains first to Bishops who are
the Apostles Successors, and to Priests either by commission of the Bishop,
who may give any Priest commission to Baptize in his Diocese, or by grant of
a Pastorship, by which they, as ordinary Pastors, may baptize; a Deacon by
his caracter and ordination is apt to baptize solemnlie when the Priest is
wanting, if it be committed to him by the Bishop, but he cannot be a Pastor.
Others cannot baptize solemnlie but only in necessity and priuatlie, and
without solemnity and the ceremonies of the Church. Wherefore Tertullian
Tertul. lib. de Baptismo ca. 17.
speaking of the minister of Baptism sareth: Dandi quidem habet i^s summus
Sacerdos qui est Episcopus, dehine Presbyteri and Di^coni, non autem sine
Episcopi authoritate: The right of giving Baptism the chiefest Priest has,
who is the Bishop and after him Priests and Deacons, but not without the
Bishops authoritis. Yet in necessity any, even weomen, or Infidels, without
solemnity may baptize, so they use the right matter, to wit elementarie water,
and the right form of words.

5. The Minister of Confirmation.
The minister of Confirmation is the Bishop, as above we have proved, for that
the Apostles only Act. 8. and 19.
by Imposition of hands gave the holy ghost whose Successors are Bishops who
ever have done that office. And therefore the cou^celles of Florence Conc.
Flor. in decreto sidei.
and I rent Conc. Trid sess. 7. can. 3.
have defined that the ordinary minister of this Sacrament is a Bishop, though
as some think the Priest having commission from the Pope may be extraordinary
minister of it. The Minister of the Sacrament of the Altar.


6. The holy Sacrament of the Altar Priests only do minister; for to the
Apostles, and in them to Priests, it was said at the last supper: Luc. 22. ^.
Cor. 11.
Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Do ye this for a commemoration of me. At
which time, as the Council of of Trent Cinc. Trid. sess. 22. cap. 1.
defines, and we above Above chap. 5.
have showed, the Apostles were made Priests. And so Priests are ordinary
ministers of the Eucharist; heretofore Deacons were by commission only to
distribute it but never to consecrate it.

7. The Minister of the Sacrament of Confession or penance.
The minister of the Sacrament of Confession or penance, is he who can in it
absolve from sins confessed, that is, the Bishop and Priest: for to them in
the Apostles it was said Mat. c. 18. verse. 18.
Whatsoever you shall bynd upon earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever
you shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed also in heaven. To them also it was,
said. Joan. c. 20. verse. 23.
Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them etc. Wherefore the
Catholic people of the Vandals when their Priests were banished by the
Arrians, cried out pitifully: Victor Vticensis de perseg. VVandalica.
Who shall baptize these infantes? who shall minister penance unto us, and
loose us from the bands of sins? and saint Cyprian Cypr. ep. 54.
accounts those Priests cruel who permit penitents to to depart this life
without absolution and reconciliation received by them.

8. The Minister of the Sacrament of order.
The minister of the Sacrament of order is the Bishop, for that, as above we
have seen, he with two other Bishops can consecrate a Bishop, and alone
ordains Priests and other inferior ministers; and therefore, as Epiphanius
Epiph. Hier. 75.
says, and as above Above chap. 6.
we have seen, he is Patrum generator, he by the Sacrament of order begets
fathers that is Priests: the Priest by baptism is Generator filioru^, a
spiritual begetter of Children. And therefore saint Paul 1. Tim. c. 4. verse.
14.
charge Timothy, not to neglect the grace that is in him with Imposition of
hands of Priesthood, that is, of a company of Bishops, as the Greek
Interpretours expound. And so the council of Trent Conc. T^id. sess. 25. can.
7.
condemns as heretics all those that say, that a Bishop is not greater
then a Priest, or has not power to confirm and ordain etc.

9. The Minister of Extreme Unction.
The Minister of Extreme Unction is the Priest, as saint James Iacobica. 5.
Verse. 14.
in his Epistle does assure us, saying: Is any man sick among you? let him
bring in the Priests of the Church, and let them pray on him, anoyling him with
oil in the name of our Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick etc.
And if he be in sins they shall be remitted to him. And so none but a Priest
can minister this Sacrament, as out of S. James his words the Fathers, and
councelles Innoc. 1. ep. ad Decent. Bern. in vita. S. Malachiae c. 32. Conc.
Cabilon. 2. c. 48.
do gather.

10. The Minister of matrimony.
The minister of matrimony, as some divines Canus lib. 8. de locis c. 8.
Syluius 3. p. q. 42. a. 1. q. 2. Con. 3.
say, is the Priest, for although (say they) it may be a civil contract
without the Priest, yet unless he say those words: Ego vos coniungo etc. It is
no Sacrament. others say that because matrimony is a civil contract, though a
Sacrament also, that the parties who contracte are the ministers of this
Sacrament, which is the opinion of Vasquez Vasq. disp 2. de matrim. c. 5. and
alij apud illu^.
and others. But whichsoeuer opinion be admitted, now since the council of
Trent Conc. Trid. sess. 24. c. 1.
and where it is received, matrimony contracted without the presence of the
Pastor or of another Priest by license of the Bishop or Pastor and 2. or 3.
witnesses, is inualid. But in England Clandestine marriages though seldom
lawful, yet are valid without the Priest his presence, because this decree of
the council has not yet been there promulgated (though it commands all
ordinaries to publish this decree so soon as they can) and the council will
not have it to be of force till thirty days after the publication of it in
the parish.

11. The ministry of Sacraments belongs to Bishops, Priests and Pastors.
By this it is easily seen that the ministry of Sacraments, which is a
principal function of the Hierarchy of the Church, appertains to Bishops
and Priests by the divine law and ordinance and institution; not to
Cardinals as Cardinals, nor to regulers as regulers; though to them also as
Bishops or Pastors, if they be called to these dignities.

12. Preac^ing oulie belongs to Bishops and Priests not to Deacons but by
Cominission.
Now as touching preaching, which was commanded for the instruction of the
people and conversion of Nations, that also by God his ordinance appertains
to Bishops and Priests, not to any others not Bishops or Priests; unless, by
commission, to Deaco^s and others. Wherefore to the Apostles, Disciples, and
their Successors, Christ said: Matt. c. 28. verse. 19.
Going therefore teach ye all Nations. And least any should demand what
authority Christ had to send preachers into the world, he tells us in the
words which go before, That all power is given to him in heaven and earth. And
again the same he inculcated by saint Mark: Marei c. 16. verse. 15.
Euntes in mundum vni^ersum praedicate Euangelium omni creaturae: Going into
the whole world, preach the Ghospel to all creatures, that is, to men. For as
saint Gregory says, man is all creatures in that he contains in him self
compendiouslie the perfection of all creatures. And it follows: Marc. c. 16.
verse. 20.
But they going forth preached every where, our Lord working with all, and
confirming the word with signs that followed. So saint Luke Lu^ae. c. 9. verse.
1. and 2.
tells us that Christ, calling together the 12. Apostles, he gave them
virtue, and power over all Diuills and to cure maladies. And he sent them to
preach the Kingdom of God. And again: Luc. c. 10. verse. 1.2. and 3.
And after this our Lord designed also other seventy two, and he sent them
two and two before his face into every City and place whether him self
would come. And he said unto them the harvest truly is much, but the workmen
(Preachers) few etc. Go: behold I send you as lambs amongst wolves, to make
them also by preaching sheep and lambs. Whence it follows that Bishops and
Priests by the divine ordinance have the office and right to preach. Wherefore
saint Thomas of Aquin 3. p. q. 67. a. 1. ad. 1.
says: Docere, id est, exponere Euangelium pertinet proprie ad Episcopum,
cuius actus est perficere secundum Dionysium, persi^ere autem idem est quod
docere. To teach, that is, to expound the Ghospel pertains properly to the
Bishop, whose act is to perfect, according to Dionysius, but to perfect is
all one as to teach. Yea the Council of Trent, Conc. Trid. sess. 5. c. 2.
because preaching is the principal office of Bishops, decrees that all
Bishops, Archbishops, Primates and all other Prelates of Churches are bound by
themselves, if they be not lawfully hindered, to preach the holy Gospel of
Jesus Christ: and if they be lawfully hindered, that they be bound to appoint
others to do this office. And the same Council Conc. Trid. sess. 24. c. 4.
in another place gives again the same charge to Bishops and Pastors of
Parishes.

13. Hence may evidently be deduced that the Apostles and disciples and their
Successors, Bishops and Priests, have by the divine ordinance authority and
right to preach to gentiles and to propagate the faith, but yet with a
dependence one the Chief Pastor. And therefore the first conversion of
Countries was done by the Apostles, Bishops and Priests. And although after
wards Regulars were admitted and sent to preach to the Gentiles, yet that
office does not appertain to the^ Iure ordinario, by the ordinary law, but
by privilege and extraordinarily. And therefore S. Thomas of Aquin S. Th. 2.2
q. 187. a. 1. in fine corp.
says that the state of Religion does not give unto monks and other
Religious authority to preach, teach, and to do such other offices: yet
Religious men may do these offices if they receive order, and ordinary
Jurisdiction, or if those offices which are of Jurisdiction be committed unto
them. And the Council of Trent Gone. Trid. sess. 24. c. 4.
forbids Regulars to preach even, in the Churches of their own orders
against the will of the Bishop.

14. The government of the Church pertains only to Bishops and Priests.
And as concerning the government of the Church, that also was committed first
to the Apostles and Disciples, then to their Successors, Bishops and Priests:
wherefore S. Paul Ephesians. c. 4. verse. 11. et. 12.
says that Christ gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and other some
Evangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors, to the consummation of the
Saints, That is, to the perfecting of them, that are already faithful (who
then were all called Saints) Unto the work of the ministry, that is, to the
ministering of Sacraments, preaching, and governing the Christians, Unto the
edisying of the body of Christ, that is, to the conversion of Gentiles, by
which the mystical body and Church of Christ is edified and propagated; and
these he has given Until we meet all in unity of faith etc. So S. Thomas of
Aquin D. Th. in hunc locum.
on this place place. And saint Paul says to Titus Tit. 1.
Bishop: For this cause I left thee in Crete: for what cause? that thou
should reform the things that are wanting, and should ordain Priests by
Cities, as I also appointed thee, that they may instruct the people, govern
them direct them, and minister Sacraments unto them. The same Apostle from
Miletum sends for the Clergy of Ephesus and when they were come to him he
gave them this Charge: Act. c. 20. verse. 28. et. 29.
Take heed to your selves and to the whole flock, wherein the holy Ghost has
placed you Bishops to rule the Church of God, which he has purchased with his
own blood. For (says he) I know that after my departure there will ravening
wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock etc. And S. Peeter 1. Petri.
c. 5. v. 1. and 2.
The Seniors therefore (that is Bishops and Priests in Greek, (...). That are
among you, I beseech my self a fellow Senior with them, that is, a fellow
Bishop and Priest etc. Pascite gregem Dei: feed the slocke of God which is
among you etc. So that by Christ his institution Bishops and Priests are to
govern the Hierarchy of the Church, to preach, to minister Sacraments, and
therefore at first they only preached the Gospel, converted countries; and
amongst the converted, placed Bishops and Priests to govern them, and to
minister Sacraments.

15. How Regulars are chosen to Eccleastisticall dignities.
But some may object that Regulars also have converted countries, have been
Bishops, yea Popes. To this I answer, that regulars in deed have been assumpted
and elected unto these dignities and offices: only I contend that by the
divine law and institution the government of the Church was not given to them,
but to Bishops and Priests (as we have seen) which names of Bishops and
Priests, are not names of regulars as regulars; for that at the beginning
especially, few regulars were Priests or Bishops; only the superior or
Abbote or some one other was Priest to say Mass and communicate the rest.
Vide Bellar. l. 2. de Monachis. c. 6. and Aug. ep. 81. and Epiph. ep. ad Joan.
Hierosol.
And it is not certain that saint Antonie, saint Benedicte, and saint Francis
(though founders of religious Orders) were Priests. Yea saint Bonauenture and
others expresselie say that saint Francis was only Deacon. Wherefore the
Council of Constantinople celebrated under John the eight Pope of thatname
says: Cone. Constable. Act. 5. and refertur 1. q. 7. c. Hoc nequaquam.
Monachoru^vita subiectionis habet verbu^, and discipulatus, non docendi, vel
praesidendi vel pascendi alios: The life of Monks has the word of Subjection
and of a scholar, not of teaching or presiding or ruling others. And saint
Hierom: S. Hier. ep. ad Ripar^^m.
Monachus non docentis sed plangentis habet officium: A monk has the office
not of a teacher, (or preacher) but of a mourner. And again: Alia causa est
monachorum, alia Clericorum. Clerici pascunt oues, ego pascor: Other is the
cause of Monks, other is the cause of Clerks: The Clerks feed the sheep, I
(says saint Hierom) ame fed. And saint Leo: S. Leo ep. ad Theodoritum.
refertur cap. Adij^imus. 16. q. 1.
hoc speciali^er statuentes vt praeter Domini Sacerdotes nullus audeat
praedicare sieve Monachus sieve Laicus ille sit, qui cuiusli^et scientiae nomine
glorietur. Ordaining this speciall^e that none be so bold as to preach but the
Priests of our Lord, whether he be a Monk, or a ^a^ma^, who may glory under
the name and title of whatsoever lerning. How Rogulars come to Ecclesiastical
dignities.


16. How then (will you say) came regulars to have charge of the Church with
other Bishops and and Priests? I answer that by these means this came to
pass. First the Popes and other Bishops knowing many regulars to be worthy of
Ecclesiastical dignities both for sanctity of life and learning, did assume
them to the Clergy, but as I said this their assumption to the Clergy, was
extraordinary. Secondly because Bishops and Priests were busied in governing
their Subjects, and so could not be spared and besides were bound to
residence; The Popes, when they found regulars fit for learning and Sanctity
of life, sent them to convert countries, in which they prospered so well, that
many Countries do aknowledge religious men for their Apostles and first
founders of religion amongst them. As we English Catholics acknowledge most
gratefully, S. Austine monk the Apostle of England.
saint Austine and his fellow monks for our Apostles; only this I contend,
which also I have proved, that this appertains only to Bishops and Priests
by the divine law and institution, not to regulars as regulars; who yet by
their vow and state of religion are not incapable of Ecclesiastical degrees.

17. This saint Thomas of Aquin S. Th. 2.2. q. 187. a. 1. in Corpore.
the honor, (after saint Dominicke the founder) of the order of the
Dominicans, and the glory of the Schools, explicateth thus: For he propounding
a question whether it be lawful for religious or regulars to preach and to do
other Ecclesiastical functions; answers to this effect: Two ways may it be
said that a thing is not lawful or conuenientfor a man. First because he has
in him self some thing that repugneth to it: So it is not lawful for any man
to sin, because he has reason and an obligation of the law of nature in
him, which opposes it self against all sinnne: So (says he) one that is
irregular may not take holy orders, because his irregularitie repugneth: So he
that is a public sinner cannot preach lawfully according to that: Ps. 49
verse. 16.
Pecratori autem dixit Deus, quare tu enarras iustitias meas: To a sinner God
said, Why deest thou prea^h my Justices? because his public sin repugneth
to preaching in that it makes the word of God or its preacher to be despised.
And in this sense, it is not unlawful for religious men to preach, and to do
other Ecclesiastical functions, for that their vow and state of life does not
repugne or make them less fit; but rather fitter for Ecclesiastical
dignities and degrees. Secondly a thing may be said to be lawful for one to
do; not because he has in him self any thing contrary to such an act or
fact; but because there is some thing wanting in him which is required to
perform such an Act; as a Deacon cannot say Mass (says he) because he
has not the order of a Priest; and a Priest must not give sentence, or
confirm, or ordain, because he has not Episcopal power and authority. And
in this second sense it is not lawful for monks or Regulars, to preach and to
do other Ecclesiastical functions. Yet they may do these things if they
receive order and Jurisdiction. And in his answer to the arguments he had
proposed to the contrary, he says, that saint Hieroms words and such like
above alleged, prove only that regulars as regulars, cannot exercise
Ecclesiastical functions; but prove not that such functions may not be
committed unto them. So that this learned and holy Doctor (though him self a
regular) grants that Regulars as Regulars are not called to Ecclesiastical
fu^ctions, as Bishops and Priests are; but yet affirms (which no good
Catholic can deny) that Regulars may be called to these functions to aid
Bishops and Pastors in the government of the Church; and to govern also when
the Church shall think good to call them, elect them, and ordain them
Bishops, Priests, and Pastors. The same doctrine the same Doctor deliureth in
his Opusculum S. Th. Opuse. 19.
which he wrote against impugners of Religious orders; for there he answers
to many obiectious framed out of the 16. q. 1. cap. alia est causa monachi.
cap. Adijcimus and cap. Iuxta and 7. q. 1. cap. uequaquam.
canon law and diverse fathers, who say that Regulars are not to be Pastors,
to preach or minister Sacraments; And his answer is, that monks and Regulars
as such, are not to presume to preach or Minister Sacraments of their own
authority, or without holy orders; but (says he) if they be called to it
and be ordained as others, then they may.

18. An objection answered.
But some may object that some Religious orders are instituted to preach, and
to convert nations as the Dominicans, Fancisca^s and Jesuits. Ergo to these at
least it appertains as well, as to the secular Clergy to do these functions.
I answer: that these orders are indeed instituted to that purpose, but yet to
help only and assist the Clergy; and to this they were not ordained by the
divine law as Bishops and Priests are, but by the Churches institution.

19. Another objection answered.
Another objection and which seems of more force is made by some, for that the
Apostles seem to have been Religious men: and seeing that the Apostles by Christ
were ordained to preach and teach and minister Sacraments, it seems that
Regulars, their Successors, are also by the divine law ordained to the same
functions. And in deed saint Thomas S. Tho. 2 2 q. 88. a. 4. ad 3. So^us l. 7.
de Iustitia q. 5. a. 5.
and some others are of opinion that the Apostles vowed poverty. Others, as
Sermientus, Sarm. 1. p. Apol. cap. 2.
think that they vowed not poverty: because although such a vow pertains to
religious they being Instatu perfectionis acquirende In state of perfection to
be gotten: yet it pertains not to the Apostles, who were Bishops and so were
in state of perfection already attained, because they are to perfect and
teach others. Vasques Vas^. Tract. de redditibus dub. 2.
one of the most learned school men of this age, says that although the
Apostles some times observed perfect poverty, and lived of that which devout
persons gave the^: And therefore said: Matt. c. 19. verse. 27.
behold we have left all; And for a time Christ (d) said unto them: Do you
not possess gold or silver or money in your purses: Yet this was but counsel;
and other times they had some thing at least in common, and Judas was their
purse bearer. And at first not only the Apostles, but all lived in common who
yet all vowed not poverty. And although Lessius Less. lib. 2 de ^tatu relig.
c. 4.
and some others think that the first Christians vowed poverty, and prove it
also by the example of Ananias and Saphira, who could not have sinned so
greeuouslie, Act. 5.
nor had been punished so severely for reserving some of their Gods, had they
not vowed poverty: yet others say that this proves not that they had vowed
poverty; for that they having given all to the Apostles and the community of
Christians that lived then in common, their goods were no more their own, but
the communities, and so reserving some goods to them selves, they sinned and
did injury to the community, and so are said to have defrauded of the price.
So that, says Vasquez, out of the factes of the Apostles nothing can be
gathered of any certainty; yet (says he) hence may be deduced, that at least
the state of Bishops does not require poverty (as in deed it does not) because
the Bishops, as saint Paul Tit. c. 1. verse. 8.
says, must be Hospital; which stands not so well with poverty. But
suppose the Apostles had vowed poverty; yet all three vows of poverty,
obedience and chastity, are not sufficient to make a religious man, unless the
Church by her decree or consent admit them, and ordain that the same vows
made before the Superior shall make a man religious, as Vasquez Vasq. 1.2.
disp. 165.
proves at large. And yet it is not certain that the Apostles vows were
ever so admitted. Lastly suppose that the Apostles had been religious men, yet
Christ gave them not power to preach and minister Sacraments, and to govern
the Church, as they were religious, but as they were Bishops and Priests; and
so in this not the Regulars, but the seculars, to wit Bishops and Priests do
succed the Apostles; and consequently they, not Regulars are by the divine
ordinance to preach, govern, and minister in the Church. But although
Regulars, as they be Regulars only, are not ordained by Christ to preach; to
minister Sacraments, and to govern the Church; yet the Church has of old time
committed to them the office of preaching so to aid the Pastors, and some
times also has choosen the^ to be Bishops, yea and Popes when she saw them
fit for their piety and learning.

10. Having hitherto spoaken of the diverse orders of the Church, and in
particular of Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons and other inferior orders,
it remains before I proceed to say any more of Bishops, that I speak of
two eminent states of this Hierarchy, to wit, Cardinals and Regulars, and
first of Cardinals they being next in dignity to the Spiritual and visible
Prince and monarch of the Hierarchy.

THE X. CHAPTER. Of the dignity of Cardinals.
1. What the name Cardinal, imports.
THe name Cardinal being derived from the word Cardo, which in its proper
signification is taken for the hinge on which the door ha^geth, is by a
Metaphor tra^s. ferred to signify every principal thing on which other
things are dependent. So the four Winds, as the Eastern, Western, Northern and
Suthern, are Cardinales venti, the Cardinal and principal winds, to which all
the other winds are reduced: So Vitruuius calls the two poles Arcticque and
Antarcticque Cardines caeli; because on them the globe and sphere of the heaven
is imagined to rely in his motion: So Pliny Plin. lib. 18. c. 25.
calls the four principal parts of the year, to wit spring, Summer,
Autumn, and Winter Cardines temporum, by which the whole year runs: So the
four moral virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude and Temperance are called
Cardinal virtues, because they are the most principal of moral virtues, and
have diverse Species and kinds of virtues under them and depending on them: So
saint Austine Aug. lib. contra Donatistas de baptism. c. 6.
calls the principal of the Donatists, Cardinal Donatists. And so the
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons of the Roman Church are called Cardinals, not
only because they serve most faithfully the Church of Rome, Why the Bishops,
Priests and Deacons of the Roman Church were called Cardi* nalles.
which is as it were the Cardo of other Churches as S. Anaclete Anacl. ep. 3.
and cap. Sacrosancta. d. 22.
styles it, but also because as the door is sustained by the hinges, so the
whole Church in her government next after the Pope depends on the
Cardinals, who are the Popes Counselors and are called In partem
sollicitudinis omnium Ecclesiarum: in part of the carefulnes of all Churches;
And after him to swaye most in the government of the whole Church.

2. When the name of Cardinals beyan is not certain.
But as the beginnings of ancient Kingdoms, Towns, Cities, and families are
not easily discovered, so of how ancient standing Cardinals are in the
Church of God it is not so certain, but that writers do dispute their
antiquity to and froe, and as yet sub iudice lis est, the controuetsie is not
determined.

3. Caluins lying, and false opinion.
Calvin as he is no friend to the Hierarchy of the Church, as we have seen
above in the second Chapter, So this owl cannot endure to behold the splendent
rays of this dignity, and therefore he raileth not only at the Cardinals,
but also at the Pope, Bishops, and Clergy of Rome, and fears not to say
(but with an impudent lie) that they are all so contaminated with all manner of
vice, that they resemble monsters rather then men. And says he: Call. uin.
lib. 4. Institut. c. 7. number. 29 and 30.
Quantum ad Cardinales (quos vocant) attinet, nescio quid factum sit, vt ita
subito in tantam amplitudinem emerserint. Hic titulus Gregorij aetate in solos
Episcopos competebat. Nam quoties meminit Cardinalium, non Romanae Ecclesiae,
sed alijs quibuslibet eos attribuit, vt in summa nihil aliud sit Sacerdos
Cardinalis quam Episcopus. Apud Superioris saeculi aetates nomen hoc non
reperio. Video tamen fuisse tunc Episcopis minores quos nunc long antecellunt:
As concerning Cardinals (as they call them) I know not how it is come to
pass that so suddenly they are grown to such greatenes. This Title in
Gregory's time aggreed only to Bishops. For as often as he mentions
Cardinals, he so calls not only the Bishops of Rome, but others also; so
that in brief a Cardinal is nothing but a Bishop; In the ages before
Gregory, I find not this name. Yet I see that then Cardinals were less in
dignity the^ Bishops whom now they far excelle.

4. Caluins Lie, concerning Cardinals.
Thus he in few lines has told us no few lies. The first is that which he
says of the lives of the Cardinals and Clergy of Rome. For that all they
who know Rome cannot but know also, that they for their gravity, Piety and
Priestelike, yea Prelatelike carriage and conversation, The Clergy of Rome the
lights of the Church: and Rome the elect City of God, shyneth in all acts of
piety.
are principal lights of the Church; and Rome it self like the elect City
of God shines more in acts of charity, Piety and Religion, then any City
of the world; whereof one reason is, because they are governed immediately by
Christ his Vicaire; another is, because as saint Cyprian Cypr. ep. 55. and lib.
1. ep. 3.
says no perfidiousnes can have access to the Romans; and consequently no
Lutheranisme nor Caluinisme, which wheresoever they enter do first corrupt
faith, then deprave and debauche manners and moral life. His second lie is
that in saint Gregory's time Cardinals and Bishops were all one; For that
there were Cardinal Deacons not Bishops, even from the first origin of
Cardinals. The third that before the age of saint Gregory there was not the
name Cardinal, whereas it is found to be much ancienter as I shall prove.

5. Turrecremata, Turrecrem. lib. 1 Sum. c. 80.
Panormitanus Panormit. in ca. Per venerabilem qui sint legittimi filij.
and some others Mauclerus. 2. p. de Monarch. lib. 4. c. 11. and alij.
are in another, but better extreme; for they are of opinion that the dignity
and office of Cardinals is as ancient as the Apostles, though the name be of
later standing; and consequently that their dignity was instituted by Christ
and before the order of Bishops. To show this Turrecremata distinguishes here
three states of the Apostles. The first is, as they assisted Christ before his
Ascension, according as Christ himself testifies saying: Luce. 1.22. v. 27
Vos estis qui permansistis mecum in tentationibus meis: You are they that have
remained with me in my tentations. The second is, as after Christ's Ascension,
they assisted Saint Peeter his Vicair General in the government of the
universal Church. The third was as they were separated from Peeter, and from
one another, and as, so separated, were to preach over all the world the
Gospel, according as Christ commanded saying: Mare. cap. vlt. verse. 15.
Euntes in mundum vniuer sum praedicate Euangelium omnicreaturae: Going into
the whole world, preach the gospel to all creatures. Which distinction
supposed (he says) that the Apostles in the first and second state were
Cardinals, in that they assisted Christ in the first state, and Peeter his
vicare in the second. In the third state they were Bishops whose office is in
their Dioceses Act. ea. 20. verse. 28.
Regere Ecclesiam Dei; To rule the Church of God.

6. Turrecremata his first inference.
Whence he makes these Inferences. First that the Apostle^ were Cardinals,
and exercised the function of Cardinals, before they were Bishops, or
exercised the office of Bishops; because they were Apostles before Christ his
passion, according to that: Lneae c. 6. verse. 13.
Vocauit Discipulos suos and elegit duodecim ex illis quos and Apostolos
nominauit: He called his disciples and he chose twelve of them whom also he
named Apostles. But Bishops and Pastors they were not till after Christ his
passion, Peeter their head being not created chief Pastor till after Christ's
Resurrection, when Christ bad him feed his sheep Joan. c. 21. verse. 17.
as above we have seen. Above cap. 3.


7. Secondly that the Apostles were Cardinales orbis, Turrecremata his second
in. ference.
Cardinals of the world and universal Church, before they were Cardinales
vrbis, Cardinals of the city of Rome. For (says he) as saint Peeter was
Bishop of the whole Church some years before he was particular lie Bishop of
Rome, as above is declared; so the Apostles were Cardinals of the whole
world, before they were Cardinals of the Church of Rome, because they
assisted Peeter in the Government of the whole Church, before they assisted him
in the rule of the Roman Church.

7. Turrecremata his third inference.
Thirdly that the Pope him self may be reckened amongst the Cardinals (for
which he alleges Archidiaconus, Archidiac. in cap. Saecrosancta, d. 22.
because he succeeds to Peeter as he was Cardinal and Assistent to Christ
before he was Bishop and Pastor: for although all the Apostles were Pastor;
yet (says he) they were Apostles before they were Pastors; whence, he
thinks to be, that the Pope is called Apostolic^^ Apostolic.

9. Turrecre. mata his fourth inference.
Fourthlie that in the Hierarchy of the Church the Cardinals, succeed the
Apostles as they were Apostles, and that the Bishops succeed them as they were
Bishops and Pastors: and seeing that the Apostles were Apostles before they
were Bishops; the dignity of Cardinals was instituted before the order of
Bishops. And so Cardinals by Christ his Institution, have their rank and
place next to the Pope in in the Churches Hierarchy, and by the same divine
Institution do take the precedence of Bishops. Thus he more subtillie and
conceitfullie, then solidlie.

10. Sotus his censure of this opinion.
Dominicus a Soto Sotus. in 4. d. 24. q. 2. art. 4.
says that although he was a most learned man (as in deed he was, though
learned men be men and so may be over seen) yet this his discourse, as it
favors to much his own order (for he was a Cardinal) so it has no solid
ground: and therefore he concludes that the order of a Cardinal, as it is
distinct from a Deacon, Priest and Bishop, is not of Christ's, but of the
Churches Institution. Vasquez Vasquez. tom. 3. in 3. p. d. 242. c. 4.
says that the office of a Cardinal is not any holy order instituted by
Christ, nor was in use in the time of the Apostles, but was after their time
instituted by the Church.

11. The authors opinion.
And in deed that which Turrecremata says of the Apostles, to wit, that they
were first Cardinals to Christ, and after to Peeter, is but a conceit, and
not grounded at all in scripture, as he imagines; for that the Cardinals
office is to assist the Pope with their Counsel, and when on Pope is dead to
elect another; which officies the Apostles did not exhibit to Christ; he as
their master, having tought them not having ever taken counsel o^ them: and he
having elected them, not being elected by them; nor did they, but Christ him
self elect Peeter to be his vicaire, as above Chap. 3.
we have proved, nor did they by common consent elect Peeters successor, but
Peeter himself before his death elected him. Cardinals instituted by the
Church.
And so the Apostles were never Cardinals, and consequently Cardinals as
Cardinals are not their successors, nor were they (as such) instituted by
Christ, but by the Church.

12. Three things in Cardinals.
Wherefore in Cardinals three things are to be distinguished. First that the
Cardinals are Priests, Deacons, or Subdeacons, and so they are Instituted by
Christ as those orders are. Secondly that they assist the Pope in governing
the Church in Councelles, and out of Councelles and do also elect him; and this
office was in deed performed even from the Apostles times, but promiscuouslie
by all Priests and Bishops. For as Cardinal Bellarmine tom. 1. lib. 1. de
Clericie. cap. 16.
and Vasquez Vasquez. disp. 2.12. cap. 4 cit.
do well observe, immediately after the Apostles time for the space of many
years and some ages; because there were few Priests and Deacons, all of them
were called to Councelles, and all concurred, to the Election of the Bishops;
and the Bishops and they to the Election of the Pope: neither at that time were
Cardinals in this distinguished from not Cardinals. For this cause saint
Cyprian Cypr. lib. 3 ep. 5. and lib. 2. ep. 7.
writing to the clergy of Rome, writes to all Priests and Deacons: And the
clergy answering him, only the Priests and Deacons answer.

13. When the name Cardinal began.
But when the name Cardina^ began, and why this name was given to some not to
other some, i^ is not a thing so certainly aggreed on amongst writers. Yet
certain it is that the name Cardinal is more ancient then Calvin makes it:
for that Euaristus Euarist. ep. 1. ad omnes Episcopos Africae.
Pope ordained that in every City where a Bishop was, seven Deacons should
assist him whilst he preached, partly for his greater honor, partly for
his better defense and protection; and these resembled the seven Angels which
assist before the Throne of God. Apoc. c. 1. v.
Yea Pope Fabian Fabia. ep. 1. and habetur in Pontif. Damasi.
also divided seven Regions of the City of Rome to seven Deacons, who were
called Dia^oni Regionarij, Regionarie Deacons. And in the second Roman Synod
Synod. 2. Romans Act. 2.
we read that Pope Syluester divided the City of Rome into seven Regions and
committed them to seven Deacons: And in the same Synod he decreed, that there
should be seven Cardinal Deacons in the city of Rome; of which seven Deacons
Nicephorus, Nicephorus. lib. 2. histor. c. 34.
and and the council of Aquisgrane Conc. Aquisgranense. c. 64.
do make mention. And although there seems to be no express mention of
Cardinals before the second Roman Synod, yet because Pope Syluester in this
Synod speaks of seven Cardinal Deacons, not as then first created, it
seems that the seven Deacons created by Euaristus and Fabian were also called
Cardinal Deacons

14. Whence follows that John Calvin either was blind or never looked into
antiquity, or else vvilfullie lied, when he said, that before Pope Gregory
he finds not the name Cardinal. And whereas he says that in saint
Gregory's time only Bishops were called Cardinals, his mouth also runs
o^uer; for that saint Gregory Greg. lib. 1. ep. 11. Et refertur ca.
Fraternitatem. d. 71.
writing to Fortunatus Bishop of Naples who desired saint Gregory to grant
unto him Gratian Deacon to be Cardinated (as he called it) in his Church who
before was Deacon in the Church of Benefrana (where by reason of persecution he
could not minister) saint Gregory answers: Idcirco scriptis praesentibus eum
necessario duximus tibi concedendum, habituro licentiam Dia^onum illum, nostra
interueniente Authoritate, Ecclesiae, tuae, Deo propitio constituere
Cardinalem: Therefore we have thought good by these present writings to grant
unto thee who shall have license, by our authority to constitute him Cardinal
of thy Church. And in another of his Epistles Greg. 2. ep. 25. and refertur
cap. Pastoralis. 7. q. 1.
he constituteth a Bishop who could not abide in his own Church, Cardiuall of
an other Church. And yet in an other Epistle Greg. lib. 2. ep. 13. ad Agnellum.
and refertur. 21. q. 1. c^ Relatio.
he constituteth one Agnellus whose Church and City was destroyed by the
enemy, Cardinal Bishop of Tarracina, as the people of that City had desired.
But in deed in these places S. Gregory by Cardo understands the Church, by
Cardinalis him that was by his ordination tied to one Church, and by
Cardinandus him who being first ordained to one Church was afterward
transferred to another, and speaks not of Cardinals who were counselors to
the Pope, or Cardinals of the Church of Rome, as Paulus Lancelottus
Lancellotus in cap. fraternitate^. d. 71. Whether the name Cardinal was given
first to the place or person.
in his Annotation upon the Chapter which begins Fraternitatem has well
observed.

15. Now if any demand whether this name Cardinal was first given to the
place or the governor of it; Bellarmine Bellar. vbi supra: sai^th to the place.
will answer that the name Cardinal was first given to the place, Church, or
Title, by reason that they were principal Titles, and of the Church the
Pastor or Governor was called Cardinal: Vasquez Vasq. vbi supra says to
the person.
contrariewise thinks that the name Cardinal was first given to the persons,
to wit, to the aforesaid Deacons, who of the Regions of the City committed to
their charge (which regions were called Cardines ciuitatis) took the name of
Cardinal Deacons, and so this name, as he thinks, came afterward to be
given to Priests and Bishops: which is also the opinion of Doctor Pitse
Pitsaeus in praesat. ad Catalogum Cardinalium Anglorum
in his preface to his catalogue of our English Cardinals. This they confirm
by the second Romain Synod Synod. 2. Roman. Act. 2. parum ante cap. 11.
where is mention of a Deacon who was, Cardine constrictus vrbis Romae, tied
to a Cardo, that is, a principal Region or part of the city of Rome. Such
Deacons were the seven Deacons which saint Syluester in the second Roman Synod,
as we have alleged called, Cardinal Deacons: which before as we have above
probably deduced were called Regionarij, and Cardinals also.

16. When Cardinals had first the precedence of Bishops.
But when they first began to have the precedence of Bishops, and when first
they were assumpted to be the Popes Counselors and Electors, it is no little
obscure. It is true that in the Council of Nice the Roman Priests, Victor and
Vincentius sat before the Bishops, yet that might be, not because they were
Roman Priests or Cardinalle^ of the seven Regions or Titles, but because they
were Pope Sylueste^ his Legates. Wherefore in tha^ Council after Osius Bishop
o^ Corduba, subscribed Victor and Vincentius before the Patriarche^ but as
Osius subscribed first because he was Pope Syluester his legate (and otherwise
could not have taken that place) so the other two, to wit Victor and Vincentius
had the the precedence of the rest of the Council, not perchance because they
were Roman Priests, and peradventure Cardinals also of some of the said
Regions or Titles, but because they were the Popes Legates, who for respect to
the Supremacy of the Pope, whom they represented, ever took the highest place
in councelles. And therefore this was their subscription: Vide Co^cilium
Nicenum in subscriptione Patrum.
Victor and Vincentius Presbyteri vrbis Romae, pro venerabili viro Papa and
Episcopo nostro Sancto Syluestro Subscripsimus, it a credentes sicut supra
scriptum est. We Victor and Vincentius Priests of the City of Rome, have
subscribed for the Venerable man our Pope and Bishop saint Syluester, so
believing, as above is written. In other councelles says Vasquez Vasquez.
disp. 242. c. 6.
the Bishops subscribed before the Priests not legates, amongst whom not
withstanding (says he) some were no doubt Cardinals of the Regions or
Titles of Rome. Wherefore in the council of Rome under Syluester, it was
decreed that a Bishop should not be condemned under 72. witnesses, a Priest not
under forty four, a Deacon tied to his Cardo (that is a Cardinal Deacon) not
under thirty six: which argues that in that Council Bishops were preferred
before Cardinal Deacons. Yet Leo Leo ix. ep. contra Michaelem etc. c. 10.
the ninthe Pope of that name in his Epistle to Michael Bishop of
Constantinople, and to Leo Acridanus; says that as Constantine the great
gave to the Bishop of Rome his mitre, Crown and other imperial ornaments, so
he gave to the most Reverend Cardinals who serve the holy Church of Rome,
the honor of Consulles and Patritij: which argues them to be very ancient.

17. But howsoever, Cardinals, since they were electours, take precedence of
all prelates next to the Pope.
since they had the honor to be the Popes daily Counselors and his sole
Electours, they have worthily taken the precedence. And so in the Council of
Florence (and as it is like before also, Council. Flerent. in subscript.
for that this dignity is not mentioned as a new thing) the Cardinal Priests,
yea and Cardinal Deacons take place of all the Bishops in their sitting and in
their subscribing, and not as Legates because Pope Eugenius was present in
person. This may be seen in the subscriptions of the Latin fathers.

18. And Turrecremata Turrecrem. lib. 1. sum. cap. 80. thinks.
is of opinion that Cardinals are in the highest state of perfection next
unto the Pope; Cardinals be in the highest state next to the Pope.
and so for this respect also do deserve the first rank after the Pope in the
Church of God. That they are in a state he proves; because a state requires
an immobilitie caused by some obligation, as appears in the state of a
bondsman, of a married man, of a Religious man; Priest and Bishop: which, says
he, is caused in that of charity, and by their office and profession they
bind themselves perpetually to assist the Pope in the rule of the Church, and
to defend him and the Church against all enemies with hazard of their lives.
That they are in a state of perfection he proves; because the perfection of
Christian life (as we^ shall see in the next Chapter) i^ Charity, which makes
us perfect in uniting us to our last end God, according to that of saint John.
Ep. 1. Joan. c. 4. verse. 16.
Qui manet in charitate in Deo manet and Deus in eo: He that abides in
charity abides in God, and God in him. And therefore it is called Coloss. c.
3. v. 15.
vinculum perfectionis, the band of perfection. Yea, says he, they are by so
much in an higher state of perfection then Bishops, by how much the universal
good of the Church, of the which Cardinals have care and charge, exceeds
the particular good of a Diocese, where with the Bishop is charged. And in deed
in this respect, the Cardinal excels the Bishop; but in other respects
the Bishop excels the Cardinal. For that the Bishops state is of the divine
institution, the Cardinals is of the Churches ordinance; The Bishops order is
a sacred order instituted by Christ, The Cardinals office is no sacred order;
nor is it instituted immediately by Christ; the Bishop by the divine ordinance
has a deciding voice in the Council, the Cardinal only by the Popes decree:
For which cause the Pope calls the Bishops, Venerabiles Fratres: Venerable
brethren; Cardinals he styles Dilectos filios, Beloved sons.

19. The Bishop greater then Cardinal not Bishop in dig ni^ie of Order: so the
Priest and Deacon.
So that, if we respect the power of order, the Bishop is greater then a
Cardinal Priest, and the Priest is greater then a Cardin all Deacon; for that
the Bishop can ordain and create Priests and other ministers, and can also
confirm; the Cardinal Priest can do neither: The simple Priest also can
consecrate the sacred Euchariste, the Cardinal Deacon cannot. And if we
regard the ordinary power of Jurisdiction, which a Prelate or Pastor has in
his own Church, the Bishop has greater then the Cardinal not Bishop, for
that the Bishop has power over a whole Diocese, the Cardinal not Bishop has
only power in his Church and Title, which says Bellarmine Bellarminus vbi
supra.
is like to the Jurisdiction of a Parish Priest in his Parish. The Bishop by
his ordinary power of Jurisdiction can make laws, inflicte excommunication,
and other censures, The Cardinal can do no more in this kind then the Pope
licenseth him.

20. The Cardinalle in the government of the whole Church is before all Bishops.
But if we consider the government of the whole Church, the Cardinal though
but Deacon, for these many years, yea for no few ages, takes place and
precedence, before all Bishops not Cardinals: and worthily also. For first
the Cardinals assist the Pope daily in all his public and most important
affairs, for which Cardinals are most apt, being ordinarily Princes or
learned and expert men in divinity or law; and being chosen from all parts
and Countries, that so they may give the better information; although most of
them are chosen out of Italy and Rome, and not without reason also; because
they being near are better acquainted with the affairs of the Court and
Church of Rome, and so also inconveniences are avoided, which have happened by
externe Cardinals, Bossius. tom. 2. lib. 10. designis c. 21. nu. 22.
as Bossius has observed. Secondly Bishops assiste the Pope only in
counsels, the Cardinals in councelles, and out of counsels: and because
councelles now a days are more seldom then in former ages, Bishops assist the
Pope but seldom, Cardinals daily. And if you demand of me why councelles
are not now so frequent as formerlie they have been, Why Council, les now not
so frequent.
the answer is ready; for that as councelles are very profitable to the
universal Church, so they are no little discommodious to particular Churches,
which (during the time of the council) are forced to want their Pastors and
since Cardinals have been the Popes Electours, the businesses of the Church
are dispatched by the Pope, and that with less discommoditie and yet
sufficiently; especially since diverse congregations of them have been
erected; one for the propagation of the faith, another for the Interpretation
of the council of Trent, etc.

21. Thirdly the Cardinals have been this great while the only Electours
of the Pope. And Alexander Conc. Lateran. c. 1. and refertur. ca. licet de
electione and electi potestate.
the third in the council of Lateran says that although before his time
there were constituted sufficient laws for the Election of the Pope; yet
because the ambition of some had abused those hol some laws, he decrees that
the Pope shall not be counted canonicallie elected unless by two parts of the
Cardinals: and since this constitution (as Bellarmine notes out of
Onuphrius) there have been fewer schisms and greater peace then before;
Bellar. lib. 1. de Cleric. c 9.
for that of twenty and nine schisms, where with the peace of the Church
has been perturbed, there have but three schisms happened since that
constitution was made, and of those three, but one through the default of the
Cardinals.

22 The Reformeers (as they call themselves though in deed they have deformed
religion, life and all) carpe with Calvin Calui. lib. 4. c. 7. number. 2 9.
at the most Illustrious college of Cardinals; yet, as Bozius Bozius lib. 9.
de signis c. 5.
observes, besides that they are for the most part Princes or learned
lavviers or divines, Cardinals the most part princes, or learned many of
them ^aue been saints.
there have been more Saints and holy men in that college then can easily
be shevved in any college of their number, they till Sixtus the fowerth his
time having not been above thirty, and till Leo the tenthe his time not above
fifty three in number.

23. Cardinals the 60. valiantes.
And in deed these most Illustrions Prelates may be compared to the threescore
Valiants of the most valiant of Israel Cant. cap. 3. verse. 7.
(the Church) as who by profession, as we have said, are to expose their lives
and to spille their blood for the Churches defense; for which their charity (
as no man has greater charity then to expose his life for his friend (x)
Joan. c. 10. v. Why the Cardinals were Scarlett.
they wear scarlet robes and cappes, Why the Cardinals were Scarlett.
as one Antonius Scappus Anton. Scappus De Bireto Rubeo. Responsione prima and
alibi.
Advocate in the court of Rome in his book De Bireto Rubeo etc. and Antoninus
Antoninus in sum. Tit. 2. c. 1.
before him declare, and are compared by one Mauclerus Mau clerus de Monarch.
p. 1. lib. 5. c. 1. compares Cardinals to Scraphins.
a learned Doctor of Sorbon to the Seraphins, that is, to the highest
Hierarchy of the Angels so called for their ardent love and charity: who
compass the little bed of Solomon Cant. c. 3. v. 7.
(the Church of Christ, the only bed of repose in matters of faith and
salvation, and little in respect of the Church Triumphant) all holding swords
and most ^unning to battle, because their life is a warfare for the Churches
defense. These Prelates are the Silver pillars Canti. ca. 3. v. 10.
of Salomons Throne yea the pourple ascending Steps Cant. c. 3. v. 10.
and stairs thereof.

24. To these Prelates says Turrecremata Lib. 1. sum. c. 8.
may be applied those words of Annaes Canticle: lib. 1. Reg. c. 2. verse. 8.
Domini sunt Cardines terrae and posuit super eos orbem: The poles of the earth
are our Lords, and upon them he has set the world; Because as the heavens
are imagined to depend in their motion on the poles Arctique and Antarcticque,
and the earth by two poles is thought to subsist, so the Church of Rome which
Anacletus Anacl. ep. 3.
calls the Head and Cardo of other Churches, is particularly under the Pope
governed by Cardinals; yea Cardinals are they who (after the Pope) swaye
most in the government of the whole Church, which is seated on earth. And upon
them God has set, and seated the world, Cardinals the 72. Seniors.
that is the Christian world and Church, whose limits are no other the^ those
of the whole world. Yea what the seventy Ancientes with Heldad and Medad to
whom God imparted part of Moses spirit (says Turrecremat. lib. 1. sum.
cap. 83.
Turrecremata) were to Moses, that are the Cardinals to the Pope: who being
called unto part of the solicitude which he has of the universal Church, do
help him to bear the great charge and pastoral burden: whom therefore saint
Bernard Bern. lib. 4. de considerat. cap. 1.
calls Seniores populi, The Seniors of the people who daily assist the Pope,
and the Judges of the world. Thus much I thought good to say of the most
Illustrious order and College of Cardinals so to honor the more the Church
of Rome whose Spiritual Senators and consulles they are; and so to give a
greater luster to the Hierarchy of the Church militant, The Conclusion of this
Chapter.
of which they are the Seraphins for the charity they profess, and the first
order for their dignity, in which they are next to the Pope and above all the
rest of the spiritual Princes and Prelates of the Church.

THE XI. CHAPTER. Of the state of Religious.
1. All aggree that God is to be worshipped with religion.
THere was never Pagan who admitted a God or Gods, but granted also Religion,
natural reason teachiug him that to such Excellency a supreme honor is due,
which we call Religion And therefore Plutarch Plutarch. l. aduersus Colotem.
says that you shall sooner find cities amongst them without walls, laws,
coins, then without Temples in which they vvorshiped their Gods; for as
Cicero says: Omnes Religione mo^entur and Deos patrios quos a maioribus
acceperunt colendos sibi diligenter and retinendos arbitrantur: All are moved
with Religion and do think that they must worship and retain diligently
their Country Gods whom they received from their Ancestors: only the
difference amongst them was what God or Gods should be admitted, and with what
worship. Al heretics acknowledge Christian Religion, but so as every one
chalengeth it to himself.
Even so all heretics do admit of some worship of Christ and some Christian
religion, because every one of them professes the name of Christ, but yet so,
as every sectmaster will challenge to him self and his sect the only true
Christian Religion.

2. Many heretics deny particular Religions and Religious orders.
But as for the particular Religion, which is a state of certain persons who
by observation of the counselles of Poverty, Chastity and obedience, and by
the vows of them do tend to more perfection then is the ordinary perfection
of Christians, and who, as saint Thomas D. Th 22. q. 81. a. 1. ad 5.
says, are specially called Religious, because they consecrate their whole
life to Christ and totallie abstracte them selves from the world; such
Religion, and such Religious, many Heretics do condemn, VViclephes
objection against religious orders.
as derogating to Christian Religion: so do Wiclephe, Luther, Calvin, and many
others: for (said Apud Th. VVald. l. 3. doctrine. fidei.
Wiclephe) Christ having instituted Christian Religion to which he obliges all
men, and this Religion being perfect and sufficient; to add other Religions
devised by men, as is it superfluous, so it is injurious to Christ, that being,
as it were, to go about to amend Christ his Religion, and to argue it of
imperfection and insufficiency.

3. Against this Heresy condemned in the council of Constance, Conc.
Constant. Sess, 8. in sent, damnat. articulorum 45. VViclef.
our country man Thomas Waldensis Thom. Vald. lib. 3.
Provincial in his time of the Carmelites, Doctor of divinity in Oxford, and
one highly esteemed by Henry the fifte, writes a whole book; showing that
as Christ Instituted christian Religion, Defend^th the^. The three counsels
instituted by Christ Mat. 19.
to which all are bound, so he instituted the substance of all particular
Religions, to wit the three counsels of Prouertie, obedience and Chastity, in
which all Religions do aggree, and on which they are founded. To which
counselles all christians are counseled, none obliged, but they who
voluntarily oblige them selves by vow, as Religious men do. And so these
particular Religions of particular orders, as of Benedictins, Dominicans,
Franciscans and others, in regard of the substance are no additions to Christ
his religion: for that he, as he instituted the commandment, so he instituted
the Counselles, but with this difference, that he obliges all to the
commandments, but none to the counselles; unless by vow they first oblige
them selves; for then he also obliges the^, saying: Vouete and reddite Domino
Deo ^^stro: Ps. 75. verse. 12.
Vow ye and render to your Lord God: In the first word vow is a Counsel, in
the second, render is a commandment. And again; Si quid vouisti Deo ne
moreris reddere: Eccles. c. 5. v. 3.
If thou have vow^d any thing to God, differ not to pay it.

4. And although the particular habits and the particular rules of Religious
orders be instituted by me^, that is by the Founders of these orders, yet these
men were holy ^en and great Sanites, as appears ^y their holy lives and
miracles, for which the Church has canonized them, that is, declared them to
be Saints; and such as we may and ought to honor and pray unto: which Church
in this and all other her definitions and declarations is to be credited, she
being Columna and firmamentum veritatis: 1. Timoth. c. 3, verse. 15.
The pillar and ground of truth. Or if Wicleph and his Scholars, Luther and
Calvin, will except against the Religious habit and rule, because it i^ not in
scripture, nor commanded by God, they may by the same reason except against
the habit of the prophets and their manner of life which they found not
commanded by scripture; yea and against the habit and rules of our colleg^ in
Oxford and Cambridge, yea an^ against all new fashions whi^^ are not
commanded by scripture If they answer that these hab^ and rules are not
against scriptures; the same say I of the religious rules and habits.

5. The first counsel is voluntary poverty.
The first counsel is the counsel of poverty, which Christ gives, saying
to the young man and in him to all; Mat. cap. 11. verse. 21.
Si vis perfectus esse vade, vende omnia quae habes, and dapaupauperibus and
habebis the saurum in caelo and veni sequere me: Counsels are not precepts.
If thou will be perfect, go sell all the things that thou have, and give to
the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven, and come follow me? Where
wese how Christ distinguis^heth betwixt commandments and counselles. For
before he had said of the commaundments: Matt. cap. 9. verse. 17.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments: but now speaking of a
counsel, he says not, if thou will en^er into life sell all, but only, if
thou will ^e perfect, sell all. For that a man may ^e saved and yet keep his
riches, as (...) braham did, but he cannot so easily attain to perfection,
unless by selling or leaving all, he free himself from the encombrances of
Riches. Thus saint Chrysostom Chrysostom. hom. 21. in 1. ep. ad Corinth.
and other fathers Theophil. ibid. Aug. ser. 61. de Temp.
expound this place. So that if a man sell all to give all to the poor, or to
other pious uses, he does well; but if he does not, The difference betwixt
counsel and precept.
he does not ill; if he give all he shall please God, because he follows his
counsel; if he do not, he shall not displease him, because he does not
against his commandment.

6. The 2. counsel of chastity.
The second counsel is of chastity which Christ also gave, when he said:
Matt. c. 19. v. 12
Non omnes capiunt verbum hoc etc. Not all take this word, but they to whom it
is given, for there are Eunuchs which were born so from their Mothers womb,
and there are Eunucher which have gelded them selves for the kingdom of
heaven. He that can take, let him take. Where is to be observed that when the
disciples had heard Christ say, that a man must not leave his wife, as the
Jews did, and take another, and that if he do take another, he shall commit
aduoutrie; The disciples said unto him; Mat. cap. 19. verse. 11.
If the case of a man with his wife be so, it is not expedient to marry: Christ
replied: Matt. c. 19. v. 11.
Not all take this word, but they to whom it is given: And again: He that can
take let him take, All have the guife of chastity that will.
not all take this word of living chastely without a wife, but they to whom it
is given. by which Apostatate Monks, and friars must not cloak their
incestuous marriages against their vows, because they have not the gift; for
so neither can married men live Chaste, without the gift and grace of God,
according to that of the wiseman, Sap. c. 8. verse. 21.
no man can be continent unless God give it, and of the Apostle: 1. Corint. c.
7. verse. 7.
Every one, even the married man, has a proper gift of God, one so, and
another so: But all that have not either this or that gift, it is either
because they will not pray for it, or will not use it when they have it, or
will not use the means, as of fasting and other austerities by which Chastity
is conserved; or will not avoid the occasions, as company of women etc.
Saint Austine Aug. l. de gratia and lib. arb. cap. 4.
says: Quibus non est datum, aut nolunt aut non implent quod volunt. Quibus
autem est datum, sic volunt vt impleant quod volant: To whom it is not given to
live chaste, either they will not, or they fulfill not what they will. But
they to whom it is given, so they will as they may fulfill what they will. The
Counsel of chastity proved.
For otherwise if it were impossible to live chaste, Christ would not counselle
it, saying: He that can take, let him take. Upon which saint Austine
discoursing, says: Aug. ser. 61. de Temp.
Aliud est consilium aliud praeceptum etc. One thing is a Counsel, ano there
thing is a precept, counsel is given to keep virginity, to abstain from
wine and flesh, to sell all and give to the poor; but a precept is given, that
justice be kept, that every man decline from evil and do good. To be brief
of virginity it is said: He that can take, let him take; but of Justice it is
not said, he that can do justice let him; but it is said of it, every tree
that yields not good fruit shall be cut down and shall be cast into the fire. He
that shall willingly harken unto counsel and do it, shall have greater
glory: he that does not fulfill the precept, unless penance help him, he
cannot avoid punishment. Conformablie to this saint Paul commands not, but
yet counsels virginity saying: 1. Cor. cap. 7. verse. 25.
And as concerning virgins a eommaundement of our Lord I have not, but counsel
I give. Upon which words thus S. Hiero^ Hiero. ep. 22.
discourses: De virginibus (inquit Apo^stolus) praeceptum Domini non habeo
Cur? quia and ipse vt esset virgo, non fuit imperij, sed propriae voluntatis
etc. As concerning virgins, says the Apostle, a commandment of our Lord I
have not. Why? because it was not a commandment, but his own will that he
was him self a virgin. Why therefore has he not a commandment of our Lord
of virginity? because it is a thing of greater revvard, which is not forced
upon a man but offered. For if virginity had been commanded, marriages
should have seemed to have been taken away. And it had been most hard to
compelle against nature, and to extorte from men a life of Angels.

7. The 3. counsel is of obedience.
The third counsel of obedience Cardinal Bellarmine and others do gather
thus: Christ counseled the youngman not only to selle all, but also to
follow him, to wit by obeying him as the other disciples did, Mat. c. 19.
who lived in a particular obedience to their master; Who also said: Matt.
cap. 16. verse. 24. Luc. 9.
Si quis vult post me venire abneget semetipsum and tollat crucem suam and
sequatur me. If any man will come after me, let him deny him self and take
up his cross and follovv me. Where is insinuated that to come after Christ or
to follovv him, is to deny our selves, which then we do when denying our own
wills we subject them voluntarily to a Superior. And the reason is, because
our understanding and will, being the principal commanders and rulers of man,
and of all his actions, in renouncing our wills and judgments and submitting
them by obedience to the will and Judgment of the Superior, we renounce our
selves. According to this saint Hierom Hiero. ep. ad Eustoch. de custodia
virginitatis.
speaking of Monks who lived together, and in common, says: Prima apud eos
confaederatio est obedire maioribus, and quicquid iusserint facere: The first
confederation with them, is to obey their elders and to do whatsoever they
shall command.

8. No credit to be ^iuen to beretiques w^o deny cou^selles.
By this it appears what credit is to be given to Luther and Calvin, who say
that there are no works of Supererogatio^, no counselles, but all
commandments; for that voluntary poverty, virginity, and voluntary
obedience to a Superior, to whom we freely submit our selves, are
counseled but not commanded; or if they be commanded, why do not the
Reformers obey them? Why did Luther contrary to his vow of these counselles
revolt from them, and shake them of, as things not necessary.

9. Vows of cou^selles proved lawful.
And hence we may gather also, that if these counselles be lawful and good
and in our power also (as no doubt they be, else our Savior Christ and saint
Paul would not have counseled them; for that unlawful things cannot be
counseled without sin; nor impossible, without mere madness) we may also
vow them. For why should it be unlawful to vow that which other wise is
honest and lawful, and in our free power? An act of virtue vowed is a double
virtue.
Certes a vow of an act (which is otherwise virtuous, as chastity, or
abstine^ce) makes it twice virtuous; for if one vow virginity, which of it
self is the most laudable and principal act of chastity, it is by vow
made also religious (vows pertaining to religion) and so is not only chaste,
but religious. Again, (...) saint Thomas of Aquin S. Th. 2.2. q. 88. a. 6. in
corp.
auerreth, he that vovveth an act of virtue does subject him self to God, not
only, quantum ad actum, sed etiam quantum ad potestatem: not only in respect
of the act, but also in respect of the power: That is, he that vovveth to God
chastity, gives him not only the act which the virtue of chastity alone
could do, but also the power: For that before a man vow virginity, he may
leave that laudable act when he pleases, and take a wife, but after he has
vowed it, he has now no lawful power to leave it, and so by vow he gives to
God not only the act but the power. So Christ says: Matt. c. 19. v. 12
There are Funuches who have gelded them selves for the kingdom of heaven.
Which is most properly to be understood of those that vow chastity. For
that, as they who are corporally gelded, have nether the act nor power to
generate; so they who vow virginity, are spirituallie gelded: for that after
their vow they have no moral, or lawful power to exercise the act of
generation; whereas yet, lived they never so chaste, they had the power before
they vowed. And besides these reasons scripture in diverse places vvarranteth
vows saying: Ps. 75. verse. 22.
Vouete and reddite Domino Deo vestro: Vow ye, and render to our Lord your
God. And again: Eccles. c. 5. v. 3.
If thou have vowed any thing to God, differ not to pay it, for an
unfaithful and foolish promise displeases him. These 3. vows are the
essential parts of religion.
But what soever thou have vowed pay it: and it is much better not to vow,
then after avowe, not to perform the things promised. These three counselles
with the vows of them, are the essential parts of a Religious life, and
therefore, as I said, all orders of Religion do in them aggree.

10. Not they but charitiers perfection.
Yet the perfection of a Religious life consists not in them, but in
charity: for although faith and hope, as which are Theological virtues, be
great perfections; yet that which makes the soul absolutely perfect, is
charity, which is greater then faith and hope; yea then all other virtues,
according to that of saint Paul: 1. Cor. ^. 13. v. 13.
And now there remains faith, hope and charity, these three, but the greater
of them, is charity. And the reason of this is. For that as the earth then
attaineth its last end and perfection, when it is united to the center, and
therefore then rests and moves no further: So the soul of man then
receives her last and greatest perfection of this life, Charitle unites to
God.
when she is united to God as to her last end and Summum bonum: who only is
her center and place of rest: according to that of saint Austine: Augustinus.
Fecistinos, Domine, ad te and inquietum est cor nostrum donec reuertatur ad
te: Thou haft made us, o Lord, to thee, and our heart is unquiet till it return
to thee. And this charity does, as she is love. For that all love is of an
unitive, and gluing nature and unites the lover to the person loved, as
Dionysius Areopagita Dion. l. de Eccl. Hier. and l. de diuinis nom.
affirms, and Scripture and Philosophy teaches. Ionathas his soul is
said: 1. Reg. c. 8. v. 1.
To have been glued to David's soul by love. Christ prayed Joan. 1. c. 17. v.
11.
that as he and his father were one by consubstantialitie, so his disciples
might be one by love and charity: The first Christians Act. ca. 4. v. 32.
had one heart and soul by charity: And the holy Ghost who prooceedeth
eternally from God the father and God the son, is called by divines, their
nexus their knotte of Freindship; by saint Austine, Aug. lib. 6. Trin. c. vlt.
their ineffabilis co^plexus, their ineffable embracing and colling: because he
is their love. The Philosopher says Arist. l. 9. Eth. c. 8. friends are one
soul in a. bodies.
that two friends by love are one soul: and that a friend by love is another
ones self; and therefore Damon, and Pythias, Pylades and Orestes would have
dyed for one another, the one thinking him self by love to be transformed into
the other, and his soul to be more where it loved, then where it lived. And
therefore saint Austine Aug. ^. 4. confess. c. 6.
thought him self half dead when his other half Nebridius was dead.
Wherefore charity uniting us to God and more then other loves, in that it is
the love of God, according to that, 1. Joan. c. 4. v. 16.
he that abides in charity, abides in God and God in him, it is the greatest
perfection of this life, and is therefore called vinculum perfectionis, the
band of perfection. Vide D. Th. 2.2. q. 184. a. 1. Colloss. 3.


11. What then are the three counselles? The 3. counselles are instruments and
means to perfection, yet not necessary.
they are instruments of perfection, not necessary, yet very profitable. Not
necessary because Abraham attained to great perfection without practice of
these cou^selles, for he only exercised the ordinary obedience due to God and
his commandments; he observed only conjugal chastity; and he was so far
from leaving all, that he was very rich in goods and possessions. And there
are many not only secular Priests who are not bound to poverty, but also
many married men more perfect of tentymes the^ are many of the Religious. But
yet they are profitable instruments of perfection, in that they are convenient
means to procure charity the love of God, in which consists the perfection
of Christian life.

12. Perfectio^s distinguished. the first is the perfection of God.
But here we must distinguish betwixt perfections; for first there is the
divine perfection which no creature, not the most blessed in heaven can
attain, though we are counseled to imitate it according to that: Matt. c. 5.
v. 48.
Be you perfect therefore, as also your heavenly father is perfect: For as none
but God can comprehend God, so none but God can love God Quantum est
diligibilis, The 2. perfection of the blessed.
as much as he is worthy of love. Secondly there is the perfection of the
blessed in heaven, who seeing God face to face, cannot but love him most
ardentlie and incessantly; and so also, that they have no inordinate motions,
nor can offend him so much as veniallie. This charity is charitas patriae and
the end of charitas viae; and so to it we are not obliged in this life, The end
of the law binds not.
the law commonly bynding us to the things commanded, but not to the end
intended. As if the General command his soldiers to assault a town with
intention to win it, if they give the assault they fulfill his commandment,
though they win not the town. The 3. perfection is of all Christians.
The third perfection consists in that charity by which we so love God, that
we will not transgress his commandments nor offend him mortallie. And by
this, as divines say; we love God above all Appretiatiuely, that is, we so
prize and esteem him, as we will not offend him mortallie for the love of any
creature: And to this perfection all are obliged, though they be neither
Bishops, nor Priests, nor Religious. Of this perfection saint John ^^eaketh
saying: 1. Io. c. 2. v. 5.
Qui seruat verbum eius, vere in hoc charitas Dei perfecta est, He that keeps
his word (that is his commandment, for a little after he says, The old
commandment is the word which you have heard) in him in very deed the
charity of God is perfected. This charity Noe had: Genesis ^p. 6. v. 6.
Noe vir iustus atque perfectus fuit: Noe was a just man and perfect. To
Abraham God said: Genesis c. 17. v. 1.
walk before me and be thou perfect. And of King Asa is written: 2. Paral. c.
15. verse. 17.
Asa his heart was perfect all his days. And this perfection the young man in
the Ghospel Matt. c. 19. verse. 20.
had, if, as he said, he had in deed fullfilled all the commandments. The
fowrth perfection implies that charity, The 4. perfection is of the regulars.
by which we so love God, as we are ready not only to observe the
commandments, but also the aforesaid counselles for his love: And this
charity is the charity o^ Religious if they observe the before said
counselles sincerely as they profess. How it differs from the perfection of
all Christians.
This perfection requires that we actuallie leave all, but the former
perfection to which all Christians are bound, requires not that we actuallie
leave all, All Christians must leave all in preparation of mind.
but only in preparation of mind, that is, that we be so prepared in mind,
that although for the present we may enjoy these things, yet we must be
ready, if the occasion were offered, to leave Father, Mother, Lands and
lives, rather then transgress God his commaundemements or offend him
mortallie; and this preparation of mind had Abraham in the midst of his
riches, and amidst his many wives. For although he left not all actuallie, as
religious men do, yet he left all in preaparation of mind, to which preparation
all Christians are bound. wherefore Christ says: Luc. c. 14. v. 26.
If any man come to me and leaves not his father and mother wife and children,
and brethren and sisters, yea and his own life besides, (that is, if he leave
not all these in preparation of mind) he cannot be my disciple. The difference
betwixt religious and other christians.
So that there is only this difference betwixt Religious and other Christians;
that the Religious leave all these things actuallie, other Christians must
leave them in preparation of mind. To leave all actually is no perfection.
The former actual leaving of them is no perfection: but an instrument of
perfection, unless it be joined with the love of God, in which consists
perfection, as saint Thomas of Aquin D. Th. 2. 2 q. 184 ar. 7. ad 1.
well observes. But to leave all in preparation of mind is perfection, because
it either is the love of God, or is joined with it.

13. We must also distinguish betwixt perfection, and the state of perfection;
for that (as saint Thomas says) evil Bishops, State of perfection and
perfection are distinct and may be separated.
and disorderly religious men are in a state of perfection, but have no
perfection; and good christians may be perfect, as Abraham was, though they be
not in state of perfection: Yea the Religious man as often as he sins
mortally, loses perfection, because he loses charity; but his state he
cannot lose. Perfection therefore consists in charity and the love of God
(as above we have declared) but the state of perfection implies an
immobilitie, What is a state of perfection.
grounded in some obligation, as S. Thomas D. Th. 2. 2. q. 184 ar. 4.
has declared unto us: for, as he well observes, a man is not a bondslaue,
because he serves an other, for that freemen do serve according to that of the
Apostle: Gal. c. 5. verse. 13.
By charity serve one another: nor is a servant, or boundman made a freeman
because he cease to serve; for that slaves may be fugitives, and remain
slaves, though they serve not actuallie. But as he is in state of bondage who
by birth is borne slave, or by contracte is made slave; so he is in state of
perfection, who by vow is obliged to acts of perfection, as the Bishop and
Religious man are. And because all states are commonly given by some
solemnity, besides an obligation or vow, which causes immobilitie, saint
Thomas D. Th. vbi supra.
also requires some solemnity; and so if a man should privately vow
poverty, chastity and obedience, as he should not be properly Religious,
because the Church has not received his vows; so he should not properly have
the state of perfection; but if he make his vows to God in the hands of a
lawful Superior, and in an order approved by the Church, which has accepted
his vows, as then he is properly religious, so then, and no before has he
properly a state. And because many oblige themselves by promise to things
which they observe not, and many observe things to which they have no
obligation (as one of the sons of the lord of the vineyarde Matt. cap. 11.
said he would not work in the vineyarde, yet afterward did work, the other
promised to work and did not) therefore evil Bishops are in state of
perfection but have no perfection: and a Religious man who keeps not his vow
or lives not in compass of his rule, has a state of perfection, but is far
from perfection.

14. There is also a difference betwixt states of perfection, for that as
saint Thomas S. The. 1.2. q. 184 ar. 7. Dionys. lib. de Eccl. Hier. 2. States
of perfection: the one as of Bishops who teach, etc.
of Aquin and others both fathers and divines affirm, there is one state of
them who illuminate and perfect, as Bishops and Prelates do: there is another
of them who are to be perfected and illuminated, The other of religious who are
taught and illuminated.
as the religious are; The one is of them who are in state of perfection
already acquired, as Bishops and Prelates are; the other of them who are in
state of perfection to be acquired, as Religious are; they by state are
perfect, these tend to perfection: And therefore look what difference there
is in state betwixt Agents and Patients, Illuminators and Illuminated, Masters
and Scholars; that is betwixt Bishops and Prelates and the Religious. And by
how much greater science is in the Master then in the scholar, so much in
regard of state, is there more perfection in the Bishop then in the Religious.
Whence it is that saint Hierom Hiero. ep. ad Riparium.
says: Monachus non docentis sed plangentis habet Officium The Monk has the
of fice not of a teacher, but of a mourner. And again: Alia caussa est
monachorum, alia Clericorum: Clericipascunt oues, ego pascor: Other is the
cause of monks, other of Clearckes: Clearckes feed, I am fedd. And as the
text of the Canon law says: 7 q. 1. cap. hoc nequaquam.
The life of Monks has the word of subjection, and of a scholar. The Bishop
by his state is obliged to expose his life for his flock, when just occasion
is offered, as other Pastors also are obliged, according to that Joan. c. 10.
v. 11.
: A Good pastor gives his life for his sheep: but the religious, as
religious, by his state is not obliged to this heroical charity, as to be
every day ready to die for his neighbor, he having no care of souls; only
be is bound to observe his vows of the three Counsels, and by them to tend
to perfection. And so in this respect not only the Bishop but also every
pastor; Yea and all they who are lawfully called to convert or govern souls
by preaching, teaching and ministering of Sacraments (especially if in
performing these offices they expose their lives, Pastors have a higher
calling then religious, but not so perfect a state.
lands, or liberties) have a more perfect calling then the Religious, as
Religious, have, because the Religious man by his calling seeks only to save
his own soul, not the souls of others, he having by state and office no care
of souls, and he is not by his calling to give his life for others, as every
Pastor, and they who have charge of souls are. And therefore when Religious
men are sent to preach to Infidelles, and to convert souls as that pertains
not to them a Religious, but as they are extraordinarily called: So they are
then sent to exercise greater acts of perfection, then purelie monastical or
regular which are properly belonging to them. And the reason of this is:
because there is no greater perfection in this life then charity, 1. Cor. cap.
3.
and there is no greater charity then to give or hazard ones life for the
saving of souls. Only the Pastor not Bishop, though he have a perfecter
callling then the Religious as Religious, yet he has not so perfect a state as
the Bishop, or Religious has: not as the Bishop, because the Pastor not
Bishop has charge only of a Parish, the Bishop of a Diocese; and that charge
the Pastor has dependentlie of the Bishop: Not as the Religious because as we
have seen to a state immobilitie is required D. Tho. 1.2. q. 184 a. 7. ad 1.
which Joan. c. 10. v. 1^.
the Pastor not Bishop has not. And therefore the Pastor not Bishop may
forsake his pastourship and retire himself to a more quiet life, either in
religion or out of religion without license of the Pope; the religious man
after his vows made, cannot return to the world, nor can he of Religious
become no religious man, as the Pastor of a Pastor may become no Pastor.

15. The Bishop in state of perfection excels.
But in this respect also the Bishop excels the religious man; for that the
Religious man may be preferred, to be a Bishop, as practice of the Church
teaches and the Canons, 18. q. 1. cap. statutum est.
which argues (says saint Thomas S. Th. 2.2. q. 184. ar. 7. in argum. sed
contra.
that the state of a Bishop, is a greater state of perfection: For if it were
lesser, it were not lawful for the Religious to be a Bishop, because as Saint
Thomas also says: Nulli licet a maiori statu ad minorem transire; hoc enim
esset retro aspicere: It is lawful for no man to go from a greater state (of
perfection) to a lesser; for this were to look back. But the Bishop cannot
leave his Bishopric weere it to be a Religious man, unless the Pope who
has full power under Christ upon some just cause dispense with him, as saint
Thomas expresselie auerreth: S. Tho. 1.2. q. 18^ art. 4. The Bishops marriage
with his Church.
for as Euaristus Euaristus ep. 2. d. 1. episc. erectis.
Pope, Calixtus Pope, Calixtus ep. 2. ad omnes Galliae episc.
and Innocentius III. Pope Innocent. III. in c. Inter corporalia. de Translat.
episc.
do acertaine us, the Bishop when he is consecrated, elected and confirmed to
his Church, does contract a spiritual marriage with his Church: and so may
not leave it unless the Pope upon an urgent cause dispense with him: Else if a
Bishop might leave his Bishopric for a greater, the door would be open to
much ambition, and none would be content with his Bishopric. And therefore
this is severely prohibited by diverse Councelles, as by the Council of
Antioche, Conc. Antioch. c. 1. and refortur. ca. Episcoperu^ in 7. q. 1.
Sardis Conc. Sardic. can. 1.
Carthage: Conc. Carthag. 3. c. 38.
by saint Leo Leo ep. 84. ad Anastas.
and Innocentius III. Innoc. III. vbi supra. and cap. Nisi cum pride^ de
renunciatione.
And Innocentius adds that it is easier for a Monk, to ascend to a
Bishopric, then for. Bishop to go to be a Monk, because the state of a
Bishop is perfecter. And hence some infer that the Bishops marriage with hi^
Church is firmer and more indissoluble then is marriage betwixt man and wife,
which is contracted, bu^ not consummated: because matrimony contracted only,
is dissolve by entrance into Religion, but the marriage betwixt a Bishop and
(...) Church cannot so be dissolved.

16. So that the state of a Bishop is an higher state of perfection the the
state of Religious; yea a religious state can be but a means to come to be a
Bishop, and so must ^eedes be inferior, the means being inferior to the end.
And therefore S. Hierom Hiero. ep. ad Rusticum Monach.
writing to Monk says: Sic viue in monaste^io vt Clericus esse merearis: So
live in ^y monastery that thou may deserve (...) be a Clearke. And with
much more ^^ason might he have said: so live (...) thy monastery as thou
may ^eserue to be a Bishop. Wherefore ^hen a Religious man is made a ^ishop
or a Pastor, he is preferred ^o an higher calling, and to a vocation of
greater perfection: yea religious men when they were sent to preach and
convert countries, they were sent to exercise higher acts of perfection; for
that in this life there is no greater charity, and co^^^uentlie no greater
perfection then to have care of souls and to hazard ones life for them, to
which the Pastor is obliged by his state and office, not the religious.

17. An objection answered.
If any obiecte that a Bishop may have riches and possessions and so observes
not that counsel of Christ: Matt. c. 19. v. 21.
Si vis perfectus esse, vade and vende omnia quae habes and da pauperibus: If
thou will be perfect, go sell all thou have, and give to the poor: I answer
with saint Thomas of Aquin 2.2. q. 184. ar. 7. ad 1.
the honor of the schools and glory of religion, that actuallie to renounce
all, is no perfection, but an instrumente and means to perfection, and
therefore though the religious person do actuallie leave all, that argues not
him to be perfecter in state then the Bishop. But the Bishop by his state is
obliged to be ready prepared in mind to expose his life for his Church, and
every one of his Diocese. Which preparation of mind Abraham had in the
midst of his riches: And in this preparation (as above is declared)
consists perfection not in the actual leauinge of all as many heathens have
done: though (as above is said) this actual leauinge of all, be a good means
to perfection.

18. Wherefore S. Thomas 2.2. q. 185. ar. 8. incorp. S. Th. his censure.
determines this controversy in these words: Status religionis ad
perfectionem pertinet quasi quaedam via in perfectionem tendens. Status autem
Episcoporum ad perfectionem pertinet, tamquam quoddam perfectionis magisterium.
Vnde status religionis comparatur ad statum Episcopalem, sicut disciplina ad
magisterium, and dispositio ad perfectionem: The state of Religion pertains
to perfection as a way tending unto perfection: But the state of Bishops
pertains to perfection, as the maistership of perfection. Whence it is that
the state of religion is compared unto Episcopal state, as instruction to
maistership: And Henricus a Gandauo handling this question Whether the
religious or the Bishop be in the greater state of perfection, concludes in
these words: Henricus Gandauensis his ce^sure. quodl. 12. quaest. 29.
Status praelatorum se habet ad statum religiosorum, sicut status magistorum
adstatum discipulorum: Magister autem debet esse perfectior discipulo. The
state of Prelates has that comparison to the state of religious, which the
state of Masters has to the state of scholars: But the master ought to be
perfecter then his scholar. And again (says he) Quando aliquis religiosus
deductus est ad summum aliquid and perfectum, tunc primum estidoneus vt
assumatur in praelatum. When a religious man is brought to a high and prefect
(degree of perfection) then first he is fit to be assumed for a Prelate. And so
where a religious man ends, there a Bishop or Pastor begins, and the
Bishop lays his foundation on the Religious man's top and roof. The
conclusion of this chapter.
Having spoake^ of all the orders of the Church though more amply and
particularly of the greater then of the lesser; it remains that in the
ensuing Chapters I examine which of all these orders are most necessary.

THE XII. CHAPTER. Bishops are so necessary in the Church of God, that it can
not subsist without them.
1. All the orders of the Church as of Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons etc. being
given with some Sacramental action, it is necessary (says D. Tho. lib. 4.
cont. gent. c. 76. Ferrar. ibidem.
saint Thomas) that there should be a sacred power which gives them, and which
also must be greater and of an higher order then they, the cause being greater
and nobler then the effect; No orders without a Bishop.
and this is Episcopal authority, by which the Bishop has power to give all
the orders, and ordain all the ministers of the Church. So that without a
Bishop there can be no other orders, and without diverse orders there ca^ be no
Hierarchy, and without a Hierarchy there can be no Church, which, as above we
have seen is Hierarchicall; and so without a Bishop there can be no Church.
Hence it is that the Council of Trente Cono. Tvid. sess. ^3. ^. 4.
declares that, Praeter caeteros Ecclesiasticos gradus etc. Besides the other
Ecclesiastical degrees, Bishops, who succeed into the place of the Apostles,
do appertain principally to this Hierarchicall order, and are placed (as the
Apostle Act. ca. 20. v. 28.
says) by the holy Ghost, to rule the Church of God, and are superior to
Priests, and do give the Sacraments of Confirmation and ordain Ministers. And
again the same counsel Sess. 23 can. 6,
thus pronounces: If any shall say that in the Catholic Church there is not
a Hierarchy instituted by the divine ordinance, which consists of Bishops,
Priests and ministers, let him be accursed.

2. Secondly the Bishop having the highest degree in the Church both in power
of Jurisdiction and order, as above is declared, there can be no lawful
ministration of Sacraments, no preaching of God his word, no laws
Ecclesiastical can be enacted, No ecclesiastical function without a Bishop.
no act Iuridicall or Hierarchicall can be lawfully exercised, no Councelles,
which essentiallie consist of Bishops, can be assembled, no consecration of
Churches, no government of Dioceses or Parishes, no sacring of Chalices, no
hallowing of vestements or other things, and so no Ecclesiastical function can
be exercised lawfully in the Church without a Bishop, all depending on him.
Wherefore saint Ignatius says: Ignat. ep. ad Smyrnenses.
Non licet sine Episcop^ neque Baptizare, neque offerre, neque sacrificium
immolare, neque dochen, id est, caenam celebrare: It is not lawful without the
Bishop nether to baptize, nor to offer, nor to Immolate the sacrifice, nor to
celebrate the supper.

3. Thirdly the Church, as above, is compared to the Hierarchy of Angels, and
to a temporal Kingdom, it being a spiritual Kingdom and called the Kingdom of
heaven. Mat. 23.
It is also a monarchy whose monarch under Christ is Peeter and his
Successor, as there also is proved. Wherefore as in the Hierarehie of the
Angels, besides one supreme Angel who under God rules that spiritual
Kingdom, there are three Hierarchies and nine orders, all which have their
Princes to govern them: And as in a kingdom or Monarchy there are rulers of
Provinces, which they rule also not as the kings Lieutenants, but as Princes in
their degree: So in the Church of God there must not be one only Monarch and
supreme Pastor (which is Peeter and his Successor, as we have demo^strated)
for that he only and alone, cannot sufficiently menage all the affairs of
the Church; nor rule and direct all the members of it: but also other Pastors,
I mean Bishops, who are spiritual Princes, are necessary: and although they
depend of the Pope for their Jurisdiction; Yet they are spiritual Princes, and
ordinary Pastors in their kinds and not his delegates. No partieular Church
without Bishops.
And therefore as the whole Church has one supreme Pastor, so all particular
Churches must have their Bishops and Pastors. And so every Patriarchship has
its Patriarch, every Archbishopricke, which contains diverse Dioceses and
suffragane Bishops, has its Archbishop; and every Diocese its Bishop, and
every Parish its Pastor. Which also argues that without Bishops, the Church
cannot subsist, it containing in it diverse particular Churches, which are of
the Integrity yea and essence of the whole Church; which particular Churches
are to be governed by Bishops.

4. Hence it is that the Apostles besides saint Peeter and them selves;
constituted Bishops in diverse places, as saint Peeter (according to Chrysostom. hom
87. in Joan.
saint Chrysostom) constituted saint James Bishop of Jerusalem: and he and
saint John and saint James the greater ordained him, as Anacletus Anacl. ep. 2.
and Eusebius. l. 2. cap. 1.
auerreth. S. Chrysostom says: Si quis a me percontaretur, quomodo Iacobus
sedem Hierosolymitanam acceperit, responderem ego hunc totius orbis magistrum
praeposuisse Petrum: Bishops constituted.
If any ask of me how James took the seat of Jerusalem, I would auswere,
that Peeter the master of the whole world, constituted him. Saint Paul
constituted Timothy Bishop of Fphesus, as saint Paul him self 1. Tim. c. 1.
v. 3.
insinuates, and Eusebius Eusebius. l. 3. hist. cap. 4.
plain lie avouches. Saint Paul Tit. c. 1. verse. 5.
also constituted Titus, Bishop of Crete that the should ordain Priests by
Cities. So after S. Peeter had founded and governed the Gelas. in decrete de
libris Apocr. Anacl. ep. 2. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 24.
Church of Antioche seven years, Euodius was there Bishop, to whom succeeded
Ignatius. So saint Mark in the name of saint Peeter founded the Church of
Alexandria, to who^ succeeded Anianus. And whosoever is never so little
conversant in Ecclesiastical histories and the practice of the Church, cannot
but see, how the Church has ever been governed by Bishops, even from the
beginning. For as we have seen, the Apostles presently after they had
converted countries and Cities, did ordain and send Bishops to govern them.
And Anacletus, Anacl. ep. 2. cit. c. 1. and ep. 3.
ordained Priest by Saint Peeter, makes mention of Patriarchs or Primates,
Archbishops, and Bishops which in his time governed. So that take away Bishops
and you take away the Church, they being essentiallie pertaining to the
Hierarchy without the which there is no Church. Wherefore S. Anaclete says:
Sacerdotum or do bipartitus est, and sicut Dominusillum constituit, a nullo
debet perturbari: The order of Priests is of two sorts (to wit Bishops and
Priests) and as our Lord has constituted, it must be perturbed by no body.
And saint Cyprian Cypr. ep. 6. q. ad Flor. edit. pamel.
says that the Church is, Sacerdoti plebs adunata and Pastori suo grex
adhaerens: The Church is the people united to the Bishop, No Church without a
Bishop.
and the flock adhering to its Pastor; And seeing that there cannot be a
people united to the Bishop, without a Bishop, it follows that there cannot
be a Church without Bishops. The same father in the same Epistle says: Vnde
scire debes Episcopum in Ecclesia esse and Ecclesiam in Episcopo; Whereupon
thou must know that the Bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the Bishop.
And why? because the one cannot be without the other. For as the Kingdom
cannot be with out a King, nor the King without a Kingdom, they being
correlatiues; so neither can the Church be without a Bishop, nor the Bishop
without the Church, he being ordained to no other end then to rule the Church.
Act. c. 20. v. 28.
And the council of Trent Canc. Trid. supra Sess. 2.3. can. 6.
as we have seen accurseth them that shall say that in the Catholic Church
there is not a Hierarchy instituted by the divine ordinance, Bishops of the
essence of the Church.
or that it consists not of Bishops, Priests and other ministers. By which it
is evident that Bishops are of the essence of the Church; and that neither the
universal Church, nor any particular Church in its perfect state can be
without a Bishop; the Church universal or particular being (as saint Cyprian
Cypr. vbi supra.
says) nothing else, But the people united to the Priest that is to the
Bishop, and the flock adhering to its Pastor.

5. And therefore they who will have no Bishops will consequently have no
Church; and so our Puritans who will have no Bishops, declare themselves to be
no Church; and the Protestants are wiser then they, who though they have no
true Priests or Bishops, and so no true Church; yet they have supposed Bishops,
and so a show of a Church: Protestants gouernme^te of their Church, better
the^ that of the puritans.
and even as a Tyrant because he has some show of a king, better governs a
Kingdom then a seditious multitude, and therefore by Tyra^nie Kingdoms have
stood for some time, never by sedition; so the Protestants Church will stand
longer under supposed Bishops who have a show of Bishops then the congregation
of the puritans under a Presbytery or consistory of Ministers not Bishops,
who therefore for lack of Bishops to keep them in order and unity, are
always at variance.

THE XIII. CHAPTER. Bishops are so necessary that even in time of persecution
(though it should be greater for the Bishops) the Church may not be governed
without Bishops.
1. BY that which has already been said in the former Chapters, and
especially in the last, it is evident that the universal Church cannot be
without Bishops: yea it is an heresy to say that the Church may be governed
without Bishops; the Church being essentiallie a Hierarchy, and Bishops being
of the essence of this Hierarchy, as the Council of Trent Conc. Trid. sess.
23. can. 6.
has defined, and is above proved, and the government of the Church being
given to Bishops by the divine ordinance, as above is declared out of many
places of scriptures, and out of the Council of Trent in the place last
alleged, no humane authority can alter it. And therefore Anacletus Anacl. ep.
3.
says, that the order of Priests is of two sorts (that is of Bishops and
simple Priests) and as our Lord has constituted, it must be perturbed by no
body.

2. The government of the Church by Bishops can not be changed.
And the reason is because the government of the Church being established by
Christ, it is Iuris diuini, of the divine law which no man can alter; in which
the Pope cannot dispense; which the whole Church cannot change: because the
Inferior Prince cannot abrogate or dispense in the laws of his Superior, as
Christ is to the Church. For as commonly divines, ^aye the Pope and Church
cannot abrogate the divine law by which the Sacraments are instituted and
commanded, nor dispense in any other divine positive laws, they being only
to be changed by God who made them. Wherefore seeing that Christ has
established a form of Government in his Church by Bishops and Priests, no
humane authority can abrogate or change it. And so the Pope cannot put down
all Bishops and govern the Church only by him self and Vicaires or delegated
officers not Bishops, Christ having appointed Bishops: This commonly divines
say, and it is evident in reason: I will allege only Suarez Suar. to. 2.
disp. 25. s^st. 1. nu. 8.
because he is a learned divine. He in his fourth tome of his Commentaries upon
the third part of saint Thomas his sum concludes in these words: Vnde sine
dubio non posset tota Ecclesia hunc modum regiminis (per Episcopos) mutare, vt
omnes etia^ autores fatentur. Et ratio breuiter est, quia Christus Dominus
instituit perfectam Monarchiam in Ecclesia. Ad perfectionem autem Monarchiae,
and bonum animarum necessarium est vt in tota Ecclesia, non tantum vnus
Monarcha, sed etiam vt sub illo essent alij veluti Principes Ecclesiae, ipsi
supremo principi, subordinati: Ergo hoc totu^ Christus instituit. Minor
declaratur, tum quia Monarchia vt sit perfecta debet habere aliquid admixtum
Aristocratiae, quia oportet vt in republica sint varij Principes sub vno primo:
Wherevpo^ without doubt the whole Church could not Change this manner of
government by Bishops, as all authors do also confess. And the reason
breefelie is because Christ our Lord instituted a perfect Monarchy in the
Church: but to the perfection of a Monarchy and the good of souls, it is
necessary that in the whole Church there should be not only one Monarche, but
also others under him as Princes of the Church, subordinate to the chief
Prince. Therefore Christ instituted all this. The Minor proposition is
declared, both because a Monarchy, that it may be perfect, must have some
thing admixt of Aristocracie, because there must be in the Church many Princes
under one the first.

3. Christ sent his Apostles not withstanding persequutio^.
Wherefore even in time of persecution, though it should be principally
intended against Bishops, this government must not be changed; it being
ordained by Christ. Certes our blessed Saniour foresaw, yea fortold the
persecutions, which were to be raised against his Apostles, for said he:
Matt. c. 10. v. 16.
Ecce ego mitto vos sicut oues in medio luporum etc. Behold I send you as
sheep in the midst of wolves. Be ye therefore wise as serpents and simple
as doves. And take heed of men: (Homo homini lupus, Man to man is a wolf) For
they will deliver you up in councelles and in their Synagogues they will
scourge you. And to Presidents and Kings you shall be led for my sake etc. And
he adds; Mat. c. 10. v. 22.
you shall be odious to all men for my name: He foretold Peeter his death by
the cross saying: Joan, c. 21. v. 18.
When thou wast younger thou did guirde thy self, and did walk where
thou would, but when thou shall be old thou shall stretch forth thy hands,
and another shall guirde thee, So says Tertu. lib. prescr. nu. 14. Chrysostom. he.
in hune locum Eusebius. l. 2. ca. 24.
and lead thee whether thou will not. And this, says saint John, he said,
signifiing by what death he should glorify God. Did he therefore omit to
make him Bishop? Nay in the words which he spoke immediately before these, he
made him not only Bishop, but Chief Bishop and Pastor of the Church. The
Apostles preach and ordain Bishops in persequution.
Yea the Apostles knowing that they were made Bishops to preach and convert the
world, and after to govern it; maugre all the Tyrants and their engines of
cruelty, they set upon this great piece of work of the worlds conversion,
and they, whom they converted were as willing to receive them, though they knew
the persecution was raised especially against them.

4. And as Christ ordained his Apostles Bishops though he foresawe this great
persecution: So the Apostles ordained Timothy and Titus Bishops, and they
ordained by Cities other Bishops Tit. 1. above. So^ did their successors.
not with standing the persecution. And the successors of the Apostles have
not omitted to ordain Bishops for fear of persecution, nor did the Christians
then except against ordaining Bishops, though they knew that the persecutors
aimed especially at Bishops, and at others for their sakes. Although the
persecuting Emperor (says Cypr. l. 4. ep. 2. ad Antoniauum.
saint Cyprian) was so infestus Sacerdotibus vt fanda and infanda
comminaretur; And did so hate the Bishops of Rome that multo patientius and
tolerabilius audiret leuari aduersus se aemulum Principem, quam constitui Romae
Dei Sacerdotem: Endured more patiently to hear of a Prince competitor, then
of a Bishop constituted at Rome: Yet should you the^ have seen (says he)
Cornelius (and other Popes) sedere intrepidum, to sit in Peeters Chair without
fear, knowing it to be protected by Peeters Master. O the courage and
constancy of the Bishops of Rome, who never shrunk the shoulders, never
intermitted their succession, but least the Church should want a head, and the
Hierarchy a Hierarchicall Prince, were content with evident hazard of their
lives, to maintain the Succession of Bishops in that seat, maugre the
barbarous cruelty of the bloody Tyra^t. And O the zeal of the Romans who
though they knew, they could not have a Bishop without hazard of his life and
theirs; yet admitted him; yea thought them selves happy to have him, and as
unhappy to be without him, as it is for the army, when it is assaulted, to be
without a General, or the ship amidde the surging waves and winds to want a
Pilot, or the flock, when the wo^fe is enraged, to be without a Pastor.

5. Wherefore, as we may gather out of Ecclesiastical histories, from the
cruel Tyrant Nero to the Clement Emperor Constantine the Great, there was
scarce any Bishop of Rome who was not a Martyr, who at least suffered not great
persecution. Twenty seven of them are commonly avouched for Martyrs, to wit
Peeter, Line, 27. Popes Martyrs before the time of Constantin.
Cletus, Clement, Anacletus, Fuaristus, Alexander, Sixtus, Thelesphorus,
Anicetus, Callistus, Vrbanus, Pontianus, Anterus, Fabianus, Cornelius, Lucius,
Stephanus, Sixtus Secundus, Faelix, Eutichianus, Caius, Marcellinus, Marcellus,
Ioannes, Syluerius, Martinus: Vide Boziuml. 8. c. 3.
To whom may be added many more who were banished and by the misery of
Banishment had their lives shortened.

6. And these glorious Bishops Peeters Successors, as they were contented the
later to succeed the former in the Bishopric of Rome and therein to hazard
their lives, knowing that it was Christ's will, that the universal Church
should be governed by one supreme visible Pastor: so they also knowing that
Christ, besides the supreme visible Pastor, instituted other Bishops to
govern with reference to the supreme Pastor, The ancient Popes ordained still
Bishops in time of persecution.
their particular Churches, so to make up a Hierarchy of diverse orders: never
omitted in the greatest persecutions to ordain Bishops over particular
Churches, though this ordination hazarded no less the ordainers, the^ the
ordaineds lives. And to omit that in the three Patriarchall Seats, of Rome,
Alexandria, and Antioche and other principal Seats there was never wanting a
Patriarch or Bishop to govern them as may partly appear by the martyrdom
of the aforesaied Bishops in the Seat of Rome, Eusebius. l. 3. hist. c. 20. and
32.
of Saint Mark and saint Anianus in the seat of Alexandria, of Euodius and
Ignatius in the seat of Antioch, of saint James, Ordinations of Popes.
and saint Symeon in the seat of Jerusalem:If you read the lives of the
Bishops of Rome, you shall find that in the greatest persecutions they omitted
not to consecrate Priests and Bishops in diverse places. Ex Ba^. ron. an.
Domini. 80. an. 43. an. 102. an. 112. an. 121. an. 132. an. 142. an. 154. an.
158.
So saint Linus saint Peeters immediate successor ordained eighteen Priests
and fifteen Bishops in the persecution of Vespasianus: saint Cletus five and
twenty Priests in the persecution of Domitian, saint Clement ten Priests and
fifteen Bishops in the persecution of Traiane: saint Anaclete Six Bishops and
five Priests in the same persecution: saint Euariste seuenteen Priests and
fifteen Bishops in the persecution of Hadrian: Saint Alexander five Bishops in
the same persecution: Saint Sixtus eleven priests and four Bishops in the
persecution of Antoninus: Thelesphorus thirteen Bishops: S. Higinus six Bishops
in the same persecution. And to omit many others: The Priest in his Breuiarie
will find in the office of Popes in the end of their lives how every one of
them in the very fur^e of Persecution ordained Deacons, Priests and Bishops in
diverse places, knovving that the Church of God according to Christ's
Institution, was to be governed by Bishops.

7. This were sufficient to show that for fear of persecution the ordination
of Bishops may not be omitted least the sheep should be destituted of
Pastors. But yet I will not omit here to propose unto my reader the fervent
zele and desire the catholics of the Church of Carthage had for Bishops. When
Hunericus Victor Vticensis l. 2. perseqvand. in initio.
began his reign, to make a show of clemency and favor toward the
catholics of Carthage, he offerred them (yet at the instance of Zeno the
Emperor and Placidia to choose in that Church and to consecrate a Bishop whom
they would (which orname^t (says Victor) carthage had wanted for four and
twenty years) but yet upon this condition, that the Arrians at Constantinople
might enjoy the free use of their Churches; otherwise (says Hunericus) not
only the Bishop that shall be ordained in carthage with his clergy, but also
all other Bishops of the Africane Provinces with their clergy, shall be sent to
the Moors. The which when Victor Primate of Afric and others heard, they
refused his courtesy with so cruel a condition, and said: Si it a est,
interpositis his conditionibus periculosis, haec Ecclesia Episcopum non
delectatur habere. Gubernat eam Christus qui semper dignatur gubernare: If it
be so, with these perilous conditions, the Church of Carthage is not delighted
to have a Bishop. The desire of the people of Carthage for a Bishop.
But the people so cried out for a Bishop that they could not be appeased
without one. Eugenius therefore an holy man being ordained their Bishop,
there was great joy, and as it were, a Triu^phe made that they had again a
Bishop; And the younger sort flocking together shevved great signs of joy,
Their joy for him.
and said that they had never before (for they had been destitute of a Bishop
twenty and four years) seen a Bishop in that Episcopal Throne And they
were so inamoured of this their Bishop, that, as Victor says: Animam suam pro
eodem vniuersos ponere delectaret: All of them would have taken delight to have
given their lives for him. Here I cannot but turn my speech to my dear
countrymen the Catholics of England, and to desire them who for their
constancy and zele for the catholic faith, have been a mirror and pattern
to all other countries, to iumitate this zele of the Carthaginians for a
Bishop, and their love toward him, and to imprinte it in their hearts. These
would have hazarded their lives for their Bishop, because they had not seen
one in their Church for the space of four and twenty years: how zealous
should you be for your Bishop, you having not seen a true Bishop in England
till these two last you have had, for far more years.

8. But let us behold another example of Hunericus cruelty and of the African
catholics zele to their Bishops and Pastors. Hunericus his cruelty Victor
Vticensis Victor, Vtie. l. 2.
describes rather by tears then words saying: Huneticus his cruel
Quibus autem prosequar fluminibus lachrymarum, quando Episcopos, Presbyteros,
Diaconos and alia Ecclesiae membra, id est, quatuor millia D. CCCC. LXVI. ad
exilium eremi destinauit, in quibus erant podagrici quam plurimi, alij per
aetatem annoru^ lumine temporalipriuati etc. But with what fluddes of tears
shall I prosequute Hunericus his cruelty. When he sent Bishops, Priests,
Deacons and other members of the Church into Banishment in the wilderness,
amongst whom were many troubled with the gout, others by age blind and
deprived of sight etc. For he further sets down what miseries they
suffered in their journey. Behold Hunnericus cruelty.

9. The Catholics zele for their Bishops.
Now let us behold also the zele of the Catholics of these countries for
their Bishops and Priests. They complained pitifully that they were to be
deprived of their Pastors, saying or rather crying: Victor. l. 2. perseq.
vandal.
Quibus nos miseros relinquitis, dum pergitis ad coronas? qui hos baptizaturi
sunt paruulos fontibus aquae perennis? qui nobis paenitentiae munus collaturi
sunt, and reconciliationis indulgentia obstrictos peccatorum vinculis soluturi?
quia vobis dictu^ est, Mat. c. 18. v. 18.
Quaecumque solueritis super terra^, erunt soluta and in caelis. Qui nos
solemnibus orationibus sepulturi sunt morientes quibus diuini sacrificij ritus
exhibenduse st? Vobiscum and nos licebat pergere, si liceret vt tali modo
filios a patribus nulla necessitas separaret: To who^ do you leave us miserable
wretches, whilst you go to receive your crowns? who shall give us the
Sacrament of Penance, and loose us tied with the bonds of sins by the
Indulgence of reconciliation? For to you it was said: VVat soever you shall
loose upon earth, shallbe loosed in heaven? who shall bury us with solemn
prayers when we shall dye to whom the rite of the divine sacrifice is to be
exhibited? we might have gone with you, that so no necessity might separate
the children from their fathers. Wherefore as for other points of our faith we
must die rather then deny them, so we must die rather then deny the
Hierarchy of the Church, it being a point of faith, as above we have proved
out of Scriptures Act. 20. Ephesians. 4.
and consisting of Bishops, Priests and ministers, as the Council of Trent
(whose words we have diverse times related) has defined. Conc. Trid. sess. 23.
can. 6.
And therefore as saint Thomas of Canturburie is a true Martyr, He should be a
martyr who should dye for the Hierarchy.
who yet dyed only for the right of the Church; So he that should dye for
defense of the Hierarchy of the Church, which consists principally of
Bishops, should be truly a Martyr.

10. The like complainte did or might our English Catholics make when in
Queen Elizabethes time, partly by banishment, partly by Imprisonment, partly
by death, they were deprived of their Bishops and Priests, and conseque^tlie
of the Sacrament of confirmation, whose use especially is requisite in time of
persecution, and of the public use of other Sacraments, and of the sacrrifice
of the Mass and other benefittes. But now that Christ by his Vicar has sent
us a Bishop, should we repine, or rather should we not rejoice and thank God
for so great a benefit.

11. The cruelty of Trasamu^dus.
But behold yet another as great a cruelty of the Arrian Tyra^t Trasamundus
answered with no less zele of the African Bishops: Oresius lib. 1. hist. c. 10.
The Tyrant commanded that they should not ordain any more Bishops in the
place of those that dyed, and so the Church of Carthage after the death of
Eugenius had no Bishop. The Bishops considering that without Bishops their
Churches could not long subsiste, but would fall without any other persecution
or violence used against them, resolved to call a council An. Domini 504.
as they did. And in that council called Byzacenum (of which is a memory in
the second tome of the councelles) all the Bishops with one consent decreed,
notwithstanding the Tyrants Edict to the contrary, to ordain Bishops;
cogitantes (as the history says) aut Regis iracundiam, si qua forsan
existeret mitigandam, The Bishops Zele.
quo facilius ordinati in suis plebibus viuerent, aut si persecutionis
violentia nasceretur, coronandos etiam fidei confessione, quos dignos
inueniebant promotione etc: Thinking that the Kings wrath, if any perchance
should be, would be mitigated or that they who were found worthy of promotion,
would be crowned with confession of their ministry, and that amidest the
tribulatious they should so give confolation to the people; And good reason had
they to do so: For, as says Baronius Baronius An. Domini 504.
Quaenam spes de Ecclesijs pastoribus destitutis vlterius reliqua esse poterat,
conuulsis earum fundamentis ipsis quibus innitebantur Episcopis? What hope
could there remain for the Churches when their foundations, to wit the Bihops,
to which they leaned and on which they depended, were ruined and pulled up.

12. Behold then O Catholics of England, A speech to English Catholics.
how these Bishops for fear of persecution do not omit to consecrate Bishops
(who are by Christ's institution appointed to govern the Church in all times
and especially in persecution) which they might justly expect from that
Arrian Tyrant, but will expose Bishops and Priests, and all to Martyrdom,
rather then their Church should sustain so great a loss as the want of
Bishops: And you, who for your constante confession of your faith have been a
mirror to all other Catholic countries of this age; refuse not to take of
those holy Bishops a pattern of true zele, which is required not only of
Bishops and Priests but also of all good Catholics. Bishops are the
governors of the Church, they are appointed by Christ him self, as above we
have showed; and they were appointed even then when nothing but a raging
persecution could be expected, and by the Church they have ever been ordained
in the very midst of persecution. To refuse therefore Bishops for fear of
persecution, is to refuse a pilot when the ship is dangerously tossed with
the surging waves, a Pastor when the wolf is ready to devour the flock, a
General when the enemy approaches and offers battle.

THE XIIII. CHAPTER. That a particular Country may not refuse Bishops by
reason of persequution.
1. I Have showed in the tenth Chapter that the Church cannot subsiste without
Bishops, for that the Church is a Monarchy and Hierarchy in which there is
not only one Chief Bishop Peeters Successor and Christ his Vicar, who is
one supreme pastor of the whole Church, but also diverse other Bishops, heads
of particular Churches. And this diversity of Bishops is by Christ's divine
law and ordinance established in the Church. Hence it is that when any such
number as required a Bishop was converted, by and by even in the Apostles
times, a Bishop was appointed over them, as S. James at Jerusalem, saint
Mark and after him Anianus at Alexandria, saint Euodius after saint Peeter at
Antioche, yea saint Timothy was appointed by saint Paul at Ephesus, and Titus
at Creete, as above we have seen, who also had order to constitute other
Bishops, When any country was converted by and by a Bishop there wa^s
ordained.
as the number of Christians required. Hence it is that when any country
was converted by any one who was not Bishop, the first thing was to
consecrate there a Bishop. So saint Austin the Monk although he was not
Bishop when he first preached in England, yet when there was a number of
Christians converted capable of a Bishop, not only he but diverse others as
Iustus and Melitus, were ordained Bishops. So saint Boniface when he first
preached to the Germans was not Bishop, yet after, when the number of
Christians increased, he and others were appointed Bishops. And the reason
was because Bishops by Christ's ordinance and Institution are the proper
rulers of the Church.

2. An objection answered.
But some may allege, that although Bishops are necessary in the whole
Church, yet they are not so necessary for every particular Church, but that a
particular Church may be Governed, at least, for a time without a Bishop, that
is till the time of persecution be blovvn over and the storm appeased. To this
I answer that if for a time some particular Church, which formerlie has had a
Bishop or requires a Bishop be governed by Priests or an Archpriest without a
Bishop, it is a thing accidental and not ordinary, nor according to Christ's
Institution, who will have his Church governed, not only by one universal,
but by diverse particular Bishops. An other objection answered.
But some may again reply, be it that by the divine ordinance there must be
some particular Bishops to govern particular Churches; yet that this Church in
particular should be so governed, it is not Iuris diuini of the divine law. I
answer that for this argument, it seems not so evident that there must be a
Bishop in this or that particular Church by the divine ordinance, as that in
general, and indeterminatlie there must be particular Churches Governed by
Bishops; Yet Sotus, Sotus. lib 10. de lust. and Iure qu 1. a 4. post secundam
conclus.
a learned Dominican affirms it to be De iure diuino of the divine law Quod
in genere singulis Ec^lesijs secundum Ecclesiasticam diuisionem sui applicentur
Episcopi; That in general to every particular Church according to the
Ecclesiastical diuistion proper Bishops are to be applied. And Bannes another
later yet learned divine of the same Order says: That Bishops cannot by the
Pope be removed from the whole Church, or a great or notable part of it. And
I argue thus: by the divine law there must be particular Bishops in the
Church, as in the former Chapter I have proved that there must be; But there
is no more reason why the particular Church of France (for I speak
especially of great particular Churches, which are notable parts of the
whole Church) should be governed by a Bishop or Bishops more or fewer according
to the extent of the Country, rather the^ the Church of Spain, or the Church
of Spain, rather then the Church of England or Flanders: Ergo France, Spain,
England, Flanders and all other particular Churches of extent must be governed
by Bishops and that it has been ever the practice of the Church to appoint a
Bishop, or Bishops to govern when the country converted was capable I have
showed sufficiently in the former Chapter. Which makes me demand why the
Popes and Bishops in the primitive Church were so diligent and exact in
consecrating Bishops; yea and making Popes even in the midst of the greatest
persecutions, and when the persecutions were principally intended against
Popes and Bishops; and would not for fear of persecution or other humane
respects let any country or Church especially of any greatness to be
without a Bishop, but that they thought it was Iuris diuini of the divine
law that every Church or country should have its Bishops.

3. And although when a Bishop cannot at all be gotten, the particular Church
must be governed as it may, necessity having no law; yet when a Bishop may be
had, though not without increase of persecution, I am of opinion (which I
humbly submit to Aurhoritie) that this particular Church cannot except any
long time against having a Bishop for fear of persecution. True it is that in
England we were long without a Bishop, but that was because we could not get
one, and our Superiors were informed tha^ a Bishop would not be permitted to
enter into England, or would presently be taken and put to death and so it was
to no purpose to send a Bishop with evident hazard of his life and no hope of
good to the people by sending him. But if a Bishop may be had, and may so live
in a Country (as he may in England) that as there is fear least he be
apprehended, When a Bishop may behad, he cannot be refused for persecution.
so there is hope he may escape some time, and so do some notable good: I do
not think that the Catholics of that country can except against his entrance.

4. For as, all though every one is not bound under mortal sin to receive a
Priest, or to keep him in his house, if he see probably, that thereby he
shall hazard his life liberty or lands; yet Catholics cannot except against
the mission of Priests into their country, because without Priests the people
can have no Sacraments, nor absolutio^ from sins, no sacrifice, no preaching
of the word of God; which to a whole country is so great a damage that no
man can except against their mission for fear of persecution; but rather ought
to hazard persecution of the body, then such damage of the soul: So although
no man in particular perchance is bound to receive a Bishop into his house, or
to receive confirmation of him with probable hazard of his life, liberty or
lands; yet neither a country, nor any of the country can except against the
mission of a Bishop into it, though his entrance might cause a persecution. And
my reasons are two.

5. The first reason.
The first is that which I have often alleged, because the government of
Bishops is instituted by Christ, and has been put in practice even in the
greatest persecutions yea instituted against persecution as we have seen in the
former Chapter.

6. My second reason is, The second reason.
because the commodity which a province reapeth by a Bishop is so great, and
the want of him is such a loss, that we should rather hazard persecution (as
above in the former chapter.
the African Catholics did) then to be deprived of a Bishop. For first
without a Bishop we cannot be perfect christians, because without a Bishop we
cannot have confirmation, By the Bishop we are made perfect Christians.
which gives us our full pitch and grough. True it is that by baptism we are
borne new creatures, and Tit. 3.
regenerated to the life of grace; but we are borne only little ones in
spiritual life, and are 1. Petr^ c. 2. v. 2.
Sicut modo geniti infantes, as infants even now borne: But we grow to be men
in a spiritual life, and receive our full strength and grough by Confirmation,
and Confirmation we cannot have ordinatilie without a Bishop. And therefore we
see what youngones and weakelinges the Apostles were before they received the
holy ghost in Pentecost, which is given by confirmation; and how strong and
courageous afterward they proved. Hence it is that saint Thomas of Aquin 3.
p. q. 65. a. 1. in corp. and q. 72. a. 1. Confirmation gives us manly
strength in our spiritual life. A similitude.
compares: Baptism to our nativity, Confirmation to our augmentatio^, by
which we get our grough; for as by our nativity we receive our being, and
have all the parts and limbs belonging to a man, but yet all weak and little,
and by augmentation we receive our full strengh and quantity in all our
limbs: So by Baptism we are born Christians, though as yet but little ones in
a spiritual life. And by Confirmation we are made perfect Christians and
receive our manly grough and force, and we are endued Luea. c. 24. v. 49.
Virtute ex alto, with force and strength from above, as the Apostles and
Disciples were in Pentecoste when they received the holy ghost, who is given
to this purpose by Confirmation. For this cause Dionysius Areopagita Diony. l
de Eccles. Hier. ca. 5. Cle. ep. 4.
calls this Sacrament a perfitting and consummating unction. And S. Clement
says: Omnibus ergo festinandum est fine mora reuasci Deo, and demum
consignari ab Episcopo; id est, septiformem gratiam Spiritus Saucti percipere,
quia incertus est vniuscuiusque exitus vitae. Quum autem regeneratus fuerit per
aquam, and postmodum septiformis spiritus gratia ab Episcopo confirmatus, quia
aliter perfectus esse Christianus nequaquam poterit etc. All therefore must
make have without delay to be regenerated to God, and then to be consigned by
the Bishop, that is, to receive the seuenfold grace of the holy ghost, because
the end of every ones life is uncertain. But when he shall be regenerated by
water, and afterward confirmed by the Bishop with the seuenfold grace, of the
spirit, because otherwise he cannot be a perfect Christian etc.

7. The necessity of confirmation.
Secondly the utility or necessity of the Sacrament of Confirmation pleads
hard for a Bishop. For although, as many divines affirm, in Catholic
countries this Sacrament be not so necessary to every one in particular, as
to bind under mortal sin, so it be not contemned; And although also even in
time of persecution a man may have sufficient grace without this Sacrament to
stand to the profession of his faith (as appears by them who though neither
confirmed nor baptized have endured martyrdom, and have been baptized in their
own blood and by Catholics who in the last persecution in England have shed
their blood for their faith, though they were not confirmed; Confirmation is
the ordinary means which gives grace to profess our faith.
yet because confirmation is the ordinary means, which is instituted to give
force and courage to profess our faith before the persequutor, and therefore
is given in the forhead, it may seem a presumption to neglect it, especially
in time of persecution, when it may commodiouslie be had; and as some divines
think, it is a mortal sin. I will not deliver here mine own opinion least I
may be thought to severe: only I will here set down what one Doctor Estius,
who was in his life time a learned and holy man, and taught divinity many
years, and has published diverse learned books, and who dyed not without
opinion of Sanctity, has published in printe. He in his commentaries upon
the master of the sentences Estius in 4. did. 7.5.18.
pronunceth thus: Quod si quaeras etc. But if thou ask whether the omission of
confirmation, when it can commodiouslie be had, be a mortal or venial sin? I
answer that it cannot be omitted without mortal sin in time and place of
persecution of faith, when forsooth there is danger to a man by reason of
infirmity, least he deny his faith in word or deed, or at least be ashamed to
confess (his faith) when he should: otherwise I thinit only a venial sin
so there be no contempt.

8. But howsoever although every man in particular cannot be condemned of
sin for omitting confirmation for fear of loosing his life, lands, or
liberty: yet I think that neither any country, nor any one of the
country; for fear of persecution, can oppose against the coming in of a
Bishop, though thereby only the Sacrament of Confirmation should be wanting;
for although the want of Confirmation be not so great a harm to any in
particular where persecution rages not, that he should hazard his life or
livings for it, Confirmation cannot be refused by a country for fear of
persequution.
it being not a Sacrament of necessity to every particular person; yet it is
so profitable a Sacrament to every one in particular, so necessary to a
persecuted country, it being the ordinary means instituted by Christ to
give force and courage in persecution, Nouatus fell for want of confirmation.
that it cannot be refused for fear of persecution; for that if one fall not,
others probably will (as Nouatus Eusebius. l. 6. c. 33. alias 34.
did) for want of it: and so we are rather to hazard persecution of the body
then to undergo such a loss of the soul, as the want of such a Sacrament
is, especially in time of persecution, for which especially it was
ordained. And consequently if there were no other damage to a country by the
want of a Bishop then that it should thereby loose confirmation, a Bishop
were to be admitted, yea to be desired and procured.

9. No Church without Bishop.
Thirdly without a Bishop there can be no particular Church. For as saint
Cyprian Cypr. ^p. ad florinum.
says, and we have above alleged, the Church is Sacerdoti plebs adunata,
and Pastori suo grex adhaerens. The Church i^ the people united to the Priest,
(Bishop) and the fllocke adhering unto its Pastor. And therefore, as I have
she vve^ above, that in the whole Church there are many particular Churches,
as of England, France, Spain so I have shevved that as the vvhol^ Church has
one supreme Bishop to govern it, who is Peeters Successor, to wit the
Bishop of Rome: So every particular Church also must have its Bishop or
Bishops, else it should not be a particular Church, and so the whole and
universal Church should not (as Christ has instituted) be a Hierarchy
composed of diverse particular Churches. Wherefore the Catholics of England
all the while they had no Bishop, were no particular Church, and shall no
longer be a particular Church then they shall have a Bishop, but shall be a
flock without a Pastor, an army without a general, a ship without a
Pilot, a spiritual Kingdom without a spiritual King, a family without a
good man of the house.

10. Fourthlie without a Bishop no Hierarchicall or Ecclesiastical function
can be exercised in the Church of God. No Hierarchicall function without a
Bishop.
Dionysius Areopagita Diony. l. de Eccl. Hier. ca. 5. vid. Tho. VValdens. l. 2.
doctrifidei ar. 3. a cap. 57.
says that the power of a Bishop which he calls the Hierarchicall virtue,
comprehends all the holy functions of the Church: for although (says he)
inferior Priests may baptize, yet they cannot baptize solemnly without the
holy oil which the Bishop consecrateth: And although the Inferior Priest
has power to consecrate the holy Eucharist, yet he may not consecrate it but
on the Altar which the Bishop only consecrateth. And above in the sixte and
tenth Chapter, I have proved that it is the proper office of the Bishop to
consecrate and ordain Priests, and others; yea that the Bishop with two other
Bishops, is also the only consecratour of a Bishop: And so without a Bishop we
ca^ have no consecration of ministers in the Church, and so no Sacraments, no
sacrifices, no absolution from sins, no consecration of Churches, Aultars,
chalices, no benedictions of vesteme^tes or other things. In fine without a
Bishop all would be profane nothing holy. And although in England in Queen
Elizabethes reign we had Priests sent into England, who were ordained beyond
seas, and so we were in some sort supplied without a Bishop of our own; Yet
that was not ordinary, for that the ordinary government of the Church
requires that every particular Church should within it self be sufficiently
furnished and provided of all these necessaries (as we se generally they are)
though with a reference to the chief Bishop Peeters Successor and with a
dependence of him, to who^ also in extraordinary cases recourse is to be had

11. The conclusion of this Chapter.
By this and some of the former Chapters it easily appears that the order of
a Bishop is the worthiest and most necessary of all the orders of the Church:
The worthiest, because it gives all other orders, and the cause is worthier
and nobler then its effects: The most necessary, because all other orders,
yea and Ecclesiastical functions depend on it.

THE XV. CHAPTER. To have a Bishop in England cannot probably increase
persecution because it cannot probably be offensive either to the King and
state, or to the provestant Bishops, it being prejudicial to neither, but
rather profitable to the temporal state.
1. IN the two last Chapters I have showed that although a Bishop or Bishops in
a Kingdom or common wealth should occasion persecution, yet they were not
therefore to be excepted against, they being appointed by Christ Act. 8. Act.
20. Ephesians. 4.
to govern the Church, and to minister the Sacraments of order and
Confirmation, which last is most requisite; yea, as above is showed, in time of
persecution to put life into the pusillanimous, and to give force and courage
to the weak and fainte ha^ ted. Now I shall show how by the presence of a
Bishop, as Catholics whould be much comforted, so neither the King nor the
state temporal or spiritual can probably be irritated, nor consequently
Catholics the more persecuted by the presence of a Bishop.

2. The reason why the King and state have no just canse to fear a Bishop.
In times past our Countries temporal state under the spiritual government of
Catholic Bishops hourished in all peace and concord of the Subjects amongst
them selves, and with their sovereign, and was thereby so strengthened, that
England was a terror to all bordering Countries; and happy then was that
Country that could obtain league and amity with England. And had not wars
happened more by the ambition of the howses of York and La^caster, and of some
other our temporal Princes and Potentates, then by any occasion of Catholic
Bishops or Catholic Religion (by which the Subjects were rather kept in awe
and obedience to the Prince) England for peace had been another Paradise. For
as the catholic Church and her Religion is no enemy to temporal states, but
rather has conserved them in a temporal felicity, so the government of this
Church by catholic Bishops has always been a stre^ght and defense unto the
kingdom, as appears by the many catholic countries which even form their
first conversion have flourished even in temporal peace and felicity under
the catholic Church, and her catholic Bishops.

3. It is heresy, not the catholic faith that causes garboiles, tumultes,
divisions, Rebellions and wars, as I could show by the example of the Arrians
who backed by some Arrian Emperors for many years to gether troubled,
disturbed, and imbroiled the Christian world, as histories do record to the
eternal disgrace of heresy. Vid. Baron. An. Christi 355. Constantij 19. and
en. 355. Constan tij 20. Vid. Ruf^in. l. 2 c. 3. Socr. l. 2. cap. 7. See the
oration of Peeter Frarin pronounced in Lo^ain in the school of Attes and
translated into English. See Surius in co^pendio rerum in orb gestarum.
And we have seen what garboiles have been raised presently upon the
preaching of Luthers and Caluins new ghospells; which their preaching seemed
nothing else but a proclamation of war. For presently upon their preachinges
the Drums began to sound, the Canons to roar, and Lucae. c. 21. v. 10.
Surrexit gens contra gentem, and regnum aduersus regnum, One country against
another, one City against another, and one part of the City against the
other were presently up in arms; as appears by the wars in Germany
caused by Luther, Munster, Zuinglius and others; by the garboiles in France
stirred up by Calvin and Beza; and the rebellions and broiles in the Low
countries caused by the Gues, which our modern Histories record, and those
countries to this day do feel. And although our country of England has not
felt so much the smarte of heresy in this kind, yet it may thank the
Prudence of our Princes, and the good nature of the people which heresy could
not altogether change, and the wall and Rampar of the Sea that gardeth it, not
heresy, which is always mutinous.

4. But some may object, An objection answered.
that now that England is not catholic, Catholic religion and her Bishops
and Priests cannot but be enemies to the state. I answer that although the
catholic faith be opposite to heresy, yet it is not opposite to state, as
appears by so many stares that have been and still are conserved by our
Religion, Church and Pastors; yea in that it is an enemy to heresy, it is a
friend and fauorour of state which rather tottereth then stands under
heresy, as appears by many states ruined or molested by its fury. And the
reason is because our Church being founded on a rock Mat. e. 16. v. 16. The
reason why a state relying on the Catholic faith is strengthhed.
so firmlie, that the gates and forces of hell could never yet nor ever shall
preuaille against it, as above I have proved, and experience of sixteen hundred
years confirms; that temporal state which relyeth and appuyeth it self
upon this Church, stands and flourishes; and that state that will not rely
on this rock but builds on the sands of heresy, rather tottereth then
stands.

5. They will yet object that it is against policy for a state which imbraceth
a contrary Religion to permit the Catholic religion and her Bishops and
Pastors. I answer that our Religion commands us to obey Princes and states
even of a contrary religion, Another objection answered.
as by and by I shall show; and so it cannot be against true policy to
permit the Catholic religion, and her Bishops and Pastors; yea it is true
policy to permit it. And therefore, as the king of France permits to the
Hugonottes and their ministers liberty of their Religion, not out of any love
to heresy, but only out of Policy: and as the states in Holland and the
netherlands permit to Catholics far greater liberty in their religion,
then is permitted to them in England, not out of any liking they have of
Catholic Religion, but only out of policy: so might our noble Sovereign
and his state permit in England liberty of Conscience to our Bishops,
Priests, and catholics, if not out of love to our Religion (as were to be
wished) at least out of policy, catholics I dare say, being the most
ancient, and (absit verbo inuidia) the most modest, quiet, and faithful
Subjects the King has.

6. Certes King lames, as of late, so of famous memory, and who in princely
policy and art of governing a Kingdom (which he had practiced from his
tender age) yielded perchance to none of his predecessor; although when at the
first he heard, that a Catholic Bishop was to be sent into England he seemed
to be moved; yet when his majesty was informed, that this Bishop was only to
govern the catholic clergy in Church matters, the laity in matters
belonging to conscience and their souls health, and not to meddle with matters
of state no more then the Priests do, who attend only to their Priestlie
functio^s, he did not oppose against his entrance, nay after he knew that he
was entered and was in London, he would not command him to be apprehended, as
he might easily both in London and any part of England, Kings having long
and powerful arms.

7. And so our wise and noble sovereign; who now happily reigns and
vvorthilie succeeds both by right of Princely birth and Princely qualities,
for which he is worthy to sway an heavier scepter and to wear a greater crown
then England can afford; will not (such is his rare wisdom and Cleme^cie) be
in any sort offended, that his catholic subjects should enjoy the comfort
of their Priests and Bishops, their religion commanding obedience even to
Princes of a different-religion; they them selves having been the most ancient
subjects since England was Christian, who have served their Kings most
faithfully in peace and war, at home and abroad, their Bishops and Priests
having from Englandes first conversion always governed the Church of England
in its greatest splendor in all peace and concord in matters of religion, and
having ever taught the lay people to be subject to higher powers: Romans c. 13.
v. 1.
and especially to the King 1. Petr. ca. 2. v. 13.
quasi pr^ cellenti) as excelling: Nay rather both his Royal majesty and the
temporal state should (as in deed they may if they look into the matter with
an indifferent eye) allow and approve of a catholic Bishop to govern in
spiritual matters the Catholic subjects.

8. The King and state have cause to desire a Cath. Bishop.
Bishops have ever been esteemed by Kings, and Emperors as their spiritual
fathers and vvisest and sincerest counselors, whose Priestlie liberty they
knew would not permit them to conceal from their kings the truth either for
fear or favor; for as saint Ambrose Ambr. lib. 5. ep. 29.
said to Theodosius: Neque est Imperiale libertatem dicendi negare, neque
sacerdotale quod sentiat non dicere: Neither is it the part of an Emperor to
deny any the freedom of speaking, nor is it the part of a Priest not to
speak what he thinks. Gratian Ex Ambr. in prologo librorum de fide ad
Gratianu^.
the Emperor before he vvaged battaylle against the Goths requested of saint
Ambrose a Treatise of faith, trusting more to the sheeld of faith the breast
plate of Justice, Ephesians. c. 6.
the helmet of Salvation and the word of the spirit, which is the word of
God, then to his military arms and forces. And such confidence he put in him
that he attributed his victories after God to his prayers; so he loved him that
he could not be without his presence; Amb. l. 5. epist. ep. 25.
And when by reason of his own soldiers he was delivered up to Maximus the
Tirant, the last words he spoke were Ambrose, Ambrose, as saint Ambrose Ambr.
orat. de obitu Valentiniani in fine.
him self testifies in his funeral oration he made of Valentinian the
younger. And although Iustina the Arrian Emperesle had persecuted saint
Ambrose, yet both she and her young son Valentinian, put such confidence in
his wisdom and fidelity, that in their greatest necessities they sent him in
two Embassages, unto Maximus the Tirant. How Theodosius the Emperor respected
him, and followed his counsel, how our King Ina Above in the seventh Chapter.
listened all ways to Bishop Aldelme his advise, how King Canutus was
directed by Egelnothus Bishop of Canterbury, and how faithful this Bishop
was to him and his heirs the sons of Emma his wife: How S. Hugh Bishop
of Lincoln prevailed with King Richard we have seen above; and how many other
Catholic Bishops have been employed by our kings in waightiest affairs and
most important Embassages, our Chronicles do record. The Bishope will hold the
Catholic subjects in obedience to the King.
And therefore neither our Noble Souueraigne nor his te^porall state need to
fear any Catholic Bishop that has been heretofore or shall be hereafter sent
into England; for that they will not degenerate from the fidelity of their
predecessors the Catholic Bishops of England, and that choice will be ever made
of men, who for their leanring and vvisdome shall be able, and for their respect
to their Prince vvilling to do his majesty service if he please to imploye
them. At least they shall do him this service, that is, they shall keep his
Catholic subjects in obedience and fidelity unto him.

9. And truly now that the Catholic Subjects have a Bishop they shall be
bound by a double bond to be his majesty's most assured subjects, Catholics
by having a Bishop, hane a double bond to the King. The first.
as well impeace as in war. Their first bond is in respect of his Royal
person, to whom, as to their true and natural Prince, their Religion binds
them. For (...) though Beza Beza. ep. dedicator. before the new Testament an.
1564.
defends rebe^^^, against Princes of a different Religion, Hollanders in
their edict printed at Francf. 1583.
which doctrine they in Holland have practiced in rebelling and deposing their
King of Spain; yet our conscience and Religion tells us that we must obey
our kings though they differ from us in Religion. For when saint Paul Romans c.
13. v. 1.
said: let every soul (that is man) be subject to higher powers, for there
is no power but of God. And those (powers) that are of God, are ordained.
Therefore he that resists the power resists the ordinance of God. And they
that resist, purchase to themselves damnation: When I say saint Paul
commanded this obedience of Christians to Princes, they were then Pagans, and
so of a contrary Religion. And therefore Vasquez Vasq. in his Paraphrase on
this place.
in his Paraphrase makes saint Paul speak thus: Every man be he Ethnique or
Christian, let him obey higher powers, and let him not refuse to obey Princes
under pretext of religion. And when saint Paul said to Titus Tit. c. 3. v. 1.
admonish them to be subject to Princes, Princes were then Ethniques; and when
saint Peeter 1. Petr. ca. 2. v. 13.
said, be subject therefore to every humane creature for God, whether it be
to the King as excelling, or to rulers as sent by him to the revenge of
malefactors etc. And again, fear God, honor the king; Kings and Princes
were at that time Ethniques. The second bond.
Their second bond now will be in respect of their Bishop, to whom, as to their
spiritual Superior, they owe obedience, according to that of saint Paul:
Hebr. c. 13. v. 17.
Obey your Prelates and be subject to them: for they watch as being to render
account for your souls. For now the Bishop commanding them to be faithful
and obedient to their king (as by his office he is bound) they must and will
obey him, and consequently now by a double bond they are bound to his
majesty: Less fear of tumultes by having a Bishop.
who therefore now has less cause to fear any tumult or insurrection or
conspiracy amongst the Catholics then ever he had: for that now if any
Catholics would out of private disgustes or coffeehouse (as they are most
contented, yea and comforted in his Majesty's government) attempt any thing not
pleasing either to the Prince or state, the Bishop who is their spiritual
father, whose counsel, direction or commandment good catholics use to
respect and obey; would easily appease them and persuade them to their due
obedience and bounden duty, and by his authority will ever keep them in
awe. And so we se how in Ireland the Catholic Subjects by their
Catholic Bishops and Archbishops are kept in obedience to the king and state
in all civil and temporal matters.

10. Having showed how the king and Temporal state have no cause to fear a
Catholic Bishop in England, it remains that I show how the protestant
Bishops of England (whom it may seem most to touch) have no cause to except
against him. And this is as easily showed. For first the Catholic Bishop out
of his respect to his Souueraigne, The first reason why the Bishops of England
need not feate a Catholic Bishop.
and the love he bears to the te^porall state, which he and all catholics
do and ought to tender, would not entermedle with the Bishops established by
the king and parliament, but will be content, as he ought to permit them to
enjoy that which the king has given them; least by entermedling he may
offend the king irritate the state, and overthrow him self and the Clergy
and all Catholics with him. The second reason for the same.
Secondly the Bishop of England who now is, has only a general spiritual
power and Jurisdiction over the Clergy and lay Catholics in spiritual
matters, and has no Title given him to any particular Bishopric in England,
but only to Chalcedon, which is far enough distant from England; and so can
by no right challenge to him self any particular Bishopric; no more then the
Priests by their faculties which they have to preach and minister Sacraments
to English Catholics in all parts of England, can therefore challenge to
themselves any particular parish Church, or Churches. And therefore if the
protestant Bishops of Ireland established there by the kings authority, fear
not the Catholic Irishe Bishops, though they have Titles to particular
Bishoprics, because they know that the Catholic Bishops as they have not
the power, so out of their respect to the king they have not the will to
supplante them, or to trench upon them: much less cause have the Bishops of
England to fear our catholic Bishop, who has no Title to any particular
Bishopric, but only a general spiritual Jurisdiction of a Bishop, by
whicth he can challenge no Bishopric, no not so much as the poorest parish.

11. The regulers need not fear a Bishop.
Nor need the Religious fear least this Catholic Bishop encroach or trenche
upon their privileges. For although there has been some controversy of late
betwixt him and the Religious concerning approbation, which the council of
Trent Conc. Trid. sess. 23. cap. 19.
commands the Religious to ask of the Ordinary before they presume to
hear co^fessions of seculars, and which is the ordinary practice in other
Catholic countries; (which yet the religious in England pretend not to oblige
them by reason of their privileges, of which I will not presume to give my
opinion the matter being referred to the highest court) Although, I say there
be some difference betwixt them and the most Reverend Bishop concerning that
point: Yet they need not fear their other privileges granted by the Sea
Apostolic, for that the Bishop out of his respect to that sea and desire of
peace with all men, will not meddle with them as he has openly protested
and declared his mind and Intention; nor is it like that he will ever offer to
restrain these their prioiledges, which he knows to be lawfully granted
unto the^, and which their orders enjoy with the peaceable permissino of all
Bishops, in all other countries.

12. The the Catholics need not fear a Bishop.
Lastly as the lay Catholics of England cannot in conscience refuse to have
a Bishop for fear of persecution, as I have proved at large the former
Chapter, partly because the government of the Church is committed to Bishops,
by Christ's Institution, who therefore have been governors of it in the
greatest rage and fury of persecution; partly for that they are rather to
hazard a temporal loss of lands and liberty, then the spiritual loss of a
Bishop, so necessary especially in time of persecution, as in the same
chapter I have at large deduced: So there is no probable reason why they should
think that their persecution will be increased by having a Bishop, there being
no other laws against a Bishop, then are already enacted and in force against
Priests and Religious; and there being no reason why a Bishop should be more
odious either to the Kings Majesty or his temporal state then a Priest or
Religious man, he being not to erect any public tribunal, as some have
feared, that being a thing neither intended by him, as he has protested, nor
suitable to these times, as he him self confesses; and he being only to
entermeddle in the government of his clergy, and Laity in spiritual matters
and in ministering the Sacrament of confirmation; which in no wise can
prejudice the temporal state, it being only a spiritual function, nor can
prove more odious to the king or state then the function of the Priests and
Religious.

13. Wherefore if for real fears the Christians of the primitive Church
refused not Bishops (as I have showed) but have hazarded ene^ their lives for
them, and thought themselves worse then dead to live without them: If the
Romans for their Popes, the Alexandrians and Antiochians for their
Patriarchs, if the Catholics of Afrique for their Bishops, were contented
to hazard livings, life, and all; and never refused them for real and imminent
dangers, as above Above chap. 14. Beda. lib. 3. c. 7.
we have seen: If our king Cenwalch when he had sent away Agilbertus his
Bishop and expulsed his Bishop Wini, thought himself destitute Diuino
praesidio, of the divine aid and succor, when he was destitute of a Bishop:
If the people of Milan, when Valentinian Ruffin. l. 2. cap. 15.
the younger, at the instigation of Iustina his mother, sent a troop of
soldiers to break open the Church doors, to pull out saint Ambrose and to
send him into banishment, stuck so fast and faithfully to their Bishop, vt
animas prius amittere quam Episcopum mallent: That they had rather loose their
lives, then their Bishop: let not us for imaginary fears seek to deprive our
selves of so great a good as a Bishop, without whom we can be no Church, we
cannot be perfect Christians, nor ca^ have so easily, and infalliblie, that
special grace which gave force to the prime Christians to profess their faith
with an undaunted courage, and to subsigne and seal this their profession with
their dearest blood.

14. The conclusion of the whole treatise.
And thus much I thought good to say of the Hierarchy of the Church, and of
the diverse goodly orders of which it is composed, so to defend the Church
against her enemies who deny these orders, and so to encourage you who are
members of this Church and parts of these orders, to suffer constantly as
hitherto you have for justifying of this Church and every order of it; so to
allure all orders to respect one another, every order in its kind deserving
respect and honor; and lastly so to persuade you all to live in peace and
concord amongst your selves and with your Bishop, as formerlie you have done,
and as it becomes members of one body, and orders of one Hierarchy: Eph^s.
c. 4. verse. 1. and 2.
To walk worthy of the vocation in which you are called, with all humility
and myldnes, with patience, supporting one another in Charity, careful to
keep the unity of spirit, in the bond of peace: And Coloss. c, 3. v.
12.13.14.15.
to put on as the elect of God, holy and beloved, the bowels of mercy,
benignity, humility, modesty, patience, supporting one another, and
pardoning one another, if any have a quarrel against any man, as also our
Lord has pardoned us, so you also. But above all these things, have charity
which is the band of perfection: And let the peace of Christ exult in your
hearts. Or as the Greek word (...) imports, let it triumph in you, and let
it have the victory over all passions and respects, that so you may prefer
the common peace before all private interests. And as in my Epistle I desired,
so in the end of this book I desire you again to take this my Treatise which I
have out of my love and respect to you all and my zeal to the common cause
presumed to dedicate unto you, in as good part and meaning, as I meant and
intended it; who intended only to defend all orders of the church, but to
offend none, to praise all in their kind and degree, dispraise none; and so to
confirm your peace and concord, but in no wise (as God knovveth) to disturb
it.

FINIS.
FAVLTES ESCAPED IN THE PRINTING.
Page 36. lin. 16. after those words of his time: Add: may be said of the
Heretics of these times. page 72. lin. 14. after the word Designasse, Add,
aliquas, sed assignasse omnes. Other faults of less momente the prudent
reader will easily correct.


