THE LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT OF Mr. JOHN KENDRICKE late Citizen and Draper of
LONDON:

Who departed this life the 30. day of December, anno, 1624.

Full of notable works of charity, worthy of lasting memory and imitation.



LONDON Printed for NATHANIEL BVTTER and Nicholas Bourne. 1625.

THE LAST WILL and Testament of Master John Kendricke, of London Draper, etc.
IN the name of God, Amen. The nine and twentieth of December, Anno Domini
1624. and in the two and twentieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord
King lames, etc.
I John Kendricke of the City of London, Draper, being sick in Body, but of
good and perfect mind and memory, (for which I give most humble and hearty
thanks to Almighty God) do make, ordain, and declare this my last Will and
Testament, in manner and form following: (that is to say)

First and before all things, I commend and commit my Soul to Almighty God my
Creator, trusting most assuredly to be saved by the death, passion, and only
merits of Jesus Christ my Savior and Redeemer.

And I will that my body be decently interred in Christian Burial in the
Parish of Saint Christopher, where I dwell, as mine Executor hereafter named
shall order and appoint.

Item, I give and bequeath to 60 poor men to every of them a Gown of
broad-cloath, to wear on the day of my burial, and twelve pence a piece in
money to pay for their dinners; the same poor men to be such as my Executor
shall appoint.

Item, I give and bequeath black gowns and cloaks to be worn at my burial by
my Kindred, Friends, and Servants, as my Executor shall think meet, not
exceeding the sum of six hundred pounds in the said gowns and cloakes, and the
rest of the charges of my Funeral.

Item, I give and bequeath the sum of three score pounds to be bestowed upon
a dinner to be provided for my friends, and the Inhabitants of the Parish of
S. Christopher, where I now dwell, upon the day of my burial, and in such
place as my Executor shall think meet and convenient.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Mayor, and Burgesses of the Town of Reading,
in the County of Berks, (I mean to the body corporate, or Corporation of the
said Town of Reading, by whatsoever name or addition the same is made or
known) the Sum of seven thousand and five hundred pounds, upon special
trust and confidence that they shall therewith perform these uses following:
(that is to say)

The said Mayor and Burgesses shall buy and purchase unto them and their
Successors for ever, I say, to the Body Corporate of the said Town of Reading,
by whatsoever name or addition the same is made or known, Lands and
Hereditaments of the clear value of fifty pounds by the year, over and above
all charges and reprises: which sum of fifty pounds a year, my will and
meaning is, shall be paid by the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their
Successors, unto my sister Anna Newman yearly during her natural life. And
after her decease the same yearly sum of fifty pounds shall be paid by the
said Mayor and Burgesses, and their Successors, to the Overseers for the poor
of the said town of Reading for the time being yearly for ever. And by them
the said Overseers for the time being, shall be bestowed and distributed to and
among the poor people of the said Town for ever: to wit, the moietie thereof
every half year, in such sums, and to such persons as the said Overseers
for the time being, shall think meet, according to the necessity and desert of
the same several persons.

Provided always, and my meaning is, that this my yearly gift shall not any
way abridge the said poor of the ordinary allowances usually assessed and
collected of the wealthier sort of the Inhabitants of the said town toward the
relief of the said poor people: but shall be unto them an additament and
clear increase of relief yearly for ever.

And if this my gift and provision shall happen (which I trust it shall not) to
be by the said Mayor and Burgesses, or by the said Overseers for the time
being, ordered and disposed contrary to my meaning thus declared, or that my
will and desire above expressed, touching the bestowing and distribution of the
said sum of fifty pounds yearly be omitted, neglected, or left unperformed by
the space of one whole year after it is by this my Will appointed to be
distributed and bestowed as aforesaid: Then my will and meaning is, that the
said sum and reuennue of fifty pounds a year shall be by the said Mayor and
Burgesses, and their Successors for the time being for ever, paid unto the
Treasurer of Christ's Hospital in London, and by the Governors of the same
Hospital employed and bestowed in the relief and education of the poor
children of the said Hospital: Or else that the said Mayor and Burgesses for
the time being, shall by their sufficient Deed in Law convey, and make over the
lands and Hereditaments of the said yearly value of fifty pounds unto the
Mayor and Communaltie, and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors
for ever, unto the use of the said Hospital, to be employed as aforesaid.

Provided always, that the said fifty pounds a year be yearly paid unto my
said sister Anna Newman during her natural life: and after her decease to the
charitable uses aforesaid.

Moreover, my will and meaning, as also my trust and confidence in the said
Mayor and Burgesses of the Town of Reading, is, that with another competent
part of the said sum of seven thousand five hundred pounds, so by me devised
as aforesaid, they the said Mayor and Burgesses shall buy and purchase unto
them and their successors for ever, a fair plot of ground within the said
town of Reading, or the liberties thereof: and thereupon shall erect and
build a strong house of Brick fit and commodious for setting of the poor on
work therein; or else shall buy and purchase such an house, being already
built, if they can find one already fitting, or that may with a reasonable
sum be made fit for the said use; the same house to have a fair garden
adjoining, and to be from time to time kept in good and sufficient reparations
by the said Mayor and Burgesses for the time being, for ever. Which House and
garden my will is, shall be used and occupied by such as the said Mayor and
Burgesses and their successors from time to time for ever shall appoint and
ordain for the employing and handling of the stock of money by me hereby left
and devised to that purpose.

And my will and meaning is, that the said lands and hereditaments of the
yearly value of fifty pounds; and also the said house and garden being bought
and purchased, as before said, with parcel of the said sum of seven thousand
five hundred pounds; then the whole residue and remainder of the same seven
thousand and five hundred pounds shall make and be a common stock to be employed
and bestowed in trade of clothing, either in making of colored clothes, or
whites, as the time shall require; and also in working of Wool, Hemp, Flax,
Iron, grinding of brasill woods, and other stuffes for Dying or otherwise; as
to the said Mayor and Burgesses afore-saide, and their Successors for ever
shall seem convenient for the employment of poor people, and for the
preservation and increase of the said common stock.

And the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their Successors for ever, shall have
the election, placing, and ordering, as also the displacing (if cause be) of
all and every person and persons to be employed in the handling and husbanding
of the said common stock in the house aforesaid, according to their the said
Mayor and Burgesses good discretion, from time to time for ever.

Wherein yet my desire is, that they shall prefer the poor of the said town
to the said work and employment before others of other places.

And for the performance of these premises, my will is, that the sum of
seven thousand and five hundred pounds before for this end by me bequeathed to
the said Mayor and Burgesses, shall be paid unto them or their Successors, in
mann^r and form following, (that is to say) two thousand pounds thereof at the
end of one year next after my decease: O her two thousand pounds thereof at
the end of two years next after the day of my decease: And the residue of the
said whole Sum, being three thousand and five hundred pounds at the end of
three years next ensuing, after and from the day of such my decease.

But if it shall happen (as my trust is it will not) that the said Mayor and
Burgesses or their Successors, shall neglect, omit, or fail to perform the
premises according to my will and meaning above declared, or shall mis-employ
the said Stock, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this my device and
disposition for the good of the poor, and their honest employment and
maintenance as aforesaid; and that such their neglect, omission, or
misimployment, shall continue at any time by the space of one whole year
together: Then my will and meaning is, that my said whole Legacy of seven
thousand and five hundred pounds, and every part and parcel thereof, shall be
thence utterly void, frustrate, and of none effect; as to, for, and concerning
the said Mayor, and Burgesses, and their Successors; and as to, for, and
concerning the uses thereof before limited and expressed: And that the said
whole common stock shall be by them the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their
successors for the time being, forthwith paid unto the Mayor and Communalty and
Citizens of the City of London, to the use of Christ's Hospital in London,
according as I have above devised and disposed touching the reuennue of fifty
pounds a year for ever, first bequeathed to the use and relief of the peore
poople of the Town of Reading.

As also my will and meaning is, that in this case of nonperformance by the
said Mayor and Burgesses, the house and garden to be purchased in Reading, as
aforesaid, shall be by the said Mayor and Burgesses, and their Successors,
conveyed and made over by their Deed sufficient in Law, unto the said Mayor
and Communalty and Citizens of the City of London, and their Successors for
ever, to the like use of Christ's Hospital in London, as aforesaid.

Item. I give and bequeath to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the town
of Newbury in the County of Berks, (I mean the Body corporate of the same
Town) the sum of four thousand pounds to buy and purchase therewith a
commodious house and garden, within the same town, or the liberties thereof,
to set the poor on work: and with the resi^ue of the same Sum to make a
common stock for the employment of the poor in the said house, according to
the good discretion of the said Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses, from time to
time for ever? And according to my meaning before declared in the devising of
the sum of seven thousand and five hundred to Mayor, and Burgesses of the
Towte of Reading to the like Use.

But my will and meaning is, that if it shall happen (which I trust will not)
that the said Mayor, Aldermen and Burgesses, of the town of Nuburie, or their
successors, shall neglect, or fail to perform my trust and m^aning hereby
committed unto them, or shall misimploy the said stock contrary unto my good
intent to the poor before declared, by the space of one whole year at any
time after my said Legacy shall be paid unto them; Then my Will and meaning
is, that my said whole Legacy of four thousand pounds, and every part and
parcel thereof shall thenceforth be utterly void and of none effect, as to,
for, and concerning the said Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the town of
Newbury, and their successors for ever: And that the said whole common stock
shall be by them the said Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of Newbery, and
their Successors for the time being, forthwith paid over unto the Mayor and
Burgesses of the Town of Reading in the same County, to be by them and their
Successors for ever employed, bestowed and used in like manner as I have by
this my Will devised and appointed another common stock for the poor in the
same Town of Reading, as by my said device and disposition before herein more
at large expressed does and may appear.

In like manner also my will and meaning is, that in case of such
nonperformance of my will and intent by the said Mayor, Aldermen, and
Burgesses of the Town of Newbery, the house and garden by them so to be
purchased and built, as aforesaid, shall be by the said Mayor, Aldermen, and
Burgesses of the Town of Newbery, and their Successors, conveyed and made
over by their Deed sufficient in Law, unto the Mayor, and Burgesses of the
said Town of Reading and their Successors for ever, to be by them sold and
converted into money, and the same money to be used and employed in their
Common stock for the poor in the said Town of Reading aforesaid, in such
sort as I have formerly hereby expressed.

And for the performance of the said trust and uses by the said Mayor,
Aldermen, and Burgesses of the town of Newbery aforesaid, my will and meaning
is, that the said sum of four thousand pounds so to them bequeathed and
devised as aforesaid, shall be paid unto them or their Successors in manner as
follows (that is to say) One thousand pounds thereof at the end of one year
next ensuing after the day of my decease: One other thousand pounds thereof at
the end of two years from and after my said decease: And the residue being
two thousand pounds, shall be paid them at the end of three years next after
my said decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Company of Drapers of the City of London (of
which Company I am free) the sum of two thousand and four hundred pounds, to
purchase lands and hereditaments to the clear yearly value of one hundred
pounds for ever, over and above all charges and reprises: and with the same to
perform these good uses hereafter mentioned, (that is to say)

The sum of twenty four pounds thereof yearly for ever, to be bestowed in
the month of December for the releasing of six poor Prisoners out of these
Prisons in London, to wit, the two Compters, Ludgate, Newgate, and the Fleet,
by four pounds for each Prisoner.

Or if such cannot be found in the said Prisons or some of them to be
released for these sums: Then the same or the residue thereof to be bestowed
in like releasing of other Prisoners out of some of the Prisons near London,
and out of the liberties thereof, as to the Wardens of the said Company for the
time being shall seem meet.

More, Twenty pounds yearly for ever to the Curate of the Parish of Saint
Christopher wherein I now dwell, to read Divine Service in the said Parish
Church at six of the Clock in the morning every day of the week for ever, in
like manner as is now used in the Chapel at the great North gate of Saint
Paul's Church in London.

More, To the Clarke and Sexton of the said Parish of Saint Christopher, to
each of them fifty shillings yearly for ever, to do their several attendance
and assistance at the same divine Service every morning.

More, To the Churchwardens of the same Parish of Saint Christopher, five
pounds yearly for ever for the manitenance of lights in the winter time.

More, Three pounds yearly for ever to the poor of the said Parish of Saint
Christopher.

More, To the poor Prisoners in London ten pounds yearly for ever: namely, to
the Prisoners of the Compters in the Poultry and in Wood-streete, and in
Newgate, to each of these Prisons forty shillings yearly for ever.

To the poor Prisoners in Ludgate, and in the Fleet, to each house thirty
shillings yearly for ever.

And to the poor prisoners in Bedlem twenty shillings yearly for ever.

More, To the Clarke of the Company of Drapers aforesaid for the time being,
for his pains herein forty shillings yearly for ever.

More, To the Beadle of the said Company thirty shillings yearly for ever.

More, to the Beadle of the Yeomanry of the same Company ten shillings yearly
for ever.

More, Five and twenty pounds yearly for ever to be distributed by the said
Wardens among poor religious men and women in the City of London, to some
more and to some less, as the said Wardens shall find^ their necessity and
desert to be; wherein my desi(...) poor Cloth-workers and their widows shall
(...)t preferred; and next, the poor of the Drapers Company: The residue of
the said sum of one hundred pounds a year, being four pounds yearly for
ever; I entreat the four Wardens of the said Company to accept for their
pains, to be equally divided between them by twenty shillings to each of
them for the time being yearly for ever.

And if the said Company of Drapers do either of purpose or negligence, omit,
and not perform the premises, but shall leave the same unperformed one whole
year after they shall have received this my Legacy of two thousand and four
hundred pounds (which I will shall be paid them at the end of one year next
after my decease) Then my mind and will is, that the Governors of Christ's
Hospital in London shall recover the whole two thousand and four hundred
pounds before specified, or the lands and hereditaments that the said Company
shall have bought with the same money; and keep twenty pounds yearly for ever
of the same Rent, for the maintenance of the poor Children in the said
Hospital, as if the same had been first given to them; and the Drapers
Company to have nothing to do with it, or the rest of the said hundred pounds
yearly for ever.

And that in this, case the yearly payment of eight pounds unto the Clarke,
Beadles, and Wardens of the said Company, as also 12 pound parcel of the said
five and twenty pounds a year before devised, to be paid and distributed by
the said Company among poor religious men and women in the City of London,
utterly and for ever to cease.

But this twenty pounds a year being so converted as aforesaid, to the use of
the Hospital, the residue of the said yearly Rent of one hundred pounds a
year I will that the Governors of the said Hospital shall pay and distribute
yearly for ever in manner and form as the said Company of Drapers should have
done.

Item, I give and bequeath to the said Company of Drapers, one hundred pounds
to be paid within a year after my decease, and by the Wardens of the said
Company to be bestowed in plate, such as they shall think good for the use of
their Common Hall in London at their meetings and dinners there.

Item, I give and bequeath to the poor of Christ's Hospital in London five
hundred pounds, to be by the Goue^nours thereof bestowed in Lands and
hereditaments* for and toward the yearly maintenance of the children of the
said Hospital for ever; this sum to be paid to the said Governors or the
Treasurer of the said Hospital* as soon as they shall have found out a fit
purchase to bestow it, and agreed of price for the same.

Item, I give and bequeath toward the curing of sick, sore, and diseased
persons in S. Bartholmews Hospital in London, the sum of fifty pounds.

Item, I give and bequeath toward the curing of sick, sore, and diseased
persons in Saint Thomas Hospital in in Southwarke near London, the sum of
fifty pounds.

Item, I give and bequeath toward the repairing of the Parish Church of Saint
Christopher where I now dwell, the sum of forty pounds, to be paid to the
Churchwardens of the same Parish, within one year after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath toward the repairing of the Cathedral Church of
Saint Paul's in London, the sum of one thousand pounds, to be paid to the
Chamberlain of London, at such time as that work of repairing of the same
Church shall be ready to proceed with effect, and to be disposed by the
direction and appointment of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the said City.

Item, I give and bequeath to be given at the Marriages of poor maids within
the City of London two hundred pounds, to be distributed by forty shillings
apeece upon the days of their marriage, to such as have served one Master or
Mistress by the space of five years together.

Item, I give and bequeath to be given and distributed to poor maids in the
town of Reading in the County of Berks, at their several marriages, by 40
shillings apeece, at the discretion of the Mayor and Burgesses of that town,
the Sum of one hundred pounds: Provided, none enjoy the benefit thereof, but
such as have served one Master or Mistress, or Dame, by the space of seven
years together. This hundred pounds to be paid to the said Mayor and
Burgesses for the use aforesaid within one year next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the town
of Newbery in Barshire, the sum of fifty pounds, to be by them bestowed and
distributed to twenty five Maids of the same town at the several days of
their marriages, none to enjoy this gift but such as have well and honestly
served with one Master, Mistress, or Dame, by the space of seven years at
least: And this fifty pounds to be paid to the said Mayor, Aldermen, and
Burgesses within one year next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath toward the setting on work of forty idle vagrant
boys, such as go up and down the streets in the City of London, begging and
pilfering, the sum of two hundred pounds, to be paid to the Treasurer for
the time being of the house of correction, called Bridewell in London, in
manner and form following: (that is to say) When any such Boy is taken up by
my Executor or his Assigns in any place within the liberties of this City of
London, and by the Treasurer of the same house of correction and Governors
there for the time being, placed and bound Apprentice with a Master for the
term of seven years at the least, with Artmasters, as Glouers, Pinners,
Shoomakers, or any other occupation or art which they shall be thought most
fit for, to learn in the said house, whereby in time they may prove good
Members, and live like honest men in the Commonwealth: I say, with every one
of these boys shall be paid to the Treasurer and Governor for the time
being, for the apparelling and placing of them in that order, the sum of five
pounds, until the said sum of two hundred pounds be fully paid for that use.

Item, I give and bequeath toward the finishing of the pinacles of the S^eeple
of the Parish of Saint Mary's in Reading in Barkshire, fifty pounds to be paid
to the Churchwardens of the same Parish within one month after the said
Pinacles shall be finished.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Mayor and Burgesses of the town of Reading
aforesaid, the sum of five hundred pounds, to be first lent to these
parties, and in the sums hereafter named, for seven years gratis: that is,
to James Winch two hundred pounds, and to Walter Rye, Richard Stamp, and
William Blacknal Clothiers, one hundred pound a piece, each of them giving bond
with two sufficient Sureties for repayment there of to the said Mayor and
Burgesses at the end of the said seven years. And afterward the same five
hundred pounds shall be lent to ten several honest industrious poor
Clothiers, Freemen of the same Town, by fifty pounds a piece gratis for three
years upon like good security: And after that in like manner from three
years to three years for ever: And no man to have the use of any of this
money twice.

But if there shall not be Clothiers enough found in the said Town to enjoy
this loan in manner aforesaid, That then the said money shall be lent also
unto other tradesmen free of the said Town, by the sums and terms of years
before last appointed, to such as set most poor people on work, according to
the discretion of the said Mayor and Burgesses. And this said sum of five
hundred pounds shall be paid to the said Mayor and Burgesses to the use
aforesaid, at the and of one year next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses of the Town
of Newbery, in the County of Berkes, the sum of five hundred pounds, to be
lent first for the term of seven years gratis unto these several Clothiers
here named, (that is to lay) to Thomas Newman one hundred pounds, to Richard
Avery one hundred pounds, to Martin Broaker fifty pounds, to William Goodwyn
the elder, fifty pounds; and to his son William goodwyn fifty pounds; to
Timothy Avery fifty pounds: to Robert Bacon fifty pounds, and to Griffin
Forster fifty pounds; every of the said several parties entering bond with two
sufficient sureties for repaiment of the said several sums to the said Mayor
and Aldermen, and Burgesses at the end of 7 years. And afterward the same 500
pounds shall be lent to ten several honest industrious poor Clothiers, free
of the said Town of Newbery, by fifty pounds apiece gratis for three years:
And after that in l^ke manner from three years to three years for ever: And no
man to have the use of this money twice. But if there shall not be Clothiers
enough found in the same town of Newbery to enjoy this loan in manner as
aforesaid, then the same money shall be lent also unto other Tradesmen free
of the same town, by the sums and terms of years last before appointed, to
such as set most poor people on work, according to the discretion of the said
Mayor, Aldermen, and Burgesses, to whom this said five hundred pounds shall be
paid to the use aforesaid, at the end of one year after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Governor, Assistants, and fellowship of
Merchant-Aduenturers of England, the sum of 900 pounds to be lent by 300 pou^ds
in a parcel for three years gratis, unto three several honest, industrions,
and frugall young men free of that company, none of them being Partners with
each others, and every of them giving bond with two sufficient Sureties, to
be tried and allowed by ballating and ^ot otherwise, for repaiment of the same
money to the said Company: And so the same money to be lent out by the said
Company in this manner from three years to three years for ever.

And my Will and desire is, that these my five present Servants shall be upon
security as aforesaid first preferred to the enjoying of this loan, to wit,
William Powle, Thomas Newman, and Simon Gundy, the first three years; and
Andrew Kendrick, and Christopher Pack, the next two parcels that shall come in
and be received in after they shall be freemen of that company. And for
performance hereof the said nine hundred pounds shall be paid unto the Trea^rer
of the said Company in London for the time being, at the end of one year next
after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to my brother William Kendricke of Reading in the
Country of Berkes Clothier, and to his children now borne and living the sum
of two thousand pounds, whereof one third part for himself, and the other two
third parts for his said children. The same two third parts of the said sum of
two thousand pounds to be equally divided to and amongst his said Children,
share and share like.

And my will is, that the said two thousand pounds be paid to my said brother
at the end of three year next after my decease: And that he shall pay his
said children their several shares thereof before limited, (that is to s^y) to
his Son his share and part when he comes to the age of twenty four years:
and to his Daughter her share and part when she comes to the age of one and
twenty years, or at the day of her marriage; which shall first happen.

And if it fortune either of my said brothers children to die or decease before
their respective Legacies aforesaid shall grow due, as above; That then the
part of such Child so deceasing shall accrue and be paid to the Surviuor of the
said children at the day and time before appointed.

Item, I give and bequeath to my said brother William Kendricke my Gold Ring
which was my Fathers, with the Letters T. K. therein engraven, and a knot
between the same Letters.

Item, I give and bequeath to my Sister Anna Newman of Reading in the County
of Berkes, the sum of one thousand Marks to be paid unto her at the end of
one year next after my decease.

Item, I give unto the children of my said Sister Anna Newman the sum of two
thousand Marks, to be equally divided amongst them share and share like: and
the shares of such as are already married (if they be daughters;) or are four
and twenty years of age (if they be Sons) to be paid them at the end of one
year after my decease: and the shares of the rest to be paid to such as be
Sons, when they shall be four and twenty years of age: and to the Daughters
at their day of marriage, or when they shall come to one and twenty years of
age respectively which of these shall happen to be first.

And if it shall happen any of the said Children of my said Sister to die
before the age and time so prfixed for payment as aforesaid (I mean those
that be yet under that age and unmarried) then my will is, that the share and
part of such as shall so dye, shall accrue and be paid unto the rest of the
same children then surviuing, share and share like: And at the days and times
of payment before appointed, for their own several shares and parts.

But my will and meaning is, that Thomas Newman Son of my said Sister, shall
not have any part of share of this said legacy of two thousand Marks; because
I give him a large legacy apart by this my will: therefore the said two
thousand Marks is to be divided and shared amongst the rest of the children of
my said sister as aforesaid.

Item, I do hereby absolutely acquit and forgive my Brother in Law Thomas
Newman of Reading aforesaid, husband to my sister Anna Newman, the sum of
one hundred Marks: which he owes me by his bond, due the second day of
November Anno dom. 1623. being all that he owes me at the date of this my
Will.

Item, I give and bequeath to my Sister Alice Vigures of Exeter, the the
Country of Deuon, the sum of five hundred pounds, to be paid her at the end
of two years next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the children of my said Sister Alice Vigures, the
sum of one thousand pounds to be divided equally among them share and share
like: and if any of them being Sons, be of the age of four and twenty
years: of any of them being daughters, be of the age of one and twenty
years, or married, then the share and parts of such respectiuelie, shall be
paid at the end of two years, next after my decease; and the shares and parts
of the rest shall be paid to such as be Sons at their age of four and
twenty years; and to such as be daughters, at their age of one and twenty
years: or at the days of their marriage, which of them shall first happen to
come respectively.

But my will and meaning is, that Simon Gandy Son of my said Sister Alice
Vigures, shall not have any part or share of this said legacy of one thousand
pounds, because I give him a large legacy apart by this my will: but my meaning
is, that this said legacy of one thousand pounds so given as aforesaid, to the
children of my said Sister Alice Vigures, shall be equally divided among the
rest of the children of my said Sister, excluding the said Simon Gandy from all
part and share of the same: and if it shall happen any of the said children of
my said sister Alice Gandy to Die, before the age and time of payments
appointed as aforesaid (I mean when they be under that age and unmarried) then
my will and meaning is, that the share and part of such as shall so die, shall
be paid and accrue unto the rest of the same Children so suruiuing, to each of
them equally, and share and share like; and at the days and times of payment
before appointed, for their own several shares, and parts.

Item, I give and bequeath to my brother James Winch of Purley in the County of
Berks, and to his children the sum of one thousand pounds, whereof one third
part for himself, and the other two third parts for his said children: the
same two third parts to be divided equally amongst the said children, of my
said brother, share and share like.

And my will is, that this said sum of one thousand pounds, shall be paid to
my said brother James Winch, at the end of one year next after my decease, and
that he shall pay forthwith unto such of his children as being sons, and of
the age of four and twenty years, and being daughters, are of the age of one
and twenty years, or married, their several shares and proportions, of the
said two third parts of this sum of one thousaud pounds: the shares and parts
of the rest of his children he shall retain in his own hands until his said
children being sons, shall be of the age of Four and twenty years, and being
daughters shall be of the age of one and twenty years or be married, and then
shall pay every of them their several shares and parts respectively.

And if it shall happen any of the said younger children to dye before the time
of payment so limited as aforesaid, then my will is, that the part and share of
such as shall so decease, shall accrue unto the rest of the said children of my
said Brother that shall then survive, to be equally divided amongst them share
and share like, and to be paid at the days and times before appointed.

Item, I give and bequeath to thirty of my poorest kindred in the town of
Reading in Bark-shire, the sum of three hundredth pounds, to be paid unto my
brother William Kenricke within three months after my decease, and by him to
be distributed by ten pounds in every parcel, as he in his discretion shall
think good, wherein I pray him to be very careful to bestow the same where
there is most need and best desert.

Item, I give and be queath to old Elizabeth Kenrick of Reading, daughter to my
fathers brother William Kenrick (as I take it) the sum of fifty pounds, to
be paid her within three months after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to my kins-man Thomas Newman now residing at Delft
in Holland, the sum of one thousand pounds, to be paid him upon the five and
twenty day of October, which shall be in the year of our Lord God 1626. when his
time of service expireth. Provided that he remain with my partner M. Laurence
Halstead and serve, him his said full time.

Item, I give and bedueath to my kins-man and late servant Simon Gandy, the
sum of one thousand pounds to be paid him within one year next after my
decease.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Arthur Aynscombe Merchant now residing at
Antwerp, who has a share with me in trade, the sum of five hundred pounds,
to be paid him within two years after my decease. Provided that he go
forward in trade with M. Laurence Halstead (if he the said M. Halstead shall
desire it) unto the end of our contract, which will be the five and twenty of
October, Anno Domini 1626.

Item, I give and bequeath to Barney Reymes Merchant now residing at Delft who
also has a share with me in trade, the sum of five hundred pounds, to be
paid him within two years next after my decease. Provided that he go
forward in trade with M. Laurence Halstead (if he the said M. Halstead shall
desire it) unto the end of our contract, which will be the five and twenty of
October, Anno Domini 1626. as is abouesaid.

Item, I give and bequeath to M. John Quarles who was my Master, the sum of
five hundred pounds, to to be paid him within a year next after my decease.
And my earnest desire and request unto M. Laurence Halstead is, that unto the
end of our contract of Partner-ship, which will be the five and twenty day of
October, Anno Domini 1626. The same M. Quarles may have his Diet, Lodging, and
washing, in his the said M. Halsteads house free and without paying any thing
therefore, as he now has it with me. And my desire also is, that he may
continue to keep the books of our partable account until the aforesaid
twenty five day of October, Anno 1626. And be paid his wonted yearly
allowance of fifty pounds for the same. And I do hereby freely and absolutely
forgive the said M. John Quarles, the sum of three hundred pounds, which he
owes me payable at pleasure, being lent him the last of March, Anno 1615 and
being all that he owes me at the Date of this my will.

Item, I give and bequeath to M. George Low Merchant, heretofore my partner,
the sum of three hundred pounds, to be paid him within one year next after
my decease. And I do hereby absolutely forgive him all that is due unto me for
his Lodging, Diet, Fyring, and washing, which he has had of me now six
years together.

Item, I give and bequeath to Thomas Billingsly son of Sir Henery Billingsly
Knight, and Alderman of London deceased, the sum of two hundred pounds, to be
paid him within one year next after my decease. And I do absolutely forgive
him the sum of two hundred pounds which he owes me, by his bond due the
twenty of December Anno 1625. lent him the twenty of this present month for a
year.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Executors of Thomas Iackson of London
Merchant Deceased (whom I take to be Miles Iackson the son of the said
Thomas) the sum of three hundred pounds to be paid at the end of one year
next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to Lucas van peenen of Middleburgh in Zealand, son
of Roger van Peenen of that town Deceased, the sum of fifty pounds sterling,
to be made over by exchange within two months after my Decease, payable at
Vsance to John Mount-Stephen now residing in that town, to be by him paid
over to the said Lucas van Peenen forthwith after he has received it, in the
full Flemish sum which the same shall produce.

Item, I give and bequeath to Ieremias Poets of the said Town of Middleburgh
in Zealand (if he be the Executor of his brother Hance Poets Deceased) the
sum of twenty pounds Sterling to be made over by exchange, within two months
after my decease, payable at Vsance to John Mount. Stephen aforementioned, and by
him forthwith after his receipt thereof, to be paid over to the said Ieremias
Poets, in the full Flemish sum which the same shall produce.

Item, I give and bequeath to William Powle my covenant servant the sum of
two hundred pounds, to be paid him within six months after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to Andrew Kenricke my apprentice the sum of three
hundred pounds, to be paid him when he shall have served seven years from the
commencement of the term of his Indenture.

More, I give and bequeath to the said Andrew Kenricke the sum of one
hundred pounds, in Lieu of so much given me with him by his Father John
Kenricke to be paid him within three months next after my Decease upon
acquittance to be given by his said Father therefore.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Christopher Pack mine apprentice, the sum of
one hundred pounds, to be paid him within three months next after my
Decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to Thomas Mayle my horse keeper, the sum of twenty
pounds, to be paid him within two months after my Decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to my maid Margaret, twenty pounds, to be paid
her within two months next after my Decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to my maid Dorothy, twenty pounds, to be paid her
within two months after my Decease.

Item, I give unto John Hutwith my drawer, the sum of fifty pounds, to be
paid him within three months after my Decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to Walter Bird my Drawer five and twenty pounds, to
be paid him within three months after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the present men-seruants of John Hutwith my
drawer, the sum of five and twenty pounds, whereof ten pounds to Charles, and
the other fiueteene pounds to be equally divided amongst the rest, as well
Prentices as Iourny-men, to be paid within two months after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to my twelve Cloath-workers that usually row and
sheere my clothes, the sum of one hundred and thirty pounds, whereof twenty
pounds to Owen Dobbins, and ten pounds a piece to the rest, to be paid within
three months next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to William Big and William Salisbury, that usually
press and fold my Clothes, the sum of five and twenty pounds, whereof
fiuetene pounds to William Big, and ten pounds to William Salisbury, to be
paid them within three months next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to my Porters at the Water side ten pounds, to be
equally divided among them, and ten pounds to my Porters that usually pack in
my house: to be paid within two months next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to my Water-bearer three pounds, and to my washer
Anthony five pounds, to be paid them forth with after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to William Beadle of Reading Clothier, the sum of
fifty pounds, if he be yet alive: and if he be dead, then to his Executors,
to be paid within three months, next after my decease: and I do hereby also
forgive the said William Beadle, the ten pounds he now owes me.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Executors of Mark Slye of Reading Clothier
deceased, the sum of fifty pounds, to be paid within three months next after
my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to Thomas Newman of Newbury Cloathier, the sum of
one hundred pounds, to be paid him within three months after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to John Skinner, secretary to the Merchants
Adventurers, the sum of one hundred pounds, to be paid within three months
next after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the widow Harrison and her daughter dwelling in
the Aley next my dweling house, five pounds to be paid within one month next
after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to Mr. Richard Bennet who was heretofore my Partner,
the sum of three hundred pounds: to be paid at the end of one year next
after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to Mr. William Towerson Skynner, Deaputy of the
Merchant Adventurers, five pounds, to make him a Ring; and to Mr. Thomas Smyth
Skynner, five pounds to make him a Ring, to be paid them, forthwith after my
decease.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Ralfe Burnet, William Ellets, and John
Southern Officers of the Merchant Adventurers five pounds a piece, to be paid
them forthwith after my decease.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Mayor and Burgesses of the Town of Reading
in the County of Berks, the sum of two hundred and fifty pound^, to be paid
them at the end of one year next after my decease, therewith to purchase Lands
and Hereditaments to the clear yearly vallew of ten pounds for ever, to
maintain divine service to be said in the Parish Church of Saint Mary in that
Town, by the Parson or his Curat every morning of the week, at six of the
clock for ever.

Item, I give and bequeath to the Mayor, Alderman, and Burgesses, of the Town
of Nuberry in the County of Berks, the sum of two hundred and fifty pounds,
to be paid them at the end of one year next after my decease, therewith to
purchase Lands, or Heredaments, of the clear yearly vallew of ten pound for
ever, to maintain Divine Service to be said in the Church of that Town, by
the Parson or his curate every morning of the week, at six of the clock to
continue for ever.

Item, I give and bequeath to my kinsman Wiliam Bye, dwelling near the Alum
Mines in Yorkshire the sum of one hundred pounds, to be paid him within three
months after my decease: and I hereby forgive him the ten pounds he owes me
by bond due long since.

Item, I give and b^queath the Company of Drapers in London the sum of
forty pounds to be bestowed upon a dinner for the Liuerie of that Company, to
be at their Hall upon the day of my burial, this to be paid forthwith after
my decease.

And my will and meaning is, that in case any of the persons aforementioned to
whom I have bequeathed Legacies as aforesaid, and not specially disposed for
case of their decease, shall happen to die before the same Legacies grow due:
Then the Legacy, or Legacies so by me given unto them as afore-sayd, shall be
paid unto their Executors or Administrators, at such time as I have before
severally appointed unto them my Legataries. And I do make and ordain my
loving friend and Partner M. Lawrence Halstead, my sole Executor of this my
last Will and Testament: Charging him as he will answer it before Almighty God
at the last day of judgment, that he truly and punctually in every
particular, perform this my said last Will and Testament; as I nothing doubt
but he will be very careful to do. Hereby giving and bequeathing unto him my
said Executor, all the residue and Remainder of my Estate, my Legacies before
bequeathed being first paid and discharged. In witness of the premises, I have
unto this my last Will and Testament, contained in eighteen several sheets
of paper put my hand and seal: That is, my seal once at the top, and my name
under every several sheere, the day and year first above written, John
Kenricke, Sealed, Pronounced and delivered by the said John Kenricke, as his
last Will and Testament, in the presence of us, John Skinner, Andrew Kenricke,
Thomas Singleton.

Probatum coram Magistro Arthuro Ducke, Legum Doctore Surrogato, etc. vltimo
die mensis Decembris, Anno Domini 1624. Iuramento Laurentij Halstead
Executoris, etc. Cui etc. de been, etc. Jurat.

