THAT WHICH SEEMS BEST IS WORST. EXPRESSED IN A PARAPHRASTICAL TRANSCRIPT of
IVVENALS tenth Satyr. TOGETHER WITH THE tragical narration of Virginias death
interserted.

By W. B.

Nec verbum verbo curabit reddere fidus Interpres.

The pith is Iuuenals, but not the rhyme:
All that is good is his, the rest is mine.
LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold
at his shop under Saint Peter's in Cornehill, and in Popeshead Alley. 1617.

IVVENAL HIS TENTH SATYR.
The Argument of this tenth Satyr.
Wealth, Honor, Empire, strength and Eloquence,
Beauty, long Life, Children and VViues we wish,
These happinesses seem to outward sense:
In this worlds swelling sea for these we fish.
Happy we think our selves, if these we have,
These therefore only of the Gods we crave.
And yet these things are those which hurt us most,
Wealth temptes the thief, Honor the envious man.
Strength makes men rash, and Eloquence is crossed,
Beauty's a whore, long Life is but a span,
And Wives and Children say as do the rest,
That things most sought for, are not always best.
The man who would be truly blessed therefore,
Must unto virtues way himself apply.
He must be patient, constant, seek no more,
Resolved, and neither wish nor fear to die.
And let him unto God refer the rest,
Who better then our selves, knows what is best.
IN all the lands, from Gades unto the East
To Ganges, few there are who know what is best,
Or worst, though error's mist were quite removed:
For what with reason is there feared or loved?
What in conceit has ere so well begun,
Which has not in the end been wished undone?
The gentle gods giving as men would have them,
Have taken from them all that ere they gave them;
They by their granting all that ere men craved,
Have undone many a house they might have saved.
In peace, in war, most hurtful things are sought,
Thus flowing eloquence has come to naught,
Murdered it self. Thus Miloes wondrous strength
Wherein he trusted, was his bane at length.
But heaps of coin hoorded with too much care
Strangle; and so does wealth which is so rare
Exceeding others, their estates and all
As does the British Whale the Dolphin small.
Thus, in those cruel times, when Nero bad
The Soldiers rifle all the goods men had,
They get them presently to Longines house,
To Senecaes rich gardens, where they rouse,
And spoil, and bear away what ere they can,
And then beser the house of Lateran:
These do they rob, while as the poor man sleeps,
Seldom the Soldier in a cottage peepes.
Bear but a little of thy silver plate
At night about thee, when thou trauelst late,
The sword, the spear, the shadow of a reed
Shaken in Moon light, filles thee full of dread:
Whereas the empty traveler goes by,
And sings before a thief full merrily.
The chiefest vows in every Church most known,
Are riches, wealths increase, our cofers grown;
And yet in pitchers poisons are not taken,
In cups beset with gemmes suspect thy bane,
Or when the Setine Wine thou may behold,
Burning within a burnisht pot of gold.
Now which of these two wise men do thou praise,
Or he which laughed, or he which wept always?
A laughing censure is an easy thing,
But strange; whence to others tears should always spring.
Merry Democritus did always smile
And beat his lungs with laughter; yet mean while
Within those Cities where this wise man bode,
There went no purple golden coats abroad,
There were no Fasces; Chaires of State as then,
No swooping trains or litters borne by men.
O had he seen the Praetor mounted hye,
And in his chariot through the street pass by
In mighty Jupiters own robes yclad,
Or in his gown with gaudy colors made,
Or else the circle of his massy crown
Such as might weigh and press his shoulders down.
The load whereof in public makes him swet,
Now least this Consul might himself forget,
Within his Coach his servant sits by,
Teaching his Masters pride, humility,
Anon he takes his mase of iuory,
On top whereof Jove's bird sits perching high,
There may you hear a noise of Corneters,
And here a rank of other Officers;
Others attending at the horses raines,
All which he hires, and with his money gains.
Democritus was wont in the same sort,
At every one he met to laugh and sport,
Whose wisdom shows, that so it may fall out,
Lords may be borne amidst the witless rout;
Men's joys and sorrows he a like disdained,
And at their tears would laugh when they co^plain'd:'
When fortune frowned, to him it was no matter,
He Would send a halter to her, and point at her.
Thus man desires both vain and hurtful things,
For which unto the Gods his vows he brings.
Others desirous to be great and known,
Have been envied, and thereby overthrown,
Their Catalogue and all their acts defaced,
Their honors lost, and they themselves disgraced,
Their statuaes spoiled, and dragged along the street,
Their Coach-wheeles broke, and al trod under feet,
And their proud horses which in triumph went,
They must be slain, and for their Masters shent.
And now the smoke and fire begins to flame,
And that adored head which had such fame,
Mighty Seianus; he who was so great,
Begins to fry amidst the flaming heat,
And of the ashes of his honored face
Pitchers are made, and vessels of disgrace.
O who could think that ever great Seian'
Should being burnt, become a dripping-pan.
Where are thy Laurels, thy triumphant bays
Thy bulls for sacrifice, the people says?
Seianus to his death is led forth right,
And goes along in all the peoples sight,
Whereat the envious multitude is glad:
Look (say they) what a face, what lips he had
Says one, I never loved this haughty man,
I did foresee this end when he began.
But say, now tell me what was his offense,
Who his accusers, upon what pretense,
What proofs, what witnesses did any bring
Against Seianus when they wrought this thing?
Tut! none of these; it was sufficient
There was a letter from Campania sent,
Which to the Senate came: O ho, wa'st so;
No more; I guess now how the world does go.
But what? mean while, what do the people say?
As always; that which fortune does, do they.
Fortunes inconstancy they aemulate:
Whom Fortune loves they love, who^ not, they hate.
Though a man's life his death may well commend,
Yet do the people hate a man condemned.
And yet these people, these self very same
Who now cry out upon Seianus name,
Had yet the Goddess Nurscia him defended,
Or had the Princes life with age been ended
Tha(...)y hour wherein the Prince had di'd
God ^^e Seianus! had the people cride.
He had been made Augustus, he alone
Had had the peoples acclamation:
But since it is not now, as erst of old,
Since now the peoples voices are not sold,
Indeed they once did give the Empery
The Fasces, Legions, and each dignity,
But now they leave, and lay aside this care
And with their bread and sports contented are.
Mean while some of the people herewithall
Begin to fear to see Seianus fall,
It Is said (says one) there is more then he proscribed,
Nay it is too true, a mighty fire's provided
As I came by, I met Brutidius
At Mars his shrine who looked most piteous:
O how I fear lest Caesar should pretend
That we the people do him ill defend?
Whereof accused, to 'scape a greater ill,
With Ajax, many a one himself will kill;
Come then and let us while his body yet
Lies on the shore, trample it under feet;
And let our slaves look on lest they deny
And bring their Masters into ieopardie.
Thus Seian' falls, and thus the people speak
Thus fortunes frowns ambitions neck does break.
And will thou now since this is come to pass
Desire to be saluted as he was,
To have his wealth, his chiefest seat of all,
Over the Army to be General,
The Princes guide, who out of Rome does sit
With Caldie Wisards practicing his wit?
Thou feign would have (is not thy mind so bent)
His Lance, his troops, his horse, his stately tent?
Thou wishest these might fall unto thy lot,
This thou do ask, and say, why should I not?
For some there are which would not kill their foe,
Which wish yet to be able to do so.
But in this world what can so happy be,
What hope from fear? what State from danger free?
Our honey sweets with bitter gall are blended
And all our joys with sorrows are attended:
Which of these two then had thou rather be,
Or great Seianus in his surquedrie.
Or else some Officer, some simple man
Awing the Fiden and the Gabian?
Clarke of the marquet like a Judge to sit,
Breaking their measures as thou think fit?
Sure thou will say, Setanus he was wood
Who wished and had, but wist not what was good,
He which to too much honor did aspire,
And, not content, did too much wealth desire,
He raised a turret ouertopping all,
The higher it was, the greater was his fall:
Fortune that raised him threw him down again,
And when he began to fall he fell amain.
What overthrew Crassus and Pompies state,
And him which did the Romans subiugate,
But honors thirst, by proud ambition wrought?
While as the Gods vouchsafd the^ all they sought.
Few Kings do die which are not murdered,
Seldom a Tyrant dies in his bed.
Since honors fall then is so violent,
Another wishes to be eloquent,
Famous as Tully or Demosthenes;
Wherefore he prays, it might Minerua please,
(And therefore celebrates her five days feast,
And buys Mineruaes picture at the least
Which in a Casket he does trimly keep)
That he may have their eloquence so deep:
But out alas! they both gave such offense,
That both did perish by their eloquence;
Each of them had a fluent tongue indeed,
But this alone did both their mischiefs breed:
Tullies own wit cut off his head and hands;
A meaner Orator securely stands
All day at bar, and pleades the best he can,
And no man seeks to hurt the honest man.
When I was Consul Rome was fortunate,
Said Tully once, but this procured no hate:
Had all the rest he spoke, been like to this
He might have skorn'd a world of Anthonies,
But it was not so, that which his throat did stick
Was his so famous second Philippicke.
Thus he whom Athens did so much admire.
Whose words did set his auditors on fire,
Who in the Theater the raines did hold,
And led the common people as he would;
This mighty torrent of swift eloquence
Came to his end by his fierce vehemence:
Hard was his hap, and sinister his fate,
The angry Gods made him unfortunate;
Whose father almost blind in both his eyes
With soot and smoke, which from his forge did rise,
From midst his rust, his hammers, and his tools,
From Vulcans shop he sent him to the schools.
O but the spoils and trophies of the war,
The Gorget, Helmet hewd with many a skarre,
The broken Chariots, Flags and Ancients torn,
The captive prisoners looking all forlorn;
These high renownes do noble breasts inflame
And make them hazard all to purchase fame:
This does the worthy Roman and the Greek,
This the Barbarian does also seek;
This makes them fear no dangers, this does make
Them all so many labors undertake;
(So far the thirst of honor does exceed,
On learnings praise, on sacred virtues meed:
For who will ever after virtue look,
If virtues guerdons be from virtue took).
Yet lust of praise, the glory of a few,
Our State and country sometimes overthrew.
O what a goodly thing it seemed to some
To see their titles graven on their tomb!
Which yet a fig, a shrub in little space
Their taking root, would ruin and deface:
And can a toombe then fame perpetuate?
Alas, it self is subject unto fate.
Weigh Hanniball and see how many pound
Within this Captains ashes may be found.
This is that Hannibal whom Africa
(Which westward stretches to the Atlantic sea,
Eastward as far as Nilus slimy sands
To Aethiopiaes mighty Elephands):
All which cannot great Hannibal contain,
But to these Kingdoms he unites Spain.
Over the Pyrenaean hills he goes,
Until he come toward the Alpian snowes,
Where natures self would seem to stop his way,
But all in vain; nothing can make him stay,
He tears the rocks, and melts the snow with fire,
And fretteth out his way with vinegar.
And now is he possessed of Italy,
Where with his army he does onward hie.
All this is naught (says he) yet must we come
And break the gates, and raze the walls of Rome,
Where in Suburra in the market place
Weel' spread our colors, and the Romans chase.
O what a martial countenance had he?
How brave a sight his picture drawn would be?
When with one eye like to a petty God
Upon an Elephant he proudly rode.
But what became of all this pomp and state?
O false vainglory, most unhappy fate!
Great Hannibal is overcome and flies,
And for his safety into Syria hies:
From thence he gets into Bithynia,
And seeks for succor of King Prusia,
Where at the Court he stands without the gate,
And for the Kings return from sleep does wait:
He which so much disturbed the world with strife
From who^ nor sword, nor spear could take his life.
He which at Cannes the Romans overthrew,
This man at length his poisoned own ring flew.
Go mighty mad man! climb the Alps again,
And then come down and rifle all the plain,
Make matter for each boy to work upon,
Wherewith to stuff his declamation.
One world will not contain great Alexander,
To find out other worlds he needs must wander:
He has not elbow room, but puffes and blows,
This world wants air, it is too strait and close
Alas! to Alexander it is no mo
Then is the island Giare or Seripho.
And yet this great one for the world too great,
At Babylon lies in a narrow seat;
Death takes us down, death does alone confess
How much our bodies then our minds are less.
It is believed mong other tales of old,
Which lying Greece has in her story told,
How Cyrus dig'd down Athos, how he came,
And with his Navy ouerfaild the same:
How in the sea on ships a bridge he set,
Over which his army and his troops might get:
And how the Persian soldiers passing by,
Have at one dinner drank whole rivers dry,
He which made land be sea, and sea be land,
(says Sostratus) who could his power withstand?
And yet this Cyrus with his flying fame,
What was he when from Salamine he came?
He which with whips was wont to scourge ye wind,
(To whom great Aeolus was far more kind)
He which would lay up Neptune fast in chains,
Or bore him through the ear with gentler pains,
Can any think the Gods (O monstrous blindness!)
Would any of them do this fool a kindness?
How came he back then? only with one boat
Which mo^gst his slaughtered me^ in blood did float:
Thus glory ends, and thus ends he which sought it:
Thus was it sold, and thus he dearly bought it.
Great Jupiter! (says one prolong my days:
Thus sometimes merry, sometimes sad he prays:
Mean while the man that lives to be old
Sustaines more misery then can be told:
Old age with many sorrows is distressed,
And those incessant that it cannot rest:
How foul and ougly it is to look upon?
Full of diseases and corruption.
O how unlike a man it makes a man,
His soft white skin it does like lether tan,
It makes his cheeks hang flag, wrinckles his brow*
Hollowes his eyes, and makes his shoulders bow,
In Tabracena like an old Bitch-Ape
Among the trees, so does he rub and scrape.
Mong young men many differences be,
He is more fair then this, and this then he,
One is more swift, another stronger is,
Each ioyeth in his proper qualities:
But old men's faces all do look as one;
His limbs do tremble, and his voice does moan,
He shakes his head, and like an infant goes,
And coughes and driuels through his snotty nose;
He suppes his meat, and softer bread he chawes,
Alas, a crust would bruise his toothlesse jaws;
A knife he cares not for, give him a spoone,
Feed him with pap, and milk, and sleep at noone:
Old man alas! he is unsavory
Unto himself, his wife and progeny.
He which would be his heir cannot abide him,
Cossus, he stops his nose, and does deride him:
The relish of his meat and drink is past,
For now his palate is quite out of taste.
The pleasures he was wont in youth to find,
Are now long since forgot and out of mind;
He can do nothing now as heretofore,
Those days be gone, he can do so no more.
His body's chill, his lusty blood is cold,
Alas, put clothes upon him, now he is old.
If he pleased others in his youthful time,
They shall do well if now they cherish him;
They must not look for former pleasures still,
Without performance what auailes the will?
But now behold! another loss appears,
The noise of music pleases not his ears,
No, though Seleucus sing with all his skill,
Or all his consort with their trumpets shrill:
It skills not in the Theater where he sit,
Cornet or trumpet he hears near a whit,
His boy, which tells him who comes in and out,
And what is the clock, must in his deaf ear shout;
The little life, which in his pulse does beat,
Is warmed only by a fevers heat.
A swarm of old diseases crawle about him,
Aches and pains within him and without him;
Whose several names if any man desire;
Sooner I might express (did need require)
The names of those which have with Hippia lain,
How many patients Themison has slain,
How many young men Basilus has spoild,
How many pupils Hirrus has beguild,
How many men long Maura in one day,
Has swallowed quick, and brought them to decay:
I could in lesser time at large express
How many Towns Licinius does possess,
Who now into the Senate house does pass,
Who erst no better then a barber was:
One of his shoulders, this of his loins complains
Another hips are weak and full of pains.
A fourth has lost both eyes, and does envy
A very blinkes that has but half an eye,
His pale wan lips, whilome so cherry red,
Must from another fingers now be fed,
Whose hungry appetite at times of meals,
Was wont to gape and ring the kitchen peales,
Like a young Swallow waiting for her dam,
He now sits gaping while they do him cram;
But which is worst, he turns directly sot,
His friends and servants names he has forgot.
They which did sup with him but yester night,
Before next morning are forgotten quite:
Nay, his own children, flesh and blood (which came
Out of his loins, bred by him (fie for shame!)
These are unknown, nay, he is so misled,
That his own heirs are disinherited,
And Phiale, that Witch, that common Whore,
Gulles him, and turns his children out of door:
And all the goods this doting fool ere got,
Must fall at length unto this harlots lot.
A mischief on it! can it be prosperous,
When old age dotes and must be lecherous?
No, no, against nature this is done, to spite her,
And fortune certainly at length will right her.
O is it not brave to see a foul rank Goat,
Hunting traine-sent upon a peticoate;
To see an old deformed crooked Ram,
Raging with lust upon a silly Lamb?
It Is odious madness, natures self does hate it,
And sense and reason do abhominate it:
Yet sense and reason here can do no good,
Nature disswades, but is not understood.
Hence she grows malecontent, and hanges the head,
And seems to live, but she indeed is dead;
Nature and sense, and reason hence are gone,
Madness and lust predominate alone.
When age and lust, dry wood and fire do meet,
How can the flame be quenched? when did you see it?
Thus to live long, and then to be a fool,
Grant it, O Jupiter to him that woole.
But say that sense and wit remain entire,
And age and wisdom happily conspire,
When strength and outward beauties are declined,
Yet virtue still suruiueth in the mind,
Is not this length of days to be desired,
As deeply wished, as worthily admired?
Yes certainly: and yet this happy age
Is but a scene upon a tragic stage;
While like a sad spectator he must see
Life mixed with death, and joy with misery;
He lives indeed to see his kindred die,
His brethren and his sisters destiny:
But this most makes him weary of his life,
Death lets him live, but killes his dearest wife;
This is the pain which longer life attendes,
Still to bewail the fortune of its friends,
To see ones house perpetually to wast,
And to be spent and quite consumed at last;
Only himself, now like a man forlorn,
Is left alive their funerals to mourn,
Unhappy he must sorrow all alone,
For all his friends alas are dead and gone.
King Nestor (if that Homer has not lied)
Did live three hundred years before he died,
Was he not happy, which from year to year
So long together could his death defer?
Counting his years upon his fingers ends,
And drink new wine so often among his friends?
But mark, I pray, a while, and Nestor cries,
And does exclaim against the destinies
Of too long life. How much did he complain,
When dear Antilochus his son was slain?
How did he hate to live, and wish to die,
When as his son was burnt, and he stood by?
Alas (quoth he, and then he turns about,
And makes his moan to all the gazing rout).
What have I done? Why do the Gods me wrong,
Against my will to let me live so long?
Antilochus, Antilochus my son,
Why do I live? Alas, what have I done?
Antilochus! and with that word, amain
His tears burst out, his griefs begin again;
So often his speech does fail, his words suppressed
With sighs and sobbes, which cannot be expressed:
Only he wrings his hands, lifts up his eyes,
And feign would speak, but can speak naught but whies.
Why? Why? (says he) O Why? nay tell me Why?
Could he speak more, he would say, Do I not die?
And thus old Peleus lived with grief to see
His son Achilles mournful tragedy:
And thus Laerta lived to hear men say,
Her son Vl^sses ship was cast away.
Had Priam died before the siege of Troy,
He might have met Assaracus with joy,
With great solemnity and festiuals,
His children had performed his funerals,
And Hector and his brethren had him borne
Unto his grave, while all the people mourn!
Cassandra had gone weeping all before,
And then Polyxena with garments tore.
O had he died before that Paris went
To build those ships which he for Helen sent!
Though this untimely death might him displease,
Yet had he gone into his grave with peace;
Then had he died, he should but once have died,
(In length of days, alas! what good is spied?)
But living longer, woe is me therefore!
He lives to die ten thousand deaths and more:
He lives to see all spoiled and ouerturned,
Asia with fire and sword consumed and burned,
When like a soldier which with fear does quake,
He lays aside his Crown, and Arms does take,
He flies, and on great Jupiter he calls,
And down before his altars dead he falls,
Even as an Ox with age and toil quite done
Under the yoke for weariness does groan:
So aged Priam ouercharg'd with woe,
Fainted and fell and could no farther go:
And Hecuba his wife, which did survive,
Till she was turned into a dog, did live.
I haste unto our own, and will pass by
The King of Pontus long-liu'd misery,
And Craesus too, to whom wise Solon said,
That till the end none could be happy made.
Marius lived long, and suffered banishment,
Cold irons, durance, and imprisonment,
And in Minturnaes marshes hid his head,
And at the loss of Carthage begd his bread;
This man! O had he died, when he had led
In triumph those whom he had conquered;
When all his warlike pomp had now been ended,
As Soon as from his chariot he descended,
Nature in earth, Rome never had possessed
A Citizen more fortunately blessed.
Campania did for Pompeies fame provide,
For with a Fever there he should have died,
Had not the peoples prayers then preserved him,
And for a worser after death reserved him:
With Civil war he did the City waste,
Which from his body smote his head at last.
Which punishment and death yet Lentulus
Escaped, and Catiline and Cethegus,
They were not cut or cast into the fire;
But being dead, their bodies were entire:
For they were hanged, forsooth, their throats were broke,
And nothing but a halter did them choke.
Next now the tender mother on her knees,
When she but Venus Temple only sees,
Softly she prays for beauty for her son:
But for her daughter she will never have done;
They both forsooth, must bear away the prize,
And be admired and wooed by each man's eyes,
Why should they not? Did not fair Venus joy,
To see Dan Cupid, and to busse the boy?
Did not Latona smile, and laugh to see
How beautiful Diana seemed to be?
Yet though this beauty make the mother glad,
So fair a face as once Lucretia had
She doubts to wish; she was too fair, alas!
Her ruin and her death her beauty was.
Her beauty 'twas which Tarquin did admire,
Her beauty 'twas which set his heart on fire.
Her beauty 'twas which brought him to her bed,
Where for her beauty she was ravished,
Which when she knew, she so abhorred the deed,
With her own hands she made her own heart bleed.
Virginia was as fair as fair might be,
As fair as any Virgin Rome did see,
But Rutila a cromp-backt monster was,
And ill complexion'd, and deformed her face,
Then she, a fouler no where could be found,
No beast so ougly living on the ground.
And yet how often did fair Virginia
Wish in her heart, she were foul Rutila:
That she could faces change, that she might be
As Rutila, and Rutila as she.
Oh if that this could ever have been done;
And each could have each others face put on.
Virginia might have lived and near been eyed:
Nor by her fathers hand at length have died.
But this was her unhappy beauties fate,
It was pursur'de with lust, far worse then hate.
Grave Appius her beauty gins to note,
And in the end must needs upon her dote.
Who would believe it? Appius is a man
That Is wise and stayed; who also wisely can
From his experience younger men advise:
Who says that Appius loves Virginia, lies:
For is not Appius old, Virginia young:
Sweet is Virginias breath, but his like dung:
She Is soft, he is hard, and how can these agree?
He may her father, she his daughter be.
This Appius knows, and this so kills his heart,
That to himself scant dares he this impart,
From others therefore he his thought does hide,
He would not for a world it were descride;
And yet for all it is so closely pent,
His heart must break, or he must give it vent.
Maugre his head this makes him sadly moan,
And with dejected eyne walk all alone,
Where he does meditate, and mainely plot
How for his lust Virginia may be got,
Mean while he sighs, looks wild, and sometimes weeps,
Forsakes his meat, and God knows how he sleeps.
Tokens of love he sends and pretty gifts,
And uses twenty thousand other shifts:
He still pursues her, wheresoere she go
Only to talk and look on her, no more.
But when he cannot come unto her right,
Under her window then he walks in sight.
When she is away; how will he look about?
What pretty tricks he will use to find her out?
When being found, naught has he else to say,
But how doo'st pretty sweet Virginia?
Or tell some tale, or else himself commend
Somewhat aloof, for fear he might offend;
His love (he doubts) she will not entertain,
Which makes him be afeard of speaking plain,
In a third person he his tale does tell
Lest she (perhaps) his ranker lust might smell,
With dearest words of love he does her flatter,
But dares not nearer come unto the matter.
Whereby much time in idle talk is spent
In wanton courting, and in complement.
Himself mean time grows flag and waxes lean,
And no man may suspect what this does mean:
A silent tongue he has, but speaking eyes,
Yet who says Appius loves Virginia, lies.
Fie Appius! fie for shame! never be so weak,
What! be fraid unto a girl to speak?
How can thou thus endure to live in pain?
And, where thou will not be deni'de, complain:
The man that spares to speak must spare to speed,
Who will not speak, shall never do the deed.
Then Appius speak thy mind, and be a man;
And so he does as much as silence can:
For Appius (if you ask him) all denies:
Who says that Appius loves Virginia, lies.
Appius is chief of the Decemuiri,
And lives in glitter and authority:
He couets mightily that he may please
The common people, and enjoy his ease,
He punishes and pardons as him list;
But many a fault in silence yet is hisht:
To fear and flattery he does incline,
Which is the ruin of all discipline:
To see a fault, and not to reprehend it,
Does often make a fault, but never mend it.
Hence comes disorder, pride and luxury,
Discord, and in the end an anarchy;
Romes youth hereby become effeminate
And dissolute, and scorn the magistrate.
How can they choose? Let modesty auaunt,
As long as Appius does use his haunt.
If Appius love! how can the younger fry
But live and wallow in foul luxury?
Why? does not Appius thus (say they) and thus,
And shall it not be lawful then for us?
If Appius his Uirginia must have,
Some liberty, as well as he we will crave.
Thus when Superiors do a fault commit,
The people presently do follow it.
Their ill example hurts a great deal more,
For all will follow, as they go before.
Mean while the Sabines such incursions make,
That idle wanton Rome begins to quake;
Their men and cattle now are driven away
They to their enemies are made a prey.
To Appius all this harm some do impute:
No marvel then, if Appius walk so mute,
Barbatus railes upon his government:
And this some say does cause his languishment.
Some one, and some another tale devise,
But who says Appius loves Virginia, lies.
Alas poor wench! Virginia all this while
Thinks Appius like her self without all guile;
And therefore bids him welcome, and is glad
When Appius comes, she is sorry when he is sad:
Good sir (says she) why are you malcontent?
Where are your stories and your merriment?
Which she does speak with such simplicity,
So harmelesly, and with such modesty,
That though her gentleness inflame him more;
Yet her chaste modest look makes him give over:
So that when he of purpose would impart
His secret thought, he dares not for his heart:
Sometimes he therefore knows not what to say,
But then heel gaze, yet will not go away.
Anon some idle matter he pretends,
Some wrong he has received from his friends,
He did not think they would have used him so,
And such a one, but let that matter go;
His answers like his thoughts are torn and rent,
And interrupted and impertinent.
He sees she is chaste, and should he talk of love,
Out of the way (perhaps) she would remove;
So might he loose her company and sight,
And this would kill him and undo him quite:
And therefore to prevent such misery,
On any terms he will have her company.
By this way then no good is to be done,
Some other course must therefore be begun;
Which he so carries in such subtle wise,
That who says Appius loves Virginia, lies.
But love increasing, hatcheth fearelesse lust,
And lust proceeds to fury. Appius must
Enchaunt Virginia with some philtrous drug,
And for to second it look trim and smug:
Her uncle Numitorius must be made
Hot Appius pandor, and he must persuade
His niece Virginia to come off and yield:
Thus Appius hopes at length to win the field,
Thus must it be (says Appius) Numitorius,
Must first be made, and then Virginius.
And Numitorius he must write or speak,
And all the matter to Virginia break:
Perchance at first the motion will distaste,
But yet I doubt not to prevail at last,
Fair promises and importunity
Will make her weary of her chastity,
And i will pursue her closely at an inch,
Let her say what she will, I will not flinch:
She Will say that I am foggy and too old,
Her uncle then shall tell her of my gold,
And of my office the Decemuirate,
And what a ioynture I will to her state.
I am not fair indeed, nor am I foul,
Nor do I always smile, nor always scowle,
Good meat I love, and good clothes I put on,
She knows I am a boon companion,
And has not many a one more old then I
Enjoyed as young as she full merrily?
Why should I not then hope and hopeful woo,
And see what Numitorius will do?
Those and a thousand other tricks he tries,
Yet who says Appius loves Virginia, lies.
But Numitorius is too wise a man,
And Appius here must fail, do what he can;
What then? is here an end? is Appius spent?
No no: Virginiaes father must be sent
Unto the wars; and then when he is away,
Appius assures himself to have the prey:
For Claudius straight, a Client of his own,
He sends; and unto him anon makes known
His mind, coniuring him to secrecy,
And then instructs him for the villainy.
It Is so (says he) I must Virginia have,
And thou must challenge her to be thy slave,
And bid her follow thee, tut! let her weep,
Take thou her home, and there thou shall her keep,
Say that she never was Virginius child,
But that thou wa'st of her long since beguild:
She in thy house was born and stolen from thence:
And until now did never see her since.
If she resist, bring her by force to me,
And thou shall have her home I warrant thee.
Now Claudius has his errand and is gone,
And with Virginia he meets anon.
Whom rudely he begins to apprehend,
And tells her that it is bootlesse to contend:
VVhereat her nurse and she with fear cry out
Which made the people all come in a rout:
Who when they had but heard Uirginias name,
They all cry out on Claudius, fie for shame!
And round about they stand in her defense,
So that she now is safe from violence:
Says Claudius then: I pra'y be still, it is so
Along with me Virginia must go,
She is my slave, I do not do her wrong,
That which I do i will justify ere long,
Before the Judge the matter shall be known,
And you shall see I only seek mine own.
Forthwith he brings her whereas Appius sat,
And there begins the matter to relate,
(Which Appius knew sufficiently before)
And Claudius now does earnestly implore
His aid, craves justice, that he may have right,
And that he be not ouerborne by might;
She is not daughter to Virginius,
But does belong to me Mark, Claudius:
And if Virginius do not say the same,
Let me be punished then and bear the blame:
Mean while I say she is my slave, and so
She ought in reason home with me to go.
Nay! (say her advocates) alas yet stay!
Her father in the wars is now away,
Within these two days he may well be here,
If any will but send a messenger,
And it is unjust (he absent) to contend,
That he his daughter present should defend;
Wherefore they beg of Appius that the doom
Might be deferred until her father come,
And that (according to his own decree)
Till then Virginia might be counted free,
And not to hazard her Virginity,
Before she is judged to loose her liberty.
Says Appius, Then the Law which you commend
Does show how much I have been freedoms friend,
And now as you desire, I am content,
That for Virginius some man may be sent,
And to defer the sentence till he come:
But Claudius mean time must have her home,
So that he promise to return her here,
As Soon as ere Uirginius shall appear.
Hereat, alas! Virginia gins to cry;
The people murmur, but none dare reply.
At length her Uncle Numitorius
And (he to whom she was betroath'd) Icilius,
These hastily come crowding through the press,
And call upon fell Appius for redress:
But Appius cries again, Take them away,
Sentence is past, and they have naught to say.
Naught? says Icilius, Yes: and moughtst thou know
It Is such a tale shall make thy ears to glow:
Threats cannot drive me hence or hide thy lust,
Who takes me hence, do it by force he must.
Know Appius that Virginia is my Spouse,
And ere that Claudius get her to his house,
Ye Gods and men! mark what Icilius faith,
He'il sooner loose his life, then break his faith.
The people fear lest this his vehemence
Should hurt Virginia, and the Judge incense;
For now the Lictors round about him get,
Yet after all they dare no more but threat.
So powerful is the strength of innocence,
That it does curb the rage of violence,
A wicked conscience when it is most bold
Is but a coward, and it is courage cold.
Go to, says Appius, you Icilius,
Would seem to patronize Virginius,
But it is another matter makes you chat,
You would be Tribune sir: say, would you not?
And to make way to your ambition,
You think it best to raise sedition:
But you shall fail for once of your intent,
And for to day Claudius shall be content
To leave his right; Virginia home shall go
Not for your sake Icilius, think not so:
But for Virginius sake who absent is,
And for the name of father, more then this.
Mean while (Icilius, you and such as you:)
I tell you this: and you shall find it true,
If that Virginius by to morrow day
Appear not here; know that I know the way,
Nor want I means or power my self alone,
To crush the Authors of sedition.
Thus for the present is the Court dismissed,
He for Virginius may go who list.
But Appius stays a while till they be gone,
Least he might seem to have sat for this alone.
Virginius friends in sending are not slack.
Appius mean while plots how to keep him back.
Icilius brother straight without delay,
And Numitorius son do post away.
But what does Appius now? he does not sleep,
He writes to his Colleagues, that they should keep
Virginius there, nor give him leave to part
Till they did hear from him, this was his art.
But this, as it fell out, did not succeed,
His letters came to late to do the deed;
For at first watch Virginius went his way,
But Appius letters came not till next day:
When as Virginius so fast does wend,
That by this time he is at his iournies end,
Where he does find his lovely daughter fate,
In mourning habit all disconsolate,
With grief and thought so pined away and worn,
That now she seemed not what she was beforue;
She that was erst so fair, with grievous moan,
Now looks like death, she is naught but skin and bone
Her meat and sleep she does forgo and why?
Because she will not live, but feign would die.
But all in vain; Appius by break of day,
Toward his seat of Justice takes his way,
Where all the City at the bar does stand,
And still expects Virginius out of hand,
The common people loved Virginius well,
When will he come (say they) pray' can you tell,
Come, come way Virginius, quickly come.
Yonder he is, says one, I pray' make room;
Whereat the people every one looks out,
And on his tip-toes castes his eye about,
Each over to others head does seek and spy,
If he see any man approaching nie,
Which if he do, as far as he can see,
O now he comes (says he) sure this is he:
So soon men credit to affection give;
For, what men wish, they willingly believe.
But Appius thinks he is safe enough for that,
When lo! unlooked for, oportunely pat,
In comes Virginius, Appius bends his brow,
A mischief (says he) on Virginius now:
But sad Uirginius like a man forlorn,
With many Matrons which with him did mourn,
In sordide and neglected weeds does bring
His lambe-like daughter to the butchering.
The doubtful people round about them press,
And all lament and pity their distress.
Virginius at length thus weeping said:
Good sirs! I beg not, but require your aid,
For you, your wives and children in the wars
My life I have exposed, received these skarres,
And for all this, shall this be my reward?
Shall I my daughter loose without regard?
My dearest child, the only child I have,
Shall she by violence be made a slave?
Thus to the people did Virginius cry,
And made his moan to all as he past by:
Icilius also told them all the same,
Whereat they wept and murmurd, and cried shame:
But cruel Appius moved with no remorse
(Such is lusts rage) became a great deal worse,
Up to his judgment seat he soon ascends,
Where he all right and equity pretends,
And Claudius now demaundes his slave again,
And of their wrong that keep her does complain:
But ere that he could any farther hie,
Or that Virginius could make reply.
Enraged Appius swollen with lust and wroth
Does burst in twain and interrupts them both:
This brall of yours (says he) does me offend,
Take her home Claudius, and there is an end.
What though Virginius and the youth repine,
She is thy slave, take her I say, she is thine.
At first the people each on other gazed,
And at the horror of it stand amazed,
And Claudius boldly in his hands her hent:
But sadly all the people did lament,
Virginius knows not what to say, but stands
And to the people stretches out his hands,
Who after he had wept, with sorrow thus,
He cries aloud to wicked Appius:
My daughter, Appius! is no slave, but free,
Her have I given to Icilius, not to thee;
And I have brought her up still hereto fore
To be a wife, but not to be a whore.
What? shall we live like beasts promiscuously,
Without distinction in foul luxury?
O^ age and sex shall no regard be bad?
Shall each man by his beastly lust be lad?
If these (the people here) shall this permit,
Others I know which will not suffer it.
With this the women do together band,
And round about Virginia they stand,
They drive Marc Claudius away, and cry,
No^ let her go, she shall have liberty.
Hearing this noise, the Crier bids them peace,
And Appius beckens to them for to cease.
Which done, and silence made, in sullen wise,
Thus subtle Appius to the people cries:
Icilius spoke his pleasure yesterday,
And tell me now what does Virginius say;
Does not he rail and rage as much as he?
If not sedition, what then may this be?
But more then this here in the City they
Have met at night, they shamed to meet by day,
So that I must thus guarded hither come
For preservation of the peace of Rome.
I come not here to wrong the innocent,
But to suppress their purpose and intent.
Lictor make room, remove the company,
And let the Master and his slave pass by.
This spoke he angerly, and with that word
Back went the people of their own accord:
So that Virginia can no longer stay,
To lust and violence she is made a pray.
Her self poor heart! for pity seems to woo,
Her father knows not what to say or do:
But down upon his knees poor man he falls,
And weeps, and cries, for help and pity calls:
Now Appius! take pity on my woe,
Let not my only child thus from me go,
Forgive my hasty words; I was dismayed,
And in my grief I knew not what I said,
Impute it to the weakness of my age,
To my affection. O let this assuage
The rigor of thy sentence, hear me speak,
Do not with sorrow cause my heart to break.
I am the wofullest wight that e're did live,
I know not what to do: Appius forgive!
Indeed I was too blame, and yet alas
She is my daughter, I her father was:
Her father was? What am I not so still?
Why do I live? this word my heart does kill.
Yet give me leave to take her nurse aside
To ask her this, by her I will be tried;
That so if falsely I thus termed be,
I shall then part with her more willingly,
And let the wench go with us; let me die!
If so I do not bring her by and by.
I will not go far hence, not out of sight,
I will but only ask of her the right.
Appius could not deny this small request,
But lets them go: Virginius much distressed,
Looking about anon he had espide
A butchers stall, and thitherward he hied,
Where being come, he cries and weeps amain,
Looks on his daughter, and then weeps again:
My only joy! my dearest child (quoth he)
What shall I do? how shall I set thee free?
Shall I? no, no: I am her father, I:
But shall she be a slave? first might she die!
Sooner I Will murder her while she is chaste,
Then be the father of a whore at last.
But then returning to his child again;
Now God forbid! (says he) she should be slain!
How say? sweet girl! (and then he began to cry,
Surely (says he) the wench is loath to die);
Now tell me pretty heart! which had thou rather
That Claudius were thy Lord, or I thy father,
I always loved thee dearly, did I not?
Yes wench, I did, it cannot be forgot?
What was the pleasure thou desiredst most,
But I would get it, whatsoere it cost?
Nothing me thought could be too much for thee,
For thou wa'st all my hearts felicity:
I cannot tell (if thou to Claudius go)
Whether that Claudius will love thee so.
Say, will thou live with Claudius or with me?
His slave he will make thee, but i will keep thee free.
The silent girl with fear does trembling stand,
And still does eye her fathers busy hand.
She answers not a word, but sighs and gaspes,
And in her griping arms her father clasps.
Into his bosom she with tears does fly,
As if, she said, good father, let me die,
Rather then live with Claudius as his slave,
And loose Icilius which to me you gave.
The good old man now lays his neck on hers
And all her bosom with his tears he blurs.
And then he kisseth her, and then he cries,
And then does gaze upon her blubbred eyes,
Poor wench (quoth he) thou shall not be their slave,
I Will sooner see thee laid full low in grave:
Yea that I will; I will my pretty soul,
Rather then thou shall suffer their control,
I Will take such order that thou shall escape,
I will deceive them of their wicked rape;
O God! says he, now tell me, is it not best?
And then he wept and kissed his daughters breast,
No no, it is not: is it not? yes; what? kill her?
Yes rather then these lustful beasts shall spill her:
But is she not thy flesh and blood, thy child?
Yes that she is; but shall she be defil'de?
And is she not thine only child, thine heir?
Look in her face, how sai'st? is she not fair?
Yes* too too fair, I would she were not so,
Her beauty is the cause of all my woe.
And who can ever so hard-hearted be
As hurt Virginia, if he do her see?
How then can I her farher do the deed,
I cannot do it, I cannot see her bleed:
She Is all the children, all the joy I have:
Her health is mine, her life my life does save:
Where shall I have more children when she is gone?
Or if I could, like her, I can have none.
She Is the best daughter father ever had,
She is so pretty: O I shall be mad.
Appius and Claudius, out you stinking goats!
O that the people will not cut your throtes!
You shameless letchers, shall she sat your lust?
I Will kill her first; O do not! but I must.
And with that word, he snatcheth from the stall,
The butchers knife, and stabs her therewithal:
Then turning to the judgment seat he cries,
Thus, Appius! for thy sake Virginia dies:
Upon thy head her blood I consecrate,
She shall not be a slave thy lust to sat:
Before she should be prostitute to thee,
This have I done, thus have I set her free.
Upon this fact a hideous cry arose,
Take him (says Appius) ere he farther goes.
But now Virginius with his knife in hand,
So made his way, that none could him withstand,
Away he flies and gets without the gate,
And then to apprehend him it was too late:
Indeed, the people for him made a lane,
They iou'd him so, they would not have him taken.
Mean while Icilius, sad Icilius,
And dead- Virginiaes uncle Numitorius,
Took up the body of this murdered wight
And laid it out to all the peoples sight:
All pale and ghastly now she looks alas,
Who erst so beautiful and lovely was:
Sad was the spectacle, sad was the cry
Of all the people that were standing by:
Some do commend, some blame Virginius:
Some pity him, and some Icilius;
Of Appius and of Claudius all complain,
Their rape and lust have poor Uirginia slain.
For whom the multitude so sore lament,
As if their tears and plaints would he're be spent:
Alas Virginia! hard was thy fare,
And thy admired face unfortunate!
Had thou been soul, or not so passing fair,
We needed not with cries thus fill the air:
Thy beauty it was which did thee so commend,
And it was thy beauty brought thee to thy end.
Beautie's a rose whose colors are most fair,
Whose precious odours do perfume the air:
Yet to it self is neither fair nor sweet,
But only unto those who smel't or see it.
Men for this cause pluck roses from the tree,
Because so sweet and beautiful they be:
While as the nettle and the dock do stand,
And grow untouched by any envious hand.
The proper man (they say) the worst luck has,
Whereas deformity is free from scath.
The fair faced boy does make his mother glad,
But care and fear of him, still makes her sad.
It is a lovely boy, now God him bless:
Yet then she weeps upon him nere'thelesse.
To catch this prettiness such baits are laid,
As always make the parents hearts afraid.
Beauty and chastity we hardly find
Together, or a fair face and fair mind.
Though parents bring their children up at home
Under their eye, and never let them rome,
Where ill behavior they might see or learn:
Though like the Sabines they be never so stern.
Nay say that natures self with a free hand
Has gi'n them wit enough to understand
What Is good, and has disposed them virtuously,
Gi'n them ablushing cheek, a modest eye;
When nature thus has ble'st them with her store,
(What can a fathers care or love do more?)
Yet then their cocker'd chicke, their tidling son,
Before he be a man must be undone.
Prodigious lust becomes a prodigal,
And for to get his purpose, spends all.
Nay such his confidence is in his coin,
That he the parents hearts hopes to purloine:
Hereby he hopes they will be both so awde,
That he will be the pandor, she the bawd.
Never was tyrant yet, that ere would geld,
That boy in whom he beauties want beheld.
Nero never loved that boy whose feet were club'd,
Whose panch was bost, whose scabby fists were scrubd,
Alas! fair boy! thou in thy beauties pride
Do little wot what dangers thee abide!
This youth becomes a known adulterer,
And all those threats and punishments does fear
Which angry husbands full of jealousy
Inflict on those which do them injury.
VViser then Mars this youth was never yet
That he should never fall into the net.
Wherefore then Mars he must not happier be,
And Mars was taken at his Venery;
And then this rage, this jealousy will have
More right then law to wrong yet ever gave:
It murders sometimes, and does sometimes tear
The flesh with whips and rowels without fear.
O but your feat Endymion never the less
Shall be a stallion to some matronesse,
And if Seruilia with crowns him woo,
(Although he love her not, he will be hers too,
For which, foul she (rather then he shall lack)
Will strip and sell her clothes from off her back;
What is it which any woman can deny
To this fair Sir, to have his company.
Oppia Catulla be it, true it is still,
She is a woman and she will have her will:
The neediest woman here, and she that is worst,
Will in this case be free, in bounty first.
But what? in beauty we no harm can find,
If there be chastity lodged in the mind.
It Is true; immodest beauty is a snare,
Where fond affections soon surprised are.
The fairest beauty void of chastity,
Is soon converted into brothelrie.
At first such beauties (having gotten fame)
Are spectacles of love, at last of shame:
And modest beauties scant have better ends,
Were not that chastity their fame defends.
But otherwise alas! their fortunes still
Unhappy are, attended with some ill.
Fair was Hippolytus, and full of grace,
Courteous and temperate, and chaste he was:
Thus did beliue and thus he vowed to die,
He would not lose his maiden chastity.
But did this profit him? did there hence grow
Ought that was good? no; but his overthrow.
Phaedra his fathers wife, and his stepmother,
Did fall in love with him above all other;
And wooed him often, and often his patience tried,
He often refused, and often her suit denide.
VVhereat she blush't to see her self disdained,
But her affection cunningly she fained,
She now does wish that she had never spoke,
Or that she could again her words revoke;
Her love she now turns into mortal hate,
And all her thoughts revenge do meditate.
Poison she thinks on, or some murdering knife,
Can she not have his love, she will have his life?
Which to effect, her busy mind anon,
This subtle stratagem has thought upon;
She tells her husband how Hippolytus
His son, would have abused her thus, and thus.
Theseus on this, could not himself contain,
Harmless Hippolytus must needs be slain.
The father follows, and the son does fly,
And yet Hippolytus scant knows why.
Yet on his horses run, until at last
Upon a rock his Chariot wheels they brast,
Whereas himself was dragged and torn asunder:
He was too fair, too chaste; it was no wonder.
Bellerophon was likewise in this case,
For he was fair and had a lovely face,
King Praetus wife, that Sthenobaea hight,
Grows fond, and in his beauty takes delight:
By circumstances she at first does prove him,
At last she plainly says that she does love him.
Bellerophon would feign himself excuse,
His friend King Praetus he may not abuse.
He modestly denies her foul request,
But she conceiues fell vengeance in her breast:
She tells her husband how Bellerophon
Would have dishonored her; he thereupon
With letters sends Bellerophon away,
Letters which did Bellerophon betray.
Thus these; Both women, when they could not have
What they did love, with hate began to rave.
A woman most of all is merciless,
When to her hate shame adds maliciousness.
Silius is fair in Messalina'es eye,
So that She doates on Silius out of cry:
Now Messalina is Claud's Emperesse,
And will not this her love her Silius bless?
Speak thy opinion which would thou choose,
Or take her love, or else her love (...).
Silius is perelesse fair, most ver^^^^^,
And well descended of a noble house:
Yet wretched he is taken, and made to die,
In Messalina'es presence, in her eye,
While she does sit dressed in her little veil,
And like a Virgin bride bids him all hail:
Her costly purple colored marriage bed,
Within her Garden on the ground is spread,
In dowry as the ancient manner is,
There shall be gi'n a thousand sesterties,
He which is marriage ioynes their wedded hands
Stands by: with those which seal and firm the bands.
Which thou did secret think, known but to few
As if she were ashamed her self to show:
No, she'ile not married be but lawfully,
And why then should it not be publicly?
Now tell me which thou likest? what will thou do?
If thou yield not, when thus she does thee woo,
Look to thy self she by some wicked slight
Will do thee mischief sure ere it be night:
But if thou do without delay the thing.
Known to the world, in Claudius ears will ring.
When this disgracethrough each man's mouth has past,
Alas good man Claudius shall know it last.
Mean while, do thou thy Messaline obey,
And sport and revel with her night and day:
For tie all one, now thou have done the wrong,
Claudius of force, must hear of it ere long,
And then, were thou far fairer then thou art,
Of his displeasure thou must feel the smart.
Thy milk white neck must stoop unto the block,
And yield it self unto the fatal stroke.
Thus may we see, those things which me^ think good
Are nothing so, if rightly understood.
What then? shall therefore men for nothing crave?
Soft! if thou seek and would my counsel have;
Doc thus: seek to those heavenly powers above,
Leave all to them, for sure they do us love,
Let God see first, what does agree with us,
What shall be fit, and most commodious.
God does not give according to our wit
For pleasant things, he gives us what most fit.
Deerer is man to him, then man can be
Unto himself; yet blind and wretched we,
Carried away by force of our own mind,
(Mighty is lust, sense brutish, reason blind),
A wooing do we go, but in such sort,
As if we went unto our brothel sport,
Red hot with lust, ranker then any Goat,
Or any ship that still in salt does float.
With glaring eyes we stare upon our loves,
And look them through and through while lust us moves.
Why should we not? we hope it is no sin
But love; yea, yea, lets ask our hearts within:
At night our thought, our nose does hunt by day,
We talk and talk, and yet we nothing say.
A mischiese on this lust! but most of all
On lust, which honesty it self does call.
This thought does gull us so, we think all is well,
Find fault who will, all is one, here will we dwell.
This ugly thought makes blushes impudent,
And honest hours in lustfulnesse be spent.
It makes rank garlikes stinking hoarie head
Grow green again, and live though almost dead,
O that I did that mould and garden keep!
Where this foul garlike lusts to lodge and sleep!
How would I tear it up? How would I rend
It Is blade, ere it my garden should offend.
It should not with his breath my nose disease,
It should not with its sight mine eyes displease.
I should soon bring its sprouting blade fullow,
And send it to some other place to grow:
Away rank stink, away! get thee to those
Like to thy self, but grow not necre the Rose!
A mischief On It! can any think it fit,
That Garlike in a Roses lap should sit?
Garlike must needs overcome and kill the Rose,
Prickles cannot defend it from such foes.
If wedded true love twixt these ever be,
Let sweet and sour, old age and youth agree.
But all in vain, this cloven Garlike head
Madded with lust, cannot be answered.
There let it grow then, if it needs must be,
Yet pretty Rose still shall I pity thee,
For thou must needs be quickly withered,
And woe is me! anon thou will be dead,
Then all too late thou will repent the hour,
Thou had not joined thee to some sweeter flower;
Then shall thou see for all thy subtle wit,
That all that is desired is not fit.
Women do husbands, men do wives desire,
And such and such they earnestly require,
And when they have them, straight without delay,
For sons and daughters they begin to pray.
God only knows, mean time what c^e we crave,
What wife and children every man shall have,
Wedding and hanging go by destiny,
And what a man must have, he cannot fly.
But that thou may ask something, and obtain it,
Unto the Temple get thee, never refrain it,
Look on the entrails of some beast and vow,
And search the puddings of some slaughterd sow.
Pray that within thy body sound and whole,
There may be lodged a sound and wholesome soul;
Pray for a mind that is brave and valiant,
Whom fear of death as yet could never daunt,
Who among rich natures greatest benefits,
Accounts that time when life and world he quits:
Knowing that while he lives he still does die,
But when he dies he lives immortally.
Who in mean time, come whatsoever will,
Or toil or labor, he endures it still,
He knows not how to chafe, he couets naught,
His mind to baseness never can be brought.
The toiles and travels of great Horcules,
He does prefer before dull stupid ease,
Or wantonness, or feasting, or discourse,
Sardanapalus is a beast and worse.
But let me show what thou thy self may give,
One way there is no more, in peace to live,
Wherein thou mai'st live most contentedly,
And that is, if thou shall live virtuously:
Fortune auaunt, were men but only wise,
Thou had not power on them to tyrannize,
And yet a Goddess of thee we must make,
And give thee leave in heaven a place to take.
Thou art a Goddess and in heaven we place thee:
But were men wise, they out of heaven would chase thee.

Laus Deo. Matritae Sept. 5. 1612. stilo vet.
-- pictoribus atque poetis
Quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas.
-- Veniam petimusque damusque vicissim.
W. B.
FINIS.

