MISCELLANIES OF DIVINITY Divided into three books, Wherein is explained at
large the estate of the Soul in her origination, separation, particular
judgment, and conduct to eternal bliss or torment.

BY EDWARD KELLET Doctor in Divinity, and one of the Canons of the
Cathedral Church of EXON.

S. AUGUST. sermon. nov. 24. de S. Paulo. Omnibus hominibus natis constituit Deus
mortem, per quam de isto seculo emigrent. Exceptus eris a morte, si exceptus
fueris a genere humano. -- Iam homo es, venisti: Quomodo hinc exeas, cogita.

printer's or publisher's device HINC LVCEM ET POCLA SACRA

ALMA MATTER GANTA BRIGIA



Printed by the Printers to the University of CAMBRIDGE, and are to be sold by
Robert Allot, at the Bear in Pauls-Churchyard. 1635.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY VERY GOOD LORD, THE LORD Archbishop of
CANTERBURY his Grace, Primate of all ENGLAND, and Metropolitan.
Most Reverend,
THE manifold graces which God has plentifully poured on you, enabling you,
even from your youth, to be a fit instrument diverse ways to advance his
glory, and blessing your great good labors with the favorable acceptance of
our dread Sovereign and State and all who have well-wishing unto this our
Sion, have caused me, a crazie, old, retired man, who never saw you but once,
and that long since, to leave behind me a testimonial to the world, both of
my hearty thanks to God, that you have been; and of my humblest prayers, that
you may long continue a prop of our Church, a favored Ezra, the prompt Scribe
in the Law; a powerful Aaron, to make an atonement for the people, an Elijah,
zealous in your calling; a provident guide to the Prophets, to the sons and
schools of the Prophets; a father, chariot, and horsemen of Israel, as Elisha
called Elijah, and as king Joash called Elisha. May heavenly influences and
divine irradiations say, Amen, Amen.

Your Graces in all duty, Edward Kellet.

The Contents of the first book.
CHAPTER. I.
Sect. 1. THe subject of the whole work. The reason why I chose the text of
Hebr. 9.27. to discourse upon. The Division of it. Fol. 1. etc. 2. Amphibologie
prejudicial to truth. Death appointed by God, yet for Adams fault. The tree of
life kept from Adam, not by fantastical Hob-goblins, but by true Angels, and
a flaming sword brandishing it self. Leviticall ceremonies dead, buried,
deadly. Things redeemed dispensed with; yet still appointed. 2 3. The Kingdom
of Death reigning over all. Bodily death here meant, and only once to be
undergone. 4 4. (...) implies not necessarily the longinquitie of future times
intercurrent; but rather a demonstration that other things were precedent.
(...) After does often signify an immediate succession. Judgment here taken
for an act of justice. 5 5. The general judgment here understood by
OEcumenius and Bellarmine. The second book of Esdras apocryphal, and justly
refused. More then the general judgment is meant. Even the particular
judgment also is avouched by many authorities. Three questions arising from
the former part of these words. 6
CHAP. II.
1. HOw God is immortal; how Angels and the souls of men; how Adams body was
mortal, and yet immortal, though compounded of contraries. 10 2. Aristotle's
last words; his death. Holcot, or the Philosophers pray for him. Aristotle
canonized by his followers. Plato and Aristotle compared. Vives taxed. Adams
body was not framed of the earth, or dust of Paradise. 12 3. Adam should not
have been subject to any external force; he was lord of the creatures: inward
distemper he could not have. Adams bodily temperature: Christ's, who was fairer
then the children of Adam: the helps for Adams body, meat, drink, and sleep 17
4. Diverse opinions of the tree of life. If Adam had eaten of the tree of life
before or after his fall he had lived for ever. If he had not sinned, he had
not died, though he had not tasted of the tree of life. To what use the tree of
life should have served. 20 5. The Council of Millan: Cardinal Cajetan,
Richeomus the Jesuit, Julianus Pomerius and Saint Augustine think that Adam
could not have died, if he had not sinned. The book of Wisdom, Holcot,
Doctor Estius, and two passages of Scripture Canonical, are authorities
evincing that Adam had in the state of innocence an immortal body. 24
CHAP. III.
1. DEath is a bitter-sweet. Enoch and Elias Raptures were not painful to
them. Christ's transfiguration and the manner of it. That it was not painful to
him. Adams translation to a life celestial and a body spiritual, should not
have been painful, if he had not sinned. They who shall be changed at Christ's
coming, shall by it find no pain. Death is painful. 28 2. Mankind died the
first minute of their sin. God draws good out of evil. Death in some regard
is changed from a punishment to be a favor and blessing of God. 31 3. Not many
or more sins, but one caused death. One only. David begotten in lawful
wedlock. That this one sin is not less in the godly, nor greater in the
wicked. Death was appointed for one sin only, of one person only. 33 4.
This one person only was man: this man that sinned that one sin was Adam.
Strange and curious speculations, that Eve sinned not that sin for which
mankind was appointed to death. 36 5. Two School speculations propounded. The
second handled at large, as expounding the former; and determined against the
Schoolmen themselves, viz. That the children of innocent Adam had been born
confirmed in grace. The censure of Vives upon these and the like points. A part
of his censure censured. 43
CHAP. IIII.
1. ADams perfection in innocence. Our imperfection after his fall, contrary
to his, both in understanding and will, and in the parts concupiscible and
irascible. 55 2. Adam had other laws given him: but one above all, and one
only concerning posterity. 57 3. What this law was. Adam knew the danger to
himself and his offspring. The first sin was against this law. 58 4. Eve
sinned before. How she sinned the same, and not the same sin with Adam. 60 5.
Zeno, the Stoics, and Jovinian confuted. Sins are not equally sinful. 62 6.
Adam sinned far more and worse then Eve. 65 7. This sin of Adam was not
uxoriousnesse, as Scotus maintained; but disobedience or pride. The branches of
Adams sin. 66
CHAP. V.
1. Original sin is an obscure point. The errors of the Schoolmen
concerning it. The oversight of Bellarmine. 73 2. Original sin described by
its causes: Distinguished from Adams actual sin. 77 3. In what sense Adam
had, and his posterity has Original sin. We were in Adam. He stood for us
idealiter. Every one of us would have done exactly as Adam did. We did sin in
Adam, and how. 78 4. Whether Christ was in Adam, and how. 82 5. We sinned not
that sin in Adam, by imitation only. 84 6. Adams sin, as personal, was
not imputed. Adam is saved. Adams actual sin, as it was ideall, and
representative, is imputed to us. 85
CHAP. VI.
1. Original sin is propagated unto us. Original sin properly is not in
the flesh before the union with the soul. 90 2. Bishop Bilson, Mollerus,
Kemnitius, and Luther, in an error. Bishop Bilsons arguments answered.
Conception taken strictly by Physicians, etc. We are not conceived in original
sin, if we respect this conception. Conception taken largely by Divines. Thus
we were conceived in sin. 92 3. A Physical Tractate of conception clearing
the point. 97 4. A Discourse touching aborsives and abortives. Balthazar
Bambach answered. The Hebrew vowels not written at first when the consonants
were. Never any wrote till God had written the Two Tables. 98 5. The manner how
the soul contracteth original sin pointed at. Bodily things may work upon
the soul. 103 6. Righteous men have unrighteous children. The contagion of
original sin is quickly spread. 106 7. No sin or sins of any of our
parents immediate or mediate do hurt the souls of their children, but only
one, and that the first sin of Adam. 109
CHAP. VII.
1. A Review of the last point. Zanchius not against it. Bucer and Martyr are
but faint, and rather negative then positive. 112 2. Bucer and Martyr make the
state of the question to be voluble, not fixed and settled. Their objections
answered. The place of Exodus 20.5. examined. 113 3. S. Augustine appealed
unto, and defended. 116 4. God justly may, and does punish with any temperall
punishment, any children like or unlike unto their parents, for their parents
personal sins. 118 5. God does, and may justly punish some children
eternally, and all temporally for original sin, whether they be like their
parents in actual aversion, yea or no. 121 6. God justly punishes, even
eternally, wicked children, if they resemble wicked parents. ibid. 7. God
oftentimes punishes one sin with another. ibid. 8. The personal holiness
of the parent, never conveyed grace or salvation to the son. ibid. 9. God
never punished eternally the real iniquities of the fathers upon their
children, if the children were holy. ibid. 10. No personal sins can be
communicated. The point handled at large against the error of Bucer and
Martyr. 123 11. The arguments or authorities for my opinion. The new Writers
not to be overvalued. Zanchius himself is against Bucer and Martyr. 133
CHAP. VIII.
1. Original sin came not by the law of Moses, but was before it in the
world. 138 2. God has good reason and justice to punish us for our original
sin in Adam. Gods actions defended by the like actions of men. 139 3.
Husbands represent their wives. The men of Israel represented the women.
Concerning the firstborn of men and beasts. The primogeniture and redemption
of the firstborn. 140 4. The whole body is punished for the murder committed
by one hand. Corporations represent whole cities and towns, and Parliaments the
body of the Realm. Their acts bind the whole Kingdom. Battelling champions
and duellists engage posterity. 144 5. S. Peter represented the Apostles. The
Apostles represent sometimes the Bishops, sometimes the whole Clergy. The
Ministers of the Convocation represent the whole Church of England. The
authority of General Councels. National Synods must be obeyed. 147 6.
Private spirits censured. Interpretation of Scripture not promiscuously
permitted. An Anabaptisticall woman displayed. 149 7. Another woman reproved
for her newfangled book in print. Scriptures not to be expounded by anagrams
in Hebrew, much less in English; but with reverence. How far the people are
to believe their Pastors. 152 8. Saul represented an entire army. Joshua and
the Princes bind the Kingdom of Israel for long time after. 183 9. Christ
represented us. Christ and Adam like in some things, in others unlike. Christ
did and does more good for us then Adam did harm. 184
The Contents of the second book.
CHAPTER I.
Sect. 1. THe question propounded, and explained. Fol. 1. 2. Armenius, or
rather his son Zoroaster, dead, and revived. ibid. 3. Antillus dead, and
living again, because the messenger of death mistook him, in stead of Nicandas:
Nicandas died in his stead. 2 4. A careless Christian died, and recovered
life: lived an Anchorite twelve years: died religiously. ibid.
CHAP. II.
1. A Division of such as have been raised. They all died. 3 2. The widow of
Zarephath her son raised, yet died again: supposed to be Jonas the Prophet.
The Shunammites son raised, not to an eternal, but to a temporary
resurrection. A good, and a better resurrection. 4 3. Christ the first who
rose, not to die again. 5 4. The man raised in the sepulcher of Elisha, arose
not to immortality. ibid.
CHAP. III.
1. Whilst Christ lived, none raised any dead save himself only. 6 2. The
rulers daughter raised by Christ, died again. ibid. 3. So did the young man
whom Christ recalled to life. 7 4. Many miracles in that miracle of Lazarus his
resurrection. ibid. 5. Christ gave perfect health to those whom he healed or
raised. 8 6. Lazarus his holy life, and his second death. 9
CHAP. IIII.
1. TAbitha died again. 9 2. So did Eutychus. 10 3. They who were raised about
the Passion of Christ, died not again; as many ancient and late Writers do
imagine. Mr. Montague is more reserved. ibid.
CHAP. V.
1. Who were supposed to be the Saints which were raised, by such as maintain
that they accompanied Christ into heaven. 12 2. A strange story out of the
Gospel of the Nazarens. ibid. 3. Adams soul was saved. Adams body was raised
about Christ's Passion, says Pineda out of diverse Fathers: Thus far Pineda
has truth by him. That the sepulcher of Adam was on mount Calvarie: so say
Athanasius, Origin, Cyprian, Ambrose, Basil, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Augustine,
Euthymius, Anastasius Sinaita, Germanus Patriarch of Constantinople. ibid. 4.
It was applauded in the Church in Hieromes time. 13 5. Theophylact thought Adam
buried in Calvarie. Drusius unadvisedly taxes the Fathers. Tertullian
consents with other Fathers, and Nonnus, who is defended against Heinsius. 14
6. At Jerusalem they now show the place where Adams head was found. Moses
Barcepha says, that Sem after the flood buried the head of Adam. 17 7. The
Roman story of Tolus, and Capitolium, much resembling the story of Adam.
ibid.
CHAP. VI.
1. HIerom says, Adam was not buried on mount Calvarie. Both Hierom,
Adrichomius, and Zimenes say, he was buried in Hebron. Hierom censured, for
doubling in this point, by Bellarmine. 19 2. Hieroms arguments answered. 20 3.
The Original defended against Hierom in Josh. 14.15. ADAM there is not a
proper name, but an appellative. Arba is there is a proper name of a man.
Adrichomius erreth in Kiriath-Arbee; and the words signify not Civitas quatuor
virorum, The city of four men. New expositions of Kiriath-Arbee. ibid. 4. It
may signify as well Civitas quatuor rerum, The city of four things: as,
Quatuor hominum, Of four men. The memorable monuments about Hebron. 22 5. It
may be interpreted Civitas quadrata, quadrilatera, quadrimembris, quadricollis;
A city fouresquare, of four sides, of four parts, of four hills. 23 6. If
Kiriath-Arba does signify the city of four men, yet they might be other men,
besides the four Patriachs. 24 7. If it had its denomination from four
Patriarchs, and from their burial there, yet Adam is none of them. 25 8.
Augustine peremptory for Adams burial in Calvarie; and Paula and Eustochium,
or rather Hierom. 26 9. Another objection answered. The Jews never showed
extraordinary honor to Adam, or Noah; but to Abraham, and others after him.
Drusius prefers the reading used by our late translation, Hos. 6.7. before
the Genevean and Tremellian. 27
CHAP. VII.
1. THough Adam was buried on Calvarie, as Pineda says; yet his proofs are
weak, that Adam was raised with Christ, and went bodily into heaven with him.
The cited place of Athanasius proves only Adams burial there. Origin, in the
place cited, is against Pineda. Augustine is palpably falsified. 29 2. Adams
skull showed lately at Jerusalem. 30 3. Dionysius Carthusianus says, Eve then
arose. His opinion is without proof. ibid. 4. Nor Abraham then arose. ibid. 5.
Nor Isaac then arose, whatsoever Pineda affirms. 31
CHAP. VIII.
1. PIneda his fancy, that Jacob then was raised. 33 2. The reason, why the
Patriarchs desired the translation of their bones, was not, to rise with
Christ, as Pineda opineth; but upon other grounds, and to other ends. ibid. 3.
Where Joseph was first buried, where secondly. 34 4. The great difficulty of
Act. 7.16. propounded. Two answers disliked. The original is not corrupt. 35
5. Beza taxed for imputing corruption to the original, on Mat. 13.35. and on
Luke 22.20. and on Matthew. 27.9. All these places defended, and the sacred
Majesty of Scripture vindicated from criticisme. Many good answers to Matthew.
27.9. Erasmus faulty with Beza. 36 6. S. Augustine and Cyrill against them. 40
7. Masius and Junius prefer the Arabic and Syriack before the Greek. Junius
recanteth. A little error may (perhaps) be ascribed to the Transcribers. A
general error in Greek and Latin may not be admitted in all copies of
Scriptures. ibid.
CHAP. IX.
1. THe second answer disliked. Melchior Canus censured for saying, S. Steven
his memory failed him. His like proof from Jephthah his mistaking, answered.
42 2. Another argument of his, from Matthew. 2.6. answered. 44 3. Heinsius
touched at, Cusanus rejected, for holding that Adam could have understood all
languages now in use. The manner of the confusion of tongues at Babel. ibid. 4.
The Oriental languages, a goodly ornament, and necessary in some places. The
Syriack enlightening the Greek. 48 5. The Jewish excommunications. Donations to
Religious houses sealed up with curses to the infringers. Mr Seldom in part
defended, though his History of Tithes has done hurt. MARAN-ATHA. The
Amphibologie of Act. 3.21. cleared by the Syriack. Vbiquitaries with Illyricus
taxed. Heavens, and Heaven, taken for God. ibid. 6. Heinsius strictly examined,
and rejected. 54 7. Things granted, viz. The inspirations and conceptions of
holy Penmen were under one or other language: in which conceptions they could
not err; nor could they err in writing. 57 8. Questions handled at large:
Whether it were necessary that the Scripture should be written: Whether the
sacred writers wrote casually. Whether they were commanded to write: Whether
they were compelled to write: Whether they understood all that they wrote:
Whether they did read profane Authors: Whether they studied the things before
hand. 68 9. Conclusions against Heinsius. There was no difference between the
Penmen of the Divine writ of the Old and New Testament, in the point of
conceiving and writing in different languages. We are not to have recourse to
the thoughts of S. John, rather then his words. They had no liberty left them,
to put in their own conceits, or in writing to add or blot out what they had
done. They had no liberty to cloth their inward apprehensions with words of
their own. They did not conceive in one language, and write in another. 95
CHAP. X.
1. Real truth in the Greek and Latin texts of Act. 7.16. The place expounded
thus, The Fathers were not Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; but the twelve sons of
Jacob. 112 2. These twelve Fathers were not buried in Abrahemio, but in Sychem.
114 3. Abraham in this place is not taken properly, but patronymice. ibid. 4.
(...) used by S. Stephen, amphibolous, and expounded. 116 5. Two opinions
concerning the place of Acts 7.16. propounded. 117 6. The last preferred. 118
CHAP. XI.
1. PIneda makes Moses to be one of the raised at Christ's Passion, if once he
died. Pineda censured for his assertion, or rather his hypothesis. 119 2. David
then arose in Pineda his judgment. 120 3. His argument answered. Bishop Bilson
wavering, and rejected, as he rejects S. Augustine. ibid. 4. A demonstration
(upon S. Augustine his ground, and Act. 2.24.) that David was not raised, nor
ascended bodily into heaven. 122 5. David's sepulcher now kept by the Turk. 123
CHAP. XII.
1. PIneda doubts whether Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, were raised at
Christ's passion; because there now are said to be some relics of them; some
at Rome, and some at Venice, says Lorinus. 124 2. Other relics. The table at
which Christ ate with his Apostles. Some hairs, said to be the hairs of our
glorious Savior: others, of his all-gracious mother. A bone of Philips. A
sandall of S. Peter's. 125 3. S. Peter's chain miraculous, as they report. ibid.
4. Mr. Mountague, now the reverend Bishop of Chichester, defended. ibid. 5. S.
Paul's chain also miraculous, from Gregory and Bellarmine. 126 6. False
relics taxt by Erasmus and Calvin. John the Baptist (...), supposed to have
three heads at the least. Three or four prepuces of Christ. ibid. 7. Relics
before Christ's time. The ark. The holy oil. The rod of Moses and Aaron. The
throne of Eternity phansied by the Jews. The horns of Moses. One finger of the
holy Ghost. The Papists faults in forging of false relics. 128 8. All
Relics are not false. What respects are to be denied to true Relics: 130 9.
What are to be given. 131 10. No likelihood of the raising up of Ananias,
Azarias, and Misael, about Christ's passion. 132
CHAP. XIII.
1. PIneda says, Jonas arose then, and Noah. His reasons very shallow. 133 2.
Daniel arose, says Pineda from Nicetas. If Daniel arose, he arose but with one
leg: the other leg is yet showed at Vercellis. ibid. 3. Job arose now, says
Pineda. His proof lame. Jobs Epitaph poetical. His sepulchrall pyramid made of
imagination. 134 4. Job shall arise at the general judgment. Pineda wrincheth
the Scripture. ibid. 5. The end of Jobs book, according to some Greek copies: a
double exposition of the words. 135 6. Jobs body supposed to be translated to
Constantinople. ibid. 7. Bartholomaeus Sibylla says, S. Hierom is express,
that the holy mother of our Lord, and John the Evangelist, are bodily ascended.
The like cited from Aquinas. And Holcot says, That the glorious virgins body
was not to be incinerated. Her supposed day of Assumption, most honored among
the Papists: and yet there is monstrous disagreeing among them who favor her
Assumption. The last instances concern not our question. ibid. 8. Pineda
presumed too far upon uncertainties. Lorinus dares not name any particularly
that were raised. It cannot be known certainly, 136
CHAP. XIIII.
1. MY conjecture, that none of the Patriarchs or old Prophets were raised. 137
2. An objection, concerning Peter's knowing of Moses and Elias on mount Tabor,
answered. ibid. 3. A conjecture that the Saints who lived in Christ's time, and
died before him, were raised at his Passion: Who they were in most likelihood.
When Joseph, the reputed father of Christ, did die. 138 4. The end, why they
were raised. To whom they appeared. 139 5. A crotchet concerning the wives of
dead men which have been raised. 140
CHAP. XV.
1. THe raised Saints ascended not into heaven with Christ; as is proved by
Scripture, and reason. Suarez his shallow answer. Epiphanius strengthening my
former positive conjectures. 141 2. If the raised ascended bodily into heaven,
the Patriarchs should not be left behind. 142 3. The ascending bodily of the
Saints into heaven, not necessary or behooffull. ibid. 4. Only Christ's body
was seen ascending. 143 5. In likelihood, Christ would have showed the
Patriarchs unto some of his Apostles. ibid.
CHAP. XVI.
1. ANgels taken for men. Angels representing men, are called men. 144 2. The
name JEHOVAH ascribed to an Angel representing JEHOVAH, say Estius and
Thyraeus. Picking of faults in the Apocryphal Scriptures, to be abhorred.
ibid. 3. Drusius his poverty. The Apocrypha is too little esteemed. The Angel,
who guided young Tobie, defended. 145 4. The great difference between Christ's
manner of rising, and Lazarus his. 146
CHAP. XVII.
1. THe place of Matthew. 27.53. is diversely pointed; and, according to the
pointing, is the diversity of meaning. The first implies, that the Saints
arose with Christ, though their graves were opened before. This interpretation
is not so likely, though received generally. 148 2. The second infers, that
they arose before Christ, though they went not into the city, till after his
resurrection. This is favored by the Syriack, and is more agreeable to reason.
ibid. 3. That the raised Saints died again, proved by reasons, and Heb. 11.40.
149 4. Christ the first fruits of the dead, and of the raised. Angelical
assumed bodies were seen and heard; much rather should men's bodies ascending
with Christ. 150 5. S. Augustine, Aquinas, Hierom, Chrysostom, Theophylact,
Euthymius, Prosper, Soto, Salmeron, Barradius, Pererius, Valentian, affirm that
the raised Saints died again. Franciscus Lucas Brugensis holds it likely. 151
CHAP. XVIII.
1. THe arguments of the contrary opinion answered. Suarez, and especially
Cajetan, censured. 152 2. That by the holy City, Jerusalem below was meant,
proved at large. Josephus and the Jews erring about the name of Jerusalem.
Hierom uncertain. 154 3. How the raised appeared. A difference between
appearing as men, And appearing as newly raised men. Franciscus Lucas Brugensis
rejected. 156 4. An argument of Maldonat answered by the prodigious Legend of
Christina, who died twice. No hurt is to man, if God will send his soul from an
heavenly place, to live a while on earth again. 157 5. No harm to die twice.
The difference between death complete and incomplete. 159 6. God can dispense
with his own laws. 160
CHAP. XIX.
1. STrange conceits concerning Nero, from Suetonius, Tacitus, Hierom,
Augustine. Nero supposed to be Antichrist. 161 2. Another incredible relation
of the Armenian, who is said to have lived at Christ's passion. The Armenians
have their holy frauds. ibid.
The Contents of the third book.
CHAPTER I.
Sect. 1. MAny Papists are very peremptory, that all and every one must die.
Melchior Canus is more moderate. The words are only indefinite, not
universal. 165 2. Objections brought to prove, that universally all shall die.
Their answers. General rules have exception. Even many learned Papists have
acknowledged so much. The point handled, especially against Bellarmine. 166 3.
Indefinites have not the force of universals. Even universals are restrained.
169 4. Salmeron brings many objections to prove an absolute necessity that
every one shall die. All his objections answered. Man's living in misery is a
kind of death. ibid.
CHAP. II.
1. THe third question resumed, Whether every one must die? The second part of
the answer unto it, That some have been excepted, as Enoch and Elias. The
controversy has been exquisitely handled by King James, and Bishop Andrews.
173 2. Bellarmines third demonstration, that Antichrist is not yet come,
propounded. The place of Malachi 4.5. expounded by Bishop Andrews: and enlarged
by my additions. The Papists objection answered. 174 3. The place of
Ecclesiasticus 48.10. concerning Elias examined. 178 4. Another place of
Ecclesiasticus 44.16. concerning Enoch, handled at large against Bellarmine.
Enoch was never any notorious sinner, in some men's opinions: Others, otherwise.
Their arguments for both opinions are only probable; and answered. My opinion:
and it confirmed. Some think Enoch died. Strange and various opinions
concerning S. John the Evangelist, his living, death, and miraculous grave.
More miracles, or else mistakings, in the Temples, of Christ's Sepulcher, and
his Assumption, about Jerusalem. S. John did die. Enoch did not die, but is
living. Mine own opinion of the place Genes. 5.24. Et non ipse: and it
confirmed. A comparison between Enochs, Elijahs, and Christ's ascension. The
posture and circumstances of Christ's ascending. 180 5. Bellarmine and others
say, Paradise is now extant: In the earth, or in the air, says Lapide the
Jesuit. The old translation censured. The heaven, into which Enoch and Elias
were carried, was not Aerium nor Coeleste; but Supercoeleste. The earthly
Paradise is not extant, as it was. Salianus with others say truly, The
material remains, not the formal: Superest quoad Essentiam, non quoad
Ornatum: The Place is not removed, but the Pleasure, and Amenitie. Salianus his
gross error, That Enoch and Elias are kept by Angels, within the bounds of
old Paradise on earth. 194 6. Enoch shall never die, as is proved from Hebr.
11.5. Three evasions in answer to that place, confuted. Melchizedech, and
strange things of him. The East-Indian language has great affinity with the
Hebrew. An error of moment in Guilielmus Postellus Barentonius. Elias was not
burnt by that fire which rapted him. Soul and body concur to make a man, says
Augustine from the great Marcus Varro. Vives taxed. Moses at the
transfiguration, appeared in his own body. An idle conceit of Bellarmine,
concerning Moses his face; and good observations of Origin upon that point. It
is probable, that Elias was changed at his rapture, and had then a glorified
body. An humane soul may possibly be in a mortal body in the third heaven.
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, are in their bodies in hell, properly so called; and
alive in the hell of the damned. Ribera and Viegas confuted. Our Doctor
Raynolds was not in the right in this matter. Some kind of proofs, That Enoch
and Elias are in glorified bodies in heaven. The place of Revel. 11.7.
concerning the two Witnesses, winnowed by Bishop Andrews. Enoch and Elias are
not those two witnesses. 200
CHAP. III.
1. SOme others hereafter shall be excepted from death. The change may be
accounted, in a general large sense, a kind of death. The Papists will have a
real proper death: Aquinas, an incineration. This is disproved 1. Thessal.
4.17. which place is handled at large. The rapture of the godly is sine media
morte, without death. The resurrection is of all together. The righteous
prevent not the wicked, in that. 224 2. By the words of the Creed is proved,
that some shall never die. The same is confirmed by other places of Scripture;
with the consent of S. Augustine, and Cajetan. The definitions Ecclesiasticorum
dogmatum, of the sentences and tenants of the Church, leave the words
doubtfully. Rabanus his exposition rejected. 227 3. The place of S. Paul, 2. Corinthians. 5.4. evinceth, That some shall not die. Cajetan with us, and against
Aquinas. Doctor Estius, and Cornelius a Lapide the Jesuit, approve Cajetan. S.
Augustine is on our side; and evinceth it by Adams estate before the fall;
which state Bellarmine denies not. Salmerons objections answered. 228 4. Some
shall be exempted from death, as is manifested 1. Corinthians. 15.51. The place
fully explicated. The common Greek copies preferred. The Greek reading (...),
We shall not all sleep, stands with all truth, conveniencie, probability,
and sense. The other Greek (...), We shall therefore all of us sleep, and the
more different Vulgat, Omnes quidem resurgemus, sed non omnes immutabimur,
Indeed we shall all arise, but we shall not all be changed, justly exploded, as
adverse to sense. 230 5. The Pelagians, though accursed heretics, yet held
truly, That some shall not die. S. Augustine dubious. Others stick in his
hesitancie. Yet other Fathers and late Writers are constant, That some shall be
privileged from death; yet, that change may be called a kind of death. 235
FINIS.
A Catalogue of the several Authors quoted in these three books of
MISCELLANIES.
A
ABen Ezra. Abraham de Balmis. Abulensis. Adrichomius. Cornelius Agrippa.
Albericus Gentilis. Albertus Magnus. Alchabitius. Alexander ab Alexandro.
Ambrosius. Bishop Andrews. Anselmus. Apollinaris. Appianus Alexandrinus.
Aquila. Aquinas. Petronius Arbiter. Arboreus. Franciscus Aretinus. Aretius.
Arias Montanus. Aristoteles. Athanasius. Avenarius. Augustinus.
B
Balthazar Bambach. Moses Bar Cepha. Baronius. Barradius. Basilius. Beda.
Bellarminus. Bernardus. Bertram. Beza. Bilson. Boethius. Bolducus. Bonaventura.
Bosquier. Brentius. Broughton. Lucas Brugensis. Bucer. Bullinger. Busaeus.
C
Coelius secundus Curio. Caesaris commentaria. Cajetanus. Calvinus. Melchior
Canus. Carafa. Carthusianus. Casaubonus. Cassander. Cassiodorus. Catharinus.
Centuriatores. Cevallerius. Chaldee Targum. Christopher Castrensis.
Chrysostomus. Cicero. Clemens Romanus. Clemens Alexandrinus. Joannes Climachus.
Philip de Comines. Concilium Elibertinum. Concilium Milevetanum. Franciscus
Collius. Coverdale. Cusanus. Cyprianus. Cyrillus Alexandrinus.
D
DAmianus a Goes. Rabbi David. Del Rio. Demosthenes. Petrus Diaconus. Didymus.
Dionysius Areopagita. Dorotheus. Drusius. Andreas Dudithius. Durandus.
E
ELias Levita. Epimenides. Epiphanius. Erasmus. Espencaeus. Estius. Eugubinus.
Eusebius. Eustathius Antiochenus. Euthymius.
F
FAber Stapulensis. Felisius. Fernelius. Ferus. Festus. Feuardentius. Dr.
Field. Dr. Fox. Fulgentius. Dr. Fulk.
G
GAgneius. Galenus. Gasparus Sanctius. Genebrardus. Gerson. Gorranus.
Gregorius. Greg. Nyssenus. Greg. de Valentia. Gretser.
H
HAlensis. Haymo Heinsius. Helvicus. Hermogenes. Hieronymus. Hilarious.
Hippocrates. Hippolytus. Holcot. Homerus. Horatius. Hugo Cardinalis. Hugo
Eterianus.
I
JAcobus de Valentia. K. James. Jansenius. Ignatius. Illyricus. Irenaeus.
Isidorus. Isidorus Pelusiota. Josephus. Justinus. Benedictus Justinianus.
K
KEmnitius. Kimchi.
L
LAertius. Cornelius a Lapide. Laurentii historia Anatomica. Joannes Leo. Rabbi
Levi. Libavius. Livius. Lombardus. Lorinus. Ludolphus Carthusianus. Ludovicus
de Ponte vallis Oletani. Ludovicus Vives. Lutherus. Lyranus.
M
MAjoranus. Maldonatus. Marianus Scotus. Marsilius Andreasius. Martin
Marreprelate. Martinus Cantipretensis. Justin Martyr. Masius. Matthew Paris.
Melchior Flavius. Rabbi Menachem. Mercer. Minshew. Mollerus. Bishop Mountague.
Lord Michael de Montaigne. Montanus. Peter Morales. Mr. Fines Morison. Rabbi
Moses. Peter Moulin. Muncer. Musculus.
N
HIer. Natalis. Nazianzenus. Nicephorus. Nicetas. Nonnus.
O
OCkam. Oecolampadius. Oecumenius. Jofrancus Offusius. Olympiodorus. Origenes.
P
PAcianus. Pagninus. Paracelsus. Paulinus. Pererius. Peter Martyr. Petrus
Pomponatius. Philo Judaeus. Photius. Pighius. Pineda. Plato. Plinius. Plotinus.
Plutarchus. Polybius. Julianus Pomerius. Porphyrius. Postellus. Primasius.
Procopius Gazaeus. Propertius. Prosper. Ptolomeus.
R
Dr. Raynolds. Ribera. Richeomus Jesuita. Rodulphus Cluniacensis Monachus.
Rosinus. Ruffinus. Rupertus.
S
EMmanuel Sa. Salianus. Mr. Salkeld. Salmanticensis Judaeus. Salmeron. Rabbi
Solomon. Mr. Sands. Sasbout. Scaliger. Scharpius. Dr. Sclater. Scotus. Mr.
Seldom. Seneca. Septuaginta. Mr. Sheldon. Barthol. Sibylla. Sixtus Senensis.
Sleidanus. Socrates. Sohnius. Sophronius. Soto. Stapleton. Robertus Stephanus.
Stow. Strabo. Suarez. Suetonius. Suidas. Surius. Symmachus.
T
TAcitus. Tertullian. Theodoretus. Theodosius. Theophylactus. Petrus Thyraeus.
Tichonius. Titus Bostrensis. Toletus. Tostatus. Solomo Trecensis. Tremellius.
Trelcatius. History of the council of Trent. Turrianus.
V
VAlla. Terentius Varro. Vasques. Vatablus. Didacus Vega. Ludovicus
Vertomannus. Blasius Viegas. Joannes Viguerius. Godfridus Abbas Vindocinensis.
Virgilius. Vorstius. Bishop Usher. Leonardus de Utino.
W
WHitakerus. Willet.
Z
ZAnchius Zimenes.
O Blessed God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, whose deserving mercy to me
has been so infinite, that nothing in earth, which I enjoy, is worthy enough
to be offered unto thee: yet because thou have so plentifully rewarded the
widow of Sarepta, for sharing that little which she had, unto the Prophet; and
have promised even the kingdom of heaven to them, who in thy name give a cup
of water, of cold water; and have most graciously accepted the poorest
oblations, both of the goats hair toward thy Tabernacle, and the widows two
mites into the treasury; receive (I most humbly beseech thee) the
free-will-offering of my heart, and weak endeavors of my hand, in this
intended service: and as thou did fill Bezaleel and Aholiab with an excellent
spirit of wisdom and subtle inventions, to find out all curious works, to
the beautifying of thy Tabernacle: so I most meekly desire thee, to enlighten
my soul, to elevate my dull understanding; that I may search for such secret
things as may be found, and find such things as may be searched for lawfully
and modestly; and that I may, like Joshuahs good spies, acquaint my self and
others with the desert ways, and the several tracts and paths, which our
souls, immediately after death, must travel and pass over, toward the
Celestial Canaan. O God, my good God, grant me to accomplish this, through the
safe conduct of Him, who is the faithful Guide, the only Way, the Light, and
Joy of my soul, my Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST. So be it, most gracious
Redeemer, So be it.

MISCELLANIES OF DIVINITY. THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Sect. 1. THe subject of the whole Work. The reason why I chose the Text of
Hebrews 9.27. to discourse upon. The division of it.

2 Amphibologie prejudicial to truth. Death appointed by GOD, yet for Adams
fault. The tree of life kept from Adam, not by fantastical Hob-goblins, but
by true Angels; and a flaming sword brandishing it self. Leviticall ceremonies
dead, buried, deadly. Things redeemed dispensed with; yet still appointed.

3 The Kingdom of Death reigning over all. Bodily death here meant; and only
once to be undergone.

4 (...) implies not necessarily the longinquitie of future times
intercurrent; but rather a demonstration that other things were precedent. To
[after] does often signify an immediate succession. Judgment here taken for
an act of justice.

5 The general Judgment here understood by Oecumenius and Bellarmine. The
second book of Esdras apocryphal, and justly refused. More then the general
Judgment is meant. Even the particular judgment also is vouched by many
authorities. Three questions arising from the former part of these words.

SECT. 1. BEcause I intend (by GODS gracious assistance) to explain at large
the nature both of humane souls and bodies (so far as concerns a Divine) and
to bring to light things hidden, secret, and strange; and more especially to
unfold the estate and passages of men's souls in their origination, and likewise
in their separation from their bodies: also in their particular judgment, and
their conduct or conveyance to pleasure or pain, with all the known occurrences
which present themselves ab instanti terminativo vitae, from the last minute of
life, till the said souls shall discern the approach of CHRIST'S second coming.
And because I may (if GOD grant me life) in a second Tractate write of the
Resurrection; and general Judgment, and of the same humane souls, from the
first instant of CHRIST'S glorious appearing, till they are placed with their
bodies in their eternal mansions; and of their bliss or punishments, with
other particularities which concern that new World: In these regards I have
chosen this Text, Heb. 9.27.

(...) For these are words of great force and moment, serving aptly to my
purpose, as including and containing whatsoever may be expressed or conceived,
concerning this subject, under these two Propositions, 1. It is appointed unto
Men once to die. 2. After this (is, or comes) Judgment.


First, the particular Judgment immediately upon Death: Secondly, the general
Judgment, in that great day of Retribution; of which in due time hereafter, if
it please GOD.

2. Now because whatsoever is ambiguous and of diverse significations, is an
enemy to the understanding, and that we are counseled by Luther to avoid
(...) in matter of Religion, as we would flee from a Devil; let me remove
doubtfulnesse from the words, and drawing away the overshadowing veil or
curtain of ambiguity, seek for the true sense of each term questionable. And
first of the first, (...) It is appointed. Some things man appoints, and GOD
some others. This appointment is the sanction, not of Man, but of GOD. Of
things appointed by GOD, some are so Lege naturae institutae, some destitutae:
some primitively, some occasionally. This appointment came lege naturae
destitutae, says Gorranus: a DEO ultore, says Bosquier in his Terror Orbis;
the Elements having permission to destroy themselves, and the things compounded
of them: GOD not only driving Adam out of Paradise, but, by fire and sword
fortifying against his approach the way of the tree of life, even whilst Adam
lived, says Epiphanius Haeres. 64: yea till the Flood (if Saint Chrysostom
misguide us not) with strange and uncouth assistance of armed spirits: which
were not (...), terrible and horrible visions; of affrighting fire in one
place; of fire in the fashion of a flaming sword in an other place; of
dreadful shapes of beasts otherwhere; as Theodoret, and after him and from
him, Procopius Gazaeus do fancy: but indeed there were true Angels, or
Cherubims; and a flaming sword which turned every way, Genes. 3.24. More then
one Angel, and more then two (I know not how many) and perhaps many swords;
every Angel having at least one sword, a two-edged sword (as some will have it)
which they brandished and flourished with, to the terror of our sinful
parents. For what should more Angels do with one sword only? Therefore the
flaming sword is to be understood for more swords, the singular for the plural,
by a Synecdoche, the certain number for the uncertain; which is usual in
Scripture: or else, besides the astonishing sight of Angels, prepared by an
unknown manner and means to defend the straits and passages unto EDEN, there
was a sword also which turned it self every way; Acies gladii sese vibrantis
and vertentis.
The edge of a sword brandishing, and turning itself, as Tremellius and the
Interlineary Bible do read, and that most agreeable to the Original. Again, of
things appointed by GOD consequentially: first, some have been wholly
abrogated, as the Leviticall ceremonies; which now are not only Non tantum
mortuae sed etiam mortiferae. Vide Aquin. 1.2. quaest. 103. art. 4.
dead, but also deadly, causing just damnation to the users of them: because
they deny in effect that Christ, who is the substance of those types, is
incarnate. It is true, that awhile after Christ's resurrection the Jewish rites
continued; for the Synagogue was to be brought honorably to her grave; and at
Jerusalem especially, S. James advised S. Paul to observe the Ceremonial Law:
yea there were fifteen Bishops of Jerusalem after Christ's time; who all
successively were of the circumcision, and one Mark was the first uncircumcised
Bishop in the time of Adrian, after the destruction both of the Temple and
City, says Niceph. lib. 3. cap. 25.
Nicephorus. But in other places it was otherwise: for though S. Paul did
circumcise Timothy, because of the Jews which were in those quarters, Acts
16.3.
(which he might well do, by reason the mother of Timothy was a Jewesse) yet
Titus, Gal. 2.3.
being a Greek, was not compelled to be circumcised, no though he was at
Jerusalem. Yea S. Paul tells the Gentiles, with great majesty and
solemnity, Gal. 5.2.
Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing. Secondly, the things appointed by GOD have been redeemed, as the
firstborn, Exodus 34.20. and tithes, Levit. 27.31. and these being instituted
by GOD to one end, were by their redemption purchased to other uses; yet made
they no gain, but redeemed them at a dearer rate: see Numb. 18.16. and Levit.
27.31. Thirdly, some other things appointed by GOD have been dispensed withal.
Thus circumcision, while the Israelites traveled in the wilderness, and awhile
after, was omitted above forty years, and again resumed into practice, Jos.
5.2. Thus the Passover, by one that was not clean, or was in his journey,
might be forborne, Numb. 9.13. To this third kind and sort of things by GOD
appointed, do I reduce this in my text. This appointed death is not wholly
abrogated, it is not redeemed; and yet sometimes it has been, sometimes it
shall be dispensed withal (of which hereafter) and yet for all this
dispensation, it is truly said, (...). not It Was appointed, as having
reference to what only was past; but It Is appointed. It is a yoke, that
neither our fathers did, nor we shall ever shake off: and not only labor and
travel is an Ecclus 40.^.
heavy yoke upon the sons of Adam, but much more death. Neither has the
worlds redeemer freed us from the stroke, but from the curse of death; for even
hitherto, Pallida morsaequo pulsat pede pauperum tabernas, Regumque turres.
Horat. Carm. l. 1. O^. 4.
Pale death does knock with equal power
At the poor man's door and kingly tower.
The grave yet gapeth: and though myriads of myriads have died before: though
Paracelsus promised immortality in this life, (and perhaps therefore was cut
off in the prime of his years) yet death is Job. 30.23. and 21.33.
the house appointed for all living: and every man shall draw after him, as
there are innumerable before him. Of the longest liver has been said in the
end, (...), His life is past: or as the Romans, when they were loath to say one
was dead, spoke significantly to the sense, yet mildly by this word Vixit,
Ecclus 14.17.
He had his time, he did sometimes live. And it is the condition of all times,
THOU SHALL DIE THE DEATH.

3 (...) The universal note or particle is not added. It is not said, (...)
yet sure it is included, and so meant; Not Christ himself, the destroyer of
death, is exempted; nor his thrice-blessed Mother, nor fair Absalom, nor strong
Sampson, nor wise Solomon, nor crafty Achitophel. It is appointed to all, men
and women; no sex is freed, no nation privileged, no age excepted. If some few
have been dispensed withal, I will say with S. Augustine, Alii sunt humanarum
limits rerum, alia divinarum signa virtutum: alia naturaliter, alia miral
iliter siunt. Aug lib. de Cura pro mortuls gerenda cap. 16
Other are the bounds of humane things, other the signs of divine power: some
things are done naturally, and some miraculously. We speak of the ordinary
course. It is appointed for all men TO DIE, (...). Death is a name of sundry
significations, and it is taken diversely: for there is The last death, by the
loss of glory:
The death of the soul, by the loss of grace:
The death of the body, by the loss of the soul.
Aug. De Civit. Dei lib. 13. cap. 12.
If it be demanded, says S. Augustine, what death God means to our first
parents, Whether the death of the body, or of the soul, or of the whole man, or
that which is called THE SECOND DEATH; we must, Consitle, si placet, ingeniosum
ejus Tractatum, cap. 15. ejusdem libri.
says he, answer, He threatens all. The death of the soul began immediately
upon their eating; and is evidenced by their hiding themselves, and shame to be
seen. The death of the body presently seconded it, Theod. in Genesis quaest. 38.
it suddenly becomes mortal, says Theodoret. The sentence of mortality GOD
called death, in Symmachus his exposition: For after the divine sentence, every
day (that I may so speak) he looked for death, as it is in the same Theodoret.
As we now expect the resurrection and life eternal every moment: so Adam every
minute looked for death; I am sure he deserved it. Peter Martyr on 1. Cor.
13.12. Our first parents perished Primi parents quum transgressi sunt, illico
periere: quoniam mors nequaquam alia censenda, quam recessus a vita: nec vitam
habemus citra Deum. Quare mortui sunt, quia a Deo recesserunt; and eorum anima
non fuit a corpore avulsa, sed in eo quodammodo sepulta: in praesentia, non
vitam, sed mortem vivimus.
so soon as they transgressed: because no other death is to be imagined but a
departure from life, and we have no life out of God. Therefore they died,
because they departed from God: and their soul was not snatched away from their
body, but in a manner buried in it. For the present, our life is not a life,
but a death. Of the bodily death only are the words of my Text to be
understood, being a prime commentary on Genes. 3.19. Dust thou art, and unto
dust shall thou return. It is appointed for men (...), Once to die. Quod casus
in diabolo, id in homine mors.
What fall is in the devil, that death is in man. They fell but once, we die
but once. We must needs die, and are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot
be gathered up again. 2. Sam. 14.14. Waters once spilt embrace the dust, and
are not gathered up again, nor can be spilt again. Christ tasted death for
every man, Hebr. 2.9. As Christ being once dead, dies no more, death has no
more dominion over him, Romans 6.9. so is it regularly and ordinarily with all
other, one corporal death suffices. It is appointed unto men ONCE to die.

4 (...), But after this the judgment. Let me speak of the words severally,
and then in a lump or mass together. That these articles, Post, tum, mox,
modo; After, then, anon, presently, and the like, are taken at large for some
years before or after: you may see it proved in Alb. Gent. disput. ad 1. lib.
Maccab. cap. 3.
Al bericus Gentilis. The Scripture thus, Genes. 38.1. At that time (But it was
ten years, says Tremellius) Exodus 2.11. It came to pass in those days: and
he means forty years. Matt. 3.1. In those days: that is, twenty and five
years after. Luke. 23.43. To day is taken for presently. Aretius has it,
(...), Upon that, or presently after that. And questionles that is the meaning:
for though (...) After may be interpreted long-after, as the word proximus,
contrarily, does not enforce necessarily a nearenes: Proximus huic, longo sed
proximus intervallo, said Virgil excellently; He was next, but a great distance
between: yet in the holy Scripture, (...), after that, does most times rather
intimate the procedure and order of things done, then intend a large
intercedencie of time. John 19.28. (...) After that, Jesus says I thirst: you
must not understand it, long after, not years, months, weeks, days, or
hours after that; for our Savior hung upon the cross not above four hours,
and many things were said and done before this. So in this place, (...) does
not evidently infer a spacious distance of time, but by the words after that,
we may say is meant, not long after, but presently, or thereupon, judgment
comes after death. Which I the more confidently do so interpret, because I
know no place in the divine Writ, where (...) does signify a vast and immense
longitude of time: but there are also, besides them, other evident words,
arguing such pawses and spaces of times: As also, because the word (...) or
post itself is so expounded by Pererius on John 5.4. Post motionem aquae,
significat idem ac st dictum fuiss^t, Postquam coepta erat motio, and turbatio
aquae.
After the troubling of the water, signifies as much as if it had been said,
After the moving and troubling of the water was begun, says he: for the infirm
did wait and expect the moving of the water, ver. 3. and the impotent man said
to Christ, ver. 7. I have no man to put me into the pool, when the water is
troubled; that is, so soon as the water begins to be troubled: for the
(...), the first descendant into the water, (...), after the troubling, was
healed. Therefore you must expound the word after, for immediately after,
instantly there upon. For if he had first stepped in, he had been healed:
whereas if you expound, after the motion, that is, a long while after, he might
indeed have been put into the water, but never the nearer to be healed. So also
(...), John 5.19. and diverse other places evince, that the phrase implies not
length of time intervenient, but rather an historical narration of things
succeeding, and sometimes depending one of the other. So here, first death,
after that, (i) shortly after that, comes (...), judicium, judgment.
Judgment is taken two ways; first, for the assenting or dissenting of the
intellect; in this sense we say, I like or like not such a man's judgment: so
judgment is taken for ones opinion, persuasion, or determination. The Text is
not meant of judgment in this sense. Secondly, it is used for an act of
justice, giving to every man what belongs to him. Thus is it here taken. An
act of justice not proceeding from man, but from GOD, and terminated upon man.
The judgments of GOD upon man are manifold, both in this present life, and in
the life to come. The judgment here mentioned, is the judgment after death.
And of judgments after death there are two, Private of souls, Public of
bodies and souls.


Whether of these two judgments is to be understood, we hope to find out,
when we have considered the last thing propounded, the words in a lump
together, (...), After that the judgment.

5 That there are two judgments after this life, we take it here for granted;
but by GODS assistance it shall be, in a fitter place of this discourse,
demonstrated at large. But whether the general judgment of souls and bodies
be especially here meant, or the private and particular judgment of souls, or
both of them, is the question now, and must be determined by authority and
reason.

Oecumenius is for the first way, and wittily interprets these words; as if it
had been said, When all and every one which ever were in the world, are dead;
then follows, after the universal death, universal judgment. To him
assenteth Bell. de Purgat lib. 2. cap. 4.
Bellarmine, and the book of Esdras long before either of them, 2. Esdr. 14.35.
After death shall the judgment come, when we shall live again, etc. where the
general judgment is pointed at, and not the particular. And from hence S.
Paul may be thought to have borrowed the words. I answer, that the Apostle had
them not from that author; for there is neither Greek, nor Hebrew copy of that
book of Esdras, Bell. de Verbo Dei, lib. 1. cap. 20.
says Bellarmine, from S. Hierome: only it is preserved in Latin, and no
Council ever held it as canonical, says Bellarmine. Again, I can find no
passage of either of these books of Esdras cited in the New Testament; though
out of other apocryphal books there be diverse things taken. And though Ambrose
cited the second book of Esdras (commonly called the fourth book of Esdras) in
his book de Bono mortis, and in his second book on. Luke, and in his second
epistle to Horatianus; yea, though Sixth. Sen Bib. Sanct. lib. 1.
Sixtus Senensis says of Ambrose, that Ambrose thought Esdras wrote this book
by divine revelation, and that S. Paul did follow Esdras in those things which
he has concerning the diversity of order of glory, of brightness in the elect
when they shall be raised: yet Sixtus Senensis himself esteems not the book
to be either canonical, or deutero-canonicall, but merely apocryphal: and in
it, he says, are Quaedam suspecta dogmata, regulis orthodoxae fidei aperte
contradiceutia.
some suspected doctrines manifestly gainsaying the rules of orthodox faith:
and he instanceth in the 2. Esdr. 4.35, 36, 39, 41, 42.
fourth chapter, maintaining, Omnes animas detineri quibusdam abditis
promptuariis in inferuo.
that all souls are kept in certain hidden floores or chambers in hell, till
the general judgment. Sixtus Senensis adds, that S. Ambrose seems to
approve of this opinion. Also, says he, in chap. 6. verse. 49. there are
fabulous Jewish fooleries, of Henoch and Leviathan, two fishes. Upon these
grounds I may confidently say, that though some ignorant people might be
seduced by this book, (and thence, perhaps, arose the error of the souls not
being judged till the resurrection) yet S. Paul would never take a testimony
from that book, which has such palpable untruths, and is not extant in Greek
or Hebrew. Moreover it has no place vouchsafed in Arias Montanus his
Interlineary Bible: nor does Emanuel Sa comment on any word of it: and
Bellarmine himself marvelleth why Genebrard would have it held canonical.
Estius says, Liber ille non habet autoritatem in Ecclesia Est. in 2. Sent.
Did. 19. number. 4.
That book has no authority in the Church. But I return to the first
exposition.

The general judgment may be meant, and is involved; I will not deny it. Yet
these reasons persuade me, that the particular judgment is not excluded.
First, if the Apostle had intended it only of the general judgment, it is
likely he would, as he does in other places, have used fittest expressions, and
terms properly advancing to that sense: as thus, At the second coming of
Christ, or, At the end of the world, or, When the corruptible has put on
incorruption, or, After the resurrection comes judgment. But, since it is
written, It is appointed for men to die, and after that comes judgment; to
interpret it only of the general judgment, is, in my opinion, to leave a
(...), a great gulf between death and judgment: which hiatus will handsomely
be filled up, if there be reference to the particular judgment.

Secondly, what if I say, that the words do denote rather the not passing of
judgment while we live, and the beginning of it to be shortly after death,
excluding judgment in this life, and placing death rather before judgment,
then any great distance betwixt death and judgment? according to the native
use of the words (...), of which before.

The second exposition is of Gregory de Valentia, Tom. 4. Disp. 1. quaest. 22.
punct. 9.
who applies the words to the particular judgment immediately upon death. So
does Ludovicus de ponte Vallis Oletani, Part. 1. Meditat. medit. 9.
who sets it down as a verity of faith, De particulari judicio animae, quod
sit proxime post mortem, judicium singulorum exerceri invisibiliter statim post
eujusque mortem.
Concerning the particular judgment of the soul, which is done immediately
after death; every one is judged invisibly presently after his death: and
evinceth it by this Text. So does Joannes Viguer. Instit. page 692.
Viguerius. Bus. initio Panarii Antidotorum spiritual.
Busaeus the Jesuit likewise accounts Secundum novissimum est judicium
particulare mortem proxime consequens.
the second last thing, to be the particular judgment following death
immediately; the severitie whereof, says he, Job the holy patient feared. Job
31.14. What shall I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I
answer him? S. Ambrose on this place has it thus, Post mortem judicabitur
unusquisque ^uxta userita sua.
Every one shall be judged after death according to their own deservings. Which
words do point at the particular judgment, says Suarez. Lastly, lest I may
seem too eager against the second book of Esdras, let me borrow a testimony or
two from thence. 2 Esdr. 9.11, 12. They that lothed my law, while they had yet
liberty and place of repentance open unto them, must know it after death by
pain. And 2. Esdr. 7.56. While we lived and committed sin, we considered not
that we should BEGIN to suffer for it AFTER DEATH. Whence we may probably
collect, That the beginning of punishment is immediately after death, upon the
particular judgment; and the increase or additament at the general judgment.
2 That some are in torments before the general day of retribution. 3 That the
beginning to suffer, is not after a long time, (GOD only knows how long) but
after death, yea presently after it. All these proofs on each side make way for
the third and best interpretation, That the Apostle means not only either of
these judgments, but both of them. Benedictus Justinian on these words, thus,
Post eujusque obitum, sequitur judicium privatum, in quo quisque suarum
actionum reddit urus estrationem: post finem mundi erit judicium omnium, tum
hominum tum daemonum.
After every ones death private judgment follows, in which every one is to
give an account of his actions: after the end of the world shall be the
judgment of all, both men and devils. Of both the Apostle may be understood,
says he. So also Salmeron, and Hugo Cardinalis, and Carthusianus.
Oecolampadius thus, Sive speciale judicium intelligas, sive generale, uihil
refert.
Whether you understand the special judgment, or the gener all, it matters
not.

Thus have I brought you back to the point where I first began: That this text
is fitted to my intentions, affording me just liberty to write whatsoever may
be conceived or expressed, concerning the estate of humane souls in their
animation or in death, or after it in the life future; because the words must
be expounded of both judgments. And now the text being cleared from
ambiguities, the terms explained, the state being made firm and sure, not
rolling and changeable; and being fixed upon its basis and foundation, three
questions do seem to arise from the first words of the text, and each of them
to crave its answer, before I come to my main intendment.

First, How and when Death came to be appointed for us?

Secondly, Whether Adam and his children, all and every one without privilege
or exception, must and shall die? It is appointed for men to die.

Thirdly, Whether they that were raised up from the dead at any time, did die
the second time? It is appointed to men once to die.

O Gracious LORD, who orderest all things sweetly, and who do dispose
whatsoever man does purpose; I humbly implore thy powerful guidance, and
enlightening assistance, in all this work, for his sake, who is Alpha and Omega,
the Way, the Truth, and the Life, thy only SON, my blessed SAVIOR JESUS
CHRIST: Amen.
CHAP. II.
1 How GOD is immortal; how angels and the souls of men; how Adams body was
mortal, and yet immortal, though compounded of contraries.

2 Aristotle's last words; his death; Holcot or the Philosophers pray for him.
Aristotle canonized by his followers. Plato and Aristotle compared. Vives
taxed. Adams body was not framed of ^he earth, or dust of Paradise.

3. Adam should not have been subject to any external force; he was Lord of
the creatures: inward distemper he could not have. Adams bodily temperature:
Christ's, who was fairer then the children of Adam: the helps for Adams body,
meat, drink, and sleep

4. Diverse opinions of the tree of life. If Adam had eaten of the tree of life
before or after his fall, he had lived for ever. If he had not sinned he had
not died, though he had not tasted of the tree of life. To what use the tree of
life should have served.

5. The Council of Millan: Cardinal Cajetan, Richeomus the Jesuit, Julianus
Pomerius and S. Augustine think that Adam could not have died, if he had not
sinned. The book of Wisdom, Holcot, Doctor Estius, and two passages of
Scripture Canonical, are authorities evincing that Adam had in the state of
innocence an immortal body.

1. TO the full answering of the first question, how or why Death was appointed
for us, I shall need to clear but these two points; That Adam for sin was
appointed to die. That Adams sin, and punishment was propagated to us.


Thus sin was the mother of death, thus we were appointed to die, because of
sin. As a preparative to the first of these two points, I hold it fit to
demonstrate, that Adam at first was made an immortal creature.

Concerning Adams soul, and the spirits of all men descended from him, that
they are immortal, I hope to prove it so soundly in an other part of this
tractate, that I will fear no other reproof but this, that I bring too much
proof for it. Therefore supposing, or rather borrowing that truth (which by
GODS grace shall be repayed with interest) I now come to show that Adams body
was created immortal.

Immortal I say, not as GOD is immortal, who neither had beginning, nor shall
have end; with whom is no shadow of change, much less any real, substantial
change; who has, as all other good things else, so, immortality eminently;
and so eminently, that our Apostle in some sort excludes all others, and
appropriateth it to him, saying, 1. Tim. 6.16. GOD only has immortality.

Neither was the body of Adam immortal, as the Angelical spirits, and souls
of men, which had a beginning, but shall have no end: Nor immortal, as the
counsels of GOD, which had no beginning, but shall have an end.

His body was not eternal, but eviternal, or immortal; not absolutely
immortal, but conditionally: it should never have tasted death, if he had not
first tasted of the forbidden fruit. Immortal, not as if it could not die, but
because it might and could have lived ever. He had not non posse mori, and so
he was mortal; he had posse non mori, and so was immortal. As mortal is
taken for earthly, animal, and contra-distinct to spiritual, so his body was
mortal and terrene, not spiritual or celestial: As he could not possibly
die, unless he had sinned, his very body was immortal.

In the Schoole-phrase, thus: both mortal and immortal are taken two ways,
Mortal, for one who must needs die: thus Adam was not mortal in innocence,
but by sin was made mortal. who can die: thus was he mortal, yet only in
sensu diviso; because he could sin, therefore could die.
Immortal, for one who cannot die: so Adam in innocence was not immortal,
save only in sensu conjuncto: Adam in natura sua habuit mortalitatem quandam,
scilicet aptitudinem moriendi: it a aliquam immortalitatem in natura sua
habuit, id est, aptitudinem qua poterat non mori.
he was immortal and could not die, unless he sinned. upon whom there is no
necessity laid that he should die: thus was he simply immortal.



Lumbard thus, Adam had in his nature some mortality, an aptnes to die; so he
had in his nature some immortality, that is, Pet. Diac. de Gratia Christ. lib.
1. cap. 6. Fulg. lib. 2. cap. 13. Max. Profess. Fidei snae, cap. 8.
to wit an aptnes by which he might not die. 2. Sent. did. 19. lit. F.

Further, as some have said, Adam was neither mortal, nor immortal (for thus
wrote Petrus Diaconus, and Fulgentius, Corpus Adae ante peccatum, and mortale
secundum aliam; and immortale secundum aliam causam dici poterat. De Genesi ad
literam lib. 6. cap. 25.
and Maxentius) so others have written, that Adam was made both mortal and
^^mortall: and all and every one of these in some sense is most true. Augustine
says that Adams body before sin may be said to be mortal in one respect,
and immortal in another, as he there proves at large. Hierome has a
different strain, and an unusual phrase in one of his Epist. ad Paulum
Concordiensem.
epistles: wherein he makes the body to be eternal, till the serpent, by his
sin, prevailed against Adam; and ascribes a second kind of immortality to
the body, because some of the first ages lived so long a time, as about, or
above 900 years.

Even they who say Adams body was mortal, agree in sense with me. They
distinguish thus, It is one thing to be mortal, and another thing to be
subject to death. If they grant to us, that he was not obnoxious to death, and
could not die without finne, I will not be offended much, though they say he
was mortal. As this our flesh, which now we have, is not therefore not to be
wounded, because there is no necessity that it should be wounded: so the flesh
of Adam in paradise was not therefore not mortal, because there was no
necessity that it should die, De peccat. Meritis and Remis l. 1. c. 3.
says Augustine. So that this is but a mere logomachy. They who call him
mortal expound themselves, that he could not mori, unless he had sinned; and
I mean no more, when I say he was immortal; that is, he could not have died in
the state of innocence: without a precedent transgression he could not have
been subject or obnoxious to death. They say, though he should not have died,
yet he was mortal: I say, he was therefore only immortal, because in that
blessed estate he could not die. Whether of these two contraries, Mortal or
Immortal, do best fit Adam before he sinned, let the reader judge.

As bodies are compounded of contrarieties, they are subject to dissolution; to
the evidencing whereof, let me recount what Holcot says on Wisdom 12.22.
upon these words, We should look for mercy.

2 Aristotle, says Holcot, spoke these his last words, IREIOYCE THAT I GO OUT
OF THE WORLD, WHICH IS COMPOUNDED OF CONTRARIES; BECAUSE BACH OF THE FOUR
ELEMENTS IS CONTRARY TO OTHER, AND THEREFORE HOW CAN THIS BODY COMPOUNDED OF
THEM, LONG ENDURE? Then he dyed, and the Philosophers prayed for him, says
Holcot. And because he did scorn to be behind the Philosophers in love to
Aristotle, Holcot himself secondeth their prayers, thus, Ille qui suscipit
auimas philosophorum, suscipiat animam tuam.
He that receives the souls of Philosophers, let him receive thy soul. This he
speaks to Aristotle, by a part of that little Rhetoric that Holcot had, or
was used in his days: or otherwise it might be the prayer of the Philosophers
related by Holcot; for the words are doubtful. No marvel therefore if after
this, our Christian Peripateticks, the Divines of Culleyn, have made Aristotle
a Saint, as they did, if we believe Corn. Agr. De Vanit. Scient.
Cornelius Agrippa, and perhaps prayed to him as devoutly as others prayed for
him. Dinis annumerant.
They count him among the Gods, says Agrippa in his 45 Chapter, though Agrippa
himself be of a contrary opinion; for he says, Ipsis Daemouibus dignum factus
sacrificium
Aristotle killed himself, being made a sacrifice worthy of the Devils. Sure I
am, I have read in a book Of the life and death of Aristotle, in the beginning
whereof the Poet prays to GOD from heaven to help him to write, concerning
Aristotle, acceptable things: and to speak in his words, De sapiente viro,
cujus cor lumine miro
Lustrasti Divae super omnes Philosophiae;
Quem si non fractum, lethi per flebilis actum,
Adventus prolis Divae, very quoque Solis
Post se liquisset, fidei qui vi micuisset,
Creditur a multis doctoribus, artis adultis,
Quod fidei lumen, illustrans mentis acumen,
Defensatorem vix scivisset meliorem.


From whence the commenting questionist examineth, Whether Aristotle would have
been in an high degree the great champion of the Christian faith, if he had
lived after Christ's time. And he resolves affirmatively: because Aristotle had
the best intellect among all the creatures under the sun: for supernaturals
(says he) are given according to the disposition of naturals, Cum conatu
hominum.
with men's endeavor; grace distilling on man, according as he well uses the
talent of nature. But at the end of that book, the Expositor strikes all dead
in these words, Concludendo finaliter and cum veritate, dico, etc.
Concluding finally, and with truth, I say, that Aristotle (who heartily
implored the mercy of GOD, praying, ENS ENTIUM MISEREREMEI.
O BEING OF BEINGS HAVE MERCY ON ME,) by an holy and bodily death is translated
Ad solium aeternae beatitudinis.
to the Chair of Estate, the Seat-royall, and Throne of everlasting bliss.
Yea, he holds the man mad who doubts hereof; because Aristotle had the
knowledge of the Almighty, because he loved GOD as the fountain of all
goodness, because Aristotle was as necessary before the incarnation of Christ,
as the giving of grace necessarily presupposes nature. Whereupon he presumes
that Aristotle was Praecursor Christi, in uaturalibus, sicut Joannes Baptista
fuit praecursor, ad praeparandam ipsiplebem perfectam, in gratuitis; and fuit
unus ex iis in Lege Veteri, qui per gratiam personalem fuerunt de Lege Nova.
the forerunner of Christ in naturals, as John the Baptist in supernaturals;
and that he was one of them in the Old Law, who by a personal grace were of
the New Law. Just as the Fathers say, David was a man in the Old, not of the
old Testament.

If Aristotle had grace, if he be the forerunner of Christ, if he be placed in
eternal happiness, it is a question not unworthy these curious times, Whether
they sinned most who prayed unto him; or Holcot, or the Philosophers cited by
Holcot, who prayed for him.

And without just offense to Aristotle's Lycaeum, I hope I may say, though
Jofrancus Offusius, that great Mathematician, in his preface to Maximilian,
which is before his book Of the divine power of stars, says, that Aristotle
was the High Priest of Philosophers, yea Vir coelestis. Hens. Prolegom. in
Nonnum.
an heavenly man, says Heinsius: others have deified him. Yet, there were
diverse Philosophers, from Aristotle's death till some hundreds of years after
Christ's time, who were in greater estimate among all the learned of those
times, then ever Aristotle was; and perhaps there may be a far perfecter body
of Philosophy compiled from the dispersed tenants of other ancienter
Philosophers, and more accordant to truth and Scriptures, then ever could be
gathered from Peripatericall principles.

Theodoret in his fifth book De curandis Graecorum affectibus (as some have it)
or De Graecarum affectionum curatione, lib. 4. which some do entitle De Natura,
has these words; Aristoteles animam corruptibilem esse impudenter asseruit,
aeque ac Democritus and Epicurus.
Aristotle has impudently affirmed that the soul was corruptible, as much as
Democritus and Epicurus. Again, Who be now the Presidents of the Stoicall sect,
and who are the defenders of the doctrine of Aristotle the Stagiritan? etc. And
as for Plato, who made many speeches of the immortality of the soul, he could
never persuade that assertion, no, not to Aristotle his own hearer.

Concerning Plato, Augustine says he was most eagerly studious; and Vives
there adds, that Justin Martyr, Eusebius, and Theodoret report, that Plato
translated many things out of Hebrew books into his own. And Numenius, a
Philosopher, said, Quiuam hodie inveniuntur Stoicae sectae praesidentes? quive
etiam sunt qui Aristotelis Stagiritae doctrinam corroborant? etc. A^ Plato
quidem, qui complures sermones de animae immortalitate disseruit, ne Aristoteli
quidene, auditori suo, persuasit eam positionem. Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 8.
cap. 11.
What is Plato, but Moses atticizing, Moses the Athenian?

Hierome Dialog. adversus Pelagianos lib. 1. brings in the Orthodoxal (though
personated) Atticus against the feigned heretical Critobulus, saying thus,
(...);
I care not what Aristotle, but what Paul teaches. And on Ecclesiastes 10.15.
The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them, Neque enim mihi curae
est, quid Aristoteles, sed quid Paulus doceat.
Read, says he, Plato, peruse the subtilties of Aristotle; Lege Platonem,
Aristotelis revolve versutias.
and, That text is fulfilled upon them. Though there he nibble at Plato, as well
as he biteth Aristotle, yet others have styled him The divine Plato. And when
Plato so often in his works says thus, Antiqui perhibent: In priscis habetur
Oraculis.
The ancients do affirm, It is in the old Oracles, and the like; he points not
at his master Socrates, or the preceding Pythagoras, but to those learned Sages
and ancient Magi, who delivered these depths to the Egyptians, as they did to
him.

Augustine thus, Therefore I was willing to treat of this point with the
Platonicks, because their books are better known. For both the Greeks, whose
tongue excels among the Gentiles, have highly extolled them, and also the
Latins; being moved hereunto, either by their excellency, or by their glory
and renown, or by their sweetness, etc. So much for the great esteem of Plato
has Augustine. Ludovicus Vives on this place adds, that from the days of
Plato and Aristotle till the reign of Severus the Emperor, Aristotle was
rather named then read or understood. Then arose Alexander Aphrodisaeus, to
expound Aristotle: yet Plato was more in request, Ideo cum Platonicis placuit
hanc causam agere, quia eorum sunt literae uotiores. Nam and Graeci, quorum
lingua in Gentibus praeeminet, eos magna praedicatione celebrarunt, and Latini;
permoti earum vel excellentia, vel gloria, vel gratia, etc. Aug. De Civit. 8.10.
until Schools were publicly erected in France and Italy, that is, so long as
the Greek and Latin tongue flourished. Then falls an heavy censure. Crebrior
in manibus hominum and notior, usque ad Scholas in Gallia and Italia public
constitutas, id est, quamdiu Graeca and Latina lingua viguerunt.
After that sciences began to be theatricall, Postquam theatricae coeperunt
esse disciplinae, omnisque earum fructus existimatus est, posse disputando
fucum fa^ere and os obturare and pulvere^ ante oculos jacere, idque
imperitissim a peritia, and nominibus ad libitum confictis, accommodatiores ad
rem visi sunt libri Logici and Physici Aristotelis.
and all their profit was thought to be able to deceive in disputing, and throw
dust before the eyes by a most ignorant dexterity and with words coined at
pleasure, the Logic and Physic books of Aristotle seemed to be more fit.

And now was Plato not named; and though Vives confesses he thinks Aristotle
no less learned then Plato, yet he calls Plato the most holy Philosopher,
nor can endure to have him neglected. And when Scaliger says, Mancipia paucae
lectionis, qui in rebus divinis an eferunt Platonem Aristoteli. Jul. Scal.
Exercit. 365. sect. 3.
They be slaves of small reading, who in divine things prefer Plato before
Aristotle, he speaks partially, neglecting diviner words of Plato then those
cited out of Aristotle, and straining the words cited to a more celestial
sense then ever they were intended: as if Aristotle had a knowledge of the
Trinity, and apprehended it above humane reach: and therefore is by him styled
the divine man.

Augustine says, Plato and the Platonicks were so far preferred before
others, in the judgment of posterity, that when Aristotle, a man of excellent
wit, and though not comparable to Plato for eloquence, yet surmounting many
others, had set up the Peripatetick sect, and (even while his master lived) by
his excellent fame Plurimos discipulos in suam haeresin congregasset: tamen
recentiores Philosophi nobilissimi, quibus Plato sectandus placuit, noluerunt
se dici Peripateticos aut Academicos, sed Platonicos. Aug. De Civitate Dei lib.
8. cap. 12.
had gathered very many disciples unto his sect: yet the most noble later
Philosophers, whom it pleased to follow Plato, would not be called
Peripateticks or Academicks, but Platonicks. Vives on this place of Augustine
confesses, that Aristotle was before Plato in variety of knowledge, etc.
above most, in wit and industry; above all, skillful in arts; that the Greeks
called Aristotle (...) now both the same Greeks called Plato (...), and the
Latins DIVINUM. These things are ill observed by Vives. First, though Laertius
brings the saying of Plato, Aristoteles in nos recalcitravit, ut in matrem
pulli.
Aristotle has kicked against us, as colts against their damme; yet others
deny that he taught publicly in Platoes lifetime. Vives little remembers,
that the precedent words of S. Augustine may incline to the contrary; besides
other authorities, as well as Laertius. Secondly, that Augustine his term
haeresis, in the Greek, is but secta in the Latin; yet, by Vives his leave, S.
Augustine could and would have said Congregasset in suum Lycaeum, in suam
scholam, partem, sectam, disciplinam, or any othersuch word, rather then in
suam haeresim, unless Augustine had intended to lay some aspersion upon
Aristotle by the word of haeresis, which is homonymous. Thirdly, Vives
reports, without his author, that Plato should say of his two disciples,
Xenocrates and Aristotle, that the former needed the spur, and Aristotle the
bridle: whereas Cicero in his third book De Oratore ascribes the saying to
Isocrates, concerning two of his disciples, Theopompus and Ephorus; Ephorus the
dull, Theopompus the witty and apprehensive: more distinctly, Suidas says, it
was spoken of Theopompus Chius, not Theopompus Gnidius. Again, Vives is
mistaken in taxing Plotinus for obscurity, Ne degeneraret a more sectae.
lest he should degenerate from the custom of the sect. Whereby he would
insinuate, that either Plato was obscure, or Plotinus, an Aristotelian: when S.
Augustine accounts Plotinus among the famous Platonicks, in the same place;
which Suidas also confirms. For Plotinus his disciples were the great Origin,
and Porphyrius, and diverse other famous Platonicks; and as all the Platonicks
did Pythagorize, so did all the Fathers Platonize; and Plato was in that high
esteem, that it was an ancient Proverb, Jovem, Graece loqui si vellet, non
aliter loquuturum quim Platonem.
That if Jupiter would speak Greek, he would speak no otherwise then Plato.

I return from the comparison of Plato with Aristotle, and from the oscitancy
of Vives to the old matter.

Strong delusions rightly befall them, who make Philosophy equal to Divinity,
and ascribe as much authority to Aristotle as to Moses or the Prophets, or to
any Apostles or Evangelists, and who do answer their Texts with equal
reverence. If they pray to them, or for them, let them see to it.

I proceed from the Philosophical axiom, That no Body compounded of
contraries can perpetually endure (which was spoken only of the decayed
estate, beyond which Philosophers could not aspire, and not of the state of
integrity, which is our Quaere; and I come to a passage of Divinity tending
that way. It is true, that Adam was made of earth, or rather of the dust of the
ground, Genes. 2.7. of the worst of the elements, and the worst part of it: God
framed man dust of the ground, as it is there in the Original: Not of the dust,
or earth of Paradise, but of other earth, Vives in Aug. De Civit. 13.24 Pulvis
aridus inidoneus erat ad plasmandum.
as it is in the Chaldee Targum, says Vives: of earth severed and distinct
from that blessed garden. Cornelius a Lapide the Jesuit says, Dry dust was
unfit for to be formed; as if God could not work but like a potter, by fit and
necessary materials: and he cites Tertullians words, God by adding some fat
liquour, Deus addito opimo liquore, in limum and quasi argillam coagulavit.
cruddled it into slime and clay, as it were. I say, though God had done so,
yet he could have done otherwise; he could have made Man of water without
earth, or of earth without water, or of any something, or of nothing. I will
confess de facto, Pulvis humectus. Aug. De Civit. 13.24.
with Augustine, it was wet dust, because it is said, Genes. 2.6. There went up
a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground; (Augustine
reads it, Fons ascendebat: the Chaldee Paraphraze has it, Nubes; but
properly it is a vapor or a mist) and immediately, The Lord formed Man. Now it
was of earth out of Paradise: for the Lord took the Man, (therefore he was
before created) and put him into the garden, to dress it, and keep it, Genes.
2.15. (therefore he was out of it ere he was put into it) and after Adam
sinned, God sent Adam forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground, or
that ground, from whence he was taken, Genes. 3.23. (therefore the ground from
whence he was taken, was a different ground from Eden, from whence he was
expelled; and so Adam was not molded or framed of the earth or dust of
Paradise. All this being granted, I say, God could frame as lasting and as good
a body, and as durable against the force of contrariety, of the dust out of
Paradise, as of the dust of the Garden. And questionles Adam was made of the
earth before it was cursed, and why not then equal to the earth of Paradise?
So that my Position is not yet shaken, The contrary disposition of the
elements had not forced dissolution, but Adam had an immortal body. Which that
you may the rather believe, let me confirm it by reason and authority.

3. The first reason is this; Death comes not but by outward violence, or
inward distemper: in which regard, Death is divided by Aristotle into these two
branches, Violent, Arist. lib. de vita and morte.
Natural. But Adam should not have been subject to external or internal
force, or dyscrasie, if he had not sinned: Therefore he had a body that,
during innocence, was immortal, and not subject to death. The Assumption is
only questionable. Concerning the former member of it, I evidence it thus:
Before Man was created, the dominion over the Creatures was reserved for him,
and fore-promised Genes. 1.26. so soon as he was created, the dominion was
assigned over to him, verse. 28. And if no beast hurt Noah, or his family in
the Ark (though every Creature imitated Adam, and rebelled against him their
Lord, as he did against his Lord God) much less could they have hurt Adam
persevering in innocence. During which estate, the lamb and the wolf, the
lion and the dragon would not have hurt one another: much less would they have
hurt Man: least of all, would the issue of Adam have done him violence, or have
said as the wicked in the Gospel, This is the heir, let us kill him, and
divide the inheritance, Matt. 21.38. For, then there had been no distinction of
Lord, Heir, and Servant, nor strife for inheritances.

It is too too true, that the higher bodies and the heavenly powers do now,
besides their ordinary influences, sometimes dart down among us hurtful and
noxious qualities, the workers of sickness and destruction; so that in diverse
Regions have been Epidemical and popular diseases: which in the great
conjunction of Planets falls out, says Prolemee, Alcabitius, with other
Astronomers. But then the heavens should have dropped plenty, and poured down
health, and no bane-full quality could have descended from them. As for
lightning and thunder, and the now-right-ayming thunderbolts, the armies of
Gods wrath and messengers of death, either there should have been none (the
air then needing no purifying) or at least not hurtful or dangerous.

Lastly, if Satan could have used outward violence, and destroyed Adam or his
posterity that way; perhaps he would never have brought in Death by the
back-doore of sin, and never have undermined him by such hidden baits, and
lurking temptations.

Likewise, inward distemper he had none, nor could have: and thus it appears;

There is a twofold temperature, Vniformis, all humors being exactly in the
same degree; Difformis, one humor ruling and prevailing over the rest.


The first may be called temperamentum ad pondus, which is proportion
Arithmetica, when all the four qualities are equally weighed and tempered: so
that there is no predominancie, no superiority, nor can be; but all parts are
equipondiall and even.

The second is termed temperamentum ad justitiam, which is Geometrica
proportio, when the four qualities hang unevenly in the balance, yet fitted to
the best service and use of the body. Whether of these two tempers was in Adam,
I will not define; But if there were in his body difforme temperamentum, it
was so perfect, yea equal in in equality, as was fit for such a body, as
might be fit for such a soul: and such was the mixture of humors, by the
divine hand of God compounding them, that both he and we should have lived, in
the flower of youth, for ever, if Adam had not offended. What the bodily
constitution of the first Adam was, may be thought to be the same or the like
of the second Adam: to whom the Psalmist sings, Psalm. 45.2. Pulchruisti prae
filijs hominum, Thou art fairer then the children of men: Perpulchruisti, as
Vatablus rendereth it: which can not be so properly understood of Solomon, as
of Christ: who not only superabounded in all virtues, (and virtue is fairer
then the morning-starre, says Aristotle) but also in all comely proportion,
and bodily beauty. Prae filiis hominum; quare and non prae Angelis? quid
voluit dicere prae filiis hominum, nisi quia homo?
Then the children of men: why not then the Angels? What means he by saying,
Then the children of men, but because he is a man? as S. Augustine on the place
reasons most acutely; inferring, that not Christ's divinity, but even his
humane nature is in this place commended for beauty. Though the Prophet says
of him, Esai. 53.2. He had no form nor comelines, yet he speaks it in the
person of the Jews, and as they thought, says Hierome on the place: Or, he had
no comelines in his own apprehension, as Christ himself in great humility
might undervalue his own worth. Thirdly, I may expound all passages seeming to
vilify Christ's bodily shape, only comparatively, with reference unto his
divinity; thus the bodily beauty of Christ is not to be named, or to stand in
competition with the Deity. Fourthly, and most properly, in my opinion, Esa^
describes Christ as he was to be in his Agony and Passion; his body rent and
torn with rods, so rufully, that David in the first and literal sense (if not
in that sense only) compares the tormentors to plowers, and the dintes,
impressions, and the bruised bloody concavities and slices, to furrows, The
plowers plowed upon my back and made deep furrows: his face spit upon, his
temples gored and bleeding by the Crown of thorns which was not only platted
on his head, but fastened in it by the beating with canes; his body
black-and-blew by their striking; his hands and feet dug throughout with
great nails, that I may use the metaphor of the Psalmist, rather dug,
foderunt, then pierced, to show the latipatencie of his wounds; his side so
rent a sunder, so broad and wide, that Thomas thrust his hand into it. Take
Christ, as bearing our griefs, as wounded for our transgressions, as bruised
for our sins, as weltered in his streaming blood, I will say as Esai said of
him; or as the Psalmographist, I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and
despised of the people, Psalm. 22.6.

But consider him before his Passion; In ejus facie sydereum quiddam illuxit.
Totum ejus corpus fuitspeciosum; quia formatum virtute Spiritus Sancti, in
cujus opere non potest esse error aut defectus. Lyran. in Ps. 45.
There shined some starrie thing in his face, says S. Hierome, and his whole
body was beautiful, because formed by the power of the holy Ghost; in whose
work there can be no error nor defect, says Lyranus. Thou art fairer then the
children of Adam (so it is in the Original) Augustine, Cassiodorus on the
place, and Chrysostom Homil. 18 on Matthew* expound it of Christ's corporeal
feature. I think I may say, if Christ exceeded not Adam, yet he was equal to
him. The first Adam was made out of virginal dust, the second out of virginal
flesh and blood; both of them being framed by the miraculous hand of God: but
miracles do more exceed naturalls, then naturalls do artificialls. What is thy
beloved more then another beloved, O thou fairest among women? say the
daughters of Jerusalem to the Church, their Mother, Cant. 5.9. She answers in
the next verse, My beloved is white and ruddy; a goodly person (as the Bishops
Bible reads it) or, as the late Translation has it, the chiefest among ten
thousand. Partium congruentia cum quadam coloris suavitate. Aug. De Civit.
22.19.
Whether beauty be to be defined Aptness of parts with some pleasantness of
color, as S. Augustine opineth, or, A convenient medly of white and red
especially, as from this place may seem probable; certain it is, Christ wanted
no comelines, nor beauty; though he had no womanish or effeminate shape, Tom
4. Disput. 1. quaest. 14. punct. 2.
but such as was most befitting a man, says Gregory de Valentia. Thou art
beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, Cant. 6.4. and, Thou art
all fair, there is no spot in thee, Cant 4.7. In which regard, perhaps, it was,
that though the humors of Christ's body did increase with the increase of his
body, and grew up from infancy to puerilitie, from it to juvenilitie, thence
to virilitie; yet there was so harmonious a proportion, if not of weight, yet
of justice, that we read not any one part of Christ's body to have been out of
tune, excepting in his Agony and Passion, when his very bones were out of
joint: nor is he recorded to have been sick at any time, nor so much as
inclining to sickness, all his life. Non suscepit infirmitates individui, sed
speciei.
He took not upon him the infirmities of particular men, but of mankind: as to
be weary, to mourn, to weep, to be hungry, thirsty, to suffer, to die. As for
sin and diseases flowing from sin, he was subject to none, nor to personal
defects; but only to the general defects of humane bodies. Indeed it is said,
(...). Bas. in Regu^is brevior^^us quaest. 177.
Esai 53.4. Surely he took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses: but Basil
expounds it thus, He bare our sicknesses; not that he did transfer them upon
himself, but because he healed those that were sick Where he semes to remove
all sickness from Christ.

Besides Adam his excellent temper, consider his food; he had all the trees of
the garden for meat, except the forbidden one. The healthie waters about
Paradise he had for drink: Wholesome things he knew from hurtful (if any
hurtful things were:) His giving them names does prove, that he was acquainted
with their natures. As for taking too much or too little, it could not be,
whilst his soul was innocent and spotless. For he had original justice,
which in the use of lawful meats should subject his senses and his appetite
unto reason. As for clothing, he needed it not: Innocence apparelled him, till
he put off the robe of righteousness; and so it should have continued. Lastly,
as Adam in Paradise had a deep sleep which fell upon him, Genes. 2.21. which, I
confess, was extraordinary; so Augustine, Aug. De Civ. t. 14.16. Tertul. De
Anima. cap. 24.
Tertullian, and the School after them, do yield, that ordinary sleep was not
excluded out of Paradise; but in the night he was allowed sleep. So that Adam
enjoying all things necessary, delightful, or convenient, which concerned his
body, we may safely conclude the first reason, That since neither outward
force, nor inward distemper could befall Adams body, if he had continued in
innocence, his body should never have tasted of death; and so was, and so
should have been immortal. And this will yet more plainly appear, if we will
weigh the reasons following.

4. Among the trees of the garden there was the tree of life, which Adam had
liberty freely to eat of.

Some think it was appointed as a means to translate Adam to immortality
without sickness or death. Others say, it would hinder the loss of natural
heat and radical moisture: whereby though years or age, yet weakness, or de
crepitnes should not come nigh him. Others say, that it being once tasted
should bring perfect immortality, even such immortality as we should have
after the Resur rection. See Bellarmine de Gratia primi hominis, cap. 28. and
Mr. Salkeld in his Treatise of Paradise, where in some whole Chapters he has
laboriously collected, and copiously explained the various opinions concerning
the tree of life. Take my gleanings after their full vintage, and taste what I
have gathered.

Though Lumbard, Sent. 2. Did. 29. Lit. F. questioneth, Whether Adam before
his sin did eat of the tree of life, and out of Augustine concludes there,
That they did eat; as it was commanded, that they should eat of every tree,
fave one: yet I can no way agree with him. This his error is grounded on an
other, which he has cited Distinct. 9. of the same book, in the letters B and
C, That Adam was commanded to eat of the tree of life; and that he should have
sinned, if he had not used it. For first, It was not a command, but a
permission. God gave the use of the tree no otherwise to man, Genes. 1.29. then
to the beasts and fowls the green herbs, verse 21: but this was by way of
indulgence, not of command. Secondly, Genes. 2.16. Of every tree of the garden
thou may freely eat. And though it be in the Hebrew, Eating thou shall eat,
yet it implies no absolute precept. Thirdly, Genes. 3.2. the woman says, We
may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; she says not, We musteat, or
We are charged; much less, presently, so soon as we see them, or before we do
other things. Fourthly, Genes. 9.3. Every moving thing that lives shall be
meat for you; even as the green herb have I given you all things. Are we
commanded to eat every beast, and every herb? then whosoever forbeareth any
one, sins. Or was there in this a difference between the grant unto Adam,
and the grant unto Noah, and their posterities?

The second error is of Lumbard, That Adam did eat of the tree of life. His
proof out of Augustine falls short, even as it is cited, though the place is
mistaken by him, and the words maym'd. Indeed Augustine thus. Recte profecto
intelliguntur primi homines, ante malignam persuasionem, abstinuisse a cibo
vetito, atque usi fuisse concessis; ac per hoc, and caeteris, and praecipue
ligno vitae. De peccat. Meritis and Remis. 2.21.
Certainly it is well thought, that our first parents, before that malicious
persuasion, did abstain from the forbidden food, and used such things as were
granted them, and consequently the rest, specially the tree of life. * Note
first, He says granted, not commanded: as Noah ate not of every thing granted
to him, yet Noah spent many hundred years more time after the Flood, then Adam
did in Paradise. Neither can I think Adam in that estate so addicted to his
belly, that he in so short a time would cat of so many, of all, and every tree.
Secondly, Rupertus says, The eating of the tree of life but once, Rup. in
Genes. l. 3. cap. 30.
had made them live for ever. Augustine moreover adds, It is no where read in
Genesis, Aug. Cont. Adversar. Legis and Prophet. 1.15
that Adam in Paradise did not eat of the fruit of the tree of life; of which
place by and by. Now as Augustine is directly against me in the second point,
he is as directly against them in the first point: Vtendi ad escam omni ligno,
quod in Paradiso erat, acceperant potestatem. Ibidem.
They had received power to eat of every fruit that was in Paradise. To
strengthen their side, Augustine annexeth this reason, What is more absurd then
to believe that he would eat of other trees, and not of that? says Augustine.
I answer, perchance Adam thought that he had no need of that tree, as yet, as
knowing both that he should not die, if he did not sin, and that the time of
his translation was not come. Nor did those or the like thoughts savor of
sin, or ignorance. Augustine in this point is incoherent to himself, saying,
Gustus arboris vitae corruptionem corporis inhibebat.
The taste of the tree of life did hinder the corruption of the body. Again,
Vitae arbor, medicinae modo, corruptionem omnem prohibebat.
The tree of life, by way of physic, did prevent all corruption. But, say I,
if corruption seized not on Adam, till he sinned; what needed Adam, till he
sinned, use that medicine? since the sick have need of physician and physic,
and not the whole. If Adam had eaten of the tree of life before he had eaten
the forbidden fruit, God would have kept him from the forbidden fruit, as after
he kept him from the tree of life: or else the fruit of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil had not caused destruction, the apple had not been
deadly; but Adam should have lived immortally. This will not seem strange, if
you weigh what follows.

If after Adam had sinned, he had taken of the tree of life, and eaten the
fruit; he had lived for ever, Genes. 3.22. for else, what needed God to have
placed such a watch and ward against him? Again, if Adam might have lived
everlastingly, for all Gods threat, yea though he had now a dead body, when God
debard him from the tree of life, if he had but eaten of it, he should also
have lived for ever, if he had eaten of it before he sinned. But, says
Augustine, Post peccatum, Adam potuit indissolubilis manner si a Domino
permissum il li esset edere de arbore vitae. Aug. lib. quaest. Vet. and Novi
Testam. c. 19. Tom. 4.
After sin Adam might have remained indissoluble, if God had given him leave
to eat of the tree of life. The conclusion reaches home against Augustine,
That Adam ate not of the tree of life, before he ate of the forbidden fruit. I
think the malice of Satan egged Adam on to taste first of the unlawful fruit,
the usher of death, though the tree of life stood next unto it (for both the
tree of life was in the midst of the garden, Genes. 2.9. and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil was also in the midst of the garden, as appears
in the same place, and more plainly Genes. 3.3.) If any be so curious, as to
enquire what was the form and figure of the garden of Eden, when two trees are
just in the midst of it; I answer, We must not take the word Midst strictly or
Mathematically, but at large, or Rhetorically. When the Shunamite said, 2.
Kings 4.13.
In medio populi ego habitans sum, it is well rendered by our late Translatours,
I dwell among mine own people; not as if the words enforced, that she dwelt
exactly in the midst of them. The like Hebraism is used by Abraham, Genes.
18.24. Si forte fuerint quinquaginta justi in medio civitatis; that is, Fifty
righteous within the city; not as if all the fifty dwelt together in the
exact middle of the city. David also uses the like phrase, Psalm. 102.24. Take
me not away in the midst of my days: in which place, as well as in the
propounded difficulty, we must not be too strict or rigorous upon the letter.
The like is in Esaias 5.8.

The last touch we will give at this point is thus; God turned Adam and Eve out
of Paradise, and by Cherubims and a sword kept away the tree of life; so that
neither Adam, nor his posterity should be able to approach it. And perhaps the
Cherubims were purposely placed to confront Satan and his evil Angels, lest
they might bring to Adam and Eve, or to their posterity, the fruit of the tree
of life: for if we had been immortally miserable and cursed, as Satan himself
is, was as much as he desired. So great a virtue had the tree of life, if once
it had been eaten.

Let me add in the third place, If Adam had not sinned at all, nor at all
eaten of the tree of life, yet he had not died: for death was appointed for
sin and for nothing else. Bonaventure says, Impossible est 'ut simul
consistant innocentia and corruptionis poena. Bonav. in 2. Sent. did. 19. art.
2.
It is impossible that innocence and the punishment of corruption should stand
together.

But to what use was then the tree of life? The question was made of old by an
adversary to the Law and the Prophets: Ista arbor quae in Paradiso fructus
vitae ferebat, cui proderat?
That tree which bare fruit of life in Paradise, to whom was it profitable? I
confess Augustine answers, To whom but first to our first Parents, the man
and the woman placed in Paradise? But that is the point to be proved. Again,
Augustine there says, Enoch and Elias eat of that tree, but (says he) we must
not hastily say that any other eats of it: but how unlikely are these things?
The adversary of the Law and the Prophets might better have been answered,
That there was no more use of that tree, then of others which were untasted
(for no man can think, that they tasted of every one in so short a time.) Or
what inconvenience arises if we say, A proffered curtesy not accepted came to
nothing? What can the adversary conclude from thence? for God profereth
salvation and the means thereof to many, who do not accept of it; the fault
being on Man's part, and not on Gods

To finish this point, I resolve, There was no use made of the tree of life, as
it fell out. If it be further questioned, What might have been the use thereof?
I answer, That the exact specialties can not punctually be known. Probable it
is, that the tree of life might have conferred much to the existence of life,
though not to the essence. Adam should have lived howsoever, and that
immortally, if he had not transgressed Gods commandment: the tree of life
might have been conducible to his better being; yea to his best being: by it he
might have been changed from his terrestrial not-dying estate, or immortal
life, to a celestial; and not only an immortal, but an unchangeable eternal
life. In which regard, perchance, the tree of life is styled Genes. 3.22. The
tree (...) hachajim, of lives, as profitable (if tasted) both to Adams present
life, which was in time to have its consummantem finem, though not consumentem;
its end, though not its death; and also to his future and more happy life,
which should never have end. I sum up all with Augustines words, Cibus
aderat, ne Adam esuriret; potus, ne sitiret; lignum vitae, ne illum senecta
dissolveret: nullus intrinsecus morbus, nullus ictus metucbatur extrinsecus. De
Civit. 14.20.
There was meat, lest Adam should hunger; drink, lest he should thirst; a tree
of life, lest old age should dissolve him: no inward disease, no outward blow
was feared.

A new Quaere may be made, Whether if Adam after his sin had eaten of the tree
life, his posterity as well as himself had lived for ever? My answer setleth
on the negative; because Adams action had been personal, not representative or
ideall; and his posterity was neither to answer for his second sin, or
after-offences, nor to have received any benefit by his good deeds succeeding
his fall: but he stood alone for us, and we were in him only as he had power
to keep or break the first commandment.

And now am I come to the second Topic place, by which I undertook to prove
that Adams body had been immortal, if he had not sinned; and that is
Authority.

5. Not S. Augustine alone, but a whole Council where he was present, to wit
the Milevitan Council, is strong on our side. Quicunque dixerit Adam primum
hominem mortalem factum, it a ut sive peccaret, sive non peccaret, moreretur in
corpore, hoe est, de corpore exiret; non peccati merito, sed necessitate
naturae; Anathema sit.
Whosoever shall say that the first man Adam was made mortal, so that whether
he had sinned or no, he should have died in body, that is, gone out of the
body; not for the desert of sin, but by the necessity of nature; let him be
accursed. And this curse fell heavy upon the Pelagians, who did think that Adam
should have died, though he had not sinned: for so they held, says Lib. de
Haeresibus cap. 88.
Augustine. Cajetan thus: In 1. Cor. 15.53.
In the state of innocence Adam had a corruptible body, in regard of the flux
of natural moisture, but not mortal. Richeomus a Jesuit says, In statu
innocentiae Adam corpus habebat corruptibile, quantum ad fluxum humidi
naturalis, sed non mortale.
If man was created mortal, those threatenings where by God did denounce death
unto him, were unprofitable; for Adam might have answered, I know well enough
that I shall die, although I neither taste nor touch the tree of knowledge of
good and evil. And again; God in the production of every one of his works,
kept an exact and most beautiful symmetry between the matter and the form, the
body and the soul, and such a symmetrie as was most fit and accommodate to Si
komo mortalis creatus fuit, inutiles crant illae minae, quibus 'Deus mortem
illi intendebat; poterat namque respondere, etc. In Valedictione animae
devotae, Colloq. 32.
obtain the end of every creature, furnishing the matter with qualities and
instruments most apt and pliable to serve the virtues and faculties of the
form. Therefore the soul of man being immortal, and the faculties and
operations proportioned to the essence, the body also then must needs be
immortal. Item, In every good marriage two things are observed at least; the
qualities of the parties, and their age. Therefore unto the soul, which is free
from the tyranny of death, God married the body, which was free also from the
grave-clothes and bands of death. Death is the brood of sin, says Julianus
Pomerius; and Adam was so created, Colloq. 34.
that having discharged his duty of obedience, without the intervention of
death he should have been followed of Angelical immortality and blessed
eternity. He had immortality, Etiam ipsam nobis corporis mortem, non lege
naturae, sed merito inflictam esse peccati. De Civit. Dei. 13.15.
yet changeable; not Angelical and eternal. As I began with S. Augustine, so
with him will I end: It is a constat among Christians holding the Catholic
Faith, Ad^ujusque creaturae finem consequendum.
that even the death of the body has been inflicted upon us, not by the law of
nature, but by the desert of sin. Peccatum est pater mertis.
Otherwhere he says, Colloq. 35.
Sin is the father of death. Again, Vt perfunctus obedientiae munere, sine
interventu mortis Angelica eum immortalitas, and aeteinitas sequeretur beata.
If Adam had not sinned, he was not to be stripped of his body, but clothed
upon with immortality, that mortality might be swallowed up of life, that is,
that he might pass from a natural to a spiritual estate, from an earthly to
an heavenly, from a mortal to an immortal, as I truly interpret his meaning.
For he takes not Mortal for that which must die. And Again, Si non peccasset
Adam non erat expoliandus corpore, sed supervestiendus immertalitate; ut
absorberetur mortale a vita, id est, ab animali ad spirituale transiret, a
terreuo ad coeleste, a mortali ad immortale. De peccat. Merit. and Remis. l. 1.
cap. 2.
It was not to be feared, if Adam had lived longer, that he should have been
troubled with age, or death: For if God was so gracious to the Israelites, that
for forty years their clothes waxed not old upon them, nor their shoes waxed
old upon their feet, Deutero. 29.5. what marvel were it, if God granted to
obedient Adam, Ibid. cap. 3.
that having a natural and mortal body he should have in it some state and
condition, that he might be old without imperfection, and at what time it
pleased God, he should come from mortality to immortality, Vt animale ac
mortale habens corpus, haberet in eo quendam statum.
without passing through death? Where though S. Augustine seems to say, Adam
had a mortal body, and should have passed from mortality; yet he takes
Mortale for all one with Animale, and opposes it to Spirituale. So that I
confess, Adam in Paradise had not a spiritual body, not such a body as he
and we shall have after the Resurrection. And thus the body which he had, may
be called Animale or Mortale: and yet S. Augustine with us, and we with him,
acknowledge this truth, that the body of Adam could not have died, if he had
not sinned: and in that regard Adams body may be justly termed immortal, not
with reference to that heavenly and spiritual body which he shall have
hereafter; but immortal therefore, because (except for sin) his body (as it
was) was free from death. And the same Augustine has a whole Chapter entitled
thus, Sine media morte?
Against the doctrines of those that believe not, that the first men had been
immortal, if they had not sinned.

Among such a troup, may I put in somewhat unthought of by others? Some have
said truly, that the divine providence, and preserving power, which extends
to the least things in our declined estate, as to the lives of birds and beasts
and the fall of every hair (God not being Contra eorum dogmata, qui primos
homines, si non peccassent, immortales futuros fuisse non credunt. De Civit.
13.19.
less in the least things, then he was in the greatest, and governing all
things in number, weight, and measure) would have much more watched over Adam
and his offspring, continuing perfect. But this is that which I propose, Whether
the good Angels did immediately minister unto Adam in his integrity, and should
have done unto us, to keep mankind from harm? To which I answer, That since
the Prophet, Psalm. 91.11, describing the blessed estate of the godly, makes
this one especial branch, He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways; and verse 12. They shall bear thee up in their hands,
lest thou dash thy foot against a stone: I can not but think that the same
Angels should have watched over us, and friendly conversed with us in our
innocence. For God reduces Deus non minor est in minimis qu^m in maximis.
the lowest things to the highest by the middle, working by subordination of
causes. Yea, Infima ad suprema per media.
grant that this is spoken of the Son of God only, (which by the Evangelists
Matt. 4.6. and Luke 4.9. seems to be the Devils argute inference) yet it
excludes not their watching over us, and their ministry (if we had not
fallen) whose very office and name consist in being ministering Spirits: All
being sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation, Heb.
1.14. which out of doubt both Adam and his issue, continuing in perfection,
should have been. But leaving these things, Christ's answer to Satan proves,
that unto whom these words were said, He shall give his Angels charge over
thee, etc. unto the same was also said, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God,
Matt. 4.7. which was not spoken to Christ alone or principally, but in the
plural number to the Israelites and others succeeding them, as appears
Deuter. 6.16. Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God, as ye tempted him in
Massah. They are deceived, whosoever imagine the ministry of Angels should
not have been any way necessary, if Adam had not sinned; since Christ (the
immaculate Lamb of God, who sinned not, nor could sin) refused not their
ministry, Matthew. 4.11. and comfort or strength, Luke 22.43; and since one
Angel strengthens himself with an other, Dan. 10.21. and Revel. 12.7; and
since they might have ministered more matter of joy unto us, by their most
familiar conversation in assumed bodies.

Unto these authorities let me add two memorable places out of the Apocrypha.
The first is, Wisd. 1.13. God made not death. Satan begot it, sin brought it
forth, Adam and Eve nursed it. The other passage is in Wisd. 2.23. God created
man (...), to be immortal, and made him an image of his own eternity. On which
words Holcot thus, Corporeal creatures have only a footstep of God: Man is
the image of God. Again, Quantum fuit ex part Dei, creavit hominem
inex^crminabile msecundum corpus.
On Gods part, he created him unperishable according to the body. And there he
has a large discourse, proving, howsoever Aristotle (Metaph. 8.) defines Man
to be a reasonable creature mortal, that the opposite is true, and he rests
in it. For Aristotle knew not Adams innocence, but spoke of us as we are in
the state of sin. Whosoever desires to read more curiosities strange and
learned, concerning the bodily immortality of Adam, at the Creation, let him
read Estius on the second of the Sent. Distinct. 19.

But to confirm the truth delivered in the book of Wisdom, the last and the
best kind of authority shall be produced out of the unquestionable Canon:
death is styled our Enemy, 1. Corinthians. 15.26. (...), inimicus, as Hierome on
the 27. of Esai reads it: hostis, says Valla: therefore death is not
natural or kindly to us, but rather a consort, and fellow-souldier of Satan
and sin, who fight against us. But the sharp-pointed places are in Genes.
2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die; or, dying
thou shall die. Mortalis eris, as Symmachus well translates it; or morti
obnoxious, as Augustine well expounds it: and Genes. 3.3 Ye shall not touch it,
lest ye die: therefore they should not have died, if they had not touched the
forbidden fruit. And so they both were, and ever might have been immortal.

When the woman of Sarepta said to Eliah, 1. Kings 17.18.
Art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my son?
does she not secretly intimate, that sin is a murderer? And if there had
been no sin, there had also been no death, In 2. Sent. did. 19. quaest. 1.
in and by her evident confession that her sin was the cause of his death.
Scotus shall determine the point; Punishment can not be without fault: but
death is the punishment of sin; and during the state of innocence there could
be no sin: therefore no death.

I have dwelt the longer on this part, because every reason and authority by
which I have proved, that Adams bodily estate in the time of innocence was
immortal, affords also, by way of preparative, a binding argument, to evince
that Adam for sin was appointed to die; which is the first of the two
Propositions which I propounded. In which words we intend to handle these
things: First, somewhat concerning death; Secondly, that Adam was appointed to
die for one sin only; Thirdly, that it was for Adams own sin only, and
not for Eves; Fourthly, we will enquire what that sin was.

O Onely-wise God, who createdst Man in thine own likeness, and mad^st him the
Image of thine own eternity: I beseech thee, to renew in me that decayed
Image; make me like unto thee: give me the favor to taste of the Tree of Life,
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, and to drink of the pure River of
the Water of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and
of the LAMB. Hear me, O blessed SAVIOR, for thine infinite Merit, and
mercies sake. Amen.
CHAP. III.
1. Death is a bitter-sweet. Enoch and Elias Raptures were not painful to
them. Christ's Transfiguration, and the manner of it. That it was not painful
to him. Adams translation to a life celestial and a body spiritual, should
not have been painful, if he had not sinned. They who shall be changed at
Christ's coming, shall by it find no pain. Death is painful.

2. Mankind died the first minute of their sin. God draws good out of
evil. Death in some regard is changed, from a punishment to be a favor and
blessing of God.

3. Not many or more sins, but one caused death. One only. David begotten in
lawful wedlock. That this one sin is not less in the godly, nor greater in
the wicked. Death was appointed for one sin only, of one person only.

4. This one person only was Man: this Man that sinned that one sin, was
Adam. Strange and curious speculations, that Eve sinned not that sin for
which mankind was appointed to death.

5. Two Schoole-speculations propounded. The second handled at large, as
expounding the former, and determined against the Schoolmen themselves, viz.
That the children of innocent Adam had been born confirmed in grace. The
censure of Vives upon these and the like points. A part of his censure censured.

1. COncerning Death, I mean in this place to touch only the strange medly
that is mixed in it, of Sower. Sweet.


The sowernes or bitterness of death is discerned, because that manner of
secession or departure is only painful; whereas all other approaches unto
glory, all other stairs, steps, and means, inducing to blessedness, are void of
pain.

Let us see it exemplified in Enoch; He walked with God, and was not; for God
took him. Genes. 5.24. His manner of not-being, as he was before (whatsoever it
were, or howsoever) was never held painful. Secondly, the chariot of fire, and
the horses of fire, which parted Eliah and Elisha both asunder, 2. Kings 2.11,
hurt neither of them: Elijah (says the place) went up by a whirlwinde into
heaven; the very form of words implying a willing-easie ascent: nor did the
whirlwinde molest him, or pain him, though Ecclesiasticus 48.9. it is said, it
was a whirlwinde of fire.

Christ's Transfiguration comes next to be considered. It was a true
representation of that bodily glory, which at the recollection and
retribution of all Saints, God will adorn and cloth the faithful withal:
Christ showing them the mark at which they ought to shoot: for we also are to
be fashioned or configured to his transfiguration, Philip. 3.21. Qualis futurus
est tempore judicandi, talis Apostolis apparuit.
As he is to be at the time of judging, such did he appear to the Apostles,
says Hierom on Matthew. 17. And let not man think he lost his old form and face,
says he, or took a body spiritual or aeriall: the splendour of his face was
seen, and the whitenes of his vestments described. Non substantia tollitur, sed
gloria commutatur.
The substance is not taken away, but the glory is changed. Or that I may utter
it in Theophylacts words on Mark 9.2. By the transfiguration (so Oecolampadius
should translate it) understand not the change of character and lineaments, but
the character remaining such as it was before, an increase was made of
unspeakable light. This admirable light not coming from without to him as it
did to Moses, but flowing from his divinity into his humane soul, from it into
his body, and from it into his very clothes; will you say his clothes were
changed, says S. Hierom? His raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow:
so as no fuller on earth can white them, Mark. 9.3. And his face did shine as
the Sun, Matthew. 17.2.

What S. Chrysostom says of the spiritual bodies of the Saints, I will much
more rather say of Christ's body transfigured (for if star differs from
star in glory, man from man; much more shall Christ shine above all other
men, by infinite degrees) They shall shine as the Sun: not because they shall
not exceed the splendour of the sun, Aquin part. 3. q. 45. art. 2.
but because we see nothing more bright then the sun, he took the comparison
thence. And this shining, says Aquinas, Fuit gloriae claritas essentialiter,
licet non secundum modum, cum suerit per modum transeuntis passionis,
was essentially a claritie of glory, though not in the manner, seeing it was
by way of a transient passion, as the air is enlightened of the sun: whereas
Ad corpus glorificatum redundat claritas ab anima, sicut qualitas quaedam
permanens.
to a glorified body claritie from the soul does accrue, as some permanent
quality. Which essential claritie Christ had from his nativitie, yea from his
first conception; yet by dispensation he ecclipsed it ever, till he had
accomplished our redemption, except at this time, when appeared a brightness of
glory, though not a brightness of a glorious body; not imaginary (unless you
take imaginary as synonymall with representative) but real, though transitory.

Can any one think that herein was any pain, or rather not infinite pleasure?
The beholders rejoiced: they could not do so at the pain of Christ. If there
were any pain or grief, it would rather have been so at the withdrawing of his
unusual claritie: which not being likely, the manifestation of this claritie,
at this transfiguration, was less likely to be painful.

The fourth and last kind of degree to happiness, is translation; not only as
Enoch was translated, from one life to an other kind of life, but such a
translation as should have been of Adam, if he had not sinned, and shall be of
such as shall be alive at Christ's coming. Adams translation had been sine media
morte. Nor was his slumber painful, nor solutio continui at the drawing out of
his rib, nor the closing of the flesh again: nor is it likely there was in
Adams side any scar, the badge of pain and sorrow: much less should he have
had pain at his translation. Pain is the grandchild of sin, the daughter of
punishment; from both which the estate of innocence was privileged. Every
thing in the Creation was very good, Genes. 1.31: Every tree was pleasant to
the sight, and good for food, Genes. 2.9; and could the tree of life cause
pain? By tasting the fruit thereof, Adam and his offspring had come to an higher
and more unchangeable happiness. The middesse was then proportionate to the
beginning, and to the end. Sorrow was part of the curse: innocence could not
feel pain, much less shall eternal happiness; and should the tree of life have
caused pain? Then were there little difference between it, and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil. Or what difference in that point would there be
between Adams death, which was painful, and his translation, if it should have
been painful? As concerning the translation of them that shall be found alive
at the last day, I am thus conceited: That there shall be no true, and real
separation of their souls from their bodies; at least, so much as concerns
the righteous: That they shall be changed: That they shall put on immortality.
If it be delightful now to our bodies to receive ease, shall it be painful to
be clothed with incorruptibility? It shall be done in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye: 2. Cor. 5.4.
Nolumus expoliari, says the Apostle, showing the unwillingnes of men to die,
sed supervestiri desideramus or volumus; for so must the Apostle be
interpreted, as appears verse. 2, We groan earnestly, desiring to be clothed
upon. Tertullian says, Qui^uon desiderat, adhuc in carne, superinduere
immortalitatem, and continuare vitam lucrifactam mortis vicaria denuntiatione?
De Resur. carnis.
Who desires not, being yet in the flesh, to be clothed upon with
immortality, and to continue his life gained by a substituted denunciation of
death? Can so blessed a change be painful? or can we naturally desire pain?
shall we groan, and groan earnestly, that we may have pain? Hierome, in his
Epistle to Minerius and Alexander, says thus of the word Rapiemur: Hoc verbo
estendi puto subitum ad meliora transcensum, and ideirco raptum se voluisse
dicere, vt velocitas transcuntis sensum cogitantis excederet.
I think that this word shows a sudden passage to a better place, and that he
said he was caught up, to signify that his passing was swifter then his
thinking; not as if it were painful to be taken, as I imagine. S. Paul
speaks of this translation and change, as a matter worthy of thanks unto
God, 1. Corinthians. 15.51, etc. Only death, of all other ways by which God uses
to call mankind to glory, death only is painful. Psalm. 116.3. The sorrows
of death compassed me. God loosed the pains of death, Act. 2.24. and Hebr.
2.15. Some through fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage.
And indeed this pain of death is part of the curse denounced. But of this
point, more hereafter. And thus do I make my approach toward it.

2. Aug. De. peccat. Merit. and Remis. 1.16.
Augustine says, When disobedient Adam sinned, then did his body lose the
grace of being obedient to his soul. Then arose that bestiall motion, to be
ashamed of by men, which he blushed at in his nakedness. Then also, by a certain
sickness taken by a sudden and contagious corruption, it came to pass that the
stabilitie of age being lost, in which they were created, by the changes of
ages they made a progress to death. For though they lived many years after,
yet they began to die the same day when they received the law of death, by
which they were to grow old. For whatsoever by a continual change and degrees
runs unto an end, not perfecting or consummating, stands not a moment, but
decays without intermission. Thus was fulfilled what God said, Genes. 2.17. In
the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. So he.

Let me add my conjecture. First, if God had not called Adam and Eve so
sensibly to an account, yet had they died, by virtue of the former sentence.
For the later sentence inflicts not death, which was then entered on them, but
labor and pain, In sorrow shall thou eat of it all the days of thy life,
Genes. 3.17. And though it be said verse. 19. In the sweat of thy face shall
thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground: for out of it wast thou
taken; for dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return: Yet this is but an
explication of the former sentence, showing that the manner of the death shall
be by incineration, which was not so exactly speciallized before. Secondly, the
same instant that Adam had eaten, I make no doubt but both their eyes were
opened and they knew their nakedness, which was the first sensible degree
toward death and corruption. For though the Scripture does not say expressly,
Immediately their eyes were opened; yet it implies so much, as may appear by
the implicative particle and, Genes. 3.6, etc. Eve did eat, and gave also unto
her husband with her, and he did eat, and the eyes of them both were opened,
etc. S. Augustine thus, Quomodo corpus nostrum dicit Apostolus mortuum (Rom
8.10.) cum adhuc de viventibus loqueretur, nisi quia jam ipsa conditio moriendi
ex peccato parentum haesit in prole? De Genesis ad lit. 6.26.
How does the Apostle say that our body is dead, (Romans 8.10.) when he speaks of
the living; but because the condition of dying, arising from the sin of the
parents, sticks to the posterity? So we also die, or are dying, the first
hour of our being. And again, Corpus mortuum est propter peccatum: Nec ibi ait
Mortale, sed Mortuum; quamvis vtique and mortale, quia moriturum, -- mox vbi
praeceptum transgressi sunt, ecrum membris, velut aliqua aegritudo lethalis,
mors ipsa concepta est. Quid enimaliud, non dicam nati, sed omnino concepti,
nisi aegritudinem quandam inchoavimus, qua sumus sine dubis morituri? Ibid. 9 10
The body is dead because of sin. He says not there, It is mortal, but,
dead; albeit it is truly mortal, because it shall die. -- So soon as they
transgressed the commandment, death like some deadly disease was conceived in
their members. For as soon as we were, I will not say born, but even conceived,
what did weels but begin a certain sickness, by which we shall undoubtedly die?
IN THE MIDST OF LIFE WE ARE IN DEATH, and now non vitam vivimus, sed mortem;
which was touched at before, and must be handled again.

God (who drew light out of darkness, yea all things out of the unformed
TOHV-BOHV, and that mass or rude lump out of nothing) is so good a God, and so
divine a goodness, that he would never have suffered sin in this world, but
that he knew how to extract good out of evil, and to turn man's sin to his
benefit. Neither would he have permitted death to enter upon man, but that he
knew how to use the sting of death to man's greater happiness, and how to bring
forth meat out of the eater, and sweetness out of the strong, Judge. 14.14. As of
the vipers flesh is made a preservative against the poison of the viper: so
from this bitter cup of death arises health, joy, and salvation to mankind.

Aug. De Civit. Dei. 9.10.
Augustine has a witty collection from Plato and his follower Plotinus: Plato
in Timaeo writes, Hominum animos mortalibus vinculis esse a d^is minoribus
illigatos.
that the spirits of men are tied with mortal bands by the lesser gods. So
Vives on the place cites Plato, but Plotinus in lib. de dubijs Animae, as he
is also cited by Vives, on that place of Augustine, thus, Jupiter Pater
laboranta^ animas mis^ratus, earum vincula, quibus laborant, solubilia
fabri^avit.
Father Jupiter, having compassion of the afflicted souls, has made their
bands soluble, wherewith they are wearied. These quotations at large, give
light to S. Augustines meaning, which is subobscure: for he says, Plotinus
Platenem prae caeteris intellexisse laudatur. Is, cum de humanis animis ageret,
Pater, in ^uit, misericors mortalia illis vincula saciebat.
Plotinus is commended for having understood Plato above the rest. He treating
of the souls of men says, The merciful Father made them mortal bands.
Whether the particle Is aims at Plato, or Plotinus, appears not by
Augustine. Bartholomaeus Barth. Sib. Peregrin. Quaest. Decad. 1. c. 2. q. 2.
Sibylla appropriateth the word Is to Plato; I rather assign it to Plotinus,
as the good Expositor of Plato: Or it may be that S. Augustine, taking some
words from both of them into one sentence, purposely left it doubtful, unto
whom the Is must be referred. Howsoever, his collection (as I said) is
ingenious and subtle; Ita hoc ipsum quod mortales sint homines corpore, ad
misericordiam Dei Patris pertinere arbitratus est, ne semper hu^us vitae
miseria teneantur.
So he thought that this very thing, that men are mortal in body, proceeds
from the mercy of our divine Father, lest they should be always held with the
misery of this life. Even as the very misery of mankind, from which no man is
free, could not pertain to the just judgment of the Almighty, if there had
been no original sin, as Augustine says otherwhere. Gods judgment brought
misery and death for sin: yet in death God remembered mercy, and distilled
good out of it, I cannot omit this memorable speech of Gregory Naz. Orat. 2. de
Pasch.
Nazianzen, Adam was expelled and extruded from this tree of life and from
Paradise at once, by God, for sin: -- And yet even in this case by death he
gains the cutting off of sin, lest the evil should be immortal. So was
punishment turned into mercy. He is excellently seconded by Rupert, Rup. De
Trinit. 3.24. etc.
How should we turn away with deaf ears the care of the death of the soul, and
the general judgment, if we should never have died, that are so proud to day,
and dying to morrow? Well therefore did our Lord God strike Man with the death
of the flesh and of the body, lest he should be ignorant of the death of his
soul, and sleep securely in his pleasures till the dawning of the last day:
that at least Man might be waked, even by the fear of the instantaneall death,
and that he might not, like the immortal devil, add prevarication to
prevarication, but rather flee and avoid the pride and height of sin by
humble repentance. Let me add, Hence is the patience of the Saints. Here are
the crowns of the Martyrs, says Chrysostom. This death causes many virtues,
which had else never been. O munde immunde, si sic me tenes breviter
transeundo, quid faceres diu permanendo?
O unclean World, says devout Bernard, if thou hold me so shortly passing,
what should thou do long remaining? If ye desire more proofs, that death was
appointed to Adam for sin, and that he was kept from the tree of life, after
he had sinned, lest his miserable life should have been immortal, consult with
the authority of Irenaeus, in his third book and 37. chap. of Hilarious, in his
commentary on Psalm. 69.26: of Hierome, on Esai 65. of Cyrill of Alexandria,
about the middle of his third book against Julian; and they shall confirm you
in this point, That death is a bittersweet, a compound of judgment and mercy,
a loathsome pill, and a punishment; yet wrapped up in gold, and working out health
and blessings for mankind. A culpa natae sunt duae filiae, Tristitia, and
Mors; quae duaefiliae pessimam matrem destruunt.
From the transgression two daughters are born, Sorrow and Death: which two
daughters destroy their very ill mother. Augustine against two Epistles of the
Pelagians 4.4. Quamvis bonis conferatur per mortem plurimum boni, (unde
nonnulli etiam DE BONO MORTIS Congruenter disputaverunt) tamen and hinc quae
praedicanda est nisi misericordia Dei, quod in usus bonos convertitur poena
peccati?
Although by death much good be bestowed on good men (whereupon some have fitly
discoursed even of the good of death) yet what hence can we commend but Gods
mercy, that the punishment of sin is turned to good uses? I will seal up all
with the saying of Cicero in the beginning of his third book de Oratore, where
he spoke wiser then he was aware of, Mihi non a diis immortalibus vita erepta,
sed mors donata est.
Life has not been taken away from me by the immortal gods, but death has
been given. Death is a benefit, though it was appointed unto Adam for sin,
for one sin only; which is the next point to be explained.

3. It is true, that the wages due to any one sin is death; and as true, that
we commit many sins; which are rightly divided into original and actual.
Actual sins are of a thousand kinds committed by us; yet none of these our
sins, nor Adams after-sinnes, but his first sin only produced death.
Likewise, original sin consists of two parts; of Adams transgression, and of
our corruption. In Adams transgression were many sins involved: and our
corruption consists both in the want of original justice, and in the positive
ill-qualitie of our nature. Adams sin is imputed to us; our corruption, both
inherent and imputed. His sin, as a quality, concerned himself; as relation,
concerned us. As he was an individual man, it touched himself only; as a
common person it dropped down upon us. His actual sin is not propagated; his
corrupting of our nature is derived. And this corruption is both a sin and a
punishment of sin. Some late Divines have written, Original sin is said to
be twofold. 1 Imputed, which was inherently in Adam, and charged upon his
posterity. 2 Inherent, which is naturally propagated to us. So, amongst
others, Scharpius page 463. But they speak improperlie; for original sin is
but one only, made up of two parts or branches; indeed, perchance, parts
constituent, not ratione only, but re differentes; yet not so natively to be
called a double sin, as one sin, of two steps, degrees, sections,
composures, parts or branches: for original sin is not many, not two, but
one only, viz for which death was inflicted. And this is the point I must now
insist upon, and thus I prove it apodictically.

Romans 5.12. Death entered by sin; and verse 21, Sin reigned unto death.
Likewise, Romans 6.23, The wages of sin is death; and 1. Corint. 15.56, The
sting of death is sin. All in the singular number, evincing it to be one
only sin. David complains Psalm. 51.5, I was shapen in iniquity, and in
sin did my mother conceive me. In sin, not in sins; both the Hebrew and
the Vulgar Translation have all these places in the singular number. Concerning
David, it is observable, (lest any one might imagine, that David's mother was
lascivious, and that therefore he complained, and so this complaint concerned
David himself only and personally, and not us) that it was no part of David's
intent, to disparage his mother; and Aquinas says, David was born of a lawful
wedlock: and we are sure by a certainty of faith, that the lawful use of
marriage is no sin.

To this let me superadde Romans 5.18. (...), Per unam offensam, as Montanus
reads it, and this exposition is by our last Translation admitted into the
margin. But of this point more by and by.

Neither is it only one, but it is all alike; not more in the evil, not less
in the good Romans 3.9, Are we better then the Gentiles? We have proved that Jews
and Gentiles are all under sin, as it is written, There is none righteous, no
not one. Verse. 19, All the world is become guilty, or, subject to the judgment
of God. Again, verse. 22. There is no difference: for all have sinned, and come
short of the glory of God. And before, he exactly describes the corruption of
every man. Galat. 3.22, The Scripture has concluded all under sin. Si
parvuli nascuntur, non proprie, sed originaliter, peccatores; profecto, eo modo
quo sunt peccatores, etiam praevaricatores legis illius, quae in Paradiso data
est, agnoscuntur.
Augustine De Civitate Dei 16.27, If infants are born sinners, not properly,
but originally; certainly in the same manner that they are sinners, they are
acknowledged to be also transgressors of that law which was given in Paradise.
How could one infant transgress the law in Paradise, more then an other?
Genes. 17.14, He has broken my covenant. Which words you are to interpret of
breaking the covenant in Adam, by original sin, as well as of breaking the
covenant of circumcision. Augustine in the place above cited, when he had said
Cortum est de fide, legitimum matrimonii usum non esse peccatum Aquin. Cont.
Gert. lib. 4. cap. 50.
Since it is not the fault of the infant, whose soul God threatened to cut off;
neither has he broken Gods covenant, but his parents, who took no care to
circumcise him (for such a child discerns not his right hand from his left,
Jonas 4.11, and such little ones have no knowledge between good and evil,
Deuter. 1.39.) then he resolves thus, Cum haec nulla sit culpa parvuli, cu us
dixit animam perituram; nec ipse dissipaverat Testamentum Dei, sed majores, qui
eum circumcidere non curarunt.
Infants, not in regard of their own life, but in respect of the common source
of mankind, have all broken Gods covenant in him in whom they have all sinned.
Again, Parvuli, non secundum vitae suae proprietatem, sed secundum communem
generis humani originem, omnes in ill o vno Testamentum Dei dissipaverunt, in
quo omnes peccaverunt.
In Adam he himself has also sinned with all the rest. My question here is,
Did not all children sin alike in Paradise? Aquinas answers, All are born
equally sinners, all equally obnoxious to original sin; so that in them that
die in original sin only, there is no difference in fault or punishment
answering unto it. See Estius 2. Sentent. Distinct. 33. Sect. 5. and before him
Lumbard, with his army of Schoolmen.

Three places there are most fully demonstrative, both that it was one offense
only, (...).
and that this offense was of one person only. Romans 5.15. By the sin, the
single singular sin, of one (for none of it is in the plural number) many
are dead. Death crept not in by more sins, or by more sinners, but for one
only offense of one person only. It is not (...) but (...), per peccatum
unius. He might have said as easily (if he could have said it as truly) by the
sin of two, if by Eves sin properly we had died. This is also excellently
secondedin the next verse, Romans 5.16. And not as it was by ONE that sinned,
(...) (there is the singularity of the person) so is the gift: for the
judgment was of ONE to condemnation (which you must not interpret of one Adam,
or one Person, but of one sin, if you make the antithesis to have marrow and
sinnews; and so the Old Bishops Bible reads it) but the free gift is (...), of
many offenses unto justification. So to the singularity of one person, you see
annexed the singularity of one offense. The same truth is confirmed and
reiterated, Romans 5.17, 18, 19: every verse proving it was but one person, and
one sin.

The Fathers join issue with us. Chrysostom Homil. on 1. Corinthians. 9, Adam by
one sin did draw in death. And again, He by one only sin brought so much
evil and death. For if Adam had not sinned; as he had not propagated his
personal gifts, graces, acquisite virtues, nor experimental knowledge; so
after his first sin, which is derived to us, his other sins were merely
personal, and one only is become natural to all of us: all his other sins
were bound up in the sole reference unto himself, none imputed or derived to
his posterity. And therefore original sin has no degrees, nec suscipit
magis aut minus; or has more branches or parts in any child of Adam, then in
others; but equally and alike extends unto all; none free, none more infected
then others, as I proved before.

Paulinus calls it In Adam, cum omnibus, etiam ipse peccavit. Aquin. 1.2. q.
82. art. 4.
The fatherly poison, by which the father having transgressed has infected his
whole kind. Others style it The venime of the loins. Chrysostom, on 1. Corinthians. 9. terms it The radical sin. Augustine says, Virus paternum quo
universitatem generis sui pater praevaricatus infecit. Apud August. Epist. 106.
There is one sin in which all have sinned, and therefore all men are said to
have sinned in one Adam, and by one sin of Adam, because all were that one
man. Item, Esse unum peccatum, in quo omnes peccaverunt, and ideo dici omnes
homines in uno Adamo, and uno Adae peccato peccasse, quia omnes ille unus homo
fuerant. De Peccat. Merit. and Remis. 1.10.
That one sin which is so great, and was committed in a place and condition
of so great happiness, that in one man originally, and, that I may say,
radically all mankind should be damned, is not done away but by Christ: And
often he beats on this point, that it was one sin which overthrew us. Illud
unum peccatum, quod tam magnum, in loco and habitu ^antae felicitatis admissum
est; ut in uno homine originaliter, atque, ut ita dixerim, radicaliter totum
genus hominum damnaretur, non solvitur nisi per Christum. Enchirid. cap. 48.
One, none but one transgression the Apostle will have to be understood, says
he against Julian. And again, Vnum, non nisi unum, delictum intelligi vult
Apostolus. Cont. Julian. 1.6.
Infants die guilty only of original sin, men of years guilty of all
sins which by a wicked life they have added to that one. Ignatius calls it
The ancient impiety. Irenaeus styles it The handwriting written by Adam. All
in the singular number pointing at one man only, and at one sin only.

Two points are cleared: We are appointed to die for one sin only, We are
appointed to die of one person only.


It follows by the native and genuine method; This person was one man;
Parvuli moriuntur soli peceato originali obnox^i; adulti omnibus peccatis quae
male vivendo addiderunt ad illud unum. Enchir. cap. 43.
This one man was Adam: And so by consequent it was not Eves sin for which
death was appointed to us. And first of the first part.

4. That this person sinning was one man, seems evidenced, Romans 5.16, (...),
By one that sinned. It is not said (...). Ignatius. Epist. ad Trallianos.
Yet if that proof reach not home, but may suffer extension, even to Angels or
spirits; others shall. 1. Cor. 15.21. Iren. lib. 5.
(...). By man came death, and by man the Resurrection of the dead. You may as
well deny the Resurrection by the Son of man, as that sin or death came not
by man. Again, Romans 5.12. (...), By one man sin entered into the World, and
death by sin: the word (...) demonstrating the humane nature; and (...)
joined with it, necessarily pointing and signing out the masculine, and not the
feminine. Romans 5.19, (...), By the disobedience of one man; where most
evidently, not only the humane nature is signed, and marked out unto us, but
also the masculine sex; the He, and not the She.

Having found that he was a Man, for whose sin death was appointed, let us
now follow the sent, and we shall trace out who he was; which is the main point
of inquiry.

Searching the Scriptures, even close to the former place occurreth this, 1.
Corint. 15.22, As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.
He who confesses the quickening power of the second Adam unto Resurrection,
must also confess the weakness of the first Adam, and that In him all men die.
Indeed it is said, Eccl. 25.24. (...) in the Accusative, Of the woman came the
beginning of sin, and through her we all die. But of Adam the phrase is used in
the Genitive, Romans 5, three several times, Per illam, non in illa morimur. The
Divines distinguish them two: We die by her, and in Adam; We also die by the
Devil, as he was the tempter of her, as well as by her, she being the tempter
of Adam; by them both occasionally, by him and only in him effectually. So for
the former part of the words, it is true, Ab Eva initium peccati, ab Adamo
complementum.
Eve began sin, but Adam made it complete. She was principium, but principium
principiatum: Satan was the principium principians, the mover primo-primus. He
was a murderer from the beginning. John 8.44. (...): not from the first
absolute beginning; for then Satan had no being: not from his own beginning;
for at his creation he was good, as all things else were: but so soon as ever
man was, he resolved to destroy man, and with reference to that intention he
was a manslayer or a murderer of man from the beginning of man. From Satan was
the beginning of sin, from Eve a seconding, a middesse, a continuation; you may
call it an other beginning, secundo-primum. But had not Adam sinned, death had
not reigned: for in Adam all die; it was never said of Eve, in Eve we die.

Augustine says, Aug. De Civit. 12.21.
God made some certain creatures solitarias, and quodam modo solivagas,
solitary, and after a sort wandering alone, as eagles, kites, lions, wolves;
other creatures gregales, that love to troop, fly, shoal, and herd together;
as pigeons, stares, fishes, dear; and made diverse of them, all at once, of
several kinds, and not only two of each kind, by which the rest should be
propagated; but he made the man unum and singulum, one and single, and would
not create the woman when he created the man; but made her of man himself, Vt
omne ex homine vno diffunderetur genus humanum.
that all mankind should be derived from one man. He annexeth other where,
That original sin might come from one only man.

The Apostle says most divinely, 1. Timoth. 2.14, Adam was not deceived, but
the woman being deceived was in the transgression. From whence though the
ignorant may think, that Eve was the sinner, and Adam was not; yet they err,
not understanding the Apostle. His main intent is to prove, that a woman ought
to be silent and subject, and not usurp authority over the man, as a talking
woman does; and this he effects by two reasons. First, Adam was first formed,
then Eve. The reason holds of things of the same species. Otherwise, beasts and
birds were created before Adam. Secondly, Adam was not deceived, but Eve: not
first deceived, not deceived by a beast, and one of the worst of them, a
serpent. Therefore she is unfit to be any longer a teacher. Chrysostom thus,
The woman taught once, and marred all; therefore let her teach no longer. Hence
it appears it was no part of the Apostles meaning, to handle, Whether the
sin of Adam or of Eve caused mankind to fall (which is our main point) for
the transgression here mentioned was not that sin, that great sin, but (...),
diverticulum transiens, a peccadillo, a little sin, in respect of that great
(...) and (...), which engaged all mankind: much less did the Apostle intend
to excuse Adam from that great presumptuous offense, in which he only was.
That sin of his being called (...), Romans 5.19: which must needs be a crying
sin, and almost infinite; since it is opposed to Christ's obedience, called
there (...). Adam was not deceived; because no man is properly deceived, but of
him who has an intent to deceive: now the Devil only had such an intent, and
thereupon deceived Eve. Wherefore she complains saying, the Serpent beguiled
me, Genes. 3.13, and the Apostle ratifieth it, 2. Corinthians. 11.3. The Serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty. And in this manner Eve only being deceived
was in the transgression. For Satan set not upon Adam. Diabolus non est adorsus
eum qui coram acceperat coelesse mandatum, sed eam quae a viro didicerat. Ambr.
lib. de Paradiso cap. 12. Dolo illo serpentino, etc Aug. De Genesis ad lit. 11.42.
The Devil set not upon him that had received in presence the heavenly
commandment, but upon her that had learned it of her husband, says Ambrose;
Yea S. Augustine opineth Tu es Diaboli janua, tu es quae eum invasisti quem
Diabolus aggredi non valuit. Tert. lib. De Habitu muliebri.
That by that serpentine craft, by which the woman was seduced, Adam could not
have been seduced. Tertullian speaks thus to womankinde; Probat quod Diabolus
non poterat seducere Adam, sed Evam. Hiero. lib. 1. adversus Jovinianum, circa
medium.
Thou art the Devils door, thou art she that have invaded him whom the Devil
could not set upon. If he could not set upon him, much less could he have
overcom him. Hierom says, * the Apostle does prove that the Devil could not
seduce Adam, but Eve. But then comes Eve in her simplicity, intending no hurt
or deceit to her husband, and upon three other grounds specialized Genes. 3.6.
First, she saw that the tree was good for food. Secondly, it was pleasant to
the eyes. Thirdly, a tree to be desired to make one wise. She (I say) upon
these three motives did both eat and give Adam to eat. So Adam was not
deceived, either first or immediately, by the Serpent or serpentine deceit, as
Eve was: neither does Adam complain, that the Serpent or Eve beguiled him; but
when he derived the fault from himself, the worst that he said of Eve was this,
Genes. 3.12, The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree.
Neither does the Scripture any where impute a malicious, envious, or guilefull
intent to Eve, in drawing Adam into the transgression. Nor does the Apostle say
absolutely, Adam was not in the transgression; but, Adam was not deceived, or
brought into the transgression by fraud. For the word (...) signifies to be
deceived by art and craft: so the Devil persuaded Eve, That God of envy unto
man forbad him that tree, says. Aug. De Genesis ad lit. 11.30.
Augustine; and perhaps told her it was no sin for her to eat, because she
received no immediate commandment; whereas Adam knew it was a sin, but
therefore might think it easily pardonable, because he had formerly known no
experience of Gods severitie, says the same Aug. De Civit. 14.11.
Augustine. And yet for all this Adam might be in a transgression, in the
transgression, and the greatest transgression, though not in that transgression
of being seduced. And for his transgression death is appointed for us. For in
Adam all die. Abel was the first who died the bodily death; yet Abel died in
Adam: and if for Adams sin death had not been appointed to him first, Abel
had not died yet, since Morte morieris was spoken to Adam alone, before Eve was
created: and it may be it implies, that upon his sin all that any way came
of him, either by avulsion of some part, as Eve did, or by propagation, should
die in him. And so though Eve had eaten, if Adam had not sinned, neither Adam,
nor perhaps Eve herself had died. And if Adam had eaten and Eve forborne, yet
perhaps Eve should have died: for Eve was in Adam as well as we, 1. Corinthians.
11.8. The man was not of the woman, but the woman of the man. And in him was
she to stand or fall, live or die, as well as we. In Adam all die, and she
among the rest, since she was one, and a part of that all. If my above
mentioned speculations require further proof, consider Romans 5.14, Death reigned
from Adam; where he is expressly mentioned, as being, in my interpretation, the
Idea of mankind, and we being in him tanquam in principio activo. Satan sinned
against God in tempting the woman, the woman sinned against God in eating and
offering the fruit unto the man. If thou, O Adam, had not consented, neither
of these sins had hurt thee or mankind. Adam erat nos omnes.
Adam was we all. Give me leave to say so, since S. Augustine says, Omnes
eramus ille unus Adam. De pe^cat. Merit. and Remis. 1.10.
We all were that one Adam. Nor did God first challenge Eve, but Adam; nor her
so punctually as he did Adam, Genes. 3.9. And verse. 22, it is not said of Eve,
but of Adam, ironically, Adam is become like one of us: for he was the root of
mankind, Eve was but a branch of Adam before or when she sinned, and no root
of mankind actual, but potentiall; for she sinned when she was a virgin.
Justin Martyr in his dialogue with Triphon thus, Eve being an intemerated
virgin, and conceiving by the Serpent, brought forth disobedience, and by
consequent, death. Theodoret on those words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 51.1. etc.
The transgression of the commandment went before Eves conception: for after the
transgression, and the divine sentence, and the privation of Paradise Adam knew
Eve his wife; and she having conceived brought forth Cain. Had Adam carnally
known Eve before he sinned, yea after herself sinned, she had conceived, and
then the issue had had no original sin: yea, he is no worse Divine then
Aquinas, who holds that at this instant if one by miracle were created an
humane creature, body and soul, he should not have original sin. 1.2. Quaest.
18. Art. 4.
Art. sequenti.
And if Adam had sinned, and not Eve, we had fallen into original sin; and if
she had eaten, and not he, we had not been stained with original sin.
Scharpius says, * The cause of original sin was Adam, not Eve; and Adams
sin, not Eves, does pass to the posterity. Tertullian proves that Eve was
nevertheless a virgin, because being in Paradise she was called a woman. * A
woman, says he, pertains to the sex it self, not to the degree of the sex. One
may be called a woman, Mulier ad sexum ipsum, non ad gradum sexus pertinet.
Tertull. lib. De velandis Virginibus.
though not a wife; but a non-mulier, a no-woman can not either be or be called
a wife. I add, she was a wife, and so called, Genes. 2.25: and yet, till after
Adam sinned, she was a virgin, espoused, married, yet not known carnally. She
was termed Isha, or Issa, Virago, before the fall, Genes. 2.23: because she was
taken out of Ish, or Is, out of man. She was also styled The female, and wife;
but she was never called Eve, during her creation and innocence, or in the
interim between her fall and Adams. But after Adams sin he first called his
wives name Eve, Genes. 3.20, because she was the mother of all living. Not as
if any did then live as from her, or were born of her, when Adam so called her;
but the great Calculator of natures, the (...), the Onomastick, or exact and
true Nomenclator of all things brought before him, thought fit to name her Eve,
that is, The mother of all living; not before, but after his fall, because, in
my opinion, she had not been Matter viventium, if she alone had sinned. Her
sin might have had other punishment, her personal fault had ended in her
personal chastisement. Eve was created in Paradise; and, for all her sin, we
had continued still in Paradise, if Adam had kept in it: but as Adam was made
out of Paradise, so out of it again by his fall he brought both himself and us.
S. Ambrose says, Fuit Adam, and in illo fuimus omnes; periit Adam, and in eo
perierunt omnes. Ambr. in Lucam lib. 7.
Adam was, and in him we were all; he perished, and in him all perished. Eve
was only a part of Adam, till his fall; he being till then the only root:
after his sin she is now also Eva, matter viventium, a root; yet radix de
radice: we receive our sap, and bring forth fruit through both of them. And for
all this, both Scripture and Fathers run with a torrent, ascribing that great
sin, which plunged mankind into destruction, not unto Eve, save only as the
occasioner, but unto Adam, as the immediate causer. And though Eve sinned
before Adam, and that in diverse respects; yet is he chiefly, yea only faulty,
for presenting us, by his fall, to destruction. Hosea 6.7. They like Adam have
transgressed the covenant there; or (as the Vulgar has it, joining Ibi to the
latter clause) Ibi praevaricati sunt in me. Ibi, says Hierom, that is, in
Paradise. And Adam is excellently painted out, Esai 43.27, Thy first father
has sinned. Eve is not mentioned; for her sin, considered by itself, reached
not to them, nor hurt any but herself per se, and us per accidens, as Adam
yielded to her temptation. When God had denounced several punishments, first
to Eve, then to Adam, and proper to each by themselves, he added this to Adam
only, Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return. For even in him, and by
him was Eve to return to dust, and by his offense formally Death comes on all.
And therefore not from Eve, but from Adam does S. Luke draw our pedigree, Luke.
3.38, Which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God. And therefore as
the Genealogies were ever drawn from the males (perchance to show that the
woman was but accidental to our first making, and the first sin reducing all
up to the Protoplast Adam, who derived original sin both to Eve and all us,
though in different manner) so when they had drawn their Genealogies down to
Christ, who had no man to be his father, nor had original sin, but satisfied
for it and all other sins, all Genealogies are ceased, yea counted by the
Apostle as foolish and vain, Titus 3.9. Against one of these passages if it be
objected, that Joab is not termed after his father, but full often, yea always
after his mother, The son of Zeruiah, for she was the sister of David, 1.
Chron. 2.16: I answer, that Zeruiah the mother of the three famous brethren,
Joab, Abishai, Asahel was, perhaps, married to some base ignoble groom before
David came to his greatness: or she herself was an extraordinary Virago, active
in State, plotting and furthering the plots of her children, though she crossed
her brother David; and therefore (as I take it) she is named, not so much in
honor as in dislike, These men the sons of Zeruiah be too hard for me, 2.
Sam. 3.39: Or lastly, the father of Joab had committed such a sin or sins,
that the remembrance of him was odious, and might resemble Judas Iscariot, who
deserved that in the next generation his name should be blotted out, Psalm.
109.13.

When Adam transgressed my statutes, 2. Esdras 7.11, 12. -- then were the
entrances of this world made narrow, full of sorrow and travel. And in
reference, it may be, to Adams especial sinning both a man-child was born
before a woman-childe, and a manchilde died before a woman-childe, and the
males only were circumcised, and Adam himself died ten years before Eve, as
Salianus, out of Marianus Scotus, Genebrard, and Fevardentius, collecteth;
though never a woman else, except Eve, from the creation til the Law of Moses is
recorded to have outlived their good husbands. As for Er and Onan, they were
wicked, and for their sin cut off shortly, Genes. 38.7, etc. Sure I am, he had
an especial manner of transgression, since some are punished who have not
sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression, Romans 5.14. Other sins we
sinned, and are like to Adam: but herein we are unlike. His sin hurt us
as well as himself: our sins hurt not him, but ourselves. Bellarmin has
brought unto my hand the three following authorities: Tertullian, Omnis anima
eousque in Adam censetur, donec in Christo recenseatur. Tert. lib. De Anima.
Every soul is counted in Adam, until it be reckoned in Christ. Hierom,
Vnusquisque nostrum in Paradiso cum Adamo cecidit. Hieron in Mich. 2.
Every one of us fell in Paradise with Adam. Cyprian derives the infants sin
from Adam only. For we were in him tanqua^ in activo principio. In him, to
stand or fall. Adam is the figure of him that was to come, Romans 5.14. Was Eve a
type of Christ? was Christ ever resembled or compared or contra-opposed unto
Eve? The Apostle, Romans 5.15, 16, Cypr. lib. 3. Epist. 8. Ad Fidum.
shows wherein Adam was like and unlike to Chirst (of which hereafter.) And
most divinely to our purpose, verse 17, etc. If by one man's offense, death
reigned by one, much more the righteous shall reign by one Jesus Christ. No
inkling, no intimation of more sins then of one; of more persons first
sinning that one sin, then of one; and that one was not Eve, but Adam:
therefore as Christ's Merits only save us, so Adams sin only did destroy us.
Cherubim faceth Cherubim, Type and Antitype must agree. When the Apostle says
of Adam, (...), illius futuri (as the Interlinearie reads it) not (...), but
(...); not quae, but qui, proves the exclusion of Eve. But of the first man
Adam and the last Adam, is a noted sweet resemblance, 1. Corinthians. 15.45. Where
he holds it not enough to say, The first Adam, but lest Eve might seem to be
included in the comparison, he adds, The first man Adam; and so compares him
to Christ. Likewise verse 47, The first man is of the earth earthy: the second
man is the Lord from heaven. Yet was not Christ the second man in number, but
in representation of mankind, being the substance of the first shadow. Adam
was the first, the only one who hurt us; Christ is the second man, the only
one who helps us. Yea, I think I may be bold to aver, that Christ would
have taken on him the feminine sex, if by Eve we had fallen: but since we fell
by man, by man only; therefore our Redeemer, though he came of a woman, yet
was made a man. And Christ having determined to be, not a woman, but a man, I
dare further avouch, if he had been a stone cut out, not Et abscissus est lapis
Dontinus, and Salvator, sine manibus; id est, absque coitu and humano semine,
de utero virginali. H^eron. in Dan. 2.34 Quid est Praecisus de monte, sine
manibus? Natus de Gente Judaeorum, sine opere hominum. Omnes enim qui
nascuntur, de opere maritali nascuntur: ille de Virgin natus, sine manibus
natus est: per manus enim opus humanum significatur, quo manus humanae non
accesserunt; ubi maritalis amplexus non fuit, foetus tamen fuit. Aug. in Psalm.
99.5. ipsi, 70 secuto, 98, sub finem.
a stone cut out without hands, Daniel 2.34, without the help of man, as he
was: if he had not been conceived by the Holy Ghost; if the Blessed Virgin had
not been over-shadowed by the power of God only: if Christ had been begotten
by one of the sons of Adam, with an ordinary and natural generation; even
Christ himself had had both original and actual sin, and had died for
himself by and through Adam, and had wanted a Redeemer for himself; much less
could he be our Redeemer. But Christ was that STONE. This Stone which the
builders refused, is become the head-stone of the corner, Psalm. 118.22: A tried
stone, a precious cornerstone, asure foundation, Esai. 28.26. Let me add a
little: Since Adam was made without the help of man or woman, and Eve came of
man without woman: since all the whole world of rational people proceed from
both man and woman; it was convenient enough, that there should be a miraculous
and fourth kind of generation, different from all the rest; namely, that
Christ should come of a woman alone, without the assistance of man, that he
might be free from original sin, which was first committed by Adam and his
masculine brood, and not without his seed and the artifex spiritus in it.

In which regard (without derogation to the thrice-blessed Mother of our Lord,
that holy-aeviternally Virgin Mary, now, next to her Son, the greatest Saint
in heaven, and placed deservedly above Angels and Archangels, Cherubims and
Seraphims) great Divines do make this difference; She, who was not begotten but
by man, was subject to original sin; but her son, the Son of God, was
free, even in his humane Nature, from all infection, original and actual,
because in his framing there was no admisture of virile and masculine
cooperation. For the poisoning of our nature arose from Adams sin, and not
from Eves. Moreover, if by miracle God should preserve a man from any touch or
tickling smach of lustful sin in the act of generation, the fathers
personal holiness should not discharge his child from original mire: for the
traducted nature is corrupt. Bell. De Amiss. gratiae and Statu peccati. 4.12.
Bellarmine goes one step further, thus, If both man and woman, the children of
Adam, by Gods singular privilege were exempted from lust, in the generation of
their children; yet should they transmit sin to their offspring. For though S.
Augustine says expressly, Non generationem, sed libidinem esse, quae proprie
peccatum traducit. De peecat. Merit. and Remis. 1.9.
that it is not the generation, but the lust, which properly transmits sin:
yet S. Augustine may be interpreted to speak of generations merely usual and
wholly natural, not privileged or extraordinary. Cursed therefore are the
Pelagians, who say, Sin and death entered by Eve. Sin personal did, but not
original, nor death. Gross is the ignorance of the Pelagians, who when the
Apostle says (...), think to delude it with this silly shift, that (...)
signifies either man or woman; and say it is not (...), which must needs have
been understood of Adam only. I answer, (...) is fully equivalent to (...),
since (...) is not, and can not be understood of the feminine. Secondly, the
Apostle makes the Antithesis between that (...) and Christ, which can not be
between Eve and Christ. Thirdly, a little after the Apostle twice expresses
Adam, but never names or means Eve. Lastly, it is said remarkably concerning
Abraham, Hebr. 11.12, There sprang even of one, and him as good as dead, many.
And more approaching to our purpose, Act. 17.26, God made all mankind (...),
of one blood, with apparent reference to Adam only. Therefore as the natural
generation is ascribed to Adam and Abraham only, though Eve and Sara in their
sort concur to the material part of the embryon, because the Men do confer
the formal: so the degenerating unto vice is justly imputed to Adam only,
though Eve did minister the occasion; because his consent and action only
could give form and shape to that prodigious sin which overthrew mankind.

5. From this point more questions may yet arise. First, If Adam and Eve had
not sinned, but Cain or some other of their children, whether that sin had
been derived to their posterity? Aquin. quaest. 5. De Malo art. 4.
Aquinas is for the affirmative, others for the negative: Because the first man
only represented our whole nature, all other men's sins are particular and
personal, and can not infect others. Thus far Scharpius.

I make a second Question. If Adam and Eve had continued in innocence, and had
been confirmed in grace, whether any of their children could have sinned?

Augustine embraces the affirmative of this Question, saying, Aug. De Civit.
14.10.
As happy as Adam and Eve were, -- so happy had been the whole company of
mankind, if they, nor no stirp of them committed sin which should receive
damnation. The same De Genesis ad lit. 9.3.
elsewhere, The children which should have been begotten of innocent Adam and
Eve, Ad eundem perducerentur statum, si omnes just obedienterque vixissent.
had been led to the same state, if they all had lived justly and obediently.
Est. in 2. Sent. did. 20. paragr. 5.
Estius seconds him, alleging these reasons: First, Adam and Eve had not
begotten children in better condition then themselves were created of God;
therefore they should have begot just children, but not confirmed in justice.
Secondly, Angels were not ordained to blessedness, but by the merit of their
free will to good or evil; and we are to think the like of men: Non prius
erantin termino constituendi, quam viae hujus curriculum, quod est tempus
merendi, peregissent.
They were not to be settled in the end, till they had finished the course of
this way, which is the time of meriting. Thirdly, Hugo and Lumbard say, God
propounded to Adam and Eve invisible goods and eternal, to be sought by their
merits, and ordained that by merit they might come to reward. Aquinas Aquin.
part. 1. quaest. 100. art. ^.
determines, That children born in the state of innocence, had not been
confirmed in justice: yae, Non videtur possibile, quod pueri in statu
innocentiae nascerentur in justitia confirmati.
it seems not possible, that in the state of innocence children should be born
confirmed in justice. So Aquine, and Gregory de Valentia on him.

A second way is taken by Abul. in Genesis 3. quaest. 6. and 7.
Abulensis, and followed by Cath. in locum.
Catharinus, viz. That if Adam had not sinned, his posterity should have been
confirmed in original justice, but not in gratia gratum faciente, in saving
grace. Where they do very ill, to set such inward friends so much at odds; for
original justice and gratia gratum faciens differ only ratione, not re; and
none could have one, that had not both, they being in the state of innocence
glued inseparably: but they had been born in gratia gratum faciente, says
Aquin. part. 1. quaest. 100. art. 1. ad. 2.
Aquine. Therefore do I conclude, both with Aquine against them, that the
posterity of innocent Adam had been born in gratia gratum faciente; and with
them against Aquine, that they had been confirmed in original justice.

Scotus seeing the inconveniences of Aquin's position, takes a third way,
namely, That the posterity of just Adam should have been born both in justice
and grace, but not confirmed till they had overcome their first temptation.
Before I come to grapple with Scotus, I must first try my strength against
Aquinas; from whose position these three consequences do necessarily flow, as
Est. in 2. Sent. did. 20. Parag. 5.
Estius his great disciple confesses. First, that some of Adams children might
have continued obedient, others might have been disobedient to God. Secondly,
That the just children of innocent Adam should have been tempted by Satan, not
once only, but often. Thirdly, That without temptation they might have sinned,
by their own will only. Against the first consequence I thus argue. If some of
innocent Adams children had sinned, should they have had any children or none?
Not none; for the blessing of Crescite and Multiplicamini reached to all.
Should their children then naturally have been good or bad? Not good and
innocent; for that is not the issue of actually disobedient offenders. If they
had been born wicked, then had their generations so been, and the generations
from them to the Worlds end: and millions of souls had perished, which fell not
in Adam, but in and by their other parents; which crosses the main current of
Divinity. For Adam only represented all mankind, and in him only were we to
stand or fall. Adam in Paradise, even before his sin, was a Type of Christ,
(compare Genes. 2.24. with Ephesians. 5.30, etc.) and stood idealiter for us all.
See Romans 5.12, etc. He was (...). Adamerat nos omnes, and nos omnes eramus ille
unus Adam. By Aquins consequence more first Adams are set up, by which mankind
might have fallen; and so more second Adams to restore them. But by one man
came death, and by the blood of only one are we redeemed. Again, if innocent
Adams just children, though unconfirm'd, had begot just unconfirmed children,
and yet after that generation these unconfirm'd fathers had sinned; what
children should they have begot after their sin? should the same father have
brought forth life and death? good children and bad? and seen some of his
children happy, and himself and other children miserable? And suppose the
mothers had sinned, and not the fathers; should the mothers have been in the
stead of the first Adam? should the children have fallen in them, or no? A
third absurdity follows from Aquins position, namely, That the righteous
should have begotten not one constantly righteous, from the beginning to the
Worlds end: but every one that had sinned, should have begotten sinful
children for ever. And so, for one that had continued righteous and been
tranlated, millions might have been sinners, and died. Lastly, no one man had
been certain of his salvation any time of his life, though he had lived never
so long, and never so justly; which yet, even in statu lapso, has been granted
to some few.

Against the second consequence from Aquins doctrine, viz. That even the just
children of innocent Adam should have been tempted by Satan, not once, but
often, I oppose these demands: How many times are included in the word often?
or when should there have been an end of tempting? If at any set time of their
life; why at that time, and never before nor after? If they should have been
tempted all the days of their life, the felicity of Eden might have been more
troubled, and fluid then the waters of it; and I might justly say, O poor
Paradise, unsettled integrity, provoked or tempted innocence, tremulous estate;
where Satan the stronger had power always to tempt, and malice enough to
charge home with cunning, and man the weaker had power always to fall.

The third consequence is somewhat questionable, as inferring, that all and
every of Mankind, even without any temptation, might have sinned by their own
will only; making the happiness of Paradise worse then our present unhappines,
where man sins not but, being tempted either by Satan, or his own
concupiscence, Jam. 1.14. For all the evil thoughts of our will are truly
divided into Immissas and ascendentes.
injected and ascending; and none of the ascending have been in the will before
they were in the understanding, and nothing has been in the understanding that
has not been in the senses. Besides, death was to be inflicted, not for the
sin of the will only, or merely, but for the eating of the forbidden fruit.

These or the like, or worse inconveniences, perhaps, made Scotus to vary from
Aquine, and more probably to defend, That upon triumph over their first
temptation, every one of the children of innocent Adam had been confirmed in
grace. We may not yield this, says Estius. And it is not true, and there is no
reason for it, and it little agrees with the commination, In the day that thou
eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, Genes. 2.17, says Gregory de Valentia.
I answer, That the words In the day may prove, that they might not have been
tempted the first or second day, or in a short time; but they hinder not, but
upon overcoming of their first temptation, they might every day after have been
confirmed. Again, the commination was not spoken to Adam, as an individual
person, but to him as the Feoffee of mankind. If every one should have stood
for himself and his posterity, what is Adams sin more to me then Cains, or
my last and immediate fathers first actual sin, if neither Adam, nor any of
his children had sinned before mine own father? But since we did fall, not
personally in our selves, not in our immediate parents, not in any but Adam, by
the breach of that commination: so on the contrary, not by any other parents
obedience, not by our own obedience, but by the obedience of that one man unto
that one commination, we should have stood, yea have been confirmed. Thus have
you mine opinion against Scotus, much more against Aquinas: and this is my
reason. Naturally, by the blessing of ordinary generation, every creature was
to beget its like according to kind: the branch was to partake of the virtue
and nature of the root; and so, without Adams representing us, he should have
begot us in such an estate as he himself was, with a liberty to good and
evil, with a power to fall or not fall. But as Gods infinite wisdom chose him
out, with express or tacit compact, that if he stood, all his posterity
should live in him; and if he sinned, they should all die in him: it seems
reasonable, that we should have had as much good by him, as we have had harm
from him, and he being to have been confirmed in grace, upon the overcoming of
the first suggestion, should have begot us his children, not voluble,
deambulatory, and pendulous, but like himself confirmed in grace. For as the
Angels were confirmed in grace, so soon as they had declared them-selves to
adhere to God; (or else, when were they confirmed, or are they not confirmed
yet? Statim post unum actum charitate informatum Angelus beatus fuit. Aquin.
part. 1. quaest. 62. art. 5.
Presently after one act informed with charity the Angels were blessed, says
Aquine) so should Adam have been confirmed presently, if he had powerfully
adhered to God. Yea, I think if he had but at that first suggestion disliked
Eves eating, or rather kept her and himself from consenting to the eating, that
nor they, nor any of their posterity should ever have eaten of the forbidden
fruit. But as it was placed at first in Paradise, to be their Shibboleth of
trial, so ever after it should have continued as a Symbol only of their
obedience. Again, by this my opinion, That all Adams issue should have been
confirmed in his confirmation, Gods justice is defended from aspersions cast
upon it, for damning some little children for the sin of Adam, which sin
they did neither commit nor could avoid. And the fault of not avoiding it was
no way arising from them; because they who can not avoid certain damnation by
Adam, might also have received as certain salvation by him, without their own
victory over any temptation; which could not be, unless by his confirmed
innocence every one of his issue had been confirmed in grace. Anselmus comes
home to my thoughts, saying thus, Anselm. lib. 1. Cur Deus homo. cap. 18.
The first men yielding to the temptation have subjected all mankind that was
to be born of them, Primi homines succumbentes temptationi, totum genus humanum
ex ipsis nasciturum subjecerunt necessitati peccati. Quare si eam temptationem
superassents and ipsi statim illius victoriae merito fuissent in justitia
confirmati, and idem confirmatae justitiae beneficium ad totam posteritatem
transmisissent.
to the necessity of sin. Therefore if they had overcome that temptation,
they had both themselves been presently confirmed in righteousness by the merit
of that victory, and had also transmitted to the whole posterity the same
benefit of confirmed righteousness. Estius answers Anselm thus; The way is
easier to the necessity of evil, then of good; as to incurable diseases,
rather then to a stable health. I reply thus on Estius, That his instances are
in decayed nature, which reach not to our point; That the way was equally alike
at first to Adam; or rather easier to goodness, in which he was, then to sin in
which he was not: yea, in this our present infeebled estate, one habitually
grounded in virtue shall find the passage over unto sin more difficult,
perplexing, thorny, and laborious, then the continuing in goodness. Out of
Scotus his doctrine let me observe three points. First, he confesses Omnes
nati servassent justitiam, non quia non servare non potuissent.
All their children had kept their righteousness, not because they could not but
keep it. So they could have sinned, but should not, in his opinion. But are not
they confirmed, who though they could sin, yet should not be suffered to
sin? Secondly, this confirmation in grace, being a supernatural gift, had
not been transfused by Adam, but superadded by God unto every one, as well as
the gift of original justice and grace. I should have asked no more of Scotus,
if he had said it should have been given to us of God, not for our personal
vanquishing the first temptation, but for our obedience in Adam, according to
Gods compact with him. Thirdly, confirmation in grace is of two sorts, one
fitting to the state of a Comprehensor, or of supreme glorification. This
confirmation at its height and in its excellence, nor Adam himself, if he had
stood, nor his innocent issue should have had, till their terrene bodies had
been translated into spiritual. The other confirmation agrees with a Viator,
which is not without a possibility of sin, but having infallible custody,
that he shall not sin mortally. This (says Scotus, and the Scholium on him)
Adams innocent issue should have had. But could they, being confirmed, have
sinned venially? Let me add two speculations more. First, God could not make a
creature in which there should not sometime be a peccabilitie, since that is a
property only of the Almighty. If that tying of Gods hand seem harsh to any
unconversant in the Schools, I mitigate it thus, by the like instance out of
Scal. Exercit. 249. in fine.
Scaliger, When unto any thing God by his infinite powerful perfection does
add perfection, he must at last surcease from bettering it, and come to a NIL
VLTRA: for he can not make ENS ESSENTIA INFINITVM, a thing of infinite essence;
for he should make another God. Which words you must not understand, as if we
stinted Gods Almighty power, but rather thus, That God can always better any
thing, even to infinity; but the creature and thing it self is not susceptible
of that infinity; the imperfection resting not in God, but in the creature. To
that effect Scaliger: and it may be aptly applied to the making of a creature
simply impeccable. Secondly, God did make Adam with a full free will, and a
power to sin or not to sin. Our will was in his, and, without offense to
the Schools, as in him we were in a sort and in one kind Viatores, before his
fall; so if he had stood, we had been, as he himself should, in a lesser
degree, Comprehensores. For though Aquine makes but simply singlie one
confirmation in grace, yet Scotus makes a twofold confirmation: and though
Scotus says, Viator and Comprehensor distinguuntur, sicut esse circa terminum
and esse in termino; yet there is a just distinction between Esse in termino
complete, and esse in termino incomplete. Christ in some sense may be said to
have been both Viator and Comprehensor. If Adam had been confirmed ere he fell,
he had been in some degree Comprehensor: so had we; and yet both he and we
should have been in some sort Viatores in termino incompleto, as not having
obtained life unchangeable, and bodies spiritual, which was to be the
compleatorie perfection of humane bliss. More arguments might I use, but they
may be gathered in the answers unto the objections before cited.

And first, the great S. Augustine has many observable passages to this point.
First, That only Adam was made of earth: that this gradation is not required,
namely; that he should be first created a child, then become a youth, then a
man, De Genes. ad literam 6.13. And in the Chapter following, Creditur factus
Adam virili aetate, sine ullo progr^ssu incrementorum.
Adam is thought to have been made in man's age, without any growth or further
increase. And more resolvedly, De peccatorum Merit. and Remiss. 2.27. Quod
pertinet ad corporis quantitatem, Adam non factus est p^rvulus, sed perfecta
mole membrorum.
As for the quantity of body, Adam was not made little, but of a perfect
bigness of members. Secondly, in the last cited place Augustine makes this
Quaere, If Adam and Eve had not sinned, Whether their young children should
have been able to go, speak, or the like? And he answers, Perhaps it was
necessaric they should be born little, according to the capacity of the womb:
but as God made Eve no little woman of a little rib, so the omnipotent Creator
might have made their little children newly born, presently to be great: Even
many beasts, a while after they are born, run and follow after their dammes;
much more might he have done for men, and given them even present use of their
members. Thirdly, though Lombard rather inclines to them who say, that the
newborn children of innocent Adam should have grown by degrees, and not have
been presently able to exercise their limbs: though accordingly he inclines
to them, who think that those innocent infants upon their birth should have had
little sense or understanding, but by time should acquire proficiencie and
perfection; yet I rather imagine, they should presently upon their birth have
had perfect use of body and mind, (though I deny not experimental
augmentations) both because there is a nearer resemblance unto Adam, who was so
created, and a further distance and dissimilitude from the estate of our
corrupted nature, which creeps sensim, pedetentim, and gradatim, by little
and little, and is incompetent to the perfection of innocence. Yea Estius
himself fights against Lombards discourse, and says, Innocent Adams children
should have had use of reason from their very nativitie, and perhaps even in
their mothers womb should have had some small knowledge of God: and confirms
his opinion by Augustine De peccat. Merit. and Remiss. lib. 1. Cap. 36. and
lib. 2. Cap. 29. and Confess. 1.7. and De Civit. 22.22. Where (says he)
Augustine speaks not of an habitual knowledge only, but of the act and use
of knowledge. Therefore if Augustine were not to be expounded, as he is by
Halensis, of confirmation in obedience upon the first temptation; yet they will
get little footing by that learned Fathers authority, if they will weigh one
place with an other, which are hereafter to be cited out of him; to which, that
I may shorte^ this point, I refer you.

I come now unto Estius, who had his first reason from Aquine and Scotus. Adam
and Eve (say they) had not begotten children in a better condition then
themselves were created by God; therefore they should have begot just children,
but not confirmed in grace. First, I answer, that though God made all things
very good at the creation, yet he might after (if he would) and may yet (if he
will) make things better then they were at the creation. Secondly, Stapl. De
Peccato Originali lib. 1. cap. 15.
Stapleton quoteth this from Augustine, Primus homo laetiorem, nos potentiorem
gratiam accepimus.
The first man did receive a more pleasant grace, we a more powerful. Neither
does Whitaker dislike this, though he confute much of that Chap. of Stapleton:
Now, if we in this forlorn estate have more powerful grace then Adam, why not
in that estate? Thirdly, though the children of innocent Adam might have more
grace intensively then he, yet Adam had had more extensively: for his
righteousness had benefitted the whole World, theirs had redounded but to their
own persons. Fourthly, let us take a more distinct view of their several
gifts. Adam receives original justice, to stand (if he would) for himself and
the whole World: his issue receive by his standing this grace more then he had
at first, (though he had it before he begot them) that they cannot fall by
themselves as he might. As for this, that their children should not fall, but
that all their generation should have been confirmed in grace, it proceeds
not from their immediate parents, but from Adam as the root. Now then, weigh in
a balance these two graces together (which the Schoolmen neglected) certainly
the grace given unto Adam was (all things considered) more powerful, more
abundant. As if God should give, in present possession, unto one man enough of
worldly wealth, to serve sufficiently, yea abundantly for himself and his seed
for ever, if he would husband it well. Secondly, if after this God should
superadde unto his son, this gift more then he gave unto the father at first,
namely, this grace, that he should not have power to diminish this wealth, for
so much as concerned his own person; which of these two, the father or the
son, had the greater gift? I doubt not but Calculator would hold, that the
father had. Again, if Ada^ had begot children beforeever he had seen the tree
of good and evil, as was possible, he had begot children as himself was
created, just, but unconfirmed. The conclusion of Aquin part. 1. quaest. 100.
art. 2. In corpore articuli.
Aquine, or extracted out of Aquine, is unworthie of him, and so are his own
words, Parents quandiu generassent, non fuissent confirmati in just it ia: ex
hoc enim creatura rationalis in justitia confirmatur, quod efficitur beata per
apertam Dei visionem.
So long as the parents had begotten, they had not been confirmed in justice:
for hence is a reasonable creature confirmed in justice, that it is made happy
by the open sight of God. I answer, that the beatificall vision is the
complement, perfection, and boundarie of all confirmation in justice: but there
may be a kind of confirmation in justice without the beatificall, present,
apert vision of God, or such as shall be in the state glorified. For since
Aquine there confesses, That the thrice holy Mother of our Holiest All-holy
Savior might by especial privilege generate, and yet enjoy the apert vision
of God, I see not why Adam and Eve continuing innocent might not do the like,
or beget children confirmed in grace, and yet generate; which he denies.
Because the supposed privilege of the All-gracious Virgin does not derogate
from the glory of our most blessed Redeemer, I will not contradict it; though
it makes her more perfect then God made Adam and Eve in their integrity.
Lastly, why might not generating parents be confirmed in grace, when in the act
there should have been no turpitude, no salacious motion, no lascivious
titillation; and those members might have been used without any itch of
ticklish pleasure, as our hands and feet and some other parts are now? Read S.
Augustine De Civit. 14.24. and 26. most fully of these things. Unto Estius his
second reason, which is this, Angels were not ordained to blessedness, but by
the merit of their freewill; and man was not first to be placed at the goal or
end, but in the way: I answer, Every Angel was to stand or fall by his own
proper actual free will. Man was unlike to them therein; Adams actual consent
for us, stood exactly for the actual consent of each Angel; for no Angel fell
in Lucifer, as we did in Adam. But to the second branch of his argument, I
confess with Aquine, Anim a hominis and Angelussimiliter ad bea titudin^m
ordinantur.
The soul of man and an Angel are alike ordained to blessedness. The way was
necessary before the goal, the means before the end. But I must add, Adam was
in the way, and we in the way by him and in him! and as he brought us out of
the way by his straying by-path, so by his undeviation we had been kept in the
way. More might be added, but the Question has swollen above its banks
already. I must be brief, though I be obscure.

What Hugo and Lombard require, was performed by Adam for us. Though Estius in
this point makes God like an hard task-master, and man a mere journy-man; yet
much was given to him who deserved little; even for one only, and the easiest
hours work. So might God have done to us for his promise unto Adams obedience
for us. In that estate, perhaps, he needed no merit challenging due reward; as
there shall be no new recompense for desert, after we are glorified. But if
merit had had place, it might after confirmation in grace have procured
speedier translation to an unchangeable life; and the accidentals of beatitude
might have been increased in us, as they shall be in the Angels of light,
though long since they were confirmed in grace.

Scotus objecteth, The children of innocent Adam should have been Viatores, in
the way to happiness; therefore they might have been sinners. I answer, Viator
is considered according to a twofold estate. First, for him that walks in a
slippery and dangerous way, where he may be in or out. Thus was Adam Viator,
thus were we Viatores in Adam before his fall, and thus we could have sinned,
yea did sin; which is more then Scotus his argument evinceth. Secondly,
Viator is taken according to the estate of him who walks in a good sure way,
where no by-path can be made. Thus we being confirmed should have been
Viatores, and yet could not have been sinners; and herein we had been like to
blessed Angels; yea the same man might have been Viator in one regard, and
Comprehensor in an other respect at the same time. So was Christ, so had Adam
and his children been upon confirmation in goodness; not that they should have
had that plenitude of comprehension which is to be enjoyed after the general
judgment, but such a comprehension which had been agreeable to that present
estate, (though susceptible of degrees, and capable of more perfection) where
Comprehensor is synonymous with beatus only, but not beatissimus. The same
Scotus further reasons thus: The grace confirmed by the Merit of Christ in
Baptism, or other Sacraments confirm not the receiver;
Therefore much less should any Merit of any parent or child have confirmed
us in justice.


I answer, The confirmation had rather been from Gods gracious promise to Adam
and his seed, then from any merit properly so called. Secondly, The graces of
Christ exhibited in the Sacraments of initiation and corroboration shall draw
us up to an infallible confirmation in the estate of glory; where we shall
have more comfort, delight, and good by Christ, then we had harm by Adam, if he
had not fallen: of which hereafter.

To some arguments and authorities for my opinion, some answers are shaped by
the Schoolmen. I will loose the argument from S. Gregory, because it
ingendereth more questions, when this is too copiously handled already.

Anselm speaks home for me, if ever man spoke; Aquinas says, He did it
opining, not affirming: Yet he saw the reason which induced Anselm to that
Assertion. Scotus also slubbereth over the authority of Anselm, winking, as it
seems, when he should have read the direct words. Dion. De Divinis Nominibus
cap. 4.
Dionysius says, Bonum est potentius malo: Good has more power and virtue
then evil. But (say I) for the sin of the first man came a necessity of
sinning upon all his children; Therefore if he had stood, there should have
been a necessity of not sinning. Scotus answers in the first place, as if
Dionysius were to be understood of a great Evil, and a little Good, which
plainly that Father never meant. Secondly, he jumpeth in sense with Aquine,
and both do answer, That we are not so necessitated to sinning, that we can not
return to justice, and Adams sin was not cause of our confirmation in evil.
I reply, we are so necessitated by our nature, that of our selves and from our
selves we can not return to justice. We are obstinate and confirmed in evil,
in regard of our own disabilities; though not confirmed in evil, nor
obstinate, if we consider the powerful mercy of God. And this is enough to
make the argument hold good. There should have been a necessity of not sinning
of our part; otherwise, Evil should have been more powerful then Good, which
is the contradictorie to Dionysius. For we can not but sin of our selves, and
are obstinate; though we are not so obstinate as the damned, nor should have
been so confirmed by Adam as the glorified shall be.

Unto our argument drawn from the similitude of Angelical reward, Aquinas
answers, Men and Angels are not alike. I reply, We were both like in some
things, and unlike in other: but in this we had been like, That as the Angels
were confirmed presently upon their first obedience, so had Adam been
confirmed, and we in him. For God loved not Man worse then the Angels; For
Christ verily took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed
of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. Scotus yeeldes himself captive to the force of this
reason, save only that he opineth, That every one of Adams children should, as
well as Adam, have been confirmed in grace, upon their actual overcoming of
the first temptation suggested unto them; whereas I maintain, That Adams
representation of us, and his obedience, should have done us equal good, to
our resisting of the first temptation.

More might pertinently be said of this matter: but besides the precedent
tediousness of it, Ludovicus Vives aurem vellit, endeavoring to restrain such
speculations to modest bounds. Thus he says on Augustine De Civit. 13.1. Of
things which might, or might not have happened to man, if Adam had not fallen;
Quid factum sit, magno nostro malo, nemo ignorant; quid fuisset, nescio an ipsi
Adam ostensum fuit; quanto minus nobis misellis? Nam quid prodest uti
conjecturis, in re quae conjecturas omnes superat humanas?
What fell out, to our great harm, no man is ignorant of: what should have
befallen, I know not whether it was revealed to Adam himself; how much less to
us poor wretches? For what avails it to use conjectures, in a thing which is
above all humane conjectures? But Vives himself is to blame. First, for his
nesciencie, or timerousnesse; as if Adam knew not, what estate he and his
should have had, if he had persevered in innocence. The ignorance of a point so
nearely concerning him, had argued imperfection; which the fulness of knowledge,
in which he was created, did clearly dispell. For if God said to the corrupted
World, Deuteronomy. 30.19. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you,
that I have set before you Life and Death, could incorrupt Adam be ignorant of
the life that was set before him? Or did Adam understand the miseries and
punishments, the orts and effects of Morte Morieris, expressly threatened
against him, in a future contingent estate; and could he be ignorant of his
present condition of bliss, and certain bliss to be increased upon his
obedience? Did he know the natures of beasts, and other creatures; could he
know the strange production of Eve, could he prophetically intimate the strict
union of Christ with his Church, by his own conjunction with Eve; and was it
not showed unto him, what state he should have had, and we in him? Secondly,
though these things be taxed of nicetie, yet the impartial Reader, overviewing
this Book, perhaps will say, It was profitable and delightful to problematize
even upon this very point. But other matters invite me hence forward to them;
and therefore having cleared, That it was the sin of Adam, of only Adam, and
not of Eve, for which Death was appointed, Let us proceed to examine, Which and
what this sin of Adam was; which is next and necessarily to be handled.

O Most glorious Creator, who did make us in the First Adam excellent
Creatures, and would have made us better, if he who undertook for us, had
not brought upon us death and destruction; Grant, I beseech thee, for thy
mercies sake, in the Merit and Mediation of the Second Adam, Jesus Christ our
only Savior, That we may recover our lost Image, and be made like unto him
here, and reign in Life with him hereafter.
CHAP. IIII.
1. Adams perfection in Innocence. Our imperfection after his fall, contrary
to his, both in understanding and will, and in the parts concupiscible and
irascible.

2. Adam had other laws given him: but one above all, and one only concerning
posterity.

3. What this Law was. Adam knew the danger to himself and his of spring. The
first sin was against this Law.

4. Eve sinned before. How she sinned the same, and not the same sin with
Adam.

5. Zeno, the Stoics, and Jovinian confuted. Sins are not equally sinful.

6 Adam sinned far more and worse then Eve.

7 This sin of Adam was not uxoriousnesse, as Scotus maintained, but
disobedience or pride. The branches of Adams sin.

1 LOmbard says, Quibusdam videtur quod Adam ante lapsum non habuerit
virtutem. Lomb. Sent 2. did. 29. lit. B.
Some are of opinion that Adam before the fall had no virtue. He had not
justice (say they) because he despised Gods commandment; nor prudence, because
he provided not for himself; nor temperance, for his appetite extended to the
forbidden fruit; nor fortitude, for he yielded to suggestion. We answer, says
Lombard, He had not these virtues when he sinned, but before, and in sinning
losed them. For Augustine in a certain Homily says, Adam was made according to
the Image of God, armed with shamefastness, composed with temperance,
splendent with charity. Otherwhere he says, Adam was endued with a spiritual
mind. Ambrose says, Beatissimus erat, and auram carpebat aetheream.
He was most happy, and led an heavenly life; and adds a good observation,
Quando Adam solus erat, non est praevaricatus.
When Adam was alone, he transgressed not. Which may teach us to fear the
enticements of company. This point deserves not to be so speedily cast off:
and therefore attend this further enlargement.

Many, very many precepts were graven in the heart of Adam, and every branch of
the natural Law was there written by the finger of God, at his Creation; nor
was he ignorant, what was to be done or omitted in any business. Eccl. 17.1.
The Lord created man of the earth: and verse 2. he changes the singular into
the plural, He gave them power over the things therein: and verse 3. He endued
them with strength by themselves, and made them according to his image: And
then follows an excellent description of their gifts. I conceive, and explain
the matter thus: Four faculties he had, and we have of our souls, Two
superior. Two inferior.
The two superior are understanding and will; The two inferior, the part
irascible and part concupiscible. First, the object of his understanding was
truth, the perfection of it was knowledge: but now, as we are in the state
decayed, this truth is darkened with ignorance, 1 Corinthians. 2.14. The natural
man receives not, nor can know the things of the Spirit of God. Ephesians. 4.18.
Their understanding is darkened, and their hearts are blind. Psalm. 49.20. Man
in honor understands not. As Adam was in innocence, he was partaker of the
truth. The Apostle, Ephesians. 4.23, 24. says, Be renewed in the spirit of your
mind. New we were once in Adam, and in him also we grew old: we are commanded
to be renewed as new as once we were; and put on that new man, which was
created in righteousness and holiness of truth; therefore the first Adam was
created in truth. You have the object, Truth; the perfection was Knowledge,
Ecclesiasticus 17.7. God filled them with knowledge and understanding: and this
is seconded by the Apostle, Colos. 3.10. The new man is renewed in knowledge,
after the image of him that created him. Renovation necessarily implies
precedent oldnes; and oldnes, precedent newnes of knowledge in the first Adam.
Secondly, the object of man's will, was, and is, Goodness; the perfection,
Love. In the decayed estate the will is infected with vanity, Genes. 6.5.
Every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
Ephesians. 4.17. We walk in the vanity of our mind. In the state of integrity it
was far otherwise: Adam was new in his mind, and holy and righteous, as was
proved before: in which regard Chrysostom. Hom. 16. in Genesis
Chrysostom says, Adam was a terrestrial Angel. Bas. Homil. Quod Deus non sit
author malorum.
Basil reckons up, as Adams chief good in Paradise, His sitting with God, and
conjunction by love. As all things else, so Adams will was good, and tended unto
good; there is the object: his love in innocence was entire, and united to
God; there was his perfection. Thirdly, the object of his, and our part
concupiscible, is moderate delight: the perfection and felicity of it, was
contentment. As now, this part is gauled with insatiable itchings, and given
over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greedines, Ephesians. 4.19.
But at the first Adam was free. Augustine says, Gratia Dei ibi magna er^t, vbi
terrenum and animale corpus bes^ialem libidinem non habebat.
There the grace of God was great, where an earthy and sensual body had no
beastly lust. The place he was in, was a Paradise of pleasure, a garden of
delight; nothing was wanting which might give true content. Fourthly, the
object of his and our irascible part may in a sort be called Difficulty, or
rather Constancy; whose glory of endeavors, end, and felicity, was Victory.
This part now is much weakened with infirmity. In the best of us, the Flesh
lusts against the Spirit, and (alas!) we are often vanquished, as being weak
by nature: But Adam was strong, and could have overcome any temptation.
Augustine says, Felices erant primi homines, nullis agitabantur perturbatio,
ibus animorum, nullis corporis laedebantur incommodis. De Civit. 14.10.
Our first parents were happy, being neither shaken with any trouble of mind,
nor hurt with any infirmity of body. Adam non opus habebat eo adjutorio quod
implorant isti, cum dicunt, Video aliam legem in membris meis, etc. Lib. De
Corrept. and Gratia.
Adam had no need of that help which these crave, when they say, I see another
law in my members, etc. Yea he is more bold there, saying, Adam in illis bonis,
in quibus creatus est Christ morte non ^guit. Ibid.
Adam in those good things wherein he was created, had no need of Christ's
death. He had, with liberty and will, grace sufficient, whereby he might have
triumphed over all difficulties and temptations. Augustine thus, In Paradiso
etiamsi omnia non poterat Adam ante peccatum, quicquid tum non poterat non
volebat, and ideo poterat omnia quae volebat. De Civit. 14.15.
In Paradise before sin although Adam could not do all things, yet he then
would not do whatsoever he could not, and therefore could do all that he would.
Adam having these excellent endowments of nature and grace, had also
necessarily certain objects, about which they should be conversant. These
objects were, all the parts, and branches of the Law of nature, whereby he
fully knew his duty. And all and every one of these he did for a while, or at
the least not break: and he and his posterity should, and ought to fulfill, as
they were private persons: and for the performance and nonperformance thereof,
both he and we should, and shall answer unto God, at the high Throne and
Tribunal of the just and righteous Judge.

2. But there was one precept, and only one, given to Eve, (perhaps to all
Adams posterity, as private persons: who, if they had eaten of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, can not be imagined, that they could have ruinated
all mankind:) but commanded to Adam only, as the public person, as the Idea
of humane nature, as the stock and root, by whose obedience or disobedience all
mankind was to be happy or unhappie, as the figure of Christ to come. And
this sin was not to be a sin of thought only, as the sin of the Angels, who
each of them sinned by his own expressed will; but such a sin, as might bring
a deserved blot, and punishment upon all his posterity, who were in him: which
could not be, unles it had been committed both by his soul and his body, and
thereby had power to infect all the parts, and faculties both of souls and
bodies. Again, the body of Adam could not sin without the soul, neither could
this be a sin of the soul alone, without some concurrents of the bodily
parts; for then Adams sinning soul should have been damned, and his innocent
body saved: but it was to be a sin compounded of inward aversion and outward
transgression. So that if Adam had seen Eve eat, and had himself lusted after
the fruit, and yet before the orall manducation had disliked his liking, had
feared the punishment, and not proceeded to eat of it, or touch it, I do not
think his posterity had been engaged, as they are. Augustine cites this out
of S. Ambrose, and approves it, Si anima Adami appetentiam corporis
refranasset in ipso ortu, extincta esset origo peccati. Cont. Julian. Pelag.
lib. 2.
If Adams soul had bridled the bodily appetite in the very beginning, the
original of sin had been quenched.

Catharinus thinks there was an express covenant between God and Adam, that
Adam and his posterity should be blessed or cursed, according to the breaking
or keeping of that one law. What Catharinus says is probable, and may be most
true, though it be not so written. For first, if the prohibition had concerned
Adams person only, since the precept was given before Eve was created, Adam
only should have tasted of death, and not Eve. Secondly, questionless that
law and covenant included posterity, as is verified in the event. When Morte
Morieris was threatened unto Adam, he was then Rectus in Curia, and stood as a
public person, representing all his branches. If it concerned him, as a
private person, he only should personally have died, and we escaped: but our
dying in him evinceth, that he was reputed (if I may so say) a general,
universal feoffee or person, to whose freewill the happy or unhappie future
estate of all his descendants was entrusted; conditionally, to live for ever,
upon the observance of one law; or to die the death, for the breach of it. Life
and death was propounded, Non uni, sed universitati.
Not to one man, but to all mankind.

3. And this law is registered, and recorded, Genes. 2.17. Of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat; for in the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely die. Which words I verily believe that Adam
understood (either by his natural wisdom, which was very great, or by divine
conference or revelation, which to him was not unfrequent) to involve his
posterity as well as himself. For if immediately upon the creation of woman,
Adam could foresee and prophecy, Genes. 2.24. That a man shall leave his
Father and Mother, and cleave to his wife; and they two shall be one flesh: and
by the same words, perhaps, understand Christ and his Church, and that mystery
explained by S. Paul, Ephesians. 5.31, etc. (those being the words of Adam, as
Epiph. Contr a Ptolemaitas.
Epiphanius says, of Adam speaking unto God, speaking the truth of God; and in
this respect (as I conceive) Christ says, Matthew. 19.4, etc. these words are
the words of God, of the Creator; as all light is from the Sun, so all truth
from God; as on the contrary, all lies are from the Devil) I say, if Adam
could foresee marriages, generations, cohabitations, mysteries, and future
usances; he could not be ignorant, that that law was given him to keep to the
bliss of all mankind, and the contempt thereof would draw on the destruction
of his posterity. And (I think) I shall not err, if I collect from the
correlative correspondencie, which must be between the Type and the Antitype,
the shadow and the substance, That the first Adam knew his (...) or
disobedience was sufficient to bring destruction on all mankind, as the second
Adam knew that his (...) or obedience, was a sufficient redemption for the
sins of all the World. Durand foolishly presupposes, that the will of Adam
sinning was ours only concomitative and interpretative, because we lost
original justice, when Adam finned, beyond his thoughts or intentions. Stap.
De Originali Peccato 1.9.
Stapleton says truly, If Adam intended no such thing with an actual
intention, yet he did it with a virtuall intention. But I rather think, that
the word If may be cut off, and we may say, Adam did, as Esau afterward, prefer
temporals before spirituals, and as all the sons of Adam do at one time or
other; for he was not ignorant of the danger, yet embraced it: and he might say
within himself, -- Video meliora, proboque, Deteriora sequor -- Aug. De Genesis ad
lit. 11.18.
Augustine has this witty Quaere, Whether Adam and Eve foreknew their fall?
For if he did before hand know that he should sin, and that God would revenge
it, whence could he be happy? and so he was in Paradise, yet not happy. If he
did not foreknow his fall; then by this ignorance he was either uncertain of
that blessedness; and how was he then truly blessed? or certain by a false
hope, and not by a right knowledge; and then how was he not a fool? I answer,
They did not know that they should fall, or sin; for there was no necessity
laid upon them; and to know the unalterable certainty of a thing contingent
(as their future estate was) is to take away the nature of its contingencie,
and to make it unavoidable. But for all this ignorance, they were certain
enough of blessedness, if they would themselves; and their wills and persons
were in Paradise blessed, though changeable, though not so wholly blessed as
good Angels are, or as the Saints shall be. For if we say, Nothing is blessed
but what has attained absolute certainty, and the height of blessedness; the
very blessed Spirits of heaven shall not be said to be blessed, especially if
they be compared with God, who only is blessed. And so Adam and Eve were beati
modo quodam inferiori, non tamen nullo, that I answer in Augustines words.
Again, to the former part of this Question I answer, That they knew before hand
that they could sin, and that God would punish them, if they did sin; and
yet for all this, they had the grace given to stand, if they would, and so to
avoid both sin and punishment; and withal they knew that they had that
grace. But if before hand they had known, or could have known that they should
have sinned, they could not have been happy in Paradise, yet, as they were in
Paradise, they were happy, though they knew not that they should fall. For if
men on earth may be called Saints, Saints of light, Blessed, (as they are
often) and Spiritual, Galat. 6.1, though they were in their bodies to pass
through both temptations and tribulations, and can not diverse times but fall:
much more Adam might be termed Blessed in Paradise, who though he saw he might
fall, yet he saw also he might have stood; and so rejoiced, says Augustine
himself, for the reward to come, that he endured no tribulation for the
present. Lastly, to S. Augustines three-headed Dilemma I answer by
distinguishing. There is a threefold ignorance. The first is pravae
dispositionis, when one is prepossessed with a false opinion, excluding
knowledge: this may be called positive ignorance, or plain error. The second
is ignorantia privationis, when a man knows not what he is bound to know:
neither of these can consist with blessedness, nor was in innocent Adam. But
there is a third, viz. ignoratio simplicis nescientiae, when we know not such
things as we need not to know. This was in Adam, and is in good Angels: yea
Christ himself knew not some things. This ignorance is not sinful, nor
erroneous, not making either imaginarily happy, or foolish.

This great law, in Tertullians phrase is styled Lex primordialis, generalis,
and quasi matrix omnium praeceptorum Dei.
The Motherlaw, breeding all other laws: which had been sufficient for them, if
they had kept it, says he. Aug. De Civit. 14.12
Augustine and Chrysostom. Homil. 41. in Acta Apost.
Chrysostom agree in this, That Adams first sin only makes us culpable.
Chrysostom. in Ephesians. 6.
Chrysostom calls it (...). The first sin. Augustine says that Prima
duntaxat Adae transgressio transit in posteros, quia illo primo peccato
universa naturae corrupta est. Cont. Julian. 3.6.
Only the first transgression of Adam is passed upon the posterity, because
the whole nature is corrupted by that first sin. Therefore when a child is
born, he has original sin, and death the wages thereof annexed as due to
it; not because he is a creature, not because he is a person, not because he is
a person of mankind or humane nature, not because he descended from his
immediate or mediate parents, not because they came from Eve, not only because
he was in the loins of Adam, of sinning or sinful Adam; but because he was in
Adam when he first sinned, and implicitly gave his consent to the committing of
that first transgression, and that primarie aversion which has led us astray
ever since.

4. Some have held, that Eve sinned before she talked with the Serpent. So Rup.
lib. 3. De Operib. Trinit. in Genesis cap. 5.
Rupertus and Ferus in Genesis 3.
Ferus. But certainly she sinned before Adam, and being carried headlong with
the Bonu^ apparens, did little imagine to work so much mischief. Had she known
that her husbands yielding should necessarily and infallibly bring forth death
to him and all his posterity, and after that have offered him the forbidden
fruit, she had been full of deceit, and her intentions had been stained with
the just aspersion of seducement. But she might think her sin was little or
none, and persuade herself she should not die, and relate that persuasion to
her husband; or think only of Gods mercy, who had never tasted of his
judgments. And, perhaps, he seeing that she had touched the fruit, and was not
dead, sunk under her enticements, and did eat. Before I part with this point,
two questions more must needs be answered. First, Whether Eve sinned the same
sin with Adam? Secondly, Whether of their sins were the greatest?
Concerning the first, I answer, In regard that both of them knew, that to eat
of the forbidden fruit was unlawful and displeasing to God, and yet did eat,
they sinned the same sin: but as the commandment was given to Adam before
Eves creation, as Adam was the root of mankind, and as his posterity was to
stand or fall in him only, and not in Eve, so she sinned not the same sin
with Adam. She sinned the same sin, in respect of the outward eating, not in
regard of the inward obligation: She sinned the same sin in se, so much as
concerned her own person; she sinned not the same sin extensive erga alios.
For as her good actions, considered by themselves, should not have been the
rule or square according to which our humane natures should have been framed;
(but for all her uprightnes, if Adam had sinned we had died) so her sin or
sins, setting Adam apart, had not extended to the corruption or destruction
of mankind.

Though in innocence they did see much, yet they could then see no deformity:
nay, though Eve had sinned, and sinned diverse sins before Adam sinned any;
(for she believed the Serpent, distrusted God, fell to unlawful desires, and
did eat) yet they were both blind: and neither Eve herself did consider her
own faults, as she should, nor Adam Eves faults; but immediately so soon as
Adam had eaten, Genes. 3.7. The eyes of them both were opened, and they knew
that they were naked. For their nakedness came by Adams sin, and not by Eves;
the same sin of hers and his was not the same: neither Adam, nor we, nor she
herself by her sins were bare and naked of goodness, or had lost Bonum
naturae, but only gratiae personalis: but when once he had sinned; he, she,
and we were all naked, our natures corrupt and to be ashamed of; and both of
them knew it. Their eyes opened themselves; so Tremellius has it, differing
from the Hebrew and the Septuagint. The truth is, she sinned the same sin
twice; for she ate first by herself, and then her eyes were not opened. Neither
was she spoiled of original justice (says Franciscus Aretinus) as it was
gratia gratis data, nor did she feelthe motions of concupiscence, or knew her
own nakedness, till Adam had sinned. For if she had been deprived of grace so
soon as she sinned, she should have been ashamed of her nakedness; neither durst
she to have gone naked to her husband, but for modesty would have sought some
covering, or fled into corners. So far Aretinus, or Cornelius a Lapide who
cites him. But after this her eating and this her sin, she comes to her
husband, and offers him some to eat, and eats with him the second time; and
perchance began to eat the second time ere he ate once, and suffered him to see
her eat. Sure I am, the Hebrew runs thus, She did eat, and gave also unto
her husband with her, and he did eat: but the 70 say of Eve first, (...). where
they are peremptory, that Adam and Eve, or rather Eve and Adam are both
together. And Vatablus well expounds the SECVM, id est, vt una cum ipsa
ederet: and the proof is pertinent enough, though we do not read with the
Septuagint, They did eat, but with the Hebrew, He did eat, namely, with her,
or, after he had seen her eat. The sum is, she ate first, she ate again with
him, she sinned the same sin. And further, though she sinned the same sin
the third time, in his eating and by it, as well as we did, who also were in him
ratione principii; yet was it not her sin, but his sin that overthrew both
him, her, and us: and in this sense we may truly say, she sinned not the same
sin with Adam. So much for the first question. It comes secondarilie to be
enquired, Whether Adams or Eves sin was the greater.

5. To say that no sin is greater then other, is one of the grossest errors
that have been. Me thinks a Stoic should be ashamed to say, that Nero,
Heliogabalus, and the grand Epicure sinned not worse, then Cato the Utican,
Aristides the Just, or Zeno the Cittien of Cyprus, the great upholder of their
own sect: or that unmatchable Titus the Emperor, who lamented the day in which
he did not good to some man, was no better then Timon the Man-hater. No other
Philosophers ever joined hands with them in that folly. Hoc de parilitate
peccatorum soli Sioici ausi sunt disput are; nam sic fecerunt contra emnem
sensam generis humani. Aug. Epist. 29. Ad Hieronymum.
This of the equality of sins, the Stoics only have dared to dispute; for
they did so against all the sense, feeling, and opinion of mankind, says S.
Augustine. Yet Jovinian sided with them; but S. Hierom confuted him, Quam little
vanitatem, in Joviniano illo, qui in hac sententia Stoicus erat, in au^upandis
autem and defensand is voluptatibus Epicur^us, de Scripturis Sanct^^
diiucidissime convicisi^.
Which opinion of theirs in that Jovinian, who in this tenent was a Stoic, but
in pursuing and defending pleasures an Epicure, out of the sacred Scriptures
thou have most clearly convinced, as S. Augustine in the same place testifies
of S. Hierom, to S. Hierom. The same in effect says S. Hierom himself of
himself, against Jovinian. Nullam inter justum and justum, peccatorem and
peccato em esse distantiam; veteremque Zenenis sententiam tam communi sensa
quam divina lectionecontrivim us Hieron. Cont. Jovin. lib. 2.
We have crushed both by common sense and by divine Scripture the error of
Jovinian, who would prove that there is no difference between just and just, a
sinner and a sinner; and also the old opinion of Zeno. And indeed, so he did in
the same book, both by answering all Jovinians objections, and overlaying him
with sound proofs. I omit whatsoever S. Hierom has laboriously, acutely, and
truly collected against the Stoicall equality of sins, and against Jovinians
wild inferences. Let him that thirsts, have recourse to the fountain, in the
said second book of S. Hierom against Jovinian: Fons vincet sitientem. Yet
suffer me to cast my mite into the Treasury. First, Elenctice, upon the by,
then Didactice, on the main. Concerning the first; unto one of the witless
positions of Jovinian, viz. Omnia membra aequaliter diligimus, nec oculum
praeponimus digite, nec digitum auriculae.
We love equally all our members, neither do we prefer the eye before the
finger, nor the singer before the ear; by which he would infer a parilitie
of sins, (besides what S. Hierom excellently answers) I can not choose but
oppose what Moses says, Deuteron. 32.10. God kept the Israelites as the apple
of his eye, it being more guarded with the double coverlids of skins and hairs,
and more curiously then any other outward part: which proverbiall similitude,
being also taken up both by David, Psalm. 17.8. and by the Prophet Zecharie 2.8.
significantly intimates, that one part of the body is more tender to us then
any other. Neither needed there such exact retaliation as is required Exodus
21.24. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, if all
members were of like worth: for a tooth might have been plucked out for an eye,
and the foot might have stood for the hand. Yea, whatsoever Jovinian opineth,
or rather raveth, Dives being in torment had more regard to the cooling of his
tongue, Luke 16.24. then to the tip of his ear. Where sin is, there is
punishment also, says S. Chrysostom; and Dives his tongue spoke many proud
things, says he: and Dives was full of loquacitie, as the Interlineary Gloss
observes even from his very speech to Abraham: and perchance his tongue was
most tortured, as having been most delighted and addulced with his daily
delicious fare. If any of Zeno or Jovinian his partisans will not believe, that
one bodily member is better then an other, I could wish it might be beaten into
them, and that they might endure sound raps or blows on their heads, which any
other man, yea natural fools, by natural instinct would rather bear off upon
the arms, as objecting unto danger the member of less worth, to save and
defend the part more principal; which hourly experience ratifieth. I pass by
all other his objections, because I have stood too long on this, and I come to
the main Question, Whether all sins are equal. The answer is plainly
negative. Reasons are these. First, diversity of sacrifices prove the
inequality of offenses, the greater offense being usually expiated with the
most costly sacrifice. The sin of the Priest was, in the estimate of God, as
the sin of the whole congregation, and the offering of his sin was a young
bullock without blemish, Levit. 4.3. If a Magistrate sinned, he was to offer a
kid of the goats, a male without blemish, verse. 23. If an ordinary man
offended, a female served the turn, verse. 28. and 32. whether it were of goats
or lambs. Where the best, greatest, and costliest of oblations does not prove,
that the estate, or the person of the Priest was better and more noble then the
estate or person of the King, or supreme Civil Magistrate, (which the Papists
impertinently would prove from thence) but the Priests greater sacrifice
evinceth his sin to be greater, by reason of his greater knowledge. For the
Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth;
for he is the Messenger of the Lord of hosts, Malachi 2.7. A second Reason may
be this: Greater punishments, both criminal and capital, are ordained by the
Law, for some people more then for others: But this can not be justly
appointed, unless there be degrees of sin: Therefore sins are not equal.
Concerning the Major, view it evinced in these instances: He that steals a
man, shall die, Exodus 21.16. If he steal an ox, or a sheep, he shall restore
five oxen for anox, and four sheep for a sheep, Exodus 22.1. He that kills a
man unwillingly, shall be protected, Exodus 21.13. if willingly, the very
Sanctuary, at the horns of the Altar, shall not save him; he shall die, verse.
14. The adultery of common people was punished with common death, Levit.
20.10. But the daughter of any Priest, if she profane her self by playing the
whore, she profaneth her father: she shall be burnt with fire, Levit. 21.9.
that is, she shall be burnt alive. The Minor is proved, because God is just,
and rewards every man according to his works, Revel. 22.12. Thirdly, the
Scripture says some are more wicked then others, Jerem. 3.11. The backsliding
Israel has justified her self more then treacherous Judah. Aholibah was more
corrupt in her inordinate love then Aholah, Ezekiel. 23.11. And some shall have
sorer punishment then others Heb. 10.29. There is a sin remissible, and a sin
irremissible, Matthew. 12.31. Tire and Sidon were more inclining to repentance,
then Chorazin and Bethsaida, Matthew. 11.21. Accordingly, It shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom, then for them, verse. 24. There are some sins
of infirmity, some of presumption, and great transgressions, Psalm. 19.13.
Reward Babylon even as she rewarded you, and double unto her double, according
to her works: in the cup which she has filled, fill to her double. How much
she has glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow
give her, Revel. 18.6, 7. Not, double as much as she has deserved; that were
injustice; but, double as much as others drink of the wrath of God. The
proselyte of the Pharisees is twofold more the child of hell then themselves,
Matthew. 23.15. and some shall receive greater damnation, verse. 14. Genes. 4.15.
Vengeance shall be taken sevenfold on him who slays Cain: Not sevenfold
more then such a deed as murder deserves, but sevenfold more then is taken on
some other men; perchance, sevenfold more then was taken on Cain himself. For
though it be a greater sin to kill an innocent, then a bloud-guilty wretch or
murderer; and more offensive to slay a brother then one of less kindred, or
acquaintance, (which may seem to be the case between Cain and Abel on the one
side, and Cain and his murderer on the other side) yet if we consider, that God
after an especial manner forbad any man to kill Cain, that God ordained life
as a punishment to Cain, that to kill Cain had been a courtesy, says Hierom,
that Cain was to live to be a terrifying example to all murderers. Lastly, if
we remember, that to deter all men from the murder of Cain, God set a
notorious mark upon him, such a oneas never any until this day had the like,
by reason of the extraordinarines thereof; whether it were a brand or stamp in
his forehead, or that the earth quaked under him wheresoever he went, or a
preternaturall and unusual shaking of his head, or dreadful tremors, or
convulsions over all his body; of which the particular is as uncertain, as the
general can not be doubted of, namely, that unto his terrors of conscience,
and a vagrant unsettled mind, some outward evident mark was annexed,
distinguishing him from other men, and in a sort forbidding any to murder him:
I say, he that now should have killed Cain, might justly sevenfold deserve
Cains punishment, and an other may rightfully incur punishment seventy times
sevenfold, as it is, if not in truth, yet at the least in the swasive of
Lamech to his wives, Genes. 4.24. There is a mote, and there is a beam, Matthew.
7.3. This beam may be sawed into many boards or rafters; and there is no
verture nor vice but has its latitude and degrees partaking of majus and
minus. There are funiculi vanitatis, Esai. 5.18. cords of vanity. There are
funes peccatorum, ropes of sins, Proverb. 5.22. And there are funes plaustri,
as Vatablus rendereth it, according to the Hebrew, cart-ropes or vinculum
plaustri, according to the Vulgat, the wain-rope, Esai 5.18. differencing
sins, and being indebted to diverse kinds of punishments. Every sin causes
a blot on the soul: the greater sin, the greater blot. A frequent sinner is
compared to a spotted leopard, Jerem. 13.23. and some notorious sinners are
called spots in the abstract, Jude, verse. 12. More testimonies I could heap,
but the point is cleared, and the enquiry, Wheter Adam or Eve sinned most, is
yet unanswered.

6. And here both ancient and modern Divines do much vary. Chrysostom. Hom. 7. ad
Pop. Ant.
Chrysostom says expressly, Eve sinned more then Adam: and In Romans Homil. 25.
in Morali.
elsewhere to this effect, Eve was more punished then Adam: but the punishment
is answerable to the fault. Therefore her sin was greater. Rupert follows
him, Triplicipoena mulier punitur, quia triplo majus peccatum fuit ejus quam
Adami. Rup. in Genesis lib. 3. cap. 22.
The woman is punished by a threefold punishment, because her sin was three
times greater then Adams. Hugo and Lombard, untruly supposing, that Eve only
believed the Serpents words promising them to be like unto God, do rather think
Eve sinned most. The Shoolmen by troops follow them. Cajetan is dubious:
commenting on Aquinas he would not differ from his Master, the great Summist,
but condemns the woman more then the man; yet expounding the third of Gensis,
he brings five reasons to excuse Eve more then Adam. S. Aug. is by both sides,
sometimes ascribing more fault to the man then to the woman, sometimes to the
woman rather then to the man: and De Genesis ad. lit. 11.35. and De Civit. 14 11.
twice he seems to hold, That they sinned equally. On the other side, Ambr.
De Instit. virginis cap. 4.
Ambrose says, Adams sin was greater. And again, Eva magis mobilitate animi,
quam pravitate peccavit. Comment. in Luc. 4.38.
Eve sinned more by unstablenes of mind then by perversenes. Isdore says,
Gravius est de industria peccare, quo modo peccavit Adam, quam ignorantia, quo
modo peccavit Eva. Isid. De Summo Bono 2.17.
It is more heinous to sin of set purpose, as Adam; then out of ignorance, as
Eve. This point needing to be distinguished upon, Aquine tells us, The
greatness of a sin is two ways considered; either exipsa specie peccati, from
the especial kind of the sin, or according to the circumstances of place or
person: and he resolves thus; Quantum adgenus peccati, vtriusque peccatum
aequale dicitur.
In regard of the kind of sin, the sin of them both is said to be equal.
Pride was in both: but if we look ad speciem superbiae, Eve sinned more, for
these three regards; She was more proud then the man: She not only sinned
herself, but made her husband sin: Thirdly, Adams sin was lessened by the
love he bore unto his wife. Which last reason is grounded on the words of S.
Augustine, Adam non carnaliconcupiscentia victus, sed amicabili quadam
compulsus benevolentia, qua plerunque fit ut offendatur Deus, ne offendatur
amicus, peccavit. De Genesis ad lit. 12. ult.
Adam sinned not being overcome by carnal concupiscence, but being constrained
by some friendly affection; by which it comes often to pass that God is
offended, lest a friend should be offended. Yea the same S. Augustine is cited
thus, Postquam mulier seducta manducavit, eique dedit ut simul ederent, noluit
eam contristari, quam credebat sine suo solatio contabescere, and a se
alienatam omnino interire.
After the seduced woman had eaten, and had given him that they should eat
together, he was loath to grieve her whom he thought ready to pine away without
his comfort, and altogether to die being estranged from him. Lastly, Aquine
says, If we weigh the condition of both persons, the man's sin was greater,
because he was perfecter then the woman. So Aquine 2.2. Quaest. 163. Art. 4.

7. Scotus thus opineth, Because Adam was more circumspect, more noble, more
strong to resist; therefore by accident his sin was more great: Formaliter
tamen, per se mere, and praecise inse, peccatum Evae fuit gravius. Scotus in 2.
Sent. did. 27. quaest. 2.
Yet formally, in it self, and precisely, the sin of Eve was greater. But the
learned Estius, on the same distinction, Paragraphe 7, thus, The greatness of
sin comes many ways; principally from the object and the end, then from the
circumstances either of the person or the intent of him, or of the frequencie
of the act, or the greatness of harm that comes by the sin, or of the
ignorance or infirmity or industry of the person. If we lay Adams and Eves
sin in the balance, respecting the object and the end, it weighed alike;
both of them believed the Serpent, both would be like God, both ate of the
fruit forbidden, both excused their faults: but weigh the circumstances (says
he) the man's sin was simply greater. First, he had more power to resist.
Secondly, he dealt with a less subtle enemy, a simple woman; but she had to
do with an evil Angel, of an higher nature then herself. Thirdly, he had the
precept from God himself; she but from her husband. Fourthly, he was to be head
over his wife, and not she over him; and he was to reduce her into the right
way, when she strayed. Fifthly, his excuse cast part of the fault, as it were,
upon God himself. Sixthly, indeed he was worse punished, and so says Augustine
truly. Seventhly, the better things are the worst in their corruption: The best
wine turns to the sharpest vinegar, the best of government, a Monarchy,
proves the worst, if it degenerate into a Tyranny. But the man exceeded the
woman as well in naturals as in gratuitous. So far in effect Estius.

Bellarmine compares their acts and per sons together, Bell. De Amiss. Gratiae
and Statu Peccati 3.9.
and concludes, that both in regard of acts and persons, Eve sinned least,
Adam worst. His observations are not only passable, but commendable, save in
two things. First, that he makes the excusation of their sin, to be one act
of the seven in Adam and Eves sin; when as in truth, their excuse was no part
or branch of their first sin, but a distinct and several sin by it self.
For having ended their first sin, they were ashamed, and had time to gather
figleaves and sew them, and make themselves aprons, or things to gird about
them: after this, they heard God speak, and hid themselves: after this, was
their examination de facto, and their confession: after all this, begins Adams
excuse, Genes. 3.12. and Eves, verse. 13. The diversity of these several
actions, and the distance of time interceding, show it was no part of their
first sin to excuse themselves. An other especial sin it was, aggravating
the former: and in this sin Adam sinned worst, as accusing God, indirectly,
for giving such an helper to him as had hurt him. Who will see things more at
large, let him consult with Estius and Bellarmine, unto whom, for the main, I
do subscribe; though I make the last part, and act of Adam and Eves sin, to
be their real orall manducation. The second escape of Bellarmine is, that
whereas in true Divinity, the fall of mankind is a consequent of our first
parents transgression; Bellarmine makes it one of the seven acts of their
sin, confounding the cause with the effect, and not sufficiently
distinguishing the fault from the punishment. May I add these things: Out of
the words of Scotus, I thus argue, Original justice was given to Adam, as to
the worthier, abler, and wiser person; yea, it was so given, that if he lost
it, he was to lose it for himself and his whole posterity. But it was not so
given, or infeoffeed to Eve; therefore since he failed, when the trust of the
whole World was reposed on him, his sin must needs be much more heinous then
hers. If the first sinning Angel was the greatest delinquent, though none of
the other Angels sinned in him, but each of himself, by his own proper will;
then Adam certainly sinned worse, who bare our persons, and being the Refer,
to whom our blessedness or cursednesse was entrusted, drew us all into
unhappiness. For the woman was but the incomplete principle of offending,
says Gorran: But by Adams first sin we lost the good of nature, Bonum
naturae, quod erat per originem naturae traducendum. Aquin in Romans 5. Lect. 3.
which was to be transmitted by the spring of nature, says Aquine. By Adams
other transgressions the good of personal grace was diminished, and might be
recovered, but the Natural good traducible could not be regained by any
repentance. The greatness of Adams sin appeared in that he might so easily
have kept the precept, Quanta erat iniquitas in peceando, vbi tanta eratnon
peceandi facilitas! Aug. De Civit. 14.15.
How great iniquity was there in sinning, where such facility was of not
sinning! says Augustine. Indeed to eat of the apple seems a small matter to
the carnal eyes of men, but in the least thing to be disobedient is not the
least offense; for as to obey is better then sacrifice, so disobedience is as
the sin of witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and idolatry, 1 Samuel
15.22, 23. Naaman, who would have performed a greater matter, should much more
willingly have been ruled by the Prophet in a trifle: it was the well-poised
argument of his servants, 2. Kings 5.13. and his correspondent obedience was
justly rewarded with health. But Adam, besides the smallnes of the matter it
self, erred grossly in the manner: for God did not appoint him any hard work, no
laborious task to perform. Omission is of an easy and pliable nature: more
facile it is for one not to wash a thousand times, then to wash once. Now, the
precept unto Adam was inhibitive, merely of omission, negation, or preterition,
easier to be kept then broken; and therefore to break it was a sin of an high
hand, a presumptuous sin, which may be aggravated in him by this
circumstance, that he received the restraint from God, which Eve did not. They
who think otherwise of Adams sin, do judge of it as the common people do of
the fixed stars, who imagine them to be no greater then a candle. But if you
truly take the height and breadth of Adams sin, it will be found, as the
stars in heaven, of greatness almost incredible; diverse of them, in their
several stations, being greater then the whole earth. Perhaps one of the
reasons, why the Apostle, Heb. 11. names not Adam among the old faithful
Heroes, was this, because he committed a greater sin then any of them. For
his offense has been the cause of death, of sickness, of all punishments
inflicted on men, in this life or in the life to come. Not Satan's temptation,
not Eves seduction, but Adams wilful disobedience cost the blood of the Son
of God. And all the despighteous sins of mankind, wherewith the Father
blessed for ever, the gracious Redeemer, and the sanctifying Spirit are
grieved, and do as it were groan under, and at which the holy Angels are
offended, and do in their sort mourn, proceed originally from that sin of
Adam, and but for that had never been. Therefore was his offense greater then
Eves. Moreover, God first summoned Adam, though Eve sinned first, and
questioned Adam particularly for that sin, and not Eve, Genes. 3.9. and at the
censure (perchance with an emphasis) God said unto Adam (which he did not unto
Eve) Genesis 3.17. Thou have eaten of the tree of which I commanded THEE, saying,
THOU shall not eat of it; and denounced more punishments against him then
against Eve, and worse; and this among the rest, ratifying the former
threatening, Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou return; inflicting death on
Adam, on Eve, on us for Adams sin, and not for Eves. Lastly, the Spirit of
God seems to derive the fault from Eve unto the Serpent, 2 Cor. 11.3. (...),
in astutia sua: (...), not (...), in his craft, and her simplicity, he
deceived her. Now let Scotus lessen Adams offense as much as he can, let him
say, Esus ligni vetiti non fuit piccatum, nisi quia prohibitum.
The eating of the forbidden tree was no sin, but because it was forbidden;
and he might well and lawfully have eaten of it, if he had not been forbidden;
and he erred not against any natural law, but a law positive, and in a thing
otherwise indifferent. I answer, The same and more excuses are for Eve. Again,
in regard of its spreading infection, and the myriads of evils thence ensuing,
and the blessed estate of many millions by him betrayed to the lake of fire and
brimstone, which never shall be quenched, contrary to the trust to him
concredited, I shall always think Adams sin the worst of all sins that
ever any one of mankind committed, not excepting the sin of Judas, or the
sin against the Holy Ghost. For these hurt but few; and if they were worse
intensively, they were not so bad extensively: and therefore I must account it
one of Scotus his errors, when he says, Peccato Adae non debebatur maxima
poena; imo si ipse damnatus fuisset pro illo peccato, non fuisset ita graviter
punitus pro isto peccato, sicut multi alii.
The greatest punishment was not due to Adams sin; yea, if he had been damned
himself for that sin, he had not been so grievously punished for it as many
others. The ancient Fathers did not so lightly prize the first sin of Adam.
Augustine says, Tam leve praeceptum ad observandum, tam breve ad memoria
retinendum, tanto majore injustitia violatum est, quanto faciliori possit
observantia custodiri. De Civit. 14.12.
A Precept so light for keeping, so short for remembering, was broken by so much
greater injustice, by how much more easily it might have been kept. And though
Scotus holds, it did consist in immoderate love and friendship to his wife;
yet I say, his uxoriousnesse was but a branch, a piece, a quarter, a rafter of
that beam, a part, a member of that body of sin. Tert. Cont. Marcion. lib. 2.
Tertull. doubts not to call Adams sin, Heresy, and Adam, a very rude
Heretic. Ambrose on Romans 5.14. Peccatum Adae non long est ab idololatria.
Adams sin is not far from idolatry. And in his 33. Epistle to his sister
Marcellina, he finds infidelity in Adam, for not believing in Gods word.
Augustine in his Enchirid. chap. 45. imputes unto him Pride, and Sacrilege;
for it was sacrilegious pride, to impropriate and usurp the fruit separated
from common use. He was a murderer, destroying himself and all mankind:
guilty he was of spiritual fornication committed with the Serpent. He may be
further charged for felony, in stealing the fruit which was not his. Rupertus
on Genes. 2.39. says, Ingratitude was his first sin. He fell by covetousnes,
says Augustine; for God could not suffice him; and having much more then he
needed, yet he would need more then he had. Any one may blot him with
curiosity, for seeking to know what did him hurt. His gluttony was manifest,
in loosing the reins to his beastly appetite. His want of natural affection
toward his posterity by him decaying, is justly blameable. Brentius has one
newfangle on John 8; That Adams sin was rebellion or defection, because he
would not be subject to Christ. He might rather have accused him for contempt
of his Creator, for his folly in venturing the loss of heaven for an apple,
for his credulity in believing Satan before God. The Apostle charge him with
disobedience, Romans 5.19. Bellarmine says, Actu primus superbiae est, ^olle
subjici imperio and praeceptis alterius, quae proprie dicitur i^nbedientia.
Bell. De Amiss. Gratiae 3.4.
The first act of pride is to refuse to be subject to the command and precepts
of another, which properly is called disobedience: as contrarily, the first of
humility is to be subject to another. But Scotus does better set down the order
of the acts of our will: Est in communi duplex actus voluntatis, VELLE and
NOLLE -- and omne nolle praesupponit aliquod velle -- and nullum nolle est
primus actus deordinatus voluntatis, quia non posset habere nolle, nist
respectu, vel in virtute alicujus velle. Scot. i^^ 2. Sent. did. 6. quaest. 2.
There is commonly a double act of the will, LIKING and DISLIKING; -- and every
disliking presupposes some liking: -- and no disliking is the first inordinate
act of the will, because it could not have a disliking, but in regard or by
virtue of some liking. In this I prefer Scotus before Bellarmine and Estius,
because the first act of pride or disobedience is self-complacencie, from
whence issues the dislike, or nolle of subjection; as in humility, the first
act is Velle placere alteri, whence arises the groundwork of obedience.
Secondly, Augustine says, In occulto mali esse coeperunt. Aug. De Civit. 14.13.
They began in secret to be evil: the ill will preceded the ill work; self-love
was the bait; the Devil could not have caught Adam, Nisi jam illo sibi placere
coepisset.
unles he had begun already to be self pleased: they were tickled with those
words, YE SHALLBE LIKE GODS Genesis 3.5 From whence I marvel Bellarmine observed
not, that Velle sibi placere is the first step of pride, and therefore the
Nolle subjici is the second act, or act concomitant. Thirdly, Bellarm, ibid.
cap. 5.
Bellarmine himself interfeering says, The pride of our parents began not from
this act, I WILL NOT BE UNDER THE POWER OF GOD, but after the hearing of
these words, YE SHALL BE LIKE GODS, they began to consider within themselves,
it was a goodly thing not to depend of an other; and at the same time they
began to be delighted with their own power, and to desire it, and vehemently to
please themselves. Here he makes three or four acts to begin together, and
makes some ill act or acts precede this, I will not be under the power of God.
Lastly, Bell. De Amiss. Gratiae 3.9.
Bellarmine has it thus, Primus actus malus in peccato viri superbia fuit, qua
in sua potius essc, quam in Dei potestate dilexit.
The first ill act in the sin of the man was pride, by which he loved to be
in his own power rather then in Gods. And he cites Augustine in Enchirid.
chap. 45. Therefore the beginning of Adams iniquity consisted in a VELLE,
rather then in a NOLLE. Now, though Scotus his Discourse and Philosophy sideth
thus far with truth, that an evil Nolle necessarily presupposes an evil
Velle, (which is expressly against the opinion of Bellarmine and Estius) yet
it crawleth on lamely toward Scot. Did. 22.
Scotus his conclusion, That Adam did first sin in inordinate love of
friendship toward his wife for I will place in Adam another Velle, a former
Velle, a malum Velle, and a pejus Velle before his uxoriousnesse. Augustine in
his 21 Sermon upon Psalm. 118. (which we account the 119 Psalm.) says thus, Quod
homo suu^ esse voluit, id est inobedientiae primum and maximum malum.
That man would be his own, that is the first and greatest evil of
disobedience. And De Civit. 14.13. and d^ Genesis ad lit. 8.14.
elsewhere he takes pride and disobedience for all one. Again, Homo clatus
superbia, suasioni Serpentis obediens praecepta Dei contempsit. Ep. st. Ad
Orosium.
Manbeing lift up with pride, obeying the persuasion of the Serpent despised
Gods precepts. And, Praecedit in voluntate hominis appetitus quidam propriae
potestatis, vt fiat inobediens per superbiam. De peccat. Meri^. and Rem. 2.19.
In the will of man there goes before some desire of his own power, to be made
disobedient through pride. Eves pride, out of doubt, arose from those words,
Genes. 3.5. Your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods. Where the hint
was given to the Velle, before the Nolle; and the first motion was to the
unlawful love of himself. Now, what the Serpent said to Eve, questionless she
related to Adam. And her pride also might first arise from the said fountain:
and his uxoriousnesse followed thereupon; and the immoderate love of himself
was before the immoderate love unto his wife. I say questionles, because it is
both true in it self, and others yield unto it, and Aug. De Genesis ad ^t. 11.34.
S. Augustine observes it, What Adam received from God, he told to Eve; what
Eve heard from Satan, she told to Adam. To conclude, De Civit. 14.13.
Augustine says, Adam and Eve were first turned from God to please themselves,
and thence and after that to grow cold and dull; that she either believed the
Serpent, or he preferred his wives will before the will of God. Where he makes
both Adams and Eves sin to be the same inordinate love to themselves; and
this is against Scotus. Prosper in the 358 Sentence, picked out of Augustine,
says, concerning Adam, Primum animae rationalis vitium est, voluntas ea
faciendi quae vetat summa and intima veritas.
The first vice of the reasonable soul is the will of doing those things which
the supreme and most intimate truth forbids. Neither has Scotus his
argutation, rather then argumentation, his usual subtlety in it. Duplexest
Velle: aut est Velle aliquid amore amicitiae, qui est propter se, vel propter
amatum; velamore commodi, qui est propter aliud. Primum peccatum Adae non fuit
ex immoderato amore sui, sicut fuit primum peccatum Angeli, nec potuit esse;
quia Angelus intelligit seprimo, per suam essentiam; and homo intelligit alia
prius quam se.
There is a twofold will: either that will by which one desires a thing with
the love of friendship, which is for himself or for the thing loved; or that
will by which one desires a thing with the love of profit, which is for
another. The first sin of Adam was not out of an immoderate love of himself,
as the first sin of Angels, neither could be; because the Angels know
themselves first, by their own essence; but man knows other things before
himself. For did not Adam know himself ere he knew Eve or Angels? or has it
any necessary consequence, if he knew her first, that therefore he must love
her content first, rather then please himself? Yea, if he had a desire to
please her, might not this arise out of a desire to please himself? Lastly, did
the Angels and Eve sin out of an immoderate desire of love toward themselves?
Then how says Scotus, that Adams first sin neither was, nor could be an
immoderate and inordinate love of himself? What was in Eve, could and might
have been and was in Adam. The discourse of Aquinas in this point seems more
agreeable to Scripture, and Fathers, then that of Scotus. And this it is. That
unto one sin many motions do concur, amongst which that is to be accounted
the first sin, in which first of all, inordination, deviation, disorder, or
aberration from the Law is found. Now it is apparent, that exorbitancy or
deordination is sooner in the inward motion of the soul, then it is in the
body; and among the interior motions of the soul, the appetite is first moved
toward the end it self, then toward the means leading toward the end: and
therefore there was the first sin of Adam, where was the first desire of an
unlawful and disordered end. The sum is, Man desired an illicit seeming
spiritual good; namely, to subsist of himself, as God does. Which first act or
motion of pride, or inward disobedience, being all one with the first
inclination to break the Law of God and to eat the forbidden fruit, and being
accompanied with that chain of other evil motions and actions before
mentioned, was consummated by the outward disobedience in the orall eating the
food inhibited. And the time was so short between the sinful motus
primo-primus in the soul, and the various continued difformitie of other
ebullitions, which were coherent and bound up in that unhappie knot of outward
disobedience, that we may safely say, it was one sin aggregative; and every
particular evil thought, act, or motion, from his farewell given unto
innocence, unto his plain downfall; from the last of his inward obedience,
unto his first outward disobedience, complete and ended, was a parcel or
branch of that one great sin which was against that Law divine, Genes. 2.17.
As our Savior says, Matthew. 5.28. Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after
her, has committed adultery with her already in his heart: So, so soon as
ever Adam looked on the apple to lust after it, the first inward motion,
tending to this lust of pride or disobedience, was averse from the Law, though
the external trespass made the sin to be full, and the breach to be
palpable and evident. And as it is but one consummate adultery, though diverse
evil thoughts, and multae morosae cogitationes, many wild motions concur
unto it: so may Adams sin be said to be but one, though consisting of diverse
parts and branches, from the primative spiritual inclination of aversion, to
the hindmost bodily formalitie, or co^summation of his disobedience. Est. Did.
22 Paragr. 1.
Estius has these arguments, to evidence that pride (which is unseparably
annexed to disobedience) was the first sin of man. First, our parents, Adam
and Eve, were first tempted with the sin of pride, by these words, Ye shall
be like Gods; therefore by that they fell first. Secondly, the Devil would draw
man to perdition, by the same sin by which he fell: But he fell by pride, 1 Timothy 3.6. Lastly, Christ by humility and obedience recovered us; therefore
Adam by pride and disobedience hurt us. And this is Augustines reason, De
Civit. 14.13. If any man desire more curiosities trenching upon this point, let
him consult with Doctor Estius, in the place above cited, who has handled such
things apertissime and satiatissime, most plainly and fully, as Augustine said
of Ambrose, against Julian the Pelagian.

And now at length I am come to that second position which I resolved to unfold
and handle, in giving answer unto the first Question, How and why death was
appointed unto us. The first part of the answer is already handled, (and here I
considered original sin principally, as it was acted by Adam) That Adam for
sin was appointed to die. The second now follows, towit, Adams sin was
propagated to us; and so by just consequent, We shall die for this sin. And
first, concerning the propagation of his sin, of original sin, as it was
an emanation from Adam, and as it lodges and abides in us.

Almighty, and most Gracious Father, grant unto us, that we which fell by
pride, may be humility and obedience be raised up, through Jesus Christ, our
only Advocate and Redeemer. Amen.
CHAP. V.
1. Original sin is an obscure point. The errors of the Schoolmen concerning
it. The oversight of Bellarmine.

2. Original sin described by its causes: Distinguished from Adams actual
sin.

3. In what sense Adam had, and his posterity has original sin. We were in
Adam. He stood for us idealiter. Every one of us would have done exactly as
Adam did. We did sin in Adam, and how.

4. Whether Christ was in Adam, and how.

5. We sinned not that sin in Adam by imitation.

6. Adams sin, as personal, was not imputed. Adam is saved. Adams actual
sin, as it was ideall and representative, is imputed to us.

1 COncerning original sin, though it be most true what S. Augustine says,
de Morib. Eccl. 1.22, Nihil est peccato originali ad praedicandum notius, nihil
ad intelligendum secretius.
There is nothing to preach of more known, nothing to understand more hidden
then original sin. And, Vltra radicem nihil quaerere oportet. De lib.
Arbitrio 3.17.
We ought to seek nothing beyond the root. Yet let us search, till we find
this root. And since the Apostle has broken the ground, and opened the way,
let us joyfully follow so blessed a guide. S. Paul, Romans 5.12. -- has a large
Tractate of original sin, as it is propagated unto us by Adam: and Romans 6.
he speaks of it, as it is in the Regenerate. The present questioned point
has nothing to do with this latter consideration, and it is pertinently
excluded from this discourse. But of original sin, as it is conveyed unto us
by Adam, diverse things must be explained. First, you are to know, that the
Schoolmen are blindly led in this point. You may see it at large in Beatissimo
Whitak. De Originali Peccato lib. 1. cap. ^.
Whitakero, (for even that title is given to him by the learned Albericus
Gentilis, in the tenth Chapter of his Disputation on the first Book of the
Maccabees.) And certainly, none of late time has so tripped them up as he has
done, in his canvasse of Stapleton. The errors of singular Schoolmen are
various, too many to be here confuted severally; yet not so many as are
imagined. Holcot in his Question, Whether every sin be imputable to the will,
proves out of Augustines Book De Haeresibus, Chap. 8. that some Heretics have
denied original sin, or that there is any such thing. But he resolves, That
the Church has determined the opinion to be erroneous. And Augustine,
Gregory, Bid, and all Authentic Doctors have spoken fully and expressly
hereof: and I (says he) presuppose it as one Article of Faith. Then comes he
to the diversity of opinions, Some, says he, have held, that original sin
is not culpa, but poena, or obligatio ad poenam. Anselm and Lombard dislike
this, says he. And indeed Lomb. 2. Sent. did. 3. lit. E and F.
Lombard proves soundly, both that according to this opinion original sin
is neither culpa, no, nor poena; and by excellent arguments establishes, that
it is culpa. Some (says Holcot) who say it is culpa, hold it is nothing else
but the actual sin of our first parent imputed to us: and this Tenet Anselm
disliketh. But Anselms dislike has not hindered Catharinus and Pighius from
embracing that error: Yea Stapleton himself acknowledges three great errors in
this bypath of Pighius. First, That he makes original sin no sin, but an
obnoxietie to punishment. Secondly, That children want all sin, and yet are
by him made sinners. Thirdly, That he makes no inherent original sin in
every one. Whitaker adds a fourth absurdity, That he teaches children are
damned, who yet have no sin. I return to Holcot, who adds, Others say,
Original sin is the pure privation of justice original, or injustice which
is nothing in nature, but a pure privation and want of justice, in subjecto
apto nato. Yet, says Holcot, (as I have said otherwhere) it appears not to
me, that any such pure privation is either original or actual sin. At last,
Holcot professes to follow Lombard, holding, that original sin is an evil
habit with which we are born, and which we contract from the beginning of our
nativitie. This habit is concupiscence, this concupiscence is a vice, quod
parvulum habilem concupiscere facit, adultum vero and concupiscentem reddit;
and this he fathereth on Augustine. But this opinion is no better then the
rest, if by concupiscence they mean (as they do) only the sensuality, lust,
and brutish appetite of things sensitive. You shall see it further confuted,
when I have disclosed the erroneous doctrine, which Lombard and his partisans
hold, to uphold this, That original sin is the vice of concupiscence. Lomb.
2. Sent. did. 30. lit. N.
Lombard maintains that every one of our bodies were in Adam: and whereas it
was before objected, That all flesh which descended from Adam, could not be at
once and together in him, because it is far greater then the body of Adam, in
which there were not so many, as it were, motes of flesh, as men, who have
descended from him; Lombard answers, All flesh was in him materially and
causally, though not formally: and all that is in humane bodies naturally,
descends from Adam, and in it self is increased and multiplied, and this is
that which shall arise at the Resurrection: That no outward substance does
pass into that substance: That it is fomented by meats; but no meats are
turned into that substance humane, which by propagation descended from Adam.
For Adam transmitted a little of his substance into the bodies of his children,
when he begat them; that is, a little MODICVM was divided from the mass of his
substance, and thereof was the body of his son formed, and by multiplication
of it self is increased, without the adjection of any outward thing. And of
that Modicum being augmented, somewhat is separated, whereby the bodies of
posterities are in the like sort still formed. His proofs were easy to be
answered: but there is a veru, or an obelisk set on that opinion, in the
margin, Magister hic non approbatur. And more at large, among the errors
condemned in England and in Paris (for so go the words of the Preface) not in
England and France, not alone in Oxford and Paris, but in both the Universities
of England, and in that of Paris, you shall find him forsaken in these
opinions, page 985. Quod in veritatem hum^nae naturae nihil transit extrinsecum.
That no external thing passes into the truth of humane nature. Quod ab Adam
descendit, per propagationem auctum and multipli^atum, resurget in judicio.
page 985.
That which descends from Adam, and is increased and multiplied by
propagation, shall arise in the day of judgment. These singular opinions being
now rejected and confuted by Estius, Sentent. 2. Distinct. 30. Paragraph. 13.
and whatsoever Lombard brings for himself, answered in his next Paragraph;
let us grapple with Holcot, who is a second unto Lombard, and let us prove,
That original sin is not the concupiscence of the flesh. See this confuted
by Bell. De Amiss. Gratiae 4.12.
Bellarmine, by this argument; If LUST were the cause of original sin, he
should have the greater sin, who was conceived in greater LUST: which is
manifestly false, since original sin is equal in all men. See other
arguments well used to that purpose by Bellarmine in that place; yet is he
amiss De Sacramento Baptismi 1.9.
elsewhere, in the answer unto the tenth argument of the Anabaptists. For,
says he, Originale peccatum non est materia poeniten tiae: nemo enim recte poe
uitentiam agit ejus peccati quod ipse non commisit, and quod in ejus potestate
non suit. Originale autem peccatum non ipsi commisimus, sed trahimus ab Adam
per naturalem propagationem: und^ di^itur de insantibus, Romans 9 11.
Original sin is no matter of repentance: for a man does not well repent of
that sin which he has not committed himself, and which was not in his power.
Now we have not our selves committed original sin, but we draw it from Adam
by natural propagation: whereupon it is said, Romans 9.11. of Esau and Jacob,
THEY HAD DONE NEITHER GOOD NOR EVIL. First, I answer to the place of Scripture,
confessing it is spoken of Esau, wicked Esau, that he had done no evil; and of
Jacob, good Jacob, that he had done no good. Again, it is spoken of both of
them, before they were born. But secondly, it is spoken of actual sins and
actual goodness; that neither did Jacob good, actual good, any good in the
womb, nor Esau any actual evil. For the bodily organs are not so fitted, that
they exercise such actions as produce good or evil. The words do evince so
much, (...), practically working no good nor evil. Yet, though God depended not
upon their works (as the Apostle there argues) for all that, they might and
did commit original sin, and in it were conceived: and the promise was made
to Rebecca, after she conceived, Genes. 25.23. It being then manifest, that the
place of the Apostle affords no patrociny to Bellarmine, I say original
sin is in part the matter of Repentance; otherwise, David in his chiefest
penitential Psalm, 51.5. would not have charged himself with that sin, nor
needed not so vehemently to call for mercy. Again, we may be said to commit
original sin, and original sin to have been in our power, as we were in
Adam, as we would have done the like, and the like against Adam, as Adam did
against us, if we had stood in Adams place, as he did stand in our stead.
Thirdly, our will was in his will, and what he did we did: Bellarmines
Philosophy here swalloweth up his Divinity. Fourthly, he must not take
committere strictly, for a full free deliberate action of commission; nor
trahere strictly, for a mere passion: but (as I shall make it appear) there is
some little inclination, from the matter to the form, of the body to the soul,
as also of the soul to the body; and that the soul is neither as a block or
stone on the one side, to receive dirt and be integrally passive, nor yet so
active as to make the original sin to be actual. So that it neither
properly commits, nor properly contracteth, draws, or receives original
sin: and yet in a large sense may be said both to commit and to receive.
Fifthly, if Bellarmine be punctilious for the terms, himself is faulty: For he
says, Trahimus ab Adam originale peccatum.
We do attract original sin from Adam. Is there any attraction on our part,
if there be no action? Or is action, or attraction without some kind of
commission? Sixthly, has the whole Church of God prayed for the remission
as well of original sin as of actual, if it be not the matter of repentance?
Or needs not one unbaptized, till he come of age, repent before Baptism, for
his original sin? Lastly, why are children baptized, but that original
sin is matter of repentance?

To set all things better in order, and to clear all mists, you are to know,
that there is wonderful mistaking, and ambiguitie, whilst original sin is
confounded with Adams actual sin, and one taken for another, whilst the
cause is undistinguished from the effect, when indeed there is a great traverse
between them.

2 Somewhat according to the new Masters of method, the efficient cause of
Adams sin was both outward and inward.

Outward Remote, Outward Propinque. Remote Principal, Satan. Remote
Isntrumental, the Serpent. Outward propinque was Eve, the principal. Outward
propinque was The apple was the isntrumental cause.
The inward efficient cause was; first, the faculties of the soul, which we may
term the principium activum, and was more remote; then the ill use of these
faculties, the misimploying of his free will, which you may style principium
actuale, and was the more propinque cause. But the cause efficient of original
sin was, outwardly, the actual sin of Adam; inwardly, the conjunction of
the soul, after the propagation of nature. The matter of Adams sin,
subjective, was the whole person and nature of Adam, and his posterity
descending from him per viam seminalem; objective, the liking, touching, and
eating of the forbidden fruit. The matter of original sin, subjective, is
all of our nature, and every one of mankind, secundum se totum and totum sui,
coming the ordinary way of generation: in so much, that all and every of the
faculties of the soul and body, of all and every one of us, is subject to all
and every sin, which has been, or may ever hereafter be committed: and this
comes only from this original sin, and the inclination wrapped up in it.
The matter objective, is both carentia justitiae originalis debitae inesse, and
the vices contrary unto it, now filling up its room and stead. Formalis ratio
of Adams first sin was aversion from God, the ratio materialis was his
conversion to a changeable good, says Stapl. De Originali Peccato 1.12.
Stapleton: both these are knit up in one disobedience. And so, the formal
cause of Adams sin was disobedience; the formal cause of our original sin
is the deformity and corruption of nature, fallen and propagated, inclining to
sin so soon as is possible, and (without a divine hand of restraint) as much
as is possible. The end of Adams sin was in his intention, primarily, To know
good and evil; secundarily, to prefer temporals before spirituals; whilst
indeed he esteemed the Bonum apparens before the Bonum verum revera, or reale.
In mankind after him no end can be found of original sin, since we contract
it when we have nullum verum aspectum, respectum, intuitum, vel-sinem. For
Finis and bonum convertuntur. There is no end of evil, per se, sed ex
accidenti; and so Gods Glory is the supreme end of all sin. The effects of
Adams actual sin were, his Corruption personae, Reatus, and Poena, as he was
considered by himself, till he repented; but as he was the Referree and
Representor of mankind, the effects were, The corruption of our nature, our
fault, our guiltines, our punishment, till we be freed. The effects of our
original sin are, sins actual, with all the penalties or punishments due
to them. Moreover, that we may more distinctly enlarge this point, and remove
the doubtfulnesse of terms, know, that in a larger sense, the actual sin of
Adam may in a sort be said to be original sin; it may be called Adams
original sin, as it was first and originally in him. It may be original
sin both of Adam and all his posterity; because our natural defects, and all
manner of sins flowed originally from this only sin, as from a defiled
fountain. Yet properly, this sin was in him actually, in us potentially; in
him explicitly, in us implicitly; in him personally, in us naturally; in him
perse, in us per accidens. And that his first sin or aversion from God, may
both be said to be his original sin, and the cause also of our original
sin; the cause, not physical or natural (for he does not traduce, by the
virtue of that sin, any real thing which is properly sinful, unto his
posterity) but it was and is the moral cause of our original sin. As
original sin is by some described, namely, to be propagated, to be in all
alike, and to be in the humane creature at the beginning of his being, or to be
an hereditarie transgression: so Adam had not original sin, but only his
posterity. As original sin is defined to be That (...) or transgression,
that total aversion of mankind from God, whereby we incur death and
damnation: so was Adams sin our original sin, and he had original sin.

3. Which the fuller to demonstrate, let me insist on this point, namely, That
sin of Adam we sinned this way, as we were in him materialiter, though not
formaliter. As the several members of a man's body united to his soul, make one
individual person: so all the branches of Adams posterity, with himself, make
one humane nature, and are as it were but one by participation of the species.
Fuerunt omnes in Adam quando peccavit; fuerunt quidem in illo, sed nondum nati
erant ipsi.
All were in Adam when he sinned: they were indeed in him, but they were not
yet born themselves, says Augustine, De Civit. 13.14. and more punctually in
the same Chapter, Nondum erat nobis singillatim creata and distributa forma, in
qua singuli viveremus, sed jam natura erat nobis seminalis, ex qua propagaremur.
The form in which every one of us should live, was not yet created and
distributed to us; but the seminall nature was already, of which we were to be
propagated. Anselm says, Infans qui damnatur pro peccato originali, non
damnatur pro peccato Adam, sed pro suo: nam si ipse non haberet suum peccatum,
non damnaretur. A^sel. De Partu Virginis. cap. 26.
The infant that is damned for original sin, is not damned for the sin of
Adam, but for his own: for if he himself had not his own sin, he should not
be damned. And therefore Augustine, Retractat. 1.13. Originale peccatum in
parvulis, cum adbuc non utantur libero arbitrio voluntatis, non absurd vocatur
voluntarium.
Original sin in infants, though they have not yet the use of freewill, is
not absurdly called voluntary. And Confess. 1.7. Imbecillitas membrorum
infantilium innocens est, non animus infantium.
The weakness of infantine members, not the soul of infants is innocent. Lastly,
De Peccat. Meritis and Remiss. 3.8. as he calls original sin oftentimes
Alienum peccatum, to show it began not in us alone, but was delivered to us,
came from without: so in the same place he terms it Peccatum proprium, our
selves sinning in and with Adam, and having corruption in us by him. It can not
sink into my head, that God would have imputed unto us Adams fault, by his
absolute irrespective decretory will of good pleasure: but that he whose
foresight reaches to things that are not, yea to things that shall never be,
much more to things certainly future (of which in another place) did foreknow
and preconsider, that every one of mankind, if they had been in Adams state
and place, would have done as Adam did. Therefore, let us not accuse God, or
lay the fault only on Adam; our selves would have done so. For, as one said
concerning the thief on the Cross, confessing Christ when Christ was on the
Cross nailed, naked, pained, reviled, scorned, dying, and forsaken of his own
Disciples, Profecto ego non sic fecissem, I should not have made so glorious a
confession as the penitent thief did at that time: So, on the contrary, I say,
and am fully persuaded, I should have done as Adam did. Let God be just, and
all men faulty; for it would have been the fault of all men. Yea, I must go one
step further, and without boldness justifiably say, by verdict of Scripture, it
was the fault of all men; all men did sin that sin in Adam. It is not said
Propter hominem, but, Per hominem Mors, 1 Cor. 15.21. and Romans 5.12. (...): In
quo, in whom all sinned. Of the first man, Adam, are all these words [By man,
and in whom] to be understood: and by him, and in him all died and sinned,
says the Apostle; and sinned that sin by which death came into the world.
Though the father of the faithful paid tithes of all unto Melchisedec, before
Leviwas born, and Abraham alone personally discharged that duty; yet for all
this, the Apostle says, Hebr. 7.9. Levi also who receives tithes, paid
tithes in Abraham; for he was yet in the loins of his father: So on the
contrary, though Adam, the universal father of mankind, did actuate that
great offense long before we were created; yet we also concurred in our kind,
and were partakers in that iniquity. For he stood Idealiter for us, and we were
in him; our will in his, our good and hurt in his: and so far as he received
a law for us, so far as he represented us; so far when he sinned did we
sin in him, with him, and by him. And if the worthy S. Augustine may say, as
is before cited, De Peccat. Merit. and Remiss. 1.10.
Omnes eramus ille unus Adam; I hope I may as well say, Adam ille erat nos
omnes. I am sure, Prosper in his Sentences picked out of Augustine says, that
Primus homo Adam sic o^im defunctus est, ut tamen post illum secundu, homo sit
Chrisius, cum tot hominum miilia inter illum and hunc orta sint: and id^o
manifestum est pertinere ad illum, omnem qui ex illa successione propagatus
nascitur; sicut ad istum pertinet omnit qui gratiae largitate in illo
renascitur: unde fit, vt totum genus kumannm quodam modo sint homines duo,
PRIMUS and SE^VNDUS. Prosp. Sent. 299.
The first man Adam so died in time past, that yet after him Christ is the
second man, although so many thousands of men be born between that and this:
and therefore it is evident, that every one who is born propagated from that
succession belongs to that former, as whosoever is born again by the
liberality of grace pertains to this latter: whence it comes to pass that all
mankind, in some sort, consist in two men, THE FIRST and THE SECOND. Yea, the
whole world, except Christ only, as men, are the first Adam; and the first
Adam, as he believed in Christ to come, is not now the first, but a branch of
the second Adam. What Christ did for us, we are said to do; what Adam did
misdo, as he represented us, we may justly be said to misdo with him, Genes.
4.10. The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me: Sanguinum; yea, Seminum,
says the Chaldee Paraphrase, and the Rabbis; whom, howsoever the Jesuit
Cornelius a Lapide faulteth, yet I will commend for their witty invention, That
God seemed, as it were, to hear the cries of all those many little ones, which
ever might have descended from Abel; and them Cain killed, and their blood he
shed even ere they were, and their blood cried in Abels. So we consented with
Adam, and in him all sinned, says our Apostle: (...), our latest Translation
has it For that all have sinned, The Bishops Bible in as much as we have all
sinned: So Erasmus, and some others; yet our latest Translation allows a
place in the margin for in whom: it is rendered by the Vulgat, In quo. (...) is
not here taken for a Preposition, of whose various constructions see the
Grammarians; none of which constructions afford so full and punctual a sense
to this place, as if we render the words (...), in whom: (...) being a
Preposition by it self, and (...) being the Dative of the subjunctive relative
article (...). The Genevian reads it in whom, and interprets the words in
whom to be in Adam: and so indeed it may be read and must be meant; for though
the Preposition (...) be otherwise rendered and used, yet diverse times it is
confounded with (...), and necessarily is so to be understood. View in one
Chapter two places, Hebr. 9.10. (...), Solummodo in cibis and potibus, Which
stood only in meats and drinks, as our very late Translatours have it. And
verse. 17. (...), Testamentum enim in mortuis ratum est: so word for word is it
construed. So Demosthenes has it, (...), In his acquiescere. Basil in his
Epistle to Nazianzen, (...), In hac solitudine. So we usually say (...), In
nobis, and the like. This reading being established, let us search the meaning
of these words In whom or in which, and to what they are referred. There are
but four things, to which these words can possibly have relation. First, unto
the word (...); and then the sense is, By one man sin entered into the world,
in which world all have sinned. This exposition is very absurd. For first, it
is nothing to the intent of the Apostle, who proves that we fell in Adam, and
are raised by Christ: but how conduces this unto that sense? Secondly, the
senselessness of the words is most ridiculous, being thus read, As by one man
sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all
men, in which world all have sinned. The Spirit of wisdom would not speak so,
nor the God of order so disjointedly. The second exposition is as unlikely, and
that reads it, In which death all have sinned: but as In peccato moriuntur
homines, non in morte peccant. Aug. Cont. duas Epist. Pelag. 4.4.
S. Augustine says, Men die in sin, not sin in death. The phrase is
improper: yet grant that some sin in death, yet it is most untrue That in
death all sin. The third word to which In whom, or which may be referred, is
Sin: In which sin all have sinned; and thus Aug. De Peccat. Merit. and
Remis. 1.10.
Augustine did interpret it once. And if it were so to be read, it is all one
in effect, to say, In Adam all sinned, and, In which sin (of Adam) all
sinned. But Vide Aug. Cont. 2. Epist. Felag. 4.4.
Augustine afterward more accuratly examining the place, rejects that
exposition, and confirms another by the authority of S. Hilarie. And indeed
Grammatical construction overthrows the sense: for (...) is the feminine
gender, to which the words (...) can have no good reference. Therefore the last
exposition is best, which renders it In quo, In which (Adam) all have sinned.
So it is expounded by Hilarie, Augustine, and Ambrose; by Origin, Chrysostom,
Theophylact, Oecumenius, and generally both by the Greek and Latin Fathers;
and the Apostle strongly argues for this sense, verse 19. By one man's
disobedience many were made sinners. In him we sinned. And whosoever shall
thoroughly weigh both the precedent and subsequent dependances, must needs
acknowledge that the words In whom, or In which do point at Adam only; in
whom, as in a mass, we were contained, and in him sinned. Photius thus, In hoc
ipsi Adam commorimur, quod ipsicompeccavimus: ille initium dedit peccato, --
nos adjutores illi fuimus.
In this we our selves die with Adam, that our selves have sinned with him: he
gave the beginning to sin, -- we have been helpers to him. And, Neither by
the Devil, who sinned before the woman; nor by the woman, who sinned before
her husband; but by Adam, from whom all mortality draws its beginning, did
sin truly enter into the world, and death by sin. So far Origin.
Augustine likewise, In Adamo omnes peccaverunt, quando omnes ille unus homo
fuerunt. Aug. De Baptismo parvulorum 1.10
In Adam all have sinned, when all were that one man. So punctually speaks
he. For we were in Adam radically, seminally, representatively. Adam was our
head; he did lead the whole body into evil: he was our parent; all the issue
of him were disinherited by him. Augustine thus, Peccavimus omnes in Adamo
voluntary; non voluntate nostra propri^, sed voluntate illius cum quo and in
quo eramus unus homo, atque vna omnium voluntas. Aug. Epist. 23. Ad Bonifacium.
We have all sinned in Adam willingly; not by our own will, but by his will
with whom and in whom we were one man, and one will of all. As the King
represents the Kingdom, and the chief Magistrate the City, and the Master of
the house the household; so did Adam represent us; and in him, and with him we
sinned.

4. I can not part with this second point, till I answer the objection, Whether
Christ were in Adam. The doubt will be cleared by these two Positions. First,
Christ may be said to be in Adam some kind of way. Therefore the Evangelist
derives Christ's Genealogy from him, and he is said to be The Son of Adam,
Luke 3.38. And if he be called The Son of David, as often he is, Matthew. 21.9.
Mark 10.47. Romans 1.3, He was made of the seed of David according to the flesh:
if he took on him the seed of Abraham, as he did, Hebr. 2.16, and is flesh of
our flesh and bone of our bones, and we of his, Ephesians. 5.30, it must needs be
confessed, He was in Adam. Paracelsus talks of Non-Adami, such as descended
not from Adams loins: these, if such, are monsters in nature, and as great a
monster in Divinity is it, to say, that Christ was no way in Adam. I will
enlarge this by a distinction. Christ was not in Adam, no, nor we neither, so,
that our substances, or any part thereof, were really or materially in him.
Yet, both Christ and we were in him. First, because mediatly we were born of
him, and because he was the efficient cause of generation; not the immediate,
propinque, and proximous cause thereof, which necessarily communicates some
matter to that which is begotten: but he was the remote, mediate, yea the
furthest, and most distant efficient natural cause of all; from which it is
not necessary that its matter reach to the hindermost effects. Secondly, be
cause if he had not begotten children, neither Christ in his humane nature, nor
we now long after him, had ever been born. Thirdly, Christ took flesh of the
thrice-blessed Virgin Mary; and she was in Adam, (as all others are, except
Christ) she was begotten by the concurrence and cooperation both of man and
woman: and so, inasmuch as his holy Mother was in Adam, Christ in a sort may be
said to be in Adam. Christus fuit de genere Adae. Hol^^t. De Imputabintate
peccati.
Christ was of Adams kindred, says Holcot.

The second Position is this, Christ was not in Adam every manner of way, as we
were. For we differed in this peculiar sort and manner, because we were in Adam
secundum seminalem rationem, qua, per communionem vtriusque sexus, fit
generatio. For Adam could beget no child without a femal sex; which was one
main reason of Eves creation: neither did ever daughter of Eve conceive without
a different sex (except only that stupendous miracle of our Saviors
Incarnation) And after this manner Christ was not in Adam. He had true flesh
from Adam; but it was only the listenes or similitude of sinful flesh that he
had, Romans 8.3. All other flesh, except his, is the flesh of sin. Had he come
from Adam every way exactly as we do, he had had not only true flesh, as he
had, but true sin also: but because he had not Patrem naturalem, as Scotus
phraseth it; therefore, neither did he sin in Adam, nor was in Adam as we
were.

Lombard Lomb. lib. 3. did. 3.
enquireth, Why Levi was tithed in Abraham, and not Christ, when each of them
was in the loins of Abraham, in regard of the matter. He answers, Leviticus
ordo qui in Abraham secundum rationem seminalem erat, ex eo per concupiscentiam
caruis descendi^: Sed Christ us non descendit secundum l^gem communem, aut
car^is libidinem.
The Leviticall order which was in Abraham according to the seed; descends from
him by the concupiscence of the flesh: But Christ came not according to the
common law or lust of the flesh. And he resolves thus, When Levi and Christ
according to the flesh were in the loins of Abraham, when he was tithed,
therefore was Levi tithed, and not Christ, because Christ was not in the loins
of Abraham, after some manner or other that Levi was. Moreover, how could
Christ be tithed to Christ? how could the same, in the same regard, both pay
and take? Melchisedec was a figure of Christ, and tithes by an everlasting law
were due to the priesthood of Melchisedec; as is unanswerably proved by my
reverend friend (now a blessed Saint, Doctor Sclater) against all sacrilegious
Church-robbers. Therefore Christ was not to be tithed in Abraham, though Levi
was. Yea, if Aaron, or Melchisedec himself had lived till Christ had come in
the flesh, and lived with him; perhaps they would have resigned up, as it were,
their Office, and no more have taken tithes; or continuing in Office
Sacerdotall under him, they would have taken tithes in his name, and for him.
Aquine out of Augustine thus, Quomodocunque Christus fuit in Adam and Abraham
and in aliis Patribus, alii homines etiam ibi fuerunt. Aquin. part. 3. quaest.
31. art. 6. ex Aug. De Genesis ad lit. 10.19.
After what manner soever Christ was in Adam and Abraham and in other Fathers,
other men were there also, but not contrariwise. And Aquine himself sets his
conclusion, When the body of Christ windeth up to the Fathers, and so to Adam,
mediante Matris suae corpore, Christ was not in them, secundum aliquid signatum
and determinatum, sed secundum originem. Which, I imagine, he establishes
against such as (Lombard says) did hold, That from Adam descended, by way of
generation, some such part or parcel as of it Christ was made. Against which
Aquine argues thus, (whether modestly enough and truly, let others judge) The
matter of Christ's body was not the flesh and bone, or any other actual part of
the Ever-blessed Virgin, but only her blood, which was potentia caro. Corpus
Christi non seminaliter conceptum est, sed ex castissimis and purissimis
sanguinibus. Aquinas ex Damasceno.
But what she received from her parents was actually part of her, but not part
of Christ's body. Nor was Christ's body in Adam and the other Fathers, secundum
aliquid signatum, so that any part of Adams body, or of the other Fathers,
could determinatly be pointed out, and be said to be the very exact individual
matter out of which Christ's body was framed: but Christ was in Adam secundum
originem, as others were. Whilst Christ was in the womb of the most happy
Virgin Mary, even many months before her delivery she was called, Luke 1.43,
(...), The mother of my Lord: which words, in part, Elisabeth took from David's
speculation, Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord. Never woman was truly
called or to be called a Mother, before she were delivered, except only the
Al-gracious Virgin Mary; who could not possibly suffer abortion, nor lose that
Blessed Fruit of her womb, by the sin of man, or the punishment of mankind
for sin: which was conceived in her, without the help of man or sin, and
was even then Lord of all things.

5 Another point follows, towit, We sinned that sin in Adam, not by
imitation only. For Adam sinned, and in a sort imitated Eve, who sinned first,
and ate of the forbidden fruit before him: yet it is not said, That in Eve Adam
died, or many died in Eve, or Adam sinned through Eve. So likewise the Devil
offended before Adam was, and Adams sin did nearly in many particulars
resemble the Devils: yet Adam died not by the sin of the Devil, though after a
fashion he did imitate it. But it is said, Romans 5.15, Through the offense of
Adam many be dead: and thereabouts, In Adam all die. Therefore this sin of
ours must needs be more then by imitation. And this is S. Augustines argument
against Pelagius, If it had been by imitation only, Apostolus peccati
principium non fecisset Adamum, sed Diabolum.
The Apostle had not made Adam the beginning of sin, but the Devil. Against
Julian, 6.10. he uses this other argument in effect, Who almost (yea, who at
all?) thinks of Adam, when he sins? whereas the imitator propounds
himself a pattern to follow and imitate. Or what is Adams eating of an apple
like unto witchery, blasphemy, murder, lying, or the like? and how there have
been, yea are yet, many millions in the world who never heard of Adam, much
less of his sin? and did they intend to imitate, or did they imitate him?
Thirdly, De Peccat. Merit. and Remiss. 1.9.
Augustine thus argues, As the second Adam (besides this, that we are to
follow him, and imitate him) gives hidden grace unto the faithful: so
(contrarily) we are faulty, and die not by the imitation only of the first
Adam, but by the secret blot and spot by which he has infected us. Fourthly,
he thus disputes in his 89 Epistle to Hierome, The Apostle says, Romans 5.16,
The fault is of ONE offense to condemnation: but he must have said, It had been
of MANY offenses, and not of ONE, if all are condemned for their actual and
personal imitation of Adam, since the offenses of many men must needs be more
then the ONE offense spoken of by the Apostle. Lastly, let me reason thus; Romans
5.14, Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned
after the similitude of Adams transgression. But death was the wages of sin.
Therefore some died who did not resemble Adam in finning. And there is a sin
not like to his; for Adams sin was actual, most voluntary, and personal.
Children in sinning of original sin do not imitate Adam: for their sin was
only implicit, in and with him; and they have not that absolute freedom of
will that he had; and their sin is rather natural then personal. Yet,
children die for sin, and for such a sin as is not after the similitude of
Adams transgression; and so original sin cleaves unto us, not by imitation
only. Aug. De Peccat. Merit. and Remiss. 1.15.
Augustine thus, If imitation only make sinners by Adam, only imitation
should make us just by Christ; and then, not Adam and Christ, but Adam and Abel
should be compared. For Adam was the first wicked man, and just Abel, Hebr.
11.4. the first just man: But these things are not thus. Therefore we sinned
not only by imitation of Adam.

6 I come to a new point, namely, to prove, That this sin of Adam is not ours
by imputation only; as if Adam alone had offended, and we were wholly clear
from that great sin. Indeed Adams actual first sin, or his other sins
after his repentance, as they were personal and private, are not imputed to
us. For he was to answer for himself as well as we are. If we repent, what does
our repentance help him? If he had not changed his mind, and turned to God,
himself alone should have been condemned, as himself alone was saved by his own
repentance. That Adam was by divine wisdom brought out of his fall, is said,
Wisd. 10.1. Veniae redditus est.
He has been restored to pardon, says S. August. And in the Tribe of Judah
there is to this day a den, or hole called Spelunca Adam, The Cave of Adam, and
in it a rock, in which are two stony beds of Adam and Eves: and here they
mourned (as is delivered by Tradition, says Adrichomius) an hundred years for
the murdered Abel. (why not rather for their own sins, say I?) This place is
not far from either Ager Damascenus, where they say Adam was made of that Red
earth, which is mire tractabilis, says Adrichomius; or from that place which
to this day is shown, and recorded to be the plat of ground which drank up
Abels blood, when Cain slew him. And though I deny not but they might mourn for
the death of Abel, yet they were more bound to mourn for that sin of theirs,
which brought death both upon Abel, and themselves, and all their posterity.

That Adam was a Type of Christ is expressed, Romans 5.15. and unfolded in many
excellent particulars by Sal. Ad annum 930^
Salianus. That the more eminent Types of Christ should be saved, is evinced,
because of their resemblance, and conformity, unto the Antitype: nor can it be
proved, that ever any of his figures were condemned. For the shadow must follow
the substance, and Christ that Proto-type being not only saved, but called
Jesus, because he shall save his people from their sins, Matthew. 1.21. They
are his people especially who in principal things resembled him: and wherein
can they better resemble him, then in being blessed and saved as he was? But I
return to Adam. Concerning Adam, Augustine says thus, De illo quidem primo
homine, patre generis humani, quod eum ibidem solverit, Ecclesia fere tota
conseutit. Aug. Epist. 99. Ad Euodium.
As for that first man, the father of mankind, almost the whole Church
agrees, that (Christ being in hell) he there delivered him. Concerning his
body, that it arose, if other Saints of the Old Testament arose, and that it
was besprinkled with the blood of Christ dying, shall be showed hereafter. And
if God had such care of Adams body, or part of it, he shall be impudently
unreasonable that shall say his soul is not in blessedness. Now, as his
personal repentance saved himself only, and not one of his offspring; so, if
he had died unrepentant, his sin or sins, as they were personal, should
not have prejudiced one of his posterities salvation.

Bellarmine Bell. De Amiss. Gratiae 3.12.
says, It was one of Tatianus his errors, That our first parents were damned.
Indeed Irenaeus 1.30. ascribes this opinion to Saturninus and Marcion, and
chap. 31. to Tatianus the first founder of it. Tertullian in his book De
Haeresib. toward the end, taxes Tatian for the same opinion, and confuteth
him thus, Quasi non, si rami salvi fiunt, and radix salva sit.
As if the branches being saved, the root also should not be saved. But in his
book De praescript. advers. Haereticos (as it is cited by Bellarmine) there is
no mention of Tatian, in Rhenanus his Edition. Augustine says of the Tatians
and Encratites, Quod contradicunt primorum hominum saluti. Aug. De Haeresib.
cap. 25.
That they gainsay the salvation of the first men. Where Bellarmine used
another Edition then Erasmus his, or was mistaken in the collation. He who will
see more into this point, let him consult with Bellarmine, in the place above
cited, and Salianus ad Annum Mundi 930. where he justly taxes Rupert, for
saying in this third book on Genes. chap. 31. Salvationem Adami and a multit
libere negari, and anullo satis firmiter defendi.
That the salvation of Adam is freely denied by many, and by none strongly
enough defended. And he brings many authorities and proofs to the contrary.
From Irenaeus he bids them blush, for saying Adam was not saved: and more
vehemently, That, by saying so, they make themselves Heretics, and Apostates
from the truth, and Advocates for the Serpent and Death. God cursed not Adam
and Eve, but the earth and the Serpent. Yea, before God pronounced any
punishment against Eve or Adam, even in the midst of his cursing of the
Serpent, with the same breath he both menaced Satan, and comforted Adam and Eve
with the gracious promise of the Messiah, Genes. 3.15. Now, there was never
any, unto whom God vouchsafed a special promise of Christ, but they were
saved. Indeed the Apostle reckons not Adam among the faithful ones, Hebr.
11. but one reason of this omission is, because he entreats of such faithful
ones only as were much persecuted; which Adam was not, so far as is
recorded. If it be further objected, That God is called THE GOD OF ABRAHAM,
ISAAC, AND JACOB, Exodus 3.6. Matthew. 22.32. and is no where called THE GOD OF
ADAM, let it be answered, That Adam is called THE SON OF GOD, Luke 3.38. And
I think he is too severe a judge, who says a son of God is damned. The
Targum or Chaldee Paraphrase (set forth by Rivius) on the Canticles chap. 1.
verse. 1. says, Et veuit dies Sabbati, and protexit eum, and aperuit os suum,
and dixit Psalmum Cantici diei Sabbati.
That the first song that ever was made, was indicted by Adam, in the time when
his sin was forgiven him. Damianus a Goes, De Moribus Aethiopum, makes this
the belief of Zagazabo and the Ethiopians, for whom he negotiated, That Christ's
soul descended into Hell for Adams soul, page 93. and that Adam was redeemed by
Christ from Hell, page 55.

How glorious was it for Christ, to save his first sheep? and how would the
Devil glory, if it were otherwise? Adams figleaves may be thought to be sharp,
afflictive, and penitential. Epiphanius, Haeres. 46. calls Adam Holy, and
says, We believe he is among those Fathers, whom Christ reckons alive, not
dead: God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Irenaeus says, Adam
humbly bare the punishment laid upon him. Can humility be damned? then may
pride be saved. Josephus 1.2. records, That Adam foretold the universal
destruction of the World; one by the flood, the other by fire. And can the
first of Mankind, the first King, Priest, and Prophet of the World be
condemned? Others probably conjecture, that before his death he called the
chief of his children, grandchildren, and their descendants, and gave them
holy and ghostly counsel, as Abraham did, Genes. 18.19. and Jacob, Genes. 49.1,
etc. and Moses, Deuteron. 31.1, etc. Salianus fits him a particular speech at
his death, and a witty Epitaph. Feuardentius, on Irenaeus, thus relates,
Nicodemus Christ's Disciple, in the History ascribed to him OF THE PASSION AND
RESVRRECTION OF THE LORD, reports, That our Lord Jesus Christ, when he
descended into Hell in his soul, spoke thus to Adam, and held his hand, PEACE
BE UNTO THEE, WITH ALL THY SONS, MY JUST ONES. But Adam falling on his knees
(such spiritual knees as before his spiritual hand, which Christ held, while
both their bodies were in the grave) weeping-ripe, thus prayed with a loud
voice, Exaltabo te, Domine, quoniam suscepisti me, nec delectasti inimicos meos
super me: Domine Deus, clamavi ad te, and sanasti me; eduxisti ab inferis
animam meam, salvastime a descendentibus in lacum.
I will magnify thee, Lord, because thou have received me, and have not made
glad mine enemies over me: Lord God, I have cried unto thee, and thou have
healed me; Thou have brought up my soul from Hell, thou have saved me from
those that go down to the pit. Thus Salianus in his Scholia ad Annum 930.
Another ancient Apocryphal book affirms, that Adam repented. Didacus Vega, in
his second Sermon on the fifth penitential Psalm, page 443. thus, Leonardus
de Vtino, in his Book De Legibus, Sermon de Poenitentia, says, That Adam
repented not of his sin, but remained obstinate till the death of Abel: but
when he saw him lie dead at his feet, wallowed in his blood, and yet pale; and
as in a glass saw the deformity of death, he began to repent. Strabo says, He
was so sorrowful, that he vowed chastity for ever, and would have performed
it, if an Angel had not enjoined him the contrary. And from the authority of
Josephus he says, Adam was so sorry for Abel, that he wept an whole hundred
years. But I believe, says Vega, He rather wept for the cause, which was
sin, then for the very death of Abel. Ludovicus Vertomannus, in his sixth
Book, fourth Chapter, of his journey to India, has recorded, that a Mahumetan
Merchant told him, that at the top of an high mountain in the Island of Zaylon,
subject to the King of Narsinga, there is a den, in which Adam after his fall
lived and continued very penitently. And though their tradition rests on an
idle conjecture, because there is yet seen the print of the steps of his feet,
almost two spannes long, (for how should they know they were his feet, rather
then some giants?) and because, how Adam should come to this Island, and why,
cannot be showed; yet, so far as is probable, we will join issue with their
belief, to wit, That he was penitent, and so saved. Thus much be spoken
concerning the salvation of Adams soul.

Concerning Adams actual sin, though I said truly before, That, as it was
private and personal, it was not imputed to us; yet (I must needs say) as it
was ideall and representative, it was and is imputed to us. He who denies
this, let him also deny, that Christ's active and passive Merits are imputed to
us. Neither can the Divine providence be taxed with rigor, much less with
injustice, for imputing Adams sin unto us. For first, he imputes not our own
actual and personal iniquities, but forgiveth us both this sin of Adam and
all manner of our own sins. Secondly, he imputes Christ's Merits unto us, as
if we our selves had done them. For as by one offense of one, judgment came
upon all to condemnation: even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift
came upon all men unto justification of life, Romans 5.18. We are then not so
accursed by the imputation of the first Adams transgression, as we are blessed
by the imputation of the second Adams holiness. Yet is this sin original not
absolutely and simply imputed unto us, if we take imputation for laying to our
charge the sin of another, without any reference to any offense of our own:
but it is imputed to us, as being both his sin and ours; though we concurred
in our kind, and he in his; he by an explicit act of his will, we by an
implicit of ours. In virtue of the masters will, the servant wills, yea
performs many things. He says to one servant, Go, and he goes; and to
another, Come, and he comes; and to a third, Do this, and he does it, Matthew.
8.9. In all transactions and negotiations, the wifes will is included in her
husbands. The father sells away lands of inheritance for ever from the son:
and though the children be unborn, the childrens will was in the fathers, and
binds them that yet are not. But of this, much more hereafter. So are we by
Adam sold under sin, Romans 7.14. Which has reference to the original sin
of Adam, says Augustine in his Retract. By one man's disobedience many were
made sinners, Romans 5.19. Not as Bath-sheba said, 1 Kings 1.21. We shall be
counted offenders: (...), say the Septuagint; Ero ego, and filius meus, says
the Hebrew; that is, in others estimate: but (...), Constituti sunt, Were made;
which is more then only esteemed sinners, more then this, That Adams sin was
imputed to us, as excluding our own unrighteousness. For this original sin
is not merely extraneall, (...), but a sin that dwells in me, says the
Apostle, Romans 7.20. and peccatum circumstans, Hebr. 12.1. which does so easily
beset us; called also there a weight, as depressing us. That I may avoid
amphibologie, and open the point plain, conceive me thus; as original sin is
taken actively, for that sin of Adam, to which our will involvedly concurred,
and which caused sin in us, it is called Originale peccatum originans: and
again, as it is taken passively, for corruption traduced unto us, it is called
Originale peccatum originatum; and both these ways sin may be said to be
imputed to us, though somewhat differently. The former more properly is said to
be imputed, the latter more properly is said to be propagated; yet both what
Adam did, bearing our persons: what we did in his loins, by a kind of implicit
blind obedient disobedience; and what he propagated to mankind, is all but
only one original sin, partly imputed, partly inherent.

O Judge most righteous, o Father most merciful, grant, I beseech thee, that
all of us who have been made Sinners by the Disobedience of one, may likewise
be made Righteous, and Sanctified, and Justified, and presented blameless
before thee by the Obedience of one; of one, thy only Son, in whom thou art
well pleased, our only sweet Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.
CHAP. VI.
1. Original sin is propagated unto us. Original sin properly is not in
the flesh before the union with the soul.

2. Bishop Bilson, Mollerus, Kemnitius, and Luther, in an error. Bishop
Bilsons arguments answered. Conception taken strictly by Physicians, etc. We
are not conceived in original sin, if we respect this conception. Conception
taken largely by Divines. Thus we were conceived in sin.

3. A Physical Tractate of conception clearing the point.

4. A Discourse touching aborsives and abortives. Balthazar Bambach answered.
The Hebrew vowels not written at first when the consonants were. Never any
wrote till God had written the Two Tables.

5. The manner how the soul contracteth original sin pointed at. Bodily
things may work upon the soul.

6. Righteous men have unrighteous children. The contagion of original sin
is quickly spread.

7. No sin or sins of any of our parents immediate or mediat do hurt the
souls of their children, but only one, and that the first sin of Adam.

1 AT length we are come to show, that original sin is traduced and
propagated unto mankind; and this is evident. For since Adams aversion
remained, and was rooted in the nature of him as an habit, and since we have
our nature from him, as he had it, not before he sinned, but after sin, this
aversion is left in nature. And this nature is conveyed unto us by generation;
conveyed (I say) as corrupt, not as sinful: and so corrupt as flesh and blood
can be, before a reasonable soul be united to it. So that we being in Adam,
secundum causam seminalem, and propagandi virtutem, our first father
transmitted after his fall some corruption unto all his children. And this
corruption was mingled with the whole nature of his posterity; neither could a
man single out any part of any one, in which there was not some deal of that
primitive corruption. And Adams offpring ever since has made such a
transmission as they received. As if one do thoroughly mingle a little leaven
with a whole unleavened lump; not only that mass may be said to be perfectly
leavened, but whatsoever is afterward incorporated into that mass. Such a
leaven of corruption was mingled by Adam, and spread or dispersed unto and by
his posterity: or as a needle touched by a loadstone, imparteth its received
virtue to other needles depending on it. From the will of every one of us,
actual sin is derived to all the other parts and faculties both of our
bodies and souls: so from the will of the first parents by generation is
original sin conveyed to all mankind. Or rather thus, in Aquinas his words.
Actus peccati exercitus per manum vel pedem non habet rationem culpae ex
voluntate manus vel pedis, sed ex voluntate tetius hominis. Aquin. in Romans 5.
Lect. 3.
The act of sin exercised by the hand or foot, is not made sin by the will
of the hand or foot, but by the will of the whole man. From which, as from a
certain head or fountain, the motion of sin is derived to every member: so
from the will of Adam, who was the fountain of humane nature, the whole
aberration of nature is found culpable in us. And the means he thus there
describes. Though the soul be not in the seed, yet in it is a dispositive
virtue apt to receive the soul; which when it is infused, is conformed to it so
far as it is capable, because Quicquid recipitur est in recipiente per modum
recipientis.
every thing received is in the receiver according to his capacity.

I need not doubt to say, That the corruption which the fleshly part draws
from our first parent, before the soul be united, is not sin, but a
punishment of sin, a debilitie of nature, an effect of sin. For if the
Embryo should die, or suffer abortion before the infusion and unition of the
reasonable soul, (as such a time there is, and such a thing may be) it must
appear in judgment, and, without extraordinary mercy, be damned, if there
were sin in it: but that a lump of flesh, which only lived the life of a
plant, at the utmost the life of a brute creature (for indeed some abortions,
seeming livelesse lumps, being pricked have contracted themselves, and showed
they had sense) which never had reasonable soul or spirit, or life of man, (for
those three several lives are not only virtually, but really distinguished) I
say, that such a rude mass of flesh should be liable to account, and capable
of eternal either joy or pain, is strange Divinity; which yet follows
necessarily, if sin be in the seed, or unformed Embryo. But you may ask, When
sin begins? I answer, So soon as the soul is united, Subest rationale
peccati susceptibile.
There is a reasonable subject susceptible of sin; and then sin enters.
Original sin is in the reasonable soul as in the proper subject, and is there
formally: the fleshly seed is the isntrumental means of traduction, both of
humane nature and original sin. Original sin (in a large sense) may be
said to be in the flesh, and fleshly seed virtually, as in the cause
instrumental, and to be in it originally, causally, materially; and in such
sort to be sooner in the body then in the soul, by the order of generation and
time: but exactly, and in most proper terms, sin is sooner in the soul by the
order of nature; and has its first residence in the substance of the soul,
then in the faculties of it, and last of all in the body.

2 In Bishop Bilsons Survey, page 173. this Position following is produced, and
maintained against him by his opposers, Pollution, that is sin and real
iniquity, is not in our flesh without the soul. The Bishop answers very
copiously, The soul comes not to the body presently with the conception.
Mothers and Midwives do certainly distinguish the time of quickening from the
time of conceiving; neither does the child quicken presently upon conception.
That the body is not straightway framed upon the conception, many thousand
scapes in all females, and namely women do prove. Physicians and Philosophers
interpose many months between the conception and the perfection of the body.
Job says, we were first as milk, then condensed as cruds, after clothed with
skin and flesh, lastly compacted with bones and sinews, before we received
life and soul from God, Job 10.10. -- The New Testament notes three degrees in
framing our bodies, Seed, blood, flesh. Upon the premises he thus argues. If
nothing can be defiled with sin (as by your doctrine you resolve) except it
have a reasonable soul; of necessity we either had reasonable souls at the
instant of our conception, which is a most famous falsehood, repugnant to all
learning, experience, and to the words of Job; or else we were not conceived in
sin, which is a flat heresy, dissenting from the plain words of the Sacred
Scriptures, and from the Christian Faith.

So far Bishop Bilson. If company may excuse his opinion, I add these.
First, Mollerus accords with him, that (...) is to be referred to the time of
conception, so soon as ever it was conceived in the womb; and (...) to the
time that the Foetus lies hid, and is carried in the womb; signifying the
seed was impure, the conception was not without the flames of concupiscence,
and all the mass of blood that nourishes the Embryo, was defiled with vices
in the womb: and lastly, the mass of the Embryo, when in the first ardor of
conception it first began to be warmed by the womb, was contaminated with
sin. Enough of Mollerus. Kemnitius in his Examen de Peccato Originali, page
167. thus, Cum mossa Embryonis, in primo ardore conceptionis, primum inciperet
uteri calore foveri, jam erat peccato contaminata; quae contaminatio, juxta
Davidis confessionem, habebat veram rationem peccati, cum nondum formata essent
vel mentis, vel voluntatis, vel cordis organa.
When the mass of the Embryo, in the first ardor of conception, began to be
warmed and cherished by the heat of the womb, it was already defiled with
sin; which defilement, according to David's confession, was truly a sin,
when the instruments of the mind, or of the will, or of the heart were not yet
framed. Luther, on the words In iniquitatibus conceptus sum, thus, Non loquitur
David de ullis operibus, sed simpliciter de materia and ipso esse; and dicit,
Semen humanum, id est, massa ex qua conceptus sum tota est vitio and peccato
corrupta. Materia ipsa vitiata est: lutum illud ex quo vasculum be fingi
coepit, damnabile est: foetus in utero, antequam nascimur and homines esse
incipimus, peccatum est.
David speaks not of any works, but simply of the matter and being; and he
says, The humane seed of which I have been conceived, is all corrupted with
vice and sin. The matter it self is infected: that clay of which this little
vessel has begun to be fashioned, is damnable: the fruit in the womb, before
we be born and begin to be men, is sin. Hierom, in his Commentary on the
words, Concipitur and nascitur in originali peccato quod ex Adam trahit^r.
Whatsoever is drawn and derived from Adam, is conceived and born in original
sin. Cajetan thus, Hic est textus unde tr^kitur originale peccatum, quo
scilicet ex commixtione maris and foeminae conceptus dicitur in originali
peccato.
This is the Text from which original sin is deduced, wherein every one is
said to be conceived in original sin by the conjunction of male and female.

All this shall not make me believe, that there is sin and real iniquity
without a reasonable soul. Illyricus is justly deserted, for saying, The very
substance of the soul is sinful. And these deserve as few followers, who say,
That the substantial, bodily, soul-wanting mass is sinful. And I profess in
this latter to take part with others rather, then with the otherwise most
Reverend and learned Bishop. For Culpa non potest esse in re irrationali.
There can be no sin in a thing reasonles. Unto Bishop Bilson I thus answer,
That all his premises are true, that I subscribe to his opinion, in the first
member of his disjunction. The second part of it I do wholly deny; nor do I fear
his aspersion of heresy. To the place of the Psalmograph, I answer with
reverence by distinguishing. First, that the words sin and iniquity are
taken rather for inclinations to sin, then for sin properly so called: thus
we were conceived in sin, that is, so soon as ever we were conceived, we had
a propension and aptitude to sin, such and as much as the flesh was then
capable of. Augustine thus, Etiam jumenta, quamvissunt rationisexpertia tamen
plerumque dicimus debere vapulare cum peccant. Aug. De Adultermis Conjugiis lib
1. circa medium.
Albeit cattle be void of reason, yet even of them we say often, that they ought
to be beaten when they sin. But let us leave the vulgar forms of speech. The
said Father annexeth, Proprie peccare, non est nisi ejus qui utitur rational is
voluntatis arbitrio. Holcot, De Imputabilitate Peccati, mendose legit argumento.
To sin, properly is but of him that uses the pleasure and liking of a
reasonable will. Secondly, If you will needs take sin according to its true
definition, then I distinguish of conception; which is used either strictly and
properly, or at large and extensively. The first way is followed by
Naturalists, Anatomists, Physicians, and Philosophers; the second way by
Divines. The first way, they make conception to be an action of the womb: for
when the womb has begun its work with attraction,

(Nam sitiens haurit Venerem, interiusque recondit) and continued it, both by
permixtion thereof and immuring retention; in the fourth and last place it ends
the operation by the suscitation of the enclosed sperms, which is properly
called Vide Laurentii Histor. Anatomicam lib. 8. quaest. 12. page 619.
conception. The spiritus artifex, and the foetus only forms, nourishes,
and increases what is done afterward: the womb only contains, and
therefore conserveth, because the place is the conservation of the thing placed
in it. To say, that we did sin properly, when our mother thus conceived us,
is to say we sinned before we had life: and we may as well be said to sin
while we were in our fathers seed, (before their conjunction and commixture
with our mothers, which is not an hour before conception) and so in their
blood before seed, and in their meat ere it was blood. Thus, I dare say, the
Spirit of God never meant that we were conceived in sin, and the traducted
matter is not properly full of sin, or sins at all. But take we conception
largely, and as Divines do use the word, (for the preparatorie formation, or a
degree of it, is a kind of conception; as the exact formation unto the full
grown measure, a little before the nativitie, may be called the completorie
conception) we may be said to be conceived in sin; conception being taken for
the time of our perfecter formation, extendible almost to our nativitie. In
iniquitatibus conceptus sum, says Lyra, Quia homo descendens ab Adam per
carnalem generationem, in unione animae ad corpus contrabit peccatum originale,
quod est ad actualia peccata inclinativum.
Because man descending from Adam by carnal generation, in the union of the
soul with the body contracts original sin, which inclines to actual sins.
Tremellius has it, In iniquitate formatus sum, and in peccato fovit me matter
mea: and expounds it in this manner, Iniquitat is and peccati reus sum; in
utero formatus and fotus; haecenim non ad formam conceptui, formationis, and
fo^us, s^dad foetus constitutionem pertinent.
I am guilty of iniquity and sin, being framed and warmed in the womb; for
these pertain not to the form of the conception, shaping, and warming, but to
the constitution of the fruit. Vatablus renders it, In iniquitate genitus sum
--, and interprets it, Fictus sum, formatus sum, natus sum.
I have been fashioned, framed, born. Concepit me, id est, peperit.
Conceived me, that is, brought forth, says Emanuel Sa, out of Hierome, though
I find it not so in Hierom on the place. S. Augustine following the
Septuagint, with Theodoret and others, for the reading In iniquitatibus
conceptus sum, has these passages, Ipsum vinculum mortis cum ipsa iniquitate
concretum est: nemo nascitur nisi trahens poenam, trabens meritum poenae.
The very band of death is grown together with sin it self: None is born
without drawing punishment, without drawing the merit of punishment: and he
does in a sort parallel this place with an other place of the Prophet (and it
is in Job, I guess, who may well be styled a Prophet) Nemo mundus in conspectu
tuo, nec infans, cujus est unius diei vita-super terram, Job 15.14. Our English
late Translatours vary thus, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive or warm me, as it is in the margin: which shaping and warming
is also after the union of the reasonable soul to the body. Not one of all
these does take conception strictly and physically, but largely, and
significantly enough both to the Scripture and to our purpose. Stapleton thus,
Anima, non caro, st subj^ctum virtutum and vitiorum. Stapl. De Orig. Pecc. to
1.4.
The soul, not the flesh, is the subject of virtues and vices. Augustine, Semen
vitiat, mest, non vitium. Aug. Hypognost 2. initio.
The seed is infected, not infection. Godfridus Abbas Vindocinensis, Non ex
carnis corruptione animae mors pracessit; nec Diabolus prius carnem no^ram
infecit quam animam. Godfridus Abbas Vind. Epist. 39.
The death of the soul went not before from the corruption of the flesh;
neither does the Devil infect the flesh before he defile the soul. Augustine,
Non caro corruptibilis animam peccatricem, sed anima peccatrix facit esse
carnem corruptibilem. De Civit 14.3. circa medium.
The corruptible flesh does not make the soul sinful, but the sinful soul
makes the flesh to be corruptible. Thus it was in Adam, is in us: our flesh is
not properly sinful or defiled before the soul inhabit it. Reason also is of
our side: for if so soon as there is conception in the womb, there is true
sin, how many thousand conceptions miscarry, and never come to perfect
formation? as in the Mola, where the forming of the parts being begun can not
be perfected, but (the weak workman being drowned in abundance of blood) in
stead of a living creature is engendered an ill-shaped, hard, and idle lump of
flesh, oppressing the womb with its ponderousnes, (says Fernel. De Hominis
Procreatione 7.8.
one) as the stomach is loaded with indigestible meats. Is there sin in this
conception? sin before life? sin when there is no motion? (as there is none in
the lumpish Mola) sin in a Moon-calf? But put we the case in a perfect
conception, which without mischance may come to formation and birth, and
casually suffers abortion before the soul be united; yet it can never be
proved, that it sinned In and At the conception.

The arguments that trendle that way are these, The very seed, of which we were
begotten and conceived, was an unclean thing (says Bishop Bilson) as Job
calls it, saying, Who can make a clean thing of an unclean? Job 14.4. It is
also corruptible, that is, (says he) full of corruption, as Peter names it,
when he says, Born again, not of corruptible seed, 1 Peter 1.23. of which we
were born of our parents. Thirdly, The Apostle calls our flesh, The flesh of
sin, Romans 8.3. If by these places he takes uncleanness, corruption, and
sin, improperly, for such ill dispositions as seed, blood, and livelesse
flesh is capable of, the Question is ended: I confess all. But he
understands uncleanness, corruption, and sin, properly. The title of his
pages 174. and 175. is this, Man's flesh is defiled in conception, before the
soul is created and infused. And in the body of his Discourse he enlarges it:
as in his Conclusion to the Reader, at the end of his Sermons, page 252. he
first propounds it, and cites Ambrose to assist him, saying, Prius incipit
inhomine macula quam vita. Amnr. Apolog. David cap. 11.
Pollution sooner begins in man then life. Now the soul is the life of the
body; then if pollution cleave to the flesh. before life come, and consequently
before the soul come, whencesoever it comes, it is evident that Adams flesh
defiles, and so condemns us. So far he. None of these proofs reach home to
clear this, That sin, true sin, proper sin, original sin or actual
is in the seed, or blood, or flesh, before the reasonable soul be united.
Neither did that learned Bishop consider, that it can not be called our
original uncleanness, pollution, or sin, till we have originem, that is,
till our soul has its first being in the body. He erreth to say, Pollution
cleaves to the flesh before life comes: and more erreth, saying, Adams flesh
defiles and condemns us, if he make the flesh subject to condemnation,
before its life and union of the soul. For then many thousand abortions should
be damned, which never had rational soul annexed to them. As for Ambrose,
Whitak. De Origin. Peccato 1.4.
Whitaker thus cites him from the same Book and Chapter, Antequam nafcimur,
maculamur contagio; antequam usuram lucis, originis ipsiut accipimus injuriam.
Before we be born, we are stained with contagion; before we enjoy the light,
we receive the injury of our very beginning. Ambrose says not, We have sin
ere we have life, but, We are conceived in iniquity: which is true, and
confessed, if we take conception largely: so Ambrose takes macula, for such
inclination to evil as is in the seed potentially maculative.

Concerning the place of Job: First, Job says not, The seed is unclean, but,
Quis dabit mundum ex immundo? Which may have reference to the person, or the
nature of the unclean father. Secondly, it may be a parallel with that of Job
25.4. How can he be clean, that is born of awoman? yea the stars are not pure
in his sight, verse. 5. Lastly, things may be said to be unclean, that have no
sin. Ask the unclean beasts, and they will justify it; and the trees will
send forth this truth as leaves. Levit. 19.23, 24. The fruit of the trees
planted shall be as uncircumcised (or unclean) unto you three years, it shall
not be eaten of: but in the fourth year it shall be holy, to praise the Lord
withal: yet was not the fruit sinful it self, but quoadusum.

The place of S. Peter is answered by the same Apostle, 1 Pet. 1.18. Silver and
gold are things corruptible: yet these creatures, as creatures, are good in
themselves; and though they are causes of most sins, yet have no sin: and
many other corruptible things, as heaven and earth, are void of all sin. As
concerning the place of the Apostle S. Paul, I answer, it is apparent he
speaks of flesh, after the soul is united; which is nothing to our Question,
and therefore a most impertinent proof of the Bishop. Lastly, the Reverend
Bishop brings this objection against himself, How could David say he was
conceived in sin, when at the conception he had neither soul nor body? His
main answer is; With God nothing is more frequent, then to call those things
that are not, as though they were, Romans 4.17. and speaks in Scriptures of
things to come, as if they were past or present. David and Job call that seed
which was prepared to be the matter of their bodies, by the names of
themselves, because it could not be altered what God had appointed. But the
void conceptions of women which miscarry before the body be framed, never had
either life or soul, and so neither name nor kind, but perish as other
superfluous burdens and repletions of the body. So he. I reply, (that I may not
question the worthy Bishop about the meaning of that place, Romans 4.17.) He has
made a great stir to little purpose, since he makes many conceptions void of
finne or punishment, like superfluous burdens and repletions of the body, which
none ever said to have sinned. Secondly, which is the better answer to the
place of the Psalmist, to say, as the Bishop does, Conceptions which come to
nothing are not sinful, but such as may have souls are sinful before they
have souls, (whereby he splitteth himself on this rock, That a perfect
conception susceptible of a soul, and aborsed casually before the unition with
the soul, is sinful and liable to account.) or to answer with me, That sin
and iniquity in the place of the Psalmist is taken for the aptitude to sin,
which is in the matter; or else, conception is taken in its latitude, for our
time in the mothers womb; and so true original sin not to be in the body
without a soul. Aquine says, Quum sola creatura rationalis sit susceptiva
culpae, ante infusionem animae rationalis proles concepta non est peccato
obnoxia. Aquin. part. 3. Quaest. 27. art. 2. in corp. art.
Since none but the reasonable creature is susceptible of fault, the child
conceived is not subject to sin before the infusion of a reasonable soul.
Whitaker says well, Carnem nihil concupiscere sine anima, nec doctus, nec
doctus dubitat, ut loquar cum Augustino. Quid enim caro i^animis a trunco
differt? Whitak. De Origin. Peccato 3.1.
That the flesh covets nothing without the soul, neither the learned nor the
unlearned doubts, that I may speak with Augustine. For what does the inanimate
flesh differ from a stock? And I hope the Bishop will not say, A block or a
stock has sin. Moreover, after thousands of sins committed in the body,
and by and with the body, yet the body separated from the soul has no sin,
is not sinful, much less is sin: and shall the seed in the womb be called
sinful or sin, as Kemnitius or Luther calls it, before it is warmed with
life or enlivened with a soul? Lastly, in our very Creed conception is used
with liberty and freedom, and not narrowly imprisoned: Christ was conceived
of the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary. Where conception includes in
itself formation of the bodily parts, and unition of the soul: So Eve
conceived, and bare Cain, Genes. 4.1. and Cain his wife conceived, and bare
Chanoch, verse. 17. Again, Genes. 16.11. the Angel says to Hagar, Concepisti
and paries filium: Thou art with child, says our late Translation, and shall
bear a son. And usually in the Scriptures there are only made two degrees of
man's nativitie. First, conception, wrapping within its verge generation, with
all degrees of formation, nutrition and augmentation. Secondly, birth or
bringing forth. Whereupon they often run in couplets together, Concepit and
Peperit; where conception is extended unto our nativitie. Let this suffice
against Bishop Bilson and his partisans, Mollerus and others, That conception
is taken by Divines, in a full unrestrained sense.

3. Let us now with Physicians say somewhat of conception, as it is taken
natively, physically, properly, and formally. Though I never met with any who
does exactly set down the beginning, progress, and end of conception, with its
infallible bounds and limits of time, and wholly agrees with his fellows; yet
out of their manifold diversity I have gathered enough to justify, that
conception is within a very short time of coition, when it is impossible there
should be sin properly, unles the seed in the bodies of mankind be sinful,
or the soul be traducted by the seed; which Bishop Bilson justly explodeth.
That which we call conception, Physicians call (...). which descends from
(...). which reception is in a short time: then follows permistion, whereupon
Non minus vivit semen, quam quadam pars corporis materni; namque per cotylas
(quae sunt acceptabula) corpor^ materni stricte sic inseritur, vt arboris
trunco ramus, qui virescii adhuc, and vita tenetur.
The seed lives no less then a part of the mothers body: for by vessels
(which are receptacles) it is as straightly ingrafted into the body of the
mother, as a science into the stock of a tree, which does still flourish and is
full of life. And Hippocrates calls it (...). for upon commistion is life:
and this some do call a conception. Galen seems to make conception, one and the
same with comprehension and retention. If so it be, since retention is
immediately upon commistion, (if not before, or at it) conception cannot be
long deferred. Lastly, if conception be a distinct action from the receiving
attraction, and from the permistion of the attracted, and from the retention of
the mingled or permixed: if conception be Vnificatio foecundi seminis ad
formandum foetum.
the vivification of the fruitful seed to the shaping of the fruit, and be the
fourth several action of the womb, as Laurent. Histor. Anatom. 8.4.
Laurentius has it: I say, grant all this; yet, since the distance of time
between these actions is very short, conception must needs be shortly post
coitum perfectum. Some say, within seven hours; I say, almost presently: but
let him that doubts have recourse to Physicians, and to the excellent
description of conception made by the learned Fernel. De Hominis Procreatione
7.8.
Fernelius. For I will pass from this point; wherein you see, how great a
difference there is between conception, as God in Holy Writ speaks of it,
with Divines accordingly using the word; and as man describes it naturally:
and I now come to speak of abortives.

4 Job makes two kinds of abortives; which the Latins also do curiously
discern and distinguish by the several words Aborsus and Abortus: (the lofty
and learned Bolducus is my Author) the former is more secret and kept close,
the latter exposed more to sight and knowledge: and if being ripe for birth, it
die before, is called Exterricinius by Festus. The former is livelesse and
formlesse; the latter living, and formed before abortion: the former aborsed
within 40 days upon conception; the latter, after distinguishable
organization. The aborsive had no images kept in remembrance of them, (says
Lorinus on Ecclesiastes 6.3. as Bolducus on Job 3.16. cites him) the abortive
had: the aborsive had no graves properly so called; but the abortive had. The
former indeed were allowed a burial place, though not properly a grave.
Fulgentius, De Prisco Sermon, says, The Ancients did call the places of
infants burial, SUGGRUNDARIA. They could not call them Busta, because they had
not bones which might be burnt; nor could they be named Tumuli, because they
were so small, that the place did not tumescere. Therefore the Vulgat did not
so aptly read it, Job 10.19. Translatus ad tumulum: it had been more properly,
ad suggrundarium. Our English late Translation has it, To the grave. And
though the word and noun Keber, there used, comes of the verb Kabar, which
signifies sepelire, (some comparing it to its transposit and anagram Rakab,
which signifies to rot, or putrify) and full often denotes the sepulchers
and graves in the Holy Writ: yet, perhaps, it would better have sorted to the
ancient custom of interring untimely births, if they had read it, I should
have been carried from the womb to my burying place, and omitted the grave, as
being the receptacle of greater bodies. Job wishes he had been like the first
of these, Job 10.18. and says of it, I should have been as though I had not
been, verse. 19. Semblably, Job 3.16. As an untimely birth I had not been; and
in reference to the speedy, and secret removing it from out of sight, Job there
calls it an hidden untimely birth. To the second sort Job wishes he had been
like, Job 3.11. Why died I not from the womb? (as our late Translatours have
it, agreeable to the Hebrew, word for word) but the sense is hit by the
Septuagint, (...), and the Vulgat, In utero. To which second sort also the
Preacher points, Ecclesiastes 6.3. saying thus, If a man beget an hundred
children, and live many years, -- and his soul be not filled with good, and
also that he have no burial, I say; an untimely birth is better then he. If
any one wonder, why Job desired to be like each of the untimely births, and why
Solomon should prefer an abortive before an unburied churl: when David
curses his enemies with this curse of God, Psalm. 58.8. Let them be like the
untimely birth of a woman, that may not see the sun: (which indeed is an heavy
imprecation, as may appear by the rest of the curse unfolded in these
similitudes, Break out the great teeth of the young lions, o Lord, verse. 6. and
verse. 7. Let them melt away as waters, which run continually: when he bends
his bow, to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces; and verse. 8. As a
snail which melts, let every one of them pass away) you are to know, that
Job did it (...), says Tremellius; and the Preacher, ex ratione carnis, says
the same; that is, (as I interpret him) out of carnal reasoning: he might
rather have said, ratione carnis, because the flesh of the abortive was buried,
and the churls carcass unburied. Nor let any man thwart me, by saying, that in
the Septuagint is no such matter; but the words are, (...) and the Vulgat
accords, Supercecidit ignis, and the whole troops both of Greek and Latin
Fathers so read it, and so expound it: I answer ingenuously, that (ascribing so
much as I do to the Septuagint and Vulgat) I wondered, how there should be so
great difference from the incorrupt original. The Vulgat (thought I) trusted
to the 70. and the 70. to some Hebrew Copy varying from others more perfect.
The 70 rendered, Genesis 4.8. not according to the Hebrew (which is certainly
defective, says Vatablus, and somewhat is to be understood; for indeed there
is an extraordinary pause) but according to the Samaritan Pentateuch, Cain said
unto his brother, Let us go into the field, as Mr. Seldom evinceth by the
authority of Hierom and Cyrill of old, and by a Samaritan Copy, now in the
hands of Bishop Usher: which the Jerusalem Targum amplifieth, relating, That
Cain told Abel there was no future world, nor reward for goodness, nor
punishment for sin: all which Abel contradicted; and thereupon Cain slew him:
So might the 70. or the Vulgat, or both, translate the passage of the Psalmist,
not accordant to those Copies which are now in price, but answerable to some
other Hebrew one. At length I rested assured, that the Copies which they used,
differed only in one letter, and in the points. For instead of (...) with five
points (as it is most commonly read) and with six points, says Kimchi, (which
signifies abortivus, and is in the Psalmist) their Copies had it (...), which
signifies cecidit, there being the same Radicals, and no letter changed.
Secondly, for (...), mulieris, which is in David, they read (...), which
signifies fire: the omission only of one letter (...), has caused abortivus
mulieris to be translated cecidit ignis. For as for the variety of punctations,
that is of small moment, by reason of their often interchangings and easy
mistakings; and points were not used in the days of the Septuagint, (as some
say) scarce when the Vulgat first was, (as others say) not from the beginning
(say I) if the names of the points and accents be Syriacall. Drusius in his
Henoch, chap. 1. says, Hieronymus ante Masoritarum tempora, a quibus apices
habemus (ut communis opinio est) qui nunc in vsu, vixit. Mercer in the great
Dictionary of Pagnine, on the word (...) relates, that when the Chaldee
translates, Deuter. 26.5. Laban Syrus quaerebat perdere patrem meum, and when
the Vulgat rendered it, Syrus persequebatur patrem meum (whereas indeed it ought
to be read, as it is in our last Translation, A Syrian ready to perish was my
father) non est dubium (says he) quin sine punctis, quibus tunc carebant
Biblia, legerint in Pihel, non in Kal. Yea, Sine dubio novas literas habemus;
if we may believe Bellarmine, De Verbo Dei, 1.1.

And indeed, the three fundamenta laid by Balthazar Bambach, That the points
were coetaneall to the Hebrew letters, are founded on the sands. First, says
he, Sine vocalibus consonantes proferri non possunt, and omnis lingua, quae
illis destituta est, manca, imperfecta, and mutila efficitur. What of all this?
how follows this, Because the consonants cannot be pronounced without
vowells; therefore the vowells were underwritten? Let him know, the Hebrew
Tongue was most perfect, when it was least written, and till Moses his time
there were not so much as consonants written; (howsoever they fable of a pillar
written upon long before) for God invented the letters first, when he made his
Two Tables, and writ the Law in them. See this proved by our learned Whitaker,
saying, Deus ipse scribendi exemplum, modumque ost endit, quando Legem suis
digitis conscriptam Mosi tradidit. Sic Chrysostom. and Theophylact. in 1 Matthew.
and Papistae in confess. Petrocoviensi, cap. 15, and Screckins Jesuita, These.
13, De Verbo Dei; Whitak. De Script. Controvers. 1. quaest. cap 2.
God himself has showed an example and manner of writing, when he delivered to
Moses the Law written with his own fingers. So Chrysostom and Theophylact write
on the first of Matthew, and the Papists in their Confession, etc. But though
Eusebius, Praeparat. Evangel. lib. 18. says, Moses first taught the use of
letters to the Jews, yet Saint Augustine, De Civitate 15.23, says, Enoch wrote
Nonuulla divina.
some divine things; since Saint Jude testifies so much. But that ever
honored Father considered not, that Jude said only Enoch prophesied, which he
might do by saying only, and not writing; as Adam, Genes. 2.24. yea God
himself prophesied of Christ in Paradise, Genes. 3.15, which Moses first wrote
(for ought that we know:) and S. Judes words are, Enoch prophesied, saying; in
which writing is rather excluded then included. Drusius in his Enoch cap. 27,
says, There was a book called LIBER BELLORUM DOMINI, out of which Moses
brings a testimony. Cornelius a Lapide says, It was written before the
Pentateuch. Aben Ezra says, The book was in the days of Abraham. In the book
of Job, who lived before Moses, is mention of writing, and of books, as of
things common, and of graving in stone with a pen of iron. Cusanus prinketh
higher: in his Compend, chap. 3. page 241. he says, Our first parents had the
art of writing; since by it man has many helps; for things past and absent are
by it made present. By the same reason he may say, Adam knew the art of
Printing, of Brachygraphy, of Characters. Let us passeby the unauthorized vast
fancy of Cusanus, and answer the objection drawn from Jobs book: which if it
were written by his three friends, or their Scribes, at their dictate, as says
Bolducus the Carthusian (since they could make Job no better satisfaction then
to historifie his innocence, and their own petulancy) or if by Elihu the Buzite
(as is very probable: for he was young when they were old, Job 32.6. and might
well live till after the writing of the Pentateuch, and publishing of books) or
by Job himself, for Job himself might have conferred in Midian with Moses,
says Bolducus; who also died but thirteen years before Moses died, says that
Carthusian: yea Job lived after Moses, if he lived 248 years (as the
Septuagint and Olympiodorus do account.) And certainly, after all Jobs misery,
he lived in prosperity 20 years longer then the whole years of Moses (compare
Job 42.16. with Deuter. 33.7.) and so Job might know the writing of the Law in
Tables of stone, and the other Sacred Writings of Moses; perhaps also books of
other men, to which he alluded; and yet there was no writing before the Law.
Concerning the book, Numb. 21.14. suppose the word run in the present tense,
Dicitur, It is said in the book of the Wars of the Lord; yet it is expounded
by the Chaldee as of a thing past, What God did in the Red Sea, and in the
brooks of Arnon; which latter clause necessarily implies, that the book was
written after the Law; for The battle of Arnon was the fourtieth year after
their Exodus, says a Jew, by Vatablus his commendation, very eminent. Or say
it be read (as Robert Stephen, in his Annotations on the Pentateuch, gathered
from the Kings Professors at Paris, has it) Sicut fecitin Mari Rubro, sic
faciet in torrentibus Arnon, which sense Cornelius a Lapide embraces; yet
those words evince, that the book was written since their going out of Egypt,
which was but forty days before the giving of the Law, says Helvicus. But
indeed, first, the word Sepher does not always signify a book, but sometimes
a Narrative of things past; whereupon Tremellius reads it, Idcirco dici
solet, IN RECENSIONE BELLORUM JEHOVAE: And so others have held, says Vatablus;
plainly denying, that there was ever any such especial book of wars. Others
read it in the future, It shall be read; and thereupon some of the Jews think
it is the Book of Judges, which handles the War with Amalek; or another book
which recounted the miracles of God in the Red Sea, and by the river Arnon:
which book, perhaps, is now perished, as diverse others of the holy Scriptures;
and amongst them, a book made by Samuel, 1 Samuel 10.25. Which I wondered that
neither Drusius, nor any who handled the controversies, whom I could yet meet
with, ever observed before me. And indeed Jeamar is the future tense, It shall
be said, or, it shall be written. So Vatablus, the Interlineary, Eugubinus, and
the Genevians. So the words are rather prophetical then historical: and so no
particular book of the wars of the Lord was written before the two Tables.
Lastly, that I may leave no objection unanswered, add this to the answer of S.
Augustine, That Christ, speaking of a prophecy in Paradise concerning himself,
does not say, It was written before Moses, but, It is written by Moses of me,
John 5.46. Moreover, if we can read the Hebrew now without vowels, much easier
and better could they whose daily speech it was. The necessity of pronouncing
the consona^ts by the vowels, evinceth not the writing of consona^ts; the
necessity of writing the Hebrew tongue by consonants evinceth not the necessity
of writingvowels: they may be of a later invention.

Secondly, says he, Quum duae linguae Syriaca and Arabica, quae ab Hebraea
ortae sunt, vocales habeant, ut ex libris manuscriptis and impressis apparet;
Matrem uempe Hebraeam, illis carere verisimile non est.
Seeing that the two tongues, the Syriack and the Arabic, which came from the
Hebrew, have vowels, as it appears out of manuscripts and printed books, it is
not likely that the Mother Tongue, to wit the Hebrew, wants them. I answer it
follows not, Because the Syriack and Arabic have now points; therefore they
had ever so when they were written: and if they had ever points, it is likely
they invented them, and added them to their consonants, the rather because the
Hebrew wanted them.

Thirdly, Qua Lingua Deus Sacra sua oracula promulgavit, banc certam minimeque
ambiguant esse necessario statuendum est.
We must needs hold that tongue to be certain, and no way ambiguous or
doubtful, in which God has published his sacred Oracles. I answer, Then God
should have writ in any other language: for the Hebrew, of all other is most
dubious and ambiguous. And whereas he adds, That the Hebrew without vowels
has no certain signification, but from the antecedent and consequent; and
admits three, four, or five significations, according to the diversity of
vowels: I answer, the antecedents and consequents are guides sufficient, and
God did it purposely to exercise our wits, and to make us know, that though in
things necessary to salvation the Scripture is easy, yet in some matters there
are depths not to be sounded; in others, The lips of the Priest should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth, Malach. 2.7. which the
unlearned scorn now adays to do; though there be much ambiguitie: but how
bold-daring, self-willed would they be, if there were no difficulties?

I return from the words to the matter, and say, That as the strong births of
the womb are a blessing of God, whether in women, or in beasts, Deuter. 30.9.
So an abortion is a curse, and abortives (I mean that had life and reasonable
souls) by the ordinary rules of Genes. 17.14. when Circumcision was in force;
and of John 3.3. whilst Baptism is in force, is a fearful estate. Howsoever
God may dispense with his own Law, and show mercy extraordinarily; yet David,
when he wished his enemies to be like abortives, wished them no good, but
evil: yea, if he did not curse them, but foretold what they should be like;
and that they were not the words of imprecation, but prediction; yet he did not
fore-divine, or fore-prophesie any good estate to them, whom he likeneth to
abortives. Let this suffice concerning abortives, incapable of sin or
punishment; and abortives, whose estate of soul is dangerous, being measured by
the rules of precepts. Which I say against Anabaptists, and the contemners or
causeless delayers of that gracious Sacrament.

5 It is now supposed, and shall (if it please God) hereafter be demonstrated,
That humane souls are not traducted, nor causally brought out of the flesh: yet
are they occasionally, (that I may touch at the manner) God having resolved and
decreed, after generation and fit organization of the Embryo, to create and
infuse a reasonable soul: which soul, because it is united to a mass
corrupted, in such a manner as a spiritlesse mass may be corrupted, or rather
to a mass inclining or inducing to corruption, in the very unition it
contracteth original sin. Hugo Eterianus thus descanteth on this point, Cum
anima languore afficitur, non voluntate, non necessitate, sed sola societate
peroellitur: si voluntate corrumperetur anima; non originale, sed actuale
peccatum censeretur: si necessitate c^deret, von ultra esset imputandum illud
vitium, Hugo Eter. de Animarum regressu ab Inferis cap. 4.
When the soul languisheth, it is neither cast down by the will, nor by
necessity, but only by fellowship, if the soul were corrupted by the will, it
should not be counted original sin, but actual: if it should fall by
necessity, that vice were no further to be imputed. Concerning the latter
part, I answer, if in his necessity he imply coaction, he says true:
otherwise, by this concurrence of our condescending will in Adam, or by our own
implicit will, we may draw on us a necessity of after-sinning, which most
justly may be imputed to us, and we may tie our selves with our own bonds. To
the former part this may give satisfaction, That against the will of the soul,
the soul it self can not be corrupted: for then the will should be forced, and
so no will at all, but Noluntas, and not Voluntas. It is not necessary, says
Bellarmine, that our soul must needs come from Adam, because we draw sin from
him: if but one part come from him it is enough. For a father does not per se
produce original sin in the child, but per accidens; namely, as by the act
of generation it comes to pass, that his son is a member of mankind, which
was overtaken in Adams corruption, and that the propension unto evil of the
earthly part traducted, meeting with a soul not much resisting, causes this
original sin to result thencefrom, and death by this original sin. So that
no sooner is the soul united to its body, and the matter glewed to the form,
but the infant deserves to be, and is the child of death, by reason of the
primigeneall corruption. If you enquire after what manner the body works the
soul unto this evil; we may truly say, Corpus non agit in animam action
physica and immediata.
The body works not upon the soul by a natural and immediate action. You
heard what Hugo Eterianus said, It is stricken or cast down only by
fellowship. He enlarges himself in the same Chapter, thus, Vitium and languor
and corruption ante animae conjunctionem in carne persistunt, ex qua tabe anima
maculatur; sicut si testa odore malo imbuta sit, quemcunque liquorem
susceperit, sua corruptione inficit.
Imperfection, languishing, and corruption abide in the flesh before the souls
conjunction; from which disease the soul is infected: as if a vessel be tainted
with an ill odor, it infects therewith whatsoever liquour it receives. Gerson
thus, Anima ex conjunctione ad corpus contrabit illud vitium; sicut quandoquis
cadit in lutum, foedatur and maculatur. Gers. in Compend Theolog.
The soul by the conjunction with the body contracteth that infection; as when
one falls into the mire, he is besmeared and stained. Felisius thus, Pomum
mundum in manu immunda positum foedatur. Vinum bonum tran^fusum in vas
acetosum, suum naturalem perdendo saporem centrabit alienum: sic anima, quando
incipit esse in carne unita, suum naturalem amittit vigorem.
A clean apple put in an unclean hand is soiled. Good wine poured into a fustie
vessel contracts a strange taste, and loses its own natural: so the soul loses
its natural vigor, when it is united in the flesh. Another thus, Anima cum
labente simul labitur, and frustra nititur dum innititur. To the same effect
another says thus, As the purest rainwater falling on dust, is turned with
the dust into a lump of mire: so at the coadunation of the soul unto the
earthly part, both spirit and flesh are plunged in the dirt of corruption.
Augustine against Julian the Pelagian, 4.15. prefers the very Heathen before
Julian; for he held, That nothing was conveyed unto us from Adam; and they
held, Nos oh antiqua scelera suscepta in vita superiore, poenarum luendarum
causa esse natos.
That we were born to be punished for old crimes committed in a former life.
And, says Augustine, it is true which Aristotle relates, That we are punished
like to those who fell among the Hetrurian robbers, Quorum corpora viva cum
mortuis, adversa adversis accommodata, quam optissime colligabantur and
necabantur.
Whose living bodies being coupled face to face with dead men's carcases, were
so killed. Of the Hetrurian Tyrant Mezentius Virgil, Aeneid. 8. records the
like; Mortua corporibus jungebat corpora vivis,
Componens manibusque manus at que oribus ora,
(Tormenti genus) and sanie taboque fluentes,
Complexu in misero, longa sic morte necabat.
But I return from this Digression. The Heathen say (as S. Augustine relates)
Nostros animos cum corporibus copulatos, ut vivos cum mortuis esse conjunctos.
That our souls united to our bodies are like the living coupled with the dead.
They saw somewhat, says he, and commends their wisdom in discerning the
miseries of mankind to be for somewhat before committed, and in acknowledging
the power and justice of God; though without divine revelation they could not
know, that it was Adams offense which brought such a wrack both on our souls
and on our bodies.

What has been hitherto related, seems too much to incline to the natural,
physical, immediate working of the soul upon the body. Others are as faulty,
who say, The soul receives no annoyance from the body, but by way of
IMPEDITION only, where the spiritual faculties are hindered, and the Music
spilt, by reason of the untuneablenes of the organes. But they will not seem to
hear, That a spiritual substance can receive infection from a nature
corporeal. Both opinions may rest contented in the middesse or mean, That as
the body cannot go beyond the sphere of its activitie, and work properly and
physically upon the soul: so by the interposition, as it were, of a middle
nature, the body not only hinders the faculties of the soul from working,
but sometimes works upon the soul. Thus the natural, vital, and animal
spirits do bind and unite the soul to the body, that neither part can part
from other, though it would. Thus bodily objects work on the mind, but it is
by the mediation of the outward and inward senses. Shall corporeal, outward,
and remote objects, by degrees, draw the soul into sin, even in our perfect
age, when our natural reason is most vigorous; and may not the corrupted seed,
having as great a propension to evil as Naphtha to take fire, at the
conjunction infect the soul with a participation of uncleannes, though the
operation be not physical, or immediate? By Adams soul sinning was Adams flesh
infected; may not our soul be infected as well by our flesh? A spiritual
substance can produce a bodily effect. Boethius says excellently, Forms
material came from forms immateriall: Our will was moved by our intellect, our
appetite by our will, and a bodily change conformable to our appetite. And may
not a bodily species work by the same degrees, backward, on the soul it self?
The reason is alike in the contrariety. Does the corporeal fire of Hell
torment and affect the incorporeall spirits of evil Angels, and shall it of
wicked men, (as most certainly it does and must; which shall be proved, God
willing, otherwhere) and may not the matter make some impression on the form,
the body upon the soul, when there is such a sympathy in nature betwixt them?
If the soul do no way suffer from the body, how does it follow the temperature
of the body? How does madness, foolishnes, anger, and love, with other
affections, work upon the mind? Yea, how comes it to pass, that not only
strength and nimblenes of body, but even goodness of wit is propagated, (if
nature be strong) and children resemble their fathers both in manners and
understanding? The flesh it self without the soul, if it be beaten, hurt, or
cut, is no way sensible. Reunite the separated soul to the wronged body, the
soul feels, and is much affected: nor is the grief in the incision only, but
in the soul. Yea, in apoplexies and deep sleeps, cast upon men by stupefactive
ingredients and compounded by art, while the soul is in the body, wounds have
been given unto the earthy part, and it never felt them: when those fits are
vanished, the soul feels the pain of the discontinuity, and division of the
flesh, as well as the body. Doctor Praelect. 51. De Libris Apocryphis.
Rainolds thus, God by nature has ordered, that the soul naturally united to
the body, Compatiatur corpori, and afflicto corpore vexetur, and recreato
exhilaretur, and corpere occiso condolescat; ut quodam medo ratione corpor is
patiatur.
Should suffer with the body, and be grieved the body being afflicted, and
rejoice it being refreshed, and be sorrowful the body being killed; so that
some way it suffers by reason of the body. Permit me but the use of his
modification, some way, and I dare say, The body draws the soul its way, some
way to sin. Aquinas on Romans 5. Lect. 3. It should not seem, that sin which
is an accident of the soul, can be produced by the original of the flesh: It
is answered (says he) with reason. Though the soul be not in the seed, yet
there is in the seed a virtue disposing the body to receive the soul, which
soul being poured or infused into the body, is after a sort conformable to the
body, because every thing received is in the receiver according to the
capacity of the receiver. To him let me add, If a new created soul should be
put into a body not descending from Adam, it should not have original sin;
but meeting with a body disposed to corruption, after its kind it yields,
and contracteth original sin.

6. Yea, but the act of Adams sin passed quickly away, and the guiltines was
forgiven; how could it infect us? I answer, Persona primum infecit naturam,
post natura infecit personam.
The person did first infect the nature, afterward the nature did infect the
person. The speedy gliding act poisoned our nature; and we have not uncorrupted
Adams nature, or any part of it; but his corrupt nature propagated corrupts
our persons. The forgivenes of that his guilt and sin joined with subsequent
holiness of life, is no privilege of innocence to his posterity; who were not
made of his perfect, but vitiated nature. Accordingly since that time, they who
are cleansed with the laver of regeneration, sealed with the spirit, justified
by faith, presented blameless to God by Christ, precious in the eyes of the
Lord, just among men, elect, and pure; even such do beget children over whom
this gangren of corruption creeps, and the babes are infected with original
sin. If it be objected, If the root be holy, so are the branches, Romans 11.16.
therefore holy men's children are better in their generation, then wicked men's
children: I answer, the fallacy is in the word Holy, which in the place to the
Romans signifies not inward holiness in the sight of God, but outward holiness,
whereby they might be distinguished from other profane people. Thus the wicked
Jews were as holy as the righteous Abraham, even the traitor Judas himself. If
any further insist and allege, The children of a believer are holy, 1. Cor.
7.14. It is also truly further answered, That the same word Holy is homonymous;
not being all one with justified, regenerate, exempt or free from sin: but
they are said to be holy, in regard of the communion with the Church, for that
covenant sake, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. So Holiness
signifies a relation, not a quality, says Sanctitas significat relationem,
non qualitatem. Scharp. Curs. Theol. page 461.
Scharpius. Augustine thus, Sicut gignatur ex oleasir^ semine oleaster, and ex
oleae semine non nisi oleaster, cuminter oleast. um and oleam plurimum distat.
Aug. De Nuptiis and Concupijcentia 1.19. and 2.34.
As a wild olive tree is brought forth out of the seed of a wild olive tree,
and out of the seed of an olive tree nothing but a wild olive tree, although
there be a great difference between a wild olive tree and an olivetree. The
seed both of the wilde-olive, and also of the garden, true, good olive tree
brings forth a wilde-olive: so a sinner is begotten of the flesh of a sinner,
and also of the flesh of a righteous man, though there is a great difference
between a sinner and a just person. Have thou ground fallowed, manured, fit to
be sown? have thou seed of the best, picked, winnowed, or tried? is it clear
from tares, chasse, or dust? though thou have thy desire for a seasonable time
of sowing, though the heavens drop fatnes, and the earth conspireth with them
to yield thee a plentiful and good crop; yet shall thy corn arise, grow up,
and be reaped with weeds, at least with husk, chasse, and dust: so does a just
man beget an unjust, Christianus non Christianum, A Christian an Unchristian;
the circumcised Hebrews beget children uncircumcised: for the generation is
natural, and not spiritual. Wicked Ahaz begat good Hezekiah, wicked Ammon
good Josiah; good, not by generation, but regeneration. Those wicked Fathers
had no more privilege then just Lot, who begat wicked daughters; or David, who
had Absalom; or Abraham, who had Ismael; or Isaac, who had Esau; or Noah, who
had Ham; or, to wind it up to the highest, Adam, whose first-begotten was the
accursed Cain. A whole family may be bound to some special service, for some
disloyalty they have showed to their King. If the King be so gracious as to
make proclamation, That whosoever in a battle fights valiantly shall be
himself freed from such servitude and bounden service; shall his children
expect to be freed likewise? Personal acceptance is no necessary sign of
general successive manumission. We betrayed God for a little pleasure. Those
that fight a good fight under Christ, are freed: yet do the children of the
just groan under that yoke, out of which their fathers by special grace have
plucked their necks. Yea, but he sins not that is begotten; for neither body
is framed, nor soul united: he sins not that begets, for the bed is
undefiled; and in matrimony the act of generation lawful, yea commanded, yea
meritorious, say some of the School: He sins not also that creates the
soul. By what crany, crank, or chink shall original sin creep in? It was the
objection of Julian the Pelagian, says Augustine: who answers, Quid quaeris
latentem rimam, cum habeas apertissimam januam? Nam secundum Apostolum, Per
unum hominem peccatum intravit. Aug. De Nuptiis and Concupisc. 2.28.
Why do you seek a secret chink, since you have an open door? for according to
the Apostle, By one man sin entered. And the manner how the soul is made
sinful, is described at large before, to wit, That by the union it is
infected, and so soon as it is infused it tastes of corruption. But this seems
strange, if not impossible, That the soul, so soon as it is tied to the body,
should be caught like a bird with a lime-bush, and bound up in corruption as in
a bundle. Let him that objecteth, remember the Angels, higher of nature then
men: Created they were in the truth, but they did not abide in the truth, John
8.44. God found no stedfastnes in the Angels, Job 4.18. Did not Satan fall like
lightning from heaven? or rather according to the Greek, Satan fell from heaven
like lightning, Luke 10.18. and lightning is gone, ere we can say, it is come.
The Angels kept not their first estate, but left their own habitations, Jude,
verse. 6. Do not some of the School say, They fell the second instant of their
creation? and Aquine and his fellows maintain, it was Statim post primum
instans.
presently after the first instant? So that what Seneca said of the burning of
Lions, Diutius illam tibi periisse, quam periit, narro. Sen. Epist. 91.
I am longer in telling thee that it perished, then it was in perishing, we may
well apply to the evil Angels not standing, or beginning to fall. And (alas!)
what a short time was there between Adams perfection, and imperfection? how
suddenly did he conceive, and bring forth corruption? So quickly does the soul
of a young child sink under corruption, though it be not speedily discerned.
The seed of a stote, fox, or serpent, has dangerous and desperate inclinations
in it, though they break not forth long after. For as in the dark night you can
not difference, distinguish, or know the blindness of a blind man's eye, from
the eye of him who is not blind; but when the light comes, it is easily
discerned: so in infants original sin appears not, but in process of time
it grows manifest. Humors putrefying and putrified are long in the body, ere
they come to their height, and show themselves outwardly: so is sin in the
soul of every child; it lurketh in our nature, which was derived unto us from
our Forefathers. Yet let me not be mistaken, as if I held, that we are
answerable for the sins of our Forefathers, or that Adams future sins,
after his first sin and fall, were propagated, or the iniquities of any other
our immediate, mediat, or remote progenitors shall lie heavy on us. For man
begets man like to himself, as he is Species hominis, not as he is
Individuum: and Accidents belonging to the individual person of the Father
pass not over to the child, but those things that pertain to the specificall
nature. Therefore what belongs to man, as he is Individuum, he does not
propagate. As for example, A Musician begets not a Musician, but a man; an
Astrologer an earthly, a wiseman a fool, a Divine a carnal, a holy man an
unclean person. Should we propagate as we are Individua, we should also convey,
and communicate to our posterity our knowledge, our arts, our sciences, and
our Fathers holy inclinations, and mortified dispositions. For good is more
diffusive and spreading of it self, then evil can be; and God extends Mercy
further then he does his Justice, Exodus 20.6. Which virtuous good since we do
not derive unto our posterity, neither do we or shall we partake of our
predecessors sins, or of any one sin, except of the only first sin of
our first predecessor.

7. There was not given either to Adam, or to the sons of Adam, any one
precept which belonged to all mankind: I mean such a precept by the breach of
which we might have fallen in their fall, or in Adams fall, without our own
actual consent, save only one, of which I spoke so much before; neither do
the acts of any fathers necessarily bind all his descendents. Jonadab the
son of Rechab commanded his children, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither
ye nor your sons for ever: neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, nor
plant vineyard, nor have any, Jerem. 35.6, 7. They are commended because they
performed the commandment of their father, verse. 16. and are blessed for
obeying and keeping all his precepts, verse. 18. but therefore (in my opinion)
more commended and more blessed, because the performance was more of voluntary
devotion, then of binding necessity, or a mere imperious charge: for his
precepts could not lay so great a tie upon all his descendents: but certainly
the obedience was of free condescent, not coactive command; unless we say, by
immediate divine revelation he was commanded to put that yoke upon his
posterity for ever.

It is a true maxim in School-divinitie, Pure personalia non propagantur.
Merely personals are not transmitted. Of this sort is holiness and sin; and
therefore not tranducted unto others. After Zachary was dumb, Luke 1.24. he
begat John Baptist, a crier, the voice of one crying, Mark 1.3. And John 9.20.
the blind man had parents which could see. Halting Jacob, Genes. 32.32. begat
the lion Judah: the lusty-lovely Jonathan, the lame Mephibosheth. But there are
others which may be called mixt-personals, and these are oftentimes
hereditarily derived. Thus through the noisome quality of the seed, one leper
begets an other; and a father subject to the stone or gout, transmitteth
those diseases full often to his children: and it has been the wish of some
Physicians, and (if I be not much mistaken) I have read it as the practice of
some countries or commonwealths, that they that are naturally subject to
contagious diseases, or evils hereditary, as Apoplexies, Epilepsies,
Consumptions, or the like, are forbidden to sow their seed in wholesome ground;
yea, are forbidden marriage, to avoid future danger. But these diseases reach
not to infect the soul with sin. Aquinas on Romans 5. Lect. 3. goes one step
further: The sons are like the fathers, even in the defects of the soul;
Angry and mad men are begotten of angry and mad men. Yet in the end he closes
thus, It is manifest, that though the first sin of the first Adam be
traducted to posterity by the original; yet Adams other sins, or the sins
of other men are not derived to their children: because by the only first
sin sublatum est bonum naturae, that natural good was taken away, which
should have been traducted per originem naturae, by the original of nature. By
other sins the good of personal grace is withdrawn, which passes not over
to posterity. Hence it is, that though Adams sin was blotted out by his
repentance, yet his repentance could not wipe out the sin of his posterity:
because his repentance was by an act personal, which could not extend it self
beyond his person. So far Aquinas. But let discourse give way to Scripture.
Jer. 31.29, 30. They shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a sour grape,
and the childrens teeth are set on edge: but every one shall die for his own
iniquity; every man that eats the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on
edge. They had occasion to use this proverb, in reference to Adam who ate one
sour grape, in whom we sinned and are punished. But as I live, says the Lord
God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel, Ezekiel.
18.3. Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also the soul
of the son is mine: the soul that sins, it shall die, verse. 4. And when
God said, Exodus 20.5. I visit the sins of the fathers upon the children unto
the third and fourth generation of them that hate me: I answer, First, the
place speaks not of the sins of children, (for the fathers personal
iniquity makes not the son inique or wicked) it is only spoken of
punishments. Secondly, even punishment eternal does not reach from the father
to the son, unless the son communicate with the sin of the father: for
if a wicked father beget a son that sees all his fathers sins, which he
has done, and considers, and does not such like, he shall not die for the
iniquity of his father, he shall surely live, Ezekiel. 18.14, 17. In this sort
you may object, A man shall not be punished at all for the sins of his
forefathers, but for his own sins only. I answer, He may be punished
temporally, but not eternally: for in temporal chastisements, as there be many
causes producing one effect, so many sins, even of diverse men, may be
corrected by one punishment; and the father is often more grievously punished
in his son, then in himself.

Now having spoken what I thought convenient, concerning the propagation of
original corruption unto all the posterity of Adam, I am in the last place to
show the just consequent; That as he did die for that his sin, so we his
offspring for having that sin should die; and in regard of this sin, It is
appointed for men to die, and to undergo that punishment. For original sin is
in one regard a fault of transgression, and the same original sin, in a
different respect is also a punishment. Aug. de baptismo parvulorum.
As every man was in Adam, and his corrupted nature was propagated to us, it is
a sin: as original sin is considerable in every man, without reflecting on
the common nature, it is a punishment. It is so a sin, or such a sin, that
it is also a punishment: and we have spoken of it as a sin, let us now
descend to handle it as it is a punishment.

MOst Prepotent, Eternal, and only Wise God, I a poor dejected sinner, with
an humble and contrite soul, devoutly beg pardon at thy Mercie-seat, confessing
from the bottom of my heart, my manifold, personal, and actual sins, from
all which if thy Grace had prevented me, yet my offense in Adam and with him
had justly condemned me: But I meekly beseech thy Divine Majesty, that I may
be one of those many, to whom the blood of thy dear Son shall do more good,
then the fault of Adam did hurt. Grant this, I beseech Thee, for the
All-sufficient merit of thy only Son, our only dear and gracious redeemer,
Jesus Christ. Amen.
CHAP. VII.
1. A review of the last point. Zanchius not against it. Bucer and Martyr are
but faint, and rather negative then positive.

2. Bucer and Martyr make the state of the question to be voluble, not fixed and
settled. Their objections answered. The place of Exodus 20.5. examined.

3. S. Augustine appealed unto, and defended.

4. God justly may, and does punish with any temporal punishment, any children
like or unlike unto their parents, for their parents personal sins.

5. God does, and may justly punish some children eternally, and all temporally
for original sin, whether they be like their parents in actual aversion,
yea or no.

6. God justly punishes, even eternally, wicked children, if they resemble
wicked parents.

7. God oftentimes punishes one sin with an other.

8. The personal holiness of the parent, never conveyed grace or salvation to
the son.

9. God never punished eternally the real iniquities of the fathers upon their
children, if the children were holy.

10. No personal sins can be communicated. The point handled at large
against the error of Bucer and Martyr.

11. The arguments or authorities for my opinion. The new Writers not to be
overvalued. Zanchius himself is against Bucer and Martyr.

1. HAving thus far proceeded, and (as I thought) without the contradiction
of any, I found by the discourse of a loving learned friend, that diverse late
Writers were otherwise minded in the point last handled in the former chapter;
whereupon I betook my self to review it. Zanchius in locis commun. Theolog.
upon the second chapter of the Ephesians. loc. prim. toward the end, brings this
objection against one part of his definition of original sin: Some say, that
if therefore Adams sin was transferred to posterity, because we were in his
loins; by the same reason, the other sins of Adam and our other parents
should be likewise traducted: which is absurd, and comes not always to pass;
since of evil parents oftentimes the best children are born. He answers,
first, The reason is not alike: for the first sin was not so proper and
personal to Adam, as common to humane nature: his other sins, and others
after him are truly personal. Which answer is excellent, and he confirms it
at large. Then comes he to a second answer, which is not his own, but only
barely related, without his approving or open disproving of it. Deinde, negant
multi viri docti absurdum esse, si dicatur, peccata pronimorum parentum
communicari liberis; ita ut similes parentibus nascantur filii, vitiosi
vitiosis.
Besides, many learned men deny, that it is absurd to say, that the sins of
the next parents are communicated to the children; so that sons are born like
their parents, vicious and perverse sons of vicious and perverse parents;
which they confirm by experience, by examples of Scripture, by Exodus 20.5. And
Augustine truly in Enchirid. cap. 46. says it is probable for that place of
Exodus. For, says he, if the son shall not bear the iniquity of the
father, but the soul that sins shall die, and yet God visit the sins of
the fathers upon the children; it seems to follow, that the sins of the
parents pass over to the sons, and the sons follow the sins of the
parents, that those sins may be justly punished in them, which are not so
proper to the parents, as common both to parents and children. And for this
opinion he cites Bucer and Martyr. All this cloud (for it is but a cloud, and
an empty one also) will quickly be dispersed. First, in the general
replication observe, that Zanchius himself never specializeth this, as his own
judgment. Secondly, note how cautelously Bucer and Martyr carry it on the
negative; Many learned men deny that it is absurd to say, etc. Themselves see
no convincing demonstration, but are content if their opinion be not absurd.
Errors there are that are absurd; if this be not absurd, all is well. Thirdly,
of those many are but two named by him, Bucer and Martyr: learned men indeed,
yet not more learned then many that herein differed from them. Fourthly, many
words are homonymous, and they themselves slide back from them, by varying the
state of the question, as will appear by and by. Lastly, let the grounds by me
set down in the last chapter be well weighed, and the truth will appear on my
side.

2. Now let me descend to the matter of their objections. Peccata proximorum
parentum communicantur liberis.
The sins of the next parents are communicated to the children, say they.
Here they should have been punctual, and I desire to be satisfied what they
mean; Whether the sins of the father and mother be transfused into all the
sons and daughters? and into all of them alike, or not alike? And if the
father be virtuous, and the mother wicked; or contrariwise, the mother virtuous
and the father wicked, what is communicated to the child? Secondly, what
sins be communicated? all, or some? Whether Atheism and profaneness of
thoughts, or only such sins as the body is much employed in performance of?
Thirdly, whether the sins of grandfathers and grand-mothers be derived? and
if so, whether if there be a good grandfather and a good grandmother and a
good father, the children shall inherit no goodness, but the sin of their
wicked mother only? Or if two of them be good, and two bad; the males good,
and the females bad; or contrariwise; what sin shall be communicated to their
children? Fourthly, whether the sins of the great-grand-father, and of his
parents, our more remote progenitors, be derived? and where begins the
derivation of these sins? and why from such determinate persons and
generations, rather then from others? Or whether they must reach up from all
the descendants of Adam, to his actual and personal sins? Fifthly, whether
such actual and personal sins as are repented of by our parents and all our
forefathers, be derived unto us? or only such as they were not repentant of?
or both sorts of them? Sixthly, let noveltie know, Peccata proximorum
communicantur liberis, in stead of Propagantur ad liberos, is an unknown phrase
to antiquity: and it is better to speak plainly according to the days of the
Fathers, then in terms covert and dubious; and then in defense of such riddles,
to say no more then the old Tenet, In universalibus latet dolus.
Deceit lies hidden in universals.

The second branch of pendulous new-fanglednesse is this: Peccata proximorum
parentum communicantur liberis; ita ut similes parentibus nascantur liberi,
vitiosi vitiosis.
The sins of the next parents are communicated to the children; so that
children are born like unto their parents, vicious of vicious. First, it is
petitio principii, that the vicious child being like to his vicious father,
proceeds from the fathers multiplied transgressions: for if he be like to his
father in sin, he is also, in that regard, as like and more like to many
other actual sinners, from whom there could proceed no generative
communication of iniquity. Secondly, what is natural, is ordinary, is
oftenest, is always so, without some notable hinderance: but the childrens
being like the parents are not thus; therefore the communication is not
natural. Thirdly, suppose a wicked son curses his father, or wishes him
dead, or mocks at him; he also begets a son, which son does the like to
him, as he did to his father: shall we say (if the generation had descended,
after many, from Cham, who laughed or mocked at his father, Genesis 9.22.) that this
sin of Cham was traduced, derived, or did pass over to this last mocker? or
shall we say it was derived unto him from the personal sin of his immediate
last father? No; we must rather say, it was derived unto him from his last
parents, in and by that original sin only, which was traduced. That this
may the better be manifested, consider these points. First, that Adams first
sin, though it were one only, yet more sins were involved in it. Augustine
says, In illo uno peccato, quod per unum hominem intravit in mu^dum, and in
omnes homines pertrans^it, -- possunt intelligi plurapeccata, si unum ipsum in
sua quasi membra dividatur singula. Aug. Enchir. cap. 43.
In that one sin, which by one man entered into the world, and passed over to
all men, more sins may be understood, if that one sin be divided into all
its parts or members. And he found there many branches of Adams sin, and
denies not but more may be found in ho^ uno admisso, in that one committed.
Secondly, he makes that one to be transfused unto all mankind. Thirdly, none
in the world were ever more eager then some of these latter times, to aggravate
the greatness of original sin. Illyricus is almost frantic on the point.
Zanchius and others are truly peremptory, that all faculties of body and soul
are infected. Let me add, There never was sin, nor can be, but the seed of
it was couched in the sin original. So that every man has just cause to
bless God, for withholding him from every sin, great or small; since every
man has a natural inclination to every sin, even unto that sin which (by
Gods grace) he most detesteth. Therefore if wicked children be like their
parents, it proceeds not from their parents personal transgressions, but
from that one infectious root of the first sin of Adam, strengthened by
connivence, ill breeding, or custom, or ill company. Fourthly, an holy man and
woman who never mocked their parents, have a son who mocks at them; shall his
mocking proceed from his parents, or his parents parents, who never personally
did the like? or shall Chams sin be communicated to him? Then, why do they
instance in this sin of the next parents? If they mean, it is communicated in
original sin, they mean what I say, and contrary to their own words. Lastly,
sin original is alike in all and every one, and alike remitted in Baptism
of infants; yea, though the parents should be infidels, and send their child
for fashion-sake, or by way of jesting to be baptized: if the Church know not
so much, and if the child be offered unto God by the wel-meaning devotion and
faith of Priest and people present, and be baptized with true matter and form,
it receives spiritual regeneration, as I read long since, if my memory fail
me not, in S. Augustine. The personal offenses or holiness of parents are not
communicated to their children. Again, they object, that they confirm this by
experience. These are words of wind, and nothing else. That wicked ones beget
often children like to them, who denies? That their children have their
fathers personal sins transmitted, is the begging of the question. Yea, but
they prove it by examples of Scripture. How? or where? By the place, Exodus
20.5. I visit the sins of the fathers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me. I answer, He does not say, I transmit,
or communicate sins, which is our only question. Even Illyricus himself
among all his expositions of visitare, has none for communicare, propagure,
transfundere, transfer: and particularly of this place of Exodus, he says,
Visitans iniquitatem patrum, id est, puniens posteros ob majorum suorum enormia
delicta.
Visiting the iniquity of the fathers, that is, punishing the posterity for
the enormious sins of their ancestors. Yet if to visit had been to propagate
actual sins, it had been his best proof, That the substance of the soul is
corrupt by original sin, and has in it the image of Satan. They allege S.
August. who says it is probable by that place of Exodus. The words of S.
August. are these in the place by them cited, Parentum quoq, peccatis parvulos
obugari, non solum primorum hominum, sedetiam suorum de quibus ipsi nati sunt,
non improbabiliter dicitur.
It is not improbably said, that children are liable to the sins of their
parents, not only of their first parents, but also those of whom they are
immediately born. And at the end of that chapter, In illo uno, quod in omnes
homines pertransiit, atque tam magnum est, ut in ^o mutaretur and converteretur
in necessitatem mortis humana natura, reperiuntur plura peccata; and alia
parentum, quae etsi non possunt mutare naturam, reatu tamen obligant filios.
In that one sin, which passed over to all men, and is so great, that in it
humane nature was changed and turned to a necessity of death, more sins are
found; and other of parents, which albeit they change not our nature, yet by
their guilt they bind children: where he makes an apparent distinction,
between that one sin which changed our nature and was propagated unto us, and
those other personal sins of our fathers, which change not our nature, but
bind us over unto punishment: for that is his meaning of reatu obligant. He
does no where say, such sins are communicated unto us, or that they bind us
with the guilt of offense; but he is to be understood of the guilt of
punishment. And so Bellarmine expounds him, De amission. great. and statu
peccati 4.18. Indeed he does it somewhat timerously toward the beginning of
the chapter with a Fortasse, non de contagione culpae, sed de communicatione
poenae locuti sunt Augustinus --
perchance. But he is more positive and fully assertive at the latter end of
the same chapter, that Augustine and the Fathers spoke only of the
communication of punishment, which Bellarmine proves, because they instance in
Exodus 20.5. which has apparent reference to punishment: and indeed so the word
visit is most-wise used in Scripture, viz. for to punish: and sometimes in
love, mercy, grace, and goodness, to visit: but never is used for the
communicating, or propagating, trajecting, or transmitting of sins. Nay,
Greg. Mor. 15.22.
Gregory goes further, as he is cited by Bellarmine, teaching that the place
of Exodus is to be understood of those children, who imitate the sins of
their parents; and so the Chaldee Paraphrase has it, says Vatablus. Lastly,
to clear this truth, that Augustine in that place meant only the binding over
unto punishment, see his own words, Chap. 47. (which I marvel that Bellarmine
passes over) Sed de peccatis aliorum parentum, quibus ab ipso Adam usque ad
patrem suum progeneratoribus suis quisque succedit, non immerito disceptari
potest, utrum ^mnium malis actibus and multiplicatis delictis originalibus, qui
uascitur implicetur; ut tanto pejus, quanto posterius quisque nascatur: A^
propterea Deus in tertiam and quartam generationem de peccatis c^rum posteris
commin^^ur, quia iram suam, quantum ad progenitorum suorum culpas, non extendit
ulterius, moderatione miserationis suae; ne illi quibus regenerationis gratia
non confertur, nimia sarcina in ipsa sua aeterna damnatione premerentur, si
cogerentur ab initio generis humeni omniu^ praecedentium parentum suorum
originaliter peccata contrabere, and poenas pro iis debitas pendere. An aliud
aliquid, de re tanta, in Scripturis san^^is diligentius perscrutatis and
tractatis, vakat vel non valeat reperiri, temere non audeo affirmare.
But touching the sins of other parents, by which every one from Adam himself
to his own father succeeds his ancestors, it may well be disputed, Whether he
that is born be involved in the evil acts and multiplied original sins of
all; so that how much the later any man is born, so much the worse: Or whether
God does therefore threaten the posterity unto the third and fourth generation
for their parents sins, because, through his merciful moderation, he extends
his wrath no further for the faults of progenitors; lest they to whom the
grace of regeneration is not given, should be pressed with too great a burden
in their eternal damnation, if they were forced to contract the original
sins of all their forefathers from the beginning of mankind, and to undergo
the punishments due to them. Or whether some thing else concerning so weighty a
matter may be found in the holy Scriptures diligently searched and perused, I
dare not rashly affirm. You have the whole chapter word for word out of S.
Augustine. In which observe, First, the adversative particle Sed,
distinguishing the question from the other: which also Erasmus in the margin
has thus diversified, comprising the meaning of the 46 chapter in these words,
Pecc^^is parentum obligari filios.
That the children are bound by the sins of their parents: and of the 47
chapter, Quousque majorum peccata prorogcutur, non temere desiniendum.
We ought not rashly to determine how far the sins of ancestors be
extended. Secondly, in the former chapter he said exactly, Non improbabiliter
dicitur, parentum peccatis parvulos obligari.
It is not improbably said, that infants are bound by the sins of their
parents. He changes the phrase in the latter, Non immerito disceptari potest;
and, Non audeo temere affirmare.
It may well be disputed; and, I dare not rashly affirm. Thirdly, his phrases
in the former chapter are not so distinct, as in the latter, where he
mentions both the contracting of sins, and undergoing punishment for them.
Fourthly, weigh this strong inconvenience which he touches at, That the latter
born in time, is still the worse in nature, worse then any that went before; as
follows necessarily, if the sins of our forefathers are communicated to us.
Fifthly, he seems to conclude the unreasonablenesse, That they who were never
regenerated, should be overburdened with eternal damnation, if they should be
compelled from the beginning of mankind to contract the sins of all their
progenitors, and be punished for them. And therefore he questioneth, Whether
it reaches only to the third and fourth generation. I would also question,
Whether (if the threat reach only to the third and fourth generation) upon
supposall, that from Adam all the predecessors of a man were wicked till the
fourth generation, that man shall have none of those sins imputed to him,
before his progenitors in a fourth ascent. Or if an others progenitors were
all good from Adam till the four last generations, and from it all and every
of his parents, in a lineall descent, were starknaught, till we come to
himself, who is good, Whether he shall have communicated to him the sins of
these four last progenitors, and no goodness for a thousand generations of
holy and repentant forefathers (himself also being a holy man) since God
shows mercy unto thousands that love him, that is, more mercy to more good
men, then severitie, which extends, even toward his haters, but to the third
and fourth generation; which number is short of thousands.

The last objection from the place of Exodus, is this; Consequi videtur, Deum
permittere ut p^ccata parentum in filios transeant.
It seems to follow, that God does permit that the sins of parents pass unto
their children, and the sons imitate the sins of their fathers, that God
may justly punish sins, which are not so proper to the parent, as to the
parent and child. I answer, He does well to mince it with It seems to follow.
But, Quaedam videntur, and non sunt; Some things seem to be, and are not. Bucer
and Martyr do float too much in generalities; they neither mention what sins,
all, or some; neither what parents, good, bad, or all; nor what they mean by
passing, when they say, Peccata parentum in filios transeunt.
The sins of parents pass unto the children. There are also nets and ginns
in these their words, Peccatorum labes and cou contegium redundat in patris
corpus, and per ejus sanguinem and semen in filios.
The spot and, as it were, contagion of sin overspreadeth the fathers body,
and by his blood and seed redoundeth upon the children. Before they said
sins, now the spot of sins, though there be a great difference between them
two: for the sin is past before the spot comes, and the latter is the effect
of the former. Again, because it is easy to prove, that Macula patris non
redundat in filios.
the stain of the father redoundeth not on the children; it is added, Labes and
ceu contagium.
the spot and, as it were, contagion. Moreover, how unaptly do they bring the
place of Exodus, to prove the sins of the next parents to be communicated (if
by them they understand only the immediate father and mother) when in that
place there is express mention of the third and fourth generation? If they
stretch the words [of the next parents] to the third and fourth generation
only, why not to the fifth, sixth, and so upward? Sixteen generations since
Christ's time, are the next parents, if you compare them to the thirty nine
generations, which in the law of Nature and of Moses preceded Christ. Lastly,
note their wild inference, God permits the fathers sin to pass unto the
child, and the child to imitate the father that he may punish: as if God
could not justly punish the sins of the fathers in the children, unless they
be like them in personal transgressions: as if the communication of original
sin only, were not cause enough to punish children for the sins of their
parents: as if the evil of sin were ordained to justify the evil of
punishment. Away then with this fishing in troubled waters, this delighting in
amphibolous terms. Which censure that I may the rather justify, I will
endeavor to explain all things necessary to the knowledge of this point, to
salve all doubts, to unfold all intricacies in these seven propositions.

4. God justly may, and does punish with any temporal punishment, any children
like or unlike to their parents, for their fathers personal sins. Horat.
Epod. 7. -- Immerentis fluxit in terram Remi
Sacer nepotibus cruor.
And Carminum 3. Ode 6. Delicta majorum immeritus lues, Roman --
For the children are a part of the fathers, and in the childs punishment the
father himself is punished. For as a son receives (under God) life and the
things of this life, by the father: so it is no injustice, if he lose the same
for him. The widow of Zarephath her son, was (in her apprehension) dead for
her sin, 1. King. 17.18. So, 2. Sam. 12.15. God stroke the child that Uriahs
wife bare to David, and it was sick and died. Both father and child endured a
punishment of seven days: the father in sorrow fasting a fast, lying on the
earth, in a holy sordiditie weeping and praying: the child by sickness
tormenting him to death. Ahabs children were punished for his offense, 1. King.
21.21. and among the rest Jehoram his son: who although he wrought evil in
the sight of the Lord, yet was not so bad as his father or mother, 2. Kings
3.2. The passage is very observable, Jer. 16.3, 4. For thus says the Lord
concerning the sons and daughters that are born in this place, and concerning
their mothers and fathers, They shall die of grievous deaths: Both the great
and small shall die, verse. 6. The punishment of Gehazi his posterity is more
exemplarie: for though they sinned not, nor could sin the sin of Gehazi;
yet the leprosy of Naaman did cleave unto him, for that his personal simonie,
and unto his seed for ever, 2. Kings 5.27. The case of Jobs children surpasses
this: for they were not stricken with death for their own sins, or the sins
of their father Job, so much as for the trial of his patience, and for the
experimental confutation of Satan; yet was it not unjust that they should lose
their lives for their fathers good, which they had by him; since he also
suffered in their sufferings, and might easily see Gods especial hand against
himself: For the greatest wind in the world naturally cannot smite the four
corners of an house; and if it should, yet one corner would uphold the other:
but this whirlwinde did so, and the house fell, Job 1.19. 1. Sam. 15.6. the
Kenites are spared, because they showed kindness to the children of Israel
when they came out of Egypt: but because Amalek had fought with Israel, Exodus
17.8. though they were presently punished, by being vanquished in battle; yet
God said, verse. 14. Write this for a memorial in a book, -- I will utterly put
out the remembrance of Amalek under heaven. -- And the Lord did swear he would
have war with Amalek from generation to generation, Exodus 7.16. And above
four generations after, about 400 years, Saul destroyed them. A Quaere indeed
may be made, Whether God can justly punish the fathers for the childrens
actual delinquencies. And this resolution is easy, That he may do it, if the
father has doted on the children, and not duly corrected them: (for so did
God to 1. Sam. 2.29.
Eli) or if wicked children do tenderly love their parents (which though it be
not usual, yet it has been so;) and in this case the punishment of the father
is indeed a punishment also of the child. But if an holy father do his duty,
and hate his sons courses, and thereupon the child loves not his father; if
God can punish the father with temporal punishments for the notorious faults
of his son, yet he will not punish him eternally. Nay, I will go yet further,
and truly avouch, that the sins of predecessors which are not of
consanguinitie with us, but are fathers only by our imitation, fully may be
punished on their children. First, the word father is taken two ways in
Scripture: for either there are fathers by imitation, or fathers by nature,
from whose loins we lineally descend. The Jews, though they came not of Cain
(whose posterity ended at the flood) yet may be said to be his sons by
imitation: yea they are called the sons of Satan, Joh. 8.44. because they
followed his steps, and did the work of their father, verse. 41. which is one
degree more remote. Those, who thus take a pattern for themselves out of
example of wicked ancestors, God justly punishes. Satan having been a
murderer from the beginning, John 8.44. Cain being (as it were) the head of
murderers among men, and the Jews treading in their steps to an inch, they may
justly be cast into the same fire prepared for the devil and his angels, Matthew.
25.41. And the Apostle S. Jude justly pronounces, verse. 11. Woe to them that
have gone in the way of Cain. Yea, our blessed Savior himself foretells the
Jews, that for their bloody proceedings, Upon them shall come all the righteous
blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of the righteous Abel, unto the blood
of Zacharias, whom they slew, etc. Mat. 23.35. Where, first, the distinct
deaths of several martyrs or just ones (as the Syriack has it) is called
(...), one just blood: secondly, they are said to slay Zacharias, whom others
slew: thirdly, the blood is not said in the preterperfect tense, to have been
shed; but in the present tense, (...), which is shed, or is now a shedding. as
Jerusalem is called, verse. 37. (...), quae occidisti, occidis, occisura es, as
Erasmus well expounds it. All these circumstances concur, to make (as it
were) one continued act of murder, from the beginning of the world till the
destruction of Jerusalem, repayed with one and the same punishment upon the
father and all the sons of imitation. Now as the punishment of the fathers by
imitation may in an extended sense be communicated to posterity: so their
sins cannot be said to be communicated. For how can the sin of Cain be
communicated unto him, who last of all killed his brother? and unto the Jews,
who descended not from him, but from the younger brother? Or can we think that
God will inflict damnation upon men for others personal transgressions?
Temporal chastisements he may justly inflict for the ungracious perpetrations
of parents. Non est tibi, Israel, ultio, in qua non sit uncia de iniquitate
vituli.
There is no vengeance taken on thee, Israel, wherein there is not an ounce of
the iniquity of the calf, says Rabbi Moses Ben Nachman, whom they call
Ramban, or Gerundensis. See an excellent place for both points together, Jerem.
32.18, 19. And eternal torment can he rightly adjudge the souls and bodies of
men unto for original sin: which is our second proposition.

5. God may, and justly does punish some children eternally, and all temporally
for original sin, whether they be like their parents in actual aversion and
backsliding, yea or no. For the most righteous sons of Adam endure pain,
labor, sickness, death, which are the orts and effects of the primogeneall
offense: and the death both of soul and body was inflicted in Morte moriemini:
and this shall hereafter be fully proved.

6. God justly inflicteth eternal punishment on wicked children, if they
resemble their wicked parents. Malorum imitatio facit, ut non solum sua, sed
etiam eorum quos imitati sunt, merita sortiantur. August. in priori Enarrat.
Psalm. 108.
The imitating of wicked men, makes a man to be punished not only for his own
sins, but for theirs also whom he imitates. This is a truth so apparent, that
it needs no further proof.

7. God oftentimes punishes one sin with an other. And in my opinion, this
manner of punishing, if it continue all a man's life, is worse then the torment
of hellfire, which were better to be speedily undergone, then to be deferred
with the increase of sin. Psalm. 69.27. Add punishment of iniquity, or Add
iniquity unto their iniquity. Thus God gave the Gentiles over to a reprobate
mind, Romans 1.28. and then such offenders do but treasure up wrath against the
day of wrath, Romans 2.5. But this happens not for the foregoing offenses of
our progenitors, but for our own transgressions.

8. The personal holiness of the parent never conveied grace or salvation to
the son. Abraham the father of the faithful prayed for his son, Genesis
17.18. Oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight! yet was he a castaway.
Temporal blessings indeed he had for Abraham's sake, verse. 20. Isaac had an
Esau, David an Absalom, and often the like.

9. God never punished eternally the real iniquities of fathers upon their
children, if the children were holy. Let an instance be given to the contrary.
Indeed it is said, Psalm. 109.14. Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered
with the Lord, and let not the sin of his mother be done away. But he
speaks, first, of a very wicked man, equalling (if not exceeding) his parents
in sin. And the New Testament applies it to Judas, Act. 1.20. to Judas, the
monster of men. Secondly, the remembrance mentioned, has reference rather to
penalties consequent, then only to sins precedent; Memoratur quantum ad
poenam, quoniam puncti sunt filii pro iniquitate patrum, qui occiderunt
Christum.
It is remembered in regard of the punishment, because the children were pricked
for the iniquity of their fathers who slew Christ, says Cajetan on the place.
And this is not our question. Thirdly, why may there not be a change of number,
as Vatablus styles it? And though the Interlinearie bible reads it patrum
eorum, and Vatablus so expounds it, but reads it patrum ejus: why may it not be
expounded patris ejus? being accordant to that following, peccatum matris ejus?
and whether it be patrum eorum, or patrum ejus, or patris ejus, I see not but
original sin may be meant in both places, as being expressed only in the
singular, rather then the many actual transgressions: especially, since our
singular original sin came to him by many fathers: and it was not the intent
of Gods Spirit in this Psalm, to extenuate the sins of the wicked one's
forefathers, and to plaster this over with the title of one single iniquity.
Indeed Theodoret on the place says thus, Paterna virtus saepe siliis
peccantibus prosuit, ut fides Abrahae Judaeis, and Davidis pietas Solomoni.
The fathers virtue has often profited the transgressing children; as Abraham's
faith did the Jews, and David's piety Solomon. So Caesar at his pardoning of
those in Marseil, and in Athens, who took part with Pompey in the civil
wars, said, They were excused for their ancestors sake: as contrarily,
Pravitas pattum filiis similibus poenam adauget.
The wickedness of parents increases the punishment of like children, says
Theodoret. I answer, That all this speaks of temporal chastisements, none of
eternal horror, infligible upon good children for the sins of their
parents. When God says, I will visit the sins of the parents; if it employed
the visiting them with like sins, as it does not; yet it is of them that
hated him also, and by their personal hating him deserved to have one sin
punished with an other: for the hatred of the sons is meant, as annexed to
the sins of the fathers. This any one may see that will read Ezekiel 18.14.
Lo, if a wicked man beget a son that does not like his father: he shall not
die for the iniquity of his father; he shall surely live, verse. 17. God has
no pleasure that the wicked should die, verse. 23. And has he delight that the
righteous shall perish eternally for his wicked ancestors? The drift of the
whole chapter is against it, and proves his ways to be equal: because a
wicked man repenting shall not die for his own transgressions, verse. 25. etc.
And shall a righteous man die, or be condemned (for he means the death of the
soul) for the offenses of others? Who ever perished being innocent? Even as I
have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap the same, Job
4.7, 8. and God rewards every man according, not to the works of his
forefathers, but according to his own works, Romans 2.6. Mat. 16.27. which
seems to be taken from the Psalmograph, who ascribes to the Lord, not
injustice, not severitie, but grace and mercy in his judicature; Unto thee, O
Lord, belongs mercy: for thou rewardest every man according to his work,
Psalm. 62.12. And Every one shall give account of himself, Romans 14.12. Every one
shall receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good or evil, 2. Cor. 5.10. If this be not enough, more may be
added with an easy hand, to the strengthening of this sixth Proposition, now
chiefly questioned, God never damned a good child for the fathers personal
wickedness. I now come to the seventh Proposition.

10. No personal sins can be communicated. Indeed, they who maintain the
traduction of souls may, if that be granted, better defend the propagation of
actual iniquities. But that opinion being false, ridiculous, exploded, and
heretical, (of which otherwhere in this Tractate) the superstructive is
founded on slippery ice: and these terms, To propagate, communicate, derive,
transmit, and transfuse sins personal, are merely amphibologicall and
dubious phrases. If they mean as the words do signify, let them say, that the
matter of sin actual is transfused, or the form, or both. The matter is the
action, the form is the obliquitie thereof: both these do vanish. Does the
guilt of punishment pass over? Reatus est vinculum inter poenam and peccatum,
quasi medium interjectum.
Guilt is a band joining punishment and sin as a thing coming between them: And
this band is rather in God, then in man, to tie or untie at his pleasure. Actus
qui jam transiit, dicitur manner quoad reatum; non quia rectus sit aliquid, sed
quia a tali actu denominatur quis reus. Reatus peccati non est aliqua res, cum
non sit substantia vel accidens, sed solum maneat in occultis legibus Dei and
mentibus Angelorum.
An act that is past already, is said to remain in regard of the guilt; not
that the guilt is any thing, but because a man is denominated guilty from such
an act. The guilt of sin is not any thing, since it is neither a substance
nor an accident, but only remains in the secret laws of God and minds of
Angels, as Holcot, De Imputab. pec. truly gathers from S. Augustine. The
guilt is not the personal sin it self, but the effect thereof; and our
question is not now of the descent of punishments. Does the guilt of sin take
hold of the child? they cannot say so, unless here also they confound the
effect with the cause: and this is but Petitio principii in other terms. Again,
how heterodoxall is it, to say, A man begets a son guilty of all his
actual iniquities? For then, though the father may be saved by his
after-repentance, yet the son who knows not perchance, nor ever heard
inckling of his fathers horrid and secret sins, (according to their position)
may be damned for them. Do they mean, the stain and spot is communicated? I
answer, The stain and spot is not the actual sin, but the fruit of it
inherent in the soul of the offender, and not transmissible by the body, and
is only metaphorically termed the stain, having no positive realitie
transmissible. Zanchius himself relates their opinion thus, Peccatorum, quae
aliquis parens committit, labem, and ceu contagium justo Dei judicio redundare
in ejus corpus and sanguinem, and per ejus porro sanguinem and semen in filios,
quos ex illo semine it a vitiose affecto gignit, transfundi.
That the spot and, as it were, contagion of the sins which any parent
commits, does redound, by Gods just judgment, upon his body and blood, and
is further transfused by his blood and seed into the sons whom he begets of
that seed thus viciously affected. I answer, That [justo Dei judicio] is
brought in tanquam Deus aliquis e machina, to make things vast and improbable
seem likely and passable: but the vain impertinencie of these words is easily
observable by any, who knows that no manner of Gods judgments are any way
unjust. Secondly, are not sins of omission personal sins? and are they
communicated to the body? Thirdly, what say you to pride of heart, and secret
Atheism? Is the proud man's, and Atheists body and blood infected with these
prodigies? Again, If such people be wholly forgiven, and their sins by
repentance blotted out; are they now in their body, seed, and blood, which are
wiped out of their soul? and suppose he beget a son between the Atheism and
repentance; shall his child be damned, while the repentant Atheist is saved?
should not he rather communicate his later repentance, then his former Atheism?

But let us weigh the words a little nearer, Peccatorum, quae aliquis parens
committit, labes, and ceu contagium, redundat in ejus corpus and sanguinem, and
per ejus sanguinem and semen in filios.
The blot and, as it were, contagion of sins which the father commits,
redounds upon his body and blood, and by his blood and seed to the sons.
What blood is corrupted? all, or only that which was made seed? and of seed,
what seed? all seed, or only that which is fruitful? Suppose a father begets
a son with the seed which was in his body yer his sin was committed; how
does his sin viciate his blood, or his blood the preformed seed? If seed and
blood be properly vicious; then any ejaculation of seed, or letting of blood,
should empty people of their sins or stains in them inherent; and sin
should no longer be a privation, but a positive thing. Moreover, when they say,
That by the fathers blood and seed, the blot and, as it were, contagion is
transfused into the sons, they speak without reason or sense. For the blot
and, as it were, contagion are transfused (if transfused at all) into the womb
of their mother, which has a preexistence; and not into the children
themselves, who have no preexistence. The vessel is before any thing can be
poured into it; how then can sin be yoted by the fathers blood and seed into
the child that had no being? The last passage is this, The childrens bodies
are first infected by these stains or actual sins, and their souls after
defiled by their bodies. If by the word infected they mean, really, truly,
properly, and actually infected, I remit them to the place where I have proved,
that the Embryo without a reasonable soul is not, cannot be sinful: If they
would be expounded of a pronitude to evil, or inclinations tending that way,
when the soul is united; they have made much ado about nothing: a mere
logomachy, retaining the old sense, and using noveltie of terms. Again, if I
should yield, That the seed of one man is proner to one vice then an other,
according to the vivid strength and able disposition of the parents, as (they
say) bastards are more healthie, and more salacious then other people, as
retaining part of that spiritfull vigor in which they were begotten; yet is
original sin the same in every one, alike in all parts and every way; and
the likeness to the parents in wickedness is most remotely ascribed to the
seed, but properly to original sin, as to the inward cause; and to the
parents ill breeding them, or to bad company, or custom, or to the
remembrance of their parents sin (which is a powerful president in corrupt
nature) as to the outward cause. For a wicked child is as like a thousand
other wicked men, if not more like in behavior then to his father; yet this
proceeds not from their seed, but from original sin. But to the more
distinct handling of this point (this seventh and last Proposition) First, I
will prove, That the personal sins of all our forefathers, are not derived
to us. Secondly, That not the sins from the third and fourth generation are
propagated. Thirdly, That the personal sins of our immediate parents are not
transfused; And so it will arise of it self, that no personal sins are
communicated. In the second place I shall bring to light the authorities on our
side. But before I begin either, let me briefly remove an objection. Bucer and
Martyr teach (says Zanchius) that by this doctrine the transfusion of
original sin is more confirmed. I answer, That Gods truth has no need of
man's lie to uphold it. Cicero said well, Perspicuitas argumentatione elevatur.
Perspicuitie is lessened by argumentation: For what is more believed, more
known to Christians, then that original sin is traduced? Weak arguments do
often prejudice a good cause; and while Bucer and Martyr would seem to confirm
that truth, which neither Jew, Turk, nor Christian doubt of, let them take
heed, lest when they say actual sins are traduced, they give occasion to the
world to think, that humane souls are not created, but traducted; and so by
consequent, bring in the mortality of the soul. For it has been confidently
averred by learned men, That if the souls be traducted, they are mortal. But
of this hereafter.

Concerning the first branch, these arguments confirm it. If the actual sins
of all our forefathers be communicated to their posterity; then they that are
the more ancient are still the better; and the last people of this world shall
absolutely, by nature, be worst. But it is not so: for Pagans and Infidels now
should be many thousand times worse then the first infidels: which is not so,
as is seen by experience. Secondly, then we might truly say, O happy Cain!
happier by nature then Abel the righteous: (since Adam and Eve did manifoldly
sin between Cains and Abels generations) yea, happier then Abraham, and the
Patriarchs, just Job, and the Prophets, the Apostles, and Evangelists: since
thou have fewer sins to answer for then any in the world. Happier is all the
drowned world in this regard, then the days since Christ. But to say so, is
new Divinity. Therefore all sins of actually transgressing parents are not
communicated. Secondly, God deals not so rigourously with mankind, as he did
with the devils: Verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but took on
him the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16. whereby he magnifieth Gods mercy to man,
above that to the rebellious spirits: but he should or did deal worse with
mankind, at least with the damned, then with them, if all the personal sins
of our progenitors be communicated to all us. For each of them bare only but
their own sins, and none did bear one another sin further then they
actually partaked with it. And this can not be otherwise: for both their sin
was pride, and their nature incapable of propagation, or communication of
sin, unless it be by real and present consenting or partaking. Lastly, They
all fell together the second or third instant of their creation, says the
School. Suddenly the devil of Lucifer became Coluber; of Oriens, Occidens; of
Hesperus, Vesper. He abode not in the truth, Joh. 8.44. Satan fell from heaven
like lightning: where lightning is not said to fall from heaven; but he saw
(...). not (...), Luke 10.18. Satan falling as suddenly from heaven, as
lightning does from the clouds on us; which is gone ere we can say it is come.
Yea, not Satan alone, but the rest of the Angels kept not their first estate,
Jude verse. 6. which Job thus varieth, God found no steadfastness in his Angels,
Job 4.18. Seneca might well say of materials, Nulla res magna non aliquod
habuit ruinae suae spa^ium.
Epist. 91. No great thing but had some space of time in its ruin and
destruction; yet in spirituals he was blind or mistaken. For there was no
succession of times in the sins of any sinning Angels: but as at once they
were punished, and their place found no more in heaven; so at once almost they
sinned: nor did succeeding Angels bear their predecessors sins or
punishments: Therefore mankind shall not do so neither.

Thirdly, S. Augustine in his Enchiridion, chap. 47. touches at this argument
as unreasonable, if they who have not the grace of regeneration, should
contract the sins and bear the punishment of all their progenitors, from
the beginning of the world; saying, Premerentur nimia sarcina in aeterna sua
damnatione.
They should be overburdened in their eternal damnation. But God punishes
rather citra, then ultra condignum; rather less, then more then we deserve;
and his mercy is above all his works. And as his wrath is to three or four
descents, so his mercy extends unto more, unto thousands; but his mercy is
not showed unto more, if all our forefathers sins lie upon us, unless we can
find that there is somewhat more then all. Therefore mankind contracteth not
the sins, nor suffers the eternal punishments due to the sins of all our
parents.

Fourthly, The justice of God will not permit the same sin a million of times
among many millions of persons to be punished: but thus it must be, if Seth
answer for Adam and Eves actual sins, and all Seths posterity to this day
for every one of their predecessors sins. Therefore all sins of
progenitors are not communicated.

This first branch receives strength and confirmation from the second, which
is this, Personal sins of our progenitors are not derived or communicated
unto us from the third or fourth generation, much less do they reach up to our
first parents. Indeed the great S. Augustine in his Ench. chap. 47. makes this
Quaere, Whether God threaten posterity with the sins of their fathers, from
the third and fourth generation; or threaten the fathers with punishing their
posterity, because his wrath extends no further, lest posterity should be
overburdened: Or whether some other thing concerning this business, may, or
may not be found by diligent search of Scriptures, I dare not rashly affirm.
But I hope, without rashness, I may be bold to affirm, that God threatens not
to punish sin with sin in that place, but with other punishment. Secondly,
nor menaceth eternal punishments for the only sins of parents preceding:
but only the commination is of temporal punishments, if they be unlike their
wicked parents; and eternal, if they be like in sin unto them. This being
the apparent meaning of the place, and the word visito being ever taken to be
synonymous with punio, or castigo, whenever it is contraopposed to facere
misericordiam (as here it is) whereupon Gods judgment is called the visitation
of souls, Wisd. 3.13. Psalm. 89.32. I will visit their transgression with the
rod, and their iniquity with stripes, or scourges. Let me in the third place
affirm, That though God punish posterity temporally, for the only sins of
parents; and eternally, if wicked children resemble their parents; yet it
follows not, that sins are communicated to the third and fourth generation.
For the temporal punishment may be justly inflicted on good children of wicked
parents: and eternal is as justly inflicted on the evil offspring of an evil
man; yet, rather as himself is evil, then as his parents were evil. Again, both
the threat and the mercy are only conditional. Lastly, if God should stint
the punishment always at the end of the third or fourth generation, which he
needs not, and does not; yet it follows not that sins are stinted at the
third or fourth generation, or that, that is the prefixed period of time, to
which the communication of sins may be extended. But as in the words [unto
thousands] there is the uncertain for the certain, the indefinite for the
definite, (for it is not expressed how many thousands, either of men, or
years, or generations) so in the words [the third and fourth generation] there
is the certain for the uncertain, the definite for the indefinite. And as God
does not tie himself to show mercy unto the exact numbers of hundreds and
thousands, so is he not restrained from punishing beyond four generations. But
therefore the third and fourth generation is named, rather then any other,
because many a man now lives to see his third or fourth generation flourish or
decay: And therefore in our Liturgy, in the solemnization of marriage, the
Priest prays that the couple united may see their childrens children unto the
third and fourth generations. And indeed, Job lived, after his great
afflictions, to see his sons, and his sons sons, even four generations,
Job 42.16. Again, Gregor. Moral. 15.22. interprets this of original sin: and
not only the Vulgat, but the Hebrew has it iniquitatem patrum, in the
singular; and the third and fourth generation, (if so understood) has
reference to the ages of the world, says Aug. Cont. Adamantum cap. 7.
Augustine: from whom Procopius Gazeus little differs upon the second
commandment, thus; Our Savior said somewhere, This generation shall not pass,
till all these things be fulfilled, (the place is Mat. 24.34. accordingly Mat.
23.36. All these things shall come upon this generation) and truly he spoke of
the end. So he makes the fourth generation from Christ's time to the end of the
World; the third from the Law to Christ; the second from Abraham to the Law (he
should have said from the Flood to Abraham; for was not Noah and all his, till
Abraham, part of humane generations?) the first from Adam to the Flood. And the
opposite member, [shewing mercy unto thousands] may be understood of millions
of actual offenses forgiven. So much by the way for that exposition.

I return to the second branch, Sins are not communicated to the third and
fourth generation. For why not as well to the fifth and sixth generations, and
so downwards to the worlds end? Let some reason be showed, why the force of
communication of sins should rest there. The place of Exodus intimates not
the communication of sins, but the punishments; and the punishments so far,
because many live so far, and few farther: and the exemplarie sins of
fathers may be seen and remembered and followed by their fourth generation, and
not further: and fathers dote not so much on their children, as grandfathers
and great-grand-fathers, nor cocker them up so much in evil. It is a senseless
consequence, That man communicates sins actual, to the third and fourth
generation, because God punishes the sins of the fathers upon the children
to the third and fourth generation, unless they can prove, Whatsoever God
punishes, man does communicate unto man: which is impossible; for God
sometimes punishes such sins of the child as the father never had, and of
such a child as never had child after, to whom he might communicate them.

The third and last branch of the seventh and last Proposition is this, That
the immediate parents personal transgressions are not communicated to us. They
may by way of punishment, by way of offense or sin they cannot. No one sin
actual is traducted, propagated, transfused, communicated. If any one actual
sin be derived, why not more? why not all, and every one?

Why should the communication of sins rest in the father and mother,
ascendendo, when many children are liker their grandfathers both in shape and
feature, and in mind, and in vices, then to their father and mother, who were
void of such personal transgressions?

Thirdly, it is a true and old distinction, That original sin viciateth our
whole nature, and actual sins infect the person. But this distinction is
taken away and removed, if actual sins do viciate our nature, and are
propagated by the seed, which is proper to sinne-originall. It is not called
original sin, for being the root of all sin, (for Satan sinned first) but
as it is in our nature originally. In this point Whitaker agrees with
Stapleton, De originali peccato, 1.4. And there Stapleton worthily observes,
that Originale peccatum differentiam specificam notat, quae opponitur
personali; designans causam peccati naturam esse, non personam.
Original sin notes a specificall difference, which is opposed to personal;
intimating that the cause of sin is the nature, not the person. As when we
mention actual sins, we make an opposition to sins habitual, or to sins
of omission, or to sin original. If personal sins do pass over unto the
children, then Adams sin did so to his children. But not so. For it is but
one single singular sin which we sinned in Adam.

If Adams personal vices were propagated to Cain; were all, or part
propagated? if part, what were those? and why those above others? if all, what
did Adam traduce to Abel, Seth? etc. Did he propagate only those sins, which
were committed between the generation of one and the other? And what sins did
Seth propagate to his posterity? Are personal sins propagated alike to all
the children? How is it that of one man's children, I have known one naturally
exceeding angry, an other naturally stupid? Again, if a natural fool begets
one wise, what sins does he communicate? or on the contrary, a Machiavel
begets a natural fool; shall the fool be damned for his politic fathers
malengin?

If actual sin be traduced; then, is it in the seed ere the soul come? in
the seed in the fathers body? in the seed at the emission, at the reception,
and retention? Then millions of seeds spent in lawful matrimony, when women
do not conceive; or what they have conceived, yet having no soul, shall have
sin actual: and if they have sin, they must come to account. But such
fruitless disburdenings do not appear in judgment. Again, if personal
sins be propagated, are they remitted in Baptism, or not? if remitted, how
are they so like their parents afterward? How can the seed, which is not so
much as an humane body actually, but only potentially, be actually sinful? If
personal sin be communicated from the next parents, how is it that
experience teaches us, that very godly men's children are given to such
enormities, as their parents in their youth, middle-age, and old age have
detested? It cannot come by communication of actual sins. You will say, it
does arise from sin original. So we say, and so do all sins whatsoever
arise from that corrupted fountain, that ever-bubbling wel-spring of evil, and
not from a fantastical communication of actual transgressions. If a mere
Pagan and heathen, an idolatrous worshipper of devils, beget two twins; shall
they be alike wicked? We have heard and known the contrary. Gods discriminating
saving grace does not difference them, as you may say it does in Christians.
Lot committed actual sin, and knew it not; was that sin propagated to his
sons? That actual sin should be in the seed, which is but a superfluity of
nature, is very strange. If Job had presently, after that God had commended him
to Satan, saying, There is none like him in the earth, a perfect and upright
man, one that fears God, and escheweth evil, Job 1.8. betook himself to the
act of generation: or David at those times, when he was a man according to Gods
own heart: what personal iniquities had they propagated? Isa. 56.5. unto holy
eunuchs God will give a place better, and name better then of sons and
daughters: yet, by this opinion, they of all other are most miserable; for they
receive all the actual sins of their fathers, and cannot waft-over either
them or their own sins into their children by their feed, (for they have
none) but all must rest in their souls, in their bodies, in their blood, and
upon themselves only.

If God should miraculously create a man and woman, not of the seed of Adam,
and they blaspheme God, and beget children; shall they transfuse actual sin,
which have not original sin? or shall their children blaspheme naturally? Or,
if they be innocent themselves from that great offense, shall they be damned
for their parents blasphemy?

If personal sin be propagated, then the habits or acts. But neither. Not
acts; for they are transient, and glide away. Not habits; for then, first, why
should not habits of knowledge, or goodness, or the like be transfused, as
well as of evil? especially the habits of knowledge of evil? Secondly, then a
child is not only originally sinful, by froward inclinations; but
habitually, by multiplied actions. Thirdly, habits belong to the person
individual, not to him as he is a species of mankind: but propagation is
according to the kind or species, not according to the individuals.

If ye object, Ezekiel. 16.3. God charge them of Jerusalem thus, Thy father was
an Amorite, thy mother an Hittite; whereby he upbraideth them with their
fathers sins: I answer, These words are not spoken of natural descent, but
of parents and children by imitation. For the Amorites and Hittites were
idolaters; and the Israelites who succeeded them in their inheritance, as
children do fathers, inherited also their sins, as appears in the whole
chapter, especially verse. 44. Behold, every one that uses proverbs, shall use
this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter. Thou
art thy mothers daughter, that loatheth her husband and her children; and thou
art the sister of thy sisters, which loathed their husbands and their children:
your mother was an Hittite, and your father an Amorite. And thine elder sister
is Samaria, she and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand: and thy younger
sister that dwells at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters. The whole
kindred is by imitation, not by nature. But our question is of true
consanguinitie, and real generation. Further, if the immediate parents of
those of Jerusalem were idolaters, like to Amorites and Hittites; yet their
sins are related, as arguments the rather to deter their children from the
like, and to keep them from the temporal punishments, which might justly be
inflicted on them: but no way do the words intimate, that they should be damned
for their predecessors offenses, unless they continued in the same.

A second objection may be this: Genesis 9.22, 25. Cham the father of Canaan saw
the nakedness of Noah, and Noah cursed his grandchild Canaan. I answer, That
Cham or Ham had diverse other children, to wit, Cush, Mizraim, and Phut, Genesis
10.6. and Noah cursed none of Chams children save Canaan only. Upon which I
conclude one of these two things; either that the curse extended only to
things of this life; or that Canaan was partaker of his fathers sin. For
otherwise, the rest of Canaans brethren must have been equally involved both in
his guilt and in his punishment. Concerning the first, the words are Genesis 9.25.
Cursed be Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren. The
other two might perchance, at distinct times, rule the one over the other; but
Canaan shall be a servant, both to Shem, v. 26. and to Japheth, v. 27. To be a
servant of servants, indeed was the curse of Canaan; and it was really
accomplished, when the Canaanites were made tributary and overcome, and the
Gibeonites (a part of them) were made vassals to the meanest Israelites, which
were the offspring of Shem. Witty Epigrams and Pasquils have been made both
against the city of Rome and its Popes. Aversum coluit quia Roma infamis
Amorem;
Nomen ei averso nomine fecit Amor.
Which name of Rome, if it had been first given, when not only the Apostle S.
Paul taxed them, Romans 1.26. etc. but even their fellow-heathen Petronius
Arbiter, in Satyr. might have had some color for that denomination: But since
it was called Rome, when the sins of that kind were not hatched or heard of;
I say the inverted and averted name was rather witty and posthumous, then
sound. Likewise they have this crochet against the Papal title of Servus
Servorum, Roma, tibi quondam fuerant Domini Dominorum:
Servorum servi nunc tibi sunt Domini.
And Calvin derideth that Gregorian title. But the Abbot Rupertus well does
difference, that the Pope is not called absolutely Servus servorum, The servant
of servants; but Servus servorum Dei, The servant of the servants of God: to
which I add, that he is not said to be Servus servorum fratribus suis, A
servant of servants unto his brethren, which was the exact curse of Canaan; but
that he makes himself to be called Servus servorum filiis suis in Christo, A
servant of servants unto his sons in Christ; from whom he imagined he took
his name of Pater and Papa. The second branch of my answer is, that Canaan was
partaker of his fathers sin. That it might be so, is demonstrable. For though
Canaan was not born while Noah was in the ark, wherein few, that is eight
souls, were saved by water, 1. Pet. 3.20. And those eight souls were Noah and
his wife, Shem, Ham, and Japheth, and their three wives, Genes. 7.13. yet
Canaan was born unto Ham not long after the flood, Genes. 10.1, and 6, verses.
The Rabbis say, Canaan was ten years of age, and first saw his grandfathers
nakedness, and in derision showed it to his father; whereupon the father was
cursed in that son more then others. But that the innocent son should be
cursed eternally for the fathers offense, was never intended.

A third objection may be this: Joh. 9.2. the Disciples asked Christ, Who did
sin, this blind man, or his parents, that he was born blind? From whence is
inferred, that the Apostles believed, that the sin of parents is prejudicial
to the child. I answer, The Apostles interrogation was grounded on knowledge,
yet perhaps mixed with some ignorance. They truly did know, both that bodily
punishments are sent of God upon men for their offenses, and that a child
might justly be punished corporally for the parents iniquity. But their
ignorance is seen in this, that they thought no punishment was inflicted, but
for some singular singled noted offense. But for whose offense, or what
offense, there is the doubt which Christ thus untieth, Neither this man sinned,
nor his parents; (where he means not that they had no particular sin, but
not such sin or sins as for which this man was made blind) but that the
works of God should be made manifest in him. Secondly, this instance is so
far from proving the sins of the fathers to be derived to their sons,
that it excuses both parents and children from such and such sins. Thirdly,
it has apparent reference to corporal punishments, which neither the Apostles
nor I do deny, but they may justly be inflicted on the bodies or goods of
children for their parents transgressions.

11. It follows in my method, that I show the authorities on our side.
Bellarmine, De Amissione Great. and Statu peccati 4.18. proves at large, Non
transire ad po steros per generationem omnia peccata parentum sed primum tantum
primi hominis lapsum.
That all the sins of parents do not pass unto their posterity by
generation, but only the first sin of the first man. Trelcatius and Willet
cross him not in this point. Scharpius page 487. in Cursu Theologico upon that
point of Bellarmine makes this Quaere; An peccata proximorum parentum
originaliter in posteros transecunt?
Whether the sins of the next parents originally pass unto their posterity?
and he answers, That Augustine moved the matter, yet determined it not: but
we (says he) agree with Aquinas, that it is impossible so to be. And he
alleges diverse sound reasons for that purpose. Augustine himself indeed
somewhere is somewhat doubtful: and though he says against Julian 6.3. That
Fundanus a Rhetorician of Carthage, Cum accidenti vitio luscus esset, luscum
filium procreavit.
being by an accidental hurt blind of one eye, begat a son likewise blind
of one eye: (where he seems to patronize the transfusion of personalls) yet
the case is above ordinary, as experience shows; and much may be ascribed to
the imagination of the mother, rather then to the imperfect generation of the
father. Though Augustine also in Enchirid. be somewhat cautelous and timorous;
yet otherwhere (as I have proved before) he is confident, that we shall stand
forth to judgment for one only sin of Adam, our original sin: which
truth he confirms in one particular, thus, against Julian the Pelagian 6.12.
Propter hoc itaque, id est, qu^niam peccavit Adam, nec ipse Cain peccasse
dicendus est, qui eundem patrem suum noverat.
Therefore neither can Cain himself, though he knew his father Adam, be said to
have sinned because his father sinned. And more fully, De peccat. Meritis and
Remiss. 1.13. Ab Adam, in quo omnes peccavimus, non omnia nostra peccata, sed
tautum originale traduximus.
We have not derived from Adam (in whom we all sinned) all our sins, but
only original. Thus much be said to prove the divine S. Augustine to be of
our side.

Only Vorstius, of all the canvasers of Bellarmine that I have met with,
differs from him and us, and makes a double propagation, General, and
Special: and says, If Bellarmines drift be against the general propagation,
it is false; because nature teaches, and experience witnesses, Corruptiores
ex corruptioribus ordinary generari.
that ordinarily worse children are begotten of worse men. If he speak of the
special traduction, our men easily assent unto him, says Vorstius. I reply on
Vorstius. First, who ever before him talked of a double propagation? Not
Scriptures, nor Fathers, nor Councels. Secondly, is this general propagation
done at the same time that the special is accomplished? Is this general
propagation better or worse then original sin? Is this general propagation,
of all sins, and of all parents up to Adam, and of sins repented of, and of
sins of omission, and of transient sins; or of such as Atheism in the
soul, which has small, or no participation with the body? Let him define or
describe this trimtram of general propagation contra-opposed to the
propagation of sin original. But, says he, Nature and experience say, Worse
children are begotten of worse men. I answer, I never knew any worse, then some
children of some good men. Secondly, he puts non causam pro causa, ascribing
the wickedness of children to the propagation of actual sin of their
immediate parents, when he may better impute it to their hearing or beholding
of their parents wickedness, or to ill breeding and ill custom. Thirdly, the
vices of the immediate parents, and of the remoter, yea of the remotest, even
from Adam, yea all the sins that ever were committed, yea which yet never
were committed, but shall be or may be hereafter, differing either in kind or
number from all sins precedent, all have been, are, shall be (in regard of
the beginning, root, and fountain) in original sin. Fourthly, none ever that
handled this controversy (as Augustine, or the School) did ever take actual
sins for inclinations to sins. Fifthly, in Vorstius his distinction there
is a fallacy, viz. Petitio principii, while he, without good proof, takes
that for granted which is the only thing denied, namely, That there is an
other propagation, besides the propagation of sin original. Sixthly, how
inconsequentiall is this? Wicked men have ordinarily wicked children; Therefore
personal sins are propagated. But indeed we deny the antecedent, and say,
The sons of the wicked are as righteous, by natural generation, as the
sons of the righteous. If Vorstius reply, that every age grows worse and
worse, and Aetas parentum pejor avis tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
And again, Aurea prima sata est aetas: --
-- subiitque argentea proles,
Auro deterior, fulvo pretiosior aere:
Tertia post illam successit ahenea proles;
-- de duro est ultima ferro:
The answer is expedite, These are but poetical fictions, fictions of those
who knew no propagation of original sin, and ascribed this growing worse and
worse to the depravation of manners then present in use, and to evil customs,
rather then to the propagation of personal iniquities: Laudamus veteres, sed
nostris utimur annis. Much there is to the like purpose in heathen authors.
Lastly, Vorstius himself, after his seeking to find a knot in a bulrush, after
his needless opposition in this point, concludes thus, Hoc transeat, quia
parvi momenti est; Let this pass, because it is of small moment. So that, even
in his judgment, this controversy is small, and indeed I think it not worth
the name of a controversy.

When I had come thus far, laboring to prove that no actual or personal
sins are propagated, I casually again conferred with that learned loving
friend of mine, who formerly brought to my hand the opinions of the new
Writers; and upon some discourse, he settled on this exposition, which otherwise
he gave over as indefensible, That they do mean by actual sins, that
inclinations unto sins are communicated. I answered, That I used to gather
men's meanings by their words, and that neither their words, nor the words of
Zanchius the relatour, do incline to these inclinations. Again, never did any
author of any time before expound personalia, and actualia peccata (for of
these must the question be necessarily understood) by the inclinations unto
sin. Moreover, if by peccata they did mean the pronenesse unto sin; to
avoid doubtfulnesse, they should, and as readily and easily they could (if they
would) have written peccatorum inclinationes, as peccata in general; or might
have signified in some other words, and in some other passages, that they had
meant so. This I know, They talk of peccata, peccata proximorum parentum, of
labes peccatorum, and ceu contagium; they have words enough, doubtful and
obscure enough, which I dare say themselves understood not when they writ, viz.
peccatorum labes, and ceu contagium: yet make they no mention of inclinations.
But I would further know, whether their inclinations are derived unto their
children, and punished in them; which rest only as inclinations, and never
come into act: Or such inclinations as begin to come into act, but are resisted
and overcome by Gods grace: Or only such inclinations as breed actual and
personal iniquity. If thus, then the inclinations are not punished, but the
actual aversions. Or, are no inclinations derived from grandfather, etc? I,
but since original sin is alike in all, and some are more like to parents;
whence does this likeness to them proceed more then to others? I answer, A
drunkards child is as like in that sin to all other drunkards, as to his
father.

But why has a drunken father more commonly a drunken son, then a sober man?
First, that is not yet proved. so naturally, because not always, no, nor
perchance commonly. Let me once more repeat, That all possible inclinations
unto sin are inveloped and involved in original sin, which they either
knew not, or considered not. Lastly, when I had taken these pains to frame this
chapter in defense of a point, which I never held to be questioned, it grieved
me to hear my ingenious friend so much to defend the new Writers, and to dance
after the new pipe. Candid and favorable expositions I shall love while I
live, and both use toward others, and desire to be used toward me; but
violent, forced, farre-fetched interpretations (as this has been) I can no way
allow. For since reformation has been so sharpsighted, as to find fault in
all things, to esteem the Schoolmen as dunses, (though they are thought dunses
that so censure them) to account the Fathers as silly old men, or as children,
(though they are but babes that admire them not) to disregard Provincial
Councels, yea General Councels, as the acts of weak and sinful men (though
they are the chiefest, the highest earthly-living-breathing Judges of
Scriptures controversed;) which cavils against former times I have heard
belched forth by the brainsick zealous ignorants of our times: since we have
hissed out the Papists, and think they speak against their own consciences,
when they maintain the infallibility and inerrabilitie of the Pope: May not
Bucer and Martyr err? Must all new opinions needs be true, and defended with
might and main, with wrested part-taking, over-charitable defenses, rather then
a small error shall be acknowledged? If such mild dealing had been used
against times precedent, we could not have found (as some now have done) about
two thousand errors of the Papists. But thus much (if not too much) shall
suffice concerning these men and this matter, with this cloze, That Zanchius
himself, in the place above cited, says thus against that newfangled opinion,
Neque enim aliud peccatum in posteros transfusum est, quam quod ipsius quoque
fuit Adami: fuit enim inobedientia cum privatione justitiae originalis, and
totius naturae corruptione. Deinde etiam, non propter aliud peccatum nos sumus
adjudicati morti, quam propter illud propter quod and Adamus: Ejusdem enim
peccati stipendium fuit mors. Illi autem fuit dictum, Morte Morieris, propter
inobedientiam, etc.
For no other sin was transfused to posterity, then that which also was
Adams: for it was disobedience with a privation of original justice and
corruption of the whole nature. Besides, we are sentenced to death for no other
sin then for that for which Adam also was: for death was the wages of the
same sin. Now it was said to him, THOU SHALL DIE THE DEATH, for disobedience,
etc.

Now let them say, (if they can) that Adam was sentenced to death for any sin
of predecessor or successor, or any other sin of himself, but one only. I
have maintained and do resolve, Death was inflicted for his first sin only.
Therefore by Zanchius his true Divinity, against Bucer and Martyr, and their
peremptory defenders, Not all, not many sins, of all, of many, of any, of
our predecessors; but the first sin only of Adam is transfused to
posterity: nor are they guilty or condemnable, for any other preceding
actual sin or sins of others whosoever.

O Father of consolation, O God of mercies, who know that every one of us
have sins personal more then enough to condemn us; lay not, I beseech thee,
the sins of our fathers, or forefathers, or our own (if it be thy holy will)
to our charge, to punish us in this life present; or our original sin, in,
and by Adam, or our own actual misdeeds, to trouble our consciences by
despair, or to damn us in the world to come: but have mercy upon us, have
mercy upon us, according to thy great mercy in Christ Jesus, our alone Lord and
Savior. Amen.
CHAP. VIII.
1. Original sin came not by the Law of Moses, but was before it in the World.

2. God has good reason and justice to punish us for our original sin in
Adam. Gods actions defended by the like actions of men.

3. Husbands represent their wives. The men of Israel represented the women.
Concerning the firstborn of men and beasts. The primogeniture and redemption
of the firstborn.

4. The whole body is punished for the murder committed by one hand.
Corporations represent whole cities and towns, and Parliaments the body of the
Realm. Their acts bind the whole Kingdom. Battelling champions and duellists
engage posterity.

5. S. Peter represented the Apostles. The Apostles represent sometimes the
Bishops, sometimes the whole Clergy. The Ministers of the Convocation
represent the whole Church of England. The authority of General Councels.
National Synods must be obeyed.

6. Private spirits censured. Interpretation of Scripture not promiscuously
permitted. An Anabaptisticall woman displayed.

7. An other woman reproved for her newfangled book in print. Scriptures not
to be expounded by anagrams in Hebrew, much less in English; but with
reverence, How far the people are to believe their Pastors.

8. Saul represented an entire army. Joshua and the Princes bind the Kingdom
of Israel for long time after.

9. Christ represented us. Christ and Adam like in some things, in others
unlike. Christ did and does more good for us, then Adam did harm.

IT has been plentifully evidenced, that death entered into the world by sin;
and that both Adam and we were sentenced to die for one sin, the first sin
only of Adam only; and not for any other sin or sins of him, or any other
our remote, propinque, or immediate parents; and that death reigned from Adam
to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams
transgression, Romans 5.14. I add, Death shall live, fight, and prevail, (though
not reign) from Moses unto the end of the world. For when this mortal shall
have put on immortality, then (then, and not till then) shall be brought to
pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory, 1. Cor.
15.54. and the last enemy that shall be destroyed is death, 1. Cor. 15.26.
Aquine on Roman. 5. lect. 4. thus, Because corporal death reigned from Adam,
by whom original sin: came into the world, unto Moses, under whom the Law
was given, and death is the effect of sin, especially original sin; it
appears, there was original sin in the world before the Law: and lest we
might say, they died for actual sins, the Apostle says, Death reigned even
over those who sinned not proprio actu, as children. So he.

2. The things themselves then being unquestionable, and before elucidated to
the full, That death is inflicted for original sin, and that we all and
every of us (except Christ) have contracted original sin; it follows
justly, by the judgment of God, that death is appointed unto us for this
sin. Tertullian lib. 1. contra Marcion. Homo damnatur in mortem, ob unius
arbusculi delibationem: -- and pereunt jam omnes qui nullum Paradisi cespitem
norunt.
Man is condemned to death for tasting of a small tree: -- and now they all
perish that never were acquainted with Paradise: and let me add, They are most
justly punished. Neither let man cavil, or cast aspersion of unrighteousnes
upon God. For though men be but of yesterday (yea though the child be born but
this minute) yet by reason of their original sin in Adam, and with him, they
were justly sentenced in Adam unto death almost six thousand years ago. For
though God needs no defense from the actions and behavior of men; yet from
their usances and customs generally received, from their right and equity
daily practiced, let us ascend to behold the blameless course in the like of
the Almighty. Do we find a young snake, viper, or other venomous or hurtful
beasts, birds, or the eggs of a cocatrice; we destroy them, not for the harm
which they have done, but for the kind sake, and for the spoil which they may
do. Do not prodigal great heirs waste and scatter abroad estates ensured to
posterity? Do they not cut off intailes, annihilate and void perpetuities,
draw inheritances dry in smoke, and consume them wholly on gut or groin, to
the everlasting prejudice of their issues? Did not the disobedience of Queen
Vashti unto her husband do a wrong, not to the King Ahasuerus only, but to all
the princes, and all the people, Esther 1.16. and, as being exemplarie, was
punished accordingly? If the whordome of the Highpriests daughter be a
profanation of her father, Levit. 21.9. and therefore she was to be burnt
alive, though other whores were put to milder deaths: if an evil done to a
brother strikes up to the abuse of the father, as it does; (for God rendered
the wickedness of Abimelech which he did unto his father, in flaying his
seventie brethren, Judges 9.56.) then why might not the wickedness of a father
descend in some sort upon the children, in a storm of wrath and punishment?

3. The husband represents the wife: what bargain he makes, she makes: they
are one flesh. The great commandment, to keep the sabbath, was given to son
and daughter, to servants and to strangers, but not to the wife. She was
forbidden in her husband, which the rest were not, but dividedly: so was Eve
forbid in Adam, not inhibited her self, but in him who represented her. The men
of Israel represented the women, and the women had good by the actions or
passions of the men. The females were redeemed in the males, every male gave a
ransom for his soul unto the Lord; all and every one, rich and poor alike,
even half a shekel; and they gave this offering unto the Lord, to make an
atonement for their souls, Exodus 30.15. Women were partakers of this benefit,
and in the men's atonement was the woman's comprised. Neither were the females
presented to the Lord, but the males, the males only: and the women in them,
and by them, but not in their own persons. In Gods due claim to the beasts,
these three conditions were to be observed: First, that the beasts should be
clean; and so not swine, not horses, camels, dromedaries, elephants, or the
like; but only these three kinds, sheep, ruther-beasts, and goats, were the
Lords (unless you will make up the number, four, with an ass; which was to
be redeemed with a lamb, or his neck to be broken, Exodus 13.13.) For though it
be said Exodus 13.2. Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever opens
the womb among the children of Israel, both of man and beast: it is mine: Yet
you must not extend the words to dogs, or cats, or things unclean, but only to
such clean beasts as God has appointed for sacrifices. Yea, though it be said,
Numb. 18.15. The firstling of unclean beasts thou shall redeem: You must know,
there is a double uncleanness. First, that which is unclean throughout all its
species; as swine, and horses, and the like: Secondly, that which is unclean by
accident, and is contra-opposed to perfect and unblemished, Levit. 22.22, 23.
as blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wen, or scurvie, or scabbed, -- or
which has any thing superfluous or lacking in his parts: such beasts, even of
clean beasts, as sheep, goats, etc. the Lord counted unclean, and claimed them
not. Those that were thus unclean by accident, were to be redeemed: and so that
place of Numb. is to be understood, and not to be wire-drawn, as if God did
claim the unclean beasts to be his. The second condition, That those clean
beasts should be firstborn: Thou shall set apart unto the Lord all that
opens the matrix, and every firstling that comes of a beast, Exodus 13.12.
Thirdly, these clean firstborn or sirstlings must not be the females, though
they first open the matrix, but the males; (...), as the Septuagints have it,
Exodus 13.12. The males shall be the Lords. Semblably in the case of mankind,
women were not the Lords claim, but the men only, and the women included in
the men. For though it be said in general terms, Exodus 13.13. All the
firstborn among thy children thou shall redeem; yet the women were not
redeemed but in the men, and the men only were offered. Luke 2.23. Every male
that opens the womb shall be holy: Opens the womb by extramission and
ejection, not by intromission and injection, as the Hebrew phrase imports:
the Greek is thus, (...), Omnis masculus primogenitus, as Beza reads it; Omne
masculinum, as the Vulgat has it; according to that, Exodus 22.29. The
firstborn of thy sons thou shall give unto me. From whence let me infer
this conclusion, That the firstborn had his denomination from the mothers
first birth or parturition, as well as from the fathers first generation. Exodus
11.5. From the firstborn of Pharaoh, to the firstborn of the maidservant
that is behind the mill. The Septuagints style the firstborn, not (...), with
reference to the fathers act, but (...), from the mother; and Christ is not
called (...), from a carnal father (for he had none) or (...), but (...), John
1.18. and (...), Luke 2.7. her firstborn son. Which (...) is ill interpreted
by the old Bishops bibles, Mat. 1.25. first-begotten; and by the Genevean
translation as ill rendered, Luke 2.7. forsaking their good rendering of it,
Mat. 1.25. But our late translation, in both places aptly has it the
firstborn, and not first-begotten. Though Jacob says, Genes. 49.3. Reuben,
thou art my firstborn: yet Leah might have said the same words as well; for he
was the firstborn of both: Yea, I dare say, if a man had more wives at once,
as Jacob had; or successively, as many others; the first male child of each of
these women by the same man may justly be called his firstborn; and every one
of these firstborn children, if they had lived under the Leviticall law, had
been consecrated to God. And therefore Reuben having lost his birthright, the
double portion which had been due to him, (and was due to the firstborn under
the law, Deuteronomy. 21.17. and was part of those Jura primo-geniturae, and one of
the (...) mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 12.16.) was by Gods appointment, and
Jacobs just allotment bequeathed to Joseph, Genes. 48.5. And of him were two
tribes, Ephraim and Manasseh: whereas no other of the children of Israel had
more then one tribe. For Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came
the chief ruler; but the birthright was Joseph's, 1. Chron. 5.2. and not
Judahs. For Joseph was the firstborn of Rachel, the first-love of Jacob, the
first wife in the light, in right, and in intention: And so her eldest son
Joseph was in right to be the firstborn of Jacob: and her self is preferred in
place, not only by Jacobs affection, but long after, by the Spirit of God,
Ruth 4.11. The Lord make the woman like Rachel and Leah. Shall I step one step
further? I may say, That if the willing and witting act of Jacob, preferring
Ephraim, the younger son of Joseph, before his firstborn Manasseh, did only
signify, that Gods blessing went not always hand in hand by the prioritie of
birth, and that God makes birthrights according to his pleasure, and not
according to man's reckoning: Yet three other passages reach more home, to
prove, That Joseph was the firstborn. First, because Jacob blessed Joseph two
several times, Genes. 48.16. and 49.22. which he did unto none of his other
children besides; and withal, he gave him one portion above his brethren,
which he took out of the hand of the Amorite with his sword and with his bow,
verse. 22. besides the parcel of ground in Shechem, where Joseph was buried;
And it became the inheritance of the children of Joseph, Josh. 24.32. which was
also a prerogative above his other brethren. Secondly, because Jacob blessed
Joseph's children before he blessed his own children, Genes. 48.16, etc.
Thirdly, because Jacob blessed both Joseph in his children, and his children in
his blessing; and blessed none of his childrens children, by name, separately,
and particularly, but Joseph's children only (though diverse of them had little
ones before Jacob went into Egypt, Genes. 46.5.) and Joseph himself Jacob
blessed with the blessings of the breasts, and of the womb, Genes. 49.25.
Which words, as they do promise a kind of fruitfulness; (which was taken from
Ephraim, by barrenness, when it was said, Hosea 9.14. Give them a miscarrying
womb and dry breasts) so I remember not, that ever the posterity of Joseph
had extraordinary number of issue above other tribes, answerable to Jacobs
extraordinary blessing; but Judah, and his offspring only, had more men of
war, from twenty years old and upward, then both the tribes of Ephraim and
Manassch, Number. 1.26, 33, 35. and therefore, in all likelihood, had more
children from twenty years downward. Which words, I say, viz. The blessings
of the breasts, and of the womb, as they may in a second sense imply a
numerous offspring; so in the first sense, I conjecture, they pointed at the
primo-geniture of Joseph and his children. Sure I am, the birthright was given
to the sons of Joseph, 1. Chron. 5.1. and the birthright was Joseph's, verse.
2. and perhaps, even in this point, Jacobs blessings prevailed above the
blessings of his progenitors, Genes. 49.26. For Abraham prayed once that his
firstborn son, by his concubine, might be blessed: O that Ishmael might live
before thee! says he to God, Genesis 17.18. and Isaac would have blessed his
firstborn Esau: Make me savourie meat, such as I love, and bring it to me,
that I may eat; that my soul may bless thee before I die, says Isaac to Esau,
Genes. 27.4. though beforehand Esau had sold his birthright unto Jacob,
Genes. 25.33. Neither Abraham, nor Isaac prevailed in their wishes: but Jacobs
blessings prevailed above the blessings of his progenitors, because, whom he
desired to bless, God blessed; and he gave, by Gods allowance, the
primo-geniture to Joseph whom he loved, and to whom, in some regard, it was due
before Reuben.

I return to the old matter, and opine, That when a batcheler marries with a
widow, which had had a son by her former husband, her first man-child by the
second husband was not a firstborn, nor so accounted in the law. And if after
a woman had had seven husbands, and daughters only by each of these, she had
been married also unto the eighth husband, and should have a son by him,
though he had had diverse sons before by other women; yet this his son by
this woman is, in the eye of the law, a right firstborn child, and sacred to
the Lord; and to be redeemed, not with the general redemption of every male,
half a shekel, of which I spoke before, but with the particular redemptions of
the firstborn. Redemptions were of two sorts: the first is expressed Numb.
3.45. where the Levites are taken in stead of all the firstborn, and the
cattle of the Levites in stead of their cattle. And because there were two
hundred and seventy more of the firstborn sons of the Israelites, then all
the male Levites came unto, every one of those odd 270 paid five shekels to
the Lord for their redemption: which sum of five shekels was ever after,
during the Law, the price of the redemption of the firstborn son, Numbers
18.16; which was the second kind of redemption.

I cannot omit to show the means which God used, to prevent the cosenage about
things consecrated. They were to do no work with the firstborn bullock, nor to
shear their firstborn sheep, Deuter. 15.19.

It is also remarkable, first, that Pharaoh commanded the midwives of the
Hebrews, Exodus 1.16. If it be a son, ye shall kill him: and gave in charge
after to all the Egyptians, his subjects, Every son that is born ye shall
cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive, verse. 22.
Secondly, that Moses was the son of a Levite, exposed to the danger of the
water; and therefore called Moses, because he was drawn forth, Exodus 2. and
after called by God, to revenge this wrong and others upon Pharaoh. Among which
plagues, this was a great one, to slay their firstborn: and as the just
retaliation used by God in other things, yea in this, was, not to destroy their
daughters, but their sons; so in his mercy he would not destroy all their
males, but the firstborn only; which you must not understand of their
daughters, though they were firstborn, but only of their males. For when it
is said, Psalm. 78.51. He smote all the firstborn in Egypt, the chief of their
strength; you cannot imagine that women were the chief of their strength, but
the men only. And God taught the people to say, Exodus 13.15. The Lord slew all
the firstborn, etc. therefore I sacrifice unto the Lord all that opens the
matrix, being males. And as the firstborn males only were sacrificed, so
only were the firstborn males redeemed. And accordingly all the male Levites
were taken for the male firstborn of Israel: and at the most righteous
massacre of the firstborn males of Egypt, the Israelites escaped by the blood
of a lamb without blemish, a male of the first year, or a son of the first
year, Exodus 12.5. From whence you may see the gross error of Cornel.
Cornelii a Lapide, who thinks, That if a woman had had a daughter first, and
sons after, her first son had not been her firstborn, but her daughter;
because she opened the matrix first: when it is evident, that if a woman had
had many daughters before one son, yet her first son was her firstborn in
the Law. And God says, Exodus 12.24, Ye shall observe this thing for an
ordinance to thee, and to thy sons for ever: viz. the ordinance of keeping
the Passover. I recollect, and apply these things thus, The men of Israel
represented the women; The firstborn son, and not the daughter, was the
Lords due; The male Levites were in stead of the firstborn sons; All
firstborn males were redeemed; Women received good by the men's circumcision,
and by men's redemption, which was in one kind or other, whether they were
firstborn or not firstborn. And though the devilish superstition of the Turks
now circumcise women (as Joannes Leo reports) yet by Gods appointment women
were neither to be circumcised, nor redeemed, but as they were in men, and as
men represented them.

4. Let me come yet nearer to the main purpose. The Apostle says, 1. Corinthians.
12.26. Whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one member
be honored, all the members rejoice with it. From whence I thus argue; As at
the committing or deed-doing in murder, the murderers hand may be said to will
the murder; not because there is any will, strictly taken, belonging to the
hand; or because there is sin properly in the right hand, which does but its
duty in obeying the souls domineering disposition, or dominium despoticum: but
because the hand is part of that man, in whose soul the will was that commanded
the murder; and because the soul is principium totius individui, the fountain
from which all members take life, and use motion, and by the soul the motion
was derived to all the other parts of the body. So were we, and every one of
mankind, willing to commit the sin with Adam; not as if we had been there
actually to agree or disagree, but as we were parts of him who was the fountain
of humane nature, which conveyed corruption unto all mankind. Semblably in the
punishment: though the right hand only give the blow, and actuate the murder,
yet upon the delinquents apprehension both hands are pineoned, both feet
fettered, the neck is haltered, and the whole body rueth it; yea, soul and all,
without repentance. So, though Adam only sinned that first great sin, yet
because he did it representing us, Adam alone is not punished for it: but we
that are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, all that are members of the
first Adam are guilty of the fault, and condignely are punished, if we be
unrepentant. For as the diverse members of a body, are part of the person of one
man: so all and every man is, as it were, a part and member of humane nature.
And thus by the participation of the species, more men are one; and one, more:
we, Adam; and Adam was we. But let us go out of man himself, and look to other
fashions of the world, in matters political. Do not the several men in a
Township or Corporation make one body thereof, and the whole Corporation is, as
it were, but one man? and what a few do, is it not the act of all? of which he
complained, who said, That Mr. Mayor, for his own particular, was an honest
man, and so were all the brethren, who promised him fairly; but (because,
contrary to their promise, they pinched upon him) the Corporation was a knave.
Does not the House of the Commons represent the Body of the Realm, in the
Parliament time, though the thousand part of the subjects be not present? and
what they enact, the absent enact; what they deny, the absent deny: and what
immunities and privileges they obtain, for succession as well as for
themselves they obtain them: and what services, tributes, subsidies, or taxes
they yield unto, all the rest of the Realm must yield unto, and pay: yea, by
the trust reposed in them, they bind or loose the whole Kingdom, sometimes in
such things as others would never have consented unto, and yet must undergo,
and see performed. In the fifth book of the History of Portugal, the
Universitie and Divines of Alcala, among other things, truly decreed, and
religiously guided Philip the second toward the attaining of the crown of
Portugal, in these words, saying, that, When as Commonwealths do choose their
first King, upon condition to obey him and his successors, they remain subject
to him to whom they have transferred their authority; no jurisdiction remaining
in them either to judge the realm, or the true successor, seeing in the first
election all true successors were chosen.

Every man is considered doubly. First, as a singular person: so only his own
proper actions belong to him. Secondly, as a member of a society: so what the
Prince, or the whole city, or the greater part do, does concern him: For so
says the Philosopher, says Scharpius the Divine. Much more did Adam represent
our persons, when, what he willed and performed, we willed and performed; we
being in him, as many waters in a fountain; all to be corrupted, if he were
corrupted; all to be pure, if he continued pure; all to live by his
righteousness, all to die by his iniquity.

Furthermore, in the famous battle between the three Horatii and the three
Curiatii, did not they represent both the armies and both the people? the
Horatii, of the Romans? the Curiatii, of the Latins? Did not their wills,
their strength, their fortune depend on the wills, strength, and fortune of
those combatants? did not the Latins fall into subjection by the death of the
Curiatii? and did not the Romans thrive and prosper by the valor of their
superviving Horatius? Yea in the Scripture, long before this battle, there
went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines, Goliath of Gath, 1.
Sam. 17.4. with a proud challenge, and bold defiance; Am not I a Philistine,
and you servants of Saul? Then he articleth, Choose you a man for you, and let
him come down to me. If he be able to fight with me, and to kill me; then we
will be your servants: but if I prevail, and kill him; then you shall be our
servants, and serve us. It should seem, the Philistines referred themselves to
his success; for when David had undertaken the duel, and when the Philistines
saw their champion dead, (they fought not a stroke) they fled. And the men of
Israel and of Judah pursued, wounded, and killed them, verse. 51, 52.

Yea, in our own country, if upon imposed crimes by an appellant, the
defendant shall yield, or be overcome in battle, V^imo supplicio punietur, cum
poena gravi vel graviori, secundum criminis qualitatem, cum exhaeredatione
haeredum suorum, and omnium bonorum amissione.
He shall be put to death with a grievous or more grievous pain, according to
the quality of the crime, with the disinheriting of his heirs, and loss of
all his goods. Furthermore, though he were slain, yet the formality of the
Common Law proceeding, adjudgeth him to capital punishment, that thereby his
posterity may suffer the grievous concomitancy of his deserved infamy, says
that most learned M. Seldom, my most courteous and loving friend, in his
Duello, or Single Combat, page 30.

5. But let us come from the sword, where things are cut out with more rigor,
if not crucltie, unto matters Ecclesiastical, and so more civil and peaceable.
Did not S. Peter stand in stead of all the Apostles, when Christ said to him,
Joh. 21.15, 16. Feed my lambs, -- Feed my sheep. And again, Feed my sheep,
verse. 17. Likewise when Christ said to him, Matthew. 16.19. I will give unto thee
the keys of heaven: and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound
in heaven: whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. And
when this promise to Peter was promised to the rest of the Apostles also,
Matthew. 18.18. and when both these promises were fulfilled and accomplished, as
they were after Christ's resurrection (and not before) and authority given, and
by a solemn ceremony exhibited by Christ, not only to S. Peter, but to all
and every of the Apostles, saying, Joh. 20.21, etc. As my Father has sent me,
even so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and says
unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained. Did
not the Apostles represent the whole body of the Ministry? unless you will
fable, that in the Apostles days they had more need of remission of sins,
then we have now; or that Christ loves not his Church now, nor affords the
like means of pardon and reconciliation, as he did in those times. But by the
same deceitfulness of cavillation, you may say as well, that when Christ brake
bread, and gave it to his Disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body: and
gave the cup to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; none but they might eat, or
drink the Supper of the Lord. But it is undeniable, that when Christ said to
his twelve Apostles, Luke 22.19. This is my body which is given for you: Do
this in remembrance of me; he spoke it to them as representours of the whole
Priesthood only: who only have power to consecrate the body and blood of our
Lord. Indeed Hierome says, Quid facit Episcopus, excepta Ordinatione, quod
Presbyter non facit^ Epist. 85. ad Euag.
What does a Bishop, except Ordination, which a Priest does not? as if the
Apostles represented the Bishops in that point onley: and the Centuriatours
acknowledge, that the first Bishops, after the Apostles, were made Bishops by
the Apostles: and they say no more then is confirmed, 1. Timothy 5.22. and
Titus 1.5. Act. 20.28. But other Fathers extend the comparison between the
Apostles and Bishops to other matters; appropriating to the Bishops, above the
Presbyters, the power of Confirmation, and diverse other things. All which
though we grant, yet no man will deny but for preaching, baptizing, and
especially for consecrating of the Eucharist, and Sacerdotall Absolution, or
Ministerial Remission of sins, the Apostles represented not the people in
any wise, nor the Bishops only; but the universal body of Christ's Ministers.

And do not, among us, the Right Reverend Archbishops, and Bishops, and the
Clergy, assembled in the Convocation, represent the whole Church of England?
are not they our National Council? do not their Articles of Religion bind in
conscience all and every one of the Church of England, as much, if not more
then Civil laws? Nor is there the like humane authority on earth, for the
settling of our consciences in matters of Scripture, or Scriptures controverted,
or to be controverted, as the external public breathing voice of a true
Ecumenical Council of the Patriarchs, Bishops, and choice Divines of the
Christian world. The essential, universal Church of Christ is (and we must
believe it is) the house of God, the Church of the living God, the pillar and
ground of truth, 1. Tim. 3.15. It never erred, it cannot err, its judgment is
infallible. The Spirit leads this Church into all truth, Joh. 16.13. Of the
Church of God, consisting of the faithful in any one age or time, I dare say,
it never did err damnably, or persisted in smaller errors obstinately; but
always some truly maintained things necessary to salvation: and unto this
fluctuant militant part of the Church, Christ has promised to be with it to
the end of the world, Matt. 28.20. The whole visible Church at no time can fall
into heresy; but some seek after the truth, and embrace it, and profess it.
Subject it is to nesciency of some things, and perhaps to some kind of
ignorance; but it cannot err in things necessary, nor in less matters,
schismatically, with obdurate pertinacy.

Of the representative Church of Christ in Councels, this may be said truly and
safely: viz.

Of the first six General Oecumenicall Councels, not one, de facto, erred in
any definition of matters of faith. Of other lawful general Councels, that may
hereafter be called, though I will not deny but they may possibly be deceived,
as they are men, and therefore are not free from errability: (but if such
Councels may err, or pronounce amiss, cannot cobblers?) yet there is least
likelihood of their erring. Such Ecumenical Councels have the supremest,
public, external, definitive judgment in matters of Religion; if any oppose
them, they may not only silence them, but censure them with great censures,
and reduce them into order. Private spirits must sit down and rest in their
determinations, else do the Councels lose operam and oleum. What S. Ambrose,
Epist. 32. said of one general Council, Sequor tractatum Niceni Concilii, a
quo me (...) mors, nec gladius (...) separare.
I follow the decision of the Nicene Council, from which neither death nor
sword shall be able to separate me: I say of all true and general Councels,
and of the major part of them, who bind the rest: without which issue, the
gathering of Councels, yea and of Parliaments also, would be ridiculous. For
though it were a true and just complaint of Andreas Duditius;
Quinquecclesiensis Episcopus, That in the Conventicle of Trent, the voices were
rather numbered then well weighed: yet he does not, he cannot find fault with
that course, in a just and lawful General Council: but directs his
complaint against the tyrannical power of the Pope, who made unlearned men
Bishops, as many as served his turn; and more would have made, if more need had
been: Bishops Pompaticos and ostensionales.
pompaticall, and only for show (as Lampridius said of Perseus his soldiers;)
namely, titular Bishops, void of learning, void of Churches, void of good
consciences, and mercenary parasites.

Concerning our National Church, till a lawful General Council may be
celebrated, both Pastors and people of England are to obey her Decrees,
Injunctions, Articles, Homilies, and our approved, last, best Translation;
above Coverdales, Tindals, or any private ones. Therefore, Obey them that have
the rule over you, and submit your selves: for they watch for your souls, as
they that must give account, Heb. 13.17. And you are to follow their faith,
ver. 7.

6. The Devil brought not a more dangerous Paradox into the Church of God this
thousand years, then this, That every one, illiterate man or woman, at their
pleasure may judge of Scripture, and interpret Scripture, and believe their own
fancies of the Scripture, which they call the evidence of the Spirit: and the
contradicting them, (though with truth) they esteem as the not convincing, nor
clearing of their conscience. So that National Councels are of no esteem,
General Councels not of much: the sheep will not hear the Pastors voice; but
to their pleasure censure them: for, All may err. The Spirit from heaven (as
they suppose) does as well dictate the sense to them, as it did sometimes the
words to the holy Penmen thereof. Let such seduced ones know, They have the
cart without the horses and horsemen: whereas the Prophet Eliah was called (and
other Church Governors may be called) the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen
thereof, 2. Kings 2.12. They have the words with the Eunuch; but want both
Philip to be their guide, and the humblenes of the Eunuch, who was willing to
be instructed, Act. 8.30. Though they have the letter, yet they may miss the
true literal sense; which is not in diverse places to be measured by the
propriety of the words only, or principally; as in proverbiall, parabolicall,
and mysterious sentences. The literal sense is the hardest to find. Simplicem
sequentes literam occidunt Filium Dei, qui totus sentitur in Spiritu.
They that follow the bare letter, do kill the Son of God, who is wholly
perceived in the Spirit, says Hierome of some men, on Matt. 26.21.
Presumptuous and illiterate Expositours are like the Carriers or Posts, hasting
between Princes; having letters of truth in their packets, but sealed up, so
that they cannot see nor know them; while their mouths are full of leasings,
false rumors, and lies. They have the spirit of self-conceit and pride. These
men little think, that they who wrested some hard places in S. Paul, as they
did also the other Scriptures, wrested them to their own destruction, 2. Pet.
3.16. What shall become of those, who wrest easy places? These dream not, that
Ejusdem pene auteritatis est interpretari, cujus condere.
it belongs almost to the same authority, to interpret, and to make: That they
are to rest on the General Commission given to the Priest, Teach all nations:
(therefore others must learn:) That the Priests lips must preserve knowledge,
and the people must fetch the Law from their mouth: That an implicit belief in
depths beyond their capacity, is better then adventurous daring to take from
the holy word of God that divine sense which it has, and to fasten their own
false sense upon it. Tertullian says, Tantum veritati obstrepit adulter
sensus, quantum corruptor stylus. De Praescript. advers. htet. cap. 17. and 38.
The truth of the Scripture may be depraved as well by a false gloss, as by
corrupting the text. Hierome thus, Non est in verbis Evangelium, sed in sensu;
non in superficie, sed in medulla; non in sermonum foliis, sed in radice
rationis. Comment. in Galat. 1.
The Gospel is not in the words, but in the sense; not in the outside, but in
the marrow; not in the leaves of speeches, but in the root of reason. Irenaeus
2.25. Melius est, nihil omnino scientem perseverare in dilectione Dei, quae
hominem vivificat, nec aliud inquirere ad scientiam, nisi Jesum Christum Filium
Dei, pro nobis crucifixum, quam per quaestionum subtilitates, and multiloquium,
in impietates cadere.
It is better for the ignorant to continue in the love of God, which quickneth
a man, and to seek no other knowledge but Jesus Christ the Son of God
crucified for us, then by subtilties of questions and much talking to fall into
impieties. And Augustine, Sermon. 20. de verbis Apost. Melior est fidelis
ignorantia, quam temeraria scientia.
A faithful ignorance is better then a rash knowledge. Again, S. Hierome ad
Demetriadem, speaks of unlearned men, Quum loqui nesciunt, tacere non
possunt, docentque Scripturas quas non intelligunt; prius imperitorum magistri,
quam doctorum discipuli. Bonum est obedire majoribus, parere praesectis. and
post regulas Scripturarum vitae suae tramitem ab aliis discere, nec praeceptore
uti pessimo, scilicet praesumptione sua.
Knowing not how to speak, they cannot hold their peace, but will needs teach
the Scriptures which they understand not, and be masters of the ignorant,
before they be disciples of the learned. It is good to obey our elders, to
submit to those that are set over us, and next to the rules of the Scriptures,
to learn of others how to live, and not to be led by our own presumption, the
worst guide of all others. Excellent is the counsel of Gregory Nazianzen to
these fanaticall giddybrain'd private spirits, Ye sheep, presume not to lead
your Pastors, etc. If a Jew, a Turk, a Devil convince thy conscience, thou
must follow it: shall the governor of thy soul have no other power over thee,
then Jew, Turk, or Devil? Or was the Ministry ordained in vain? In vain indeed
it was ordained, if every one be his own judge, or a peremptory judge of his
guide. If great learned men may be deceived; may not the ignorant man much
more? I dare truly avouch, that the unlearned,
single-languaged-interpreting-lay-man, has all the faults whatsoever learned
men have, and some other; especially such as are the offsprings of ignorance.
That wise Historian Philip de Commines, in his 3. book 4. chap. reckons it as
an unseemly thing to reason of Divinity before a Doctor. The world is turned
topsi-turvey: the great and most learned Archbishop of Canterbury was
confronted by a cobbler; yea confounded, if we will believe that monster of men,
that incarnate devil, Martin Marre-Prelate, who thus sung of his Idol, Who
made the godly Cobbler Cliff
For to confound his Grace?
I warrant you, the spirit, the private spirit, by which the fool presumed that
he was guided. Sleidan, Comment. 22. fol. 266. says it was one of Charles the
fifth his Edicts, Ne quis de Sacra Scriptura, maxim de rebus dubiis and
difficilibus, privatim aut public disputet, aut ejus interpretationem sibi
sumat, nisi sit Theologus, qui probatae alicujus Academiae testimonium habeat.
Let no man take upon him to dispute publicly or privately of the sacred
Scripture, especially of doubtful and hard points; or to interpret it; except
he be a Divine that has the testimony of some approved University. It was an
holy Edict, breeding reverence to the sacred word of God, and I could wish it
were in practice with us; though I must needs confess, the breach of the edict
was too severely punished: for the men were to be beheaded, and the women to be
buried alive, though they desisted from their error; but if they were
obstinate, they were to be burned, and their goods confiscated. Yet the
rebellions of the Anabaptists in Germany may be some cloak for that cruel
sentence; which rebellions also (forsooth) were moved by the Spirit of God; if,
for example sake, you will give credit to Thom. Muncer his oration unto the
armed rebellious clowns: Constat nobis, auspicatum esse me hanc actionem, non
mea quadam autoritate privata, sed jussu divino.
We are sure (says he) that I began not this action by any private authority
of mine, but by a divine injunction, etc. And again, Videbitis ipsi manifestum
Dei auxilium.
Ye your selves shall see the manifest help of God. And he had Scripture to
confirm it; Scripture in word, not in sense; Scripture misapplied, things
falling out contrary to his prophetical Spirit: for they were overcome, and he
beheaded. Likewise Sleiden, Comment. 30. fol. 28. says of the Anabaptists, Cum
Deo colloquium sibi esse, and mandatum se habere aiebant, ut impiis omnibus
interfectis, novum constituerent mundum, in quo pii solum and innocents
viverent.
They said they had conference with God, and a mandate from him, to kill all
the wicked, and then to frame a new world, wherein none but the godly and
innocent should live. This I will say of mine own knowledge, that when that man
of happy memory, the late right Reverend, now most blessed Saint, Arthur Lake,
Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, appointed Doctor Sclater (now also a Saint of
heaven, then my most learned loving friend, and sometime fellow-Collegian in
the two royal Colleges at Eaton and Cambridge) with my self, to confer with
an Anabaptisticall woman; we heard her determine great depths of Divinity as
confidently as ever S. Paul did, though he was taught by Christ himself; and as
nimbly as ever an ape cracked nuts: yet so ignorantly, and with such nonsense,
that we both wondered at her incredible boldness. The Revelation she had at her
fingers ends: she thought that she understood it better then S. John himself;
and defined in a few hours conference more depths of Divinity, then six
General Councels would in a long time. Mysteries were no mysteries to her: if
an Angel of earth, or one from heaven instruct her contrary to her frantic
prepossest imagination, she would conclude, Because the Spirit blows where it
lists, that the Spirit instructed her in the right way. A fit consequence for
such a pseudo-prophetissa.

7. But what do I speak of her self-conceit, when of late an other of her sex
has printed a book of her fantastical crudities, and by English anagrams
expounds Scripture? A new kind of interpretation never thought of, fit for a
woman to be the inventour of. She teaches Daniel to reveal himself after a new
fashion: and such things, which, were he alive and racked, he must say he never
thought of. She thinks she untieth knots, and gives light to prophesies; but
indeed misapplieth things past, and perhaps future contingents, to present
times: and while she gathers many excellent strains of words and sentences
out of the divine Writ, in coupling them together she makes such a roaring
hotch-potch, as if she had vowed to write full-mouthed nonsense in lofty
terms; others not knowing, nor perhaps herself, what she aims at. Take a
taste of her anagrams.

DANIEL. I END AL.
Yet did not he end all prophesies, nor all things.

MEDES AND PERSIANS.
SEND ME SPANIARDS.
What would she do with them? It was feared that they would have come too soon
for her and others too.

THE ROUGH GOAT.
THE GOTH ROGUE.
Like you this? you shall have more as bad, as void of wit.

PRINCE OF PERSIA.
I CAN POPE FRIARS.
If Friars should come, and prevail, they would teach her to be more humble.

DARIUS THE MED.
I DREAMED THUS.
Awake dreamer: no sense is in thy dreams, much less religion. Was ever
Scripture made such a nose of wax? did ever any religious heart think, such
could be the meaning of those words? Let me but touch at her obscene exposition
of the end of Christ's Circumcision, page 5; and consider her fanaticall
imagination, that the Spirit of God by Michael understood King James, page 50:
And the war in heaven with Michael and his Angels, against the Dragon and his
Angels, is thus expounded by her, page 55. The fray is fought by seconds: by
Michael is meant King James; the Dragon is the Pope, whom Michael overcame by
the blood of the Lamb, and by the testimony of so many Bishops, and other
faithful, crowned with the glory of Martyrdom: whereas King James had never a
Bishop so crowned, and never a Bishop was so crowned since he was born. Holy,
peaceable, and harmless King James, who would scarce hurt a worm, is now
interpreted to be the greatest fighter among the celestial host.

I could wish she would repent for her blasphemy, page 70, where she writes,
That the person of the son of God (not made) was turned into a lump of clay:
and for her pointing out the day of judgment. For though she confesses, page
90, Of the day and hour no man knows, no not the Angels that are in heaven,
nor the Son, but the Father; yet she adds, The account of this book of note
is by centuries of years. Suppose it were so, (as it is not) could not Christ
and his Angels know the day by the computation of centuries, as well as she?
but she, by a new account, has found out (as she imagines) what Christ and
the good Angels were ignorant of, namely, the exact day of doom. For thus she
determines, page 100, There is nineteen years and a half to the day of
judgment, July the twenty eighth one thousand six hundred twenty five. Had not
this woman been better never to have seen Scripture, then thus to profane it,
and take Gods word in vain? You think you have the Spirit of God, as you write
in the last page: but I am sure, if you repent not betimes, for your
wire-drawing of Gods word, and intruding into hidden and unsearchable depths of
Divinity; you are in a desperate case, and all the Separatists and Enthusiasts
of the Nether-lands, where they say your book was printed, cannot defend you.
Let the women rather go to their needle, and their spindle. Let the woman learn
in silence with all subjection, 1. Tim. 2.11. But I suffer not a woman to
teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, (as she does, if she turn
expositrix) but to be in silence, says S. Paul.

Quis expedivit psittaco suum (...),
Picasque docuit nostra verba conari?
Cornelius Cornelii a Lapide deserves the severest censure of the Inquisition,
for expounding the word of God by an Hebrew anagram, on Exodus 25.18; though he
cite a piece of Scripture for a parallel. Indeed S. Hierome on those words,
Sheshach shall drink after them, Jeremie 25.26, interprets it to be Babel:
because, if you mingle in the Hebrew Alphabet the first letter with the last,
the second with the last save one, and so forth, till you come to the middle,
and invert the order of reading, which we do for the memory of children: as for
example (...); when you are come to the midst (...) and (...) do meet: then
that which in the ordinary and forward reading is Babel, in the inverted
reading is Sheshach. I apprehend him thus: write in one line the Hebrew
Alphabet, beginning with (...), and ending with (...); in another line begin
with (...), and end with (...): what in the right way is Babel, in the froward
way is Sheshach. For (...) the second letter being doubled, and (...) the
twelfth letter in their proper places and rank, make with their vowels, Babel;
and (...) the second letter being also doubled with (...) the twelfth letter in
the alphabet, in the preposterous posture of them, with the same vowels, do
make Sheshach; and therefore Babel is called Sheshach. Magno conatu, meras
nugas: Great ado about mere trifles. Indeed the Rabbines have many mutual
oppositions of letters in the inverted alphabet, and none so ancient as this,
as Bertram in his Comparatio Grammaticae Hebraicae and Aramicae truly
observes; and of the Cabalisticall interchangeing of letters, he prefers
this Athbasch above all: yet is it more nice and curious, then sound or
religious; neither can S. Hieroms authority give authority or allowance to this
minglemangle-kinde of interpretation: his authority in this point being
weakened by his slender conjecture. I think (says he) that the Prophet Jeremy
did prudently conceal the name of Babel, lest the besiegers of Jerusalem should
be enraged against him: but (say I) otherwhere he names Babel, as Jeremy
50.18. and lays a burden upon the kingdom and city of Babylon, upon her
Princes and her wise men, both in the 50 and 51 chapters. Yea in the same 25
chapter, ver. 12, Jeremy says from God, I will punish the king of Babylon, and
that nation. Which inconvenience Lyra foreseeing, therefore, perhaps, the
rather thinks, that Sheshach is the name of the Egyptian King, and that
Pharaoh was the common name; as afterward Caesar was the common name of the
Emperors, and Julius a proper name. This is evident, there was a Sheshach,
king of Egypt in the days of Solomon, 1. King. 11.40. and there might also be
a second Sheshach after. But Lyra himself on Jer. 51.41. says, that Sheshach
in that place is used for Babel; and I am forced to say, that no part of the 51
chap. touches on the woes of Egypt, but purposely is bent against Babylon; and
it is not likely that the same Prophet would call two distinct kings, or two
distinct kingdoms by the same word Sheshach. Therefore Lyra is out of tune in
this strain. But why then is Sheshach put for Babel? If no reason could be
assigned, yet the word of God is not so to be dandled withal, or rather to be
tortured, as to draw expositions out of anagrams; and therefore the Jesuit was
justly blameable, to make this place a pattern of his anagrammatisticall
interpretation. Mr. Seldom de DIs Syris, Syntagm. 2. Cap. 12. says, Sheshach
may seem to be an idol of the Babylonians, a she-idol, or perhaps (as it is in
his Addenda) a masculine Deity: but he leaves all to conjecture; wherein
though he has done excellently, yet I rather follow in this point Tremellius,
who on Jeremy 25.26. observes, that Sheshach in the Babylonish tongue does
signify Diem festum celebrans, and so may signify, either the King, or the
City, keeping a festival day: Which was never without feasting. Now that both
the feast was kept, and the festival day designed to the worship of their
idols, may be judged by the event, Daniel 5.4. where they praised the gods; and
for so doing was Belshazzar reprehended, verse. 23. Tremellius adds, that
Jeremy by this one word did demonstrate with his finger the very day of the
King of Babel, and Babylons fall; as if he had said, At a feast he shall be
slain, or, In her feasting the city shall be destroyed. For as the Lord
prophesied by Isaiah, Prepare the table, watch in the watchtower, eat, drink,
Isa. 21.5. where both the feast, and the fall of the King of Babel, and of the
city also is divinely foretold: so God gave a second warning, Jeremy 51.39. In
their heat I will make their feasts, and I will make them drunken, that they
may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep. Where Babylons feasting-destruction
is named; then follows, I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter,
ver. 40. whereupon he cries out in the 41. ver. How is Sheshach taken? that
is, Diem festum celebrans, either the feasting Belshazzar, or, the feasting
city overthrown? Concerning the King, the Scripture says, Daniel 5.1. He made
a great feast to a thousand of his lords, and drank wine; and whiles he tasted
the wine, he commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels of the temple of
Jerusalem; and in the same hour the fingers of a man's hand wrote his
destruction; and that night was he (the wine-bibbing Sheshach) slain.
Concerning the city, I proved before out of Jeremy, that her destruction was to
wait upon her intemperance; and so, Quomodo capta est Sheshach, id est, Civitas
diem festum celebrans? And indeed I rather incline to this latter exposition,
in this place, because also of the words immediately following, How is the
praise of the whole earth surprised? (but neither Belshazzar, nor Sheshach, if
it were an idol, were the praise of the whole earth) How is Babylon become an
astonishment among the nations? If you judge it to be a she-idol, because it is
said, Quomodo capta est Sheshach? I first answer, that at that feast service
was done to many idols of gold and silver, brass and iron, wood and stone,
Daniel 5.23. but that Sheshach was the chief among them, or that any one idol
of them was so named, is yet to be proved. Therefore the other answer may stand
good, that there is no necessity of making the word Sheshach to be the proper
name of King, City, or Idol: it may rather be an appellative. For Jeremy 25.26.
Rex Sheshach bibet post eos: which (as I said) you may interpret, Rex diem
festum celebrans bibet post eos, The King celebrating a festival day, shall
drink after them; though Tremell. has it thus, Rex Babyloniae festa habentis
bibet, etc. I cannot deny, but if there were such an idol among them as was
termed Sheshach, (which is our main enquiry, yet unproved) it might, as well as
Bell, Merodach, and Melcom, signify the people which worshipped it. Till that
point be evidenced, I will say with Tremellius, that the forbearing to name the
King, or veiling the name of the city, and describing him or it by what was
prophesied they should be doing or acting, (as indeed it fell out) is to be
referred ad De qua Hermog. Tom. 4. de inventione.
(...) orationis, to the gravitie and weight of the speech: wherein the
Scripture keeps its majesty; and neither with bitter invective, nor harsh
exprobration, but with composed gravitie, and eloquent solemnity designeth the
King or Babylon out, not expressly, by his or her name; but by their actions:
as Nabals name was applied by his own wife, to signify his churlish nature, 1.
Sam. 25.25. Nabal is his name, and folly is with him: and Jerusalem is called
the holy city, for the holy things there done, there contained. I conclude
thus, If anagrammes from the Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack, or Greek, languages in
which the words of holy Scripture were writ, may not be admitted (as indeed
they may not;) much less may we expound the sacred Original by English
anagrammes, the flashes and fireworks of luxuriant brains.

Hearty reverence, and a kind of ceremonious civil adoration beseems the
word of God. It is not much prating, or pridy-self-love, that makes the good
expositour. The silence of swannes is not overcome by the noise of swallows;
but when the swallows are grown hoarse, the swannes shall sing, says
Nazianzen. The application is easy. Josephus, in his second book against Apion,
says of the Jewish high priest, He shall judge of doubtful matters, and
punish those that are convinced by the law. Whosoever obeys not him, shall
undergo punishment, as he that behaves himself impiously against God. The
great, dubious, perplexed scruples and difficulties were not left to the
judicature of private fancies. Artificum est judicare de art, It belongs to
artificers to judge of the art, is a maxim of infallible truth. Hierome upon
these words, Eccles. 3.7. A time to keep silence, and a time to speak, thus;
Omnes arts absque dectore non discimus; solae haec tam vilis and facilis est,
ut non indigeat praeceptore.
We learn no art without a teacher; only this is so mean and so easy, that it
needs no teacher: and he speaks by Ironie of those who are rath-ripe in
religion. Aristotle Ethic. 1. Every one judges aright of those things which he
knows; and this is a good judge. And this is called by Ockam our countryman,
Judicium certae and veridicae cognitionis.
the judgment of certain and veridicall knowledge. Luther divinely, Non licet
Angelis, nedum hominibus, verba Dei pro arbitrio interpretari.
It is not lawful for Angels, much less for men, to interpret Gods words as
they list: much less for women, say I. Tertullian in his time styled them
heretical women, that dared to teach, and contend in argument: and nothing
truer then this, that Imperitia considentiam, eruditio timorem creat.
Ignorance breeds confidence, learning fear and distrust. Who is more bold then
blind bayard? To the word of God we must add nothing contrary or foreign,
says Aquin. No prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpretation, 2.
Pet. 1.20. Know this first, says the Apostle there. Or is Daniel no Prophet,
and his writing not prophetical? If the wit of men, or Angels from heaven,
should make a law, a written law, by which people should be ruled or judged,
(as for example, concerning theevery) and appoint no living judge to determine
who offend against the law, and who are punishable or not punishable; but leave
every one to judge himself by this written law, and every one to interpret the
law to his pleasure: were it not a foolish law, a mock-law, and indeed a
no-law? And shall God give us a law concerning our souls, and permit the
interpretation of it to every one? The living judge, in matters of Faith and
Religion, in every Kingdom of Christian government, is the National Council
thereof, till there be found that panchrestum medicamentum, that medicine good
for all diseases, for the Universal Church of Christ, a true and free general
Council; from which is no appeal, it being the supremest external judge on
earth.

Yea, but the Bereans received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so, Acts 17.11. Shall
they examine the very Apostles doctrine, and not we the doctrine of our
Pastors? I answer, first, These Bereans were learned and eminent men. But
every unlearned skullion now, that has skill only in the English original,
will contest with the profoundest Clerks. Secondly, these Bereans were
unbeleevers before the examination of those things: for immediately it
follows, Therefore many of them believed, and many honorable Greek women and
men. Art thou an unbeleever? Do thou then as those unbeleevers did. If thou
beleevest, show me one passage of Scripture, where ever the unlearned people
did call the doctrine of their learned Pastors into trial.

I confess, that the judgment of the Scripture and Creed is only authentic,
and perfectly decisive. And if we could exactly hit on the true meaning, all
differences were quickly at an end. Nor do I monopolize learning to the Clergy,
when I confine and restrain the judgment of learning to the learned. Many
there are among the people, who in all literature, humane and divine, exceed
many Priests: and I wish they were more in number, and that way more abundantly
qualified. With the Churchmen it would be better, since Scientia neminem habet
inimicum, praeter ignorantem.
Learning has no enemy but the ignorant. There are sons of wisdom, and
sons of knowledge. As Wisdom is justified of her children, Matthew. 11.19. so
learning is not to be judged by the unlearned, but by her children.

I acknowledge, that all and every one of the people are to answer for their
thoughts, words, and deeds; and that God has given them a judgment of
discretion in things which they know: but in matters above their knowledge, and
transcending their capacity, they have neither judgment to discern, nor
discretion to judge. Ne suitor ultra crepidam. Shall blind men judge of
colors? Sus Minervam? Phormio Hannibalem? Asinus ad lyram? (...).
He that learns must believe, says Aristotle.

I abhor that monstrous opinion of Tolet and others in the Papacy, That it is
meritorious in simple men to be misled by their Pastors. And yet all truth is
not at all times to be published to all alike. Christ forbad the Apostles to
reveal the truth to the Gentiles and Samaritanes, (who were then in an
indisposition to believe) Matthew. 10.5. Give not (...), that which is holy unto
dogs, and cast not (...), your pearls before swine, Matthew. 7.6. By which (...)
and (...), he means the Gospel, says S. Augustine, De adulterinis conjugiis
1.27. Again, Matthew. 16.20, our Savior charged his Disciples that they should
tell no man that he was Jesus the Christ: (namely for some time) which yet
himself published, as he saw occasion, John 5.18. and 10.30. and 18.37. and
died for the publishing of it, sealing the truth with his blood, Mark 14.62. 1.
Tim. 6.13. Yea, Christ himself concealed diverse things from his own Apostles,
and from some Apostles more then from others. Peter, James, and John did see
more then the rest of the Apostles, and were commanded to conceal the
Transfiguration, even from the rest of the Apostles. Tell the vision to no man,
until the Son of man be risen again from the dead, says Christ to them,
Matthew. 17.9. and yet the knowledge of the Transfiguration was none of the
necessary points to salvation. Christ at first taught obscurely as it were by
shadows and resemblances: both his death by the amphibolous words, Destroy this
Temple, Joh. 2.19. and his resurrection and ascension, by instancing in the
type of the brazen serpent lifted up, Joh. 3.14. For Christ was lifted up or
exalted; both by men ((...), When you have lift up the Son of man, Joh.
8.28.) and by the right hand of God, (...), Acts 2.33. Yea, God (...),
superexaltavit eum, highly exalted him, Philip. 2.9. After, he spoke more
plainly, and he began to teach his Apostles of his sufferings and resurrection,
Mark 8.31. and that openly, ver. 32. which is confirmed by specializing of the
time, Matthew. 16.21. (...), From that time forth began Jesus (...), to
demonstrate: insomuch that his Disciples said unto him, Lo, now thou speak
plainly, and speak no proverb, or parable, Joh. 16.29. And the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 3.1, 2. acknowledges, that he fed them with milk, because they were not
able to bear strong meat: insomuch that he could not speak unto them as unto
spiritual, but as unto carnal, as unto babes in Christ. Could not, that is,
could not conveniently, could not to their good or edification. A young man is
not a fit hearer of moral Philosophy, says Aristotle.

Briefly thus, All religions under heaven, the true and the falsely called
religion, have had their arcana, their secrets and mysteries, the patefaction
whereof was not promiscuously imparted to every one of the vulgar or illiterate
sort: who sometimes her upon a good belief, and by it may rapere coelum, take
heaven by force (in the phrase and sentence of S. Augustine) whiles learned men
may be thrust to hell; but indeed know little with the perfection of knowledge.
It must be confessed, that it was the accursed policy of our adversaries, to
nuzle up the people in ignorance: but Buy the Bible, says S. Chrysostom;
Search the Scriptures, says Christ, John 5.39. Let all the people daily read
or hear them, meditate on them, and labor to follow them: let them who have
any learning interpret them according to the competency of their gifts, and in
their own families instruct the more unlearned. What said King Henry the
eighth, December. 24. in the 37 year of his reign? (as it is in Stows
Chronicle, enlarged by Howes, page 590) and to whom said he it? Be not judges
your selves of your own fantastical opinions, and vain expositions: For in
such high causes you may lightly err. And though you be permitted to read
holy Scriptures, and to have the word of God in your mother tongue; you must
understand, it is licensed you so to do, only to inform your consciences, and
to instruct your children and families; and not to dispute, and make Scripture
a railing and a taunting stock against Priests and Preachers, as many light
people do.

Queen Elisabeth also showed her dislike in Parliament, March 29. in the 27
year of her reign (in Stows Chronicle, page 702) saying, I see many overbold
with God Almighty; making too many subtle scannings of his blessed will; as
Lawyers do with humane testaments. The presumption is so great, that I may not
suffer it, -- nor tolerate new-fanglednesse. So she. Humility, and subjection
of spirit ought to be in every Prophet to the Prophets: and shall the unlearned
take up presumption as a buckler? and arm himself with obstinate singularity,
(which is a branch of pride) as with a sword? As I would not have the people,
with the Papists, as it were, to hoodwink and cover their eyes, that they may
be led by others; and glory in blind obedience, which little differs from
wilful, and stupid ignorance; but advise them to unmuffle their heads, and
open their own eyes, and judge of things which they do or can know, and are
skillful to judge: (but Ignorantia in Jadice aequiparatur dolo.
Ignorance in a Judge is as bad as injustice, and a simple unlearned Judge is a
mischief, as intolerable, as unheard of) so do I wish the people, to avoid the
other extreme of Separatists; who thinking they know all things, though they
have no heavenly inspiration, will seem wiser then their teachers; and taking
up opinions for truth, and malepert obstinacy for humble constancy, disrepute
their Pastors, disregard all authority, and ascribe nothing to that sovereigne
general commission, He who hears you, hears me: which is enough to seal up
their mouths and captive their thoughts unto their learned Pastors, in things
which themselves cannot apprehend, and their Pastors can well judge of.

Oh but men are men; and as men, may err. I hope, the unlearned people are not
Angels, nor more free from error then the learned. Yet we must be led by our
consciences. True; and your consciences even therefore ought the rather to be
well grounded, and founded; not upon the slippery sand of self-conceit, but on
knowledge, as on a sure and safe rock. And in whom should knowledge reside, if
not in your Pastors?

But in Queen Mary's days should a man have been led by his Pastors, when
themselves were at ods, and the greatest part awry? Or how should a true
Protestant, and now a subject of Spain, in Spain behave himself? How much is
left to his power of discretion, when the whole Estate, both Ecclesiastic and
Civil, runs with a torrent the contrary way? If he be led by his conscience,
and oppose them; there follows (with the hideous, secret, most feared, and
affrighting torments of the Inquisition) confiscation of goods, and sometimes
shameful, commonly a painful and violent death. If he rely on the advice of
the Pastors, he sins against his own conscience, and against truth. Who
can, or will direct this wavering Christian, in such uncertainty of ways, that
he step not aside, nor be out of the right path?

O gracious God, send out thy light and thy truth; let them lead me, Psalm.
43.3. Let them direct my discourse, and illuminate it; that it may be to the
anxious and scrupulous conscience as a guide, to direct the way; and as a
lanthorn, to give it light in the way.

S. Hierome and Ockam, and Doctor Field, (of the Church 4.13.) three most
eminent in three ages (a Father, a Schoolman, and a pillar of our Church) do
counsel good men, in such a case, to silence and mourning in secret, as the
Prophet Jeremy did: Men (says he) have nothing left unto them, but with
sorrowful hearts to refer all unto God. I should rather, under correction,
say, That a Christian thus perplexed is to take these courses, which those
Divines, perhaps, did presuppose as necessary preparatives, but did not
express.

First, I advise that man, whose conscience runs a singular way, to wash his
heart from wickedness, Jerem. 4.14. to lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty: which is pointed at, as a means whereby men may come to
the knowledge of the truth, 1. Tim. 2.2. etc. For unto the wicked God says,
What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my
covenant in thy mouth? Psalm. 50.16. Ezekiel. 20.3. Yes, but thou art confident
that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a light of them which are in
darkness, an instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, having the form of
knowledge and of the truth in the Law, Romans 2.10. I answer, Thou must also take
the qualifications and necessary appendants to a reformer, following in that
place immediately: Thou therefore that teach an other, teach thou not thy
self? etc. Thy self must not be ignorant, thy self must not steal, not commit
adultery, not commit sacrilege, not break the Law, not dishonor God. For, as
it is Wisd. 1.5, 6. The holy spirit of discipline will flee deceit, and remove
from thoughts that are without understanding, and will not abide where
unrighteousness comes in. For wisdom is a loving spirit. Never were the
uncharitable, ignorant, or sinful men, fit undertakers to contradict
established doctrines, disciplines, or commonwealths. But, Thou hypocrite,
first cast out the beam out of thine own eye; and then shall thou see clearly
to cast out the mote out of thy brothers eye, Matthew. 7.5. Reasons more then
ordinary will be expected by God and good men from him who leapeth out of the
Church in which he was born and bred, kicking at the breasts of his mother,
running with the bit in his teeth his own ways. I conclude this first point
thus; He who will needs run such singular courses, had need be a man of rare
sanctity, and of singular good endowments of knowledge.

Secondly, I would have him earnestly to pray for humility, and to practice it.
By pride Satan cast himself out of heaven; Adam him and his out of Paradise.
David said, Psalm. 131.1. Lord, my heart is not haughty, -- neither do I
exercise my self in great matters, or in things too high for me. And verse. 2.
Surely I have quieted my soul as a child that is weaned of his mother: my soul
is even as a weaned child. On which words, suffer me to make a little
excursion, by way of explanation.

Concerning the first passage: If David had appealed to men, some scruple might
have remained: but saying to God the searcher of hearts and reins, Lord, my
heart is not haughty; he makes his humility unquestionable.

In the second passage, observe, that though he was a King and a Prophet; yet
some things were too high for him, by his own confession. Nazianzen (...) page
153. Him I count humble, not that speaks humbly and modestly of himself, or
that speaks courteously and humbly to his inferior, but that speaks modestly
concerning God, and knows what to speak and what to conceal, and in some things
can confess his ignorance, and yield to them to whom the office of teaching is
committed. On the contrary, Objectum superbi est ipsemet, c^lsior quam e^
convenit.
The object of a proud man is himself, and he is higher in his own conceit then
is fit, says Cajetan. Pride exalts a man, humility casts him down: and as
all pride shall be at the last thrown down; so all true humility shall be
exalted. I would not go to heaven by pride: no man ever went to hell by
humility.

In the third passage, this is the sense: May my hopes, or God himself fail me,
may evil betide me, (for this, or some such like imprecation antecedent is to
be understood) si non posui and silere feci animam meam, as it runs in the
Hebrew. The oath it self, or imprecation is not expressed, that people may
learn to be abstemious in swearing. In which regard also it is said, Ecclus
23.10. (...), Jurans and nominans; He that swears and names God: Where the
Vulgat and Septuagint omit the name of God; though it be necessarily
understood, and is expressed in our best translation.

In the last passage, remember that we ought all, in this point of humility,
to be as little children, if we will enter into the kingdom of heaven, Matthew.
18.3. David adds, My soul is as a weaned child: not in this respect, that
newly weaned children are commonly more froward: (similitudes hold not in every
particular) but as the mother applies mustard, wormwood, and other bitter
things, to her breasts, that she may keep her child from the milk which he
desires; though she know it inconvenient, or hurtful for him: so God did wean
David, by the bitter remembrances of death, fear of Gods judgment, and the
pains of hell; and by crosses also of this life, sickness, banishment, envy in
court, insurrection of his own sons, and the like, from those pleasurable
things which David affected, but God knew to be naught for him. There was never
any archheretick, or grand impostour, but made private ends his cynosure,
self-conceit and self-love his card and compass.

Even after God had wondrously appeared unto Moses, and gave him his mission,
Moses replied, Exodus 3.11. Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh? etc. and
Exodus 4.1, 2. his backwardness further appears: yea, after, though God by
his two miracles confirmed the calling, yet twice more did he declare, that he
was afraid to begin so great an alteration, Exodus 4.10. and especially at the
13. verse. insomuch that the Lord was angry. Humbleness, which is always
accompanied with modesty, bashfulnesse, measuring ones own strength, and
subjection of spirit, is to be prayed for, and practiced by any scrupulous
Christian, before he make himself a formal party of opposition or
contradiction.

The third requisite follows; That this holy and humbled man confer with
more learned men, and specially with his Pastor. If his Pastor give him not
sufficient satisfaction, let him confer with other Divines. Yea, if he be a
Pastor himself, yet let him take heed of singularity, the daughter of pride:
and let him not lightly or slightly esteem of their judgments, who more
abound in knowledge, or to whom a direction of souls is by God himself more
especially committed; who are, in matters above his capacity, his proper
judges; and he is in such things, to subject himself unto them. I doubt not,
but, if his superiors should mislead him in things surmounting his knowledge
and capacity, his humble, conformable obedience, and desires are better
accepted of God, then another man, who without knowledge or any true ground
stumbleth on a truth, grows talkative and presumptuous, though he be ready to
die for that truth. Above all things, let him not apply himself to such men
alone, as he knows to be addicted to his own way; nor come with prejudice to
hear the contrary part: but since he will not rest in other men's
determinations, he, who will be an upright judge, ought indifferently to hear
both causes pleaded; and, after all good and necessary procedure unto true
judicature, to judge with right judgment. This is a rock, upon which many
split themselves; who pretend to seek out the truth, but go only to such as
they know beforehand do run with a byas to their humor, and will animate them
in their singularity: and thereby, in stead of instruction, are flattered in
their folly, and soothed in their erroneous conceits. Qui statuit aliquid part
inaudita altera; Aequum licet statuerit, haud aequus fuit.
He that determines any thing before he has heard both parties; though he
give just judgment, he is not a just judge. And again I say, Ignorantia in
Judice aequipatatur dolo.
Ignorance in a judge is as bad as injustice.

When this godly man is humbled, when this humble man has conferred with his
own Pastor, and other learned men and Ministers, and impartially heard both
sides; and still rests unsatisfied from others, and his conscience still
settled, that he has the truth; I wish him, not blindely to give over himself
to others; but, keeping the staff of direction, and the exercise of his
judgment of discretion, (for things within his verge, or reach) and following
the ways of his own conscience, in the fourth place, I would counsel him to
remove into other parts. So Elijah fled from Jezebel; yet poured out his
complaints to God, 1. King. 19.3, 10, 14. So our Savior, when the Jews would
have stoned him, hid himself, John 8.59. And he directed his Apostles to flee
from one city to another, Matthew. 10.23. S. Paul through a window was let down
in a basket by a wall, and escaped, 2. Cor. 11.33. and God himself hid Baruch
and Jeremy, Jer. 36.26. Thus many, both learned and unlearned, did in Queen
Mary's days; and God has given a great blessing ofttimes to this course. So
S. Cyprian fled at the first; and then, during his voluntary exile, wrote
diverse excelelnt matters, and yet afterward died a glorious Martyr.

In the fifth place, if the good Christian will not, or cannot flee, I would
now commend unto him silence and mourning, as the Prophet Jeremy did; which S.
Hierom, Ockam, and Doctor Field prescribe as the only means. Let him worship
God in private, as Daniel did three times a day, and prayed, Daniel 6.10. for
God will regard the prayer of the destitute, etc. This shall be written for the
generation to come, as it is Psalm. 102 17, 18. which Psalm is a prayer for the
afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and pours out his complaint before the
Lord: for this is the very superscription of that Psalm. The Prophets days
consumed like smoke, and his bones burnt as an hearth, verse. 3. His heart was
smitten and withered, verse. 4. and by reason of the voice of his groaning, his
bones did cleave to his skin, verse. 5. He was a pelican of the wilderness, and
like an owl of the desert, verse. 6. like a sparrow alone upon the house top,
verse. 7. whiles his enemies reproached him, and were mad against him, and sworn
against him, he ate ashes like bread, and mingled his drink with weeping, ver.
8, 9. The Lamentations of Jeremy would fit his mouth, and the doleful
complaints in diverse Psalms would well accord with them. But above all, he
should call to mind, That there was no sorrow like Christ's sorrow: That he
alone trod out the wine press of Gods wrath: That he was reviled, spit upon,
buffetted, whipped, crucified; and that despiteous piercing rent his very dead
body. Let him solace his soul with spiritual comforts, and make melody to God
in his heart; losing himself in speculation of Christ's infinite merit, and
applying to his own soul all heavenly joy. Let him withdraw himself from being
seen in public: let him embrace privacy and retiredness; living (if it were
possble) under Jonas his gourd, or in vaults, whose darkness and blackness he
expels by internal illumination, and spiritual irradiation. The Baptist;
and our blessed Savior himself, betook themselves to deserts and mountains for
their solitary devotions, when error and unrighteousness sat in the chair of
Moses. Thus the persecuted holy ones of the Primitive Church served God, at the
burial of their dead, by nightly songs, says Orat. 2. in Julian.
Nazianzen; residing sometimes in cryptis, in caves and grots under ground, in
dens, among the rocks. But suppose he be drawn forth, and cannot lie hid;
suppose the Magistrate summon him to his tribunal, and examine him very
strictly: how then ought this man to behave himself? First, I would have him to
abhor all mental reservations. If he use ambiguity of word, phrase, or
sentence, (which was the guise of the mysterious, enigmaticall oracles) if by
an Aposiopesis, Irony, or any Rhetorical figure allowed in art, practiced
among men, and conceiveable by an intelligent auditour, he excuse, qualify,
and keep secret his own actions or other men's counsels; I will not wholly blame
him: Nemo tenetur prod^re seipsum: quisque tenetur defendere seipsum.
No man is bound to bewray himself: every one is tied to defend himself. A
traitor may without sin plead, Not guilty; that is, not proved guilty at
your bar; where Vausquisque praesupponitur esse bonus, donec probetur esse
malus.
Every one is presupposed to be good, till he is proved to be bad. I am not
guilty, so far, as I am bound to accuse my self. And this is the allowed
general acceptance of that usance. Within the veil of ambiguous words there
lies a secret, second, homogeneall good sense; perhaps hid from some simple
ones, yet discernable by quick, piercing, and deep apprehensions; a sense
cousin-germane in the second degree to the words; a sense involved, implicit,
having traces and footsteps of reason; hard, yet investigable. Fuga in
persecutione is allowed; this subterfugium verborum is but a branch of it. I
will not condemn David for acting the part of a frantic man, to escape: He
changed his behavior before them, and feigned himself mad in their hands, and
scrabled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down upon his
beard, 1. Sam. 21.13. Neither will I wholly dislike a verbal equivocation;
while the sense is transparent to the wise or learned, though veiled to the
ignorant. Philip Cominaeus, 4.11. reports, that when the Constable of France,
Earl of S. Paul, had played foully and falsely on all sides; King Lewis the
eleventh said thus unto Rapine, a trusty servant of the Constable, I am busied
with diverse affairs of great importance, and had need of such an head as thy
masters is. The servant interpreted all comfortably, to the better sense; but
the King said softly to the English men and the Lord of Contay, I mean not,
that we should have the body, but the head without the body. This manner of
amphibolous speech our Savior used, when he said, Destroy this temple; which
they understood of the temple builded with stones: but he spoke of the temple
of his body, John 2.19, 20, 21. And in the eighth of John, Christ more then
once made use of that homonymous verbal equivocation.

But let him flee, as from a serpent, so from the delusions of the serpent; who
of late has taught his locusts to make an answer consisting, part in words
expressed and intelligible, part of thoughts reserved and unintelligible: the
speakers mind feigning, framing, and new-coyning a wild sense, which had no
correspondence with the words at all. So that, for example, if the Devil should
ask of a Jesuit, Will thou give me thy soul? the Jesuit may (by their
doctrine) safely and soundly answer him, I will give thee my soul: provided
always, that he keep in the hollow of his heart this mental reservation, If
thou be God Almighty. Thus the Jesuit thinks, that he can cozen the Devil
himself, because indeed he is not able to find out that unexpressed thought of
the Jesuits heart. Yet the Angel of darkness perhaps laugheth, perhaps
wondereth to see himself outgone in his own wiliness and depths, by his own
children; though time will declare the truth, that by such subtilties they
undermine, and blow up, as with gunpowder, their own, and their adherents
salvations.

I conclude the point: I will not condemn the man, who handsomely and artfully,
without lying or mental reservation unconceiveable, can shift off danger and
trouble from himself or his friends; but he condemns himself, who uses such
double dissimulation, such ledger du coeur: who plougheth with an ox and an
ass; making up a mixed, linsy-woolsy proposition, of words sensible and
thoughts heterogeneall and incomprehensible: incomprehensible (I say) by any
power or powers created; since the thoughts strangely vary from the words,
lurking in the vaults of the heart, and can not be fished or hooked out from
antecedents, or consequents, or any other circumstances.

But, if he be put to his oath, what shall he do? If the matter concern not his
life, let him answer exactly. Bishop Andrews seems to dislike, That a man
should be sworn against his own life; because the Prophet, by Gods direction,
made that particular exception, Jeremy 38.15. and for other reasons by that
most Reverend Prelat mentioned, page 95. in his Opuscula. Yet my opinion is, If
the life of Kings or Princes, or if the welfare of the Commonwealth be in
danger, or any extraordinary mischief be like to ensue, (which was not the case
of Jeremy; a Prophet, no traitor; an holy man, no plotter, contriver, or
partaker with wicked ones) a man may lawfully, by the Magistrate, be put to his
oath, though it cost him his life; or to the rack and torture. Unusual harms
must have unusual remedies. The particular nature will destroy it self, to
uphold the universal. Rather then there shall be a vacuum, fire will descend.
Vbi scelera per abruptum eunt, (per praerupia, in the African phrase of
Tertullian) iniquum est justitiam ad gradus teneri.
Where sins run headlong, it is not fit that justice should be tied to go
by degrees, says Seneca. If the matter concern his life, he may be silent, he
may appeal: It is 2.2. quaest. 63. art. 1. in corpore artic.
Aquins judgment on a case not much unlike; If a Judge ask any thing beyond
what he ought in law; the accused is not bound to answer: he may appeal, or
otherwise avoid it lawfully; but he may not lie. And again, Art. 2. in corpore.
It is one thing to conceal a truth, another thing to propound a falsehood. It
is lawful to conceal a truth in some cases (as when a man is not bound to
answer, and when he is not bound to confess it) Per aliquos convenientes modes.
by any convenient means: Yet a man may not either say an untruth, or conceal a
truth which he is bound to confess: Neque etiam licet aliquam fraudem vel
dolum adhibere, quia fraus and dolus vim mendacii habent.
Neither is it lawful to use any fraud or deceit; because fraud and deceit are
equivalent to a lie. But may not one equivocate when he is put unto his oath? I
answer, That not so much as verbal equivocation, much less that lately
invented and cursed Chimaera of mental reservation, is to be allowed. Fraus
non dissolvit, sed distringit perjurium.
Deceit does not excuse, but aggravate perjurie, said Cicero long since. De
summo Bono 2.13.
Isidore thus, With what art of words soever a man swears; yet God, the Judge
of conscience, so esteems it, as he to whom the oath is made does understand
it. S. Hierome on Ezekiel 17.19. thus, Sententia secularis est, -- Dolus, an
virtus, quis in host requirat?
It is an opinion of the world, that it matters not, whether a man overcome his
enemy by guile or by valor. But this himself resolves; Quamdiu non jures,
and pactum non ineas sub nomine Domini, prudentiae est and fortitudinis vel
decipere vel superare adversarium utcunque potueris: cum autem te constrinxeris
juramento; nequaequam adversarius, sed amicus est, qui tibi credidit, and sub
occasion jurisjurandi Dei nuncupatione deceptus est.
As long as thou do not swear, and enter into a covenant, using Gods name; it
is wisdom and valor either to deceive or overcome thy adversary any way thou
can: but when thou have bound thy self with an oath, then he is no longer
thine adversary, but thy friend, who has trusted thee, and is deceived
through thy oath, and using of Gods name. A little before, on verse. 15. Qui
dissolvit pactum, numquid essugiet?
He that breaks his covenant, shall he escape unpunished? S. Hierome truly
thus concludes, Etiam inter hosts servanda fides est.
Even among enemies faith is to be kept: adding a divine caution, which
compriseth our cause: Non considerandum cui, sed per quem juraveris. Multo enim
fidelior est ille, qui propter nomen Dei tibi credidit and deceptus est, te,
qui per occasionem divinae Majestatis hosts tuo, imo jam amico, es molitus
insidias.
It is not to be considered to whom, but by whom thou have sworn. For he is
much more faithful, who for the name of God believed thee and was deceived,
then thou who did circumvent thine enemy (yea now thy friend) by abusing
Gods sacred Majesty. I acknowledge, that S. Hierome speaks of oaths between
Kings, or such as have been enemies: but the reasons reach and extend
themselves even to the causes of private men. Lying, fraud, or any collusion by
mental reservation, or verbal equivocation, is wholly to be secluded and
abhorred, when an oath is taken: prudent silence, in diverse cases, is
admitted. Yea, but if an examinate be adjured, shall he then be silent? still
silent? I answer, I would have him imitate our blessed Savior, who saying
nothing at diverse times, insomuch that the governor marvelled greatly, Matthew.
27.14. yet when the high priest said, Matthew. 26.63.
I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us, whether thou be the Christ
the son of God; though he knew it would cost him his life, he concealed not
the truth. And in such an adjuration upon Religion the examinate is bound to
give an account of his faith, and to witness a good confession, though to the
expense of his blood.

Contra Marcionem lib. 4. page 286.
Tertullian seems to be more scrupulous in lesser matters, saying, Justa and
digna praescriptio est, in omni quaestione, ad propositum interrogationis
pertinere debere sensum responsionis. Aliud consulenti aliud respondere,
dementis est.
It is a just and worthy rule, that in every question the answer should be
applied to the same sense and purpose to which the interrogation is made. To
answer of one thing when he is asked of another, is the part of a mad man.
Again, Sensus responsionis non est ad aliud dirigendus quam ad propositum
interrogationis: quo magis absit a Christo, quod ne homini quidem convenit.
The sense of the answer is not to be directed to any other thing then that
which was propounded in the interrogation. So far is that from Christ, which
beseems not a mere man. So he. I answer, first, Tertullian speaks of
questions in Divinity, to instruct the soul: and there it were sin to delude
the simple questionist. Secondly, he speaks of questions extra jactum teli,
cum aries murum non percusserit; of questions not concerning great danger,
life, or limme: which does somewhat vary the case. Thirdly, an homonymous
answer of verbal equivocation, does both correspond to the sense of the
question, (which is all that Tertullian requires) and implies also a second
sense, which may be understood by an intelligent hearer; which in a mental
reservation is impossible to be unlocked, opened, and cleared, except by an
hand divine. Fourthly, Tertullian cannot be thought to condemn verbal
equivocation; the dainty use whereof makes almost as great a difference
between a wise man and an idiot, as between an idiot and a beast; and none but
wise men can use it with comfort and delight. And the wiser men be, as their
hearts, by diverse thoughts, are deeper then the fools; so their words are more
abstruse, bivious, multivious. What writings under heaven, of finite men, have
or can have such multiplicity of meanings, as are in Scripture comprised under
the words dictated by an infinite Spirit? whose whole, entire, exact depths,
the mere creature never knew fully and perfectly. If I might have my desire,
quoth S. Augustine, I had rather speak in words, whose diverse senses might give
content to diverse people of different apprehensions, then in words that can
have one sense only.

The second thing I would commend unto this examinate, is, to give fair
language to his Judges. Let him not be bold and malapert, nor use clamorous
opposition. Let not the ignorant Syllogize in Barbara, Darii, Ferio; or mar
his cause by ill handling: yet if he be unmoveably constant, let him say, I
cannot dispute, but I can die: let him not provoke the Judge by words or
actions ill advised. Eulalia, being a girl about 12 years old, did spit in
the face of the Judge, that he might the rather condemn her. The answer of
Hannah, 1. Samuel 1.15, etc. when she was in bitterness of soul, to the
misjudgeing and uncharitably zealous Priest Eli, was as a sweet incense in the
nostrils of God; and is a good lesson for all to take out, when they are called
before the Magistrates, though hard measure were offered. How long will thou be
drunken, quoth he? put away thy wine from thee. And she answered, No, my lord,
I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit; I have drunk neither wine, nor strong
drink, etc. Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial. The manner of
answering may be sinful, though the matter be good: froward behavior never
benefitteth a cause, but a gentle answer pacifieth wrath, Proverbs 15.1.
Taunting recrimination argues a distempered spirit in the gall of bitterness.
How humbly did our blessed Savior behave himself under the hands of unjust
Judges? How constantly, zealously, and boldly (because they were inspired
immediately from God) did the Apostles, Act. 4. plead for themselves, yet
without malapertnesse, or irreverence. S. Paul his speech to the high priest
exacteth a larger discourse. Acts. 23.5, Paul said, I knew not, brethren, that
he was the high priest. Some think, that S. Paul knew Ananias to be high
priest, when he called him painted wall. I answer, (if so it were) this is no
fit example for sauciness to be used, in our times, toward Magistrates. For,
first, if S. Paul did know him, he might speak, though not as a Prophet, yet
illuminated and inspired from God: which now is not in use. Secondly, he might
speak as a Prophet, foredivining an evil end to Ananias, as indeed it came to
pass, says Homil. 6. de Laudibus Pauli.
Chrysostom. If any one of them who now revile Magistracy, have the spirit
prophetical, denouncing contingent future things, which yet end in
accomplishment; I will not call him a saucy presumptuous fellow. Thirdly though
diverse learned men think the contrary; and that he spoke by an Irony, when he
said, I knew not: yet I persuade my self, that S. Paul, in truth, knew not
(when he spoke) Ananias to be the high priest, for these reasons:

First, because he seems to put on the spirit of mildness toward them that
stood by him, who were also the same (...), standers by, who had smit and
buffetted him: and calling them by the charitable term of brethren, whom it had
been fitter to reprove; it argues his plain sincerity, speaking of his
superior.

Secondly, if S. Paul had spoken by way of jest, irrision, or Irony, when he
said, I knew not, brethren, that he was the high priest; he might well have
ceased there. But since he brings in the sacred Text, seriously, truly, and
sadly, to confirm his nesciency; and that there is no mocking with the divine
verity; with me it shall pass current, that he spoke from the bottom of his
heart, when he said, he knew him not to be the high priest. The Spirit never
taught any inspired to apply Scripture contrary to their knowledge, nor to cite
the sacred Text of truth to prove an untruth.

Thirdly, consider the Antithests and opposition between the words. In the
fifth verse he said simply, and directly, (...), I knew not: where his
ignorance is the more seriously professed by the opposition in the sixth verse,
(...), But Paul knowing that the one part were Sadduces, and the other
Pharisees: as if the Spirit had said, Paul indeed was ignorant who was the high
priest; but he knew they were divided into factions: the word But running with
a singular emphasis to this point.

Fourthly, by this exposition we shall cut off that objection, which Julian the
Apostata used against S. Paul; as if, by this double dealing, he were a very
time-server in his words; we maintaining all to be done in solemn gravity, and
reality of truth.

Fifthly, if S. Paul had spoken Ironically, that he had not known the high
priest, when they knew one an other; how easily could the high priest have
confuted and confounded him, and laid lying and imposture to his charge? But
this he did not do: therefore, in likelihood, S. Paul knew him not.

Lastly, the objections for the former opinion are easily answered. How could
he be ignorant, who was the high priest; when he was bred up in their law, and
well acquainted and familiarly in their Synedrion, and had been there, when S.
Stephen was condemned, and when he got letters from the high priest, a little
before his conversion? especially, since he appealeth to the high priest, as to
his witness, Acts 22.5?

To the first point; I confess, he was bred up in their law, and could not
then in likelihood be ignorant who was the high priest, or what was his name:
yet now he might be ignorant; for S. Paul had been away from Jerusalem a good
while, avoiding the storm of persecution; and high priests died as other men:
and at that time there were two high priests, which was not of old: and with
one of them he might not be acquainted.

Oh, but he frequented the Synedrion. I confess, that not only the witnesses
laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose name was Saul, Acts 7.58.
but that Saul consented to the death of S. Stephen, Acts 8.1. and as certain
that he (as a principal agent) received letters from the high priest, and all
the estate of the elders, to search out the Christians, and to bring them to be
punished, Acts 22.5. and so he must needs know the high priest and the elders,
and they him: and therefore, in likelihood, he was conversant sometimes in
their Synedrion. But I say as before, this might not be that high priest, who
sat to condemn S. Stephen, or to whom S. Paul appealed as witness: but the
other high priest might sit at this time, and on this day; since now and then
one sat, now and then an other, and sometimes both of them. And thus S. Paul
might be ignorant, who was his Judge.

Oh, but he well knew the high priest by his place and by his clothes. I
answer; The Jews were not now sitting in their Councel-house, but where the
chief Captain commanded them to appear, Acts 22.30. himself sitting as the
Moderatour in his own tribunal; which he was not wont to do in their
Synedrion: neither might the high priest take the proper vestments in such a
place, by which he might be known from others.

To close up all; If nothing said before do satisfy thee, but thou art
confident, that S. Paul did know the high priest; (though thou were better to
adhere to the words) yet have I found out an other way for the opening of this
point, which has perplexed many learned men. Observe therefore, I pray thee,
these things:

First, that not only the high priest, but all their Council were summoned to
appear, Acts 22.30. and of the Council each man had liberty to speak at his
pleasure: and at such public trialls there is a great dinne, murmures, and
mutterings; so that the speaker is not always discernable, whiles many may
speak at once, and some louder then others.

Secondly, while S. Paul earnestly beheld, not the high priest only, but the
Council, Acts 23.1. (casting his eyes from one to another) the high priest
commanded him to be smitten on the mouth. These words S. Paul might hear: and
yet not know, in such a confused noise, which of those his many Judges spoke
them: and in likelihood thought, that such an unjust sentence could not proceed
out of the high priests mouth: but to the author of those words, whosoever he
was, to that unjust Judge S. Paul sharply and punctually replied, God will
judge thee, thou painted wall. But when S. Paul was informed, that they were
the words of the high priest himself; he was sorry for his quick speech, and
said, I knew not, brethren, that he was the high priest. So that, if S. Paul
had known the high priest, and the high priest him; if they had been well
acquainted the one with the other, at this time of S. Paul's trial (which will
never be sufficiently proved;) yet here is now a new way, as probable as any,
to excuse the Apostle from dissimulation, and from using the Scripture as a
cloak to it; viz. Though S. Paul knew the man to be the high priest; yet he
knew not at first that it was the high priest, who pronounced so unjust and
furious a sentence: but diverse of the seventy two Judges might be speaking one
to another; and S. Paul might be mistaken, at first, in the speaker: As if he
had said, I knew not, brethren, it was the high priest that spoke these words
concerning me.

And thus, I hope, this difficulty is cleared. I will only add this, That
diverse ancient Fathers from S. Paul's example, in this place, prove his modesty,
moderation, and undisturbed passions, by his sudden, wise, settled answers: And,
That I hold this paraphrase probable, as if S. Paul had said, If I had wist,
that it was the high priest who used those words; though I would not have
forborne others, yet I would have forborne him; since God had said, THOU SHALL
NOT SPEAK EVIL OF THE RULER OF THY PEOPLE.

But yet this man that is sought out, and drawn into judgment, and answers
(as he ought to do) truly, without mental reservation, modestly, and as
befitteth him to answer unto his superiors: if he receive no satisfaction in
his conscience, and his Judges doom him worthy to die; what shall he now do?
Shall he be overruled by his superiors, both spiritual and temporal, doing
as they do, and thinking as they think? shall he go against the dictates of his
own conscience? or shall he adventure his blood and life?

What my self would do, by Gods grace, I will prescribe unto another. First,
before I would sacrifice my life, I would once more recollect my former
thoughts for humbleness; and diligently consider, whether the matters for
which I am to suffer death, be abstruse depths, beyond my reach or capacity. If
they be very intricate, I have cause to think, that I am an unfit man to judge
of things which I know not, and cannot comprehend, 2. Cor. 10 13, etc.
Secondly, I would in this case, before expense of blood, bring my intentions to
the touchstone; call to mind, that good intentions alone cannot excuse me
before God, but good intentions well grounded and regulated. S. Paul with good
intentions persecuted the Church, and was injurious: but he did it ignorantly,
in unbelief, 1. Tim. 1.13. where an ill belief, though meaning well, is counted
unbelief. In a good intention S. Peter would have dissuaded our Savior from
death, but he was called Satan for it, Matthew. 16.23. though Christ had blessed
him before, and promised him excellent gifts, verse. 17, etc. I cannot think,
but they who offered their children unto Moloch, did think they served God
rightly, though indeed they served the Devil: yet God says, Levit. 20.3. I
will set my face against that man, and will cut him off from among his people.
The priests of Baal, who cut themselves after their manner with knives, and
lancers, till the blood gushed out upon them, 1. King. 18.28. did they not
follow the ill guide of a misled conscience? did they not think they were in
the right? do not millions of Turks, Jews, and of Pagans go to the Devil,
though they persuade themselves they be in the only true way? do not many
think that to be constancy, which in truth is obstinacy? and that to be
knowledge, which is ignorant self-love? There is great resemblance, and
manifold likely hood between some truth and some error, and the mistake is
easy; and there is a great difference between opinion and sound belief.
Thirdly, I would endeavor to think humbly of my self, and, as the Apostle
advises, to prefer others before me. I would ruminate on that which the
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 13.3. Though I give my body to be burned, and have not
charity, it profits me nothing. And, showing what he means by charity,
adds, Charity suffers long, and is kind: charity envieth not: charity is
not rash, or, vaunteth not it self: is not puffed up, does not behave it self
unseemly. So that he who behaveth himself unseemly, who is puffed up, who
vaunteth himself, or is rash, who envieth, and is unkind, and hasty, has not
charity: And, though he give his body to be burned, his death profits him
nothing, says the Apostle. Examine therefore, and again I say, examine thine
own heart: if thou find any one of these sins beforenamed reigning in thee,
then know there is a spot in the sacrifice. And till that be washed away, rased
out, or reformed; thou must suspect thy self, and may well be dubious.
Self-conceit is a branch of pride: pride never agreed with charity: and no
death profits a man any thing, who has not charity.

Oh, but this enfeebleth the resolution of confessors, and stoopeth down the
constancy of martyrs to pendulousnesse: it makes them draw their hands back
from the plough, and to look backward to Sodom, with lots wife. No no, my
discourse intends only to dull the edge of singularity, to stop the mouths of
pridie undertakers, and ignorant praters, to put a bridle into the teeth of
such as revile Magistracy, to reduce people to humbleness, and such thoughts
as these, If many may be deceived; how much easier may I? If the more learned
be awrie; how shall I be sure I am right? They have souls to answer, as well as
I: and charity bids me think, they would not damn their own souls by damning
mine: have I alone a sound rectified conscience? Self-denial is a better
schoolmaster to true knowledge, then presumption. An acceptable martyr is a
reasonable sacrifice, and an acceptable sacrifice is a reasonable martyr. A
conscience not founded on good causes, not strengthened with understanding, is
like a fair house built on the sands, a very apple of Sodom, a painted
sepulcher, which appears beautiful outward, but is within full of dead men's
bones, and of all uncleanness, Matthew. 23.27. My cautions are not remoraes, of
staying or withdrawing any man, so far as his knowledge can or does aspire
unto; (for so far I allow them a judgment of discretion) but necessary
preparatives to the true, perfect, and glorious martyrdom. He shall be no
martyr in my estimate, who without great motives runs to death, and posteth
rashly to destruction. But when pride with all her children, singularity,
self-love, vaunting, rashness, unseemly behavior, is cast out of the soul;
and the contrary graces, the children of charity, possess it: then, if thy
conscience can no way be convicted; if thou know thy cause to be good, and
the contrary to be apparently amiss; follow not the multitude, conform not thy
self to the world, keep thy conscience untainted, pour out thy blood unto
death, offer thy life and body as a reasonable sacrifice; die, and be a martyr;
be a martyr, and be crowned; crowned, I say, not only with glory and
immortality, but with those gifts and aureolae, which are prepared above others
for true martyrs. In this sort, Whosoever shall confess Christ before men, him
will Christ confess also before his Father which is in heaven; Matthew. 10.32.

The judgment of jurisdiction, which is in superiors having authority; and
the judgment of direction, which is in Pastors by way of eminency, forbid not
in this case the judgment of discretion, which is and ought to be in every
private man, so far as he has discretion and knowledge or immediate
inspirations: of all which I would not have a man too presumptuous.

That which our Divines do term the judgment of discretion, is, in the words
of Contra Marcionem 4. post medium page 269.
Tertullian, Clavis Agnitionis: He must never contrary this; for this must he
die. What he knows, let him, as a good witness, seal with his blood, if need
be. But in things beyond a simple man's capacity, I will say once more, with
Sermon. 20. de verbis Apostoli.
Augustine, Melior est fidelis ignorantia quam temeraria scientia.
A faithful ignorance is better then a rash knowledge. In such things is he to
be guided by his Pastors. The easy things any man may judge of: in the more
abstruse, the voice of the Pastors is to be followed. Quam clavem habebant
Legis Dectores, nisi interpretationem legis?
What key had the Doctors of the law, (says Tertullian in the same place) but
the interpretation of the law? So the key of interpretation rests in the
ministry, for things which need interpretation, as hard places do; though the
key of agnition, in things unto which their knowledge can aspire, is permitted,
yea, commended unto all men: and they who withhold this key of knowledge from
the people, are accursed by Christ, Luke 11.52.

To the further explaining of my opinion, let us consider, in a Church
corrupted, these two sorts of people. First, the Magistrates, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical: And we will subdivide them into the Wilfully blind, and the
Purblinde.

Of the first were some Bishops, and Nobles, and Gentry in Queen Mary's days;
who hunted after blood, even the blood of innocents; and strained their
authority to the highest. Such is now the Inquisition, falsely called the holy
house, with all the chief officers thereof: such in the days of Christ, were
diverse Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces, and some Rulers of the people; who knowing
the truth to be on Christ's side, by his doing such miracles as no man ever did
before, did choke and strangle their belief, made shipwreck of their
consciences, resisted the holy Spirit; who would neither go into the kingdom
of heaven, nor suffer others that were entering, to go in: against whom Christ
pronounced woe upon woe, Matthew. 23.13. etc. For they took away the key of
knowledge, Luke 11.52. and purposely kept the people ignorant and blind.
According to their demerits, there are reserved for them intima inferni, the
depths of hell, blackness of darkness, and the greatest torments thereof,
without repentance.

The next tribe, or sort, are the purblinde Magistracy, either Secular, or
Clergy. Such were diverse in the days of Queen Mary; who had learning enough,
to know that all went not right; yet did not vehemently oppose the truth, but
did swim with the stream, and made the time their stern; the whole Church
turning and returning three or four times in one age. These were seduced, as
well as seducers. Such also at this day are diverse in the Papacy; more
moderate, less rigid and rigorous, concealing some truths they know, because
they have given up their hearts and beliefs to trust in their Church, for such
things as they do not know; though they have means to learn, and capacity to
understand, if they would; and therefore are faulty. Such also were diverse in
the Jewish Church and State. Ye killed the Prince of life, says S. Peter to
the people, Acts 3.15. And now brethren, I wot that through ignorance ye did
it, as did also your rulers. Such were those Pharisees, Matthew. 15.12. who were
offended with Christ; of whom Christ says, verse. 14. They be blind leaders of
the blind. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch:
In foveam peecati and inferni.
Into the ditch of sin and hell, says Hugo Cardinalis, on the place. Cum
pastor per abrupta graditur, necesse est ut grex in praecipitium ducatur.
When the shepherd goes by craggie clifts, the flock must needs fall headlong
and break their necks, says Gregory. Duces, praeceptores; fovea, infernus.
The guides are the teachers, and the ditch is hell, says Faber Stapulensis,
on the place. So much of the purblinde Magistracy, Clericall or Laicall, in a
corrupted Church.

From the Magistrates in the first place, we descend to the people in the
second place, whom we also divide into their several ranks and files.

In the general, they are either learned or unlearned. The learned are first
such, as go against their conscience, and practice contrary to their knowledge
and belief, sailing with wind and tide: and because they will be found fault
withal by the fewest, they will do as the most do. Timorous hypocrites they
are; fearing persecution, loss of goods, liberty, and life, more then they
fear God, who is able to destroy both body and soul: for whom is kept the
allotment of hypocrites; brimstone and fire, storm and tempest, ignis and
vermis: this shall be their portion to drink, without repentance.

An other sort of learned men professing truth, there are in a corrupted
Church; and each of them (forsooth) will be a reformer of the public: these
despise government, are presumptuous, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak
evil of dignities, 2. Pet. 2.10. speaking evil of the things that they
understand not, verse. 12. (as out of question they understand not all things,
which in their carping humor they censure:) people-pleasers, ambitious of
esteem, full of words, running as much after their own will as after their
consciences, hearty enough to draw on danger, obstinate enough to provoke
death. Of these men, though they die for some truths; yet because they have a
mixture of many errors in their intellect, perverseness in their will, and
ill grounded, ill bounded affections, wanting those godly endowments of charity
before spoken of; we may pronounce, as the Apostle did, They shall utterly
perish in their own corruption, 2. Pet. 2.12. Such a fellow was he, and his
like, of whom Anno 1543.
Mr. Fox reports, that when Christ said, This is my body, interpreted the
words to this effect, The word of God is to be broken, distributed, and eaten.
So when Christ said, This is my blood: the blessed words are missensed; as if
Christ had then said, The Scripture must be given to the people, and received
by them. By which forced exposition, the seal of our redemption is trodden under
foot, the thrice-blessed sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord is
utterly annihilated; whereas indeed, in the words of consecration, there are
included verba concionatoria and praedicanda, words predicatorie and serving
for doctrine. I will not esteem him as an holy perfect martyr, who dies with
such crotchets in his brain, such pride in his heart. Such an one was
Ravaillac, who for conscience sake (forsooth) stabbed the Anointed of the Lord,
the Heroes of our time, his natural Sovereign, Henry the fourth of France. He
followed his conscience; but his conscience had ill guides. When he had
outfaced tortures, and death it self (though he thought that he died a martyr)
if he died unrepentant, the powers of hell gat hold upon him.

Such manner of people were those Jews, who in most desperate fashion said, His
blood be on us, and on our children, Matt. 27.25. Do you think they all were
wholly ignorant? do you think, they all swerved against their consciences? or
rather, meddled they not in things above their callings? were they not too
presumptuous? Thus, though they had the knowledge of some truths, and perhaps
would have died for them; yet their zeal wanted more and better knowledge, to
have rectified their consciences: and they should have called to mind the
miracles of Christ, and born witness to his innocence, rather then to set
themselves forward in things beyond their reach and knowledge.

Philip de Lib. 8. cap. 19.
Commines tells of two Franciscans, who offered themselves to the fire, to
prove Savanorola to be an heretic, and not to have had revelations divine: and
an other Friar, a Jacobin, presented himself also to the fire, to uphold
Savanorola, though Savanorola did not then expose himself to that purgation by
fire. Which intendments of theirs seem rather to be the fruits of evil then of
Christian fortitude. For, Matter martyri est fides Catholica, in qua illustres
Athletae sanguine suo subscripserunt.
The mother of martyrdom is the Catholic faith, to which those famous
champions have subscribed with their blood, says Aquin, out of Maximus. But
those bravadoes of the Friars savoured of the transalpine and cisalpine
factions: some inclining to the French king, with his adherents, the other to
the Pope and Venetians, and their partakers.

Some drew death upon them, when they needed not, in the Primitive Church; and
the holy Fathers, and Councels, have disliked them for it. The Elibertine
Council, chap. 60. Si quis idola fregerit, and ibidem fuerit occisus; quia in
Evangelio non est scriptum, neque invenitur ab Apostolis unquam factum, placuit
in uumerum eum non recipi martyrum.
If any one break idols, and be killed in the act, we think it not fit that he
be received into the number of martyrs, because for his so doing he had neither
warrant of Scripture, nor example of the Apostles. The Cicumcellions thrust
themselves into the mouth of dangers: ambitious of martyrdom to that height of
infatuation, that if no body would kill them, they would murder and massacre
themselves.

There were also certain women, who to keep their chastity hastened their own
deaths. Sophconia killed her self, lest the Emperor Maximinus should abuse
her, says Eusebius. Pelagia flung her self headlong into a river, lest a
soldier should violate her. Such things ought not to be done, and are sinful,
and unlawful to be done. And yet because the Church has accounted them
martyrs, we must conclude that the Church did think, they had divine
inspirations directly animating them to that course, as Samson had in the Old
Testament. Cum Deus jubet, seque jubere sieve ullis ambagibus intimat; quis
obedientiam in erimen vocet?
When God commands, and plainly intimates that it is his command; who can blame
him that obeys? says De Civit. 1.26.
S. Augustine.

Aquinas 2.2. Quaest. 124. Artic. 1. in the third objection, has these words,
Non est laudabile quod aliquis martyrio se ingerat, sed magis videtur esse
praesumptuosum and periculosum.
It is not commendable for a man to offer himself to martyrdom, but seems
rather to be presumptuous and dangerous. And in the answer he intimates, That
a man ought not to seek death; and says expressly, Non debet homo occasionem
dare alteri injuste agendi: sed si alius injuste egerit, ipse moderate tolerare
debet.
A man ought not to give occasion of doing unjustly: but if another do
unjustly, he ought to endure it patiently.

The third and last sort of learned men, in a Church and State full of errors,
are thus qualified;

They are pious toward God, charitable toward men, zealous, according to
their knowledge, knowing so much as they can well learn, mourners for sick and
dead in Sion, signing their cheeks with tears for the backsliding of the
people, having cornea genua, knees hardened like horn by their frequent bendings
at prayers, that God would show mercy to the misguided; singing to God in their
hearts when danger stops their mouths; not petulant, or immodest against the
Magistrates; no prompt, proterve undertakers; no railers, censurers, or rash
damners of others; no factionists, or disturbers of Commonweals; avoiding the
storms of persecution, so far as conveniently and conscionably they may;
keeping the unity of truth, as much as is possible, in the bond of peace; thus
far flexible and pliable, that they would willingly exchange any old error
(if such be settled in them) for apparent truth; thus far constant and
irremoveable, that they prefer the naked truth above their lives, and can in
all humbleness and patience write the confession of their faith with their own
blood. Such a life may I live, such a death may I die: greater glory then such
shall have, I desire not. This is the true character of a martyr, so perfect as
usually flesh and blood affords.

The last point concerns unlearned men, who live in a defiled Church. Shall
these be ruled by their Pastors, leaving the dictates of their own
consciences, unpractised, unbeleeved? I answer, There is not the simplest of
the people, to whom I will deny a judgment of discretion: which he is bound
to follow, even unto death, according to his conscience. And among the
unlearned, there are some of excellent wits, quick capacities, and some
endowments, both of nature and grace, surpassing diverse learned men. Yet let
every one of these take this advice from me; let them learn to be
Christi-formes, conformable to Christ, (which is a point that the godly and
learned Cardinal Cusanus often and excellently inculcateth) and let them
labor to be every way equal to that famous martyr* whom immediately before I
characterized and described. By how much the less they have of knowledge, let
them have the more of humility and conformablenesse. Lastly, let them ponder,
how merciful the Lord is to such as sin of ignorance: and on the contrary,
that not only diverse of the unlearned, but such as have had a fair competency
of knowledge, have been transported with self-love; and treading out paths of
singularity, have run headlong into damnation. Witness diverse Arians, burnt
in the days of Queen Elisabeth: witness Hacket, seduced by the Devil under a
show of long, extemporary prayers, and extraordinary holiness; till at the end
he grew blasphemous, and in the heat of it died. Let him think of Sir John
Oldcastle; who intimated, not only a possibility, but a likelihood of his
rising again the third day after his hanging and burning, if Stows chronicles
had sufficient ground to write to that effect. If I should repeat the like
monsters in other Churches and Commonwealths, I might much more enlarge this
discourse, which is too long already. I conclude: The simple unlearned good
man, who is bound up in invincible ignorance, and is misled by his Pastors, to
whose guidance he has subjected his conscience, is less sinful, by many
degrees, then he who casts himself violently, singularly, and proudly, into
the same errors, or as bad. And if it be dangerous to take from the people
their discerning power, in any cause, as some imagine; let them ponder, whether
it be not more dangerous, to let every one of them to run loose, like the
unbridled Circumcellions, to choose their own ways, (which is the guise of
Separatists) and to be their own judges, and judges of whatsoever their
Pastors preach, (which is the practice of ill taught zelots in our Church) and
by necessary consequence, judges of things of Faith, of Controversies, and of
Scripture it self: And so the supreamest Tribunal, for interpretation of
matters religious, to be the conscience of an unlearned brain. But thou, O Man
of God, flee these extremes; and, O blessed God and man, O Savior of mankind,
Jesu Christ, keep us in the mean, and bring us by holiness to the truth, and
by thy truth unto thy glory. So be it, Lord Jesu, so be it.

The word of God is a sea, says Epist. 44. ad Constan^num.
S. Ambrose, having in it deep senses, and height of prophetical riddles. But
in these days of Libertinisme the simplest presume, they can sound these
deeps, and find out the riddle, though they plow not with Samsons heifer.
Hence are these innumerable springs of errors, which Luther, even in his own
time, seeing to overflow Germany, in his first book against Zwinglius and
Oecolampadius, says, If the world continue, it will be again necessary, by
reason of the diverse interpretations of Scripture that now are, if we will keep
the unity of the faith, that we receive the decrees of Councels, and flee to
them. The place of Augustine is common, and in every man's mouth, Ego Evangelio
non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae Catholicae authoritas commoveret.
I would not believe the Gospel, unless the authority of the Catholic Church
moved ^^e. How should we know, that such and such things are S^^^^ure, and not
such or such, but by the Church, as by the f^^^^^ ^roductary means? or why
should not the unlearned people as well trust their Pastors for the exposition
of Scripture, as they have done, and do, and must do for the translation? For
be ye not deceived, O over-inspired brethren; neither Moses, nor the Prophets,
nor Christ, nor the Evangelists or Apostles ever wrote or penned your English
Scripture. They wrote in Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack, and Greek: but they were
your Pastors, who translated the word of God into our mother tongue; and some
translations are more imperfect then other, and no one absolutely perfect. And
will you, silly ignaroes, who cannot know whether the words be true or false,
well or ill translated, be every one of you your judges of the meaning thereof,
(which in deep points is harder then translating) and usurp the power of
interpretation? I may take up the complaint of Michael Piccart, in his epigram
before Balthazar Bambach his tractates, Et tractare quidem quisnam est qui
sacra veretur?
Imberbes pueri jam quoque sacra crepant.
But I am loath to add, as he does, O pecus Arcadicum, linguas prius imbibe
sanctas,
Et sacra ex ipso font deinde pete.


Yea, I have an intent to have a bout with the learned Daniel Heinsius, for
maintaining in the preface to his Aristarchus Sacer upon Nonnus, That no man
can rightly interpret the Scriptures, but he that is skilled in Eastern
languages; Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack, and Greek both sacred and profane,
Hellenistical and the pure, which is all one in effect with the Jewish-Greek,
and the Heathen-Greek. Some of his words, page 53. are these, Multum resert
scire, Hebraea Hellenistes Graece expresserit, an Syra: Hebraeum item textum,
an interpretationes respiciat Graecorum. Quae nisi omnia distinguat, operam
necesse est interpres ludat. Nos autem, ut exiguae scientiae, it a nullius, ut
loquuntur vulgo, conscientiae existimamus, qui transfer Sacra audet, nec de
istis cogitavit.
It is very material to know, whether it be Hebrew or Syriack which the
Hellenist expresses in Greek: also, whether he has respect to the Hebrew
Text, or to the Greek translations of it. All which unless the expositour
distinctly considers, he must needs lose his labor. And we think him to be a
man as of little skill, so of no conscience, that dares translate the
Scriptures without any consideration of these things.

Both these were eminent professors, and men singular among thousands; the
first in High-Germany, the other in the Netherlands; from whence some of them
brag, and some of us rejoice that we have received the reformation of religion.
I will only humbly propound to your religious considerations these things:

First, that the difficulties of the Hebrew, Chaldee, and Aramean languages in
the Old Testament, and of the Greek in the New, especially where it reflecteth
up to the Syriack, are above common capacities, even of the learned. I might
add, that words of diverse other languages are part of the sacred Text. The
Egyptian Abrech, Genes. 41.43. the Arabic Lehhem, Job 6.7. and Totaphoth,
Exodus 13.16. a compound of Egyptian and African languages, and the like. Yea
one verse, and one only was written by Jeremy in the Chaldee language, viz.
Jeremy 10.11. which every captive Jew was commanded to cast in the teeth of the
Babylonians. Moreover Daniel 5.25. Mean Mean, Tekel Vpharsin, was written in
the Chaldee, with the Samaritan letters: so that the Chaldeans themselves could
not read their own language. I would tell you of (...) final being placed in
the middle of a word of the Text, and of diverse other difficulties, which in
part I pass over, and in part thus contract, in the observations following.

Secondly, that Hebrew words without points may have four or five
significations, according to the diversity of vowels affixed to them; and have
no certain meaning, but as it is guided by antecedents and consequents. And yet
you shall have an ignorant mechanic, or talkative woman, as confident of the
Genevean Translation and notes, as if God himself did speak or write the same
words, as he did once the law on Horeb.

Thirdly, that in the Hebrew many words are written with fewer letters, then
they are pronounced.

Fourthly, that many are written with more letters, then they are pronounced.

Fifthly, that diverse words are written in the sacred Text, which are not
pronounced at all, but others are read in their stead. Sunt octo voces quae
s^riptae sunt in Textu, sed non leguntur, quas adducit Masora, Ruth 3.12.
There are eight words written in the Text, but not read, which the Masora
alleges, Ruth 3.12.

Sixthly, that the Jews have most severely and strictly forbidden, that any
Rabbin should teach Christians the true sense of the Talmuds; which (as they
boast) no labor and endeavor can attain unto without such a guide. Elias
Levita in Mas^oreth-Hammassoreth, complains, that the Jews were wonderfully
offended with him, because he instructed Christians in the Hebrew. And though
some tax him for singing placentia, to sooth and flatter his patron Aegidius;
and call him a turn-coat, because he came forth of the Jewish synagogue to pray
with us in our temples: yet that odious name ought to have been spared, unless
he kept still a Jewish heart within him; which certainly he did, if Balthazar
Bambach says truly of him, Praecipua mysteria reticuit, and nibil arcani
revelavit.
He concealed the chief mysteries, and revealed nothing of their secrets.

Seventhly, that many Hebrew Radixes do signify not only things wonderfully
disparat, and incompatible the one with the other (as Sheol signifies the
grave in some places, and hell in other places: which caused some to deny
Christ's descent in his humane soul into hell) but even things clean contrary.
This instance (as the former) shall be in a word generally known. Job 2.9. his
wife says unto him, (...), Curse God; others render it, Bless God. None
hitherto has infallibly expounded it. Yet my Laick can swallow camels, and
strain at gnats, that is, builds upon the Translation made by the Ministers,
though the ground has been slippery and full of ice; but will (forsooth) be
judge of the meaning, when he understands not the words: as if one unskilful
in the Dutch language should say, when he heard a German speak, I know his
meaning by his gaping, or by the sound of his words, or by the gargarism of his
throat-speech.

Though the Apostle says, 1. Thessal. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that
which is good; yet he speaks of the spirits of private men, or misperswasions
of the false Apostles; who presumed very much, and knew very little. These are
to be tried. But concerning the decrees of the Church, the same Apostle does
not say, Prove them, examine them, try them, judge them: but Acts 16.4, Paul
and other Ministers, as they went through the cities, delivered them the
decrees for to keep, (or observe) that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders
which were at Jerusalem. And so (or by this means of keeping, or observation)
were the Churches established in the faith, etc. verse 5. But (says the
frantic Libertine) I am a man spiritual: But he that is spiritual judges
all things, yet he himself is judged of no man, 1. Corinthians. 2.15. I answer, S.
Paul speaks of the Apostles, who had the Spirit of God, verse. 12. and spoke
in words which the holy Ghost taught, verse. 13. and who might well neglect the
judgment of men, 1. Corinthians. 3.3. Prove thou thy Apostleship by such
undeniable miracles and testimonies, as they did; and thou shall judge, and not
be judged. But that every idiot should claim the privilege of an Apostle, is
lewd divinity, or rather insufferable pride. The Angel in the Church of
Thyatira is censured, Revel. 2.20. because he suffered that woman Jezebel,
which called her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce Gods servants. If the
profoundest Divines on earth, unexperienced in worldly courses, should teach
the skilfullest tradesmen their trades, or manufactures, and meddle in their
crafts (as they call them;) would they not expose themselves to laughter and
mocking? is not the proverb of the world too true, The greatest Clerks are not
the wisest men, if you take them from their books? Are there more depths in
trades, then in the Word of God? Or shall tradesmen, and women judge of the
depths of Divinity; and the learned Divines in their own profession be not
believed, but laughed at, controlled, and censured by the private spirit of
unlearned people? Are not the spirits of the Prophets subject to the Prophets?
Very learned men scarce trust to themselves. A Physician that is very sick,
seeks counsel of an other who is whole, and dares not trust his own judgment:
and shall a soul sick of sin, sick of error, sick of scruples, be its own
helper? shall it understand without a guide? be cleansed of its leprosy
without a Priest? Hierome in his Preface to the Co^mentary upon the epistle to
the Ephesians. thus, From my youth I never ceased to read, or to ask of learned men
what I knew not. I never was mine own Master, or taught my self: and of late I
journeyed purposely to Alexandria, unto Didymus, that he might satisfy me in
all the doubts which I had found in the Scripture. Now adays many a one is
wiser then his Teachers; not by supernall illumination, but by infernal
presumption. And if they have gotten by rote the letter of Scripture, and can
readily cite tmemata and tmematia, the chapter and the verse, (though they have
little more judgment then Cardinal Ascanius his parret, which would prate the
Creed all over) they vilify the opinions of the most learned, and their
private spirit of seduction will bear them out. Lib. 11. cap. 9.
Ruffinus says thus of Basil and Gregory Nazianzen, They were both noblemen,
both students at Athens, both colleagues for thirteen years together; all
profane learning removed, studied on the holy Scriptures, and followed the
sense, not taken from their own presumption, but from the writings and
authority of the ancients; which ancients, it appeared, took the rule of right
understanding the Scripture, from Apostolic succession. S. Basil himself says
of himself and others, in his Epistle to the Church of Antioch, As for us, we
do not take our faith upon trust from other later men, (...).
nor dare we deliver to others the conceits of our own brains, lest men's
devices should be thought to be articles of Religion: but what we have been
taught of the holy Fathers, that we declare to those that ask of us. How often
does the divine S. Augustine confirm his interpretations by the authority of
Cyprian, Ambrose, and other preceding Fathers? How often does he confess his
own ignorance, though he was the most accomplished that ever writ since the
days of the Apostles? It was a wise observation of Scaliger, That some words
and passages in Plato Plus sapiunt authore.
are wiser then their author: and many excellent conceits are collected from
Homer and Aristotle, which they never dreamed of. But in the Word of God it is
contrary. The Spirit was, and is infinite that did dictate it: the finite
capacity of man cannot comprehend it: whatsoever good interpretation we find,
may well be thought to be the meaning of the Spirit: and yet the Spirit may,
and does mean many things, which the wit of any man could never disclose. And
the true literal sense is the hardest to find.

I confess I have dwelt too long on this point; but it is to vindicate the
authority of our Church from the singular fancies of private unskilful,
unlearned, and censorious men and women, and to show the madness of those base
people-pleasers or publicolae, who make, or esteem tradesmen, and youth, and
ill-nurtured, unlettered idiots (yea though their places be eminent) the
competent judges of controversies; whilst they flee from the chairs of the
Universities, and from the representative Church of our kingdom, viz. the most
learned Bishops, and Convocation-house; unto whom they ought to have recourse,
and in whose judgment they are, by way of obedience, without opposition to set
up their rest. For as for private immediately divine, and infallible
revelation, there is none at all; or, if any be, it is in some of those learned
ones, who are lawfully called to be the members of our Church representative.
And if any defects be in learned men, there are more in unlearned. But of this
point otherwhere.

8 Another observation there is, That kings and supreme Officers do represent
the people committed to their charge. And here I will tell you, in honor of
the Royal Majesty, what Lib. 2. contra Appionem.
Flavius Jose phus says, We offer daily sacrifices for the Emperors, and that
not only on ordinary days of the common cost of all the Jews, but also when
we offer no other sacrifices of the common charge, no not for our children. We
give this high honor to the Emperors only, which we do not give to any other
man. This he says they practiced in the behalf of heathen Emperors, different
from them in Religion: how much more ought we, by all lawful means, exceed
them in the honoring of our Kings?

Espencaeus calls a Prince columbam Dei, Gods dove: Saul is termed the beauty
of Israel, 2. Sam. 1.19. David is styled the light, candle, or lamp of Israel,
2. Sam. 21.17. Josiah was the breath of our nostrils, says Jeremy, Lament.
4.20. Are not these two latter phrases ideall? are their persons, themselves
only? Again, is not Saul called the head of the Tribes of Israel? 1. Sam.
15.17. and David the head over Nations? 2. Sam. 22.44. Hom. 2. ad popul.
Antioch.
Chrysostom entitled Theodosius, The head and supreme over all men on earth.
And therefore, as the people reap benefits extraordinary by their Kings; (for
Saul clothed you in scarlet, with other delights; he put on ornaments of gold
upon your apparel, says David, 2. Sam. 1.24.) so for their Kings offenses
they justly may be punished, 2. Sam. 24.17. Lo, I have sinned (says David;)
but these sheep, what have they done? Yet the pestilence, worse then the bane
or rot, fell upon those sheep.

(...),
(...)
that is, Apollo being incensed against the King Agamemnon, sent an evil
disease upon his army; and the people perished. The story is memorable, of
Saul, 1. Sam. 14.24, etc. He took a foolish and rash oath, hurtful to his own
soldiers, profitable for the enemy. Neither Jonathan, nor the Captains, nor
the people did swear with him, but in him, and by him, and through his oath:
yet it bound both the people and himself; yea tied as well Jonathan, who heard
it not, and knew it not, as those who were present, and heard it: for the lot
from God drew Jonathan out, as faulty, and punishable for his fathers
adjuration; who swear expressly, by name, the death of Jonathan (if he were
faulty) verse. 39. yet the love of the people delivered him; and (as I think)
the father did not much care to break his oath. In this fact Saul's person
represented the whole army; and the people, for their own particular, held
themselves wrapped up to obedience in his oath.

But what do I instance in slighter matters, when a proof is pregnant, That the
chief governors oaths bind the whole nation and their posterity for evermore,
while their Polity lasted? Joshua unadvisedly, without counselling with God,
made peace and league with the Gibeonites, (the descendants of Canaan, that
servant of servants) to let them live in the lowest rank of slaves: and the
Princes of the congregation swear unto them, Josh. 9.15. And though all the
congregation murmured against the Princes, verse. 18. (from whence I conclude,
that the people consented not to the treaty, much less were sworn to it) yet
the Princes resolved justly and conscionably, We have sworn unto them by the
Lord God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch them, verse. 19. And verse.
20. thus, We will even let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the
oath which we swear unto them. And accordingly Joshua freed them from the
intended slaughter of the angry Israelites, verse. 26. That this oath concerned
not the people then living only, but reached also unto posterity, is apparent,
2. Sam. 21.1, etc. When for the breach of this oath, committed about four
hundred years after, the Lord himself taxes Saul and his bloody house,
because he slew the Gibeonites; and therefore sent purposely a trienniall
famine upon the land; and Gods wrath was not satisfied, till the Gibeonites
were appeased by the death of Saul's posterity. And these 5 things are yet
observable. First, Saul sought to slay the Gibeonites, in his zeal to the
children of Israel and Judah, v. 2. Secondly, God commanded Moses to destroy
all the inhabitants of the land, whereof the Gibeonites were part, as they
themselves confessed, Josh. 9.24. Thirdly, what was the oath of the Princes
only, is said to be the oath of the children of Israel, (as it is, 2. Sam.
21.2.) because it concerned them for ever. Fourthly, after the punishment, for
this cause inflicted, God was entreated for the land. Fifthly, it was about
four hundred years after the oath of Joshua and the Princes, when God thus
severely vindicated the breach thereof by Saul, upon Saul's posterity.

9 Lastly, let us diligently consider how much Christ Jesus our blessed Savior
has done for us, representing, as it were, our persons; and what we perform
and shall obtain in him, and by him.

Isa 53.4. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows: which is
applied to him, Matthew. 8.19. The force of which words is expressed by the
Apostle, 1 Peter 2.24. Christ his own felf bare our sins in his own body on
the tree, (or, to the tree, (...)) and by his stripes ye were healed. S. Paul
says, Christ died for our sins, 1. Corinthians. 15.3. Christ tasted death for
every man, Heb. 2.9. Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. And in the next verse, We be
justified by his blood, and, We shall be saved from wrath by him. He has
blotted out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was
contrary unto us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross, Coloss.
2.14. And, By him God has made peace, through the blood of his cross, and
reconciled all things unto himself by Christ, Coloss. 1. verse. 20. He has
reconciled you in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and
unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight, verse. 22. He was delivered for our
offenses, and was raised again for our justification, Romans 4.25. Ye are buried
with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him: and you being dead he
has quickened with him, as it is most divinely expressed, Coloss. 2.12.13. In
Christ we are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit,
Ephesians. 2.22. Our life is hid with Christ in God, Coloss. 3.3. And in the verse
following, Christ is our life. Ye be risen with Christ, Coloss. 3.1. God has
quickened us together with Christ, and has raised us up together, and made us
sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Our
conversation is in heaven, Philip. 3.20. From which positive proofs, and
doctrine, that Christ stood in our stead, and that almost all (if not all) his
actions and passions, as he was the Mediator between God and man, were
representative of us, let us descend to the comparative, and show, that Christ
has done, and will do more good unto us, then Adam has done harm. Which point
I have more enlarged in my Sermon (at the re-admitting into our Church, of a
penitent Christian from Turcisme) being one of the two, entitled, A return
from Argier: where these five reasons are enlarged. First, that Adam conveyed
to us only one sin: but Christ gives diversities of grace, and many
virtues, which Adam and his posterity should never have had; as patience,
virginity, repentance, compassion, fraternall correction, martyrdom. Secondly,
Adams sin was the sin of a mere man only: but the Son of God merited for
us. Thirdly, by Adams offense we are likened to beasts; by the grace of Christ
our nature is exalted above all Angels. Fourthly, Adams disobedience could not
infect Christ: Christ's merit cleansed Adam, saving his soul and body. Fifthly,
as by the first Adam goodness was destroyed; so by the second Adam greater
goodness is restored, and all punishments, yea all our own sins turned to our
further good.

To which I will annex these things following. By Adams sin we were easily
separated from God: Satan, the woman, and an apple were the only means: But I
am persuaded, (says the Apostle, Romans 8.38.) that neither death, nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us
from the love of God. Again, Romans 5.13, etc. the Apostle seems to divide the
whole of time in this world, into three parts, under three laws; the law of
Nature* of Moses, of Christ. In the first section of time, sin was in the
world: -- Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, says the Apostle.
In the law of Moses, though death was in the world, yet sin chiefly reigned,
and the rather for the law: Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negatum: This
the Apostle confirms often, especially Romans 7.8. Sin taking occasion,
wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. The third part of times division is
in the days of grace, under Christ: and now, not so much death, not so much
sin, as righteousness and life do reign, or rather we in them, by Christ; and
the power of both the other is diminished, and shall be wholly demolished.

If Adam hurt all mankind one way or other, Christ has helped all mankind
many ways. In this life he gives many blessings unto the reprobate: his sun
shines on all, his rain falls both upon good and bad: and I do not think,
that there ever was the man, at least within the verge of the Church, but had
at some time or other such a portion of Gods favor, and such sweet
inspirations put into his heart, that, if he had not quenched by his natural
frowardnes the holy motions of the Spirit, God would have added more grace,
even enough to have brought him to salvation. For God is rich in mercy, Ephesians.
2.4. The Father of mercies, 2. Corinthians. 1.3. Thou love all things that are,
and abhorrest nothing that thou have made: for never would thou have made
any thing, if thou had hated it, Wisd. 11.24. What thou do abhor or hate,
thou do wish not to be; what thou do make, thou do desire it should be,
says Holcot on the place. In our Common Prayer Book, toward the end of the
Commination, this is the acknowledgement of our Church, O merciful God, which
have compassion of all men, and hate nothing that thou have made, which
would not the death of a sinner, but that he should rather turn from sin,
and be saved, etc. God is entitled (...), Amator animarum, A lover of souls,
Wisd. 11.26. Holcot on the place confirms it by Ezekiel. 18.4. All souls are
mine, says God. Men commonly love the bodies, says Holcot, but God the souls.
Amat Deus animas, non singulariter, sic, quod non corpora amet; sed
privilegialiter, quia eas ad se in perpetuum fruendum praeparavit.
God loves the souls; not only, as if he did not love the bodies; but
principally, because he has fitted them for the eternal fruition of himself.
It is not the best applied distinction: for whose soever souls shall enjoy God,
their bodies also shall, and that immortally for ever. If he had said, that God
had loved humane souls privilegialiter, because man had nothing to do in their
creation or preservation; he had spoken more to the purpose. Nor think I, that
God forsakes any, but such as forsake him: but, Froward thoughts separate from
God -- (Wisd. 1.3. etc.) For into a malicious soul wisdom shall not enter, nor
dwell in the body that is subject unto sin. For the holy spirit of discipline
will flee deceit, and remove from thoughts that are without understanding.
Concerning the souls of infants, dying without the ordinary antidotes to
original sin, baptism and the pale of the Church; though they may most
justly be condemned, yet who knows how easy their punishment may be, at least
comparatively, as some imagine? For, that some drops of mercy may
extraordinarily distill upon them, they cannot deny who say, That the
rebellious spirits of actually sinful men and Angels, are punished citra
condignum. But to leave these speculations, I dare boldly affirm, that if there
be any mitigation of torments in any of them, it is not without reference to
Christ.

Moreover the redeeming of man was of more power, then the very creation: for
this was performed by a calm Fiat; but the redemption was accomplished by the
agony, passion, and death of the Son of God. Aug. in Joan. Tractatu 72. post
medium.
Augustine on those words, John 14.12. Greater works then these shall he do,
says thus, It is a greater work, to make a wicked man just, then to create
heaven and earth: Therefore much more does Christ's merit surmount the fault of
Adam.

In the first Adam we only had posse non peccare, posse non mori, A
possibility of not sinning, a possibility of not dying; (We should have been
changed, though we had not died) posse bonum non deserere, A possibility of not
forsaking goodness: and should, by his integrity and our endeavors, have
attained, at the utmost, but been agere, and beatificari, To do well, and be
blessed. By Christ we have not only remission of sins, and his righteousness
imputed; but rich grace, abundance of joy, and royal gifts; (Not a more
joyful, but a more powerful grace, says Non laetiorem, sed potentiorem
gratiam. Aug. de Correp. and Gratia cap. 11.
Augustine) and we shall have non posse peccare, non posse mori, An
impossibility of sinning or dying, An unchangeable and immortal life, Non
posse deserere bonum, vel adhaerere malo, An impossibility of for saking
goodness, and cleaving to evil; and not only beatitudinem and gloriam, but
coronam gloriae, Not only blessedness and glory, but a crown of glory, (...),
An immarcescible crown of glory, 1. Peter 5.4.

Lastly, if we go to the numbering of them that were hurt by Adam, and the
number of those who receive benefit by Christ; the greatest number is on
Christ's side. I would be loath to say, what the Apud Sleidan page 293.
Franciscane preached publicly at the Council of Trent, Eos, qui nullam
haberent Christi cognitionem, and alioqui vitam egissent honest, salute^^ esse
consecutos.
That they who had no knowledge of Christ, and yet had lived honestly, had
obtained salvation. Nor will I conclude with others, that Aristides, Cato, yea
Julius Caesar himself is saved; though, according to the fertility of the
Italian wits, diverse of them have found quaint passages and conceits tending
that way. Nay, in these days of presumption, (wherein, by all likelihood, a
thousand surfeit and perish in the hope of mercy, in comparison of one soul
ship-wracked on the rock of despair) I am afraid to confirm what Coelius
secundus Curio has writ, in his books de Amplitudine regni Christi; or
Marsilius Andreasius of Mantua, de Amplitudine misericordiae Christi, before
him; who maintains, That far more are saved by Christ, then are condemned.
For though Christ says, Matthew. 7.13. Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide
is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there
be which go in thereat: and verse. 14. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way
which leads unto life, and few there be that find it: and though diverse
other passages of Scripture (by the little flock, and few laborers, with the
like phrases) seem to import the paucity of humane souls saved, in comparison
of the many condemned: yet he restrains all those places to the days of
Christ; when indeed few believed, in respect of the unbeleevers: and the
emphasis may accordingly be set upon that word YE; Enter YE. And, perhaps, the
antithesis is observable, Many there be which GO in to the wide gate, and broad
way; but it is not said, Few SHALL go in at the narrow gate; nor, Few SHALL
enter in: but, Few there BE that find it. And it may be expounded, Few there
be that find it; by themselves, or by their own natural power, without
patefaction divine. But what they cannot find without a guide, they may find
by a guide: and many may enter in at Christ the Door, and many may walk in
Christ the Way. Where sin abounded, grace may much more abound. As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one may many be
made righteous. Concerning which places, with the precedent verses, Romans 5. we
shall treat by and by. But I return to their answer, That respect was had to
the primitive days of Christ's Church; and, That we are to consider, that when
Christ likened the Kingdom of God to a grain of mustard seed, which waxed a
great tree; and to leaven, which leavened the whole lump, Luke 13.18, etc. he
spoke not without reference to his own days, in which they were generally
persuaded, (as the Papists are now) that many were easily saved in their
Church: whereupon one wondering at Christ's doctrine, of the hardly obtaining of
heaven, and that by few, says (Luke 13.23.) Lord, are there few that be saved?
And Christ answers, not without respect to those times, Strive to enter in at
the strait gate: for many will seek to enter in, and shall not be able: because
they sought awry, and refused the right way offered. Yet many might be saved,
and more in aftertimes then at that present time; more by far in the Church
of Christ growing and increasing, then in the Church of the Jews, waning and
decreasing. Yea, at this present, though a diligent computer shall not find
much fault with me, for saying, that, if the world were divided, for places and
people, into thirty parts, Nineteen thereof are Infidels, six of the Mahometane
Religion, and five of the Christian, the Roman Church and the Reformed
Churches making but one part of the five; (so that the Greek Churches may more
brag of their Catholicisme, then the Roman; and the scabbed petite flock, and
schismatic parlour-full, yea scarce hand-full of Separatists of Amsterdam,
may cease to claim themselves to be the only Church, by their paucity; which
the least number of the never-agreeing, and subdivided Brethren may appropriate
to themselves; excluding by that argument all the Churches of the world
besides, yea even their own fellow-schismaticks) yet this I will be bold to
say, that many places of the Prophets in the old Testament, and many in the
New, did and do foresignifie, that great abundance of men, women, and children
of all nations, of all places, shall be saved by Christ; that there shall be
(as it were) Mundus hominum electorum, A world of elect men, a great multitude
of men, which no man could number, Rev. 7.9.

Unto which number of humane souls, if we annex those thousand thousands of
Angels, and ten thousand times ten thousand, Daniel 7.10. even that innumerable
host also; we may confidently aver, what Elishah said of the blessed Angels
in an other case, 2. Kings 6.16. They which be with us, are more then they that
be with our enemies, or, more then our enemies. More in number enjoy eternal
life by Christ, then are condemned to eternal death by Adam. For though Christ
be not a Mediator of redemption unto the Angels; yet was he a Mediator of
confirmation in grace; and whatsoever blessings they did, or do, or shall
enjoy, they had it for and by the merit of Christ foreseen. For he is the head
of the Church, and they be but members: and all the virtue or happiness in the
body, or in any part of it, is derived from the head. All things visible and
invisible, thrones, dominions, principalities, powers, were created by him, and
for him, Coloss. 1.16. In him all fullness dwells, verse. 19. From him the
whole body is fitly joined together, Ephesians. 4.16. In him all the building fitly
framed together, grows unto an holy Temple, Ephesians. 2.21. And of his fullness
have all we received, and grace for grace, John 1.16. And not we alone, but the
good Angels also were predestined, created, confirmed, and glorified by his
means, as Suarez well concludes, in his Commentaries on the third part of
Aquine his Sum, Tom. 1. page 656. Dico Christum meruisse Angelu gratiam, and
gloriam, quae illis data fuerat propter merita Christi praevisa.
I say, says he, that Christ merited for the Angels grace, and glory, which
was given them for the merits of Christ foreseen. So Aquinas, Cajetan,
Albertus, Sentent. 3. Distinct. 13. Artic. 2.
Marsilius, In illud, Psalm. 102. BENEDICITE DOMINO OMNIA OPERA BIUS.
Jacobus de Valentia, Lib de Regno Christi.
Melchior Flavius, Theosophiae, 3.13.
Arboreus. And again, the same Suarez page 65.8. Christus Dominus meruit
sanctis Angelis omnia dona gratiae, exceptis iis quae ad remedium peccati
pertinent: meruit iis electionem, praedestinationem, vocationem, auxilia omnia
excitantia, adjuvantia, sufficientia, and efficacia; denique, omne meritum and
augmentum gratiae and gloriae.
The Lord Christ has merited for the holy Angels all gifts of grace, except
those which belong to the remedy of sin. He has merited for them election,
predestination, vocation, all means exciting, helping, sufficient, and
effectual: Lastly, all merit and increase of grace and glory. As the precious
ointment, upon the head of Aaron, ran down upon his beard, and thence descended
to the skirts of his garments, Psalm. 133.2. so all virtue distilleth from
Christ the Head, upon every member of his Church, Angelical, or Humane;
Triumphant, or Militant: neither have they ought, but what they received, and
from him only. In brief, we have exchanged, and bartred our brass for gold;
Periiss^mus, nisi periassemus.
We had perished, if we had not perished, as Themistocles said of old. O felix
culpa, quae tantum and talem meruit Redempterem!
O happy fault, that has obtained so great and excellent a Redeemer! Christ
has done us more good, then Adam did himself or us hurt.

If these my humble private speculations, or rather relations of other men's
opinions, give not satisfaction; I desire you to have recourse unto the
Apostle, who has put the first and second Adam into the balances; and behold,
the first Adam is found too light. In which comparative, being like in the
genus, and unlike in the species, (as Origin soundly and wittily observed)
First let us see the (...), the things wherein they are like. Romans 5.12. As by
one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: the Apodosis is not
expressed, but thus to be conceived, So by one man grace came into the world,
and life by grace. See the same confirmed, v. 19, 20. Secondly, As by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, shall many be
made righteous. The third thing wherein they were like, is set down in the 18.
verse; of which hereafter.

Concerning the (...), the things wherein they differ, they are set down in the
15 verse, and so downward: Not as the offense, so also is the free gift. For if
through the offense of one, many be dead; much more the grace of God, and the
gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. An
other dissimilitude is in the 16 verse, And not as it was by one that sinned,
so is the gift: for the judgment was by one to condemnation; but the free gift
is of many offenses unto justification. And verse 17, If by one man's offense,
death reigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of grace, and of
the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ. After
this, he returns to the third point of their comparison (the (...), the
things wherein they differ, being involved in a Parenthesis) which indeed may
seem at the first sight more strange, Therefore as by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation: even so by the righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life, verse. 18. But
the true meaning is this, according to the way of S. Augustine: As none comes
to death, but by Adam; and none to Adam, but by death: so none comes to life,
but by Christ; nor to Christ, but by life. Thus the free gift came on al, as
the offense came on all. As when we say, All entered into the house by one
door; it is not intended or included, that all that ever were, far or nigh,
came thither, into the house; but that no man entered into the house, save by
the door: So though the Apostle says Omnes, in the application; he means
not, that all and every one are justified; but that all that are justified, are
not otherwise justified then by Christ: and this is S. Augustines exposition,
against Julian the Pelagian, 6.12. As if he had said, Christ is the A and O,
the beginning, means, and end. There is none other name by which we must be
saved, Acts 4.12. He perfecteth them for ever who are sanctified, Hebr. 10.14.
And they are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1. Cor. 3.23. (...), He is my love
and delight, said Ignatius. And I profess, I desire not heaven, or the
blessedness of heaven without him, as I, undeserving, ill-deserving, poor I,
hope to reign in life by him only, who gives spiritual birth, life, and
increase, till he bring us unto blessedness; even all them who are saved, even
the universality of the chosen in Christ. The limitation of the word Omnis is
frequent in Scriptures; not comprehending generally, or universally every one
in all, and all with every one; but being put for a great number, for many:
Luke 6.26. Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you: where All must not
be tentered and stretched to its utmost extent; for all and every did never, do
never, and never shall, speak well of them. So Acts 22.15. Thou shall be
witness unto all men, says Ananias to S. Paul: which was not accomplished, if
All have no restraint. Again, Titus 2.11. The grace of God which brings
salvation, has appeared to all men: and yet there were then, and now are many,
who never saw or knew that salutiferous or saving grace. So here you are to
reduce the word Omnes, to omnes sui; All that are in Christ, says the Gloss.
Again, why may not All be as well taken for Many in this our 18 verse. as Many is
taken for All in the 19 verse? where it is said, By one man's disobedience many
were made sinners: when all and every one that descended ordinarily and
naturally from Adam, sinned in him and by him, as is expressed, verse 12. and
proved before, Genes. 17.4. Thou shall be a father of many nations; which is
repeated word for word, Romans 4.17. and is thus varied, Genes. 22.18. In thy
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed: and this is confirmed,
Galat. 3.8. where Many and All differ not in sense and substance.

By Omnes homines, All men, you may understand Humanum genus, Mankind; and
because all mankind must be distinguished into two sorts, goats and sheep; and
considered according to two estates, fallen and repaired; and their different
receptacles, the two cities; the one the city of God, the other of the Devil;
in the first member the word All must be interpreted generally, without
restriction; because in it was speech of Adam, by whom death came upon all,
without exception: but in the second and opposite member, All is not to be
taken in the same amplitude, sed juxta rem subjectam, But according to the
subject spoken of: All that have grace, and the gift of righteousness: Omnes
vivificandi, All that are to be made alive, says S. Augustine; All that are
Christ's.

So much in defense of those who by All understand genera singulorum, but not
singula generum, Some of all kinds, but not all of every kind; restraining
and imprisoning the word, yet, as it were, in libera custodia. The free gift
came upon all men to the justification of life, that is, it came upon all, upon
whom it did come, freely: and yet upon many, which were not of Christ's flock,
it came not at all. If this seem harsh to any, there is a second
interpretation, which came in my mind before ever I had heard or read, that
any other thought so: and amongst a whole army of expounders, I never met with
any who wholly agrees with me; and never but one, whose opinion, in part,
concurreth with mine: and he is Cardinal Tolet, who is found fault withal
covertly, by Justinian the Jesuit, and by the learned Estius, under a general
Quidam vir doctus, A certain learned man; and expressly by name by Cornelius a
Lapide the Jesuit: whose judgment otherwise I had been ignorant of, as not
having Tolets labors on the Romans. The words of S. Paul, Romans 5.18. at the
latter end, are these, By the righteousness of one, ((...)) the free gift came
upon all men unto justification of life. So it is read (according to the
Vulgat) in our late Translation: the Bishops Bible has it, Good springs upon
all men to the righteousness of life: but it is certainly amiss; for they
take (...) for (...) whereas there is great discrepancy between them: for (...)
is generally confessed to be (according to Philosophers) that virtue, or
aggregation of virtue, which is named Justice general: or (according to
Divinity) the virtue, or the habit of justice, the work of grace,
sanctification, righteousness, or holiness inherent. Neither is (...) all one
with (...). for though I would be loath to say, as Beza does on that place; I
do not admit, says he, Ne in anis quaedam argutia tribuatur Apostolo, id est,
Spiritui sancto.
that these two are all one, for this reason among others, Lest some vain
nicety should be attributed to the Apostle, that is, to the holy Ghost; (for if
I did admit them to be all one, yet I would rather admire the depths of the
holy Spirit, which I am not able to sound, then ascribe any empty or vain
nicety to the perfection of divine Scripture; Adoro Scripturae plenitudinem.
Tert. lib. contra Hermog.
Whose plenitude I adore, that I may use Tertullians phrase: whereas Beza
intimates, as if the infinite Spirit knew not to dictate what he could not
understand) yet will I be bold to say, there is a main difference between them.
(...) commonly is rendered justificatio: For grant, that among Heathen writers
(...) be now and then expressed, A just cause, or The groundwork or foundation
of a just cause, as 1. de coelo.
Aristotle uses it. Grant we also, that in Scripture (...) is used sometimes
for the judgment of God, as Romans 1.32. and Revel. 15.4; sometimes for the
ordinances of God, as Luke 1.6. and Heb. 9.1, and 10 verses, and Romans 2.26: yet
most properly it is rendered Justificatio, and by it is meant the merit of
Christ, and his righteousness imputed to us; and is in Christ, and not in us.
Beza says right in this, (...) ipsam justificationis nostrae (ut ita dicam)
materiam hic declarat ab effecto, nempe illam Christi obedientiam, cujus
imputatio nos juslos in ipso facit; quam paulo ante vocavit (...), quo Deus
gratis eam nobit largiatur.
The word (...), Justification, declares (as I may say) the very matter of our
justification from the effect, namely that obedience of Christ, the imputation
whereof makes us righteous in him: which a little before he called (...), the
free gift; because God gives it freely to us. Thus is the imputation of Christ's
righteousness and our justification all one in effect, and only diverse in
words to the same sense. Thus (...) is used both in the 16 verse, and in this
present place: and thus Rev. 19.8. The fine linen is the righteousness of
Saints: Not of themselves, not inherent: for to the Church was given, or
granted, that she should be arrayed (ut cooperiat se, as some read it; (...))
in fine linen, pure and white: (...), pure in it self; (...), white to be seen
by others. And since our Savior, Revel. 19.13. was clothed with a vesture dipped
in blood; which Blasius Viegas says, is commonly interpreted of Christ's
humanity begored with its own blood, by the Jews (which suffer me to term
Meritum rubrum, as well as the Schoolmen style it Meritum udum) which was
pointed at, Esai 63.1. Who is this that comes from Edom, with dyed garments
from Bozrah? and verse 2. Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy
garments like him that treads in the wine-fat? which Tertullian wittily thus
expounded, Spiritus propheticus, veluti jam contemplans Dominum suum ad
passionem venientem, carne scilicet vestitum, ut in ea passum, cruentum habitum
carnis in vestimentorum rubore designat conculcatae and expressae vi passionis,
tanquam de foro torcularis; quia exinde quasi cruentati homines de vini rubore
descendunt. Contra Marcionem, 4.40.
The spirit of the Prophet contemplating, as it were, his Lord going to his
passion, clothed with flesh, as suffering in it, describes by the redness of
his garments the bloody habit of his flesh trodden and pressed by the force of
his passion, as by a wine press; because men come out thence, as it were, all
bloody with the redness of the wine: According to that prophesied of him,
rather then of Judah; or of Judah, as a type of him, Genesis 49.11. He washed his
garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes. So that S. John may
be thought to expound Esai, and Esai to reflect on that prophecy of Jacob; and
all to design out our Saviors passive obedience, by which (that I may so
speak) our sins are most properly washed away, or not imputed. Upon
proportionable semblance of reason, permit me to say, that the pure and white
linen describes Christ's active obedience, his fulfilling of the Law, in
number, weight, and measure: (which the Schoolmen call Meritum siecum, a dry
merit; and I, Meritum candidum, a white merit) which actions and performances
of his, are as the fine linen with which the Saints are properly clothed and
apparelled, when they are imputed to us. And thus, to return to my old matter,
(...) in the place of the Revelation is taken for the merits of Christ,
clothing us with fine linen; as Jacob was with his elder brothers clothes, when
he was to receive the blessing, Genes. 27.15. so we with his righteousness,
which is ascribed unto us, as if it were our own; and now called ours, because
it was given unto us by Him. Yet thirdly and lastly, besides these two words,
(...) and (...), the Apostle uses another verbal, differing from both: and
that is (...) which (under correction) I opine is not to be translated, either,
with the Bishops Bible, righteousness of life (for that is coincident with
(...)) nor yet justification, or Christ's righteousness; for then it were all
one with (...), which was immediately before ascribed to Christ. But what is
then (...); and how is it to be translated? It is but twice used in the New
Testament. First, Romans 4.25. (...). He was raised again for our justification.
But some Greek Copies have (...), in stead of (...), in that place; and then
the sense alters of it self. Beza says, (...) in the fifth to the Romans
signifies more then it does in the fourth, and seems thus to difference it,
That, in Romans the fourth, the passive obedience imputed is understood; and,
in Romans the fifth, the active obedience imputed is meant. And though in both
places he does Latinize it, Justificatio; yet the new coined words of
Justificamen, or Justificamentum, seem better in his judgment to express the
sense in the latter place. In this he says wittily, that (...) is opposed
(...). And this is the only argument of worth against the following opinion.
Yet thus it may be answered, That though (...) be expounded damnation, or
condemnation, or a sentence damnatorie, as Beza calls it; yet Beza himself
will not translate (...), Sententia absolutoria, vel salvifica.
a sentence absolutorie, or saving. For there is no necessity, that a direct
opposition, in all parts, should be between those terms; neither does the
nature of the antithesis necessarily require such an exact contradiction. But
how does Tolet render and interpret these words? Putat justificationem vitae
bic appellari actionem and eperationem, qua Deus, ex justitia and merito
Christi, omnes homines, etiam reprobos, a morte suscitabit ad vit^m perpetuo
duraturam.
He thinks (says Cornelius a Lapide of him) that by the words jusTIFICATIO
VITae, The justification of life, (which in the Vulgat is the exposition of our
(...)) is here meant that action or operation whereby God through the
righteousness and merit of Christ will raise up all men, even the reprobate,
from death to a life for ever to endure. And so the similitude between Adam and
Christ is every way complete: for as by Adams sin all and every one die; so
by Christ's merit all and every one shall be made alive. And certainly for the
truth of Tolets opinion, it is a part of our Creed, and denied of none: and it
is expressly avouched, even in the same comparative form, 1. Cor. 15.22. As in
Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But my opinion herein
differs from Tolets, That I do make, not only Gods power and the merits of
Christ concurring to this (...), but also make (...) (which is more commonly,
then properly rendered justificatio) to be an act of man defending and pleading
for himself, at the resurrection. As if the Apostle had thus balanced Adam and
Christ: As by the offense of the one, judgment came upon all to condemnation:
so by the righteousness of the other, the free gift came upon all, that they
shall all, without exception, be raised up; to know the cause, why they deserve
wrath; to excuse themselves, if they can; to plead in their own defense, if
they can justify their lives, and free themselves from condemnation. (For God
condemns no man without reason, nor without suffering him to come to his
answer, nor without letting him see and know the just cause of his
condemnation.) The substantial truth whereof is confirmed, Romans 14.10. We
shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and every one of us shall
give an account of himself to God, verse. 12. The end is specialized, 2. Corinthians. 5.10, That every one may receive the things done in the body,
according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. As for the objection
of our adversaries, and their demand, where the word (...) is so used in
Scripture: I first retort it thus; Let them prove the use of the word, in
Scripture, as they apply it. Secondly, I say, It is iniquum postulatum, An
unjust demand on either side; since the word is only once, only here, in the
New Testament, without variation of reading, so far as I remember. Thirdly, I
think that (...) is opposed to (...), crosse-pleading, and all one with (...),
as Apud Lysiam.
Suidas expounds it: and what is (...), but causificatio, causae suae defensio,
juris sui in medium prolatio? 2. Maccab. 4.44. (...), They pleaded the cause
before him. Yet nearer to the purpose, Psalm. 43.1. Plead thou my cause, (...)
Litiga litem meam, as it is in the Interlineary; Disceptando tuere causam meam,
as Vatablus interprets it. And Psalm. 35.23. Awake to my judgment, even unto my
cause: The Septuagint have it, (...) and Symmachus reads it, (...). Where
David makes God a Judge and Umpire, between David himself pleading his own
cause, and David's adversaries who pleaded against him, and opened their mouth
wide against him, verse. 21. So that with Symmachus, (...) is exactly the
pleading of ones own cause, as here (...) is the defense of a man's thoughts,
words, and deeds in this world, and may in a good sense be called a
justification of his life. Moreover, it is said, Exodus 12.49. Lex una erit
indigenae, and peregrino, One law shall be unto him that is home-born, and unto
the stranger. Which is diversified, Levit. 24.22. Ye shall have one manner of
law: Judicium unum erit vobis, as the Interlineary reads it; it being (...)
here, whereas in the place of Exodus it was (...). Also in the Septuagint, the
first place is thus, (...) and in Leviticus, (...) where (...) may well be
expounded one manner of pleading their causes, as there was one law. This I am
sure of, the verb is so used, Micah 7.9. I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him, (...), until he plead my cause. Why
may not then (...) be the pleading of ones cause? And why may not the meaning
of our Apostle be, That as Adam was ostium mortis, The door of death: so
Christ is clavis resurrectionis, The key of the resurrection? as Tertullian
sweetly calls him: And as by Adam all and every one was guilty of death and
damnation: so by Christ's merit every one shall arise, to free himself from it,
if he can; and to plead wherefore he should not be condemned; to defend
himself, and answer for himself, as Paul did, Acts 26.2. to apologize: And
herein Adam and Christ to be like, That as every one was made guilty, by one,
of condemnation: so every one, for Christ's all-sufficient condignity, shall be
permitted, yea enabled, to speak for himself, why the sentence shall not be
executed. But these things I leave to the Professors of the Greek tongue, and
suo quisque judicio abundet.

So much for the second exposition of the words, and for the similitudes and
dissimilitudes between Adam and Christ; from which resulteth, That Adam
representing us, did not so much hurt us, as Christ representing us did do good
unto us. And therefore, since we are acquitted from sin, from all sins,
original and actual; since we are acquitted from eternal death, and have
grace, and abundance of grace, and the gift of righteousness, and shall have
life eternal, and shall reign in life, by ones obedience, by one only Jesus
Christ, who in his life, and on the altar of the cross merited all these
things for us: it is no hard measure, no iniquity of God, if for Adams sin
and disobedience, when he sustained our persons, both himself and his posterity
in his loins, implicitly consenting with him, be appointed to die. And thus
much shall suffice for the first general Question upon the words of the Text.
The second follows.

Drusius toward the end of his Preface before his book called Enoch, thus,
Haec, and alia quae hoc libro continentur, ut and in aliis omnibus a me unquam
editis aut edendis, subjicio libens Ecclesiae Catholicae judicio; a cujus recto
sensu si dissentio, non er^ pertinax.
These, and other things which are contained in this book, as also in all other
books which have been or shall be set forth by me, I willingly submit to the
censure of the Catholic Church; from whose right judgment if I dissent, I
will not be pertinacious.

O Deity incomprehensible, and Trinity in Unity, in all respects superexcellent
and most admirable; with all the faculties of my soul and body I humbly beg of
thee to show thy mercy upon me, for Jesus Christ his sake: and O blessed
Redeemer, accept my prayer, and present it with favor to the throne of grace,
where thou can not be denied. If thou, O gracious Jesu, art not able to help
me, and to save my sinful soul; let me die comfortless, and let my soul
perish: but since thy power is infinite, I beseech thee to make me one of those
whom thou bring to more happiness, then all our enemies could bring to
misery. Hear me, for thy tender mercies sake, and for thy glorious name, O
great Mediator Jesu Christ. AMEN, AMEN.
MISCELLANIES OF DIVINITY. THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Sect. 1. THe question propounded, and explained.

2. Armenius, or rather his son Zoroaster, dead, and revived.

3. Antillus dead, and living again, because the messenger of death mistook
him, in stead of Nicandas: Nicandas died in his stead.

4. A careless Christian died, and recovered life: lived an Anchorite twelve
years: died religiously.

SECT. 1. THe second Question, which, from the words of my Text, I propounded,
is this: Whether such as have been raised from the dead, did die the second
time, yea, or no? because it is said, It is appointed for men once to die. I
speak not of those who have been thought to be dead, and have been stretched
out, and yet their soul has been within them; though diverse, for diverse days,
and upon several sicknesses, have had neither heat, nor breathing discernable:
but only of such, who have suffered a true separation of their souls from
their bodies: Whether these have again delivered up the ghost, and died, I make
my question.

2. Before I come to mention those whom the Scripture records to be truly
raised, I hold it not amiss, to propound to your view a few stories out of
other authors. Theodoret, lib. 10. de fine and judicio, has two strange
relations. The first is out of Plato, of one Armenius: but Clemens
Alexandrinus, Stromat. 5. relates from Zoroaster himself, that it was
Zoroaster, the son of Armenius; He who only, of all the world, laughed so
soon as he was born (says Plin. 7.16.) and was so famous a Magician: One of
these two, either father or son, the twelfth day after he and others fell in
the battle, and was to be buried, ante pyram constitutus, revixit, and being
come to himself, told what he had seen apud inferos: namely, that his soul
being divided from his body, came with many others, (who died with him) to an
admirable and incredible place, in which there were two gulfs, opes, or
ruptures of the earth: and two open places of heaven right over them. In the
midst of these hiatus, or gulfs, judges did fit; who, when judgment was ended,
bade the just souls ascend by the heavenly opennes and gaps: the judges sowing
on their breasts, the notes of their judgment. But the souls of the wicked men
were commanded to go on the left hand, and to be hurried to hell, carrying with
them, on their backs, the memorial of their passed life. But as for himself,
being now come in fight, the judges bade him diligently hear and see all
things, and tell all those things which were done, when he revived. These are
sayings worthy of Philosophy, says Theodoret.

3 A second story is cited in the same place, by Theodoret, from Plutarch,
among those things which he wrote De anima. Sositiles, Heracleon, and I (says
Plutarch) were present, when Antillus told us this, of himself: The Physicians
thought Antillus to be dead: but he came to himself, as one out of a deep
sleep, and neither said, nor did any other thing, Quod emetae mentis signum
possit censeri.
which might argue him to be crazy or lightheaded: but he told us, that he was
dead, and that he was again revived, and that his death, upon that sickness,
was not altogether irrevocable: but that the messengers, who brought him to
judgment, were sharply blamed by their governors, because they brought
Antillus in stead of Nicandas. Within a while after, Nicandas died, and
Antillus recovered life and health. And Plutarch, in my opinion, seems to
insinuate, that he was present at the recovery of him. Of both these (if each
particular were true, that they were dead, and relived) we may boldly aver,
that they died again. Neither does Plato, Plutarch, or Theodoret doubt of it.
As strange a story, though more remote from our subject, you shall find in
Alexander ab Alexandro, Genialium dierum, 6.21.

4 An other istance you shall find in Bellarmine, De art been moriendi, lib.
2. cap. 1. taken out of Joannes Climachus, in scala sua, grad. 6. who relates
thus of a man, that died twice: In his first life (says he) he lived most
negligently: but dying, and his soul being perfectly separated from his body,
after one hour, he returned again, and he desired Climachus, and the rest, to
depart. Whereupon they walled up the cell, and he lived (as an Anchoret) within
the cell, twelve years; speaking to no man till he was ready to die again;
eating nothing but bread, and drinking water: sitting so, he astonishedly
revolved those things only, which he had seen in his separation, with so
earnest a thought, that he never changed countenance, but continuing in that
amazement, secretly wept bitterly. When he was at deaths door the second time,
they forced open the entrance into the cell, and coming to him, humbly desired
him to speak some words of doctrine. He answered nothing but this only, Nemo
qui revera mortis memoriam agnoverit, peccare unquam poterit.
The serious remembrance of death will not consist with sin. The like story
you may find in Venerable Bede.

All these, if they lived again, died again, and rose not to life immortal.
And in this sense is that averred, Wisd. 2.1. Never was any man known to have
returned from the grave; viz. not to die again: for otherwise, some were known
to have been raised. From these I come more especially to speak of such, whom
the word of God reports to have been raised.

MOst gracious God, who did breathe into the face of man the breath of life,
and at thy pleasure drawest it forth again out of his nostrils; grant that we
make such use of this present life, that we may see, love, and enjoy thee in
the life eternal, through Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. Amen.
CHAP. II.
1. A division of such as have been raised. They all died.

2. The widow of Zarephath her son raised, yet died again: supposed to be
Jonas the Prophet. The Shunammites son raised, not to an eternal, but to a
temporary resurrection. A good, and a better resurrection.

3. Christ the first who rose, not to die again.

4. The man raised in the sepulcher of Elisha, arose not to immortality.

1. ANd because diverse have been raised up, of whom there is not the like
doubt, and answer in each kind to be made, I will therefore distribute them,
in regard of their times, into three sorts:

Such as were raised 1. Before Christ's death. 2. After he was ascended. 3.
About the time of his death.
Which inverted method I purposely choose, because I will reserve the hardest
point to the last.

The first sort again is subdivided into such as were raised, either before
Christ was incarnated, or by Christ himself.

They who were raised before Christ was born, were three: 1. The widow of
Zarephath her son, 1. King. 17.22. 2. The Shunammites son, 2. King. 4.35.
3. A dead man who was cast into the grave of Elisha, and when he touched the
bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood upon his feet, 2. King. 13.21.


All these three were raised up to live, and lived to die again. Neither did
the intention of such as requested to have them raised, or of such as raised
them, aim once, that they should live immortally: but live only on earth again
as other men did, and then die again. Neither did I ever read any, who held
these to arise to immortal glory: neither stands it with reason. For that they
were once dead and raised to life, the Scripture says: and that they must
either live to this time, or be translated to immortal glory in their bodies,
or die, is as true as Scripture. Now, because there is no ground to say, that
they yet live, or were translated bodily into heaven; there is good ground to
conclude, that again they died.

2. Concerning the first of these: the Jews think he was Jonas the Prophet: and
S. Hierome, in his Prologue on Jonas, cites their opinion, and dislikes it
not. Tostatus also says, Diverse others think so. If Jonas were the widow of
Zarephath her son, we know that Jonas died afterward: for the Prophets are
dead, Joh. 8.53. and he was one of the Prophets. And concerning both the first
and second instance, it is thought by many good Authors, that they are pointed
at, Heb. 11.35. The women received their dead raised to life again: or, the
Prophets delivered to the women their dead, as the Syriack reads it; that is,
to converse with them as formerly, being raised not to an eternal, but a
temporary resurrection; and so to die again at their appointed times. And to
this truth the Text it self gives in evidence: for it is said in the same
verse, (...), that they might obtain a better resurrection.

Of holy men there is a double resurrection; the first, and the last; the good,
and the better. The resurrection mentioned in the beginning of the verse was
good: and with reference to the former (says Chrysostom) the latter
resurrection is called the better. For the former was temporary, the latter
eternal, called also The holy resurrection in our book of Common Prayer, in
the Epistle on the sixth Sunday after Trinity; though there is no substantial
ground for the word holy, either in the Latin, or Greek, Romans 6.5. Of the
former, Aquinas, in his Comment on Hebr. 11.35. says it was rather a
resuscitation then a resurrection: and again, Isti sic resuscitati, sunt iterum
mortui: Christus autem resuegens ex mortuis, jam non moritur, Romans 6.9.
These being raised died again, but Christ rising from the dead, dies no more,
Romans 6.9.

3. And therefore Christ's resurrection was (as Aquinas says, and as it is
indeed) the beginning of the future resurrection. Then must they needs die
again who were raised before him. He was the first Guide that lead the way to
the eternal resurrection. He abolished death, and has brought life and
immortality to light, 2. Tim. 1.10. Life and immortality to light, which were
before in darkness. And I think that the Apostle may well be thus paraphrased
in that place to the Hebrews: The women desired that their dead children might
be raised again, (1. King. 17.18. 2. King. 4.22, etc.) and, as a gift they
received their dead raised to life again, to live with them according to their
desire. But others were tortured, and would not accept deliverance, and cared
not for the joys of this life, or the punishment unto death, nor temporary
raising, that they might obtain the better resurrection: not to die again, as
the others did; but to live for evermore.

4 But as for the third, Tostatus says, He lived a long time, and he was more
healthie then he was before he died: And he gives this sound reason; Because
what things are done supernaturally, are far more perfect then they that are
done naturally. Never was there so good wine, as the water turned into wine:
the choicenesse whereof was so easily discerned, even when the palate was
cloyed, when the taste was corrupted and dulled, toward the end of a feast,
Joh. 2.10. Now as he lived a long time, so out of doubt in the end he died,
tasting of mortality as truly as the Prophet did, whose bones before had
raised him.

O Blessed Jesu, I beg not at thy hands the reuniting of my soul unto my body,
for a temporary life: but, if it be thy holy will, let the virtue of thy
Passion raise me first, from the death of sin, to the life of righteousness;
and from a righteous temporary life, to the life of immortal happiness. Grant
this, for thy glorious Names sake, O holy Redeemer. Amen.
CHAP. III.
1. Whilst Christ lived, none raised any dead save himself only.

2. The Rulers daughter raised by Christ, died again.

3. So did the young man whom Christ recalled to life.

4. Many miracles in that miracle of Lazarus his resurrection.

5. Christ gave perfect health to those, whom he healed or raised.

6. Lazarus his holy life, and his second death.

1. THe next place of my division leads me to treat of those whom Christ
himself raised. For if Christ did give authority to his twelve Apostles to
raise the dead, Matthew. 10.8. though both in the old Interpreter and Theophylact
these words are wanting, says Beza: yet did they not, or the Seventie, at
their return to him, say they had raised any, (which he himself did so
sparingly) though they healed the sick, Mark 6.13. and the devils were subject
unto them through his name, Luke 10.17. Neither did the Baptist, nor any in
Christ's lifetime raise up any, so far as can be gathered. It was a work he
appropriated to his own power, for the act thereof, whilst he lived; and which
he makes to be an infallible token and proof that he was the Messiah; as
appears by the answer of the embassage which Christ returned to the Baptist,
Luke 7.22. The dead are raised by me, or by my power: Therefore I am he that
should come. For that is one member of his argument. And indeed (perhaps) he
raised diverse, whom the Scripture has not particularized: for he did very many
things that are not written, Joh. 21.25. Yea, many signs truly did he in the
presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book, Joh. 20.30. and
his Apostles after his death did actuate that power, which habitually in his
life they received.

2. But those that are mentioned to be raised by Christ, whilst he lived on
earth, are likewise three: 1. A Rulers daughter, Matthew. 9.25. 2. A dead man,
the only son of his mother, Luke 7.15. 3. Lazarus, his friend, Joh. 11.44.
And all these returned to do their offices, and follow their vocations in this
life; and in the end paid their due to nature, and died again.

In the first we observe, that she was a damsel of twelve years of age; and
being dead, her spirit came again, Luke 8.55. She arose and walked, Mark 5.42.
and Christ commanded to give her meat, in the same place of Luke. And as the
meat was commanded to be given her, that they might see she was to live such a
life as before she lived: so, out of doubt, the commanded meat was offered unto
her, and she did eat, and was strengthened by it: both living and dying
afterward, as other maids and men did, and no way rising to immortal life.

3. As for the second, he was a young man, on whose mother Christ had
compassion, Luke 7.13. She was a widow, the youth her only son: and when
Christ touched but the coffin, and said, Young man arise; (that you may see
both his virtue and his voice had a piercing and quickening power) he that was
dead sat up, and began to speak; and Christ delivered him to his mother, verse.
15. Now, these are evident signs of a natural life in a natural body, which
must yield in the end to the stroke of death. And the raising of this young man
being bruited abroad, was the especial motive why the Baptist sent two
disciples with a message unto Christ, Luke 7.17, etc.

4. The third whom Christ raised was Lazarus, who had been buried four days
ere Christ came unto him, Joh. 11.17. (that I may pass over the uncertain time
from his death to his burial) Foetens, and quairiduanut.
Stinking after four days, enterring, says S. Augustine: Yet when Jesus
cried with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth; he that was dead came forth bound
hand and foot with graveclothes, and his face was bound about with a napkin:
and Jesus says unto them, Loose him, and let him go, Joh. 11.44. In which
miracle I find four or five wrapped up and involved: That so suddenly his
soul did come from its abode: That the stinking ill-organized body was so soon,
so well prepared: That the soul was so quickly united; and no sooner united,
then exercising her faculties on the body, which yielded such ready obedience:
That he could see the way out of the grave (and, perchance, approach toward
our Savior) when his eyes were blinded: That he was able to go and walk before
he was loosed by them, while his hands and his feet were bound with
grave-clothes. Yet that the miracle aimed not to raise him to an immortal
life, appears, because he did not only go from his grave to Bethanie, to the
house where his sisters, Mary and Martha were; but because he supped with our
Savior; he being one of them that sat at the table with Jesus, Joh. 12.2.
where, out of doubt, he did eat as the rest did.

There is an argument yet left, as undeniable, as unanswerable. That the then
living did think Lazarus lived to die again: For, the chief Priests consulted
that they might put Lazarus to death, as well as Christ, Joh. 12.10. which they
would not, they could not have done, if he had not lived, and could not die
like other men; if he had been raised to life immortal: and they knew he was
once raised, Joh. 11.45, 47.

5. Concerning the sick that were healed, and the dead raised by Christ, worthy
Writers further agree, that Christ did integram corporis sanitatem confer,
omni infirmitate rejecta, Left no relics of sickness or infirmity when he
healed. Christ never healed any one man twice, Joh. 7.23. (...), Totum hominem
sanum feci, I made a man every whit whole; Healed a man wholly, say the
Rhemists. Perhaps I may add, that Christ never healed the body of any, but he
healed his soul likewise, at least for the instant time. I am sure Chrysostom,
Augustine, and Beda to this purpose say, The same man was healed by Christ,
Joh. 5.14. Qui foris ab infirmitate, ipse etiam intus salvavit a scelere: He
saved the man from outward infirmity and inward sin: He healed (as I may
comment on the words) his body at the pool of Bethesda, his soul in the Temple.
Christ himself said, Totum hominem sanum feci, I have healed the whole man: and
Beza on Joh. 7.23. says, He was healed both soul and body: Corporaliter and*
spiritualiter, Both bodily and ghostly, says Hugo Cardinalis. Even he, who was
impotent, and had an infirmity thirty eight years, upon Christ's command
immediately was made whole, and took up his bed and walked, Joh. 5.9. and
immediately, upon Christ's word, the blind received his sight, Mark 10.52. the
deaf and ill-speaking man, after Christ had said, EPHPHATHA, his ears were
straightway opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke
plain, Mark 7.35. The fever immediately left Simons wives mother, after Christ
took her by the hand, and lift her up: and she ministered unto them, Mark 1.31.
Christ left no relic of any old disease; and whom he healed of any one
infirmity, we never read that he complained of any other. So though Lazarus
before his death, was (...), Languens, longa infirmitate fractus, actu
aegrotus, Pining, feeble, sick, says Salmeron: yet was he immediately and
perfectly cured: and (as I imagine) he was upon his resuscitation, not only in
latitudine sanitatis, Void of all weakness; so that no part was sick or
mis-affected by any dyscrasie: but in perfectione salutis, In full complete
health; and had obtained by Christ, (...), The height and fullness of health; a
constant, settled, habitual soundness in each part of his body. For as art is
but the ape of nature, and natural things are far more absolute and perfect
then artificial: so things miraculous as much exceed things natural in
perfection. So that no natural crasis, no temper or temperature, no health is
so pure and exact, as that which is wrought immediately by a divine finger: In
the vigor and strength whereof Lazarus might have lived, as Adam and Eve did,
a long time.

6. What do I speak of likelihoods, or possibilities, when we have good
Authors which give us more light concerning Lazarus his life, and concerning
his death? There is a manuscript of the English history in the Vatican at
Rome, testifying, That about the 35 year of Christ (says Baronius on the same
year) Lazarus, Marie Magdalene, and Martha, with Marcella their waiting woman,
with Maximinus their disciple, with Joseph of Arimathea their companion,
Imponebantur navi, absque remigio.
were put into a little sciph, or great boat, without oars or fit tackling,
and so were in great danger at the sea: but by Gods providence, Massiliam
appulerunt.
they arrived at Marsillis, a city of Provance in France. Tostatus upon 1.
King. 17. says, Lazarus was a Bishop, and an holy Martyr. Epiphanius in the
catalogue of Manichaeus his assertions, says he has it by tradition, that
Lazarus was thirty years old when he was raised up, and that he lived
afterward other thirty years. See the same Epiphanius, Haeres. 66. Gregory the
great, Dialog. lib. 4.28. adds, that Lazarus never laughed after he was
raised, and he did so tame himself with fastings, watchings, and labors, that
his very conversation did seem to speak, (though he held his tongue) that he
had seen the infernal torments. So far Gregory. Yet, under his correction,
he might as well, and as much bring his body under, and flee from the very
inclination to sin, because he had tasted of the joys celestial, and peace
unconceiveable. Thus have you the life and death of Lazarus.

O Thou who art the Resurrection and the Life, quicken me with thy Spirit, lead
me by thy grace, and crown me with thy glory, for thy tender mercy, O my sweet
Savior, my joy and delight, the life of my soul, my Mediator and Advocate,
Jesu Christ. Amen.
CHAP. IIII.
1. Tabitha died again.

2. So did Eutychus.

3. They who were raised about the Passion of Christ, died not again, as many
ancient and late Writers do imagine. Mr. Montague is more reserved.

1. NOw am I come to speak of those, who after Christ's ascension were raised.
For though in his life time, none of Christ's inwardest disciples or friends
raised any; (as Elisha's servant could not raise the Shunammites son, but
Elisha himself must do it, and did it, 2. King. 4.31, etc. And Elisha himself
raised none, while his master Elijah lived, but Elijah himself did it, 1. King.
17.22.) yet after Christ's ascension, by his power communicated to them, the
believer shall do the works that I do, and greater works then these shall he
do, says Christ, Joh. 14.12. One was raised by S. Peter, an other by S. Paul.
You shall find the first, Act. 9.40. When Peter had kneeled and prayed, and
turned him to Tabitha her body, and said, Tabitha, arise; she opened her eyes,
and when she saw Peter, she sat up. Yet was she dead before, and washed, and
laid in an upper chamber, verse. 37.

2. And for the other, the story is this, Act. 20.9. As Paul was long
preaching, Eutychus sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft,
and was taken up dead: perchance broken in some parts of his body; bruised
certainly: him S. Paul raised, and they brought the young man alive, and were
not a little comforted, verse. 12. Of these two, as well as of the rest, there
is no doubt but that they lived again, again to die. So thinks Aquinas, 3.
part. Sum. Quaest. 53. Artic. 3. and the whole School (following him) agree
with us in this. So Suarez, Lorinus, who not? Take one of the ancients for all:
Cyprian reckons up those who were raised in the Old Testament; and others
raised by Christ's command; and says of these, Aliquo tempore beneficio vitae
usi, iterum ad funera rediere; Page 523. de Resur. Christi, paragr. 8.
They lived a while, and died again: and a little before of them in the Old
Testament, Ad mortem quam gustaverunt iterum redierunt.
They tasted of death the second time. And therefore it needs the less proof,
because none denies it: and the contrary needs the less disproof, because
none has averred it.

3. Now it is time to come to the third and last part of my main first
division, and to speak of them who arose about the time that Christ died; for
of them there is a deep and intricate question: and the history of them is set
down at large by the Evangelist, Matthew. 27.52, and 53 verses: The graves were
opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves
after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and appeared unto many. So
far the text. Of the various pointing of which words see more hereafter,
opening two windows for two expositions. On which words, diverse worthy men,
both modern and ancient, conclude, That those Saints died not again, Sed
apparuerunt multis, and etiam cum Christo, nunquam ultra morituri, abierunt in
coelum.
But appeared to many, and, with Christ, never after were to die, but went into
heaven, says Jacobus Faber Stapulensis. And Mr. Beza on this place opineth,
that they did not rise, that again they might live among men, and die as
Lazarus and others did: but that they might accompany Christ, by whose power
they rose, into eternal life. The late Writers (says Maldonate) think, that
they went into heaven with Christ: and with them does himself agree. So Pineda
on Job 19.25. So Suarez a third Jesuit. So Anselm. So Aquinas on the place, and
on the Sentences. So (if Suarez cite them truly) Origin in the first book to
the Romans, about those words of the first chapter, By the resurrection of
Jesus our Lord: and Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. 6. and Justinus, Quaest. 85.
Ambrose in his Enarration on the first Psalm; and Eusebius, Demonst. 4.12. and
of modern Authors, and of our Church, Bishop Bilson in the effect of his
Sermons touching the full redemption of mankind by the death and blood of
Jesus Christ, page 217. So Baronius ad annum Christi 48. number. 24. concerning
those Saints whom Christ piercing the heavens carried with himself on high,
leading captivity captive, Ephesians. 4.8. More reserved and moderate is Mr.
Montague, that indefatigable Student, sometime my chamberfellow, and President
in the Kings College in Cambridge, now the Reverend Lord Bishop of Chichester,
who in his answer to the Gag of the Protestants, page 209. says of these
Saints, They were Saints, indeed deceased, but restored to life, and
peradventure unto eternal life, in bodies as well as souls.

MOst clear Fountain of Wisdom inexhaustible, wash, I beseech thee, the spots
of my soul, and in the midst of many puddles of error, cleanse my
understanding, that I may know and embrace the truth through Jesus Christ. Amen.
CHAP. V.
1. Who were supposed to be the Saints which were raised, by such as maintain
that they accompanied Christ into heaven.

2. A strange story out of the Gospel of the Nazarens.

3. Adams soul was saved. Adams body was raised about Christ's Passion, says
Pineda out of diverse Fathers: Thus far Pineda has truth by him. That the
sepulcher of Adam was on mount Calvarie: so say Athanasius, Origin, Cyprian,
Ambrose, Basil, Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Augustine, Euthymius, Anastasius
Sinaita, Germanus Patriarch of Constantinople.

4. It was applauded in the Church in Hieromes time.

5. Theophylact thought Adam buried in Calvarie. Drusius unadvisedly taxes the
Fathers. Tertullian consents with other Fathers, and Nonnus, who is defended
against Heinsius.

6. At Jerusalem they now show the place where Adam his head was found. Moses
Barcepha says, that Sem after the flood buried the head of Adam.

7. The Roman story of Tolus, and Capitolium, much resembling the story of
Adam.

1. TO the clearing of this cloud, and that we may carry the truth visibly
before us, I think it fit to enquire, First, Who these Saints were which thus
miraculously arose: and then secondly to determine, Whether their bodies were
again deposited in the earth till the resurrection: or, Whether in their bodies
with Christ they ascended into heaven.

2. For the first, Hugo Cardinalis on Matthew. 27.53. has an old story: It is
said (says he) in the Evangelisme of the Nazarens, that two good and holy men,
who were dead before about forty years, came into the Temple, and saying
nothing, made signs to have pen, ink, and parchment; and wrote, That those who
were in Limbus rejoiced upon Christ's descent, and that the devils sorrowed.
Though the rest be fabulous, yet herein the Gospel of the Nazarens agrees with
our Gospel, That the names of the raised are not mentioned. Others have been
bold to set down both the names and the order of them who arose.

3. Augustine, Epist. 99. ad Euodium, thus, De illo quidem primo homine, patre
generis humani, quod eum ibidem (Christus ad inserna descendens) solverit,
Ecclesia fere tota conseutit.
Almost the whole Church agrees, That Christ descending into hell, freed the
first Adam thence. That the Church believed this, non inaniter, not vainly, but
upon some good ground, we are to believe; from whence soever the tradition
came, though there be no express Scripture. If this be true of Adams soul, yet
is it nothing to our question of his bodily resuscitation. Proceed we therefore
to those that think his very body was raised.

Adam then arose, says Athanasius in his Sermon of the Passion and the Cross:
says Origin in his 35 Tractate on Matthew: says Augustine, 161 quest. on
Genesis: and others also, if Pineda on the forecited place wrong them not. And
he gives this congruentiall reason, That Adam, who heard the sentence of
death, should presently also be partaker of the resurrection by Christ, and
with him, who had expiated his sin by death. To which may be added, That (as
S. Hierom reports) the Jews have a tradition, that the ram was slain on mount
Calvarie in stead of Isaac; as also Augustine (Sermon. 71. de Tempore) ratifieth.
And to this day they say they have there the altar of Melchisedech. So
Athanasius reports from the Jewish Doctors, that in Golgotha was the sepulcher
of Adam. This is true; but it is not certain that Adam was raised; and not
true, that he ascended bodily into heaven.

Mr. Broughton, in his observations of the first ten Fathers, says thus:
Rambam records that which no reason can deny, how the Jews ever held by
Tradition, that Adam, Abel, and Cain offered, where Abraham offered Isaac,
where both Temples were built, on which mountain Christ taught, and died. And
as the place was called Calvaria, because the head or skull of a man was there
found, and found bare without hair, and depilated, says Basil; so diverse
Fathers have concluded, that Adam was there buried, and that it was his head.
See Origin, tractat. 35. on Matthew. Cyprian in his sermon on the resurrection;
Ambrose in his tenth book of his commentaries on Luke 23. Basil on the fifth of
Esaias; Epiphanius contra Haeres. lib. 1. Chrysostom Homil. 84. in Joannem;
Augustine Sermon. 71. de Tempore, and de Civitat. 16.32. Euthymius on Matthew. So
Athanasius Sinaita, lib. 6. in Hexam. in Tom. 1. Bibliothecae Patrum; and
Sanctus Germanus Patriarch of Constantinople, in Theoria rerum Ecclesiast. as
you may see in Tom. 6. Biblioth. Patrum; besides abundance of new writers, with
whose names I delight not to load my page.

4 Hierom on these words, Ephesians. 5.14. Wherefore he says, Awake thou that
sleep, etc. tells, how he heard one disputing in the Church, of this
place, thus: This testimony is spoken to Adam buried in Calvarie, where Christ
was crucified. Which place was called Calvarie, because there was placed Caput
antiqui hominis, Adams skull. Therefore at that time, when Christ, being
crucified, did hang over his sepulcher, this prophecy was accomplished,
saying, Arise Adam, that sleep, and stand up from the dead; and not as we
read, (...), Christ shall give thee light; but (...), Christ shall touch thee
because by the touch of his blood, and of his body hanging over him, he might
be enlivened, and rise. Now though Hierom himself says, that this sense
agrees not with the context; yet he leaves it to the Reader to judge, whether
the thing be true, or no; and confesses, that the words were pleasingly
entertained by the people, and Quodam plausu and tripudio sunt accepta.
approved with applause extraordinary both of hand and foot. And Haeres. 46.
contra Tatian. in fine.
Epiphanius expressly affirms, that Adam was buried in Calvarie, and that the
mountain was so called from Adams head there found; adding, In quo crucifixus
Dominus noster Jesus Christus, per aquam and sanguinem, qui fluxit ab ipso, per
compunctum ipsius latus, in aenigmate ostendit salutem nostram ab initio
massae, primi bominis reliquias respergere auspicatus.
Where our crucified Lord Jesus Christ, by water and blood which flowed from
his pierced side, figuratively showed our salvation from the primitive lump,
whilst auspiciously he sprinkled the relics of the first man. -- Therefore,
Now was fulfilled, says he, Surge qui dormis, Arise thou that sleep, etc.
Ambrose and Paulinus seem to have read it (...), and Augustine on these words,
Psalm. 3.5. The Lord sustained me, cites this place thus: Surge qui dormis, and
exurge a mortui^, and continget te Christus.
Arise who sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall touch thee:
which reading was used also by others in Hieromes time.

5. Theophylact on Matthew. thus: They that hold Traditions, say, Adam was buried
in Calvarie. It is a Tradition (says he, on Mark) from the ancient Fathers:
adding this, Therefore Christ, who healed the fault and death of Adam, was
there buried; that where was the beginning, there should be the end, and
destruction of death. On Luke he alleges this reason, Vbi per lignum casus,
illic per lignum and resurrectio.
Where the fall was by the tree, there by the tree also should be the rising
again. Now as this reason is but weak, so his words on John are worthy
remembrance: That the Tradition is Ecclesiastical, not Judaicall; that it was
published by Noah after the flood. Whence we may justly tax Drusius in his
first commentary ad voces novi Testamenti, on the word Golgotha, who ascribes
the finding of Adams skull, and his burial on Golgotha, to the too much
credulity of the Fathers, in believing the Jews. It rather makes against the
Jews, and the Jews gain nothing (in my opinion) by that report. Certain old
verses fathered on Tertullian, prove directly, that in the same place that Adam
died Christ died also; and of Golgotha, and Calvaria in particular, thus run
the verses, Hic hominem primum suscepimus esse sepultum;
Hic patitur Christus; sic sanguine terra madescit,
Pulvis Adae ut veteris possit cum sanguine Christi
Commistus, stillantis aquae virtute lavari.
The first man here, they say, was buried;
The earth was here with Christ's blood watered:
That Adams dust commixt with Christ his blood,
Might so be bathed as in a sovereign flood.


Tertullians Latin verses may be seconded with Nonnus his Greek verses on John
19.17. (...),
(...).
Which are thus translated, Donec in locum venit nominati cranii,
Adam prisci nomen ferentem ambitu capitis.
Until he came toth' place (as goes the fame)
Which from old Adams skull did take its name.
Where Nonnus concludes, (as many other more ancient did before him) that it
was called the place of a skull, from the first Adams head. The learned
Heinsius (Exercit. sacr. page 196.) contradicting says, The Evangelist did not
think the place was so called from Adams skull, nor that the word SKULL
inclines to that sense: nor is it called ADAMS SKULL, but THE PLACE OF A SKULL.
-- And whereas Epiphanius says, that Adams skull was found in that place,
(which gave occasion to the words of Nonnus) I marvel that they who were
conversant in books of the Hellenists, found not the beginning of that fable.
For in them, the word ADAM is taken Collective, after the Hebrew manner. So in
the Latin, 1. Sam. 7.9. The words are in 2. Sam 7.19. This is the law of men,
says Heinsius, not of Adam. Our translation has it, This is the manner of
man, without restraining it to the first Adam.
Ista est lex Adam, hoc est, (...). Moreover Symmachus interprets (...),
Humane nature. So where Josiah (2. King. 23.20.) is said combussisse ossa
(...), to have burnt the bones of Adam, the Seventie have it, (...), He burnt
the bones of men on it. Because therefore in this place were the skuls of Adam,
that is, of men, the place is called so. And whereas ADAM should be taken for
MEN, Nonnus by signing out the first Adam has increased the absurdity of this
error. To this effect Heinsius on that place. In this my defense of Nonnus, I
give but a touch at the slip (...), which the Septuagint have (...) answerable
to the Hebrew; and at the other slip of citing 1. Sam. 7.9. in stead of 2. Sam.
7.19. and, granting that (...) is taken sometimes Collective both in Scriptures
and some Hellenists, do desire to know how it is applied to this place. For,
though there be mention of Adam in Nonnus, yet there is none in the Text; which
might give the hint to the error of Nonnus, as Heinsius mistermeth it. And
when Heinsius produces one Hellenist expounding Golgotha, and there using
(...) Collective, he shall say something. But says the worthy Heinsius, it is
not called Cranium Adami, The skull of Adam; but (...), The place of a skull. I
answer, Neither are the words Crania Adam, The skulls of men, as Heinsius
understands it. For Luke 23.33. it is said expressly, The place is called
(...) the other three Evangelists have it also, all and every of them, in the
singular number, (...). To the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, the
place of a skull, Mark 15.22. Called Golgotha, that is to say, a place of a
skull, as it is Matthew. 27.33. or as it is varied by S. John, He went forth into
a place called the place of a skull, which is called in the Hebrew, Golgotha,
John 19.17. Even in the Hebrew, GOLGOTHA Syrum est, non Hebraeum.
GOLGOTHA is a Syriack word, not an Hebrew one, says Hierom on the word, in
his exposition of the Hebrew names, used by S. Matthew. He is seconded by De
verbo D^i 2.4.
Bellarmine, who is confident, that the vulgar tongue, spoken, and written in
the Apostles days, was the Syriack, and not the pure and sacred Hebrew;
instancing in Golgotha. The truth is, though the termination be Syriack, yet it
is an Hebrew word of the radix (...), Circuire, To compass: from whence comes
GALGAL, Sphaera, An orb, and GULGULETH, or GOLGOLETH (which the Caldeans and
Syrians express by addition of Aleph) Caput, ob ejus rotunditatem, An head,
for its roundnesse. Mercer and Cevallerius add in the Italick letters, The
skull is properly so called: Pars pro toto, imo and pro toto homine dicitur, ut
cum Latin dicimus, Per capita.
Part is taken for the whole; and not for the whole body only, but for the
whole man: as when after the Latin guise, we say, By the heads; meaning, By
the people. So also in the common proverb, Quot capita tot sententiae.
So many heads (that is, men) so many minds. From Golgoleth comes Golgoltha,
or Golgotha, the letter (...) being taken away by Syncope, Ex consuetudine
illius temporis.
As was then usual, says Drusius: yea, and Euphoniae gratia.
for a sweet and pleasant sound sake, says Lucas Brugensis. For as the Syriack
omits the first (...), reading it Gogultha, or, according to Drusius, Gagultha;
(though Mercer and Cevallerius say it is Golgolta in the Syriack tongue) so the
Greek and the Latin leave out the second (...), and read it Golgotha. Now
since none of the Evangelists have the exact Syriack word, and S. John says,
The place is called Golgotha in Hebrew; let Golgotha pass, not for a Syriack,
but an Hebrew word, especially since the Syrians have an other word, by which
they signify a skull, viz. Karkaphto; and let us come up close to Heinsius.

If he could prove, that Cranion, a skull (being the word which all the
Evangelists insist upon) is taken collective, for many skuls, in the Hebrew,
Syriack, or by the Hellenists; if one skull could belong to many men; I would
say his proof were sharp, and pointed: but since it is harsh to conceive, or to
write, or say (not the places, but the place; not of skulls, but of a skull)
the place of a skull of men (it being a very Solecism in the Hebrew, and the
Syriack, in the Greek, whether sacred or profane, and indeed in all languages)
I must take liberty to say, Heinsius his argument is too weak and blunt, to
hurt Nonnus; though we add this his other exception, Quia in isto loco crania
fuerunt Adam, hoc est (...), ita dictus est locus.
The place was called a skull, because men's skuls were there. I answer, Though
many were there buried, and many other skulls were there extant; (as in other
Polyandriis, or Ossaries, Churchyards, or Charnell-houses) yet since Adam was
there buried also, how follows it, that the place was called so from the
ignoble many, rather then from the first Adam.

To speak truly, Golgotha was not an ordinary dormitorie; there were no caves
for burial, there were no places of sepulchers. All malefactors, even amongst
them at that time, were not there executed; only some, for some offenses: and
all that there were executed, were not there interred; but some were removed to
their private buriall-places. If from the multitude there congested, the place
had its denomination; the three Evangelists (who have it (...), The place of a
skull) might most easily, and, in likelihood, one of them would have varied it
(...), The place of skulls: but because the Scripture is express, it was one
single skull, from which the place was so called; and constant Tradition has
delivered, that Adam was there buried; and diverse Ancients, besides Epiphanius,
have both believed, and written, that Adams skull was there found; Nonnus had
reason, in his paraphrase, to apply the Text unto Adam: neither is it a fable,
error, or absurdity. The Scripture says, The place of a skull; Nonnus says,
with Antiquity, The place of Adams skull; Heinsius says, It was called
Golgotha, or the place of a skull, from the skuls of many men there buried. Who
has most likelihood? Nonnus, or Heinsius?

6. Mr George Sands, in the relation of his journey, page 163. reports, that
on the left side of an altar, in mount Calvarie, there is a clift in the rock,
in the which they say, that the head of Adam was found, and (as they will have
it) there buried, (others say in Hebron) that his bones might be sprinkled with
the real blood of our Savior; which he knew should be shed in that place, by
a prophetical foreknowledge. And in the next page, he picturing out the
chapels, and several monuments, has honored that clift, where they say the
head of Adam was found, with a local delineation.

Now because it may be thought, that the flood did overthrow sepulchers,
houses, and monuments, and Adams among the rest; Moses Barcepha, in his book de
Paradiso, excellently secondeth Theophylact, and says, That Noah, fore-knowing
the flood, took into the ark with him, the bones of Adam; And (having
tripartitely divided the world unto his three sons, says Epiphanius in
Anchorato, near the end; all Asia even to Egypt, unto Sem; Africa unto Cham;
Europe to Japheth) he gave to Sem, the head or skull of Adam, who, burying it
in the old grave, called the place Calvaria.

Not far from the beginning of the first book Oraculorum Sibyllinorum,
Sibylla Babylonica says, She was with her husband in the ark, at the general
undage, or cataclysme, which some do thus expound; that by Sibylla, is meant
the Kabala; which is nothing else, but the constant belief, and knowledge of the
Fathers, delivered by Tradition: so Kabala, or Sibylla might be in the ark at
the universal inundation, and, in a sort, may be said to be married to Noah,
or to Sem, with whom there remained (out of doubt) the most certain agraphall
Traditions: and among those, this might be one, of the grave of Adam, and his
head there, after the flood, buried. See Baronius ad Annum Christi 34. numero
112. and sequent. Lastly, S. Hierome is fully and exactly for us, Epist. 17 ad
Marcellum.

7. The Romans have a story somewhat resembling this. Suffer a digression not
unworthy your reading.

In Rome there was an hill, called first, Mons Saturninus, from Saturn who
dwelt there, says Terentius Varro, Dionysius, and Festus. Afterward A duce
Tarpeio mons est cognomen adeptus, says Propertius, lib. 4. ante medium: and
was called Mons Tarpeius, from Tarpeia, a traitorous maid there killed, and (as
it were) buried under the spoils. See Pliny, lib. 19.1. Propertius there
intimates, that she expected marriage with Tatius, and specializeth his reply
in disdain, Nube, ait, and regni scande cubile mei.
Dixit, and ingestis comitum superobruit armis.
Haec, virgo, officiis, dos erat apta tuis.
Whilst she both wife and Queen did look to be,
He smothered her with armor thrown upon her:
And said, Virgin, this dowry fitteth thee,
Being for thy ill offices the meetest honor.


But Livie, confessing that by their armor she was smothered, reports two
different relations. First, that she compounding with them to have what they
wore on their left arms, (which were, according to the present fashion,
bracelets of pure gold) they thought their promise quitted, by throwing to her,
and on her, their targets. Others secondly say, she demanded their principal
armor of defense, and thereupon suspecting that her intent was to deceive,
they paid her in her own kind, and by them killed her.

Thirdly, upon this accident it received its surname of Mons Capitolinus:
Ludovicus Vives, on Augustine de Civit. 4.10. cites Dionysius saying that it
was called CAPITOLINUS, Ab humano capite in fundamentis reperto, From a man's
head found in the foundation of it. Livius, toward the end of his first book,
says, That in the foundation of the temple there appeared a man's head, and his
whole face sound and incorrupt. Arnobius, contra Gentes lib. 6. almost in the
beginning, instructs us at large, whose head this was: and from the ancient
authorities of Sammonicus, Granius, Valerianus, and Fabius, declares to the
Romans themselves, as well as to the other Gentiles, That there was one Tolus,
slain by his brothers servant: that his head was cut off, and carefully hid for
good lucks sake: that his grave or sepulcher was the Capitol: that the
composition of the name, made the thing to be known: and that the city of
Rome, being to dedicate and name the temple, was not ashamed to call it, ex
Toli capite, CAPITOLIUM; rather then after Jupiters own name. And perhaps, upon
a relation of the head found on mount Calvarie, Adrian might cause Jerusalem to
be called not only Aelia-Adria, but also Capitolina, with reference to their
hill and the head there buried also.

O Righteous Savior, which did shed thy most precious blood on the Cross,
to purify thy Church; let one drop of thy blood distill upon my soul; that it
may be presented blameless at the Throne of Grace, and avoid the second death,
which, without thee, is due unto me. Grant this (I humbly beseech thee) for
thine own Merit and Mercy. Amen.
CHAP. VI.
1. Hierom says, Adam was not buried on mount Calvarie. Both Hierom,
Andrichomius, and Zimenes say, he was buried in Hebron. Hierom censured, for
doubling in this point, by Bellarmine.

2. Hieroms arguments answered.

3. The Original defended against Hierom in Josh. 14.15. ADAM there is not a
proper name, but an appellative. Arba is there a proper name of a man.
Adrichomius erreth in Kiriath-Arbee; and the words signify not Civitas quatuor
virorum, The city of four men. New expositions of Kiriath-Arbee.

4. It may signify as well Civitas quatuor rerum, The city of four things:
as, Quatuor hominum, Of four men. The memorable monuments about Hebron.

5. It may be interpreted Civitas quadrata, quadrilatera, quadrimembris,
quadricollis; A city fouresquare, of four sides, of four parts, of four
hills.

6. If Kiriath-Arba does signify the city of four men, yet they might be
other men, besides the four Patriarchs.

7. If it had its denomination from four Patriarchs, and from their burial
there, yet Adam is none of them.

8. Augustine peremptory for Adams burial in Calvarie; and Paula and
Eustochium, or rather Hierom.

9. An other objection answered. The Jews never showed extraordinary honor to
Adam, or Noah; but to Abraham, and others after him. Drusius prefers the
reading used by our late Translation, Hos. 6.7. before the Genevean and
Tremellian.

1. ON the other side, and for the contrary opinion, the same Hierom, on Matthew.
27.33. says, Calvaria signifies not the sepulcher of the first man (Adam) but
the place of those that were beheaded. Secondly, Adam was buried by Hebron, and
Arbee, says Hierom. Thirdly, the accurate Adrichomius, in verbo HEBRON, page
49. says, Hebron or Chebron was first called Arbee, and Mambre, and
Cariath-Arbee, the city of four men, because the four Patriarchs, Adam,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob there dwelt, and were buried. Franciscus Zimenes
Archbishop of Toledo, and many others accord with him. S. Hierom led them all
the way; though awry: Hierom, in lib. de locis Hebraicis, on the word ARBOCH,
thus, Corrupt in nostris codicibus Arboch scribitur, cum in Hebraeo legatur
Arbee, id est quatuor: ^o quod ibi quatuor Patriarchae, Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob sepulti sunt, and Adam magnus, ut in Jesu libro scriptum est; licet eum
quidam conditum in loco Calvariae suspicentur.
It is corruptly written in our copies ARBOCH; since in the Hebrew it is read
ARBEE, that is, Four: because there the four Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob were buried, and the great Adam, as it is written in the book of Joshua;
though some suppose Adam to be buried in Calvarie. The same Adrichomius, page
46. describes a double cave in the tribe of Judah; which cave, with the ground
and trees, Abraham bought of the sons of Heth, in which were buried Adam and
Eve, Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and Leah, which Mausoleum
continued till the time of S. Hierom. Now this place was close by Hebron; and
Hebron and this sepulcher far from mount Calvarie; 250 stadia, or
there-abouts. Lastly, says Hierom, If any will strive that Christ was
crucified in Calvarie, that his blood might distill on the tomb of Adam; I
will ask him, why others, even thieves were there crucified? The force of these
authorities, or reasons, is not such, as to remove me from the common opinion,
that Adam was buried in Golgotha. And thus I answer the Objections in order.

Bellarmine, de Amissione gratiae, and statu peccati, 3.12. brings Hierom
against Hierom, and wondreth at his doubling: and he refuteth Hieroms
arguments; and produces many strange proofs, that Adam was buried in mount
Calvarie. But I descend to the particulars.

2. The first is, a mistaken imputation of S. Hierom. For who says, or ever
said, that the word Calvaria signified the sepulcher of the first man? Neither
can any man primarily argue from the names of Golgotha, or Calvaria, and (...),
or Calvariae locus, The place of a skull, that Adam was there buried: nor yet
does Calvaria signify locum decollatorum, though Hierom would have it so. But
since Calvaria, (...), properly and natively, is truly translated a skull, the
skull of a man; and GOLGOTHA, the place of a skull, Matthew. 27.33. not of skuls,
or beheaded men, in the plural number, (for it is in the singular, in every of
the Evangelists) and constant Tradition has delivered, that Adam was there
buried; we may conclude, not from the name to Adams burial; but from the
received opinion of Adams burial in that place, unto the name; and may say,
with diverse Fathers, more then probably, It was termed Golgotha, or the place
of a skull, with reference to Adams burial, or his skull.

3. Secondly, S. Hierom groundeth his second reason on the sands, and offers
violence to the place of Scripture. Thus he reads it, Josh. 14.15. Nomen
Hebron ante vocabatur Cariath-Arbee; Adam maximus ibi inter Enacim situs est:
Hebron was before called Cariath-Arbee; The first Adam was there placed among
the Anakims. Whence he concludes, That Adam was buried by Hebron and Arbee,
and so not on mount Calvarie: for they were many miles distant each from other.

I answer, that neither the Seventy nor Hebrew have, Ibi situs est. Secondly,
what had Adam our Protoplast to do, or to be buried among the Anakims? Wiser
Baronius in the place above cited, misliking Hierom, makes the giants name in
that place of Joshua, to be Adam: and not the first Adam to be one of the
giants, or to be buried with them. Thirdly, both Hierom and Baronius are
deceived, in thinking that Adam in that place is a proper name; for the words
may, yea must run thus according to the Hebrew, and is seconded by our later
translation; The name of Hebron before, Kirjath-Arba, who was (or which Arba)
was a great man, among the Anakims. Now it were nonsense to say, The name of
Hebron, was the city of four, who was a great man among the Anakims: and as
senseless were it, Josh. 15.13. to read it, Caleb had the city of four, the
father of Anak: But taking Arba, for the proper name of a man, and the city so
called of him; the sense, reason, and truth are all apparent. A great man, of
whom the city was so called, says Tremellius: Arba was the name of a great
man among the giants, says Aben Ezra: Homo maximus, says Andrew Masius: The
greatest and chiefest among the giants, says Vatablus in his commentary, and
Emmanuel Sa in his notes on the place. This Arba was the father of Anak, Josh.
21.11. And the sons of Anak were giants, and came of giants; and we were,
(say the Israelites) in their and in our own sight as grasshoppers, Number. 13.33.
And this also reflects an answer upon the third objection of Adrichomius, who
though he be most accurate in other things, yet here he is asleep. For though
Arbee signify four, when Arbee is not a proper name; and Kiriath-arbee may be
rendered, The city of four; yet it may also signify The city of one Arba,
or Arbee: and so Kiriath-Arbee in Hebrew is no more, then Arbepolis in Greek;
so called of one Arbee, who was a man, The father of Anak, Josh. 21.11. as I
proved before: as Persepolis, Adrianopolis, Constantinopolis, Alexandrinopolis
in India (as Appian Alexandrinus has it in his book of the Roman wars with
the Syrians) and Alexandropolis, a city of Parthia, as Plinius 6.25. varieth
it. So Magnopolis, as Appian calls one city, in his book of the Roman
wars with Mithridates; and Pompeiopolis, a city of Cilicia: both of these so
styled of Pompey the great: though the latter lost its name, and was after (at
the best of the empire, and at its greatest growth) called TRAjANOPOLIS,
because Trajan died there, says Solinus. So Claudiopolis, a city of
Cappadocia, Plin. 5.24. and Philippipolis, a city in Arabia, so called of
Philip the Emperor. All these cities, and many other (if it were worth the
labor to recite them) had their denomination from men: likewise might
Arbepolis be the city of Arba. But why do I stand on potentialls, or may-bees,
when Joshua at the chap. 15.13. calls it (...), as the Septuagint translates
it? and Josh. 20.7. (...), where it is in the Hebrew, Arba. Sara died (...),
Genes. 23.2. The city of Arbock: where both Hebrew and English have
Kiriath-Arba; and the Vulgat, In civitate Arbae, which is impossible to be
rendered The city of four, in reference to the four Patriarchs burial: for
both Abraham and Isaac were not buried, but alive then, and Jacob was not as
yet born: yea the city of Arba is called (...), Josh. 14.15. And they gave
them (...), Josh. 21.11. she being the mother-citie; and therefore the villages
about Kariath-Arbee, are called her daughters, Neh. 11.25.

4. Secondly, let us grant ex superabundanti, More then we need, that it is to
be expounded in this place, Civitas quatuor, The city of four; yet it may be
called the city of four memorable things that were there: as Kiriath-jearim,
Josh. 15.60. or Kariath-jarim, as Adrichomius reads it, is, urbs sylvarum, a
city of woods; for so he expounds it page 22. and Cariath-sepher, Josh. 15.15.
that is, (says he on that word Dabir, page 133.) Civitas literarum dicta, s^^
Vniversitas and Academia Palestinae.
A city of learning, an University of Palestine. And he adds, It was Valida
and regia urbs data sacerdeti^us.
A strong and royal city given to the priests. The name of KARIATH-jARIM,
signifies a city of woods, says Masius, on Josh. 9.17. and KARIATH-SEPHER is
Literarum vel librerum urbs.
A city of Records, or Libraries: and so called, in all probability, says
the said Masius, on Josh. 15.15. See his conjectures on the place. Yea, the
other name of Kariath-sepher, to wit, Kariath-senna, is either so called, a
spinis, from the thorns (which may grow among the woods) as most do think; or
if the letter (...) was set for (...), then the word has reference to the
disputations of learned men, as it is Deuter. 6.7. says Masius. And the
Seventy render it, in both places, (...), The city of writings or letters.
Howsoever, as one of the cities was so called from the woods, or thorns; the
other, from the Academie there flourishing, or from the monuments and records
there kept, as Masius would have it: So might Kariath-Arbee be so named, from
some other four eminent things. For many excellent monuments, most famous in
their kinds, were thereabouts: from some four of which it might be named
Kiriath-Arbee, Civitas quatuor rerum, The city of four things. The first was
the Altar that Abram built there, Genes. 13.18. Which perchance made Absalom
feign a vow, to sacrifice in Hebron, at the altar of Abram, 2. Sam. 15.8. So
the Seventy and Vatablus expound it. The second may be that famous tree, which
some call Ilex, An holm: others Quercus, An oak, which is favored by the
Original, Genesis 18.1. and 8. verse. Hierom, Terebinthus, The Turpentine tree:
Under which, says Adrichomius, Abraham ministered to the Angels; which
continued till the time of Hierom; yea, says Saligniacus, Ostenditur adhuc
hodie ilex illa, ante ostium tabernaculi Abrahae.
The holm is yet to be seen, before the entrance of the Tabernacle of Abraham.
The old being dried, an other sprung out of its root. Now this Saligniacus
lived but a while since. Besides, the Quercus Mambre, The oak of Mambre was so
renowned, that Adrichomius, in his map of the Tribe of Judah, has the
resemblance, and picture of an oak there growing. And Constantine appointed a
fair Church to be built at the oak of Mambre, says Eusebius in vita
Constantini, 3.5. S. Hierom, de locis Hebraicis, thus, Quercus Abraham; quae
and Mambre, usque ad Constantii Regis imperium monstrabatur: and Mausolcum ejus
in praesentiari^ cernitur. Cumque a nobis jam ibidem Ecclesia aedificata sit, a
cunctis in circuitu gentibus, Terebinthus superstitiose colitur, (or as others
better read it, Terebinthi locus colitur) eo quod Abraham sub ea Angelos
hospitio susceperit.
The oak of Abraham, called also the oak of Mambre, continued to the Empire of
Constantine: and its monument is yet seen: And since we have built a Church in
that place, all nations do reverence the place of the Turpentine tree, because
under that did Abraham entertain Angels. The third may well be Spelunca Adam,
the cave where Adam mourned. Fourthly, the very plot of ground, where Abel was
slain, which is showed to this day. Fifthly, the monument of Caleb. Sixthly,
the field of Damascus, where the red earth lies, of which they report Adam was
formed; which earth is tough, and may be wrought like wax, and lies close by
Hebron; all the other things also being in the circuit near that place.
Seventhly, the Montana Hebron, Josh. 11.21. and the Vallis Hebron, Genes.
37.14. and the Convallis Mambre, as the Vulgat has it significantly, Genesis
14.13. Convallis Mambre, quae est in Hebron, The dale of Mambre, surrounded
with hills, which is in Hebron, Genes. 13.18. The unparallelled eminencies of
which hills and dales, for profit and pleasure, (the two main load-stones of
the worlds desires) you may discern by what Mr George Sands says (if he do not
poetize, or hyperbolize) in the third book of the relation of his journey, page
150. We passed this day (says he) through the most pregnant and pleasant
valley that ever eye beheld: on the right hand, a ridge of high hills, whereon
stands Hebron, (oh how delicately situated!) on the left hand, the
Mediterranean sea, bordered with continual hills, beset with variety of
fruits: the champion between, about twenty miles over, full of flowery hills,
ascending leisurely, and not much surmounting their ranker valleys: with groves
of Olives, and other fruits dispersedly adorned. Eighthly and lastly, there
were other things of singular note; Abraham's Churchyard, the field of
Machpela, consecrated from heathenish profanation, to holier uses; and the
cave, which was the place of his sepulcher. From some four of these most
reverend monuments, or the like, being but a little distant from Hebron, might
the place be called Kariath-arbee, Civitas quatuor rerum, The city of four
things.

5. Again, if that city of Hebron were quadrata, as many cities then were, and
now are, and with us Bristol amongst the rest (built of old by Brennus, as I
have read in a manuscript of Edward the fourth his time) and renowned Rome (as
some say, varying from Livie) which was first founded on the four hills,
Palatine, Capitoline, Esquiline, Aventine, (though afterward Servius Tullus
enlarged it on the other three hills, Coelian, Viminal, and Quirinal) and
answerable to which Romulus left (as they say) but four gates, Carmentalis,
Romana, Pandana, Janualis: though afterward there were many more gates
belonging to that city. You may find this in a map of Rosinus, Antiq. Roman.
lib. 1. cap. 13. describing the city of Rome as it was built by Romulus; and
afterward made more great and capacious by the Kings. And Livie himself says,
That when Romulus divided the tribes or wards of the city into four parts, he
did it answerable to the quarters and hills of the city. It being (I say)
probable, that the city of Hebron was quadrata, it might be called (...), and
Kiriath-arbee, of (...), RABA, quadravit: from whence comes (...), RABUA, or
RABUANG, quadratum and quadrum; cujus latera quatuor longitudine and latitudine
sunt aequalia, Whose four sides are equal in length and latitude. As Exodus
27.1. Altar erit quadratum, The Altar shall be foure-square: from whence also
comes (...), ARBA, quatuor. So from the foure-square building of the city, it
may be called Kiriath-arbee; as old Jerusalem, which was built foure-square on
the four hills, mount Sion, mount Moria, mount Acra, and mount Bezetha, says
the Translatour of the travels of the holy Patriarchs. As the new Jerusalem
(...), Quadrangularis sita est, vel, In quadro posita est, Lies foure-square,
Apoc. 21.16. So that Kiriath-arbee, Civitas quatuor, may be expounded, Civitas
quadrilatera, quadrimembris, quadricollis, A city of four sides, four parts,
four hills: for even so Rome is called Septicollis, The city of seven hills.
And Douza of late, and ancienter Nicetas, call Constantinople also (...), Vrbem
septicollem, The city of seven hills. And indeed, the same Translatour in his
Itinerarium totius Sacrae Scripturae, page 85. thus reports, Others there are
that say, the city Hebron, being divided into four parts, was therefore
called (...) for ARBA signifies a quaternion, from the root (...), RABA,
Foure-square.

6. But grant we further, that Kiriath-arbee does here signify the city of
four men: yet it follows not, it was so called because Adam, Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob were these four men. For Heth, the son of that cursed Canaan,
whose posterity (the Hittites) inhabited in it, first built the city, says
he ibid. in his Itinerar. and Heth might be one of these four men. Secondly,
it is said Genesis 35.27. Jacob came unto Mambre, unto the city of Arbee, which
is Hebron. Whence we may conclude, that the city had three other names, of
three other distinct men, viz. of Mambre, who was Abraham's friend and
confederate, Genes. 14.13. of Arbee, a great giant (as I proved before) of
Hebron, one of Calebs sons so called, 1. Chron. 2.42. But how in Jacobs time
(or perhaps in Moses time, who wrote the book of Genesis) it might be called
Hebron of Calebs unborn son, is difficult to conceive, unless by
prophetical anticipation. Howsoever, Adrichomius says word for word out of
Hierom, Hebron, ab uno filiorum caleb, sortita est vocabulum.
Hebron was so called from one of the sons of Caleb. I should rather think,
Caleb himself, well known to Moses, might be the fourth man, of whom the city
might be called Civitas quatuor hominum, The city of four men, if from men it
had its denomination of Kiriath-arba: For Josuah gave unto Caleb, Hebron for an
inheritance, Josh. 14.13. and because he drove thence the three famous giants,
the grandchildren of Arba, the sons of Anak; Sheshai, Ahiman, and Talmi,
Josh. 15.14. for Conquerours left their names unto the cities which they
overcame, 2. Sam. 12.28. Neither is it unlikely, but Caleb might call his son
Hebron, after the name of the city bequeathed him, rather then the city,
after his sons name, especially, since there is mention of a city Hebron
before there is any mention of a man Hebron, or of Caleb himself.

Moreover, I read of an other exposition given by Solomo Trecensis, that it
might be called Civitas quatuor virorum, The city of four men, from Anak and
his three monstrous before-recited sons, who dwelt there. For both cities and
lands have been called after the names of giants: as Ashtarosh, alias
Hashtaroth, Aseroth, and Astaroth-Carnaim, and Carnaim-Astradoth in the
confines of the land of Hus was a great city, inhabited by giants called
Carnaim, or Rephaim (and the place, says Adrichomius, was called TERRA
GIGANTUM) whom Chedorlaomer killed when in the time of Abraham he led an army,
and fought against the king of Sodom, Genes. 14.5. And there was a valley of
giants not far from the cave of Adullam, says Vatablus on 2. Sam. 23.13. and
the Seventie read in that place, (...), In the cave or den of giants: and so
both the Interlinearie and Genevans have it in the margin, which others read
in valle Rephaim. So much be said to show it might be called Kiriath-arbee,
from other four men, and not from the four Patriarchs, if from four men it
had its appellation.

7. Grant we yet once again, more then we need, that it was called
Kiriath-arbee from four Patriarchs, yea and from the burial of four
Patriarchs in that place (which can never be proved;) yet it is not evinced,
nor will follow necessarily, that Adam was one of these four Patriarchs there
buried. S. Hierom, in Epitaph. sanct. Paulae, says, Kiriath-arbee was Oppidum
quatuor virorum.
The town of four men, of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and the great Adam, whom the
Jews say to be there buried, according to the book of Joshua; Though (says he)
Plerique Caleb quartum putant, cujus ex latere, memoria monstratur.
most think Caleb was the fourth man, whose rib is a memorial. And Adrichomius
himself makes the sepulcher of Caleb not far from Hebron. The opinion of
Adams being there buried, is fathered on the Jews: the common Tenet was, that
Caleb was the fourth man. Probability also consorteth therewith: for if Adam
had been there buried; as Abraham could not have been ignorant thereof, so he
would, in that regard, have the rather bought that place, and perhaps would
have given intimation of it to the children of Heth. But as it should seem,
Abraham stood indifferent at the first, and said only, Give me a possession of
a burying-place with you, Genes. 23.4. And when they offered him any of their
sepulchers, he chose the cave of Machpelah. To conclude, the objection of
Adrichomius is thus answered: Kiriath-Arbee may signify the city of Arbee; or
the city of four things noted and memorable; or the city of four angles,
sides, or parts; the city sited on four hills; and if it be to be
interpreted, Civitas quatuor hominum, A city of four men, the four men may
be, Heth, Mambre, Arbe, and Caleb; or Anak and his three monstrous sons.
Howsoever, the word proves not, that four men were there buried: and if it
proved so much, yet Adam was none of these four; for Adam was not buried in
Hebron, but in mount Calvarie, as I proved before to the full, and yet shall
add more by and by.

8. To the last and fourth objection of S. Hierom, being a demand, why others
even thieves were there buried? I answer, Though Adam were there buried, yet
what hindered, but it might be a fit place for malefactors to be executed,
especially being on high, and without the walls of the city? and both thieves
might there suffer as in a place appointed for such use by the Magistrate; and
Christ might there die, as appointed by the secret providence of God, beyond
the reach of man, that the blood of the second Adam might fall on the sepulcher
of the first Adam, and other sinners: to signify, that the water and blood
flowing from Christ, did purge even the greatest malefactors, Adam, and the
notorious sons of Adam. Divinely says S. Augustine, Sermon. 72. detempore, Et
vere fratres non incongrue creditur, quia ibi erectus sit Medicus, ubi jacebat
Aegrotus: and diguum erat, ubi occiderat humana superbia, ibi se inclinaret
divina Misericordia; ut sanguis ille pretiosus, etiam corporaliter puiverem
antiqui peccatoris dum diguatur stillando contingere, redemisse credatur.
Truly, brethren, with good reason we believe, that there the Physician was
lifted up where the sick man lay: and it was well worthy that divine mercy
should there stoop, where humane pride fell; that Christ's precious blood
vouchsafing corporally to touch and moisten the ashes of old Adam, may be
believed to redeem him.

To conclude, either the two learned women, Paula and Eustochium, or Hierom
rather himself (whose style it seems to be) in Epist. 17. ad Marcellam, says,
In hoc tunc loco, and habitasse dicitur, and mortuus esse Adam: unde and locus,
in quo crucifixus est Dominus noster, CALVARIA appellatur; quod ibi sit antiqui
hominis Calvaria condita, ut secundi Adam, id est, Christi sanguis, de Cruce
stillans, primi Adam and jacentis Protoplasti peccata dilueret.
In this place then Adam both dwelt and died: From whence that place where our
Lord was crucified is called CALVARIA; because there was buried the head of the
old Adam, that the blood of the second Adam, namely Christ, distilling from the
cross, might blot out the sins of the first-formed Adam, thereunder lying.

9. An objection more, Franciscus Lucas Brugensis touches at, against this
opinion: namely, that if the Jews had known that Adams sepulcher was on that
mount Calvarie, they would have had the place in far greater esteem; they
would have decked it with some stately monument; and never have suffered the
malefactors inordinately there to be executed. The former part of which
objection, as I do strengthen by Matthew. 23.29. Ye build the tombs of the
Prophets, and garnish the tombs of the righteous, says Christ to the Scribes
and Pharisees: so to it I answer thus; That there is not the least touch in
Scripture, nor in any Author, that I remember, that the Jews ever regarded or
honored Adam, or held him righteous, or gloried in him above others: nay, they
thought ill of him, 2. Esdr. 3.21. etc. and 2. Esdr. 4.30. and find fault with
him 2. Esdr. 7.48. O thou Adam, what have thou done? for though it was thou
that sinned, thou art not fallen alone, but we all that come of thee. And a
little before, namely verse 46. This is my first and last saying, that it had
been better not to have given the earth unto Adam; or else when it was given
him, to have restrained him from sinning. Mark also the Antithesis used
Ecclesiasticus 49.16. Sem and Seth were in great honor among men; and so was
Adam above every living thing in the creation: where he remarkably extolleth
Sem and Seth; but praises Adams excellency only at the creation: And so
Vatablus expounds it. Howsoever, after his fall he was not so highly esteemed
as others were. No more did the multitude show any extraordinary estimate of
Noah, though as Adam was the fruitful root, the protoplast; so Noah was the
restorer of mankind, under God: For these were the founders as well of
Gentiles as Jews. But Abraham, and the Patriarchs, and the Prophets since them,
they reverenced above measure, for the extraordinary blessings vouchsafed by
God unto the Jews above the Gentiles for their sakes, and in them, and by them.
Now to such indeed their posterity builded tombs, Matthew. 23.30. though their
fathers had killed some of them.

To the second part of the objection, Why they did suffer malefactors to be
there punished; I answer, that it is a doubt undecided, whether the ordinary
delinquents were put to death on mount Calvarie, before the Romans overcame
the Jews. If not, then patience perforce; they could not remedy it, if the
other appointed it. If so, yet the Jews might be ignorant of Adams sepulcher:
and how could they grace and beautify his tomb, when they knew not where he
lay? Again, what if I say, That like as Gods eternal decree and determinate
counsel being, that Christ should die for our sins, the Jews and Gentiles,
Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, yea the devils themselves were, for a while and
a time, blinded, that they knew not, or would not know Christ to be the
Messiah, though they had more evident miraculous proofs of his working, then
could be of a buriall-place, so long fore-passed, as Adams was; but put him to
death, Act. 2.23. and chap. 3.17. So Gods eternal decree, that Christ should
be crucified in the execution-place of malefactors, and in the place of Adams
sepulcher, being (perhaps) to this end, to manifest, that Christ's blood did
wash and purge sin original, sin actual; Adam and notorious offenders,
with all and all manner of persons; and all, and all kind of sins; the
people were also blinded, that either they did not know, or not respect the
place of Adams burial; especially since God often casts in their teeth Adams
disobedience, and compared their sins to his; They, like Adam, have
transgressed the covenant, Hos. 6.7. Where Drusius prefers this reading with
us, with Hierom, with Pagnine, and with Rabbi Solomon, the ordinary
Interpreter of the Hebrews, before the reading of Junius and Tremellius, and
the Genevans. And Jerem. 32.19. Gods eyes were open to all the ways of the
sons of Adam. Which is also confirmed, Isa. 43.27. 2. Esdr. 7.11. Thus much
in love of truth, against all opposites, with Pineda, for the common opinion of
the Fathers, that Adam was buried on Golgotha. I add, that if any of the
Patriarchs arose bodily, Adam was one. For, upon other reasons hereafter to be
shown, I dare not be so assertive, as the Liturgies of diverse Churches, and as
diverse Fathers, who are express, that Adam was raised from his grave. See them
cited by the learned James Usher, Bishop of Mead, in his answer to a challenge
made by a Jesuit, page 324. -- which is the next point to be handled.

O Light inaccessible, O Ancient of days, O Fullness of knowledge, govern me
walking in the paths of darkness, in things of old, in ambiguities and
uncertainties of opinion, and keep me from singularity of self-presuming; that
I may keep the unity of truth in the bond of peace, through him, who is both
our Truth and our Peace, even Jesus Christ the Righteous. Amen.
CHAP. VII.
1. Though Adam was buried on Calvarie, as Pineda says, yet his proofs are
weak, that Adam was raised with Christ, and went bodily into heaven with him.
The cited place of Athanasius proves only Adams burial there. Origin, in the
place cited, is against Pineda. Augustine is palpably falsified.

2. Adams skull showed lately at Jerusalem.

3. Dionysius Carthusianus says, Eve then arose. His opinion is without proof.

4. Nor Abraham then arose.

5. Nor Isaac then arose, whatsoever Pineda affirms.

1. BUt the second part of Pineda his opinion, on Job the 19.25. I cannot like,
though he labors to prove it, partly by authority, partly by reason; That
those many, who arose about the time of Christ's Passion, ascended bodily into
heaven with him. As Authors, he cites Athanasius in his Sermon on the Passion
and the Cross, Origin, etc. That Adam was buried on Golgotha, Athanasius
says; but that Adam arose not long after Christ's resurrection, I cannot find
in him, or cited by any other out of him. As for Origin his second Author, in
the same Tractate cited by Pineda, he makes directly against him: for he
maintains from Tradition, that the first Adam was buried where Christ was
crucified: that as in Adam all die, so in Christ all should be made alive: that
in the place of a skull, the head of mankind (namely Adam) Resurrectionem
inveniat cum populo universo, Should partake of the general resurrection, by
the resurrection of our Lord and Savior, who there suffered and rose again.
But the last and best Author, the divine S. Augustine, is palpably and
apparently falsified: for he has no such word in the quoted place. Lastly, the
reason that Pineda alleges is shallow, That Adam who heard the sentence of
death, should presently be partaker of the resurrection by him, and with him,
who had satisfied for the sin. What likelihood is there of inference or
coherence? I dare say, not one of the Fathers cited at large by Baronius,
Salianus, and Maldonate, to prove that Adam was buried in Golgotha, do give the
least touch at this reason of Pineda; but many other ends of Adams being there
buried do they muster up.

2. And the Jesuit Pineda, either knew it not, or forgot it, or sleeked it
over, as little imagining we should have notice that the cheating priests, who
kept the sepulcher, and the Church built over it, at Jerusalem, did show to the
devout Christians a skull, which they said was the skull of Adam: of which,
they said also, the mountain was called Golgotha, as says the eye and
eare-witnesse, Mr. Fines Morison, in his first part, 3. book, 2. chap. page
230. and page 233. Thus, according to them, Adam either arose not hitherto; or
arose without a head, at least without his skull; or with an other man's head:
which three latter ways destroy the truth of the resurrection. Therefore he
arose not at all as yet. Lastly, should we grant that Adam did bodily arise
with Christ; yet has Pineda neither Author nor reason, that Adam ascended
with Christ into heaven (as I said before) which is the main point now in
question. Thus much (if not too much) touching Adam.

3. Eve also arose, says Dionysius Carthusianus on Matthew. 27. but voucheth no
authority, nor produces any reason, or probability: and therefore I pass it
over the more slightly; adding only this, that in the Original it is not,
(...), but (...) so that except (...) be understood, either no women arose, or
more then one or two; though Pineda mentions not one woman; and Carthusian,
but only and soly Eve. But why Eve should rather arise, then Sarah, or the
mother of Moses, who were singled out for famous Heroinae, Hebr. 11. or other
Prophetisses, in the Old and New Testament, as old Anna, and the like, I see no
reason: or that Eve in her raised body, should be translated into heaven, and
not Adam her husband, nor Abraham, nor David, is both foolish and fabulous.
This have I said, as supposing the words to be understood of women alone, as
indeed they are not; nor probably can they be applied to women mixed with men,
so far as any likelihood could present it self to the great conjecturer Pineda,
who would have balked none of them.

4. Abraham arose, says Pineda on Job 19. and annexeth this color, because
Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's day, and saw it, and was glad, John 8.56. I
answer, Whatsoever is meant by these words of the Text, My day: either Christ's
Godhead; which Abraham saw, Quia mysterium Trinitatis agnovit.
Because he acknowledged the mystery of the Trinity, says S. Augustine: Or
the day of Christ's nativitie; which Abraham might have notice of in his life
time, by supernatural inspirations; and then did remember, being dead; and
desired that day (for, separated souls have both remembrance and appetite
intellectual, as I shall evidence hereafter:) Or it may be, Abraham being in
bliss, might first know it, by divine illumination, so soon as the day came;
and thereupon rejoiced, as the Angel did; and the heavenly host, Luke 2.13. of
which host, Abraham might be one: for, even the souls of men are also called
(...), Revel. 19.14. says Gregory, Moral. 31.12. In the foresaid place of Luke
mention is made of an Angel and the heavenly host; whereas, if only Angels
were the heavenly host, it might have been only said, The Angels: or only,
The heavenly host: but, The Angel and the heavenly host may give us cause to
think, that there were some of the heavenly host, which were not Angels; though
Angels only be mentioned. If so; humane souls were part of that quire: and
then Abraham, in likelihood, was one of them. Now, as the chief Angel, like a
chaunter, began the Evangelisme of Christ's birth; so might it be answered by
the heavenly host; viz. (as is probable) partly by the Angels singing Glory to
God in the highest; partly by Abraham, and the souls of men, concluding the
Anthem, On earth peace, good will toward men. I say, Whatsoever is meant by the
words My day, they cannot be expounded of Christ's resurrection.

Some there are, who interpret My day, of the time of Christ's passion; whom
Maldonate justly misliketh, because (says he) it is added, ABRAHAM SAW IT, AND
REJOICED: but then, when Christ said these words, Abraham could not see Christ's
passion, because it was not yet come. I may say the same or more, against
Pineda, who will have it expounded of the day of Christ's resurrection: for,
Christ speaks of the day that was past, he did see it, he was glad, and
rejoiced: so that day was ended, when Christ said this: but Christ's
resurrection was not accomplished, when he uttered these words: therefore they
cannot be understood of Christ's resurrection. And if they were so to be
interpreted, yet it is not written, Abraham arose, or Abraham was partaker with
Christ, or Abraham ascended bodily into heaven (this being the issue, which we
joined, in this controversy:) but, Abraham rejoiced, he saw it, and was glad:
which words differ far from Pineda his ridiculous interpretation.

5. An other, which rose at the same time, was Isaac (says Pineda, ibid.) for
he was a parable of the resurrection; and this was done, to recompense the fear
(which possessed Isaac) of being slain, when he represented Christ.

To this puncto I answer; Pineda himself will not say, that every one, who was
a parable, or pledge of the resurrection, or who figured it, was raised; as
Samson from his sleep, arising in strength, and carrying away the gates of
Azzah, in type of Christ, who brought away the gates both of death and hell: or
those, who were raised by the Prophets, or by Christ himself, or the like; for
he mentions none of these. Secondly, what proof, what consequence, what
shadow of truth is there, that Isaac his fear, which was past (he being dead
one thousand seven hundred years before) should just now be recompensed, and
recompensed by being raised to a temporal life? which was a poor reward, if
he ascended not into heaven: which Pineda proves not, nor can prove. Lastly,
though it be truth it self, that Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac,
Genes. 31.53. yet it is not meant, as Pineda fancieth, the fear that Isaac was
in, when he was to be offered. For (I suppose) he knew by Abraham, that it was
Gods especial appointment; and that he also willingly offered himself; and
might think (as Abraham did) that God was able to raise him up even from the
dead, Hebr. 11.19. that in his voluntary condescent, and free-will-offering,
he might be a type of Christ, who laid down his life, John 10.17. But the fear
of Isaac was either the filial fear, by which Isaac reverenced and worshipped
God, (as Aben Ezra and Cajetan say) or the pious and humane fear, wherewith
Jacob revered his father Isaac: or rathest of all, Fear is here taken for the
object of fear, Metonymically, for God himself: as it is also taken, Esa. 8.13.
Let God be your fear; let God be your dread; as Cornelius Cornelii a lapide
has observed, after Augustine, and diverse others: for, not Isaac his fright,
or Jacob his piety, is to be sworn by, but God, Deuter. 6.13.

O God, the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the God of the living, and not of
the dead; I beseech thee, make me to die to my self, and live to thee; through
him, whom the Fathers looked for, and whose day Abraham rejoiced to see, even
Jesus Christ, thy only Son, my alone Savior. Amen.
CHAP. VIII.
1. Pineda his fancy, that Jacob then was raised.

2. The reason, why the Patriarchs desired the Translation of their bones, was
not, to rise with Christ, as Pineda opineth; but upon other grounds, and to
other ends.

3. Where Joseph was first buried, where secondly.

4. The great difficulty of Act. 7.16. propounded. Two answers disliked. The
original is not corrupt.

5. Beza taxed for imputing corruption to the original, on Mat. 13.35. and on
Luk 22.20. and on Matthew. 27.9. All these places defended, and the sacred
Majesty of Scripture, vindicated from criticisme. Many good answers to Matthew.
27.9. Erasmus faulty with Beza.

6. S. Augustine and Cyrill against them.

7. Masius and Junius prefer the Arabic and Syriack before the Greek. Junius
recanteth. A little error may (perhaps) be ascribed to the Transcribers. A
general error in Greek and Latin may not be admitted in all copies of
Scriptures.

1. JAcob then also arose, says Pineda in the same place; since he had a great
care of translating his bones, out of Egypt, into the land of Canaan, Genes.
49.29. By the same reason, the Jesuit might have argued, that Joseph then also
arose: for he had the like care of his bones, Genes. 50.25. yea a greater care:
for he took a strict oath (Exodus 13.19.) of the children of Israel, for the
performance of his desire; whereas Jacob put Joseph only to the oath; and
concerning the rest of his children, it was but a fatherly command. Yet Pineda
skippeth over Joseph, who was a lively parable and figure of Christ in most
things; as being the best beloved of his father; as being sent to look to his
brethren; as hated of them and sold by them, and put into the pit; as thrust
into the dungeon; as being innocent, and falsely accused; as being taken out of
the pit, Genes. 37.28. and out of the dungeon, Genes. 41.14. as raised, and
raised to be next to Pharaoh himself; as being worshipped by his brethren; as
having the double portion of the firstborn; as a mediator for his brethren,
and a preserver of them in the time of need.

2. But the truth is, neither Jacob, nor Joseph ever desired the removal of
their bones, in that regard, which Pineda aims at: and never any (that I
could read) but he, and the Author of the scholasticall history, Quaest. 100
in Genes. aver so much: it being against reason; for then the Patriarchs
would have caused their bones to have been translated to Jerusalem, being the
right way from Hebron to Calvarie; or to mount Calvarie itself. But Jacob was
buried by Hebron, thirty miles, or thereabout, from Golgotha; and Joseph was
buried in the Tribe of Ephraim, and not of Judah. Now as they were to pass
from the land of Goshen to Sychem, they must pass not far from Hebron; and
from thence near to Jerusalem; and leaving Jerusalem, and mount Calvarie but a
little, the way was to Sychem, in the Tribe of Ephraim. Therefore, if they
desired to be translated, in hope of such a resurrection with Christ, (as
Pineda wildely imagines) they would never have carried their bones close by
mount Calvarie, and so beyond it; but there would have deposited them: nor
would have transported them to Sychem, which was about as far beyond the
sepulcher of the first and second Adam, as Hebron, the buriall-place of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, was short of mount Calvarie. Their aim was to be
buried in the land of Canaan, as the land of promise, as the figure of heaven,
as the ground which their Fathers bought and paid for, and were interred in. I
will lie with my Fathers, and thou shall carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in
their burying-place, says Jacob, Genes. 47.30. and bury me with my Fathers,
Genes. 49.29. says the same Jacob. Besides, if with reference to Christ his
resurrection, and in hope to be then and there raised by him and with him, they
removed their bones into Canaan; it was to be near to Christ's rising-place,
and to save part of the long journey from Goshen to Golgotha. But this can be
no reason; for Job arose, says Pineda: but he was buried in the land of Hus,
in Arabia, not near unto Calvarie, though not so far indeed as Goshen. And
Moses died in the wilderness; and Daniel in the captivity of Babylon; which
was farther off, then the land of Goshen, from Christ's sepulcher, by almost
five hundred miles; and yet Daniel and Moses arose also, says Pineda. And Noah
died hard by mount Ararat in Armenia, 600 miles Northward from Jerusalem, or
thereabout: yet Noah also arose, says Pineda. Now, why could not Jacob and
Joseph be raised, and come a shorter way, from Goshen to Jerusalem, then Daniel
or Noah could a longer way? And to beat Pineda with his own words, Nunquid
lassitudine viae deterrerentur and fatigarentur, qui immortali vita
potiebantur; ut venire ex regione longin qua opportune non possent?
Were they terrified or wearied with the tediousness of the way, who enjoyed
an immortal life; that they could not come fitly from so remote a region? Or,
can they be truelier said to come into a place, into the holy city, that come
from near, then they that come from far? This Pineda alleges, to prove
that the graves of Saints opened afar off, as well as at Jerusalem: Therefore
say I, What need they care to have their bones brought near to Golgotha, to
that end and purpose?

3 Concerning Joseph, he was first buried on an high ground, upon a little
branch of Nilus, in a city now called EL-FIUM (says John Leo, upon report, in
his eighth book of the history of Africa) and Moses dug up his bones.
Secondly, it is said expressly, Josh. 24.32. the children of Israel buried his
bones in Sychem, in a parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of
Hemor, the father of Sychem, for an hundred pieces of silver; and it became the
inheritance of the children of Joseph. On which place, Masius inquiring, why
holy men should so earnestly contend to be buried in Canaan, answers himself,
Vt apud sucrum popularium animos, fidem promissis Dei firmarent, qualem ne mors
quidem cripere potuisset.
To confirm their countrie-mens minds by the promises of God, with such a
faith, as death should not take away. Whereunto I add the place of the
Apostle, Heb. 11.22. By faith Joseph, when he died, made mention of the
departing of the children of Israel; and gave commandment concerning his bones;
making the removing of his bones, and the memorial thereof, a divine
prognostic, that they should come forth of the Egyptian captivity or
slaverie, and enjoy the land, promised to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; of which
their bones, and their wives bones, beforehand did, and Joseph his bones
should take seizen and possession. Kimki says (and Masius likes it) that Jacob
gave to Joseph that place of burial, because he being, as it were, the Parent,
Monitour, and Guide of his brethren, should be wholly alienated from Egyptian
affairs, to think of the land of promise. And since Masius taxes the Jews for
thinking, that they who were buried in Canaan should first arise; he would have
laughed at Pineda, if he had read in him, that a Patriarch caused his bones to
be translated, in hope to be raised within a while of Christ's resurrection.
Solenne autem fuit priscis illis Patribus, ut quisque in suam inferreretur
possessionem.
Each of those Fathers were solemnly brought into their own possession (says
the same Masius:) which is thus confirmed, because Abraham did bury Sara in his
own possession, Genes. 23.19, 20. Isaac and Ishmael buried Abraham in the field
which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth, Genes. 25.9, 10. And to sum up
the rest, In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, (the purchased cave
and field) which is before Mambre, was buried Abraham and Sara, Isaac and
Rebeka, Jacob and Lea, Genes. 49.30, 31. The distance of which cave or field
from Calvarie, I gathered before, from Adrichomius, to be 250 Stadia; which,
upon allowance of eight Stadia to one Mile, amounts to one and thirty miles,
and a quarter: from which account S. Augustine differs but little,
considering the various reckoning of miles, with the diverse measurings of
beginnings and endings: for, Augustine, Quaest. sup. Genes. lib. 1. quaest.
161. thus reports, Dicunt, ab eo loco, quod ABRAHEMIUM vocatur, ubi sunt ista
corpora, abesse locum, ubi crucifixus est Dominus, fere triginta milliaribus.
From the place called Abrahemium, or Abraham's churchyard, where are these
bodies, (namely of Abraham and Sara, Isaac and Rebeka, Jacob and Leah) to the
place where our Lord was crucified, there is almost thirty miles distance. Now,
as the sepulcher of the three Patriarchs was thus far from Jerusalem,
South-west-ward; so Sychem, where Joseph his bones were buried, was farther
from Jerusalem, toward the North.

4 One difficulty more there is, and a great one: I may not pass it; for the
length will be recompensed by the sweetness. Acts 7.15, 16. Jacob, and our
fathers died, and were carried over unto Sychem, and laid in the sepulcher that
Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emor the father of Sychem.
Which passage seems to contradict what out of other parts of Scripture I
proved concerning the Patriarchs sepulcher.

That this is a knot hard to be untied, all confess: S. Hierom promised in his
101 Epist. to clear it, says Lorinus: And in his Questions on Genes. says
Beza: but he has not performed his promise, say both of them, on Acts 7. Nodum
nectit Hieronimus, nec eum dissolvit, says Erasmus: And I only propound it,
says he, that the studious reader may be stirred up to discuss it. But this
is a shallow slurre, unfit for so great a Critic; for many had done so much
before, and more then so. I come to the point.

That there are invented many ways, and means of answering, cannot be denied:
but some are vast and improbable; some more fair and expedite. The absurd
answers are two. The first, That the Original is there corrupt; and that, for
Abraham, Jacob is to be written and read; I say, not meant, expounded, or
interpreted, but exchanged, and intruded into the Text; and that, (...), should
be expunged, as needless; it being with equal ignorance and boldness, added
by one or other, says Andrew Masius on Josh. 24.32. With Masius agrees Beza
in this, that the name of Abraham is crept into the Text; adding, that the
erring, in notes of number, or proper names, must not be ascribed to the
Authors; but to the ignorant transcribers. But I say, that the erring in a
proper name, or notes of number, may breed as great and unsufferable confusion,
unlikelihood, inconvenience, yea untruth, as the error in any other common
word. And why the errors in proper names should be ascribed to ignorant
transcribers, rather then errors in other words; or that the holy Spirit does
privilege other words, and not proper names, or numbers, from being mistaken,
misplaced, misadded, or superadded in the Text, I see not.

Aretius bluntly blundereth it out, that you must understand Jacob for Abraham:
yet by what example, or for what reason, he mentions not: but stumbleth on a
truth; of which hereafter.

Drusius, Praeterit. lib. 5. on the words Quod emit Abraham, has yet some show
of reason. It seems (says he) it was sometimes written, EMIT IPSE, that is
JACOB, into whose place the name of ABRAHAM is crept.

5. Beza defends it by two parallels: the first out of Hierom, who in his book
de optimo genere interpretandi, ad Pammachium, notes, that the name of Isaiah
was crept into many copies, on Matthew. 13.35. that afterward, the name of Asaph
was substituted for Isaiah; and now neither of them is there read.

I answer to the misapplied instances of Beza, that I cannot abide to hunt
after errors in the Scripture, and to cast aspersions on it. To question the
corruption of the Canon, to pass our judgments, whether the square or rule be
right or crooked, to put into the Text, or to take from it, as some
Philologizing Neotericks endeavor in their super-nice criticisme, is to tear
up the very foundation of religion. Whilst other answers may be found, though
but probable, I should not have such a thought, as Beza had, on Luke 24.13.
where he acknowledges, both the Syriack, and all our Copies have it (...),
Sexaginta, Threescore; and the exact truth is accordant to that reading: for
Emaus is seven miles from Jerusalem, as Mr Sands (who rode from Jerusalem to
Emaus) witnesses, page 174. and threescore Stadia (allowing eight Stadia to a
mile) make seven miles and an half; which halfe-mile, upon diversity of
measures, or the beginning of measuring, or ends thereof, makes small
difference. Yet Beza says, Aut hic peccatum est in numero, aut apud Josephum,
de Bello Judaico 7.27. non recte scribuntur stadia triginta. The more
favorable phrase should have been by Beza ascribed rather to the Scripture,
then to Josephus. Or can we think, that all Copies do err? He makes us fight
upon the ice, and to have no firm footing. Why should he use the first part of
the disjunction, when he might better distinguish, and so reconcile all?
Likewise Beza, on Luke 22.20. confessing the uniformitie of reading, both in
the Syriack, and all the Greek Copies which he had seen; yet adds boldly, Aut
manifestum est soloecophanes, -- aut potius, cum haec essent ad marginem
annotata ex Matthaeo, and Marco, postea in Contextum irrepserunt. Now, though
he would sleek it over afterward, saying, Potest excusari soloecismus, etc.
yet the wound, which he gave to the Word of Truth is too deep, to be so healed;
and the very plaster is offensive: for he committed a soloecisme, who looking
on the earth, cried out, O Coelum! and casting his eyes up to heaven; cried, O
Terra! Had the Reverend Beza no handsomer word for his plaster? might he not
have defended it, by the Hebrew Idiotisme, without calling it a Soloecisme?
Soloecophanes might have well been spared: but Soloecismus is not to be endured.

Much more might be said: but I dwell unwillingly on this point; and return to
the first place of Matthew. 13.35. and say, Who ever denied, but that some Copies
have been corrupted? and in some of them, some words foisted in? but all Greek,
all Latin Copies, with the Arabic and Syriack translations, read Abraham,
and not Jacob: Whereas some Copies were always perfect, in that place of
Matthew. Now, if you grant corruption in any point, or title, in all the Greek,
and all the Latin Copies; how will you prove any part or word of the New
Testament to be incorrupt? Which razeth up the very Cornerstone of our Faith.

Mr Beza again objecteth, that the name of Jeremie is written for Zachary,
Matthew. 27.9. I answer, that the Author of the book of Maccabees, gives us to
understand, that Jeremie wrote other things, which now we have not, 2. Maccab.
2.1. and so did diverse of the Prophets: and why may not this be then taken from
some of those works, which are perished? Secondly, S. Hierome says, a Jew
brought him an Apocryphal book of Jeremie, in which he found this testimony,
word for word; and this book was called APOCRYPHA, or OCCULTA JEREMIAE, The
Apocryphals or hid writings of Jeremie, says Erasmus on Matthew. 27. As what S.
Paul says of Jannes and Jambres, 2. Tim. 3.8. and what S. Jude says of
Michael the Archangel, striving with the Devil, is thought to be taken out of
the books Apocryphal: so might this testimony be cited also out of Jeremies
Apocryphals. Thirdly, Erasmus supposes, that Zachary had two names, and was
called both Zachary and Jeremie; and so no inconvenience follows. Fourthly,
not only the Syriack leaves out the name of Jeremie, but even in Augustines
time, the name of Jeremie was not in many Latin Copies, as Augustine himself
testifies, de Consensu Evangelistarum lib. 3. cap. 7. The ordinary gloss
also says, that in some editions, it is only thus, By the Prophet, and the
name of Jeremie is left unmentioned. Fifthly, Augustine in the last recited
place of his, resolves, that the Divine providence purposely set down Jeremie
for Zachary; and what the holy Spirit did dictate, S. Matthew did truly
write. And one reason why the Spirit of God confounded the names of Jeremie and
Zachary, was this, says Augustine; To insinuate, that all the Prophets wrote
by one Spirit, and wonderfully consented in one; and therefore we must believe
that Quacunque per eos Sp^itus Sanctus dixit, and singula esse omnium, and
omnia singulorum.
What the holy Ghost spoke by them is not to be appropriated unto any one, but
to all and every of them. What was said by Jeremie, was as well Zacharies, as
Jeremies; and what was said by Zachary, was as well Jeremies as Zacharies. God
spoke, not by the MOUTHS; but, by the MOUTH of all his holy Prophets, since the
world began, Act. 3.21. and they had but one Spirit to guide them into all
truth. The Prophecy of Amos, is called The book of the Prophets, Acts 7.42.
and the Word of God, which in diverse places is called, in the plural number,
Scriptures, (as John 5.39. (...), Search the Scriptures) is also oftentimes
called, in the singular number, The Scripture: as John 2.22. they believed the
Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said. Belief was to rest, as well on
his Word only, without Scripture, as on Scripture, though he had said nothing:
and the word Scripture is not to be restrained only to that place of Scripture
before pointed at; but to the whole Word of God written, which they believed.
The Scripture has concluded all under sin, Gal. 3.22. where not one single
place only, but either common places of that point, or the whole body of the
Scripture is to be understood. A few words of a Psalm of David, is called by
Christ himself, The law of the Jews; It is written in their law, They hated me
without a cause, John 15.25. which is only so written, Psalm. 35.19. Again, he
says to the Jews, John 10.34. Is it not written in your Law, I have said, ye
are Gods? but it is written so only, Psalm. 83.6. Yea, though one and the same
thing in effect be written, both Isa. 28.16. and Psalm. 118.22. as also Matthew
21.42. and Acts 4.12. yet S. Peter reckons all, but as one; All, but one
Scripture, though severally written by these four: It is contained in the
Scripture, (says he) 1. Pet. 2.6. in the singular number; he mentions
Scripture, as if what one wrote the rest wrote. S. Peter says not, It is
contained in the Word, with reference to one Spirit inditing or inspiring,
(though that might have also been truly spoken) but contained in the
Scripture, with relation to the unity and consent of the Penmen. Lastly, the
words of the Evangelist are these, Matthew. 27.9. Then was fulfilled that which
was spoken by the Prophet Jeremie, saying, And they took the thirty pieces of
silver; (...), effatum Jeremiae, dicentis, That which was spoken by Jeremie,
saying, etc. Now Jeremiae might say it, speak it, dictate it, which is most
true, and is all that S. Matthew says; who by the Spirit might also know, that
Jeremie did teach, preach, prophecy, and utter these words: and yet for all
this, and after all this, Zachary by the same Spirit might write, transcribe,
and insert those words of Jeremie into his own Prophecy (which S. Matthew
denies not) as Baruch wrote diverse things which he had heard from Jeremie; as
Agur collected some Proverbs of Solomon. Again, there was no necessity that
all things whatsoever Jeremie, as a Prophet, did speak, Jerem. 36.2.
he himself or Baruch should write, much less presently: since there were many
years between Jeremie his speaking and his writing; for Enoch prophesied, as
it is in the 14. verse of the Epist. of S. Jude; but he prophesied, Saying,
etc. as it is there written: for writing was none, till God set the Copy unto
Moses, by writing the Law in the Tables on the mount.

Again, S. Paul (Act. 24.35.) remembers the words of our Lord Jesus, how he
said, It is more blessed to give, then to receive: yet none of the Evangelists
record such words: but this might the Apostles relate unto S. Paul; or by
divine inspiration he might know that Christ spoke them; or they might be part
of the words which Christ himself spoke unto S. Paul: for there is no
certainty, that they were written. S. John the Evangelist was commanded to
conceal, and not to write, the words of the seven thunders, Revel. 10.4. If he
had wholly concealed such a thing, we could not know it: he spoke it, but wrote
it not. Jeremie might speak this, and not write it; or write it, and not speak
it. Any of these answers is better, then to incline to Beza, that the Text is
erroneous, or patched up with a false addition; or to Erasmus, on Matthew. 27.
intimating, there was lapsus memoriae in Evangelistis: howsoever he qualifieth
it; That, if there were memoriae lapsus, in Nomine duntaxat, he did think no
man should be so morose, nosy, and stern, as thence to question the authority
of the whole Scriptures. But his opinion is justly exploded as hypercritically
nice, and Julius Scaligers whip here fetches blood of Erasmus, Maximus esse
potuisset, si minor esse voluisset: He diminishes himself, by taking upon him
to be a censor of the Scripture. Nihil parturiens, continuo parit omnia, says
a Papist of Erasmus.

6. Wiser S. Augustine, in Epist. 19. ad Hieronymum, thus; Ego solis cis
Scripturarum libris, qui jam Canonici appellantur, timorem hunc, and honore^
didici defer, ut nullum little autorem scribendo aliquid errasse firmissime
credam.
I have learned to give that reverence and honor only to those books of
Scripture which are called Canonical, that I most fully believe, no writer
thereof erred any Iota. But if there were a fail of their memory, they did
somewhat err, whatsoever Erasmus should seem to suggest; who would have taken
it in fume, if the Friars his opposites had said, there had been in his books
lapsus memoriae, A fail of memory. S. Augustine is constant to himself, and to
the truth: for again he says, concerning the Evangelists, Omnem falsitatem
abesse ab iis decet, non solum eam quae mentiendo promitur, sed eam etiam quae
obliviscendo.
The Evangelists must be so far from lying, that they must not fall into an
untruth of forgetfulness. S. Cyril. lib. 6. in Levitic. toward the end of his
book, ascending from one particular, says of the whole Scripture, divinely
inspired, Quid dicemus? Oblivionem dabimus in verbis Spiritus Sancti?
What shall we say? shall we grant forgetfulness in the words of the holy
Ghost? And he answers his own question, in general, Non audeo hoc de sacri^
sentire sermonibus.
I dare not think so of the sacred Text.

7. Yea, but says Masius, The Syriack translation proves, that this place is
faulty: for the Syriack Copies have it thus, Jacob was translated into Sychem,
and laid in the grave that Abraham bought for money of the sons of Hemor.
Junius his Syriack accords with Masius; and on that place Junius thus, The
Syriack Interpreter either used a diverse Copy, or his own judgment and
authority. Lastly, the Arabic translation, as it is set out by Junius,
reads it correspondently to the Syriack: and Junius on the Text, in the
Arabic translation, prefers the Arabic and Syriack reading before the
Greek; and the meaning of the Arabic and Syriack is this, That Jacob being
dead, was carried into the field of the Sychemites; the Egyptians accompanying
Joseph, and the Israelites; where septemdialis luctus, Seven days mourning was
made; and after the mourning he was carried again from Sychem to Hebron, to be
buried with Abraham. This is wittily invented, (says Beza) yet not to be
admitted. And indeed, Junius himself in his Parallels retracts it: and
Chorographie shows, it is no witty invention. For Hebron lies between
Goshen and Sychem: now that they should carry him from Goshen, even almost
through Hebron, it is not likely. Wherefore, to conclude, neither be the
Arabic or Syriack Copies of authority enough to confront the Greek (for the
Greek was not translated out of them, but they out of the Greek) neither may we
yield, that either the Evangelists did labi memoria, fail in their memories; or
that generally, in any place, all the Greek and Latin Copies are corrupted. If
it had been a literal error (as Genes. 3.15. the Vulgat reads ipsa, for
ipse or ipsum; or Dei, for diei, in Epist. Jude, verse. 6. or lapides seculi,
for lapides sacculi, Proverb. 16.11. or viduam ejus, for victum ejus, Psalm.
132.15. or fontem, for fortem, Psalm. 42.2.) we would yield it was the fault of
the transcriber: but to admit such a corruption, wherein is no similitude of
letters, and in all Copies, both Greek and Latin, I cannot like, though more
Authors, then Masius, Beza, Drusius, or Erasmus, did join hand in hand to
justify it.

O Infinite Spirit, unsearchable, yet searching all things; Omnipotent, yet
unable to lie or be untrue; who never did lead into error thy holy
Instruments, nor sufferedst the Penmen of thy sacred Scripture to take thy
Dictates amiss; I humbly beseech thee to inspire me with knowledge and zeal,
to vindicate thy heavenly Word, and the most blessed Writers thereof, from
imputed corruption, mistaking, or obliviousnesse. Grant this, at the Mediation
of my only Lord and Redeemer, Jesus Christ. Amen.
CHAP. IX.
1. The second answer disliked. Melchior Canus censured for saying, S. Steven
his memory failed him. His like proof from Jephthah his mistaking, answered.

2. An other argument of his, from Matthew. 2.6. answered.

3. Heinsius touched at, Cusanus rejected, for holding that Adam could have
understood all languages now in use. The manner of the confusion of tongues at
Babel.

4. The Oriental languages, a goodly ornament, and necessary in some places.
The Syriack enlightening the Greek.

5. The Jewish excommunications. Donations to Religious houses sealed up with
curses to the infringers. Mr. Seldom in part defended, though his History of
Tithes has done hurt. Maran-atha. The Amphibologie of Act. 3.21. cleared by
the Syriack. Vbiquitaries with Illyricus taxed. Heavens, and Heaven, taken for
God.

6. Heinsius strictly examined, and rejected.

7. Things granted: viz. The inspirations and conceptions of holy Penmen were
under one or other language: in which conceptions they could not err; nor
could they err in writing.

8. Questions handled at large: Whether it were necessary that the Scripture
should be written: Whether the sacred writers wrote casually: Whether they were
commanded to write: Whether they were compelled to write: Whether they
understood all that they wrote: Whether they did read profane Authors:
Whether they studied the things beforehand.

9. Conclusions against Heinsius. There was no difference between the Penmen
of the Divine writ of the Old and New Testament, in the point of conceiving and
writing in different languages. We are not to have recourse to the thoughts of
S. John, rather then his words. They had no liberty left them, to put in their
own conceits, or in writing to add or blot out what they had done. They had no
liberty to cloth their inward apprehensions with words of their own. They did
not conceive in one language, and write in another.

1 THus then, the constant and uniform accordance of the Greek and Latin
Copies being held for Authentical and Canonical, and all manner of corruption
and general aberration in any one letter being wholly removed; there is
invented a second way of answer, gross and absurd; which I dislike as ill, if
not worse then the former. A defender of it is Melchior Canus, de Locis
Theologicis, lib. 2. cap. 18. toward the end of that book and chapter. For he
would seem to gather from Beda and Rabanus, That it happened to Steven, as to
other common people; namely, that in a long narration, especially if it be
sudden, he has mingled and confounded some things, In quibusdam etiam memoria
lapsus fuerit.
And forgot himself in some things, to wit, in such things as belonged little
or nothing to the purpose: for he was busily musing, and intent upon the main
matter. But (says he) S. Luke writing the history, changed not one jot, but
writ as Steven spoke. Now we need not defend Steven from all error and fault
(says he) but we must quit the Evangelist. For only the Prophets, Apostles,
and Evangelists, did never labi memoria, or err in any matter, great or small;
other men did. His proofs are these.

Jephthah in Judges 11.26. pretends 300 years possession, when they were not
so many: and the divine Penman or Historiographer, writes as Jephthah
pretended; and established not the truth of the thing it self.

I answer, that Salianus, in his Annals, Anno Mundi 2849, makes one account,
wherein the time of the Israelites coming out of Egypt, to the instant of
Jephthahs arguing, is 377 years: and from the death of Sihon king of the
Amorites, 337 years. But the truth is, (if we will hit the exact number) both
Salianus and Tremellius, and many others say, That from the coming out of
Egypt, and from the giving of the Law, unto this present controversy of
Jephthah with the King of the Amorites, there were 305, or 306 years expired.
And Tremellius well observes, that Jephthah began his narration from their
coming forth of Egypt, verse. 16. Therefore thence begins the number, and the
reckoning. Now the shortning of an account, is an usual Ellipsis, both in
Scripture, and in other Authors. The 70 Interpreters are cited for 72. Among
the Romans, the Centum-viri consisted of one hundred and five men. Judges
20.46. all which fell of Benjamin that day, were 25000. yet there fell that day
100 more, verse. 35. So 2. Sam. 5.5. the account is shortened by six months
less then was set down in the precedent verse; it being Synecdoche frequent,
ad rotunditatem numeri.
A frequent Synecdoche, to make a round and smooth reckoning, says Tremellius.
If any shall yet contend, that Jephthah says expressly, v. 26. Israel dwelt in
Heshbon and her towns; and in Aroer and her towns; and in all the cities that
be along by the coasts of Arnon, 300 years; Peter Martyr on the place
answers, That the Scripture-account often follows the greater number. Now
because the years from Sihons death, were nearer 300. then 200. Jephthah
reckons not the refract, but the whole number; and accounts them 300
years, as inclining to the greater number. For Sihon was overcome, and slain
the last year of Moses his life; being to the present debate, 266 years,
says Abulensis; 267, says Lyranus; 270 years, says Peter Martyr. If Peter
Martyrs answer be slighted, I add, that the perfection of Scriptures stands
not so strictly on exactness of number, but that it puts a certain number for
an uncertain. Instances are obvious. So, while we plead too much for number, we
shall, as S. Augustine says, forget, or neglect, both weight and measure.
Lastly, grant that Jephthah either mistook, or mispleaded the years, in a
braving fashion; and say, that the holy Ghost has penned, not what was truth
in it self, but what Jephthah alleged erroneously, or covetously, for his
prescription (for Jephthah had more then one error:) yet, it follows not,
that S. Steven was deceived; for he was full of the holy Ghost, when he spoke
this, Act. 7.55. and before he spoke this, he was full of faith, and of the
holy Ghost, Act. 6.5. Full of faith and power, verse. 8. and they that disputed
with Steven, were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit, by which he
spoke, v. 10. Therefore he spoke wisely, truly, and by the Spirit, as well as
S. Luke wrote by the Spirit; and neither of them could in this passage err,
though Jephthah be held a man of imperfections.

2. Secondly, says Canus, the Evangelist has it, Matthew. 2.6. That IT IS
WRITTEN BY THE PROPHET, AND THOU BETHLEHEM, IN THE LAND OF JUDAH, ART NOT THE
LEAST AMONG THE PRINCES OF JUDAH, when it is not so written by the prophet; who
says, Micah 5.2. BUT THOU BETHLEHEM EUPHRATA, THOUGH THOU BE LITTLE AMONG THE
THOUSANDS OF JUDAH; the sense being very different, almost contrary. In which
place S. Matthew reports the words, not as they are in Micah; but as the chief
Priests and Scribes recited them to Herod. Quod testimonium nec Hebraico
textui, nec 70 Interpretibus convenire, me quoque tacente, perspicuum est.
Which testimony (says Hierome on Micah 5.2.) agrees neither with the
Hebrew, nor the Seventie; as is plain, though I say nothing. Then follows his
opinion, Arbitror, Matthaeum volentem arguere Scribarum and Sacerdotum erga
divinae Scripturae lectionem negligentiam, sic etiam posuisse, ut ab iis dictum
est.
I think that S. Matthew being willing to reprove the negligence of the Scribes
and Priests, toward the reading of holy Scriptures, related the words, as they
were cited by them. So that though the Scribes and Pharisees were blind, and,
seeing the Prophet through a vail, took one thing for an other; and though the
Evangelist purposely recites their mistaking, that we might discern the fault
of these ill guides, and ignorant teachers, yet it no way follows, that S.
Steven did err, or was mistaken, or that S. Luke misreported the words of S.
Steven. But enough of this, to testify my dislike of the second opinion, and
of such, who excusing the Greek Text from corruption, (wherein I wonderfully
applaud them) do impute an error and slip unto the holy, powerful, graceful,
truth-speaking, and dying Protomartyr, S. Steven (which I cannot endure in
them.) And certes, both these former rejected opinions are built on a false
ground, and idly do presuppose, that there is no real historical truth in
the words, as they are in the Greek, and in the Latin Text. But truth there
is, and though truth lie deep hid, as in a well (said he of old;) yet, by Gods
help, we shall wind her up, and draw her above ground, that every eye may see
her, though we have many turnings.

3. Which that I may the better accomplish, I must straggle awhile after two
most learned men, Cardinal Cusanus, and Daniel Heinsius; especially Heinsius;
whom when I have overtaken, and wrung and won from him some holds, which are
offensive to the majesty of sacred Scripture, then shall I return, and descend
to the most difficult place of Acts 7.16, etc.

The learned worthy Heinsius (whom I name not without honor, though I dissent
from him) in his Exercitations upon Nonnus, and in the Prolegomena, beats out
certain paths, which never any on the earth trod upon, before him; page 27.
making the Hellenisticall language to be the best interpreter of the Hebrew and
Chaldee; and the Hebrew and Chaldee, interchangeably, the best interpreters of
it.

Before all his words or my answer be recited, I think fit to premise these
things:

First, If Heinsius mean only to extol the knowledge of the Hellenisticall
language, and of the Chaldee and Syriack; I assent unto him: nor shall any man,
in right, ascribe more to the holy mother of them all, and of all other
languages, the primitive Hebrew, the language of God (when he spoke audibly)
and of Angels, unto men, then I will. Yet the purest gold may be over-valued,
and the very shekel of the Sanctuary thought heavier then it is. And indeed I
should be loath to say, what the most learned Cardinal Cusanus has written in
his Compendium, cap. 3. page 240. Nec absurdum videtur, si creditur, primam
dicendi arte^ adeo fuisse copiosam, ex multis Synonymis, quod omnes postea
linguae divisae in ipsa contineba^tur. Omnes enim linguae humanae sunt ex prima
illa parentis nostri, Alae scilicet hommis, lingua. Et sicut non est lingua
quam homo non intelligit; ita and Adam (qui ide^ quod bomo) nullam, si audiret,
ignoraret. Ipse enim vocabula legitur imposuisse; ideo nullum cujusque linguae
vocabulum ab alio fuit originaliter institutum. Nec de Adam mirandum, cum
certum sit, dono Dei, multos linguarum omnium peritiam subito habuisse.
It is not absurd to believe, that the first art of speaking was so copious,
and full of many Synonymaes, that all the afterward-divided tongues were in it
contained: For all languages are derived from our first parent Adams language.
And as there is not a tongue which man understands not; so even Adam (who was
no other then a man) could understand any language if he heard it: For he was
the (...), who imposed names upon the creatures; and therefore no word of any
other language was originally instituted by any other. Neither are we to wonder
at this in Adam, when it is certain, that by the gift of God many have suddenly
obtained, and speedily were inspired with the skill and knowledge of all
languages. So far Cusanus.

That there is no language under heaven, but has some words retaining the
footsteps of the Hebrew, I believe; and in the languages which I understand, I
can demonstrate: but that Adam could understand all languages now spoken, if he
had heard them, is not credible. When God confounded their language, Genes.
11.7. etc. the language of all the earth, he did it to this end, that they
might not understand one another speech. The confusion was not of inventing of
new letters, vowels, and consonants; for they are still the same: and if there
were seventie two languages, as say the Ancient, Hierom, Augustine, Prosper,
Epiphanius; or but fifty five, (as our Modern writers conjecture) answerable
to their families, Genes. 10. yea two thousand four hundred languages more;
they might all be uttered by the first two and twenty letters: Nor was it only
such a confusion, as when the sweet singing of the nightingales is
undistinguishable through the obstreperousnesse of gagling geese, and
chattering daws. For if at the beginning of that confusion every one had spoken
to another articulately and distinctly, alternis vicibus; they could not have
understood, what either said; though afterward by use, each family understood
themselves, as we may dumb men. But the confusion consisted in this, That God
took away from all, save the family of Heber, the habitual, or actual
knowledge of the Hebrew tongue; emptying the treasuries of their memories, both
sensitive and intellective, from all and every old note, impression, character,
figure, or species.

Secondly, when by an universal (...), or oblivion, he had drowned or blotted
out all former conceptions; he prompted readily unto them new forms, and
furnished their intellectualls with new notions; which the pliable obedience of
the tongue (at first not knowing what it said) uttered in new words and
languages; by the transposition and trans-changing, adding or diminishing of a
letter, or letters. See Avenarius, drawing almost all Greek; and our Minshaw,
many languages from the Hebrew. But if they retained the same syllable, and the
same word; yet in one language it signified one thing, and in another, another
thing; as sus signifies, in the Hebrew, an horse; with the Flaunderkins,
silence; among the Latins, an hog: as Cornelius a Lapide has observed. Nor
think I, that Noah (who lived at the confusion of Babel; and was born within
sevenscore years of Adams death) could understand all their languages, without
much commerce, study, or divine revelation. Besides all this, all ages have
made and framed new words; nor is any time to be blamed, -- si nova rerum
Nomina protulerit, -- If it coin new names:
it was lawful, and is yet, -- dabiturque licentia sumpta pudenter, It shall
be lawful, so it be done modestly without enforcement, says Horace, De art
Poetica. And though there were but few years, about half a man's age, between
the first and second Punick war; yet the articles of peace made at the end of
the first war, were hardly understood at the second, as may be gathered from
Polybius. What speak I of words, when new languages have sprung up, more then
ever were at the confusion of Babel? If God at the overthrow of Babel coined or
stamped the Greek; and if Adam could have understood it; were all its dialects
distinguished, or no? and the Hellenisticall Greek, or Grecanick language?
(that I may use some of Heinsius his words.) And if those were then spoken, and
then intelligible; was the now common corrupt Greek misformed? or could Adam
understand that, which Plato or Aristotle would sweat to expound? If the
Teutonick were then spoken; was the Saxon, English, Scottish, etc. (the
derivatives from it, as Verstegan and others will have it) then in use? If the
Latin was framed in Babel; was it the first old blunt Latin, or the refined?
If the refined; was the Valachian, Italian, Spanish, French, (the Provincial
tongues of Rome, if I may so call them) at that time spoken? I could be
plentiful herein. But I pass unto the objections of Cusanus, which shall
receive this satisfaction in order.

Object. 1. The first art of humane speech was copious by many Synonymaes.

I answer, The Hebrew had but few Synonymaes, few primitive Radixes, in
comparison of other languages; many words signifying contrary things, every one
diverse things: nor did Adam speak any but Hebrew, nor needed he know any more.
Cicero cried out of old, O inops verborum Graecia!
O word-wanting Greece! and much more Judea, say I.

Object. 2. All languages came from the Hebrew which Adam spoke.

I confess it, quoad fundamenta sermonum, id est, quoad literas. There were no
new letters stamped or added to the first: but the tongues themselves came
after diverse descents: so that many languages now in use may acknowledge other
mothers; though even those mothers were grandchildren, or daughters of the
Hebrew: neither of which, by reason of the long tract of time, and the
insensible degrees of their growing, could know one another, if they could meet.

Object. 3. As there is no language but some man understands, so there is no
language but Adam, who signifies a man, could understand if he heard.

I answer, The word Adam is homonymous, and the similitude unlike, and
disjoynted.

Object. 4. But Adam imposed names on all things: therefore no man else
originally invented any other name.

I answer, He says true, if he confine his meaning to the Hebrew, to that
Origo originans. But that Adam called Cheese, Coise; or Cattle, Catalla; or a
Chapel, Capella; a learned man should not think.

Object. 5. Oh, but some, by Gods gift, had the knowledge of all tongues: then
wonder not if Adam had.

I answer, They had the gift of all tongues then necessary to be spoken or
understood; perchance of all tongues then in being: that as when people
inclined to idolatry, the diversity of tongues was introduced; so when they
were to be reconciled to Christ, the cloven tongues sitting on the Apostles,
might find a remedy for that diversity, by the gift of languages. Yet says
Aquinas, 2a.2ae. quaest. 176. art. 1. ad 1. Instructi fuerunt divinitus in
linguit omnium gentium, quantum requirebatur ad fidei doctrinam, etc.
The Apostles were taught from heaven the languages of all nations, so far
forth as was requisite for the doctrine of faith; but for points of elegancie,
the Apostles were only skillful in their own tongue. As in wisdom and
knowledge they were sufficiently instructed, so far as the doctrine of faith
required; but they were not furnished (says he) with acquisite knowledge, or
conclusions Arithmeticall, or Geometrical. Thus far Aquinas. But that they
understood or spoke tongues which since have sprung up, is not likely: no more
did Adam.

That Adam could have done it by Gods miraculous power, I confess: that he
could out-weather any mere man by his natural gifts, I believe: what he could
have done by labor or study in a little time, if he had heard or read any
language, I will not question; since man has found out the language of
Hieroglyphics; and the tongue of characters has been read; and if you place
constantly several things in the room of several letters, a dog for A, a
tooth for B, a lion for C, and the like; a little practice will discover the
true meaning. But my controversy with Cusanus is, What Adam could do suddenly,
naturally, and ordinarily, if he heard our mongrell Neoterick languages. He is
for the affirmative, That Adam understood them, or could understand them. I am
for the negative.

4. But I must return to Heinsius, with whom I will acknowledge, that the
Oriental languages are of infinite worth, most necessary to be studied,
exacting as much labor and pains before they be gained, as they afford delight
and profit spiritual when they are obtained; yea, I heartily wish, that even
the learned would not presume to interpret the harder places of Scripture,
unless they be furnished with knowledge in the Eastern tongues: much less
should the ignorant Laics expound it. Those beasts ought not to touch this
mountain.

That I may omit many memorable passages concerning the Old Testament; I say,
that an unusual splendor from the Syriack, has fully enlightened many places
of the New Testament, which lay in darkness. View two instances.

5. What was the meaning of Anathema Maranatha, 1. Cor. 16.22. was long
unknown, long sought after in vain; as being impossible to be found in the
Greek or Latin languages, how copious soever: in the end, it was traced to be
an Idiotisme of the Syriack; and a phrase borrowed from the usance and practice
of the Jews: for their polity had three sorts of Excommunication. The first
called Niddui, which regularly was a separation for thirty days: during which
time, the excommunicated person must keep himself four cubits aloof from all
men and women in all places. The Evangelist seems to touch at this, when he
records the Constitution of the Jews; that, if any confessed Christ, (...),
extra Synagogam fieret, He should be put out of the Synagogue, as the last
Translation well expounds it, Joh. 9.22.

The second, and heavier degree was called Cherem; in the Greek (...) in the
Latin, by the Livian phrase, Devotorius; by the Cesarean, Devotus. It were
easy to mention some, who have vowed-away themselves, as that resolute young
Roman Knight, Marcus Curtius, (see it in Livie lib. 6.) and the soldurii (from
whence in likelihood comes the name of soldiers) in Cesars commentaries
conditionally devoted.

-- Deciique caput fatale voventes;
And the Decii vowing their own destruction.
Also, at several times and places, diverse others, both captives and natives,
have been dedicated to the infernal deities. To which, in the spiritual
censure of Christian Excommunication, there is some allusion, where S. Paul
delivered Hymeneus and Alexander unto Satan, 1. Tim. 1.20. and 1. Cor. 5.5.
where he likewise decreed the like sentence against the incestuous Corinthian.

The third and highest step in this Excommunication, is called Anathema
Maranatha, (...) for so some read it in the Greek; also most of the Latin
Bibles make it all one word, Maranatha; others, Maranata, says Cornelius a
Lapide. What it did signify, Diu doctos Theolegos torsit.
the learned Divines long and much endeavored to know: and all much labored
to find the fountain and origination of that Anathema, says Bertram in the
Preface on his comparison of the Hebrew and Aramean Grammar. Elias, in Thisb.
says, MARA signifies DOMINUS; and so the letter (...), is paragogicall: And
it may be read, DOMINUS VENIT, The Lord comes, says Peter Martyr. Likewise
for the language, Some (says he) think it is Vna dictio Syriaca.
one Syriack word. Vox Hebraeo-Syriaca.
Half Hebrew half Syriack, as Cornelius a Lapide has it. Magis Syrum est quam
Hebraeum.
It is more Syriack then Hebrew, says Hierom, Epist. 137. ad Marcel. Tametsi
ex confinio utrarumque linguarum aliquid and Hebraeum sonet.
Though (as he adds) it somewhat sounds like Hebrew, by the nearenesse and
proximitie of those languages. In the perfect Hebrew, Marenuatha, is, Dominus
noster venit, Our Lord comes. ATHA is used Deuteronomy. 33.2. (...), Et venit. That
MAR, MARA, or MARAN, is used for Dominus, till after the Babylonish captivity,
I read not. What in the Hebrew is MORE, in the Chaldee is MAR; MAR Dominus;
MARA or MARIA, Domina. Some Christians of the East at this day call their
Prelates MAR-ABRAHAM, MAR-JOSEPH, says Cornelius a Lapide. Yea, the whole
sentence is Chaldaick (if ye believe the learned Estius:) at large,
MARANA-ATHA; contracted, MARAN-ATHA. He also has a witty relation, That the
Jews, before Christ's coming, were wont ordinarily to have this word in their
mouths, Maran, in expectancie of Christ the Lord; and on every occasion with
reference to him, MARAN, Our Lord, He will come, he comes; MARAN, MARAN. But
after Christ was born indeed, and God took on him our nature, and many Jews
believed; whenever the unbeleeving brethren still cried their old MARAN, as
if the Messiah were not come; the believers answered, ATHA, to their MARAN;
MARAN-ATHA, Our Lord is come: which because the other would not believe, they
were called Marani, and Maranitae, from their iterated Maran, and rejecting of
Maran-atha.

Baronius in fine Anni 775. reports from Mariana, in his Spanish story, 7.6.
That a gift was given to a Monastery; and the violatour of that donation,
jubetur esse Anathema, Marrano, and Excommunicatus. Where the word is not taken
(as some suspect) a Mauris, from the Moors; because most of them (in Italy)
renounced their Christianity in the days of Frederick Enobarbus; for he
reigned 360 years, and more, after that gift: but rather, it is to be borrowed
from the Syriack, MARAN-ATHA, says Mariana, commended by Baronius.

The consideration of which curse and excommunication, strikes horror to my
soul, in compassion of those who have raised their houses out of the ruins of
things sacred with such dreadful imprecations, and feed themselves fat with
revenews properly belonging to the Altar. If man had not cursed such
sacrilegious infringers, God would: but Founders have blasted them with
lightning and thunder from heaven. What says King Stephen in confirmation of
his gift to the Priorie of Eye in Suffolk, cited by M. Seldom in his History
of Tithes, cap. 11. page 350? Quicunque aliquid de his quae in hac charta
continentur, auferre, aut minuere, aut disturbare scienter voluerit; autoritate
Domini Omnipetentis, Patris, and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti, and sanctorum
Apostolorum, and omnium Sanctorum, sit excommunicatus, anathematizatus, and a
consortio Domini, and liminibus Sanctae Ecclesiae sequestratus, donec
resipiscat.
Whosoever shall willingly and wittingly take away, diminish, or disturb any
one of all these things which are contained in this Charter: By the authority
of God Omnipotent, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and of all the Apostles
and Saints, let him be excommunicated and anathematized, and sequestered from
the company of the Lord, and not be admitted into the Church till he repent.
By which words he intended to terrify succession, and to keep them from
sacrilege. Let the world know that there are many, and, as it falls out now,
too many such direful execrations annexed by holy Benefactours, to eternize
their gifts: And as that good King said of himself, That he was Volens partem
habere cum iis qui felici commercio coelestia pro terrenis commutant.
Willing to partake with them who by an happy commerce exchange earth for
heaven: So I fear, that the sacrilegious Usurpers have indeed exchanged Heaven
for Mammon; and I pray to God that such devout and deliberate maledictions hang
not over their posterity to this day, nor may extend beyond the first
Atheistical cormorants.

The same M. Seldom in his book called Marmora Arundelliana, page 65.
mentions a Christian inscription which (as he conjectureth) both prayed to
the most holy Mother of God for such as were Benefactours to a Monastery; and
cursed them who did it any damage, with the imprecations of diverse holy men;
wishing, that whosoever did so, might in the day of judgment have against him
for an adversary the same most holy Mother of God. These things I have related
out of that most learned Antiquarie, my worthy friend M. Seldom, rather then
the like out of other Authors; because I would not have either Clergy or
Laity conceit of him (as full many do) that he intended as great a devastation
to our tithes consecrated by God and to God, by a double Jus divinum, as ever
the Black-smiths son brought upon Religious houses; or that he was the
instrument of ungracious Politicians; or his book the trumpet to animate the
armies of the destroyers against the pitiful poor remnants of our Church, not
enough (forsooth) as yet reformed; that is, not enough beggarly: though some
poison in that book has already wrought so piercingly upon us, that our hair
is fallen from our heads, and our nails from our fingers, as needing no more
paring; and in the cases of our tithes we are shaved and cut worse then the
messengers of peace, 2. Sam. 10.4. Yet says M. Seldom himself in his Review,
page 471. The many execrations annexed to the deeds of conveyance of them, and
poured forth against such as should divert them to profane uses, should be also
thought on: Not only thought on, say I, but trembled at, till the hour of
restitution. And let them remember also who says, That it is a destruction for
a man to devour what is consecrated, Prove. 20.25. which destruction is
damnation; not cared for by our devouring Esaus, if they may fill their bellies
with our hallowed morsels; as appeared in those whirl-winde-dayes of Henry the
eighth, and would have appeared since, if God had not ruled the heart of
religious King James, of most happy memory, and of our sacred Sovereign (to
whom we of the Clergy do more especially pray God to send all happiness,
equal to his desires on earth, and a more glorious estate among blessed
Saints, then he has now among men) to keep the commandments of their and our
God, above any worldly benefit.

I must return back to Maran-atha; whose composition is thus, as Martyr
opineth. The first part of it, is the Noun MARA: the second is an affix of the
possessive Pronoun, of the first person, with the number of multitude, making
MARA to be MARAN: the third particle and the close is the Verb ATHA, venit.
Moreover, concerning the tense of the Verb there is question. Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Theophylact read it in tempore praeterito, (...), Our Lord is come;
with whom agree Hierom and Estius: others will have it to be the present tense;
speaking as if he did come presently, because he shall come certainly; and
because none can say, he shall not come at this present. This tense Cornelius a
Lapide approves, on this consideration, because the Jews condemning any were
wont to do so, under the commination and contestation of the instant divine
judgment, as Psalm. 9.19. Arise, O Lord, -- let the heathen be judged in thy
sight: or rather, says Lapide, it may be in the Optative, MARAN-ATHA, Veniat
Dominus: howsoever he is peremptory, that it is a cold exposition which
applies the words to the Preterperfect tense, and the meaning to the first
coming of Christ.

Let me add, that whether the word be read in the Present tense in the
Indicative, or in the Optative mood, Venit, or, veniat; He comes, or let him
come; it points not at the past, but at the future coming of Christ. Yea,
Jude 14. (where the word (...) is used) our Translation has it, The Lord
comes; and the words immediately following, make it to have apparent, and
undeniable reference to the last judgment. Nor were the words Maran-atha taken
from Moses, Deuteronomy. 33.2. though he says, The Lord came with 11000 of Saints:
where is a great similitude of some particulars; for there is related what
passed at the deliverie of the Law; and neither Mara nor Maran is mentioned;
but rather by the semblance of words we may think Moses alluded to the
prophecy of Enoch, which long after this S. Jude cites expressly, as
prophesying of future punishment to be inflicted for the breach of the Law. And
indeed Ambrose well expounds our Maran-atha of the second coming of Christ: so
Clemens Romanus, Epist. 2. in fine. Augustine Epist. 178 thus, Anathema,
condemnatus, Maran-atha, definiunt, Donec Dominus redeat; Condemned till the
Lord return to judgment.

Most true it is, Maran-atha is added, to exaggerate the power of the
Execration, and that it is a form of Execration: so was it in the intent of the
Donor in Mariana. The Talmudists say, it signifies one delivered into the hand
of the Tormentour, by the judgment of the Lord himself. Answerable it is in
sense, to the words in the 17. Chapter of the 6. Council of Toledo; Perpetuo
Anathemate damnetur.
May he be perpetually anathematized: and Chapter 18. Anathemate divino
perculsus, absque uilo remedii loco habeatur damnatus aeterno judicio.
Being stricken thorough with the divine curse, without all hope of remedy let
him be esteemed damned by the eternal judgment. Therefore indeed foolish were
they, who thought Anathema Maran-atha, to be a kind of oath; as if S. Paul
adjured them, by the coming of Christ; yet so some held, says Peter Martyr.
More foolish was Cornelius a Lapide the Jesuit, who on the place confessing the
words to be Verba execrantis, and denuntiantis aeternam damnationem, imo verba
condemnantis.
Words of imprecation, of commination of the eternal damnation; yea words of
condemnation: acknowledging also, that Maran-atha, is Anathema, like to
Hasschammata, being usually contracted to Schammata, which was generally known
to be an excommunication of an high form; adding also, that Maranus est idem,
quod (...), excommunicatus ob apostasiam.
Maranus and a man excommunicate for apostasy are Synonymaes: yet for all
these things, by himself avouched, says expressly, Non sunt verba
excommunicantis.
They are not words of one that excommunicateth. But indeed they are words of
an excommunication, taken from the minatorie prophecy of Enoch, recited by S.
Jude, verse 14. The Lord comes; Inde ergo nemo non videt deductam illam
Anathematis rationem, and ex primis illius Anathematis verbis, minus alias ad
alia aliarum sententiarum initia usitatis, Anathema ipsum de more Hebraeorum
appellatum fuisse.
From thence therefore every man seeeth that Anathema is deduced, and that
according to the Hebrew guise it is called Anathema, from the beginning or
first words of that curse: which words are otherwise less used to the
beginnings of other sentences, says the learned Bertram. Maran-atha is
Extremum genus excommunicationis apud Hebraees.
The highest and greatest degree of excommunication among the Jews, says
Drusius in his Henoch, page 29. who adds, concerning the Apocryphal books of
Henoch, that the Jews say, they have them yet, to this day. From whence it is
likely, both that the Jews took their form of excommunication, and from the
first words of the curse, Maran-atha, might denominate the entire Anathema,
Maran-atha: as from the beginnings of writs, or from the principal words, many
of our Common-law-writs are so called as well as the decrees of Popes.

Nor let any object the unlikelihood, that this Anathema is taken from Enochs
prophecy, because S. Jude has it not, like Maran-atha, (...), but (...). I
answer, that neither Hebrew, nor Syriack, nor our English, so well endure the
placing of the Verb before the Noun, as the Greek does; but follows naturally
the natural sequel of the words: and not only when Enoch spoke it, but when
S. Jude first wrote in the Syriack (if in it he wrote) that was Maran-atha,
what after, by the Spirit was changed into (...) and the meaning is all one;
whether it be (...), or (...), the Noun must be construed before the Verb, The
Lord comes, Maran-atha. This excommunication S. Paul briefly and in two words
recites, as an usance of the Jewish Synagogue; and fit to be introduced into
the Christian Temples, and exercised in Ecclesiastical discipline. So much of
that.

An other instance is in Act. 3.21. What is in the Latin and Greek full of
Amphibologie, diversely, at diverse editions, rendered by Beza and others, is
plain, and radiant in the Syriack; (...), Quem oportet quide^ coelum recipere,
says the vulgat; The sentence is altogether doubtful both in Greek and
Latin, says Bellarmine, Tom. 1. page 409. whether Jesus suscipiat coelum, or
coelum Jesum, as Cajetan opens the case. Now the Syriack, translated by
Tremellius, has it, Quem oportet coeli capiant; Quem necesse est coelis ut
capiant, as it is varied by the skillful Linguist Bertram; Quem oportet coelum
ut capiat, says the Arabic; all running to the second exposition, that the
heavens must contain Christ.

Which words being firm against the Ubiquitaries, they interpret Coelum, not
properly, but figuratively, for the glory, reign, and majesty of God.
Alioqui enim, si sermo esset de loco, dictum esset, Quem oportet coelo recipi.
For otherwise, if he had meant the place of Heaven, it would have been said,
Who must be received into Heaven: So Illyricus, in lib. de Ascensione Christi.
But Illyricus must not teach the holy Ghost how to speak; nor be offended, if
the All-wise Divine Spirit use an Amphibolous phrase in the Greek, which is
cleared by the more Eastern tongues. In my opinion, he might rather have said,
that, perhaps, by Heaven GOD is meant; both because our blessed Saviors last
words were, Luke 23.46. Father, into thy hands I commend my Spirit; which most
certainly was received into the hands of his Father in heaven; as also, for
that not only the word Coeli, in the plural number, is taken for God;
according to the use of the Aramaeans and also of the Jews; as appears in the
record containing the jointure and dowry which Rabbi Moses made to Clarora,
the daughter of Rabbi David, explained by Bertram, at the end of his Aramaean
and Hebrew Grammar; where the Bridegroom says (among other things) Esio mihi
in uxorem, juxta legem Mosit and Israel; and ego, ex verbo Coelorum, colam,
honorabo, alam and regam te.
Be thou a wife to me according to the law of Moses and Israel: and I according
to Gods commandment will worship, honor, keep and govern thee: somewhat
according, as in our marriages, the husband promises to worship, comfort,
honor, and keep his wife: save only that the Jew did promise to govern his
wife, which we leave out: which is also consonant to the authentic Hebrew,
Daniel 4.26. Dominantes Coeli, or Coeli dominentur, The Heavens do rule, as it
is in our late Translation; that is, God in the Heavens does rule: But also
because (the Jews, in reverence and fear, avoiding the naming of Jehova, and
calling him, among many other attributes, Coelum) our Savior representing in
this historical parable the person of a young penitent Jew, speaks as the
Jew would, and places the word Heaven in the singular number for GOD. Luke
15.18. Father, I have sinned against Heaven. Likewise Matthew. 21.25. The
baptism of John, whence was it? from Heaven, or of men? it is not from Heaven,
or from Earth; but from Heaven, or of men; not a place, but persons are to be
understood; and in Heaven, rather God then Angels: and if likelihood lead us to
expound it of Angels (as it does not) yet those Angels represented God, and
were so called in his stead. And thus we will pass from this point.

6. The second thing, fit to be premised, is this. If Heinsius mean only, that
there are diverse words, phrases, and sentences in the Greek Testament, which
never were coined, stamped, or allowed in Athens, as free-denizons of Greece;
but are borrowed, and translated from the Hebrew, Chaldee, and Syriack; no man
will oppose him; and the exemplifying of it were easy and delightful, if I
had not made too large excursions before, in a matter not much differing from
this: But when he says, They who were Jews by birth or generation, and withal
did both know and speak Greek, may be called Hellenists; and that these
Hellenists, writing in Greek, much differed in language from the Heathen
Grecians: As I deny it not in the general; so some Jews there were, who, being
wonderously well versed in the Greek, wrote in Greek most politely: whence
Philo judaeus was said to Platonize; and Josephus is styled by Baronius, The
Greek Livius.

Thirdly, if Heinsius had only said, that S. John saw the Hellenists; that S.
John might have seen the paraphrase of Onkelos; that the Chaldee Metaphrase
Sanctissimo Joanni plurimis in locis placuit; that S. John ad Chaldaicam saepe
allusit interpretationem; qua Judaei Asiatici, ut olim, ita nunc utuntur; all
which he says page 61. I would only have wished to see his proofs.

Fourthly, if Heinsius mean, that the Hellenists only, who were not inspired
from God, conceived in one tongue, what they did write; and wrote in another,
what they conceived; I will subscribe; and add, that whatsoever they did speak
in Greek, they first had the notions of it in Syriack; and thence did, as it
were, translate their speech, or writings; even (perhaps) Philo, and Josephus,
and such as trafficked much with Greece, and Greeks: unless among the Jews
there might be such a case, as was of Lord Michael de Mountaigne, who (as
himself relates in his Essaies, 1.25.) being born a French man, yet never
heard French, till he was above six years old; nor understood any word of his
mother tongue, no more then he did Arabic; because he was brought up, where he
heard no other language spoken, then Latin only: and therefore long after,
when he usually spoke nothing, but his Perigordin or French; yet upon great
sudden exigents, his conceits were first shaped in Latin; and his words brake
forth, ere he was aware, in Latin, and not in French, as himself records. So
say I, if a Jew were thus brought up in the Greek, or in any other languages,
his conceits might be the apprehensions of his childish language, and not of
that tongue which he used after.

Fifthly, and lastly, if because Heinsius himself is a dainty Critic, he will
reduce the judgment of all Divinity to Scriptures; of all Scriptures to
Criticisme; I will not contradict it, if we confine this judiciarie Censorship
and Criticisme to men skillful and eminent in all arts, sciences, and
languages: for who can so well interpret Scripture, as such men? It was a
passionate conceit of hood winkt men, as is recorded in the history of the
council of Trent, lib. 2. page 122. Potestate unicuique facta in Scripturae
verstonem inquirendi, utrum proba sit, necue; vel cum aliis interpretibus eam
comparando, vel contextu Hebraeo consulto: tum novos hosce Grammaticastros
omnia interturbaturos, and sibi solis judicium and arbitrium in rebus fidei
arrogaturos.
When each man has power to inguire into the translation of the Scripture
whether it be good or no; either comparing it with other interpreters, or
consulting with the Hebrew Text: then these new-sprung pettie-Grammarians would
make a confusion of all things, and arrogate to themselves alone the judgment
and resolutions in matters of faith. And page 125. Almost all allowed the
vulgat Edition, In praesulum animos vehementi inde impressione facta, quod
dicebatur, Grammaticos Episcoporum ac Theologorum instituendorum potestatem
sibi arrogaturos.
This made a powerful impression upon the minds of the Prelates: because it
was said Grammarians would assume to themselves authority to direct and
instruct Bishops and Divines. Wisely, wisely; as if Divines and Bishops ought
not to have been perfect Grammarians before they were Divines: As if both could
not consist together: As if famous and deep Divines had not been admirable,
yea, the best and soundest of all Linguists and Critics; whom they scornfully
term petty Grammarians: As if they envied any men these passages of learning,
which they kenned not; and would put out the candle, which other men lighted;
delighting rather in darkness, then suffering some places, used by Popes and
Schoolmen, to be questioned and cleared: and it was a just indignation of the
Friars against the Fathers, in the council of Trent, because they were so
prompt to define Articles, and pronounce Anathemaes, when they did not well
understand, and were loath to be taught the things themselves, as it is in the
History of the council of Trent, lib. 6. page 481.

But since he says of the Evangelist S. John, Perpetuo ad Targumistas respexit.
He always had an eye to the Targumists, page 289. and, Ad Targumistas semper
respie^t.
He still respects the Targumists, page 250. and, Totum (...), quod voces and
sermonem spectat, peregrinum est.
All the words and speech sounds strange, page 230. as if there were not in
S. Joh. one line, or phrase, of pure good heathen Greek. Since he makes the
Hellenisticall Greek and the other Greek, diverse languages, page 373. though
they differ not so much as some Dialects, (besides his jerk at Nonnus for his
Grecanick, rather then Greek) adding to this effect, Prolegom. page 93. Many
have known superficially the Hellenisticall tongue, but few the depth of it.
Since he rests not at this, saying, It much mattereth to know, whether an
Hellenist express the Hebrew, or the Syriack in Greek; and whether he has an
eye to the Hebrew Text, or to the interpretations of the Grecians; but adds,
Quae nisi omnia distinguat, operam necesse est interpres ludat.
All which unless the Interpreter distinguish, he must needs lose his labor.
And he has little knowledge, and no conscience (as Heinsius censureth) Qui
transfer sacra audet, and de his non cogitavit.
who dares translate the Scripture, and thought not on these things, Page 53.
Prolegom. Whereby all the Primitive-Church, the Schoolmen, and late Writers,
Interpreters or Translatours, who knew not Hebrew from Syriack, are censured as
unconscionable ignorants. Since he proceeds, avouching, The knowledge of the
New Testament Frustra petas ex Graecis, quia ad Hebraeam aut Syriacam d^ dictio
and voces exigendae sunt.
in vain shall you seek from the Grecians, because both words and phrases wind
up to the Hebrew or Syriack. And again, The Greek Fathers Omni eruditione ad
stuporem omnium instructi.
amazing the world with their abundant learning, have given document, that
other things without the Hebrew are little worth: Whence may be inferred, that
the knowledge of the Greek in the New Testament is not to be found in the Greek
Fathers, and that their labors have been of little worth: though some Greek
Fathers knew the Eastern tongues better then Heinsius; as Origin, Theodoret,
and others; and the most learned of them all in those Eastern languages, to
wit, Origin, was the worst of them all in the interpretation of Scriptures.
Since he proclaims in his Prolegomena, Cum plurima in novo foedere a summis
maximisque hominibus sunt praestita, potissima pars superesse videtur: Which is
as much as if he had said, All the world have not expounded the Greek Testament
half well enough: or, not half of it well enough to this day: or, the choicest,
learnedest men have labored much; but the best or chiefest things have they
not cleared: as if they who well interpreted Hebrew with her Dialects in the
Old Testament, had been faulty in their interpretations of the New Testament,
because they understood not, or reflected not up to the same Hebrew and her
Dialects.

I say, in all these regards we must sever from Heinsius; and leaving him to
his singularity, hold our selves to the general expositions which Fathers,
Councels, and the Church of God has made of Scripture; till this more then
Doctor subtilis, or Doctor Seraphicus (for they are by him rejected, as being
wholly ignorant of the Hebrew, Syriack, or Hellenistick Greek) give us better
and more light. All which things I pass by with a touch only, because he has
one strain of far more both difficulty and moment. In which one point many
are involved, and some of those seldom or never handled.

His words are these in his Prolegomena, page 52. Si quis ex me quaerat, Quanam
lingu^ scripserit Evangelista noster S. Joannes; Hellenistica scripsisse dicam:
Si quis qua conceperit, quae scripsit; Syriacam fuisse dicam: Ad came autem,
quod est Hellenistis proprinm, and voces and sermone^ deflexisse Graecum. Quare
ad allusiones, non quae extant, sed quas animo conceperat, eundum est.
If one ask of me, In what language S. John wrote; I will say, He wrote as an
Hellenist: If one enquire in what language he conceived the things which he
wrote; I will say, He conceived them in the Syriack tongue, and that he did
bend the Greek, and wind up to the Syriack both the words and the sayings, as
is proper to the Hellenists. Wherefore we must not have recourse to the
allusions which now are, but we must look to them which S. John then conceived
in his mind. Yea, Proleg. page 49. he says in general, Novi foederis
Scriptores lingua conceperunt alia, quae scriberent; alia scripserunt, quae
conceperant.
The Penmen of the New Testament conceived in one language what they wrote, and
wrote in another what they conceived. So he.

Such is the power and virtue of naked truth, that if we could see her as she
is in her self, Admirabiles sui amores excitaret, She would make men
wonderfully enamoured on her: and such is the ouglinesse of error and untruth,
that they dare not appear without masks, vizors, colors, fucusses; but go
commonly trooping in the company of truth or likelihoods. And so it fares in
these words of Heinsius; in which there are some truths mingled and shuffled
together with some errors; which will easier be distinguished by their
several ranks and files, if we consider and handle three Lemmata, or
Postulata, Reasonable axioms or demands, which I account as granted: seven
Questions and five Conclusions directly opposing Heinsius.

7. The first Postulatum is this, That the inspirations and conceptions of the
sacred Penmen, were divinely delivered under one or other language.

S. Basil in Psalm. 28. said remarkably, that the intellectual and inward
conceits of the inspired were after a wonderful manner, as it were, figured
and characterized. S. Augustine, de Genes. ad literam, 12.26. says thus of the
kind of prophesying by spiritual vision: Si ab ipsis similitudinibus
rapiatur, ut in illam quasi regionem intellectualium and intelligibilium
subvebatur, ^^t sine ulla similitudine perspicua veritas cernitur, nullis
opinionum falsarum nebulis obfuscatur; ibi virtutes animae non sunt operosae:
ibi videtur claritas Domini, non per visionem significantem, sive corporalem,
ut visa est in monte Sina, sive spiritualem, ut vidit Isaias, and Joannes in
Apocalypsi; sed per speciem, non per aenigmata; quantum ea capere men's humana
potest, secundum assumentis Dei gratiam, ut os ad os loquatur ei, quem dignum
tali Deus colloquio fecerit; non os corporis, sed os mentis.
If the soul be rapted from and above the phantasmes, so that it is elevated
and carried, as it were, into that region of things intellectual and
intelligible, where without any phantasme or similitude apparent truth is seen,
no clouds of opinion dimming it; there the faculties and powers of the soul are
not turmoiled or painfully busied: there the brightness or excellency of the
Lord is seen, not by any typical or corporal vision, as it was seen in mount
Sina; or spiritual, as I saiah saw, and S. John in the Revelation: but plainly
and directly, not darkly or in riddles, so far as the mind of man can
conceive, according to the grace of the indulgent Lord, so lifting up the soul,
that he speaks face to face to him whom the Lord makes worthy of such a
conference: Understand the face or mouth, not of the body, but of the mind.

Dionysius, coelestis Hierarch. cap. 1. somewhat otherwise: Impossible est
aliter nobis lucere divinum radium, nisi varietate sacrorum velaminum
circumvelatum.
It is impossible that the divine light should otherwise shine upon us, then
clouded and surrounded with variety of sacred vails and coverings. For humane
understanding cannot conceive the very bare and naked intelligible truth her
self, without conversion to the Phantasmata; therefore things propounded to men
by God or Angels, are propounded under sensible similitudes, and resemblances
not merely incorporeall: I say, by God, or Angels; for howsoever Dionysius cap.
4. de divinis nominibus, part. 1. aliquantulum ante medium, says, Omnes
divinae illuminationes perferuntur ad bomines mediantibus Angelis.
All divine irradiations are brought unto men by the interposition or help of
Angels: and Gregory, Dialog. 4, 5. In hoc mundo visibili nihil, nisi per
creaturam invisibilem; dispoui potest.
In this visible world nothing can be ordered, but by the invisible creature:
yet I would be loath peremptorily to exclude Gods immediate operation or
illumination; but rather conclude, That all intellectual irradiation of men,
either by God immediately, or by Angels, is by known species.

Basil on Isa. 7.3. Arbitror Prophetas nequaquam percepisse Verbum Dei sensili
auditu, per conformationem aeris: sed quando animae intellectu praeditae, suae
suppetunt aures, quae a supernis unntiabantur, citra ullam corporis vocem, ad
little pertingebant notitiam.
I think that the Prophets received not the word of God by sensible hearing, by
the corresponding help and conformation of the air: but since the intellective
soul has its proper kind of ears or hearing, what was spoken from above and
from God, came to their knowledge and notice without any bodily voice. See
Aquin. part. 1. quaest. 210. art. 1.

In all three kinds of oracles, by which God speaks to men (the External,
the Imaginarie-spirituall, the Spirituall-intellectuall) there are some species
or other intercurrent between God inspiring and inlightning, and man
apprehending or conceiving. Though where Fulgentius says truly, that in divine
inspiration, Sine sonis sermonum and elementis literarum, eo dulcius, quo
secretius, veritas loquitur.
Without the sound of words or elements of letters, the truth speaks so much
the sweeter, by how much the secreter, is rightly inferred; that there is no
outward sound; yet there is an intellectual loquitur of the Spirit to our
inward man; and it attempereth and mouldeth it self to the capacity, ability,
and habitual species of the part recipient, that is, our understanding; or
frames our understanding to it.

Men may be taught new languages on a sudden, and understand as suddenly things
before unknown; but to conceive without some kind of word, is above conceit.
God himself cannot be conceived by men, but by similitudes of things
corporeal; and, perhaps, even Angels cannot conceive of him but under some
shadow: for a finite thing cannot comprehend an infinite essence, but only
according to its model. An infinite thing only can comprehend infinity as it
is in itself.

When the Spirit of God immediately speaks to the spirits of men, though the
irradiation be spiritual and intellectual, yet it is shaped to the habits of
knowledge acquired. Infused notions must be proportionable to acquired;
actual, to habitual; all homogeneall, not heterogeneall; having affinity,
and holding correspondent intelligence with the species received. Quiequid
recipitur, recipitur ad modum reciptentis.
Whatsoever is received, is received according to the measure, power, or
faculty of the receiver, is a true ground, and sound maxim, as well in
Divinity as in Philosophy.

There is not an higher illumination then was that of S. Paul: yet was there in
him, and in all others, somewhat loco signi and vocis, in the room or stead of
the sign, voice, or species. 2. Cor. 12.4. I heard unspeakable words, (yet
words spoken) which it was not lawful (or possible) for a man to utter: yet to
him they were uttered; and it is not certain that he was bodily rapt into the
third heaven.

Augustine, de Genes. ad liter. 12.27. discoursing of Gods speaking to Moses,
Numb. 12.8. Os ad os loquar ad illum, in specie, and non per aenigmata; I will
speak to him face to face, apparently and plainly, not by riddles or
obscurities, says, This is not to be understood according to the bodily
substance presented to the eyes of the flesh; for so he spoke to Moses face to
face, when Moses said, Ostende mihi temetipsum, Show me thy self: and adds,
Illo ergo modo, in illa specie qua Deus est, long ineffabiliter secretius and
praesentius loquitur locutione ineffabili.
But in that way, and in that form as he is God, he speaks ineffably, more
secretly, more home and close to the purpose, more nearely present with words
unspeakable. And in the Chapter following he says, The speaking mouth to mouth
was Per speciem scilicet, qua est Deus quicquid est: quantulumeunque cum meus,
quae non est quod ipse, etc.
by such a species, by which God is whatsoever is: howsoever the mind of man
which is not as God, cannot conceive him without body or bodily similitude:
where still he makes a kind of not-speaking speech, or of speaking
non-speech, according to the capacity of man.

The second Lemma is this, That the holy Actuaries, or Writers of the Divine
Scripture, could not err in their conceptions.

Augustine, de Genes. ad liter. 12.25. proves daintily in general, that our
outward and inward senses may be deceived; when only the intellectual vision
is certain, and is not deceived: Aut enim intelligit, and verum es^; aut, si
non est verum, non intelligit.
Either it understands, and then it is true; or if it be not true, it
understands not. As the air is enlightened by the resplendent rays of the
sun, so was their intellect by supernall, bright, unfailing irradiation;
which beam of divine light wrought these two effects: First, that they knew
certainly it was God who spoke unto them: Secondly, that they could not
misconceive or take awry in an erring sense the things inspired: which
illumination may be called Gustus Dei, The taste of God, Psalm. 34.8. The wheels
with strakes full of eyes round about them, Ezekiel. 1.18. Cloven tongues like as
of fire, Act. 2.3. As it were, Sextus sensus praenoscendi.
a sixth sense leading to knowledge, as Clemens Recognit. lib. 2. terms it: A
joyful sound, the light of Gods countenance, Psalm. 89.15. In thy light we
shall see light, Psalm. 36.9. A burning and a shining light, Joh. 5.35. A
mavelous light, 1. Pet. 2.9. Sol spiritualis, An intellectual sun: Sapor,
a savor or taste; which Monica could not express by words, as her son
relates, Confess. 6.13. Intimus sapor, says Gregory, Dialog. 4.4. Intimus
sapor and experimentalis illuminatio, A most inward relish, and experimental
illumination, as Gerson styleth it: Columna ignis, A pillar of fire, Exodus
13.21. Stella Magos in Orient antecedens, The star conducting the wise men
of the East, Matthew. 2.9. An holy, undeceiving, unambiguous influent
coruscation: The Spirit of God moving upon the face of the waters, Genesis 1.2.
This made Abraham not unwillingly to sacrifice his son. The quenching of this
Spirit against the clear light of his own convicted conscience, made the old
Prophet more inexcusable then the other officious lying Prophet, who deceived
him, 1. Kings 13.16, etc. Nor did an Angel speak unto the seducer by the word
of the Lord, verse. 18. Samuel being but a child might not indeed, as a novice;
or some others, for a while, might not know the voice of the Lord: as Peter at
the present knew not the operation of God by the Angel, in his miraculous
deliverie: But now I know (says he) that God has sent his Angel; yea, I know
of a surety, Act. 12.11.

Profane ones I will not privilege from mistaking of God: as perhaps, lest
Satan might out-stretch his Commission from God, when he gave Job into his
hands, God said restrainingly, Only save his life, Job 2.6. And S. Augustine,
de cura pro mortuis gerenda, cap. 12. tells an admirable story of two men,
each called Curma; to wit, How Curma the Countryman lay almost dead many
days: only, a little steam of breath coming from him, they kept him from
burial, though he was without motion, or any feeling, whatsoever they did unto
him; in which time he saw many visions: So soon as he opened his eyes, he said,
Let one go to the house of Curma the smith. Who was found dead that moment in
which Curma the Husbandman came to his senses. And the surviving Curma related,
that he heard in the place from whence he was returned, that the smith, and not
himself, was to be brought to that place. A mistaking there was by the
messengers of death, though it were after righted. Caiaphas might not know the
inspiration or instinct prophetical which he had; because he was a wicked man:
Dispensative illi contigit sermo, He did distribute the speech to others, which
he knew not himself, says Basil in Prooem. Isaiae. He was a Prophet perchance;
Casu, says Origin on John. Balaam his ass and Caiaphas spoke they knew not
what. The prophecy was transitory, says S. Augustine. Wherefore I conclude,
as before, That wicked men may be punished with mistakings in things divine.
But that ever any holy man was ignorant to the end, that God moved when he
moved him; or that the righteous were ever deceived by Oraculous, anfractuous
perplexities; or that the Notaries of heaven, the writers of any part
authentic of either Testament, could be deceived in their conceptions, is not
agreeable to likelihood, reason, or truth.

The last Lemma is this, The holy Penmen could not err in writing.

If they could, what difference is there between their Writings, and other
profane Authors?

And to what end had they infallibility of understanding, if what they
understood they could express erroneously?

A ready, perfect, and quick scribe writes not falsely; but, My tongue is the
pen of a ready writer, says the Psalmograph, Psalm. 45.1. Holy Ezra, who was
the divine amanuensis of the book of Ezra, is called by the same words, SOPHIR
MAHIR, a ready, swift, exact scribe, Ezra 7.6. no question, with allusion to
the words of the Psalmist.

John 16.13. When the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all
truth. How into all truth, if there be an error in writing? Or, had God care
that the Apostles should not miss of the truth in their Speeches, and yet
miss in their Writings?

If the Prophets could not err, no more could the Evangelists or Apostles:
for, if there were any superiority in privilege, we are rather to ascribe it
to these latter, then to those former; in regard that the Law of Christ and of
Grace, is far above the Law of Moses, as the Apostle does demonstrate to the
Hebrews themselves. But that the Prophets could not err is apparent, because
Christ himself, who is Truth, would not have appealed from the present more
visible pretending Synagogue, to them as all-sufficient Judges (as he often
did) if they could err. A perfect rule is not to be tried by an imperfect one.
Prophets writ their Prophesies, and fastened them to the gates of the Temple,
and other public places, to be read: and were rather judged by their
Prophesies written, then by them as inspired or uttered by mouth.

The Gnomon of the Sunne-diall, which our late Hieroglyphical Poetaster does
make to signify the Scriptures, is better to be judged by a moving clock, the
curious handie-work of the same great Artist (I mean, by the Church, and
Churchmen; with whom Christ has promised his Spirit shall be to the end of the
world) then by the rude masons, or rather the senseless stones and mortar of
the walls, (I mean the ignorant people) who have plucked down not only the
Weathercock (by his interpretation, the Pope) but usurp to themselves a power
to judge the Gnomon; and to reform and amend the well wrought, well ordered
clock. The shallow fantastic stateth not the question aright, when he is so
magisterially peremptory; saying, That the Clergy may not so judge of the
Scriptures, as to conclude or teach any thing against them; or to vouch
unwritten verities (if they be certain verities, it mattereth not much whether
they be written or unwritten: Verity will vouch it self in spite of lying
Poets) as some call them, or Traditions contradictorie to the written Word:
Which contradictorie Traditions do much differ from unwritten Verities,
howsoever the Poet confusedly joyneth them. For, who of us ever taught that the
Clergy may teach any thing against the Scriptures? when we profess with him,
that the Church ought to subject it self to be directed by the Scriptures. But
that fabling rymer may say any thing, who in his Sarcasmos and Frontispice is
suffered thus to rave, No wonder that the Clergy would be Kings: whereas we
the now unpriviledged Clergy, do humbly pray to God to uphold our declining
estates from the hands of those Atheists, and turbulent Anti-episcopall,
Anti-monarchicall Reformists; perhaps Pensioners of the forcin enemies of our
State, who, under the pretense of Religion, labor to pluck down our Church and
Ecclesiastic Hierarchy; and upon the ruins thereof to arise to the depluming
of the Eagle; to the bearding of the Lion; not only to the paring of the
royal prerogative, but also the removing the very scepter and crown from the
Anointed of the Lord, (whom God always mightily defend!) and to the bringing
in of popular government: for, No Bishop, no King, said the learned, wise, and
pious King James, most truly.

I return to retort the Church-reforming Poets words upon himself: In his
Solarie he says, That the dial is the Written Word, which is of it self dead
and unprofitable, without further illumination; since none of the Philosophers,
nor Solomon himself, by the mere strength of Nature, could from thence draw
saving knowledge without saving grace. The question is not, Whether the
Scripture or Church shall be Judge; but, Whether the Clergy or Laity shall be
Interpreters of this dead word, and unprofitable without further illumination.
We bid not the people to pluck out their eyes, that they may be led by us, as
the Jesuits and Popish Priests do; neither do we like the other extreme of the
people, presuming that they can give better answer then the Ephod, the Urim and
the Thummim; and over-see the Seers, who ought (by the express commandment of
God himself) to have the oversight of them, Heb. 13.7. But they are to rest
contented with the general Commission given to the Ministry, He that hears
you, hears me; especially in things (as most things are) above their
capacity. But the people will expound Scriptures, contradict their Pastors,
censure their labors, judge their Judges, even in matters of such speculation
as they may most safely be ignorant of; and, under pretense of desire to have
their consciences well informed, will not be informed at all in any thing
against their humors and fancy; but monopolize the Spirit to themselves, and
yield no more in this point to the ordinance of God, who has committed to us
the word of reconciliation, then to the very devils, whom they are bound to
believe and follow, in all things wherein their consciences are well informed.

My former task recalleth me. Bezaleel and Aholiab both did and could work all
manner of work for the service of the Sanctuary, according to all that the
Lord had commanded, Exodus 36.1. Had God more care of his Sanctuary, then of
the Church of Christ? Or could God command an untruth, when he guided the
Apostles and Evangelists as powerfully, if not more then ever he did the
workmen of his Sanctuary? Or had the Penmen less grace or goodness then the
workmen? Certainly they had, if they swarved in writing from what was commanded
by God. Moses was admonished of God, when he was about to make the Tabernacle;
See (says God) that thou make all things according to the pattern showed
thee in the mount, Hebr. 8.5. which the Apostle borrowed from Exodus 25.8, etc.
where God gives this charge, Let them make me a Sanctuary -- according to all
that I show thee, after the pattern of the Tabernacle, and the pattern of all
the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it. So, and no otherwise; not so
much as a little nail or peg shall make any difference. And shall we think,
that the Evangelists and Apostles might swarve in writing from what was
delivered unto them?

That Christ himself could and did read, is proved Luke 4.16. That he could
and did write is plain, John 8.6, etc. That he ever wrote any part of his
doctrine, of the Law of Grace, of our Scripture, is not evident: for though
Baronius, ad annum Christi 31. says, That many of the Ancients believed that
our blesved Savior wrote an epistle unto Abagarus, or Abgarus, Prince of
Edessa; yet since Salianus wholly balketh this story, (which he would not have
done, if there had been either truth or likelihood in the matter; because of
the miracles mentioned by Baronius, wrought by the image of our Saviors face,
which himself sent to the same Prince) let us esteem it as a thing unworthy of
belief. That whatsoever Christ did, he did both well and conveniently; and
whatsoever he omitted, he also omitted well and conveniently, I take for most
certain: and yet, if he had done something which he omitted, I dare say he had
also done well and conveniently: and I should be afraid to say, That it was not
convenient for Christ to write any part of Scripture therefore, because
personally he wrote none. It was convenient for others, and not for Christ
himself, to write his own doctrine (says Aquin. 3. part. quaest. 42. art. 4.)
for the excellency both of the Teacher, and of the doctrine; which he
confirms thus, The most excellent way was, to imprint his doctrine in their
hearts: So did Christ teach, As HAVING POWER, Matthew. 7.29. and Pythagoras and
Socrates, the excellentest teachers among the Gentiles, would write nothing.
For the Scripture is ordained to imprint doctrine in the hearts, as to an end.
Moreover, if Christ had written his own doctrine, Nihil altius de ejus doctrina
bomines aestimarent, quam quod Scriptura contineret.
men would never have had an higher esteem of his doctrine, then of that which
might arise from things contained in Scripture. Those are the words of Aquin.
Much of this is but mere froth, and the shadow of reason, unfitting the pen of
so Angelical a Doctor; who remembered not that God himself wrote the Law; and
that God did write the Law in some men's hearts, as well as in stone, Hebr.
8.10. and so might Christ in both, if he had pleased. As for Pythagoras and
Socrates, if they wrote nothing, yet their words made no deeper impression upon
the hearts of their auditors, then the writings of many other men have done
upon the hearts of their readers. Moreover, some have thought that Pythagoras
and Socrates were not the excellentest teachers among the Gentiles; Aristotle
and Plato are esteemed their equals; and some have preferred Hermes
Trismegistus and Homer before both of them. Indeed the Scripture was ordained
to imprint doctrine in the heart; was it therefore inconvenient that Christ
himself should write? His speech was ordained to imprint his doctrine in their
hearts, as to an end; yet was not his speech inconvenient: no more inconvenient
had been his writing; yea rather more convenient (if so it had pleased him)
because many of his words reached but to a few; but his writings might have
reached to many millions of places and persons more, and might have been
everlasting. To conclude, If the Jews looked through the vails, types, and
shadows of Moses Law, to the more spiritual things of Christ; then certainly,
if Christ had writ his doctrine, we would not esteem of him according to the
letter only of that doctrine; but we would think (as we ought) that either he
wrote not all, or wrote only such things as were fit for us to know, or as we
could understand; reserving more secret, deep, and divine things to himself.
For reasons best known to himself, he baptized not any, no not his own
Apostles. For reasons best known to himself, he wrote not immediately any part
of Scripture. To say it was not convenient because Christ did it not, infers
that Christ was bound to do all things convenient; yea, and which man judges
convenient; and what he did not do was not convenient.

God might have bettered, and may yet better some of his own works, though they
be very good: Shall we conclude, that because he did not, therefore it was not
fit he should have done so? God did not say at the end of the second days work
particularly and expressly, It was good, or God saw that it was good; as he
did at all and every of the other five days creation: Was it therefore not
good? Yes verily; for Genesis 1.31. God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold, it was very good.

John 14.16, etc. The Comforter shall abide with you for ever: even the Spirit
of truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither
knows him; but ye know him: for he dwells with you, and shall be in you.
And verse 26. The Comforter shall teach you all things: Therefore he shall
teach them to write truly: the Spirit of truth will not suffer them to write
falsely whilst he dwells with them, and in them; as he did when they wrote.

Inspiration was ordained as a cause, and as a means of right conceiving:
conceiving or apprehension was appointed as a cause and a means of right
expression: expression was either by word or writing. Many words were
prophetically and most divinely spoken, which were not written; not so many
were written, as were first spoken: The vocal expression was more transient
and transitory; perhaps, concerning some few, and those only of those times:
the expression permanent, and by writing, was and is directorie to mankind to
the end of the world. Inspiration, apprehension, and much expression by voice,
were all as means to this main end, that there might be a Scripture. Shall the
means be certain, unerring, and inerrable; and shall the end be dubious,
crooked and erring? The perfect use of the right means leads on infallibly to
an undeceiving and exact end: If the Divine Penmen could not err or be misled
in the former, which some^imes vanished, leaving no footsteps behind them; it
is not possible that they should err in writing, which is the masterpiece of
that divine work, lasting for ever; the absolute square, and judge, and canon
of all men's thoughts, words, and deeds; unless you say, God had less care to
preserve from corruption divine records filed up on eviternitie, and necessary
at all times, for all persons, in all places (as the Scriptures now are) then
he had of inspirations: which ended only in the apprehension, if they were not
expressed; or turned into air, and vanished almost with the breath, if they
were only spoken.

Nor let any man say that writing is further removed from the divine operation,
then inspiration was, and so more subject to error: for it shall appear ere
long, that the same Spirit which began by inspiration, sat, still moving on the
waters, not leaving his own work till there was a perfect production, till the
end was accomplished, and the will of God was written in words and letters of
truth; so that not one Iota or tittle had any error. Yea, let me go one step
further, and say, that when the Apostles did dictate to their scribes,
actuaries, or secretaries, not only not themselves, but not their notaries
could err.

And yet I have read of two mad stories cross to my opinion: the one in Sixtus
Senensis, Bibliothecae sanctae, 2. page 120. on the name Tertius: who records
out of Diodorus Bishop of Tarsus, that this Tertius, being no excellent speaker
nor writer, made the obscure Epistle of S. Paul to the Romans to be more
obscure, whilst he labored to express S. Paul's thoughts and sense, by more
confused and unabsolute sentences, and transposed explications. As if S. Paul
could not write sufficiently himself: though he said (in humbleness) Rudis
sermon sum, I am rude in speech, 2. Cor. 11.6. yet was he powerful in
writing, 2. Cor. 10.10: As if he had not diverse most sufficient scribes by him:
As if he would permit the writing of so divine, super-divine an Epistle to an
Ignaro, a silly fellow: As if Tertius himself wrote not this Epistle in the
Lord, that is, by divine authority, or (as Cajetan thinks) these words, In
the Lord, are added to show that he did not write it as an hireling: which
sense is made good by some authorities, according to the diversity of
punctation: As if the Spirit who inspired Paul dictating, ruled not the hand of
Tertius writing: As if S. Paul would make so block-headed a disciple as Tertius
is feigned to be, to be his scribe, and that in his most majesticall and
obscurest Epistle: Or if Tertius were so, that he should be thought worthy to
be Iconii Episcopus, and have that extraordinary grace to be crowned with
Martyrdom; as Ecclesiastical history records of him: As if S. Peter (whom
Paul withstood for a smaller matter to the face, Gal. 2.11.) when he said that
there were in all S. Paul's Epistles some things hard to be understood, would
have commended his fellow-Apostles wisdom, as he did, 2. Pet. 3.15. and not
rather have found fault with his folly, and the manner of his writing, if not
with the matter also, if Tertius had been so absurd as Diodorus imagined;
especially seeing S. Peter says, that the unlearned and unstable wrest some of
those writings unto their own destruction: which in all likelihood should
justly rather swallow up S. Paul for his carelessness of inditing, and Tertius
for his supinenesse, or rather blasphemous forgerie of divine truths by
mis-writing them, if any fault could have been truly imputed to either of
them. But of this we shall speak (by Gods help) more at large in the next
section save one.

The second mad story follows. Because some were wont to forge Epistles in
S. Paul's name, (as is apparent 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. where he beseeches them, Not to
be shaken in mind, or to be troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by
letter, as from us) therefore he always subscribed his own name to all his
Epistles, Vbicunque sciebat falsos adesse doctores.
Wheresoever he knew that there were false teachers, says Hierom on Gal. 6.11.
On which place he also relates, that a very learned man of those times said,
S. Paul being an Hebrew knew not Greek letters: and because necessity required
that he should subscribe with his own hand to the Epistle, Contra consuetudinem
curvos tramites literarum vix magnis apicibus exprimebat.
He wrote, though in ill-shaped, unhandsome, very great letters: showing this
testimony of a kind affection, that he would endeavor to do for the
Galatians what indeed he could not do. Whereby he concludes, that S. Paul
could not write Greek, at least, not in a legible good hand. S. Hierom wondered
at the ridiculousnesse of his exposition (as well he might) because the Apostle
used to subscribe to diverse of his Epistles, and here he wrote this whole
Epistle with his own hand: and yet S. Hieroms exposition is almost as forced as
the former: Grandibus Paulus literis scripsit, quia sensus erat grandis in
literis, and Spiritu Dei vivi, non atrameuto and calamo fuerat exaratus.
S. Paul (says he) wrote in large long characters or letters, because the
sense was great in the words, and was written by the Spirit of the living God,
and not with pen and ink. For though the sense and words of this Epistle to
the Galatians be from God, and most divine; yet there is no reason to imagine,
that S. Paul intended to include that sense under these words, Videte, or
Videtis qualibus literis scripsi vobis manu mea You see how large a letter I
have written to you with mine own hand. But if the word (...), does signify
quantity; though S. Paul wrote in great letters and characters, yet it might
be a very good and fair hand: as there are few fairer writings then some where
the letters are large and full drawn: and I doubt not but he who gave them the
extraordinary gift of tongues and languages did also, as a necessary
appendant, give them the power to write well those languages; especially since
their writings were to benefit more then their voices could reach unto. We
never read that the holy Apostles, Peter, James, or John, were learned; or
could read or write before their calling; or learned it by degrees after their
Apostleship: yet they could and did write; and as the Spirit guided their
thoughts and words, so did he their hands; and they wrote both divinely for
matter, and (as I think) exquisitely for the manner; yea, more exquisitely then
other men, as being governed and actuated by the hand of God, which is perfect
in all his works. And indeed the true sense of the place (in my opinion)
touches not at the deformednesse of the characters, or at the grand-greatnesse
of them; but at the length or prolixitie of the Epistle: which is excellently
rendered by our English, You see how large a letter I have written; as if S.
Paul had spoke thus, more at large; I who before told you that we must not be
weary of well-doing, but must do good unto all men whilst we have time,
especially to the household of faith; I say, I my self have not been weary in
writing this Epistle, though it be long: and whilst I had time, I have spent
that time in doing you good, by writing this letter, by writing this long and
large letter to you. For though I have written longer Epistles, yet I did
rather subscribe to them, and wrote not all of any one of them with mine own
hand; but you may take it as a token of my hearty love, that I wrote all this
Epistle my self: You see how large a letter I have writ to you with mine own
hand. And this sense better answers to the coherence, then that of S. Hierom,
or of the other learned man whom S. Hierom wondered at. So much for the third
Lemma.

8. I come now to the first Question: viz. Whether it was necessary that
Scripture should be written for men's instruction?

That it was not absolutely necessary, must be confessed: for God might have
used other means. He is liberrimum agens, the freest agent; or rather ipsa
libertas, liberty it self, not chained to fate, nor bound in with nature or
second causes. Necessity, freedom of our will, or indifferency to either
side, and contingencie, are the issues of his will.

Yea, God did use other means in the law of nature; for above 2450 years the
Patriarchs were nourished with agraphall Tradition only. No word was ever
written till God wrote the Law; the two first Tables, the work of the onelywise
Almighty; The writing was the writing of God graven upon the Tables, Exodus
32.16. Written with the finger of God, Exodus 31.18.

The Jews say, The book of Genesis was written by Moses, before God wrote the
Law. For though God spoke all the words of the Decalogue, Exodus 20.1. etc. yet
he delivered not the Tables to Moses till Exodus 31.18. but Exodus 24.4. it is
related, that Moses wrote all the words of the Lord: and verse. 7. that he took
the book of the Law, and read it in the audience of the people. Kemnitius
answers, That the things are recorded per Anticipationem, seu per (...), The
last is recorded in the first place: for the writing and dedication here
mentioned, were accomplished afterward, Exodus 34.32.

The pillar of stone, and that other of brick, which Josephus Antiq. 1.4. says
the children of Seth did write in before the flood, were either fictions, or
antidated. The prophecy of Enoch was not written by him, as S. Augustine de
Civit. 15.22. and Origin Hom. 28. in Number. think: but Enoch prophesied, Saying,
Jude 14. As the prophecy of Adam, Genes. 2.24. and of God himself, Genes.
3.15. both of them concerning Christ, were spoken in Paradise, not written; and
as the Apostles wrote not the Creed, but delivered it only viva voce, by word
of mouth, says Irenaeus, 3.4. and Augustine de Fide and Oper. cap. 9. and
Ruffinus on the Creed, and diverse others: so is it likely, that Enochs
prophecy was not written; or rather was written long after it was spoken: for
writing was not so necessary for the Patriarchs: First, because they were
purer in mind, says Chrysostom, Hom. 1. in Matthew. And it is the fault of our
corrupt nature, and we may be rightly impleaded, that ever there was any
writing; as may be gathered from Isidorus Peleusiota, lib. 3. epist. 106.
Secondly, the long lives of the Patriarchs supplied the room of writing: for
Methusalah, who lived 240 years with Adam (with the first Adam, who was
AETATIS ILLIUS EPISCOPUS, Bishop of those times, says Kemnitius in Examine,
part. 1. page 13.) lived also 90 and odd years with Sem, and Sem lived 50
years in Jacobs time, by the calculation of Helvicus; and there were not 200
years from Jacobs death to the writing of the Law. Thirdly, besides such aged
venerable Prophets as were Adam, Enoch, Noah, and Abraham (who was an eminent
instructor with authority, and, as it were, with a Pretorian power: Genesis
18.19. I know that Abraham will command his sons and his household after him,
that they keep the way of the Lord) other Patriarchs knew the will of God by
immediate revelation, by dreams and visions; (...), At sundry times, and in
diverse manners, Heb. 1.1. Gods speech was in stead of writing. But when men
grew more impure, and upon the increase of sin man's days were shortened, God
did withdraw himself, and his familiar conversation was not so common: but
because their hearts of flesh were hardened, in which was printed the law of
nature, by them even obliterated, and they received new evil impressions in
stony hearts; God himself wrote the Moral Law in two Tables of stone: and
Gods own handie-work being broken by the occasion of their sin, to show that
the Moral Law should continue for ever, the broken Tables were removed (and
none knows what ever became of them) and Moses was commanded to frame two new
whole Tables of stone, like the former.

Two extremes about the written word are here to be avoided: The first is of
the Papists, who too much disgrace the Scripture, at least comparatively;
Putane piures baeres^^ and sectas exerituras fuisse, fi nuila p^nitus S^riptura
extitisset, quam nunc cum Scritura mortalibus a coelo data est? Ego certe
propior sum existimanti, pauciore^ fuisse futuras.
Do you think that more sects and heresies would have bubbled up, if there had
been no Scripture at all, then now are, when God has sent us the holy Writ? I
rather incline to that side, who think there would have been fewer divisions,
says Gretser in his defense of Bellarm. de Verb. Dei, 4.4. Pighius de Eccles.
Hierarch. 1.2. says Apostolos quaedam scripsisse, non ut scripta illa
praeossent Fidei and Religion^ nostrae; s^d ut su^essent potius.
That the Apostles wrote some things, not that they might rule over our Faith
and Religion, but be subject rather: and concludes, that the Church is not
only not inferior, nor only equal, but in a sort superior to the
Scriptures. The Carmelite Antonius Marinarus, in the second book of the
History of the Council of T^ent, page 118. is confident, Ecclesiam fuisse
perf^ctissimam, prius ^uam Sanctorum Apostolorii ullas s^ripsisset: neq
Ecclesiam Christi perfecti^^e ulla carituram, etiamsi nihil unquam scripto
fuisset mandatum.
That the Church was most perfect before any Apostle wrote, and that the Church
of Christ had never wanted perfection, though never any thing had been written.
Majoranus Clyp. 2.28. thus, Vnus Ecclesiae consensus, qui nunquam caruit
Spiritu Dei, pluris apud nos esse debet, quam omnes e^ingues and muti codices,
and quoiqu^t sunt and crunt unquam s^ripta volumina; quae hominum ingemis
semper materiam contentionis praebuerunt.
The uniform consent of the Church, which never was destitute of Gods Spirit,
ought more to be esteemed by us, then all the dumb writings and volumes which
are or shall be written: which have ministered matter of debate to the wits of
men. These are accursed errors, and easily confuted; because traditions are
inconstant, and their number was never yet determined by themselves; but the
Scripture is certain, and our Savior both rebukes the Pharisees for holding
of traditions, Mark. 7.8, etc. Luke 11.39. Matthew. 23.18. and commands them to
search the Scriptures, John 5.39. and refers himself, and the whole course
of his life and death to be examined by Scripture, Luke 24.25, etc.

The other extreme is of such, who neglect or deride the Church and the very
name thereof, because they have the written word: and these do as much glory in
it, as the Jews did in the material Temple of Solomon; when, in truth, their
contempt of the Church and its power, turns to their damnation, without
repentance; and if the frequent, divine, immediate revelation had been imparted
by God to us, as it was to the Patriarchs, it had been better for us: for in
that illumination there was no error, no mistaking, no doubtfulnesse, but an
impossibility of being deceived. So that my discourse ends in the point in
which it began, The Scripture was not absolutely necessary to be written; but
ex hypothesi, conditionally, and supposing the divine decree, it was
necessary; yea upon corruption of manners and doctrine, it was not only
(...), convenient, but (...), necessary: not only the most convenient way,
but the most necessary means. Otherwise, God would never have written it. It
is necessary, if not as a cause, yet as a concause; The word as a cause, the
writing as a concause, says Trelcatius. The Scriptures are not simply
necessary ad esse Eclesiae, to the being of a Church, whatsoever Scharpius
says; but ad been esse, to the wel-being: for nothing was written of the New
Testament in Christ's lifetime, nor in some years after. Away with the Popish
vilifying of Scripture; Materia litis, non vox judicis.
Matter of strife (say they) and not the voice of the judge. Away with the
Puritanicall cut, disdaining the Church, and the interpreters thereof (to wit,
their thrice-reverend Bishops and Priests) and priding themselves in their own
senseless private Spirit.

The second question follows; viz. Whether the holy Penmen or Actuaries wrote
the Scripture casually?

I answer, If we take casually for forte fortuna, for sole chance, or only
bare contingencie, they wrote not casually: Te facimus, Fortuna, deam, coeloque
locamus: Men think they make Fortune a goddess (a giddie one like the people
themselves) but indeed God works that which we call Fortune amongst men.
Augustine lib. 80. quaest. quaest. 24. divinely reasons in this sort, What is
done by chance, is done suddenly, or rashly: what is so done, is not done
providently; but whilst providence administreth all things, nothing falls by
chance in this world; if through it we look up to God, as to the universal
cause by his providence: For nothing falls under our senses, but was commanded
or permitted from the invisible and intelligible Hall of the highest Emperor,
says Augustine, de Trin. 3.4.

1. Kings 22.34. A certain man drew a bow at a venture (or, in his simplicity)
and smote the King of Israel between the joints of the harness. What the 32
Captains of the King of Aram could not accomplish, though this were their
Commission, Fight neither with small nor great, save only with the King of
Israel, verse. 13. that this roving arrow did by chance accomplish, and slew the
bloody Ahab: yet so by chance, as the hand of the Lord did guide it, -- Nec
erranti Deus abfuit: -- and it might have been written on the shaft, before it
was drawn out of the quiver, Deus Achabo; more certainly then what was written
on the arrow that stroke out the eye of Philip of Macedon, Astur Philippo.

A wealthy merchant sends two of his Factours, one to the East Indies, the
other to the West; each of them not knowing the others employments: after
certain years he appoints each of them to be at such a port on such a month
and day, if they so can: They both meet, both wonder, both at the first hold it
a strange chance; when the deep wisdom of their master providently determined
all this. There is no chance where providence reigns.

If we take casually as importing counsel merely humane led by opportunity
only, and excluding inspiration; as men consilium capiunt ex tempore, and pro
re nata, Advise according to the fresh occurrences: or, as bonae leges ex malis
moribus oriuntur, Good laws are made upon former mis-behaviour: thus the holy
Prophet^, Evangelists, and Apostles wrote not casually; for as the Prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1.21. so both for the Old and New Testament,
S. Paul says, All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2. Tim. 3.16. Is
that casual?

If we conceive the matter thus, The holy penmen wrote casually, that is, Upon
just occasions, and newly emergent occurrences, the Spirit of God inspired them
to write, who otherwise would not have written; I will say they wrote casually;
for casualtie in this notion presupposes things done upon reason; and who
dares say that God did ever any thing without good ground or reason, says the
divine S. Augustine? They wrote fortuito, say the Papists; non fortuito, says
Vorstius: Clear the terms by the former distinction, and the question is ended.

No part of Jeremie is in Chaldee, but one verse only; and upon what occasion
was that? The Chaldee Paraphrast thus relates it, says Vatablus; Jeremie
wrote to the Elders in the Captivity; If the Chaldean people did say, House of
Israel, worship idols; the Israelites should answer, The idols which ye worship
are idols indeed, in which is no profit: they cannot draw forth rain from
heaven, or fruit out of the earth; Let them and their worshippers perish from
the earth, and be destroyed from under heaven. And to that effect speak Lyra
and Rabbi Solomon: but the words of God by the Prophet are thus to be rendered,
Jer. 10.11. Thus ye shall say unto them, May the gods, or, Let the gods that
have not made the heavens and the earth, perish from the earth, and from under
these heavens; PEREANT, so the Vulgat, Vatablus, the Interlinearie, and
translated Chaldee: (...), say the Septuagint. And this does somewhat ammuse
me, why our last English Translation, with others, embrace the Future tense,
reading They shall perish, when the words are a present execration of past,
present, and future idols. I come to the point; If the Jews had said the effect
of these words in Hebrew, the Chaldeans could not have understood it; nor had
it been written in Chaldee, if the Chaldeans had had no intercourse with the
Jews; and in this sense that verse was written casually.

As Ananias and Sapphira their withholding of things consecrated, ministered
occasion to the holy Spirit, both to impart the knowledge of their sacrilege
to S. Peter, and to inspire into him that particular prophecy, Act. 5.9. which
S. Peter otherwise had never spoken: So if Onesimus had not been a bad servant,
and after converted, S. Paul had not written that Epistle to Philemon, at least
not the greatest part of it. Chemnitius, in Examine, part. 1. declares at
large, Qua occasion, propter quam causam, and in quem usum, primum Scriptura
tradita sit a Deo: And he speaks of the Old Testament.

Concerning the New Testament, neither Christ nor any of his Apostles wrote any
thing for many years; nor did any one Evangelist or Apostle singly write, till
the Church was pestered with Schismatics, Who troubled them with words,
subverting their souls, Act. 15.24. To remedy which discord, a Council was
gathered at Jerusalem of the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church; and
they wrote Letters, or an Epistle to the brethren; And, Acts 15.28.
Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis, It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to
us, was the forefront of their main decree. And this was the beginning of
writing of any part of the New Testament, says Chemnitius in his Examen of the
Council of Trent, part. 1. page 32. though others dissent from him. I will
only say, If that schism had not been, that Council had not been gathered,
that Epistle had not been written. Briefly thus: Eusebius in the second and
third book of his history, specializeth the causes and grounds why each of the
four Evangelists did write; which is exemplified by Chemnitius in the place
before cited, even to satietie; whilst he at large describes the occasions,
and inducements, or reasons, why all and every book of the New Testament was
written. Thus the conclusion being firm, That the word of God was written
casually, that is, the sacred Penmen were inspired to write all of it upon
just motives, and fair occurrences; and yet not casually, if we take the word,
in sensu profano, and usu forensi: I proceed to the third Question, Whether
they were commanded to write?

They who read the Scripture, may think this question idle and impertinent:
but who has been conversant in the thornie paths of controversies, shall find
much opposition by our adversaries. Bellarmine, de Verbo Dei non scripto, 4.3.
says thus, Falsum est, D^um mandasse Apostolis ut scriberent. Legimus mandatum
ut praedicarent; ut scriberent nunquam legimus. Deus nec mandavit expresee ut
scriberent, nec ut non scriberent.
It is false that God commanded the Apostles to write. We have read they were
commanded to preach, Matthew. 28.19. we have not read that they were commanded to
write. God did not command expressly either that they should write, or not
write. To the place alleged by Bellarmine, I answer: They are not there
commanded Praedicare, but his very Vulgat has it Docere; which may be by
writing, as well as by preaching. The Original has it (...), discipulate, or
discipulas facite omnes gentes: where (...) is not taken neutro-passively, for
discipulum esse; for that implies that the Apostles should learn of the
Gentiles, and not teach them: but actively, as if it were in the Conjugation
HIPHIL; ac si dicas, DISCIPULARE, says Beza. The very word (...), praedicate,
preach, used Mark 16.15. does not necessarily imply only the Apostolical
preaching viva voce in suggesto, aloud in a pulpit; but does signify a
publication in general: not only a going up into the pulpit (as idiots
imagine:) for an Angel did (...), Revel. 5.2. preach; or proclaim, as it is in
our last Translation: and Christ preached to the spirits in prison, 1. Pet.
3.19. and the possessed of a legion of devils, being dispossessed, (...), Mark
5.20. Began to preach, or publish, how great things Jesus had done for him.
None of these (I dare say) climbed up into the pulpit. Moreover, publication
may be by writing, as well as by preaching; and more disciples have been made by
Evangelicall and Apostolical writings, then ever were by their preachings in
their own times.

I answer again: He says, It is false. To prove a falsehood a man must have
express truth, which he confesses he has not: and how lamely follows this?
Because we now read it not, Ergo, they were not commanded. He would have
laughed at such a negative proof of ours. Augustine says, Quicquid Christus de
suis factis and dictis no^ legere voluit, hoc scribendum Evangelis^is, tanquam
suis manibus imperavit.
Whatsoever Christ would have us read of his words and works, that did he
command the Evangelists, as if they had been his own hands, to write.
Bellarmine answers: Lequitur de imperio interno, quod suggestio quaedam and
inspiratio potius quam praeceptum proprie dictum existimari debet.
He speaks of the inward command, which is rather a suggestion and
inspiration then a proper command. I reply; Of precepts properly so called,
some are hid and secret, others more manifest: the internal command binds as
much as the external; divine suggestions often times have the force of an
express inward precept; and commands are sometimes manifested by inspirations.
Praeceptum proprie dictum, which is by word or writing, and Imperium internum,
may be equivalent; and so long as it is Imperium internum, what need we care
though it be not Praeceptum proprie dictum? And the command was to write, which
is an outward act.

The second Objection brought by Bellarmine against himself, is from the
Revelation, where S. John is commanded diverse times to write. To this he
answers most unclerklike, That S. John was commanded to write certain hidden
visions; not the doctrine of the Gospel, and precepts of manners. But this is
easily confuted: for Revel. 19.9. it is said, Write, Blessed are they which are
called to the marriage-supper of the Lamb. Is not this the doctrine of the
Gospel? what is more Evangelicall? He might have considered the marriage-feasts
in the Gospels, Matthew. 22.2, etc. and Luke 14.16. And a voice from heaven said,
Revel. 14.13. Write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth; yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works do follow them. Are these hidden visions? Is not this the doctrine
of the Gospel? The like might be amplified out of the first, second, and third
chapters of the Revelation, where matters of morality and precepts of manners
are commanded to be written, and are written: and not hidden visions, but
rather the doctrine of repentance, and of the Gospel.

Christ says to his Apostles, Act. 1.8. Ye shall be witnesses unto me. He
forbeareth the word of preaching; and uses more general words, (...), Ye
shall be witnesses; and they bare witness by writing: Joh. 21.24. This is the
disciple which testifies of these things, and wrote these things; and we know
that his testimony is true; not only he himself, but Peter and the rest, WE
know that his testimony is true: what testimony but his writings? Toti operi
suo fidem vult conciliare.
He would have all his works or writings believed, says Luc. Brugensis, and
Maldonate.

When the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write, says
S. John, and a voice from heaven says, Write them not, Revel. 10.4. The
Apostles forwardness or pronenesse to write, argues not necessarily that he
was not commanded first to write; but rather presupposes it: and this present
inhibition, Write not, may serve as an exception to a former general command
that he might have to write.

Indeed there is no express record that all and every of the Apostles were
enjoined to write: nor is it likely they were; for then they would have obeyed;
whereas not the one half of the Apostles committed any thing to pen, ink, and
paper, for ought we know; But we are sure that some writers of the Old
Testament were commanded to write: Exodus 17.14. And the Lord said unto Moses,
Write this for a memorial in a book; Jerem. 36.2. Take thee a roll of a book,
and write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee, etc. and S. John
was commanded eleven or twelve times to write: and thence it is more then
probable, that the rest of the Apostles which wrote were commanded to write;
they might be expressly appointed to write, though in their writings so much
be not expressed. To say as Bellarmine does, It is false that God commanded the
Apostles to write, because so much is not written, is rash and ill-advised;
inferring, that they were commanded nothing, except those things which are
written. Is every thing false that cannot be proved? is nothing true but what
can be proved? To evince a thing to be false, is required a real proof of
truth positive, which Bellarmine wants: and the falsitie may justly be
retorted home to the Cardinal himself, from the authority of a prime man of
his own part. Wiser Aquinas 3. part. quaest. 42. artic. 4. and 2. thus, When
the disciples of Christ had written what he showed and spoke unto them, we must
in no wise say that Christ himself did not write, since his members wrote that
which they knew by the dictate of him their Head. For whatsoever he would have
us read of his deeds and words, he commanded them as his own hands to write.
Now let Bellarmine say, It is false, that the Apostles were commanded by God to
write. And thus much shall serve for the third question.

The fourth question. Whether the Prophets, Evangelists, and Apostles were
compelled to write?

As when it is said, Luke 1.70. GOD SPOKE BY THE MOUTH OF HIS HOLY PROPHETS,
per LOQUENDI verbum, SCRIPTIONEM quoque comprehendit: so what I propound of
Prophetical, Evangelicall, and Apostolical writing, must also be understood
of their speaking, or dictating; Whether they were compelled to it?

Compulsion is of two sorts; Proper and absolute, Improper or mixed.

Proper, when a man is forced (as we say) in spite of his teeth, against his
will; as some who have been drawn to punishment. Thus were they not compelled.

Mixed, when a man does that which he would not do, unless he feared a greater
loss; as when a Merchant or Mariner cast their goods into the sea to save
their lives; which has in it part of the voluntary, and part of the
involuntarie: And of this there may be some question; for Jonah fled from the
presence of the Lord, Jon. 1.3. that is, was unwilling to do the message. Moses
again and again refused to be Gods ambassador to Pharaoh, Exodus 3.11. and to
the Israelites, Exodus 4.1, 10, 13. Isaiah was also backward, Isa. 6.5. One
answer serves for all: They were at first fearful rather then unwilling; but
when they were confirmed, they readily and boldly did their duties. So far
were they from shadow of compulsion, that they offered their service. When the
voice of the Lord said, Whom shall I send? and, Who will go for Us? (Isa. 6.8.)
the Prophet said, Here am I, send me.

Yea, but they were impulsi, rapti, agitati, acti, (...), 2. Pet. 1.21. I
answer, The word rather excludes voluntary and arbitrarie will worship, or
self-will-service; then includes compulsion: for all this was performed Libero
motu voluntatis, With the free motion of their will: or (as others take it)
Salvo pleno usu liberi arbitrii, Without any impeachment of the freedom of
their will. Acti a Spiritu sancto loqunti sunt a Deo afflati; compositos tamen
intellige bos motus; non quales fuere profauorum vatum.
They who were led by the holy Ghost, spoke, being inspired by God: yet know
that their motions and inspirations were settled and composed; unlike to the
profane heathen priests or prophets (for they were wild, senseless, not
knowing what they did or said) says Tremellius. Romans 8.14. Many are led by the
Spirit of God, (...). Aguntur is no more in effect then ducuntur. If it had
been trahuntur, yet Herba trahit evem.
Meat draws a sheep to it, says Augustine: and all is far from coaction.
And this may stop the mouth of Aretius, saying, on Peter 2.1. Inviti saepe
rapti sunt in hunc ordinem, Moses, Elias, and alii, qui fuga potius hoc munus
maluissent declinare.
Moses, Elias, and others, who had rather have fled from these duties, were often
unwillingly drawn to them.

It may be further objected: Act. 4.20. We cannot but speak the things which we
have seen and heard. Fond is the exposition of the Ordinary gloss, We CANNOT,
that is, We WILL NOT. By such a That is I will confound heaven with earth. But
I answer, The words imply no violence; the wills of the Apostles were not
enforced: if the will of man could be compelled, it were no longer Voluntas, A
will, but rather Noluntas, No will. A thing may be said Posse, aut non posse
fieri, To be, or not to be made; these ways:

1. We cannot but speak, that is, Non possumus convenienter tacere, It is
unreasonable that we should be silent. Can the children of the Bridechamber
mourn? (Matthew. 9.15.) is a question without question; for certainly they could:
but while the bridegroom was with them, they could not mourn; that is, It was
no fit time for them to mourn. Likewise, the Apostles could hold their peace;
but then it became them not: and therefore they say, We cannot but speak.

2. Non possumus licite, We cannot lawfully: so Lyra expounds the words. We can
do nothing against the truth, says S. Paul, 2. Cor. 13.8. that is, We cannot
lawfully: unlawfully he might, and so might any other. So here, If we do
lawfully, and as we ought, We cannot but speak.

3. We cannot but speak, that is, We are very prone and apt to speak. Mat.
12.34. How can ye, being evil, speak good things? and how could the Apostles,
being good, but speak good things? their souls were filled with grace, which
boiled forth into words; their mouth could not choose but speak what their
heart thought: My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned;
then spoke I with my tongue, Psalm. 39.3.

4. We cannot but speak; that is, We speak not of our selves, but as God
teaches us: Est Deus in nobis, agitante calescimus illo:
When God on us does blow, By him our heat does grow.
He moves us, and mota facilius commoventur, Things fixed are not so soon moved
as things in motion: so the Apostles were silent before; but when the Spirit
enlightened their understanding and framed their words, could they hold their
tongues? themselves answer, We cannot but speak.

I sum it up all thus: It was inconvenient not to speak; It was sinful not
to speak; It proceeded from the habits of grace and goodness that they were so
prone to speak; It proceeded from the celestial suggestion, actuating their
hearts and tongues: Therefore (say they) We cannot but speak: And yet away
with all coaction.

Others may yet allege the 1. Cor. 9.16. Necessity is laid upon me to preach
the Gospel; and verse 17. If I do this thing willingly, I have a reward: but if
against my will, a dispensation is committed unto me. Unto the first part I
answer, The necessity is not of pressure, angariation, or force; but of
precept: Obstrictus sum ad hoc, I am commanded and bound to this, as it is in
the translated Arabic: for he was often commanded to preach: In Damascus, Act.
22.15. in the temple of Jerusalem, Act. 22.21. at Antioch, Act. 13.2. Si
voluntatem adjungo necessitati praecepti, mercedem habeo.
If unto the precept I add a willing-readie heart, I have my reward, says
Aquin. But, I will freely sacrifice unto the Lord, says David, Psalm. 54.6. and
S. Paul will preach rather for love, then necessity.

The other part of the words, against my will, evinceth not compulsion, but
backwardness, slownesse, and ill ends. If I preach WILLINGLY; that is, for the
love of Christ, of my self, of my brethrens souls, for Gods honor and glory,
and at his command, I HAVE MY REWARD: But if AGAINST MY WILL, that is,
Unwillingly, or in an unwilling manner: ( Si solo timore servili praedico.
If for only servile fear I preach, says Aquinas) if for fear of woe denounced
against me, if for my private ends of fame or gain; yet even to such a
mercenary IS THE DISPENSATION COMMITTED. (...) is opposed to (...), the words
against my will, are not so properly expounded, though it run so in our
Translation. (...) is with a good will, as Coverdale well translates it: (...)
signifies a thing done proprio motu; therefore (...) is with an ill will,
grudgingly, mercenarily: (...) is non volens, sluggishly, drawlingly, formally,
for fashions sake. I will conclude this answer with the exposition of the
Arabic and Syriack Translatours: Si facio hoc ex proposito mentis meae,
voluntate mea, est mihi merces; si autem, cum facio, ingratum est mihi, etc.
If I do this purposely, with a full will, I have my reward: if when I do it,
it is harsh, unpleasant, and sour, etc. says Arabs. Si voluntate mea, si
praeter voluntatem meam.
If with my will, if besides my will, says Syrus. None of this tastes of
coaction.

There yet arises up another objection: The same Apostle says, The love of
Christ constrains us, 2. Cor. 5.14. I answer, The words are diversely
expounded: Vrget nos, Urges us, says the Vulgat; Cohibet nos, Restrains us,
says Montanus; Continet nos, Contains us, says Oecumenius; Incendit nos
amore, Sets us on fire with love, says Theodoret; Charitas Christi
constringit nos in hac sententia, The love of Christ binds us fast in this
opinion, says Arabs: such a constraint as would not be free; such a bond or
knot as would not be untied; such a constraint as when a man is commanded to do
that which he would do without command; when precept is joined to
voluntarinesse; when injunction is interposed between both precedent and
subsequent willingness. So much for the Objections.

On the other side, for the truth these arguments stand forth.

Luke 1.3. It seemed good unto me to write unto thee, says he. This proves
that the Evangelist was not compelled.

Gal. 6.11. Ye see how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own
hand; by which words S. Paul seeks to ingratiate himself with them for that
labor. But it was neither matter of kindness on his part, nor thank-worthy
on their part, if he were compelled.

No man dares write in a Princes name, without his command: S. John was spoke
to, advised, commanded twelve times to write: that he was compelled I read not.

The second of John's Epistle verse. 12. the Apostle had many things to write;
yet would not write with paper and ink, or with ink and pen, as he phraseth it,
Epist. 3. verse. 13. If he would not, how was he constrained?

S. Jude gave all diligence to write, verse. 3. so far was he from coaction;
And it was needful for me to write, says he in the same place: It was not
absolutely necessary; he says not that he was compelled.

Diverse followers of Solomon wrote his Proverbs; who coacted them?

S. Paul wrote according to the wisdom given unto him, 2. Pet. 3.15. Was this
a power compulsive?

In the Epistle to Philemon, verse. 21. Having confidence in thy obedience, I
wrote unto thee, knowing that thou will also do more then I say: which words
imply, he would not have writ if he had thought Philemon would have been
obstinate, or refractarie, and would have done nothing at his request:
howsoever, he was free from coaction.

2. Tim. 1.5. The remembrance of the unfeigned faith in Timothy, in Lois, and
Eunice, was the reason of S. Paul's writing unto him. Does reason use violence?

By Silvanus I wrote briefly, exhorting you, says the Apostle, 1. Pet. 5.12.
Was he compelled himself, who exhorted others?

Simpliciter voluntatem cogi ad actum volendi, contradictio est.
It implies a contradiction to say simply, The will was enforced to the act of
willing, says Scotus. The will may be compelled by God or by the creature,
quantum ad actus imperatos, so far as belongs to the commanded acts in
which the body is passive. Joh. 21.18. Another shall gird thee, and carry thee
whither thou would not, says Christ to Peter. Many are compelled to go to
the Gaol, and to be hanged: but the will is induced, quantum ad actus elicitos,
by the emanant and distilled acts. What the holy Penmen spoke or wrote, they
did freely and willingly, void of compulsion.

The fifth question follows, viz. Whether the holy Penmen understood all that
they wrote?

Christopher Castrus on the smaller Prophets, lib. 3. de vera futurorum
cognitione, cap. 12. handles this point at large; and to him I ow a great part
of these authorities. Montanus held that the Patriarchs and Prophets spoke in
an ecstasie, not knowing what they said; as Epiphanius, Haeres. 48. contra
Montanistas, relates. But he was an heretic for it. The devil so moves the
tongues of the rapted or ecstaticall heathen, that they neither understand what
they speak, nor have power not to speak; and their speech is low out of the
dust, and their voice out of the ground, Isa. 29.4. as with the Montanists
their Prophetisses Prisca and Maximilla; and among the heathen the Pythonists;
and diverse orders of religious irreligion this day among the Turks, especially
the Dervises. But our Prophets, says the worthy Estius, did speak and write,
prophetical light being infused into them, and the knowledge of the mysteries
inspired, and with the free motion of their will. The Fathers run in full
streams to this depth.

Origin, Homil. 6. in cap. 16. Ezekielis, Non excidebant mente Prophetae.
The Prophets were in their right minds. And Tom. 6. in Joan. Fatendum est,
quae proprio ore protulerunt Prophetae, eos intellexisse, inque labiis gestasse
animi candorem.
We must confess that the Prophets understood what they spoke, and carried in
their lips the courteous grace of their mind. And (Periarch. 3.3.) Omnes
Prophetae vel Apostoli divinis responsis sine ulla mentis obturbatione
ministrabant
All the Prophets and Apostles were obedient to the words divine, without any
disturbance or distraction of mind.

Basil in Prooemio Isaiae, Sunt qui dicunt eos extra se raptos, prophetare,
humana mente a Spiritis absorpta. Verum id abhorret a professione divinae
praesentiae, ^t amentem reddat qui a numine corripitur: cumque plenus divinorum
decretorum esse coeperit, tum a Propria mente excidat. Quomodo consentaneum
est, ut quis ex sapientiae Spiritu reddatur simillimus insano? Quin potius
neque lumen caecitatem parit, verum videndi vim a natura insitam expergefacit:
nec Spiritus tenebras inducit animis.
Some say that the divinely illuminated do prophecy, their humane soul being
swallowed up of the Spirit. But it abhors from the professed truth, and
goodness of the divine presence, to make him a mad man who is inspired by God:
and when he shall begin to be filled with divine Oracles, that then h^ should
be out of his own wits. Is it likely or convenient that one by the Spirit of
wisdom should be made most like to a mad man? Rather light stirs up the
visive faculty naturally: nor does light breed blindness, nor the Spirit
infuse darkness into the minds of men. See the same Basil on Isaiah 13, at
the beginning: Chrysostom, Homil. 29. in primam Epist. ad Corinth. 12. Hierom
in prooem. Isaiae, and Nahum, and Abacuc, and in 3. cap. ad Ephesians. Augustine de
Genes. ad literam 12.9. and Epist. 112. and contra Adamantium Manichaeum, cap.
28. Gregory, Moral. 11.12. All aim at this mark.

That they were rapti, or in an ecstasie, none denies: but there is a double
ecstasie. The first either from outward and inward senses, the mind remaining
more enlightened and free and perfect: Thus were they sometimes in an ecstasie.
Secondly, there is an ecstasie from the mind it self, when it understands
not: Thus they were never in an ecstasie. So Philo Judaeus in his book, Quis
rerum divinarum haeres?

Cyril, lib. 8. in Joannem, cap. 3. Non ad Prophetae rationem id semper
exigit^r and necessarium est, ut quae sutura denuntiat intelligat: habuit
Dauiel complures visiones quas primum non intellexit; sed ab Angelo postea est
edoctus, and nomen Prophetae non perdidit.
It is not always necessary that a Prophet should understand whatsoever he
foretells. Daniel had many visions which at the first he understood not, but
was after taught by an Angel; and yet he forfeited not the name of a Prophet.

I answer with Hierom on Daniel 10. They did know what the things signified,
though they were not presently enlightened; Vt per moram occasio daretur,
aneplius Deum deprecandi, and lacrymis and je junio invocandi Deum, ut mitteret
Augelum suum qui docere^ Danielem.
that upon the delay occasion might be ministered unto them to pray oftener and
more unto God, and with tears and fasting call upon him, that God would send
his Angel to instruct Daniel. So that every Prophet knew what words he spoke,
and knew the literal meaning of every word: but the spiritual meaning they
understood not at the first, or presently, but afterward. So Zachary saw many
things and knew them not, but asked the Angel: Zach. 6.4. What are these, my
Lord? And 1.9. O my Lord, what are these? And 4.5, 6. Know thou not what
these things be? And I said, No my Lord. Then he answered and spoke unto me,
saying, This is, etc. See the like in the 13 and 14 verses.

Pharaoh, Nabuchodonosor, and Caiaphas did apprehend, but not understand things
divine: Prophets understood almost always, says Castrus: Always, say I,
within a short while; so that they were never left wholly nescient of what they
prophesied.

Aquinas, 2a, 2ae, quaest. 173. artic. 4. comes home to me in the question
propounded and in the close, though he holds somewhat aloof in the body of
the Article. His Quaere is, Vtrum Prophetae semper cognoscant ea quae
prophetant? Whether the Prophets always understand all things which they
prophecy? and at first he resolves, Non oportet Prophetas quaeeunque
praedicun^ cognoscere.
It is not necessary that they should know whatsoever they foretell. I
confess there is no absolute necessity of it; and the Non oportet makes
another distinct question: But against my position detur (...), give me one
instance. He proves it by Caiaphas, who knew not what he prophesied. It is
answered before; He was no Prophet, though he spoke a prophetical sentence, no
more then Balaams ass was a man, because he once discoursed more wisely then
his master. Aquinas adds, and that truly, That the Spirit moved the minds
of the soldiers to part Christ's garments; but they knew not what it signified.
But this is far from our question: for neither were they Prophets, nor spoke
any prophetical sentence; but only fulfilled one. Three Arguments he brings
unanswerable for my opinion.

1. Augustinus super Genes. ad literam 12.9. toward the beginning: Quibus signa
per aliquas rerum corporalium similitudinet demonstrabantur i^ Spiritu, nisi
accessisset mentis officium, ut etiam intelligerentur, uondum erat prophetia.
Sed ea quae intelliguntur, non possunt esse incognita: Ergo Propheta non
ignorant ea quae prophetat.
Who saw by the Spirit heavenly visions in and by the glass of bodily
resemblances, unless there were added also the use, employment, and offices of
the mind, whereby those things may be understood, he deserves not the name of
a Prophet: But those things that are understood are not unknown: Therefore the
Prophet is not ignorant of what he prophesies.

2. Majus est lumen prophetiae, quam lumen naturalis rationis: Sed quicunque
lumine naturali habet scientiam, non ignorant ea quae scit: ^rgo quicunque
lumine prophetico aliqua enuntiat, non petest ea ignorare.
Greater and brighter is the divine light of prophecy, then the light of
natural reason: But by natural reason we are not ignorant of those things
which we know: Therefore whosoever is inspired with the spirit of prophecy,
cannot be ignorant of such things as he prophesies of.

3. Pr^phe^ia ordinatur ad homanum illuminationem: Vnde dicitur, 7. Pet. 1.19.
HABEMUS PROPHETICUM SERMONEM, CUI BENEF ACITIS ATTENDENTES, QUASI LUCERNAE
LUGENTI IN GALIOINOSO LOCO. Sed nihil potest alios illuminare, nisi in se sit
illuminatum: Ergo videtur quod Propheta prius illuminetur, ad cognoscendum ea
quae aliis enuntiat.
Prophecy is ordained as a means to instruct and inlighten men's
understandings: whereupon it is said, 2. Pet. 1.19. WE HAVE A MORE SURE WORD OF
PROPHECY, WHEREUNTO YE DO WELL THAT YE TAKE HEED, AS UNTO A LIGHT THAT SHINES
IN A DARK PLACE: But nothing can irradiate or give light unto others, that is
not illuminated in it self: Therefore it seems that a Prophet is first
enlightened himself, to know those things which he fore-divineth to others. His
only answer to the objections is, that the three reasons speak of true
Prophets, whose mind is from heaven perfectly enlightened: Which is wholly my
conclusion, except he differ from me in this, That the minds of the true
Prophets are not perfectly enlightened in the things which they do prophecy:
which his words may insinuate, and my opinion contradicts. It is true, that
Faith is of those things that are not seen; Hope is of those things that are
not had or enjoyed; Prophecy is of those things that are not, but are to come:
and things to come are as easily known lumine prophetico, by the light of
prophecy, as present colors are discerned lumine naturali, by the light of
nature: But that prophecy is of things hidden from the true Prophet, evinceth
that a Prophet and a Seer are not all one; and what I say concerning whatsoever
the Prophets spoke or writ, I say also of all other Penmen of holy Scripture;
They knew what they spoke, they knew what they wrote; even S. Paul that heard
unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter, 2. Cor. 12.4.
out of doubt understood whatsoever was said unto him: He says not, he heard
words that he could not understand; but words unspeakable.

Three Objections follow: two brought by Castrus, but not answered; the third
is drawn from diverse passages of the Apostles.

Object. 1. Augustine, de Civit. 7.33. says, Prophetae quaedam intelligebant,
quaedam non intelligebant.
The Prophets did understand some things, and not understand other things.

It is true, No one of them knew all things, but some things were revealed to
one, some to another, in several times, places, manners, and degrees: but
Augustine will not say, that the holy Prophets were ignorant of what they
prophesied themselves, and were to teach others. Elisha knew not the cause of
the woman's coming to him, 2. King. 4.27. and till the minstrell played, the
hand of the Lord came not on him, 2. King. 3.15. but the same Elisha knew, not
only things to come, but also things contingent, and which did never come to
pass: Whereas Joas smote but thrice upon the ground, Elisha knew by the spirit
of prophecy, that if Joas had smitten five or six times, then had he smitten
Syria till he had consumed it, 2. Kings 13.19. Now let any one think the
Prophets to be parcell-ignorant in their own prophesies, I will not.

Object. 2. Ambrose, de Abraham, 1.8. says, Abraham prophesied he knew not
what, when he spoke to his young men, Genesis 22.5. Abide you here with the ass,
and I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.

Melchior Canus, de locis Theologicis, 2.4. in initio, says, Sunt alii quibus
ego vehementer assentior, qui admittunt Abraham mentitum fuisse; Others admit
that Abraham told a lie, to whom I strongly adhere. I answer in general, Canus
had done better if he had followed them, Qui pie graviterque contendunt,
Abraham non esse mentitum.
Who religiously and gravely contend (as himself speaks) that Abraham lied
not. I answer more particularly, The plural might be used for the singular; or
he might think reservedly, If God will, If we both live. Either of these ways
is better then that of Canus. But the truth is, The father of the faithful
knew, that though himself did kill Isaac, yet God who is able to stones to
raise up children unto Abraham, Matthew. 3.9. was able to raise up Isaac even
from the dead, Heb. 11.19. and in hope or full assurance thereof might say, I
and the lad will return; and yet intend faithfully to sacrifice his son. And
who knows but he might be divinely and extraordinarily assured, that his
child should return with him?

The third Objection consists of these parcels: 1. Pet. 5.12. By Silvanus a
faithful brother unto you, as I suppose. 2. Cor. 11.5. I suppose I was not a
whit behind the very chiefest Apostles. In both places is used the word (...),
computo, supputo: Existimo, says the Vulgat, I suppose. 1. Cor. 7.40. (...), I
think I have the Spirit of God. Joh. 21.25. There are many other things which
Jesus did, the which if they should be written, I suppose that even the world
it self could not contain the books that should be written: (...), arbitror, I
opine, think, or suppose. From which or the like places the objection thus
arises; Opinion is conversant about those things which are changeable; and is
only of all the powers of the soul busied about contingents; and is a
trembling, pendulous, shaking and uncertain habit, circa complexa: upon
probable reasons inclining to one side; yet fearing or doubting the
contradictorie: for opinion is framed on likelihood, as knowledge is upon
truth. Where opinion or supposall is, there is not certain knowledge: But our
Apostles did think or suppose: Therefore they had not immediate divine
revelation or certainty in the points supposed, and therefore wrote somewhat
which they knew not.

I answer to each of these Apostles in particular: and first to S. Peter, who
seems to be in doubt and uncertainty what was to be thought concerning
Silvanus.

Diverse say, he speaks modestly of him, as the Apostolical men were wont to
do of themselves. S. Augustine, Tract. 37. in Joan. averreth, that under those
words is couched an asseveration: As if one should say to a stubborn servant,
Thou do contemn me: Consider; I suppose I am thy master: where the seeming
supposall makes him neither to be, nor seem to be ever a whit the less his
master. But I answer, That the holy Ghost having not revealed unto S. Peter
fully what the heart of Silvanus was, or was like to be, left him to suppose;
and according to the supposall of his soul, did dictate unto S. Peter (what the
blessed Spirit knew better then S. Peter) these words. The supposall of the
Apostle infers not a supposall of the Spirit; The Spirit was most certain
when the Apostle might be dubious: The holy Ghost spoke (if I may so say)
representing Peter, and in Peter's person; which might be subject to a
supposall, and yet divinely inspired to know certainly what he wrote, namely to
know this, that he did suppose. And that upon good motives.

Whereas S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 11.5. I suppose I was not a whit behind the
very chiefest Apostles: and 1. Cor. 7.40. I think I have the Spirit of God; he
speaks not so much doubtingly as humbly. To use diminuent and sparing phrases
concerning ones self is lawful: 2. Cor. 11.23. I speak as a fool, says S.
Paul; yet there was as great a dissimilitude between a fool and him, as between
any (I think) then breathing. Ephesians. 3.8. (...), Unto me who am less then the
least of all Saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ. No man had the like privilege in
every degree, as he had in this. S. Peter was Doctor Judaeorum, the Doctor of
the Jews; S. Paul Doctor Gentium, the Doctor of the Gentiles: yet no man can
speak more modestly then S. Paul does of himself: Less then the least of the
Apostles, had been much; but less then the least of all Saints, is the depth,
the heart, the soul of humility: which yet is further evidenced, in that he
says not, this grace was given when he was a persecuter, and so indeed worse
then any Saint, yea almost worse then any man; but to me even now when I am
called, now when I am turned; to me now less then the least of all Saints, is
this grace given. Less then the least is contrary to the rules of Grammar,
which admit not a comparative above a superlative; contrary to common sense;
contrary to the literal truth of the things themselves: for he was a chosen
vessel, a chief Apostle; few (if any) more chief: though he should boast more
of his authority, he should not be ashamed, 2. Cor. 10.8. No whit inferior
(...), to the very chiefest Apostles, 2. Cor. 12.11. A Minister of Christ more
then others, 2. Cor. 11.23: Now though S. Paul used terminis diminuentibus, and
spoke sparingly and modestly in some places concerning himself; yet otherwhere
he reveals the whole truth; he knew the certainty of things, to wit, that he
was not less then the least, that he was not as a fool: and when he said, I
suppose, or I think, he did know. Dum minus dicit, majus innuit: Whilst he
speaks the less, he intimates the more: he was never a trumpeter of his own
worth, but when he was urged unto it by opposition.

Concerning the place of S. John thus I answer: The Apostle was governed by the
holy Ghost, to use an Hyperbole, or (...), according to the Oriental
Idiotisme; and perchance aimed at the words, Genesis 13.6. The land was not able
to bear Abraham and Lot, that they might dwell together: Or at the place of
Amos 7.10. The land is not able to bear all his words; as is well observed by
the curious Heinsius. He also here is guided by the same Spirit, to write, I
suppose, or I think, that even the world could not contain the books: as for
other reasons to us unknown, so perhaps because both the Spirit would qualify
the Hyperbole, and speak within truth which is allowed, rather then beyond
truth which is disallowable: I suppose, rather then I know.

Secondly, I answer more punctually; If the holy Spirit did leave S. Paul
nescient, whether he were rapt in body, yea or no; and Paul did know his own
nesciencie, 2. Cor. 12.2. why might not the same Spirit leave S. Paul, S.
Peter, S. John in supposals? and yet no inconvenience arises thencefrom, since
they perfectly knew that they did suppose. This is the disciple which
testifies of these things, and wrote these things; and we know that his
testimony is true, John 21.24. as S. John says of himself.

To conclude this point; No man ever said, that whatsoever the holy Penmen
mentioned or treated of, they understood perfectly, invested with all their
circumstances: for they spoke and writ of the day of judgment, and other
secret visions, whose depths were never sounded by mere man; but sealed and
reserved, perchance from Angels, till the general judgment: yet whatsoever
matter, sentences, and words they wrote, they knew as they were writers
thereof, and were in no doubt of them, nor could they mistake them. As they
were not omniscient on the one side; so were they not ignorant on the other
side: but whatsoever they spoke or wrote they knew, and knew much more then
ever they spoke or wrote.

The sixth question follows, viz. Whether the holy Penmen did read profane
authors?

Upon the premisall of six points, the answer will be most expedite.

The first is this, That diverse Prophets and Penmen of the Old Testament, were
Noblemen, Rulers, or Kings, cannot be denied by him, who thinks of Isaiahs
birth of royal lineage, says Hierom in the Prologue on him; and Lyranus from
the Rabbis; or on David, Solomon, and others.

Secondly, That diverse also were learned before their calling to public
place, is most apparent. Thus Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the
Egyptians, and was mighty in words and deeds, Act. 7.22. and this before he
was called to his public charge. Thus was Job skilled in Astronomy, as his
words declare; and Solomon the best Philosopher (as I think) that ever was,
except Christ and Adam; though Solomon's great learning was rather infused then
acquired.

The third puncto is, That no Penmen of the New Testament were Noble: And
perchance even therefore our Blessed Savior would write nothing by himself in
person, because he was of the bloud-royall. S. Hierom in his Epistle to
Principia the Virgin, says, S. John was Noble, and for his Nobility known to
the high Priest. I answer, that he was very near of kindred to our Blessed
Savior, and therefore Noble; but that ever he was nobly bred or brought up
according to the usance of the world, or that he was by his nobility made
known to the high Priest, I see not proved. S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 1.26. Ye see
your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble are called: and verse. 28. God has chosen the base
things of the world, and things which are despised. If any one object, Though
there were not many noble called, yet S. John might be one: Estius is
peremptory, that Inter duodecim Christi Apostolos nullus erat secundum seculum
sapiens, potens, nobilis.
Not one of the twelve Apostles, according to the world, was wise, powerful,
or noble. Ambrose, lib. 5. in Luc. ad illud Capitis sexti, 13. ELEGIT EX IPSIS,
thus, Adverte coeleste consilium: non sapientes aliquos, non divites, non
nobiles, sed piscatores and Publicanos, quos dirigeret, elegit; ne traduxisse
prudentia, ne podemisse divitiis, ne potentiae nobilitatisque authoritate
traxisse aliquos ad suam gratiam videretur.
Observe the providence of God: He chose not any wise, nor rich, nor noble, but
he elected fishers and Publicanes: and them he instructed, lest he might seem
to have drawn men unto him by worldly wisdom, or to have redeemed them by
wealth, or to have allured them to his side and to the participation of his
grace, by the reconciling authority of power and nobility.

The 1. Cor. 4.11. the Apostle speaks in the person of all his fellows, thus,
Even to this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place; and labor, working with our own
hands, etc. which things the Noble of this world will neither do nor suffer:
Therefore they were not Noble.

The fourth thing premisable is this, None of the twelve Apostles were learned
before their calling. S. Paul indeed was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel,
Act. 22.3. and S. Luke, as being a Physician, might be learned ere he was a
Christian: the like might be surmised of S. Mark; and the rather, because we
read not that the gift of tongues was given to these two. Concerning S.
Matthew, though there may be some probability that he was learned before his
vocation, because he sat at the receipt of custom, Matthew. 9.9. for few
unlearned men were gatherers of Cesars customs or tributes: and though
Publicanes were vilely esteemed of among the Jews, yet diverse passages of
Cicero do show, that they were of good account among the Romans: and though
more particularly it is observed, Luke 5.29. that Levi (or Matthew) made Christ
a great feast in his own house; and there was a great company of Publicanes
and of others that sat down with them; whence may be inferred, that S. Matthew
was a rich man; yet notwithstanding all this, he might be unlearned; and a
poor man might make a great feast for joy of his extraordinary calling. See
what the young, perhaps, poor plough-man Elisha did, 1. King. 19.21.

Joh. 7.15. the Jews say of Christ, How knows this man letters, having never
learned? The Priests, Scribes, and Pharisees knew Christ frequented not their
schools, no not those at Jerusalem (for Franciscus Lucas Brugensis calls them
Schools) pointed at, Luke 2.46. which were in the Temple, and at the outwardest
Eastern gate of it; I say, Christ frequented them not to learn; but he at
twelve years of age went and heard the Doctors, and asked them questions; and
belike, when they could not answer, he did; or else, perhaps, he did answer to
other questions propounded by them: for all that heard, him (even they with
whom he disputed) were astonished at his understanding and answers, Luke 2.47.
John 7.27. We know this man whence he is, say the Jews. As if one be eminent
among us, we usually enquire of his parents, of his breeding, and whole course
of life: so in likelihood they did of Christ: They knew his breeding in the
city of Nazareth; Where from his childhood he used a mechanical trade with
his supposed father, says Pererius: They saw him not poring on books, nor
tumbling them over, nor for studies sake resorting to any places where religion
was taught; yet they heard him, Legis testimonia proferentem, Allege the words
of the Law. They did not admire his doctrine (say Chrysostom, Euthymius, and
Theophylact) nor believed they it; but they were astonished at his eloquence
and learning, acknowledging them rather inspired then acquired. From whence
has this man these things? and what wisdom is this which is given unto him?
say they, Mark 6.2. As Christ never went to any Schools, no more (in all
likelihood) did any of his twelve Apostles; who being poor tradesmen, may well
be thought unlettered: Matthew. 4.21. even John, and his brother James, with
their father Zebedee, were mending their nets; whereby their poverty and mean
calling was described. Their ignorance is taxed by the Jews, John 7.49. This
people, who knows not the Law, are cursed: where his disciples are held as
illiterate ignorants. And for this cause, I think, Christ chose not either
Nicodemus, or Joseph of Arimathea, or the Lawyer which offered to follow him,
or Scribe, Priest, or Pharisee, to be any one of his Apostles; that
Apostolical learning might be rather Divine, then Humane: in which regard
also, perhaps, he chose none of the Doctors with whom he argued: sure I am, S.
Augustine says, for this very cause Nathanael was not numbered among the twelve
Apostles, Quia doctus erat in lege, Because he was a learned Lawyer; though
otherwise Nathanael was a most accomplished men. Act. 4.13. it is said, That
the high Priests, Rulers, and Elders perceived that Peter and John were
unlearned and ignorant men: Unlearned in the knowledge of things themselves;
ignorant in skillful speaking: simple men both for matter and manner. And this
the Jews perceived, that is, by disquisition found out, says Lorinus.

Augustine, de Verb. Domini, Sermon. 59. Tom. 10. Magna artificis misericordia:
sciebat enim, quod si eligeret Senatorem, diceret Senator, Dignitas mea electa
est: si Oratorem, Eloquentia mea: si Philosophum, Sapientia mea electa est. Da
mihi istum piscatorem: veni tu pauper; nihil habes, nihil nosti; sequere me.
Tam largo fonti vas inane admovendum est. Leguntur modo verba piscatorum, and
subduntur colla Oratorum.
Great was the mercy of Christ: He knew if he had chosen a Senator, the
Senator would have said, I was chosen for my place and dignity: If an
Orator, he would have pleaded, My eloquence has made me regarded: If a
Philosopher, My wisdom caused me to be chosen. Give me the Fisherman: Come
thou poor man; thou have nothing, know nothing; follow me. Put me an empty
vessel where is so great a spring. The words of Fishermen are read only, and
the necks of Orators are subject unto them. Or (as Athanasius, de Incarnat.
and Sacrament. cap. 9. has it) Verba Philosophorum excludit simplex veritas
piscatorum.
The plain downright truth of Fishermen, has thrust out of doors the
oratorie of Philosophers.

Lorinus, on Act. 1.26. relates the opinion of Antoninus, thus, That Christ
whilst he lived chose rude and illiterate men, lest the conversion of the
world should be attributed to humane industry and wisdom: yet the Apostles
chose the learned Matthias, to insinuate unto the succeeding Churches, That not
idiots, but skillful men were to be chosen Governors of souls; Yea, even
Christ himself from heaven, vocally called the learned S. Paul. And so I shake
hands with this point.

The fifth follows, viz. That it was lawful for them, and is for others, to
read, or seek profane Authors.

The arts are as handmaids to Divinity. Clemens Alexandrinus, primo Stromat.
says, Non minus literas illas Gentilibus ad Christum paedagogi vice, quam
legem Judaeis esse
The arts are as a Schoolmaster to bring the Gentiles to Christ, as the Law was
to the Jews. Though the Apostle says, Beware lest any man spoil you through
Philosophy, (Col. 2.8.) yet it is that Philosophy which is joined with vain
deceit. True Philosophy is a branch plucked from the eternal Verity (says
Clemens in the same place) and is the child of rectified reason. But Recta
ratio est lex summi Jovis.
even Jupiter is ruled by good reason, says Cicero: and Tertullian, more
African-like, Res D^i Ratio.
God and reason are at one. When any Fathers tax Philosophy, it is because it
comes too nigh the Mountain, and intermingleth with Divinity: otherwise, it
is lawful to use it, or any other profane authority. See it proved by
Nicephorus, 10.26. Gregory Nazianzen defends S. Basil for his learning in
Ethnicks, and censureth those that condemn it, saying; The air, the earth, are
not to be contemned, because some have abused them. Fire, meat, iron, and other
things, Per se sunt neque utilia neque noxia.
of themselves are neither profitable nor harmfull, but as they are used. As we
make Theriacall medicaments of creeping things: so let us choose the good
things out of them, and contemn the bad; Sanctificantes profana and facientes
occlestastica.
making the profane things to be sanctified and ecclesiastical, says Origin,
Homil. 31. in Luc. Hierom well observes in the beginning of his Commentaries
on Daniel, and in his Preface on Job, That, if you look over all the books of
Philosophy, you must needs find in them Aliquam partem vasorum Dei.
some part of the chosen truths of God. In Plato, God to be the Architect of
the world: in the Stoicall Zeno, Hell, and the immortality of souls. We are to
vindicate their good things from them, as from unjust possessours, and to
transfer the spoils of Egypt to our selves, as Augustine sweetly alludeth, de
doctr. Christ. 2.40. When Ruffinus accused Hierom for using in his letters
humane learning, Hierom Epist. 8. answers, That that is to kill Goliath with
his own sword, 1. Sam. 17.51. Let Philosophy submit her self, as Agar to Sara,
says Clemens ibid. Let the captive woman's head be shaved, and her nails pared,
Deuteronomy. 21.12. If the handmaid be obstinate, Cast out this bondwoman and her
son, Genesis 21.10. Quomodo repudiamus secularia studia, sine quibus divina esse
non possunt?
Why do we refuse secular learning, without which we cannot comprehend things
divine? says Tertullian, de Idololat. And Aquinas most divinely in his
disputed questions de side, Art. 10. Rationi naturali verae nunquam
contrariatur Theologia; sed eam excedit saepe, and sic videtur repugnare.
Divinity is never contrary to true natural reason, but often excels it;
and so going beyond it, does seem to thwart it. And so this fifth point, That
it was and is lawful to read profane Authors, is the rather concluded,
because it shall be confirmed by the sixth,

The holy Penmen did cite Poets or profane Authors.

Titus 1.12. One of themselves, even a Prophet of their own, said, (...)
Cretenses semper mendaces, malae bestiae, ventres pigri:
The Cretians are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies.


Epimenides the Cretian in his book (...), de Oraculis, has the whole
Hexameter: Callimachus came after him, and from him took the Hemistich: But the
whole verse was not taken by S. Paul from Callimachus, because the whole verse
was not entire in Callimachus: Besides, Callimachus was of Cyrene, not of
Creet. The learned Estius is my author.

The same S. Paul cites this (as it is Act. 17.28, 29.) In him we live, move,
and have our being, as certain also of your own Poets have said: For we are
also his offspring. In which discourse S. Paul insists in the writings of
diverse of their Prophets. First, verse. 24. God made the world, and all things
therein; which almost all Heathen acknowledged, and many have published: verse.
26. He has made of one blood all nations of men: Orpheus comprised both of
them before in few words, Vnus perfectus per se; ex uno omnia facta: He is one
and perfect of himself; and by or of that one were all things made. Verse. 28.
seems to be taken from Xenophanes Colophonius, who comes home to that point,
as he is cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, Stromat. 5. or else from Orpheus, who
acknowledges that in God -- cuncta moventur,
Ignis, aqua, and tellus, --
All things are moved, Fire, water, earth.


Concerning those words, verse. 29. We are his offspring; they are the very
words of Aratus in the beginning almost of his (...), Ipsius enim genus sumus,
We are his offspring. Clemens Strom. 5. and Vasques, Tom. 1. part. 1.
disputat. 28. number. 17. expound it, as if we were his Genus Creatione, By
creation. That is true, but not enough: for Genus may be taken for Soboles, an
offspring; and men may be said to be (...), Jovis proles, Born of God, The
issue of God; or, as another has it to an other purpose, Semideique homines,
semihominesque dei:
Men half gods, and gods half men.


Another place in S. Paul, is 1. Cor. 15.33, (...)
Evil communications corrupt good manners.
Tertullian, ad uxorem, 1.7. says, This versicle was sanctified by the
Apostle. Hierom, ad Demetriad. virg. Epist. 8. cap. 10. says, S. Paul assuming
this secular verse, made it Ecclesiastical. Socrates, 3.40. and out of him
Nicephorus 10.26. say, It is borrowed from Euripides. Hierom, Peter Martyr, and
many mo report it to be Senarius Menandri, an Hexameter of Menander. I
reconcile them thus, That it is in both of the Poets. Justinian the Jesuit
relates, that Photius, apud Oecumenium, says, Some such thing is in the
Prophet Isaiah; But I could never find it, says the Jesuit. Perhaps he
mistook Photius; for if Photius had any relation to the precedent words, verse.
32. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die; the Jesuit might find the
same Isa. 22.13. And so Athanasius, on the place of the Apostle (or rather
Theophylact, if we believe Bellarmine, de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, ad annum
340. in Athanasio) says, Those words were taken from Isaiah.

Acts 20.28. Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock; Attendite vobis,
etc. That Thales Milesius was the first that said, Non sine oculo Domini (.i.
attentione) equum; non sine vestigio Domini, (id est, attentione) agrum
pinguescere, was a good observation of Bishop Andrews in his Concio ad Clerum,
in Synodo Provinciali, page 29: but that grave Prelates intimation (for indeed
at the utmost it is no more) that Paul alluded to that saying of Thales, is a
conjecture far enough fetched. Eodemque in loco, Paulus (jam Milesius) Nec,
sine attentione, been esse Ecclesiae dicit. So he. Much more may be said to the
point concerning the Apostles citing Apocryphal, or not Canonical writings.

S. Paul knew the names of Pharaoh his Magicians, 2. Tim. 3.8. Jannes and
Jambres, as we read it according to the Greek and Syriack; which is also
followed by Numenius apud Eusebius. de praeparat. Evangel. 9.3. though the Vulgat
has Mambres in stead of Jambres, and the Hebrew Talmud, and Rabbi Nathan, as
Genebrard cites them in the first book of his Chronology. Apostolus e Talmud
habet nomina principum Magorum Pharaonis, ut communis opinio est.
It is commonly thought that the Apostle took from the Talmud the names of
Pharaohs chief Magicians, says Drusius, in Henoch, page 25. and in the margin,
Credibilius est, ipsum sumpsisse ex libro Apocrypho, qui Jannes and Mambres
vocatur; nam Talmud inde habuit.
It is more credible the Apostle took it out of an Apocryphal book, called
JANNES AND MAMBRES: for from thence the Talmud fetched it, says Drusius. I for
my part will not define whether S. Paul was only immediately from heaven
assured, that these were the names of the Magicians; or whether he had read
their names also in some Apocryphal book now perished, or in the Talmud.

James 1.17. (...) etc.

Every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above: Which words I have both
heard and read alleged for the lawful use of humane literature; though I, for
my part, cannot guess whence the Apostle took them.

That S. Jude had the history of the strife between Michael and the devil,
about the body of Moses (the 9 of Jude) in part from Deuteronomie, and in part
from an Apocryphal book, Aretius maintains: The title of the book was
Assumptio Mosis, The assumption of Moses (as some say;) or, Ascensio Mosis, The
ascent of Moses, as others say. That S. Jude might also have read the book of
Henoch and his prophecy, I will not deny: for he cites some words of it,
verse. 14. So think Hierom in Catalogo, and in his Commentary on Titus 1.
Augustine de Civitat. 15.23. and ibid. 18.38. and Beda on the place. But the
book of Henoch is Apocryphal.

That S. John read the Targumists, in many places, the learned Heinsius proves
or labors to prove by many passages. Thus much clearly must be confessed, that
the gifts both of reading, and of writing, and understanding of strange tongues
was conferred on all the Apostles; not one was an illiterate man, after the
cloven tongues like as of fire sat upon each of them, Act. 2.3. and I make no
question but they also read the Old Testament, after that time, and might read
other books, Talmudists, Targumists, Hellenists, Apocryphal books, yea Heathen
writings; and perhaps did so.

But in all these or the like places, which the Apostles cited or pointed at,
this is now my last resolution, as a Corollarie to the Question before briefly
answered,

Either the sacred Penmen never read those things themselves, but the
all-knowing Spirit did tender and dictate both matter and words to them: Or if
they did read profane authors, and were conversant in them; yet they used the
words, not as their own reading, not as humane learning, not as drawn out of
the treasury of their own memories, not as if they had the choice to insert
those sentences above others; but the holy Ghosts inspiration guided them
wholly, and reached forth words unto them, both in things which they knew, and
in things unknown unto them before.

Yea, I believe, that if Plato, or Aristotle, Tullie, or Varro had lived after
Christ's days, and been called to write any part of Scripture, they should not,
would not have conceived one thought, or written one word of humane literature,
as from themselves, or any part of their own great knowledge; but would have
quitted themselves, and been wholly led by the holy Ghost.

The seventh Question. Whether they studied the things beforehand?

That both Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, were filled with holy thoughts,
and heavenly meditations, we certainly believe and know. Psalm. 45.1. My heart
is enditing of a good matter; or (as it is in our margin) boyleth, or bubbleth
up a good matter: Eructavit cor meum verbum bonum, says the Vulgat; Verily
good thoughts were in my heart: The like I say of all, and every of them. Psalm.
39.2. I was dumb with silence, I held my peace even from good, and my sorrow
was stirred: and verse. 3. My heart was hot within me, while I was musing the
fire burned; then spoke I with my tongue: and verse. 4. Lord, make me to know
mine end. From whence appears, that David was premeditating, as other people
do: and at the last, as other men's, his thoughts brake forth. The similitude is
taken from sorrow and grief, which being for a while suppressed, grows
greater; or from fire, which being smothered, or half quenched with water, upon
recovery of its strength, grows far more violent. The answer is, that David
relates what course he took when he could not exonerate and alleviate his soul
by conference with men, whose ways he liked not: He poured out his complaints
and prayers unto God: So Musculus. And this no doubt did the Spirit of God
stir him up to do. It pleased the holy Ghost to make those thoughts of David,
which before were pure and divine, yet private, now to be divine, public, and
canonical.

Again, That they might conceive and understand by the Spirit, a great deal
more then the holy Ghost would have to be written, I deny not: and on such
things they might muse.

Yet I conjecture, that what they wrote in holy Scripture, they studied not
beforehand (the Spirit has no need of man's study or learning) and I do
remove from every part of it, all humane premeditation; and maintain, that the
Spirit did frame both matter and words (as by Gods grace shall anon appear)
pro re nata, as occasion offered it self.

One chief reason may be this, That nature, which is the right hand of God,
has greatest care of greatest matters, and less of least, and equal care of
things equal. If the Apostolical and Evangelicall writings are not
(consideratis considerandis, weighing one thing with an other) of more esteem
then their words were; yet let them go as equivalent: Then Christ will have as
much care of their writings as of their speaking: But their speeches were
without premeditation, and were commanded so to be: Therefore all their
writings. Matthew. 10.19. Take no thought how, or what ye shall speak: you see
both the matter and manner is not to be from them. For it is not ye that speak,
but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you, verse. 20. Not they, there
is the negative; but the Spirit, there is the positive. Likewise, Mark 13.11.
Take no thought beforehand, -- neither do ye premeditate: An absolute
inhibition; and it had been a great sin to transgress it, and a distrust of
the holy Ghost. The like I say concerning all their writings.

They might have indeed in their meditation beforehand diverse of those things
which afterward they wrote: but when they thought on them, they knew not they
should write them; and when they did write, they wrote them not as copies or
extracts of former conceits out of the womb of their own memories; but as
freshly and newly inspired, apprehended, indicted, and dictated unto them.

There is one kind of knowledge proceeding from principles known by the
natural light of the intellect: as Arithmetic, Geometry, etc. Others proceed
out of principles known by light of an higher knowledge: as Perspective, from
the principles evinced by Geometry; and Music, from principles known by
Arithmetic: So is the Scripture believed by an higher light, even by the
revelation of God, says Aquin. part. 1. quaest. 1. art. 2. and not believed
only; but the matter, and manner, and words proceeded from a diviner
understanding, then humane conceit could reach unto; and were written by an
higher and better hand then the hand of man. All was the holy Spirits doing,
even the leading of their hands whilst they wrote, that they could not err.

Cornelius Cornelii a Lapide, on 2. Tim. 3.16. thus, The Spirit did not dictate
all Scripture after one manner. The Law and the Prophesies are revealed and
dictated to a word; the Histories and Moral exercitations, which before by
sight, hearing, reading, or meditation the holy Writers had learned, there was
no necessity to be inspired, or dictated from the Spirit; since they knew them
already: So John 19.35. He that saw it, bare record: and Luke 1.3. It seemed
good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very
first, to write unto thee in order: Then does he mince, modifie, and qualify
his former saying, in this manner; But the holy Spirit may be said to have
dictated even the latter also: First, because Astitit scribentibus ne vel in
puncto a veritate aberrarent.
he was present whilst they wrote, that they could not go one jot from the
truth: Secondly, because it stirred them up, and suggested that they should
write this rather then that: Conceptum ergo, and memoriam little quae sciebant,
non iis ingessit Spiritus Sanctus.
Therefore the conceptions and remembrance of such things as they knew, the
Spirit did not inspire into them. Thirdly, says he, The Spirit did order,
direct, and methodize all their conceits, that they might put this in the
first, that in the second, another in the third place. In which words of his
three things deserve censure, even the strict censure of the Inquisition.

First, That the Spirit did not dictate all Scripture after one manner.

I answer, Then all is not of a like dignity: that which is after the divinest
manner, is to be held best: that wherein there is a medly of divine and humane
knowledge and wisdom, is of an inferior sort. But this may not be granted;
for, All Scripture is of divine inspiration. Excellently says Doctor Estius
on 2. Tim. 3.16. Rightly and most truly from hence do we conclude, that all
the sacred Canonical Scripture was written by the dictate of the holy Spirit;
(not in that manner, say I, that he left the Penmen to their own memories and
knowledge, which as humane were weak and imperfect) but Ita nimirum, ut non
solum sententiae, sed and verba singula, and verborum ordo, ac tota dispositio
sit a Deo, tanquam per semetipsum loquente aut scribente.
so, that not only the sentences, but every word, and the order, placing, and
the whole disposing of the words was from God, as speaking or writing by
himself. But God (I dare say) has no need of their memories; nor his writing
or speech, of their hearing, reading, sight, or premeditation.

Secondly, he is to be taxed for saying, there was no necessity that things
Moral and Historical should be inspired.

I say, there was a necessity that histories and moralities should be
inspired, if they are to be parts of the sacred Writ: otherwise, this knowledge
and writing are only parcels of humane learning. Though S. John bare record to
what he saw, his bearing record without the Spirit, had been but an ordinary
testimony. Not his saying, but the inspiration makes the record divine: and
his testimony from the Spirit, That he saw, is of more force then his
testimony could be to the Spirit, What he saw. It seems good unto me, says
S. Luke; but it was made to seem good unto him by the Spirit: yea, first it
seemed good unto the holy Ghost; as the Apostles in the like case said, Act.
15.28. It seemed good unto the holy Ghost, and to us. The words do not notify
the pleasing of his own fancy, without the dictate of the holy Ghost, say I.
And the understanding that he had of things from the first, was not by sight;
for he was not then called: nor by humane relation; for that may be mistaken,
increased, or decreased, or subject to error. But the knowledge issued out
from the light divine; and therefore is there termed perfect understanding;
like Gods gifts, James 1.17. All other guides are somewhat imperfect.

Thirdly, the Jesuit is justly blameable for saying, The Spirit need not tell
them what they knew before.

I say, they might have forgotten or mistaken some things, as they were men;
and by the Spirit they might know more certainly, what they knew before more
doubtingly; and by the same Spirit they might know some circumstances more then
before they knew: what they knew humanely, they now know divinely.

I will not discuss the question at large, Whether the Law written by the hand
and finger of God immediately, were to be regarded above other things divinely
inspired into holy men, and written by them. This I will say, That if I were
ascertained that I saw the very tables, the latter tables of stone which God
himself wrote; or if I had seen any thing which Christ himself had written (for
I will not say he wrote nothing; and I know he could write) I should prefer
them somewhat above whatsoever should be transcribed or written by any other
whosoever: and this is my reason; Though Moses his writings were inspired and
dictated from God; yet he placed them in the side of the Ark, Deuteronomy. 31.26. a
place not altogether so noble: (see Cajetan on Heb. 9.) but the tables, and
only the tables written by Gods own finger, were laid up in the Ark it self;
as appears, 1. Kings 8.9. and 2. Chron. 5.10. howsoever afterward it seems
there was a change, Hebr. 9.4.

At length I am come to the five Conclusions, which beat directly upon the
learned Heinsius: whereof the first is this, There was no difference between
the Penmen of the divine Writ of the Old and New Testament in the point of
conceiving and writing in different languages. Which in this manner I do
explain;

If I demand of the worthy Heinsius, in what tongue the Old Testament was
conceived: his answer is peremptory, Prolegom. page 26. Hebraea ac Chaldaea
conceptum est lingua.
It was conceived in the Hebrew and Chaldee language. It had been clearer if he
had used some disjunctive, rather then a copulative Preposition. For none will
imagine that the skillful Heinsius did ever mean, that all of the Old Testament
was conceived both in Hebrew and in Chaldee, to which his words seem to
incline: but either in Hebrew or in Chaldee was it conceived; and they who
wrote in Hebrew conceived in Hebrew; and they who wrote in Chaldee conceived in
Chaldee. I do not think but he would thus have expressed himself, and explained
his own meaning, if he had been put unto it. Whereupon I discourse in this
manner: Jeremie wrote somewhat in Chaldee, and Daniel wrote some chapters: If
they being Hebrews or Jews by generation and birth, and perfect in their
mother tongue, ready Scribes in the law of Moses, as well as Ezra, Ezra 7.6.
did yet conceive in the Chaldee, that Chaldee which they wrote (which the
ingenuous Heinsius will not deny: for what was conceived in Chaldee, if that
which was written in Chaldee was not so conceived?) why did not the Writers of
the New Testament, though they were born and bred in the use of the Syriack,
conceive in Greek what they wrote in Greek? What reason have we to discriminate
them: so that the Penmen of the Old, shall conceive and write in one and the
same language, the Chaldee in Chaldee, and Hebrew in Hebrew; and not the Penmen
of the New Testament? but they (forsooth) must conceive in Syriack, and write
or dictate in Greek? especially since all of them conceived and wrote by the
inspiration and dictate of one and the same Spirit? Either let him make the
forenamed passages of the Chaldee language in the Old Testament to be conceived
in Hebrew, though writ in Chaldee; and so none at all to be conceived in
Chaldee: or let him equal the Penmen of the New Law to those of the Old in
this point, That they wrote in the self-same tongue in which they conceived.

Besides, it will be hard to prove, that Jeremie ever knew any part of the
Chaldean language, till that very verse was inspired into him: and so with it,
both the knowledge, and the words, and the power both of pronuntiation and of
writing. So that Jeremie could not possibly conceive and utter also the Chaldee
in the Hebrew; but conceived that verse in Chaldee, and in Chaldee pronounced
or wrote it.

A second error in the learned Heinsius, Page 49. Prolegom. is this, Quare ad
allusiones, non quae extant, sed quas animo conceperat Joannes, eundum est.
Wherefore we must rest not on the allusions which now are, but which S. John
conceived in his mind.

Against which I set down the second Conclusion; viz.

We must have recourse to the allusions which are. S. John was Sol Evangelii,
The light, the sunshine, the very Sun of the Gospel, as Dionysius termed him:
This Sun is in eclipse, and we have not, cannot have his true and perfect
light, if we must not look to his rays and shine, which are his words; but to
his thoughts, that is, the light which is in himself; to his internal and
substantial light, and not to the external.

The certainest rule is most to be trusted unto: therefore let us not go from
the words and extant allusions which we know, to the thoughts of S. John which
we know not. For, Who knows the thoughts of a man, save the spirit of man
which is in him? 1. Cor. 2.11. And if the finite thought of every man be
unknown, can the thoughts of him, who is inspired by the infinite Spirit, be so
soon and so easily known? Moreover, the same words written in Greek may be
conceived two or three ways in the Syriack: for variations are in that
language, and different expressions of the same things; And which of those
shall we think was the conceit of S. John? And when we have lighted on diverse,
and all of them good expressions of Syriack; yet the Spirit might guide S. John
to an other, which we never thought upon: And so we are for ever uncertain what
allusion S. John conceived in his thoughts. For he conceived more by the
boundless power of the divine inspiration, then we can possibly reach unto:
and there was never place of Scripture so, since the Apostles days, expounded,
(if before) that I dare say, The Spirit aimed at nothing else, and all is
known. All known good expositions may be said to be of the Spirit, but the
Spirit has many depths which never yet were searched. Therefore our
anchor-hold must be on the words; or else we shall flote in the wide vast sea
of imagination and fancy, without sail, oar, or rudder, without card or
compass; by having recourse to the Non entes, or Non extantes allusiones,
Vnextant allusions, which were in the thoughts of our blessed Apostle. It is no
rule or canon which is not extant. Non Ens is an ill guide to Ens.

Besides, the Syriack now much differs from that in the Apostles days: how
then can we find out, what the Apostle conceived? For the Syriack and Arabic
now in use (except perhaps the Gospel of S. Matthew, and the Epistle to the
Hebrews) were translated out of the Greek, and not the Greek out of these. Had
we exactly the identicall (...), first original manuscripts, in which S.
Matthew wrote his Gospel, and S. Paul his Epistle to the Hebrews, in the Hebrew
or Syriack; had we the true self-same paper or parchment, in which the
Evangelists and Apostles or their amanuenses wrote the divine dictates; we
might better guess at their thoughts and the allusions to which they bended
themselves. But now Heinsius would have us to shoot at rovers; or rather to no
steadie mark at all, at the then thoughts of our Apostle.

Lastly, the worthy Heinsius does a little interfere, when he counsels us to
go to the allusions which were in the thoughts of the Apostles, and not to the
allusions which are extant: For suppose I grant that he has found whatsoever
the Apostle alluded to in his mind; is not this now extant? Or can a thing be
found which is not extant?

The third conclusion trenching upon Heinsius is this, They had no liberty
left unto them to put in their own conceits, or in writing to add or blot out
what they had done.

This point concerns the matter which is written.

Peter Moulin in his third Epistle to Bishop Andrews, as it is in the 182 page
of the said Bishops Opuscula, wrote thus; Quae ad salutem and fidem pertinent,
ab Apostolis statuta sunt afflatu divino; in caeteris, saepe usi sunt sua
prudentia, ut innuit Pauius.
What things soever concern faith or salvation, they were determined by the
Apostles under the guidance of divine inspirations. In other things they often
used their own discretion and prudence, as S. Paul intimates, 1. Cor. 7.25.
The grave and profound Oracle thus answers him, page 193. Parcius ista, de
Apostolis, prudentia sua ufis: periculose enim vel dicitur, vel scribitur,
Apostolos in Quibusdam asslatu divino, in reliquis sua prudentia saepe usos;
idque in iis quae scripta reperiuntur. Atqui vel illium ipsum locum, ubi (...),
cis ita concludi, (...) ita ut vel illius (...), a Spiritu Dei dictamen suum
habuerit.
I pray you speak more sparingly of this point, viz. That the Apostles used
their own wisdom or prudence: for it is dangerous to say or write, that the
Apostles were in some things inspired from heaven; in the rest often used their
own counsel and prudence, and that in matters which are found written in the
Scripture. But you know it is concluded immediately after these words,
ACCORDING TO MY OPINION, or judgment; AND I THINK ALSO THAT I HAVE THE SPIRIT
OF GOD, 1. Cor. 7.40. So that his very opinion or judgment, had its dictate
from the Spirit of God. Again, If the place cited were not inspired, but
written in humane prudence; we must note it as Apocryphal. Then let us make an
expurgatorie index of the New Testament. For we must separate that which is
precious from that which is vile. Things of humane wisdom will never stand
mixed with things divinely inspired. So far he. Enough indeed for an Epistle;
but I could have wished that the most learned walking-librarie had more fully
answered all the objections which do most forcibly arietate the truth;
especially such as are couched in the same chapter, which is cited by Peter
Moulin. If I come upon the stage after Roscius, I look not for praise, but
pardon. Let us muster up all their forces together: and since that famous
Bishop has withstood the utmost of their strength in the first brunt; the rest
will (like the French fury in war) be the easier answered.

The first objection is, 1. Cor. 7.6. I speak this by permission, and not of
commandment.

The second objection is, verse. 10. Unto the married I command, yet not I, but
the Lord: as if he had said, A common man may speak, and both deceive, and be
deceived; but I say these things being taught of God.

The third objection is, verse. 12. To the rest speak I, not the Lord.

The fourth objection, verse. 25. Concerning virgins, I have no commandment of
the Lord; yet I give my judgment, as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord
to be faithful.

The fifth objection, verse. 40. She is happier, if she so abide, after my
judgment: and I think also that I have the Spirit of God.

To the first I thus answer, The Apostle means not, that he was permitted
only to write or speak some things, and commanded to write other things: nor
touched it any part of his thought, to permit a little sin, that a greater
might be avoided, as some hence maintain; Dum tribuit veniam, denotat culpam.
Whilst he forgiveth them, he grants they were faulty, says Augustine
concerning these words, in lib. de peccat. Orig. cap. 38. Again, de bono
Conjugali, cap. 10. Quis ambigat, absurdissime dici, non eos peccasse, quibus
venia datur?
It is most absurd to say, They sinned not whom pardon absolveth. Again, in
Ench^r. cap. 78. Quis esse peccatum neget, cum dari veniam facientibus
Apostoliea authoritas fateatur?
Who can deny there is a fault, where the Apostle confesses that the doers
thereof were forgiven? I answer, Erasmus says, some Copies have it (...), and
not (...), secundum indulgentiam, as Augustine and others read: and then the
sense is, I tell you my opinion, or This is my advice; I leave you to your
selves, I do not command it; God makes not it a matter of precept, but thus I
advise or counsel: and then it sounds all one with that in the 25. verse,
where the Apostle says, (...), sontentiam do; and verse 40. (...). Liberum
interim faciens hac in re suum cuique judicium.
Leaving every man to his own liberty in this point, says Erasmus.

Secondly, I wonder that that holy Father could think S. Paul would permit the
least sin, when Romans 3.8. he counts them slanderous reporters that affirmed
he said, Let us do evil that good may come; adding, their damnation was just.

Again, if it be read (...), our English well translateth it, By permission:
and the Arabic expounds it by (...), By my concession: Non dico ut in decreto
decisivo.
Nor speak I it as a sinall sentence or binding decision, as Beza has it. The
Arabic of Junius has it, (...), With mutual consent: and thus enlarges it;
Quod dico ex consensu posse alterum ab altero discedere ad tempus propter
jejunium and orationem, non jubeo sed consulo. Nam ne 'Deus quidem ipse hoc
ordinarium aut perpetuum esse mandavit suis, sed exemplum praebuit cum hoc
consilio me^ (...), etc.
Whereas I say, One may depart from another by consent for a time, that they
may fast the more, and pray the better; I command not this, but advise it. For
even God himself never gave charge unto any of his, that this should be done
commonly, and kept perpetually, but he has given us an example agreeable to my
counsel, that it may be done sometimes for a while upon extraordinary occasion.
Exodus 19.15. Come not at your wives. The translated words of the Arabic by
Junius are these, Dico hoc, juris (ut dici solet) consiliunt, non ut mandatum.
This is the advice, not the decree of the Law. Beza makes the sense of the
words to be, as if S. Paul did not command expressly, that all should be
married, as some might collect from his words, verse. 2. Junius applies them to
his leaving it indifferent for man and wife to forsake the company of each
other for a time. Nomen VENIAE perperam torquetur ab Augustino.
Augustines PARDON is far fetched and forced too much, says Beza: for (...)
is a candid interpretation upon good reason; and does not always imply such a
pardon as connoteth a fault. Aristotle says, (...). Eth. l. 6. c. 11
It is an upright sentence, inclining not to rigor, but to moderation. Peter
Martyr says, Versatur circa aequii, and summum jus remittit, quod alioqum est
summa injuria.
It is exercised about that which is equal, and qualifieth the rigor of the
law, which otherwise is extreme injury. -- Even in the same sort could I deal
with one whom I saw to fast, or to study too much; that he might sometime
refresh himself. Which I would not say imperiously, but by way of counsel
grounded on equity. Neither does it therefore follow, that to study hard, or
to fast holily is a sin. So far Peter Martyr; who might as well have
insisted in S. Paul's advice to his scholar, 1. Tim. 5.23. Drink no longer
water, but use a little wine for thy stomachs sake, and thine often
infirmities. The Syriack in Junius has it answerable to the Arabic; Hoc dico
ego, tanqua^ infirmis, non ex mandato.
This I say, as to the weak, not by commandment. Ex concessione, non ex imperio.
By grant, not precept, as Tremellius turns it. Non praecipio, sed permitto.
I charge not, but permit, says Haymo: for how could S. Paul command when
Christ left it free? When Christ said, It is not given to all: or, He that is
able to receive it, let him receive it, Matthew. 19.12. if the words have
reference to the second verse: or, when God himself left it indifferent, if it
has dependence upon the temporary abstemiousnesse, upon just occasion touched
at in the fifth verse?

Concerning the second objection, verse. 10. Unto the married I command, yet not
I, but the Lord. I answer, First, that those forms of speech are not simply
exclusive, much less contradictorie; and denote not so much a simple negation
as a kind of comparison sometime: I, yet not I. And we have other places of
Scripture to be ranked in the same parallel: John 7.16. My doctrine is not
mine, but his that sent me. As therefore it was most true, that Christ's
doctrine, even as he is God and Man, is not his in one sense, that is,
originally; (for as he had not the divine essence of himself, or from himself,
but from God the Father; so from the Father had he the divine doctrine) and yet
in another sense is truly Christ's doctrine; as conceived and preached by him
who is God, the Fountain of truth, yea Truth it self. And as the doctrine which
he had as he was Man, was partly not his, (for the infused doctrine into the
soul of Christ, comprehending all scientificall habits, by which Christ
naturally knew, and that most perfectly, whatsoever was to be known, was not
his as Man, but was infused of God) and partly his, namely such as he, like a
Viator or another Man, experimentally might gather. And the true meaning of the
words may be, The doctrine which I preach is not the invention of mine own
brain, but his rather who sent me, to teach you what he taught me: and so is
both mine, and not mine: To which effect Pererius. So in the place of the
Apostle where it is written, I command, yet not I, but the Lord; since S. Paul
might be considered either as an ordinary man, or as an Apostle inspired from
God: he first says, I command; and then by distinguishing explaineth his
meaning, Yet not I, as a common man, but rather the Lord, by me his Apostle.
And all this proves not that S. Paul could write any thing as he was an
Apostle, of his own head; or yet put in any of his own conceits: but was wholly
guided by the Spirit. For, whatsoever is so properly man's work, that it is not
also Gods, that is not good; since the Author of goodness is excluded.

Secondly I answer, The place does rather expressly say, that whatsoever S.
Paul wrote or spoke as an Apostle, they were not his words or writings, but the
words of God (for his commands were not his, but the Lords) then any way imply
that he could write any thing as an Apostle, without the Spirit, or by the
dictate of his own natural prudence only.

Thirdly, Praecipio non ego ex mea sententia, sed Dominus in Evangelio, etc.
I command not according to mine opinion, but the Lord in the Gospel does, That
a man may not depart from his wife except for fornication, says Haymo. Where
our Savior speaks not of a short departure with consent, for the improvement
of religious duties (for then S. Paul might have had a command for it in the
objection precedent:) but our Savior speaks of a total or final departure
of man and wife by bill of divorcement or separation: for of this Christ spoke
expressly, Mat. 19.9. Mark 10.11. Luke 16.18. Therefore S. Paul commanded not,
but the Lord; namely Christ in those places of the Gospel to which he aimed.

The third objection is out of the 1. Cor. 7.12. To the rest speak I, not the
Lord. These words compared with the former may seem to carry it clear against
me. For what can be of more force? I command, yet not I, but the Lord; and, To
the rest speak I, not the Lord: as if S. Paul spoke and wrote something by
humane wisdom, which the Lord bid him not. First, I answer with Peter Martyr,
S. Paul says thus, because before he had reference to Christ's speech in the
Gospel, of not easily dissolving matrimony: but now he sets down somewhat, of
which Christ in the Gospel is not found to have said any thing. So now he
speaks, not the Lord: namely, not Christ in the Gospel, not Christ by word of
mouth as he was man: and yet on the contrary side, we may as truly say even
in this place, and to S. Paul's proper sense, with the words inverted, The Lord
speaks, not I: Not I, of my self; not I, as a man: but God from heaven, or the
holy Spirit speaks.

The conclusion is, S. Paul speaks or writes nothing as an Apostle from
himself, without the Lord, without divine immediate revelation from the holy
Ghost: but he might relate something which Christ spoke not whilst Christ
lived on earth; something that is not registered in the Gospel: And thus S. Paul
did speak, and not the Lord: And thus may an other speak or write, and not the
Lord. Ego dico, non Dominus: Nunquid Dominus non loquebatur per eum^ Vtique.
Sed ideo dixit se dicere, and non Dominum; quia hoc praeceptum non continetur
in Evangelio dictu^ a 'Domino sicut illud superius.
I speak, not the Lord: Did not the Lord speak by him? Yes. But therefore he
said that himself spoke and not the Lord, because this precept is not contained
in any of the Gospels, as the other was, says Haymo before Peter Martyr. And
indeed, I remember not that Christ so much as touches at this point; Whether a
believing man should put away, or dwell from an unbeleeving woman, yea or no?

To the fourth objection, 1. Cor. 7.25. I have no commandment from the Lord,
yet I give my judgment, I answer, It was matter of counsel, not of precept; it
was left indifferent; the doing, or not doing had not been sin. Noluit Deus
de virginitate and coelibatu praecipere, quia visus fuisset damnare nuptias
Christ would give no command concerning single life or virginity, lest he
should seem to condemn marriage. So Augustine, in libello de sanct. virginit.
So Hierom against Jovinian: So Ambrose, says Peter Martyr. Yet the Consilium
do, I counsel, is the advice of such an one, as had obtained mercy of the Lord
to be faithful: and a faithful steward will not distribute more or less then
his Lord appoints.

The unjust steward made them write less then was due: the usurer makes them
write more: the good and faithful man follows his masters will (...), foot
by foot. So this place proves not that the Apostle as an Apostle wrote or
spoke by humane wisdom any thing, but what was appointed of God.

The Rhemists on verse 12 say, By this we learn, that there were many matters
over and above the things that Christ taught or prescribed, left to the
Apostles order and interpretation: wherein they might, as the case required,
either command or counsel; and we bound to obey accordingly. Doctor Estius
goes further: Satis autem insinuat hic sermo, Praecipio non ego, sed Dominus,
Apostolos and eorum successores posse quaeda^ praecipere quae Christus ipse per
se non praecepit.
This speech, I COMMAND, YET NOT I, BUT THE LORD, does sufficiently evidence,
that the Apostles and their successors can command something which Christ
himself by himself commanded not. Both of them run awry in one extreme.
Doctor Fulk answers to that place of the Rhemists; The Apostles had not
particular precepts for every case; but they had general rules in Christ's
doctrine, which they were bound to follow in their precepts and counsels. I
think he approaches too nigh unto them; unless he mean that both their
precepts and counsels had the divine dictate to guide them; especially in
things which they wrote. And whereas he says, They had not particular precepts
for every case, I say, they had for all cases necessary: especially concerning
the whole Church. And their general rules might rather be for guiding matters
of order and discipline, then of doctrine. For he that promised to lead them
into all truth, would not leave them in the framing of particulars; as he does
us and other men, who out of generals do deduce these and these specials. For
there is a great distance and traverse to be placed between those sacred
Penmen, and other succeeding Expositours of holy Writ. And S. Paul does imply,
that even his judgment or counsel was according to the Spirit of God; as
Bishop Andrews well observed, and now comes to be handled.

The fifth objection is verse 40: in the same verse where he says, (...),
According to my judgment, he adds, (...), I think also that I have the
Spirit of God. Minus dicit, plus volens intelligi, He speaks sparingly, but
would be understood more largely, say I. So verse 26, I suppose: and 1. Cor.
4.9. I think that God has set forth us the Apostles last. Puto autem. Sobrie
loquitur, minusque dicit and majus significat; ut sit sensus, Certo scio.
I THINK. He speaks soberly, signifying more then he spoke; and it is all one
as if he had said, I KNOW CERTAINLY, says Dionysius Carthus. with whom
accords Primasius, Do not think that I speak what I do of my self; the Spirit
of God speaks in me: Futo non dubietatem significat.
The word I THINK is not wrapped about with doubtfulnesse. Peter Martyr thinks
it is an Ironie against the false Apostles, who traduced S. Paul as unworthy to
be an Apostle. And then the Ironie has as full force, as if he had
peremptorily avouched, The Spirit of the Lord is in me, and by it I write what
I write.

Other objections may be made, as the 2. Cor. 11.17. I speak it not after the
Lord, but as it were foolishly in this confidence of boasting. Therefore not
only humane wisdom, but humane infirmity may seem to challenge part both in
his words and writings. It is answered in a few words of Dionysius
Carthusianus, Non loquor, id est, Loqui non videor: that is, It seems not so to
some, though my self know the contrary.

Others may object, 1. Cor. 9.8. Say I these things as a man? or says not the
Law the same also? I answer, that he might speak or write some things like an
other man, some things unexpressed in their Law; but now he speaks or writes
(for they are both one sense in this notion) as an Apostle; who therefore was
equally to be regarded (as a Penman of the Law of Grace) with Moses, a Penman
of the Law Leviticall.

It may yet be objected what S. John says, 2. Epist. verse. 12. Having many
things to write unto you, I would not write with paper and ink: and 3. Epist.
John ver. 13. I had many things to write, but I will not with ink and pen write
unto thee. From whence a power seems to be wholly left in him, both whether
he would write or no, and what he would write. I answer to both places; If he
had said he had writ any thing without or beyond the Spirit, or what he was bid
not to write; he had spoken home to the purpose: but these words do not imply
that he had either power or will to write any thing of his own head, or by the
wisdom or learning of man; but they fully evidence, that the holy Ghost had
suggested many things unto him, which the same blessed Spirit would not have
him to write; as being fitter perhaps to be delivered face to face, and not
concerning posterity.

If I knew any more opposite arguments, I would endeavor their answer. The
positive proofs I refer to the last point of all; it being the very main
hinge of the controversy. Only consider this one thing, The Scripture has a
privilege above all other writings. Aquinas on 2. Timoth. 3.15. gives this
reason, Quia aliae traditae sunt per rationem bumanam; sacra autem Scriptura
est divina.
Because other writings savor of humane reason; but the Scripture is divine:
Where he excludes the prudence of man from composing any Scripture. If any
earthly wisdom wrote any part of it, it is no more to be accounted our
Scripture. Let this suffice for the third conclusion, concerning the matter of
Scripture: wherein the holy Penmen had no liberty left them to put in their
own conceits; or in writing to add or blot out what they had done: whereby all
humane literature and wisdom is removed from sharing part in the holy Writ.

The fourth conclusion follows, concerning the manner of writing: viz. They
had no liberty to clothe their inward apprehensions with words of their own.
Either all the Penmen had the liberty, or none: (The disjunction stands upon a
Da tertium, Give me a reason why some should, and not others. Who were these
some? and why those?) But all had not liberty: (for the very words were
dictated unto some of them) Ergo etc.

Either every Penman did apparel his understanding with words of his own
throughout all and every of his own writings, or it was practiced in some
places only. If so, then again I enquire what places they were; and why those
had an especial privilege above others.

S. John indeed was bid to write the things which he had seen, and the things
which are, and the things which shall be hereafter, Revel. 1.19. I answer, This
general command evinceth not, that the holy Ghost did not administer as well
the words as the matter.

If it be objected, that the Evangelicall Prophet Isaiah, and the Psalmograph,
and some others, are most eloquent in the Old; and in the New Testament, the
beloved disciple S. John is compared to an Eagle for his lofty flight; and S.
Paul may seem to have brought some of the third heaven down with him; so
heavenly is he: but Amos, and some others writ more plainly, in an homely
style. I answer, If all this were true, yet it proves not that any of them
were left to express as they would their own dreams, visions, or
illuminations; neither did they frame and fit their styles to the Spirit, or
their words to the matter; nor indeed could they. For what proportion is there
between finite and infinite? and how can the shallow capacity of man
comprehend the depth of God? God forbad the linsie-woolsie; and to the divine
truths would he suffer them to adapt humane expressions? How often in the Old
Testament, is both the matter put into their hearts, and the manner with the
words into their mouths? And is the Law of Grace of less worth then the Law
of Moses? God forbid. But whosoever reads the Prophet Amos, and the rest that
are undervalued, shall find more in Amos, then Amos; more in him then in one
among the herd-men of Tekoa, Amos 1.1. and shall hear the piercing language of
the Spirit in others: sometimes perhaps attempering it self to the party
writing, and making both words and matter easy; but at other times it rapteth
him above himself, and makes him (as it were) to prink it in lofty and almost
undiscernable towering; by infusing things, phrasing sentences, and dictating
words above what was agreeable to the meannesse of his former calling.

That the holy Ghost can and has suggested the very words very often, I think
none will deny. That ever he permitted them a liberty of many sentences, of
many phrases, of many variations of words, to choose what they liked, and to
refuse the rest; I think few ancient Divines ever said before, but to that
effect says Heinsius. Else what can his meaning be, when he says, S. John saw
the Chaldee Paraphrase, and Hellenists, and had often reference to them; and
that diverse things were taken from the Targummim? Ad Targumistas semper
respicit Evangelista.
The Evangelist always has an eye to the Targumists, says he, page 550. If
the noble Heinsius had said in any one place (which he did not, so far as my
remembrance now bears) that the holy Spirit had guided S. John to those
Authors and authorities of the Targumists, Hellenists, and Chaldee Paraphrast;
I should have subscribed, and sat down at his feet. But when he so often
appealeth from the Greek to the Syriack, and says, S. John was so conversant
with the forenamed Authors; he derogateth (in mine opinion) from the majesty
of the holy Writ; whilst he would seem to have ought of it taken from humane
reading or wisdom, though of an Apostle; unless it were added, That the holy
Spirit guided the Apostle unto it, and did dictate it unto him, not as it was
known before to the Apostle, but as the holy Ghost thought fit to make use of
it, and to sanctify that part of humane literature: to dictate, I say, the
words and syllables, yea every letter and iota; and in the writing to guide
their hands aright; as a good master of writing over-spreadeth and over-ruleth
the hand of his scholar, and writes what copy he pleases, without reference
or regard to the scholars former knowledge, but rather to his future
instruction.

This is that which against Heinsius may be averred, That though many things
which are in S. John and other holy Penmen, were before in the Targum, Talmud,
Hellenists, Chaldee Paraphrase, or any heathen Authors; yet it does not
necessarily evince, that the holy Actuaries or Notaries did oversee, read,
hear, or transcribe those things out of their knowledge from the said
Authors: but both the names of those Authors, and the things themselves were
presented to them by that blessed Spirit which knew all things; and this among
the rest, That these words, phrases, and sentences, were fit to be inserted
into the holy Writ, which now are in it.

All Scripture is of divine inspiration: But the very words are part of
Scripture: Therefore even they were inspired.

Revel. 19.9. The Angel said, Write, Blessed are they which are called unto the
marriage-supper of the Lamb. Did not the Angel speak the words? Did not he
give the Apostle both matter and words?

When the Apostle was commanded, Revel. 14.13. by a voice from heaven, to
write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, etc. was he commanded to
write his conceits and thoughts apprehended in Syriack, and translate them into
Hellenisticall Greek? or did the heavenly voice suggest only an holy
inspiration into him, and left him to coin words, as Heinsius would have it? or
rather did not the voice teach the very words which should be written, viz.
Blessed are the dead, etc.? Now let us pass to the fifth and last Conclusion,
in which we must dissent from the worthy Heinsius, and disarm him of his
often-inculcated, but not once proved Tenet,

The (...), or Writers of holy Scripture, conceived in one language, and writ
in an other. Upon which ground he has raised a strange structure: but his very
groundwork is sandy, slipperie, and false: And this I hope to evince by
Scripture, Authority, and Reason. All which shall be squared to that
Cornerstone, which more then once before I hewed upon more roughly, and now
(by Gods grace) intend to polish; namely, That the very words and letters were
dictated unto the holy Scribes: and therefore they had no power to change or
transchange, to add or diminish; or to express by their own words their
internal irradiation: but in the language which they conceived, they also
wrote their heavenly dictates.

2. Pet. 1.21. The Prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy
men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Therefore their very
speech being according to the motion of the holy Ghost, their words were not of
their own choice, but from above; and not only divine thoughts, but sacred
words were also given them.

1. Cor. 2.13. S. Paul spoke in words which the holy Ghost taught. Did the holy
Ghost inspire thoughts into them in one language, and teach them words to speak
in an other language? Cui bono? To what end and purpose? and why not all done
in the language which they conceived?

2. Tim. 3.16. Scriptura per Spiritum scripta est, The Scripture was writ by
the Spirit, says the Syriack; not only inspired, as it is from the Greek, but
written; and as it was inspired, written.

Revel. 19.9. The Angel says concerning very words which he commanded to be
wrote, These are the true sayings of God. Not inspirations only of God, and
the words of Men; but the sayings of God.

Exodus 34.27. Write thou these words: for after the tenor of these words I
have made a covenant. God was not tied to the words, Moses was to the writing
of the very words.

Jerem. 30.2. Write thee all the words which I have spoken unto thee in a book.
He gave him no power to put in words of his own.

Twelve times in the Revelation was S. John commanded to write: and knew he not
the words?

Hos. 8.12. I have written to Ephraim the great things of my Law; Even all what
my Prophets have done, I challenge as mine own writing.

Authorities of men.
The Scriptures were written Magisterio Spiritus.
in obedience to the Spirit, says Sasbout on Peter: Therefore the Apostles had
not the power left unto them of writing their own conceits, but were fitted
with words by the Spirit.

Si Spiritu saucto inspirati, and ab eo impulsi, locuti sunt Prophetae, and
caeteri librorum sacrorum scriptores, Consequens est, Scripturam totam esse
verbum Dei; non aliter a nobis accipiendam, quam si Deus immediate and absque
humano vel Angelico ministerio eam edidisset, and, ut ita dicam, digito suo
scripsisset.
If the Prophets and other writers of holy Scripture spoke by the moving and
inspiration of the holy Ghost; it follows, that all the Scripture is the word
of God; no otherwise to be esteemed of by us, then if God immediately without
the ministry of men or Angels had set it forth, and, as I may say; had written
it with his own finger, says the learned Estius.

Even Cornelius Cornelii a Lapide himself, on Timothy thus, Prophetae, and
alii scriptores (...), vocantur calami and instrumenta Spiritus sancti, quast
scribae velociter scribentis, inspirantis, and dictantis sacras literas.
The Prophets and other holy Penmen of Scripture are styled the pens and
instruments of the holy Ghost, as of that scribe who speedily writes,
inspireth, and dictateth the divine writ. Where he confesses the holy Spirit
not to inspire only, but to dictate; yea, to write like a swift scribe the
holy Scripture.

Gregorius, Praefat. in Job cap. 2. Scriptores sacri Eloquii, quia repleti
Spiritu sancto, super se trahuntur, quasi extra semetipsos fiunt; and sic Dei
sententias, quasi de labiis, proferunt.
The writers of the heavenly word, because they are filled with the holy Ghost,
are elevated above themselves in him; and, as it were, out of themselves: and
so the sentences of God are uttered, as it were, by their lips.

Athanasius, Epist. ad Lib. says, Christus vetus and novum Testamentum
composuit.
Christ made the Old and New Testament.

Quid est illud o^ Domini, nisi Scripturae, per quas loquitur Dominu^?
What is the mouth of the Lord, but the Scriptures, by which the Lord speaks?
says Rupert on Matthew. lib. 4.

Philo Judaeus, in lib. Quis rerum divinarum haeres? thus, Propheta nihil ex se
proloquitur; sed omnia, submonente alio.
A Prophet prophesies nothing out of his own brain; but all things by the
prompting of the holy Ghost: as he wittily concludes. Therefore not so much as
the words are his own.

Chrysostom, de Lazaro, Homil. 4. Though a dead man revive, and an Angel come
from heaven, you must believe Scriptures above all: for the Master of Angels,
the Lord of the living and the dead, he himself framed them. The same
Chrysostom, de expulsione ipsius, shows the manner. I read his own
handwriting, etc. They are done by his hand; the very writing it self is his:
and therefore called Chyrographum Dei, A writing under Gods own hand, by
Augustine, on Psalm. 144.

Now follow the Reasons why they concelved and writ in the same tongue.

First, there is little or no difference between the Apostles and other men, if
the Apostles did frame words to their heavenly inspirations. For when it
pleases the blessed Spirit, who blows where he lists, to drop down into
the soul of an ordinary man some thoughts divine, and in the language of
spirits says unto the same soul, Of these see that you make a prayer; the
righteous man accordingly obeys, and of those inward apprehensions shapeth a
verbal prayer, and pours it forth before God Almighty, and sets it down
in writing: Shall the prayer be held as Divine as Scriptures? Then may Manasses
his Apocryphal prayer, immediately before the books of Maccabees (as it is in
our last translation) be no longer Apocryphal, but Divine; as Divine as any
prayer made by the selected holy Penmen. To have a thing perfectly Divine, is
required that heavenly words may be mixed with heavenly illumination.

Secondly, our faith will be questioned, if thoughts were inspired, and the
Penmen should add what words they pleased. Titutabit fides, si Scripturarum
vacillat authoritas.
Our faith will stumble, if the authority of the Scripture be shaken never so
little, says Augustine, de doctr. Christian. 1.37. But the Scriptures
authority shakes, if God give only the matter, and men the words.

Thirdly, the Prophets and Apostles wrote not always all their own things
themselves; but sometimes used the ministry of diverse others. A Scribe and a
Prophet were two distinct persons and offices, Jer. 36.26.

Jeremie had Baruch: Jer. 36.4. Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the
words of the Lord: so then the words of Jeremiah to Baruch, were the words of
the Lord to Jeremiah. And when that roll was burnt, Jeremiah by the word of the
Lord, was bid to take another roll, and write in it, verse. 28, etc. Which
Jeremie did, not by himself, but by Baruch the scribe, verse. 32.

The nine first chapters of the Proverbs of Solomon were written by Solomon
himself. The rest were writ by others, who attended on Solomon and heard them:
and are like so many precious stones apart, and severally; though not made up
into one jewel or chain, nor hanging together in any settled method; yet to be
esteemed at as high a rate and value as the very writings of Solomon. The same
Spirit inspired all, the same mouth spoke all, though they were penned by
several hands, by the command of the same holy Spirit.

In the New Testament S. Paul wrote much with his own hand; The whole Epistle
to the Galatians, Gal. 6.11. (at least to these very words:) and to Philemon,
verse. 19.

Many saluations: 2. Thessal. 3.17, 18. The salvation of Paul with mine own
hand, which is the token in every Epistle: so I write, The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen. So that we may soundly gather, that
whatsoever Epistle under his name has not that in it, it was not written by
him. There was an Epistle written in his name to the Thessalonians, terrifying
them as if the general judgment had been present: as may be gathered, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. But S. Paul disclaims it. It had not (belike) the salutation with
his own hand, his friendly farewell and prayer, which (says Anselm) was in
these or the like words, Grace, etc. as all the rest of his Epistles have
toward their end, though with a little variation of words; sometimes larger,
sometimes briefer: even the Epistle to the Hebrews also, Hebr. 13.25. Grace be
with you all. Amen. That you may not question, but also that is his Epistle:
whereas no other Apostles have it so fully; though S. Peter comes nearest him,
1. Pet. 5.14.

For all this, he used the help of some others in writing. All the second
Epistle to the Thessalonians was written with another hand, except the
salutation at the end, says Estius. Romans 16.22. I Tertius, who wrote this
Epistle, salute you in the Lord. The words will bear this sense, I Tertius, who
wrote this Epistle in the Lord, salute you: or thus, (as the Vulgat has it) I
Tertius salute you, who wrote this Epistle in the Lord. He said, IN THE LORD,
to show that he wrote not for money, says Cajetan. Questionless, Paul
dictated, and Tertius wrote the Epistle, says Estius. Even those words
themselves are not Tertius his own, inserted as a private man's or secretaries,
but are divine Scripture. And either by the Spirit he was commanded to write
so, and that thought was from heaven put into his heart, and those words into
his mouth, to be written by his hand: or else (which I take to be most likely)
S. Paul knowing the mind of Tertius, perhaps in part by Tertius his own
expression, but rather and chiefest by Divine revelation, that Tertius did
salute them in the Lord; he willed him so to write.

I hope Heinsius will not say, that Tertius conceived in Syriack, and wrote in
Greek: or, when S. Paul made his narrative in the Hebrew tongue, Act. 22.2.
that Luke conceived in Syriack, and wrote in Greek: neither can he say the like
of the holy secretaries, to whom not first thoughts in language spiritual, and
then words; but thoughts by words outward and expressed were revealed. Yet
Erasmus in his last Annotation on the Epistle to the Hebrews, says thus, Quod
aff^runt hic quidam, Paulum ipsu^ scripsisse Hebraice, caeterum Lucam
argumentum Epistolae, quam memoria tenebat, suis explicuisse verbis, quantum
valeat, viderint alii.
What some do affirm, THAT S. PAUL HIMSELF VVROTE IN HEBREW, BUT S. LUKE DID
EXPRESS IN HIS OWN WORDS THE ARGUMENT OF THE EPISTLE WHICH HE HAD GOTTEN BY
HEART, let others consider what force and power it has. What, will you say
nothing to this? Not so great a Critic? Sure this drop might have fallen from
your pen, That such manner of writing had savoured no more of the Spirit, then
any ordinary writing where a skillful scribe does amplify the heads given unto
him.

Again, Erasmus on Hebr. 2. in his Answer to Fabers 57 objection, relates that
Faber, Quicquid est incommodi and off^ndiculi, id in Interpretem rejicit; sed
meo judicio parum prudenter.
Whatsoever seems incommodious or offensive, lays the fault thereof upon the
Interpreters: but not prudently enough, as I think, says Erasmus: and in the
answer to the one and fourtieth objection, Faber flagellat Interpretem huius
Epistolae, qui in Psalmo non verterit ELOHIM, A DEO, cum idem fecerint
Septuaginta, quibus magis conveniebat hoc imputari.
Faber scourges the Interpreter of this Epistle who did not turn the word
ELOHIM, in the Psalm, FROM GOD, when the Septuagint did so, to whom this might
rather be imputed. Again, Erasmus says, ibid. of Faber, In ^us trahit
Interpretem Epistolae.
He commenceth a suit against the Interpreter of this Epistle. All this shows
Fabers opinion to be, That some writers of Scripture had power to use such
words as they pleased: and used some amiss, even such as he found fault
withal. O novell criticism! Will thou set thy self no bounds till thou
reachest up to heaven, and tramplest on the word of God? The holy Amanuenses
were guided by the Spirit to write, as well as the Apostles to dictate.

When S. Paul accounted, and would have his Galatians to account it as a favor
above ordinary, that he wrote so large an Epistle as that to the Galatians with
his own hand; and since the Epistle to the Romans was larger then it, and was
writ by Tertius; let me probably collect, that other Epistles of S. Paul, as
those to the Corinthians, and that to the Hebrews, and any other (if any other
be longer and larger) were not written by S. Paul's own hand. For then his own
writing had not been so great a testimony and argument of his love to the
Galatians: for the rest were longer and larger; but were writ by some other
hand, except perhaps the close and salvation.

Fevardentius, on 1. Pet. 5.12. and Salmeron, Tom. 13. Disput. 5. (as they are
cited by Lorinus, Act. 15.23.) do think that Paul and the rest of the Apostles
wrote seldom with their own hands, but did dictate and subscribe: which they
prove by S. Peter, 1. Pet. 5.12. By Silvanus a faithful brother unto you (as I
suppose) I have written briefly. Lorinus answers, That by the same reason,
Judas and Silas wrote the Epistle of the Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15.23. Let
me reply, That I see nothing to the contrary in the Text, or otherwhere, but
Judas and Silas being chief men among the brethren, might write it as well as
any others; and might also be joined in Commission with others, to carry it.

Concerning which Penmen this is my opinion, That even they were led by the
holy Ghost, both to conceive what the Apostles spoke, and to write exactly what
they dictated: so that they did not, they could not err in writing any one
word, syllable, or letter of the first Originals; no nor did, nor could
mis-accent it, or mis-point any part thereof: nor can it be proved, nor seems
it likely that ever the Apostles revised, or righted what the Penmen had done;
but subscribed to it, took it as their own, or rather as the holy Ghosts, and
sealed it for divine Scripture. Oh that the first Originals themselves of the
New Testament, or of some part of it, could yet be found! I would go a thousand
miles on my bare feet to see them, kiss them, and in Tertullians phrase, I
would adore the plenitude of them. They would prove an Antidote against many
heresies, a correctorie of more false opinions which have sprung up from the
variation of Copies, and the uncertaintie what reading is best.

By this opinion, I am sure, one firm anchor-hold is established; That humane
wisdom and skill is excluded from having part in any parcel of Scripture: and
the whole Scripture is by me maintained to be wholly and absolutely true;
certain, and most divine; which Heinsius and others seem not to do. So end I
this point.

I Give thee thanks, most gracious God, that thou have freed me of the gout,
and eased me of the stone: that I have been able, though in great weakness, to
swim through this sea, to go through this wilderness, in paths untrodden:
Lord, I beseech thee, by thine infinite mercies, be merciful to my soul;
prepare me thoroughly for my departure; and in the hour of death and judgment,
good Christ deliver me. Amen. Amen.
CHAP. X.
1. Real truth in the Greek and Latin texts of Act. 7.16. The place expounded
thus, The Fathers were not Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; but the twelve sons of
Jacob.

2. These twelve Fathers were not buried in Abrahemio, but in Sychem.

3. Abraham in this place is not taken properly, but patronymice.

4. (...), used by S. Stephen, amphibolous, and expounded.

5. Two opinions concerning the place of Acts 7.16. propounded.

6. The last preferred.

I Now return to the old matter and Text, Act. 7.16. Four propositions there
are in the words of S. Stephen, which are all questioned.

First, that the Fathers are said to be carried over into Sychem.

Secondly, that they were laid in the sepulcher of Abraham.

Thirdly, that Abraham bought the sepulcher of the sons of Hemor.

Fourthly, that this Hemor was the father of Sychem, as our last Translation
has it very truly.

Now let us see what different or contrary propositions are maintained against
these; and so labor to reconcile them.

First, that the Fathers were not carried over into Sychem.

Secondly, that they were not laid in the sepulcher of Abraham.

Thirdly, that Abraham bought the field of Ephron the son of Zohar, Genesis 23.8.

Fourthly, that Hemor was the son of Sychem, as the Vulgat and Genevean
translations have it.

That the first proposition may be reconciled to his opposite, let us examine
what is meant by the word Fathers. All the Patriarchs indeed were Fathers, and
so called: Abraham is our Father, say the Jews, Joh. 8.39. and, Art thou
greater then our Father Jacob? says the woman to Christ, Joh. 4.12. I am the
God of thy Fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, says God himself, or
an Angel representing him, Act. 7.32. Abraham was a great Father, Ecclus.
44.19. These Patriarchs were Patres majorum gentium, Fathers of the highest
rank: if I may accommodate the Roman distinction unto the Jewish Governors.
And whereas David is called, Act. 2.29. according both to the Greek and Latin,
a Patriarch; there by the Arabic Translatour he is termed Princeps Patrum, The
chief or Prince of the Fathers. Yet in the sense of S. Stephen, by the word
Fathers, those first or greatest Fathers, and prime Patriarchs are not to be
understood: but the Patres minorum gentium, Fathers of a lower degree; only
Joseph and the other sons of Jacob, the immediate Fathers and Heads of the
twelve Tribes. And this is apparent by the light of the words themselves; where
there is a wall of separation between the one and the other, Act. 7.15. Jacob
died, he and our Fathers: therefore there were some who were called Fathers,
after Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Jacob died, he and our Fathers: Not Abraham
and Isaac; for they died before Jacob: but Jacob died; and who else? He, and our
Fathers: What more? He, and our Fathers (when they were dead) were carried to
Sychem. But Abraham and Isaac were never carried to Sychem. Again, such Fathers
are meant as died in Egypt; (for they that died in Canaan needed no carrying
over to the place where they were) and Jacob went down into Egypt, and died
there, he, and our Fathers. But Abraham, though he went down into Egypt, yet
died not there; but he went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he
had, Genes. 13.1. lest you might think, that he by leaving ought behind might
be occasioned to return into Egypt. And Isaac was never in Egypt; therefore
could not die there. Jacob died, and his bones were removed to the same
sepulcher where his father and grandfather lay; which was not in Sychem, but in
Hebron: Therefore the word Fathers cannot be fitted in this place to Abraham,
Isaac, or Jacob; but to the twelve Patriarchs (as S. Stephen calls them) the
sons of Jacob. For both Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebekah, Jacob and Leah,
were buried in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah by Hebron, Genesis
49.31. but Joseph his bones were buried in Sychem, Josh. 24.32. Lastly, the
rest of the Fathers the brethren of Joseph were buried in Sychem, as well as
Joseph: for S. Hierom proves it by their sepulchers extant at Sychem, and
visited, as their sepulchers, in his days; who is to be believed, and was an
eyewitness, says Beza: So that the first-seeming contradiction is salved up:
Joseph and his brethren, the twelve Patriarchs, were those Fathers which died
after Jacob, and were translated into Sychem, and there buried: Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob were not those Fathers: for only one of them died in Egypt, and all
three were buried by Hebron, and needed not to be, nor were translated to
Sychem.

2. The semblance of the second opposite proposition, inforceth me to handle
this point, Whether the brethren of Joseph, the twelve Patriarchs, were buried
in the sepulcher of Abraham at Hebron, which he bought, and where himself was
buried. Josephus, Antiq. 2.8. says, All the sons of Jacob were buried in
Hebron, except Joseph, who was buried in Sychem. Yea the words of S. Stephen
are very punctual, That the Fathers were laid in the sepulcher which Abraham
bought. On the contrary, we proved before, that the sons of Jacob were buried
in Sychem. Some do answer, Positi sunt in sepulchro, They were laid in the
grave, is to be referred to Jacob only; and that the Scripture uses the
plural number sometimes, when in exactness it belongs to one only; positi
for positus, more buried, for one buried. But this is forced, and the great
difficulty remains, concerning the names of them that sold the ground.

The maker of the School-historie, Carthusian, and Gagneius, say, The twelve
Patriarchs dying in Egypt, were buried in Sychem, and then translated to
Hebron; and the monuments of their sepulchers might be in both places. And so
all may be true, what S. Stephen, Josephus, and Hierom say. Of this translation
of their bodies (which I approve not) more hereafter.

3. The true way of answering even to this point, will be found in the attoning
of the third different proposition. Abraham bought the sepulcher of the sons
of Hemor, says S. Stephen: Abraham bought the sepulcher of Ephron the son of
Zohar, says Moses, Genesis 23.8. etc. Some say the ground was twice bought, once
by Abraham, once by Jacob: others say, the ground and the men had each of them
several names, and that Ephron was called Hemor. Others say, with some
likelihood, that the father of Ephron, of whom Abraham bought the ground and
the cave, had two names; the one was Zohar, Genes. 23.8. the other Hemor, and
so called by S. Stephen. Neither can I say ought against these expositions,
save this, That I see nothing to prove them but conjecture.

But others, who no way can digest that the twelve Patriarchs were buried in
Sychem, and thence translated to Hebron, but say that their bones, bodies, and
sepulchers remained at Sychem, are driven to fly unto this strong hold, That
Abraham bought not the sepulcher of the sons of Hemor, nor did S. Stephen
mean so; but (...) Abraham, is taken patronymice: for the fathers name is often
used for the child or children; as Israel, Edom, Moab, for their offspring.
So Genes. 11.12. Arphaxad begat Salah: Where Arphaxad is set for his son: for
Arphaxad begat Cainan, and Cainan begat Salah, Luke 3.36. Likewise, 1. King.
12.16. What portion have we in David? (say the revolting Israelites) neither
have we inheritance in the son of Jesse; to your tents, O Israel: now see to
thine own house, David. By Israel he means the people of Israel: or his
descendants after many generations are called himself, by the name of Israel.
By David and the son of Jesse, you must not understand the person of David
himself, or Solomon his son, but Jesse his great grandchild, David his
grandchild, the son of Solomon, Rehoboam; exactly parallelling our
instance. Again, Abraham is said to be Levi his father, Heb. 7.10. but Jacob
was Levi his immediate father: so even there Abraham in some sort supplieth the
room of Jacob; and Abraham is taken for Jacob. Yea, I may boldly and truly
proceed yet further, and say, that David is called the father of Ezekiah, Isa.
38.5. though there were twelve generations from David to him: and David is
called the son of Abraham, Matthew. 1.1. though there were fourteen generations
from Abraham to David, Matthew. 1.17. If predecessors so many descents removed
be called Fathers; the grandchild may be called by the grandfathers name.
The sum is, Abraham is not here the proper name of the Father of the
faithful; but it must be expounded of Jacob the grandchilde of Abraham. For
indeed Jacob the grandchild of Abraham, bought the ground of the sons of
Hemor the father of Sychem, Josh. 24.32. To confirm this, that Abraham should
be more handsomely taken for his sons son Jacob, I found it in a
margin-note of Drusius, Praeteritor. lib. 5. thus, Abraham, that is, the son
of Abraham: where he makes (...) Abraham to be the Genitive case, and filius to
be understood. So Vatablus does: and Martinus Cantapretensis is express, that
Abraham is the Genitive case: and Gasparus Sanctius likes it, who says, that
among the Hebrews the parents names are put in the Oblique case; and in them
their sons are understood: as Luke 3.24. (...). Which was the son of
Matthat, which was the son of Levi, which was the son of Melchi, which was
the son of Janna. This is a witty exposition, and most excellent, if any
copy of the Greek had read it (...), or any Latin copy had it filius
Abraham: for filius Abraham might extend, not only to Isaac, but to Jacob
himself, and lower; for, in Scripture phrase you shall find the woman healed
by Christ, Luke 13.16. called a daughter of Abraham: and Christ himself says
to the Jews, Joh. 8.56. Your father Abraham rejoiced. So much for the
reconciling of the second and third Propositions; all being cleared by taking
Abraham for a patronymick, for Jacob.

4. The fourth difference is, That in the Latin translations it is read a
filiis Hemor filii Sychem. But Hemor was the father of Sychem, Josh. 24.32. as
is also proved Judge. 9.28. where Gaal the son of Ebed persuaded the
Sychemites to serve those that descended from Hamor and Sychem, rather then
Abimelech; as Vatablus collecteth. Peter Martyr says, Gaals argument runs
thus, Serve rather those who were ancient lords of this city; and if we served
not them, shall we serve Abimelech? Where Gaal said, Who is Abimelech? and who
is Sychem? The Septuagint have it, (...); Who is the son of Sychem? But
whether there were at this present in the reign of Abimelech one Sychem
living, and in high account, descended from the ancient Sychem, who was pointed
at in these words, Who is Sychem? or whether any of Sychem his posterity
(otherwise named) are here called Shechem; or whether Gaal made this (...),
augmentation, Who is Abimelech? yea, Who was Shechem himself (for the word will
bear it in the Original) that we should serve him? Which way soever it be, the
place proves, that Hamor was the father of Shechem: for so run the words
afterward in the same verse, Serve the men of Hamor the father of Shechem.
Again, if the words may be thus translated, Quis est Abimelech, and quae est
Shechem? as both the Interlinearie and Tremellius read it; the sense may be,
Abimelech is not so great, and the city of Shechem is not so dejected, so
forgetful of its old liberty, as to serve Abimelech. Our old Bishops Bibles
read it, What is Abimelech, and what is Sychem? -- Serve such as come of Hemor
the father of Sychem: and in the margin is set, Genes. 34.24.

Moreover, Junius in his Arabic translation on the Acts, chap. 7. observes,
that (...), Sychem, is neither in the Arabic, nor Syriack, nor some Greek
copies: and Beda in his Commentaries cited by Lorinus says, that for filii
Sychem, it is read in some copies, qui fuit in Sychem, (...), who was in, or of
Sychem: accordingly Junius in his notes on the Syriack, Act. 7. says thus,
What is read in the Greek, viz. (...), may fitly be expounded by an Hebraism;
and the name of the Prince of that city may be understood; as if he had said,
Which he bought of the sons of Hemor the Prince of Sychem. Beza indeed says,
It may be read with the Vulgat, the sons of Sychem; because the Greek
Ellipsis uses to be so supplied: but (...) may as well be interpreted, Patris
Sychem, The father of Sychem. You have the like instance, Luke 24.10. (...),
Marie the mother of James, as the Syriack there expresses it. Another proof of
the like kind, is Mark 15.40. So I expound it here, The sons of Hamor,
(...), the father of Sychem. Thus much for the fourth couplet of Propositions,
and the knitting up of that seeming opposition in a real accordance, That
Hemor or Hamor was the father of Sychem, as above all denial is proved from
Josh. 24.32. though the Greek word used by S. Stephen be amphibolous. And now
it is time to leave the several answers to each particular doubt, and to
render the sense of the words together.

5. One of these two ways is (in my opinion) necessary to be embraced:

First, that the twelve Patriarchs the sons of Jacob were carried out of
Egypt into Sychem, and afterward out of Sychem into the sepulcher of Abraham:
And then behold these three difficulties: First, their father of whom Abraham
bought the ground, must have two names. Secondly, it is hard and harsh to
believe, that in the removal of the Patriarchs bones the Israelites would
carry them over to Sychem, and so pass by Hebron close to the Abrahemium, or
the cave where Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with their wives, were buried; and
afterward remove the bones back again from Sychem unto the sepulcher which
Abraham bought, which is sixscore miles (if not more) if we measure from Hebron
to Sychem, and so backward from Sychem to Hebron. Calvarie and the city of
Jerusalem lay almost even in the way from Goshen to Sychem, and from Sychem
back to Hebron: And on Calvarie or there abouts, certainly they would have
deposed their bones, if they desired the translation of them to rise with
Christ. Thirdly, this exposition implies, since Joseph was one of the Fathers,
that Joseph was also buried in the sepulcher of Abraham; which is disproved by
Josh. 24.32. And yet, that we may make this Exposition passable and probable,
let us consider the answers. The first difficulty is cleared by saying, It is
an usual thing in the Scripture for the same man to have two names; as Solomon
is called Jedidiah, 2. Sam. 12.25. and the like. To the second difficulty this
answer may be shaped, That though we could see no reason, nor could imagine any
end, why they should carry and recarrie these bones; yet reasons and just
motives might then lead them, which we now may be ignorant of. But I take it as
evident, that the Israelites sooner and more quickly possessed the tribe of
Ephraim, and the city of Sychem (and therefore there might they leave their
bones for a time) then Hebron or Jerusalem. For Joshuah in his time called a
Parliament or a Diet at Sychem, Josh. 24.1. and the Ephraimites peaceably
enjoyed their inheritance in Joshuah his days, and the Canaanites served under
tribute unto them, Josh. 16.10. But after Joshuah his death, they wan Jerusalem
and Hebron, Judge. 1.8, 10. and then they might recarry the bones of the Fathers
to the Abrahemium by Hebron. The third knot is loosed, if we may say, that all
the Fathers were carried into Abraham's cave, who had not a distinct
buriall-place of their own, as Joseph had; who accordingly was not buried by
Hebron, but by Sychem.

6. The second way of expounding S. Stephen, according as the words lie in the
Greek and Latin copies, is this; That the other Patriarchs the sons of Jacob
were buried by Sychem, as Joseph was; and their bones brought up with his, when
the Israelites came out of Egypt, and laid in the sepulcher which Jacob the
grandchilde of Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Hemor the
father of Sychem, as is expressly said, Josh. 24.32. Which latter way, for the
accordance of words and names both in the Old and New Testament, I do most
willingly embrace. For it represents not unto us so many or so great
difficulties; yea none at all, since it was not so strange that the word
Abraham should be a patronymick, and used for Jacob; especially when Rehoboam
is called David, and the son of Jesse; and Abraham is said to be the father
of Levi, which Jacob was; and the Israelites are termed Joseph, Psalm. 81.5.
though most of them descended not from him; and they who ascended out of Egypt,
issued from Joseph after diverse generations. In two of which places most
punctually, as well as here, the grandfathers names are put for the
grandchildren. Especially let this be thoroughly considered, that the
grandchilde himself is distinctly described in other places of the divine
story, to have bought the same ground of the sons of Hemor, about Sychem,
for an hundred pieces of money, Genesis 33.19. and the grandfather Abraham not to
have bought that, but an other piece of ground, at an other time, in an other
place, for Genes. 23.16, etc.
four hundred shekels of silver of Ephron the Hittite, near Hebron, which was
far distant from Sychem. Which sale of Ephron, and purchase of Abraham, is
ratified by the witness of truth, in the mouth of Jacob himself, and dying
Jacob, Genes. 49.29, etc. Therefore though the name of Abraham be read; it may
be, it must be a patronymick; and Jacob is called by his grandfathers name; and
Jacob did what is ascribed to Abraham: for other passages of Scripture do force
us to expound it of Jacob.

Thus have I digressed, to satisfy the great doubt which has tortured the
wits both of old and late Writers.

O Lord God, God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, God of our fathers, Father
of Jesus Christ our God and Savior; be pleased, I beseech thee, that these my
poor weak labors in points obscure, may receive strength from thy strength,
light from thy light; that thy most blessed, holy, and all-wise Word may be a
lanthorn and light, not only to my paths, but to my understanding: that so I
may know thee, love thee, and always cleaving to thee, may be glorified by thee,
through Jesus Christ my Redeemer and Advocate. Amen.
CHAP. XI.
1. Pineda makes Moses to be one of the raised at Christ's Passion, if once he
died. Pineda censured for his assertion, or rather his hypothesis.

2. David then arose in Pineda his judgment.

3. His Argument answered. Bishop Bilson wavering, and rejected, as he
rejects S. Augustine.

4. A demonstration (upon S. Augustine his ground, and Act. 2.24.) that David
was not raised, nor ascended bodily into heaven.

5. David's sepulcher now kept by the Turk.

I Return to my old task against Pineda, and of him I demand, Who else are said
to arise about the time of Christ's Passion, besides Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob?
He has already answered At fuerit quoque redivivus Moses, stolim diem suum
obiit.
Moses also lived again, if long since he died once. I answer; Why does he make
a needless If? The Scripture says expressly, he died, Deuteronomy. 34.5. and he was
an hundred and twenty years old when he died, verse. 7. and he was buried,
verse. 6. If he died not, yet then first was he partaker of celestial
blessedness, says Pineda, after Christ was risen. But in Christ's life (say I)
Moses and Elias appeared in glory, and spoke of his decease, Luke 9.30, 31.
They were not only glorified, but they did appear gloriously to Christ, and
his Apostles, before his resurrection. And if S. Ambrose has such words as
Pineda cites, we may trulier reply, Mosen nunquam in caelesti gloria legimus
postquam, sed antequam Christus resurrexit.
We never read that Moses was, or was seen in heavenly glory, after Christ
arose, but before.

2. From this his pendulousnesse concerning Moses, he descends to others,
Neque abfuerit omnino David.
David was one of them, and was not excluded. I confess with the divine S.
Augustine, that if any did arise to the eternal glory both of their souls and
bodies, David may be thought to be one (neither then will I exclude Adam,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and other Patriarchs under the law of Nature) but
Augustine in the same 99 Epistle ad Euod. cited by Pineda, proves by diverse
reasons, that they who arose out of their graves, arose not then to an eternal
happiness.

3. Yea, but Sophronius in his Sermon of the most blessed Virgins Assumption,
evinceth (says Pineda) that David did then arise; because S. Peter, speaking
of the death of David, Act. 2.20. says not, His body was at Jerusalem; but,
His sepulcher is with us. Cajetan on Aquin. part. 1. quaest. 53. artic. 3.
adds (ascribing it to Hierom) that S. Peter said, Cujus sepulchrum apud nos
est; quasi non ausus fuerit dicere, cujus corpus apud nos est
Whose SEPVLCHRE is with us; as if he durst not say, Whose BODY is with us.
Bishop Bilson in the place afore-cited, is either for us, or dubious, in the
rere or end; although he be peremptory and adverse to us in the front and
beginning: for he holds, That it would somewhat impeach the power of Christ's
resurrection, if it were able to raise the Saints to life, but not to preserve
them in life. I answer, The question is not of what Christ could do, or can do;
but what he did do, and what was done. A Posse ad Esse non valet argumentum.
And if he imagines that it impeacheth the power of Christ's resurrection,
unless de facto the raised Saints be now alive in their bodies, (which is his
intent;) any indifferent reader will say he is amiss, and ought not to square
the power of Christ's resurrection to his own fancy. Yea, but says he, The
whole fact will seem rather an apparition, then a true resurrection. I answer,
If he take apparition for a fantastical vision, and mere imagination, or a
delusion of the senses, his meaning is not to be suffered: yet in a good sense
and at large it may be called an apparition; for they appeared unto many,
Matthew. 27.53. A true apparition, and as true a resurrection. A true
resurrection is of two sorts: the first, and the last; a good, and a better
resurrection: of which I spoke before. One eternal: Such was Christ's; Christ
dies no more, death has no more dominion over him, Romans 6.9. and, He has the
keys of death, Revel. 1.18. yea, he alone was blessed with this resurrection:
hereafter we shall; Every man in his own order. Christ the first fruits,
afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming, says the Apostle, 1. Cor.
15.23. The very time is expressed. S. Paul wrote this after Christ's first
coming; yea after his resurrection many years: and therefore you must needs
interpret it of his second coming, as is most evident by the context: Therefore
either those Saints are not Christ's, or they shall arise at his last coming;
and therefore have not risen to an eternal resurrection. The other true
resurrection is temporary: Thus some were raised in the Old Testament, and
some in the New: and though they died again, I dare not say their resurrection
was an apparition. And as out of doubt some of them who were raised by the
Prophets, or by Christ in his life time, died sooner then other: so if any of
them had died within three or four days, yea within an hour or two after
that their resurrection; yet had it not been an apparition only, but a true
temporary resurrection. As, if a child should die the third instant after the
souls infusion, there were a true union, and a true death: so if one should die
again presently after a resurrection, there must needs be both a true reunion,
resurrection, and a second death; God reuniting the soul, and again separating
it, and disposing of the creature without its wrong, to the glory of the
Creator.

If I be bold with Bishop Bilson, he is as bold with S. Augustine, and
sleighteth his reasons, and crosses the very argument which Aquinas
magnifieth, and which we have now in hand concerning David. All the Reverend
Bishops words are too large to be transcribed; you may read them, page 217.
and 218. I will only single out such passages, as show him to be singular or
dubious in that point. That David is not ascended into heaven, does not hinder
(says he) but David might be translated into Paradise with the rest of the
Saints that rose from the dead when Christ did: but it is a just probation,
that David's body was not then ascended, when Christ sat in his humane nature
at the right hand of God. Again he says, Augustine has some hold to prove
that David did not ascend in body when Christ did, or at least not into heaven,
whither Christ ascended; because in plain words Peter says, Acts 2.34.
DAVID IS NOT ASCENDED INTO HEAVEN. But (says he) either the bodies of the
Saints slept again, when they had given testimony to Christ's resurrection: or
they were placed in Paradise, and there expect the number of their brethren,
which shall be raised out of the dust: or lastly, David was none of these that
were raised to bear witness of Christ's resurrection; but only such were
chosen, as were known to the persons then living in Jerusalem. So far Bishop
Bilson.

Before I come to press the argument, let me desire the Reader to observe
these things in the forecited words, and to censure accordingly. That the
Saints may be in Paradise with their bodies, but not in Heaven. Is there any
paradise but in heaven? and when S. Paul was in paradise, was he not in the
third heaven? Shall the Saints that rose upon Christ's resurrection, and (if
they ascended at all) ascended upon his ascension, Shall they (I say) be taken
up from the earth, and not be glorified? or being glorified, not be with
Christ? Shall they be kept at distance from the blessed spirits of Angels and
men, that attend upon the Lamb; and hang between the earth and that heaven
where their Redeemer reigns? Secondly, against his former determination, and
against the reasons which he brought to confirm it, he says, Either the bodies
of the Saints slept again, (But does it not impeach the power of Christ's
resurrection? or will it not seem an apparition, rather then a true
resurrection, as you before reasoned?) or they were placed in Paradise, or
David was none of those who were raised to bear witness of Christ's
resurrection. You see now his resolution is come down; but S. Augustines
argument is sound, that David was not excluded from that privilege, which
other ancient Fathers and Patriarchs enjoyed, if they enjoyed them. Bishop
Bilson himself confesses, that David ascended not when Christ ascended; but
Christ sat in his humane nature at the right hand of God, when David's body was
not ascended. If not then, when did he or they ascend? or how were they
witnesses of his ascension? Lastly, that the Fathers before Christ were in
bliss, is out of doubt: that they were in some mansion of heaven, is probable:
that they were comforted and made happier by Christ's exaltation, may be
believed: But that either the souls of the Patriarchs, and David, are not with
the other blessed Angels and spirits of men now where Christ is; or that the
Apostles and Evangelists, and other most holy disciples of Christ, do not
follow the Lamb wheresoever he now is, but are in a paradise out of heaven;
seems strange divinity, somewhat touching on the error of the Chiliasts. But
I leave Bishop Bilson, in this point unlike himself; he being a chief of our
worthies, famous above thousands for a most learned Prelate.

4. And if from the ground of S. Augustine, and the words of S. Peter, I do not
demonstrate that David rose not to an eternal resurrection; I am much
deceived. The confessed ground of S. Augustine is, That it is hard and harsh to
exclude David from being one that arose, if any arose, to eternal life: so
that if David arose not, none may be thought of them so to arise, as to ascend
in their immortal bodies to heaven; since he had greater gifts or privileges
then some of them, and as great as almost any of them. But say I, David was
none of those that arose; or if he did, he ascended not into heaven. And this I
will undertake to prove by S. Peter. For first, S. Augustine in the same
Epistle says, The intent of S. Peter was to prove that these words, Psalm.
16.10. Thou shall not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy
one to see corruption, were spoken of Christ only, and not of David: and the
Apostle evinceth it by this reason, Because David did die, and was buried, and
his sepulcher is with us, that is, his bones and his body, and his ashes are
yet with us: whereas if David had bodily ascended, they would have fitted David
as well as Christ; who died, and was buried, and his sepulcher remained; but
his body was not incinerated, neither was his flesh corrupted, as David's was,
but ascended: And so the Apostles argument had been impertinent. Secondly, it
is said most remarkably, Act. 2.34. David is not ascended into the heavens: But
Christ is by David's confession.

Note first the force of the Antithesis. Secondly, observe that S. Peter spoke
this after Christ's ascension into heaven; whereas if any arose to incorruptible
glory, they arose or ascended with Christ; and so, by just consequent, before
this time when S. Peter spoke these words: yet the Apostle says, (...), He is
not yet ascended, or, He has not ascended into the heavens. Again, though
David were in heaven in his soul long before that time, as we say; or if he
went up out of Limbus Patrum, as some Papists say: yet certainly someway he was
not ascended, when S. Peter thus preached. If any way he ascended not, it must
needs be in body or soul. They dare not say, He ascended not in soul: and
therefore we may boldly say, He ascended not in body; unless they will show
us some third nature in David that might ascend, which thwarteth both
Philosophy and Divinity.

5. Moreover, the Turks now inhabiting Jerusalem keep the sepulcher of David,
forbidding entrance to all Christians into it, as every traveller into those
parts knows; and they questionless respect the sepulcher, as containing the
body, bones, or ashes of David there present and unremoved. Lastly, if David
ascended not when Christ did, or a little after, which is evidenced from the
words of S. Peter; our enemies themselves will not say that he ascended long
after, or of late: Therefore David is not ascended bodily as yet, howsoever
Pineda fancieth.

O Most merciful Savior, the son of David, the Lord of David; who have
supereminently the Key of David; and openest and no man shuts, and shuttest
and no man opens: when in all contritest humility I cast my self down to the
gates of hell, I beg, and call, and cry unto thee, that thou would shut
them; And open unto me (I beseech thee) the gates of heaven, and lift up for me
those everlasting doors, that I may come in to thee the King of glory, and
sit at the feet of thy servants in those celestial mansions. Grant this, O
most Blessed Jesu, for thine own sweet name sake, and for the merit of thy
death and passion. Amen.
CHAP. XII.
1. Pineda doubts whether Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, were raised at
Christ's Passion; because there now are said to be some relics of them; some
at Rome, and some at Venice, says Lorinus.

2. Other relics. The table at which Christ ate with his Apostles. Some
hairs, said to be the hairs of our glorious Savior: others, of his
all-gracious mother. A bone of Philips. A sandal of S. Peter's.

3. S. Peter's chain miraculous, as they report.

4. Mr. Mountague, now the reverend Bishop of Chichester, defended.

5. S. Paul's chain also miraculous, from Gregory and Bellarmine.

6. False relics taxt by Erasmus and Calvin. John the Baptist (...), supposed
to have three heads at the least. Three or four prepuces of Christ.

7. Relics before Christ's time. The ark. The holy oil. The rod of Moses and
Aaron. The throne of Eternity fancied by the Jews. The horns of Moses. One
finger of the holy Ghost. The Papists faults in forging of false relics.

8. All Relics are not false. What respects are to be denied to true Relics:

9. What are to be given.

10. No likelihood of the raising up of Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, about
Christ's passion.

THe same Pineda is a little more reserved in the persons following; for he
only adds this, I would say that Ananias, Azarias, and Misael did now arise
also; but that their relics are said to remain this day amongst men. Part at
Rome, part at Venice, says Lorinus on Act. 2.29. I marvel that neither
Christ, nor any of his Apostles ever went to visit them; that none of the
primitive Church went ever on pilgrimage to them; and that none of the ancient
Fathers ever mentioned them. And certes, I did think, till of late, that the
Papists had no relics beyond the days of the Apostles, or the birth of
Christ. From that time they say (whatsoever they think) that they have store of
them. That I may not reckon among them, the very same table whereat Christ sat
with his blessed Apostles; which was at Toledo, says Joannes Leo, in his first
book of the history of Africa; which Table being covered with pure gold, and
adorned with great store of precious stones, was esteemed to be worth half a
million of ducates; and was at the sack of Toledo transported into Africa. They
expose sometimes to show, three hairs of the beard of Christ, says Mr.
Morison. page 38. And, part of the hairs of the most glorious mother of our
Lord, and a bone of Philip the Apostle, to be seen at Venice, says the same
author. Pererius himself, Disput. 45. in primum cap. Joannis Evang. says,
They show the sandal of S. Peter in the Church of Oniedo in Spain. And Baronius
says, They have the chain with which S. Peter was tied at Jerusalem, when the
Angel delivered him. Of which they have, even to a wonder, strange and
different relations.

3. For that chain being sent by Eudocia to her daughter Eudoxia to Rome (for
the other chain and S. Peter's sword were kept still at Constantinople) by
divine miracle was conjoined to that other chain, wherewith S. Peter was bound
in Rome under Nero, whilst he was in prison. Here Baronius himself, ad annum
Christi 439 number. 7. Habent tabulae Ecclesiasticae, ambas has catenas simul
collatas, ejusdem generis and artis inventas, sibi invicem miraculo copulatas,
junctasque, ac simul unitas, ex duabus unam effectam esse.
Ecclesiastical records have it, that these two chains being compared
together, are found to be of the same kind, art, or fashion: and by miracle
were coupled one to the other: and being joined or united together, of two
chains were made one. In memory of which chain, the kalends of August were
made an holyday by the Bishop of Rome, and a Church dedicated to God, according
to the name, Sancti Petri ad vincula.

4. Let me a little digress in defense of my ancient friend and chamber-fellow
Mr. Mountague, now the reverend Bishop of Chichester: who is not rigidly to be
expounded, as he is by the furious Papists and Puritans: for though in his
answer to the Gag, page 235. he says, Baronius observes S. Peter's chain was
not found till Augustine was dead: yet that learned Antiquarie could not be
ignorant, that Baronius proves, and proves probably enough, the manner how it
was kept by some of Herod's ministers, and so downward. But he means, as I
expound him heartily, It was not found in the Church as a public relic. For
it was not brought unto Constantinople, till Chrysostom was dead, says
Baronius, number. 5. And in the days of Proclus there was a translation of those
two chains of S. Peter from Jerusalem, or where they were kept, unto
Constantinople; and shortly after, one of them was sent to Rome, as I said at
first. And yet (that you may see great Papists agreeing like harp and harrow)
observe that Petrus Thyraeus a learned Jesuit, de locis infestis, part. 3. cap.
67. cites a Sermon of S. Chrysostoms, de Adoratione catenarum S. Petri.

5. I return from my digression, and will make Bellarmine also shake his
chains. Bellarmine, de reliq. Sanct. 2.3. tells out of S. Gregory a strange
story of S. Paul's chains. Gregory promised to send unto Constantia the
Emperesse some of the filings of the chains of S. Paul, if at least any part
could be filed away: For the chains had this condition, that if a worthy party
desired them, part of them would presently be filed away; if the party
desiring were unworthy, though one took great pains with all his strength to
file, yet he could file away nothing. A tough smith with a good file, would (in
some men's judgment) confute this miracle.

6. Other Papists in other places do show the prepuce of Christ, which, being a
doubtful thing, they worship more then whole Christ, says Erasmus. If one
should question, How is Christ risen? circumcised, or uncircumcised? perchance
it would puzzle them.

But why say I so? when Tolet on Luke 2. gathers from Titus Bostrenus on the
same place, Antiquam concertationem extitisse de praeputio Christi, That there
was an old controversy concerning the prepuce of Christ. But I answer, That
the Commentary on Luke ascribed to Titus, is spurious and of latter times, as
Bellarmine, de Scriptor. Ecclesiast. page 130. ad annum Christi 365. proves.
Yea, even Chrysostom himself, and Cyrillus Alexandrinus, and Feleusiota (whom
the supposed Titus does often cite) were but children when the true Titus
Bostrenus died, says Bellarmine. Thirdly, both Titus and Theophylact say, That
Christ resumed the circumcised part at his resurrection. If they had but one
author of that antiquity, that Christ left it on earth as a relic of his;
how would they triumph? After this, Innocentius the third, somewhat above 400
years since, enquiring whether Christ did arise with his foreskin, says, Some
believe it to be kept at S. John's of Laterans: others say, Charles the great
translated it to Aquisgrane; and afterward it was left at Carosium; and
determines nothing but this, Melius est, totum Deo committere, quam aliquid
temere definire.
It is better to refer all unto God, then rashly to determine any thing. Yet
in the sixth book of the revelation of S. Briget, cap. 112. it is said, That
the glorious mother of our Lord, kept it about her wheresoever she went.

I yet do question, (if it were so) Who kept it till Brigets days? and, Which
is the true prepuce? that at Rome? or that which Charles the great received
from an Angel, and left in Germany, not at Rome? But these books of
revelations may want credit with us; when the learned Francis Collius, de
sanguine Christi, lib. 5. disput. 8. cap. 5. says thus of a revelation in the
very chapter, Etsi ea sit maximi ponderis, tamen non tanti, tamque efficacis
censenda est, ut ab ea discedere impium and irreligiosum fuerit.
Though it be of most especial moment, yet it is not to be so thought of, as
that it is impious or irreligious to differ from it. If it be maximi ponderis,
of chiefest account, and of greatest weight, it is impious and irreligious to
depart from it. But since he departs from one Legend, we may from the other.

After this the prepuce of Christ was stolen, buried, lost, found, torn in two
pieces; and is now in high esteem, if Cardinal Tolet on Luke 2. may be
believed. The sum of his narration is this, That 1527, when Rome was sacked by
the soldiers of the Duke of Burbon; one of them stole away, among other
relics, the prepuce of Christ, and buried it in a cellar; and, as he was
dying, revealed what he had done. Pope Clement the seventh caused it to be
searched for; yet it was not found. Thirty years after a Priest finds it,
carries it to the land-ladie of the place: she thrice tries to untie the
things wherewith it was covered; and thrice by a miracle is inhibited. Clarix a
young virgin her daughter untieth all; and puts the prepuce first in a silver
basin, then in a silver casket: Thus it is placed in the Church of Calcata;
then removed into the Chancel. Miracles are wrought. The Pope sends
Commissioners to search the truth. One of the Priests, ere he was aware, tore
the prepuce in two pieces; (Is it still eadem numero membrana, the same
numericall skin, O learned Collius?) the Commissioners certify it was the
true relic of Christ; and it is kept at this day at Calcata, in the temple of
S. Cornelius, and Cyrian, where God daily works miracles.

In the year 1584, at a woman's request, Sixtus quintus granted plenarie
indulgence for ten years, in the same Church of Calcata upon the day of our
Lords Circumcision. Thus far Tolet.

You may observe, that from 1527 (when it was stolen by the soldier) to 1584,
or perhaps, so long as the indulgences lasted, the prepuce of Christ was not in
S. John of Laterans: and so, besides the prepuce at Caresium, there are two
other fore-skinnes of Christ on the earth; One at Calcata, 20 miles from Rome,
kept to this day, says Tolet, commenting on Luke: And the book was printed
1611. Of the other, Collius the Millanoise, de sanguine Christi, lib. 5.
disput. 7. cap. 2. says, It is now kept at S. John of Laterans, in that place
of the Church which is called THE HOLY OF HOLIES, as Innocent the third and the
Cardinal S. Petri ad vincula, and Carthagena, and all and every of the writers
of this age who have handled this point do say. Collius might have excepted
Tolet, whose preceding narrative checketh him. The same Collius, ibid. thinks
it very credible, Salvatoris pr^putium non resurrexisse idem numero quod in
circumcisione ceciderat; sed divina virtute aliud suisse comproductum.
That Christ rose not with that self same fore-skinne which was cut off at his
circumcision, but by a divine virtue another new one was comproduced, Christ
being in heaven uncircumcised: but yet he upholdeth the gainful vanity of
Impostours, who deserve to be branded; yea, to be burnt to ashes, for feigning
two or three fore-skinnes on earth of our Savior.

I cannot forget their vaunts, That they have intimam vestem, the smock, or at
least the peticoat of the most graceful Virgin, and her milk, honored almost
as Christ his consecrated body: The breeches of Joseph: The comb of S. Anne
(and her very head, says Sleidan, Comment. 15. fol. 170.) And so many pieces
of the cross, as would almost lade a ship of burden, says Erasmus on Matthew.
23.5. Calvin, de inventor. reliquiarum, proves some of the Romish Saints to
have three heads; some three bodies shown in several places. The Rhemists on
Matthew. 14. annot. 2. say, Honor is now done to the Baptists head at Amiens in
France: Fulk adds, The same part that is at Amiens, is at S. Angely; the rest
of his head, from his forehead to his neck, is at Malta; yet the hinder part
of his skull is at Nemours; his brain at Novium Rastroviense; another part of
his head is at Jean-Morien; his jaw bone at Vesalium, at the Church of S. John
the greater; another part at Paris; a piece of his ear at S. Floride; his
forehead and hairs in Spain at S. Salvadores; another piece of his head at
Naion; another at Luke in Italy: and yet for all these pieces, his whole head
is at S. Sylvesters Abbey at Rome, to be seen and worshipped. Half of S. Peter's
body is at S. Peter's at Rome; half at S. Paul's: yet he has an head at S. John
Laterans; and his nether-jaw with the beard upon it, is in France at Poyters;
at Triers are many of his bones, at Geneva was part of his brain, says Fulk in
Romans 16. annot. 1. See Sleidan Comment. 15. page 169. summing up a book of
Calvin's to the same purpose.

I could make you laugh in disdain at what a chief printer at Paris has
written in his preface to the defense of Herodotus, touching these horrible
impostures, and the sudden quick-cousening wits of the Friars: as how a strange
feather was promised to be shown for a holy relic, as being one of an
Archangels feathers: and when a cunning hand had stolen it away, and placed a
coal in the room of it; the nimble juggling Friar persuaded his besotted
auditorie, that they were unworthy to see so great a relic as an Archangels
feather; but God had sent, in stead of it, one of the very coals with which S.
Laurence was broiled to death; and thereupon showed them the coal which was
foisted in.

7. He that would rake this sink, might have his nose full. I must ascend
somewhat higher, and whereas I imagined no relics were found beyond Christ,
now Salianus, annal. tom. 6. page 34. says from report, that the heads of the
seven brethren martyrs, 2. Macc. 7.1. etc. are in a Nunnerie at Cullein, in a
Church of the Maccabees so called 400 years since. And Pineda tells us, that
the relics of Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, are reported to remain: and not
those only; for Lorinus on Act. 7.44. says, The Scholasticall history
reports, that the Ark was carried in triumph at Rome; and is kept in the
Church of Lateran. Lorinus indeed disliketh that opinion: but it may pass as
well as this, That unto Lewis the eleventh were brought the holy oil, and the
rod of Moses and Aaron; as the French history has it at the end of his life.
How missed they a piece of Noah's Ark? (for I take it, that the Scholasticall
history speaks of the Arca Testamenti) and the fruit of some of the trees of
Paradise? A parcel of the Tohu-Bohu had been an excellent relic; as the
primitive and ancientest remainder of the unformed lump and mass of the first
immediate creation. For a piece of that Nothing out of which the Tohu-Bohu was
made, cannot be had, since Nothing has no parts.

If the Papists did think with the Jews, that Solium Aeternitatis, The Throne
of Eternity, was one of those things, which was made before the grand creation
(as Mr. Calvin relates concerning the Jews, on Micah 5.2.) some of the Papists
perhaps would outstrip the Jews, and say, that they had a relic even of that
Throne.

In no foolerie have the Papists prejudiced themselves, more then in this; yea,
they are not only come to that degree of infatuation, as to feign that they
can show the horns of Moses (which were merely non entia, none at all; growing
only in the imagination of the deceivers, and deceived) but they are carried
even (...), to that height of madness, that they say, they have had (horresco
referens, I quake to write it) one of the fingers of the holy Ghost; which was
a most blasphemous imposture, I had almost said, (...), above and beyond
pardon. See Mr. Sheldon in his book concerning the miracles of Antichrist, page
335. Sleidan, Comment. 4. fol. 37. ad annum Dom. 1624. says, That among other
things it was decreed in an assembly of the Helvetians at Lucerna, thus; Qui
sancti Spiritus, Mariae virginis, divi Antonii circumferunt reliquias, a nemine
rideantur.
Let not them be laughed at, who carry about the relics of the holy Ghost,
of the Virgin Mary, of S. Antonie. And yet the same Sleidan, Comment. 12. fol.
129. makes it to be a part of the very pretended reformation, to be made even
by the Papists themselves, That they who carry about the relics of S.
Antonie, are to be put down; because they lead the people into superstition,
and cozen them. Their own learned Valla and Vives reproved this mercenary
juggling; and long before them, Glaber Rodulphus Cluniacensis Monachus, in
Historia sui temporis, lib. 4. cap. 3. tells strange stories of Ledger de la main
about relics, and of their working of miracles, which he ascribes to devils,
or humane errors. Likewise, the moderate ingenuous, unsiding, learned George
Cassander, Consult. art. 21. has branded them, and gives some advice
concerning them, especially against the false relics.

8. I speak not unreverently of any true relic; and I think many both
Oriental and Occidentall relics were and are true; and fully believe, that
diverse holy relics were in this last age torn down, and buried in ruins, by
those sacrilegious hot-brains in the giddie whirl; or by those Turkish
acquists, which in a whirlwinde regarded more the benefit of sinful men, then
the good of souls, or glory of God in the beauty of his Churches.

If I could see one undoubted ancient relic of the best sort, (for they do
much differ) I would reverence, though not worship it. Venerandi sunt martyrs,
non adorandi ut Deus.
The martyrs are to be very highly esteemed, yet not to be adored as God, says
Ludovicus Vives on Augustine de Civit. Dei, 8.27. and establishes it out of
Hierom. The same say I of relics: and thus expound my self in particulars;
First, negatively; Secondly, positively. I would not kneel unto any relic,
much less pray unto it; nor say (as the Papists do) to the Sudarium Christi,
Sanctum sudarium ora pro nobis, and libera nos a peste.
Holy napkin pray for us, and free us from the plague. Or to the linen
handkerchief of Veronica, Salve sancta facies, impressa panni^ulo; nos ab omni
macula purga vitiorum.
All hail holy face, printed or stamped on this handkerchief; cleanse us from
all the blots of our sins. Nor to any part of the cross, or to all of it, if
I saw it entire, would I cry, O crux, ave; salva nos.
God speed, O cross; do thou save us. Yet such idolatry Scharpius imputes to
the Papists. I would not light lights before the bones or ashes of a martyr;
which Hierom condemns as the dotage of superstitious women, who have zeal,
but not knowledge. I would not erect altars, temples, or appoint holy days, or
form a prayer to worship them; but to God for them. All these are derogatorie
to the honor of the Almighty.

If I were sure to have help if I prayed unto a relic, I would not pray, and
would refuse that help. I would not dig up the body, or any part of the body
of the greatest Saint buried; unless it were buried in unseemly and unfit
places: then would I not worship it, but translate it to a decent sepulcher.
The bodies of the Patriarchs, Jacob and Joseph, were not taken up to be kept as
relics, but to be translated to their several sepulchers: and David caused
the bones of his dearest Jonathan, when they had been carried from Gilboah to
the street of Beth-shan, from Beth-shan to Jabesh-Gilead, to be buried in Zelah
of Benjamin, in the sepulcher of Kish, 2. Sam. 21.12, etc. He kept them not for
relics, nor worshipped them.

I would not give so much reverence to any relic, as I would to the Saint
himself, if I were divinely ascertained that the Saints soul presented it self
in a shape unto me: and yet I would not fall down to worship that Saint; and
should I to his relic? I would not religiose venerari, religiously worship,
(as Petrus Thyraeus, de locis infest. part. 1. cap. 67. Thesi 4. confesses the
Papists do:) But what says sober S. Augustine on Psalm. 98.5. Anceps factus
sum: timeo adorare terram, ne damnet me qui fecit coelum and terram: fluctuans
converto me ad Christum, quia ipsum quaero hic, and invenio, quomodo sine
impietate adoretur terra.
I am in a doubt: I am afraid to adore earth, lest he damn me, who made both
heaven and earth. In this hesitancie or pendulousnesse I turn my self to
Christ: and here I seek and find, how without impiety earth may be
worshipped: As if no earthly thing should be adored, but his body only.

I would not say or think, that any relic or relics have in themselves, or
from themselves power to expel devils, or to work wonders: for a spiritual
power (as Thyraeus well observes, though it wound himself) is not within a
thing corporeal: and a bodily power cannot drive away devils; or, work
miracles, say I. The great works of healing, etc. which have been done at the
tombs of Martyrs, (read S. Augustine de civitat. Dei, 22.8.) might in those
days, extraordinarily, be done by the Martyrs; or by the Angels Suscipientes
personam Martyrum.
in assumed bodies like to the Martyrs, as Augustine phraseth it, in lib. de
cura pro mortuis gerenda, cap. 16.

The relics have no virtue in themselves, to effectuate or actuate such
miracles: yea, the very Angels or Martyrs themselves, were but the agents,
instruments, and the right hand of the Almighty, who only works great
wonders by his power independent.

I would put no trust, no confidence in the relic of any Saint or Martyr
whosoever, or whatsoever, for help either of soul or body: For this also is a
wrong offered unto him in whose name our help stands: Our help comes from
the Lord, which made heaven and earth, Psalm. 121.2. And my God shall supply all
our need, according to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus, Philip. 4.19.

9. What would I then do? or how would I behave my self toward a true,
unquestioned, choice relic? I would (which is the positive part by me
promised) with Chrysostom, Hom. 5. in Job, tom. 1. honorably esteem of it,
kiss it, and reverently both touch it, and behold it, and think of it; and
charily lay it up: I would show it to others not mercenarily, but with joyful
and comfortable remembrance of him whose relic it was: I would esteem of it
above silver, gold, or precious stones: I would make it my remembrancer of
things past; as a motive stirring me up to the imitation of that Saints virtues
and actions, which is their best relic: I would use it as a bridle to curb
evil in me, and as a spur to goodness. If any instrument of Satan should
debase it, and say that it is vilissimus pulvis; I would scorn his scorn, and
esteem it as a most especial instrument of the most High; and would say to the
caviller, or rather to his master Lucifer the Father of lies and detraction,
Saepe hoc vilissimo tortus es pulvere.
Even this which thou call most vile dust, has often tormented thee, as S.
Hierom said of old. Lastly, till of it self it decayed, and by its imperfection
or rottenness called for interment, I would not bury it: but commend it to be
kept even in Churches and other holy places; except idolatry were committed
with it, or people in their profane religion adored it: And then would I also
bury it.

10. Much more might be said, but I must take manum de tabula, or make a quick
end; and, returning to Pineda, say, That if Ananias, Azarias, and Misael have
no relic now remaining, which Lorinus reports from report; if they did arise,
or intend to arise with Christ; they having a far longer journey from the
place of their captivity to the sepulcher of Christ, then Jacob had to the
land of Goshen, would or should have had as great a care as Jacob, of
translating their bones, if Jacob translated his in hope to arise with Christ,
as Pineda intimates.

O Gracious God, who art to be loved by me for thine own self only, Grant, I
beseech thee, that no worldly thought may nestle and breed in me, nor that I
may fasten any respect on any creature, which may be derogatorie to the
devotion due to thee my Creator, for Jesus Christ his sake, in whom only thou
art well pleased. Amen.
CHAP. XIII.
1. Pineda says, Jonas arose then, and Noah. His reasons very shallow.

2. Daniel arose, says Pineda from Nicetas. If Daniel arose, he arose but with
one leg: the other leg is yet showed at Vercellis.

3. Job arose now, says Pineda. His proof lame. Jobs Epitaph poetical. His
sepulchrall pyramid made of imagination.

4. Job shall arise at the general judgment. Pineda wrincheth the Scripture.

5. The end of Jobs book, according to some Greek copies: a double exposition
of the words.

6. Jobs body supposed to be translated to Constantinople.

7. Bartholomaeus Sibylla says, S. Hierom is express, that the holy mother of
our Lord, and John the Evangelist, are bodily ascended. The like cited from
Aquinas. And Holcot says, That the glorious virgins body was not to be
incinerated. Her supposed day of Assumption, most honored among the Papists:
and yet there is monstrous disagreeing among them who favor her Assumption.
The last instances concern not our question.

8. Pineda presumed too far upon uncertainties. Lorinus dares not name any
particularly that were raised. It cannot be known certainly.

NOw also arose Jonah, says Pineda. That Jonas was a lively type of Christ's
resurrection, appears Matthew. 27.40. But if every lively type of Christ arose,
then Samson, Samuel, Joshuah, Gedeon, Melchizedech, Aaron, Solomon, then
hundreds of others arose, whom Pineda mentions not. Tandem resurrexit Noah.
At last Noah arose, says Pineda. Why AT LAST? since he was living before
other, and great in Gods favor: who was saved and delivered from the common
destruction of all mortal men. This last reason as well holds, That every
one that was in the Ark arose also: For they were delivered, as well as Noah,
from the inundation of waters; and especially Sem, who was an holy man, and was
great in Gods favor.

2. And Daniel arose, who was brought out of the lions den, says Pineda; and
he proves it by Nicetas. But neither he; nor Nicetas proves it by any reason.
He might as well argue, that Jeremie arose with Christ: Because he being cast
into the dungeon where he sunk in the mire, was afterward drawn out of the
dungeon, Jerem. 38.6. and 13. And if Daniel arose, he arose but with one leg:
for Crus Danielis asservatur Vercellis, etc.
A leg of Daniel is kept at Vercellis, a city of Liguria, says Lorinus on
Act. 2.29. Daniel died in Babylon, says Sixtus Senensis concerning him. Of
relics he makes no mention, nor of his rising again with Christ: but
alleges the last of Daniel, the last verse: Which words may prove that he
arose not with Christ; or, if he did, that he died again. For the Spirit says
to him, Go thou thy way till the end be: for thou shall rest and stand in the
lot at the end of the days, IN FINE DIERUM. Which words are applied by
Vatablus, to the resurrection of the last judgment; which was mentioned, Dan.
12.2. And lest any should interpret the rising out of the dust, verse. 2. (as
Porphyrie did) for their creeping out of the holes and caverns, in the time of
the Maccabees, Lyra expressly contradicts it, and says, it is to be
understood De resurrectione vera in fine mundi.
of the true resurrection in the end of the world; implying, that Daniel shall
then arise, as he arose not, says Lyra, at the time of the Maccabees, nor at
the opening of the graves, before Christ's resurrection.

Ergo and resurrexit Job sanctissimus.
Therefore most holy Job arose also, says Pineda, equalling Noah, Daniel, and
Job, in this privilege. But the consequence is lame; for Ezechiel does not
mention the equal privileges of these three, in their resurrection, (though
perhaps this latter is figured out) but only the delivery from famine, or
death by famine, (Ezech. 14.13, etc.) of Noah, Daniel, and Job; or rather of
other holy men also, designed out by their names, and like them in their
several virtues: Noah overcoming the world, Daniel the flesh, and Job the
devil.

Concerning Pineda his other proof, That Gregory Nissen, in his third Oration
of the resurrection, says, That the day of their resurrection who arose out of
the graves, was much more joyful to them, then the day of the general
resurrection: If I should grant, that he said so, and that he said so truly:
yet it follows not necessarily (scarce probably) that they went with their
bodies into heaven. The day of the general resurrection is not yet come, and
could not be rejoiced at but in hope.

More especially concerning Job, though Salianus, ad ann. mundi 1544. number. 783.
makes Jobs tombe-stone speak thus, Clausit, viator, hoc marmor aliquando
mortuum, emis itque gloriosum eum Principe Messia resurgentem Jobum
This stone, O wayfaring man, kept under it dead Job, and sent forth also Job
in glory arising from the dead with Messiah our Prince: though Pineda, his
fellow-Jesuite, in the end of his Commentaries on Job, says, That Jobs
sepulchral pyramid, and kingly monument, was made for him by his seven sons
and three daughters, and was framed and erected Ad pietatis memoriam
sempiterna, spemque resurrectionis cum Redemptore certissimain.
for an eternal memorial of piety, and most certain hope of his resurrection
with our Redeemer: yet none is ignorant that these are tricks of wit,
panegyric Eulogies, poetical Epitaphs, even a little thwarting one another,
rather then divine truths, or historical relations.

4. And further it is evident that Job spoke of the general resurrection, when
he said, Job 19.25. etc. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth: and though after my skin, worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God. By which latter, or last day, we
may fitly expound, not the last day of judgment, says Pineda; but the state
of the Evangelicall Law, and of Christ's suffering and rising; ending (by his
death and resurrection) the former times, and beginning to appoint a new: for
he is THE FATHER OF THE WORLD TO COME, Isa. 9.6. Did ever man thus delude
Scripture, and make it a nose of wax? It is scarcely worse used by our
unlearned lay-Rabbies, the Doctors of Doctors. Who ever dreamed, that Dies
novissimus should signify so unlikely a matter? and if it did, how vain is his
proof? The words are (...), Pater aeternitatis, The father of eternity, as the
Interlinearie Bible reads it, and Vatablus with it, expounding the words,
Anthor vitae aeternae
The author of eternal life, (which has no reference to Pineda's wild
Comment) or, the everlasting Father, as we translate it.

5. The Seventie indeed, and the Book of Job thus, Job died, being old, and
full of days: so far also goes the Hebrew: and it is added in the Greek,
But it is written, that he shall again be raised up with those whom the Lord
shall raise. These words are not in the Original, nor in Aquila, nor in
Symmachus, nor in the Seaventie used by Vatablus: but Theodotion so reads it,
and the Vatican Edition of Sixtus so acknowledges it, and Origin in his
epistle to Africanus confirms it, and Clemens Romanus, cap. 5. lib. 6.
approves it. Two ways there are of expounding the word Rursus, Again. Francis
Turrian the Jesuit, on the place of Clement, collecteth that Job shall not
only be raised up in the last day, at the general resurrection: but that he
should be first raised when Christ arose; and afterward, at the last day.
Nicetas says better, The word AGAIN, was therefore put that his first
resurrection might be understood to have been, when he was delivered from his
troubles. Which way soever you follow, we have it, That Job shall be raised at
the last day of the world: And therefore he arose not with Christ: or died
again, and so went not into the eternal happiness of body and soul; for
glorified bodies shall not be raised.

6. Lastly, there is an opinion even to this day, among the Turks, grounded no
doubt on some old Tradition. That Jobs body was removed from the place of his
burial, to that city and place which is now called Constantinople, as Mr.
Fines Morison in the first part of his Itinerary, page 243. witnesses. These
are all that ever I read of by name, that are thought by Pineda, or others,
both to rise with Christ, and to partake with him at that time of the eternal
happiness both in soul and body.

7. Bartholomaeus Sybilla, Peregrinarum quaestionum decade 1. cap. 3. quaest.
7. dubio 3. cites Henricus de Assia as Author, that, Perhaps, not only Enoch
and Elias are kept in Paradise, to preach against Antichrist; but both John the
Evangelist, and those that rose with Christ. Observe, says Sybilla, the word
PERHAPS: for S. Hierom says formerly, concerning S. John, WE DOUBT BUT BOTH S.
JOHN THE EVANGELIST, AND THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARIE, DO REJOICE IN THEIR
GLORIFIED FLESH WITH CHRIST. And Aquin. in 4. sentent. distinct. 43. artic. 3.
cited by Sybilla, says, It is a point of faith holily to be believed
concerning the blessed Virgin Marie, and S. John the Evangelist, that their
resurrection is not deferred to the end of the world.

Also Holcot says, on Wisdom, cap. 2.2. Corpus benedictae Virginis non fuit
resolvendum in cineres, quia in ca fomes extiuctus extitit.
The body of the blessed Virgin was not to be turned into ashes, because in
her was no fountain of ill: from whence her asportation into heaven may seem to
be confirmed. The feast day of her assumption is greater and more festival
then any other holy day for her, says Durandus, Rational. 7.24. Surely, I must
needs say, we read nothing certain concerning her death; nor is her body or
her tombestone found on earth; nor did S. John the Evangelist, who outlived
her and the rest of the Apostles, by all men's consents, write any thing of her
death, much less of her assumption; though as Christ committed her to him, so
he took her (...), to his own home, and was a son unto her, Joh. 19.26, 27.

Amongst those who assent to her assumption, Monstrosa quaedam discrepantia
reperitur.
there is monstrous diversity, says Baronius, Anno Christi 48. number. 4. Which
words I wonder he would let drop from his pen, or that others of their side
would suffer to be printed. Of the former instances I say the less, because if
all which was supposed were granted, and if they had this privilege to prevent
others in their bodily glory; yet it was long after Christ's ascension; whereas
my principal question was of those many that arose about Christ's Passion, Who
in particular they were?

8. The sum is, Pineda has taken great pains to little purpose; has
presumed to name those whom the Scripture or any sound tradition has left
unnamed: his proofs have been so slender, as his conjectures have been bold. He
convinces not exactly, that any one of those whom he specializeth were raised;
much less to eternal happiness: and I have demonstrated that some of those
whom he names did not then arise to a glorious immortality. In the particular
instancing in those who arose about Christ's death, his fellow-Jesuite dares not
follow him; Non ausim de ullo particulatim definire.
I dare not say peremptorily that any such an one was raised, says Lorinus
most modestly, on Act. 7.29. Yet still it must be confessed, that many bodies
which slept arose, etc. though the book be clasped, the secret reserved, and no
absolute knowledge can inform us who they were.

O Lord who did open the eyes of the blind, to thee do I confess the
blindness of my understanding: open, I beseech thee, those eyes of my mind,
dispell the clouds, leading me in the right way amidst bypath and
uncertainties; even for thine own sake, who art the only way to the true life.
So be it, Lord Jesus; Amen, Amen.
CHAP. XIIII.
1. My conjecture, that none of the Patriarchs or old Prophets were raised.

2. An objection, concerning Peter's knowing of Moses and Elias on mount Tabor,
answered.

3. A conjecture that the Saints who lived in Christ's time, and died before
him, were raised at his Passion: Who they were in most likelihood. When Joseph,
the reputed father of Christ, did die.

4. The end, why they were raised. To whom they appeared.

5. A crotchet concerning the wives of dead men which have been raised.

IF still you press the question, Who those MANY were? or, Who were some of
those MANY? I answer with Lorinus, that part of truth lies hid and covered.
Amongst conjectures, I propound this mine own as probable. First negatively,
That none of the ancient Patriarchs, Prophets, or Types of Christ in the Old
Testament, arose: for if one; Who is he? and why not others as well as he? and
if they had risen, Who should have known them? or how could they induce the
then living to believe that they were the same Patriarchs or Prophets? They
might have been as well thought to have been incarnate spirits: for the evil
spirits also kept about the tombs and graves of the deceased: Unless you will
multiply miracles upon miracles; and say, God by miracle did reveal these to be
true Patriarchs. Otherwise they could not prove it to those who lived 2000
years after them. And if there had been such miracles, the Evangelists would
not have slipped them.

2. Yea, but S. Peter knew Moses and Elias at Christ's transfiguration, though
they were taken away from among men long before: And therefore the then living
might know the dead Patriarchs and holy men raised, though they died long
before. I answer, That S. Peter, and the other Apostles James and John, might
know by the conference between Christ and Moses and Elias, who they were:
Whereas Christ never conversed or conferred with those that were raised, for
ought that is recorded, or probably to be maintained. And it is a figment to
say or imagine, that there was any third person, which knew both the then
raised on the one side, and the living which never had been dead on the other
side; or could give assurance that the raised were such and such Patriarchs and
Fathers. Nor were their testimonies to be taken one for another, since the
denial or doubt concerning any one, draws in the denial or doubt of all the
rest: and upon supposall of one false apparition, any one and every one of the
rest might be questioned. Secondly, S. Peter and S. John might know Moses and
Elias by divine revelation, which to them was not unfrequent: as Christ's
Divinity was revealed to Peter, Matthew. 16.17. and Ananias his heart, Act. 5.3,
etc. or as Luke knew by the Spirit that Peter wept bitterly, though Peter wept
secretly: for he went out first, Luke 22.62. and what he went out purposely to
conceal, shall we think that he did purposely reveal? Now though the Apostles
had supernall illumination guiding them into all truth; yet that by divine
revelation extraordinary every one of them then living at Jerusalem knew every
one of them who were raised and appeared unto them, is, unnecessarily to
multiply many miracles. Now since they knew not the persons of the raised by
Christ, nor any other third person, nor by heavenly instruction; they could no
way know the raised Patriarchs, unless by their pictures or statues: which of
all other ways is most unprobable, as being a course not practiced in those
times and places.

The argument now has received its answer. Peter might many ways, and did
some way know Moses and Elias: and yet I find not any way whereby the
inhabitants of the holy city could personally know the Patriarchs and Fathers,
being before buried and incinerated: And therefore I probably conclude, Not any
one of these were raised.

3. Secondly, my positive probable conjecture is this, (which also seems more
likely to Lucas Brugensis) That many of those Saints who lived in Christ's time,
and believed in him; whose memory was fresh, and whose children, kindred, or
acquaintance were yet living, and who were known to adhere to Christ (and to
this opinion Bishop Bilson seems somewhat to incline) Many (I say) of those
dead Saints now arose, and appeared unto many: as, it may be, John the Baptist
(though the deceitful miracle-mongers show the false relics of that good
Saints head in diverse places) and Zachary and Elisabeth his parents; and those
many, Luke 1.66. and those shepherds, Luke 2.8. and those wonderers, to whom
the shepherds told our Saviors nativitie, Luke 2.18. perhaps some would add
those wisemen, who came to worship Christ, Matthew. 2.2. and old Simeon, and Anna
the Prophetess, and Joseph Christ's reputed father (though some think that
Joseph lived after Christ's resurrection: and yet others say, he died the
twelfth year of Christ's age; to whom Baronius rather inclines: Ad annum
Christi 12.
Joseph being very aged, about 80 years old, when he was espoused to the
holiest Virgin, as Epiphanius and others do guess. For my part, I embrace the
mean, and tread in the middle path: Neither thinking that Joseph died the 12
year; for when Christ was twelve years old, Joseph went up to Jerusalem, Luk
2.42. and after Christ's descent to Nazareth, Christ was obedient to Joseph and
the all-garacious Virgin, verse. 51. therefore Joseph could not be dead in the
twelfth year of Christ; which the learned Baronius did supinely and sluggishly
pass over, and not observe: Nor yet do I imagine on the other side, that he
lived beyond Christ's resurrection, or till his death; since there is frequent
mention of Christ's Apostles, of his holy mother, and of his cousins, and
friends, men and women, yea of strangers; and no mention, nor intimation at
all, See Salianus in his Annals in annum mundi 4065, at large on this point.
that Joseph lived till Christ began publicly to preach, and do miracles; much
less after his death. So upon my supposall that he died between the thirteenth
year of Christ and the twenty ninth, Joseph might very well be one of those
who were raised at that time) and with him (perhaps) diverse, whom Christ had
healed, or to whom he had preached (if they died before) and many others, with
whom Christ conversed till he was thirty years old.

4. And all these did prove and confirm unto the incredulous or wavering
Saints, their friends or kindred, yea and to the very believers also, the truth
of Christ's doctrine, of his death, of his resurrection: appearing not
promiscuously to Grecians or to Romans, not to all, no not to all the Jews; but
to many; but to fit persons, says the Interlinearie Gloss, whether Jews,
Grecians, or Romans then residing at Jerusalem; to such as knew them in their
lives, and at their deaths. This conjecture may pass the more plausibly, if we
consider that Christ himself appeared not to all indifferently, but only to
some, and to some oftener times then to others: yet no where is said to have
showed himself to any, but only to his followers and Disciples. And as the
Apostles were confirmed by Christ's holy conference; so might many other then
living believe, or the rather believe the Gospel of Christ upon proof made by
the new raised, in many particulars strengthening their faith. They arose, Vt
Dominum ostenderent resurgentem.
To show that Christ was raised, says S. Hierom on Matthew. 27. Cum eo debebant
resurgere, ut ipsum ostenderent resurrexisse.
They ought to rise with Christ, that they might show he was risen, says
Ludolphus the Carthusian. That Debebant.
they ought, savoureth of presumption. Dionysius the Carthusian has more
moderate terms: he, on the place, says, They did testify that Jesus was the
Christ, that he was truly risen, and had destroyed hell. Hierom, Tom. 3. fol.
50. in his answer to the eighth question of Hedibia, thus, Non omnibus
apparuerunt, sed multis qui resurgentem Dominum susceperunt.
They appeared not to all, but to many who received our Lord risen from the
dead. And yet let me superadde (by his leave) If they had appeared to the
Disciples and Apostles of Christ, who received Christ, I cannot think they
would have concealed it.

5. Among my other diversions and (...), or winde-abouts, let this be one,
occasionally arising from the odd position which Estius has, in 1. Cor. 7.39.
Recte ex Apostoli verbis inferunt Aquinas and carthusianus, Non teneri mulierem
ad recipiendum virum de morte resuscitatum.
Aquin and Carthusian conclude rightly (says he) from the Apostle, that a
woman is not bound to receive her husband newly raised, nor may she enjoy him
without a new contract. What if I answer, That a woman is tied to her husband
as long as he lives? but he lives afterward, though he had been dead: and
when the Apostle speaks of death, he speaks of a complete death, not
susceptible in this world of another life. For he opposes the dead man to the
living: as if one could not be dead, and then living; but first living, and
then dead for ever till the general resurrection. Suppose we Lazarus was
married; had not his wife been his lawful wife, bound to him by their first
agreement, even after his resurrection? I doubt it not. Yet this might be the
case of some of the many, who were raised; especially if they died but a while
before. But I confess, the case differs, and is more perplexed, if the
party were dead, and the days of mourning past; and the woman married to
another. Yet even here (...).

O Father most gracious, O Savior most merciful, O holy Spirit most
comfortable, I humbly beg thy grace, mercy, and comfort to be shed forth
upon me in this life; that I may please thee in my vocation, and do thy will,
and fulfill the business which thou have appointed for me. And leave not off
(I beseech thee) to guide me by thine enabling counsel here, till thou art
ready to crown me with thy glory in the life to come. Amen, Lord Jesu, Amen.
CHAP. XV.
1. The raised Saints ascended not into heaven with Christ; as is proved by
Scripture, and Reason. Suarez his shallow answer. Epiphanius strengthening my
former positive conjectures.

2. If the raised ascended bodily into heaven, the Patriarchs should not be
left behind.

3. The ascending bodily of the Saints into heaven, not necessary or
behooffull.

4. Only Christ's body was seen ascending.

5. In likelihood, Christ would have showed the Patriarchs unto some of his
Apostles.

THat these raised Saints, who bare witness of Christ, settling many pendulous
and doubting souls, strengthening many followers and Disciples of our Savior,
and (perhaps) converting some unbeleevers, by teaching them that their expected
Messiah was now come, that he did live among them, and had died for their
sins, and risen again for their justification; That they (I say) after this
office performed, again deposited their bodies in the earth, and ascended not
corporally into heaven, you may behold proved by this first reason, drawn from
Scripture. For Christ is compared to the high Priest, who alone entered the
SANCTUM SANCTORUM, Hebr. 9.7. It is true indeed, that we enter into the Holiest
by the blood of Jesus, Heb. 10.19. but he only, Hebr. 10.10.
by a new and living way, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh, Hebr.
9.12.
entered in once into the holy place. His entering differing from others entering;
and differing in this, That with his body he entered, others ascended not into
heaven with him bodily. Secondly, if they had ascended into heaven, following
Christ; their bodies must have been seen as well as Christ's: But their bodies
were not seen ascending; for the Evangelists would not have omitted a matter of
such moment. Suarez denies this, because the Evangelists do describe such
things as may be seen with bodily eyes, in which regard, neither the Angels,
nor the souls of Saints are reported to have accompanied him, which yet diverse
believe to have kept wing and way with him to heaven. I answer, Though Angels
and the spirits of men be not specified, as not being seen, as not being to be
seen without bodies; yet such Saints as arose with their bodies, and went into
heaven with their bodies (as Suarez and others think all they who arose out of
their graves did) might in likelihood be seen ascending with Christ, as well as
Christ's body. And their bodies were as subject to be seen with bodily eyes, as
Christ's was; yea, more visible, by how much Christ's body was more glorified
then any of the Saints; if claritie, impassibilitie, agilitie, and subtilitie
do make glorified bodies to be less visible: all which Christ had in an
eminent degree above any other. An unglorified eye can see naturally a
glorified body: though a glorified body can be seen or not seen, according as
it pleases. See the Supplement of Aquin, part 3. quest. 85. artic. 2.3.
Therefore my conclusion is firm, as his objection is impertinent. Thirdly, from
Epiphanius in Ancorato, I gathered what before I only conjectured, That such
only were raised as died a while before, who rising were known to such as then
lived, that their testimony might, by their former familiarity, the rather be
believed, and be void of exception; whereas if such were raised as died long
before, they must first use arguments to prove that themselves had sometimes
lived, and that they once died, that they were newly raised, and that they were
the same persons whom they reported themselves to be.

2. Now, that these should go into eternal happiness both of souls and
bodies, and leave the Patriarchs bodies in the dust, is in judgment
improbable. Therefore if it were to be proved, that those who arose out of
their graves after or upon Christ's Passion, did ascend into the most glorious
happiness in heaven, both of body and soul: as, above other men, I should
think and maintain, that Adam, Seth, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, and all the rest
before mentioned, and others unmentioned, holy Prophets and others, were they
that did arise, and were they who were partakers with Christ of perfect
immortality, and had more favors and privileges then other men: So since
Epiphanius concludes, That others of later times were raised; I will be bold
to infer, that others ascended not into heaven before those holy Patriarchs,
but laid their bodies in the graves again.

3. Again, if the end of their resurrection mho now arose, was to testify that
Christ was risen; this duty they might fulfill, though they ascended not into
heaven with him. If to testify that Jesus was the Christ, that he was just,
that he was the Son of God (which was the collection of the Centurion, when
he saw the graves open, and that many bodies arose, Matthew. 27.54.) their
ascension into heaven was not necessary to that certificate. If they say, They
arose to be witnesses of his ascension into heaven: I answer, He had other
witnesses of it, Act. 1.9. who would have been witnesses of their ascension
also, if they had ascended with him. If you say, they arose to be companions of
his ascension; I reply, that you do but beg the question, and hold a
groundless conclusion.

4. Moreover, Christ was seen of the Apostles forty days, and spoke of
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1.3. and He showed himself alive
after his Passion, by many infallible proofs, as is said immediately before:
and they saw, when he ascended into heaven, verse. 9. But that Christ ever
conversed with any of those that were raised; or was seen with them; or they
with him; or they with the Apostles, or Disciples; or that any ascended into
heaven, is no direct mention; as perhaps there would, if Adam and the rest of
the holy Patriarchs and Prophets had been raised, and had gone into heaven.

5. Neither would Christ, who vouchsafed Peter, James, and John, to see him
confer with Moses and Elias at the Transfiguration, have now denied Peter,
James, and John, to see him confer with the same Moses and other Patriarchs
after his resurrection, if they had arose and conferred with him, as out of
doubt, during the time of forty days that he conversed on earth, since their
and his resurrection (if they arose) he often discoursed with them: for he did
but about twelve times appear to the Apostles, and that most on the
Sabbath-dayes and then stayed not very long with them: and so I may probably
think that he did employ some part of the rest of the time from his
resurrection to his ascension, in conference with Moses and the Patriarchs
raised; especially if they were to ascend bodily into heaven with him: But none
of these things are once pointed at: Therefore there is no likelihood that they
were raised, much less that they ascended with Christ into heaven.

O Glorious Savior of mankind, who did ascend bodily into heaven, to
prepare a place for us amongst those many mansions filled with bliss, Open the
gate to me who do knock, bid me enter into my masters joy; that I may praise
thy name, and wait on thee my only stay, my delight, and the life of my soul,
my Lord and Redeemer Jesus Christ. So be it.
CHAP. XVI.
1. Angels taken for men. Angels representing men, are called men.

2. The name JEHOVAH ascribed to an Angel representing JEHOVAH, say Estius and
Thyraeus. Picking of faults in the Apocryphal Scriptures, to be abhorred.

3. Drusius his poverty. The Apocrypha is too little esteemed. The Angel, who
guided young Tobie, defended.

4. The great difference between Christ's manner of rising, and Lazarus his.

INdeed it is said, Act. 1.10. (...), etc. Behold, two men stood by them in
white apparel, whiles the Apostles were looking steadfastly into heaven after
Christ; and they told them of his coming to the last judgment in the same
manner as he ascended. Which two, certainly, might be men, and were men, says
the Text; yea (say some Expositors) were some of those Many, who arose out of
their graves after Christ's resurrection. These were amicti vestibus albis,
says Erasmus: In albo vestitu, says Beza: Now, the Saints are arrayed in white
robes, Revel. 7.13. and whiteness of garments is a token of joy, Ecclesiastes
9.7, 8. and these had cause to joy. I first answer, with most of the Ancients,
with the modern Beza, Sa, Montanus, and Sanctius, That these two men, so
called, were Angels. For the Angels representing men's persons, are called
according to their names or titles whom they represent. As in the vision which
S. Paul saw by night, Act. 16.9. it is said, (...), There stood a man of
Macedonia, etc. Now clear it is, this was not a Macedonian indeed; but an
Angel bearing his person, in the shape of man calling him with the call of God:
and what is said in truth of story, Joh. 20.12. Marie sees two Angels in
white, sitting, the one at the head, and the other at the feet, where the body
of Jesus had layen, is said by representation, Luke 24.4. Two men stood by them
in shining garments; they took on them the shapes of two men, and stood in
their places.

2. If Angels represent the person of God, and do things, or say things as from
him, and as for himself; they are called Gods, and the very name of JEHOV A is
attributed to them: as the Angel appearing in the fiery bush to Moses; and
other Angels, says De loci^ infestis, part. 1. cap 23.
Thyraeus, and Sentent. 2. Distinct. 8. Paragr. 8.
Estius. In the New Testament, another Angel is called Alpha and Omega, Revel.
22.13. which were blasphemy for any Angel to say or usurp, if the Representer
might not be styled according to the dignity of the Represented. Which note I
have the rather insisted upon, to lash the rash censure of such, who, under
pretense to keep the Canonical Scripture at a great distance from the
Apocryphal, pick unnecessarie faults in the Apocryphal: such faults, and so
small, as a man not prepossessed could not see, and a natural rational
Philosopher would esteem but little, in comparison of greater doubts in
semblance, arising from our undoubted Canonical. S. Hierom was the first that
styled them Apocrypha, who never left any thing objected against him
unanswered: yet being therefore taxed by Ruffinus, that therein he had robbed
the holy Ghost of his treasure, he made no reply. Thus some have been hurt with
kissing, and the tenderness of the ape kills those young ones whom she
loves best. And whilst they play the Critics in censuring the Apocrypha,
they breed irreverence and irreligion toward the Canonical, by how much the
doubts seem more, or greater; seem, but are not.

3. The most painful and learned John Drusius, in his epistle to Joseph
Scaliger; before his Commentary on the first book of the Maccabees, intimates
his fear of want, even of things necessary; and, in the very end of his
castigations on Ecclesiasticus, prays to God to stir up the hearts of the
Great ones and illustrious Lords to help him (may heaven and earth take notice,
how miserable the estate of the learned is; when tithes the fixed honourary of
the Priesthood by Divine right, are usurped by the Laics; and reward is
measured not by true worth, or by the measure of the Sanctuary, which was
full, running over, and double to the common and profane measures; but by the
ignorant estimate of niggardly mechanics, their under agents:) yet he brake
through all difficulties, and has bestowed great pains in his notes on both
these books. Scaliger, de emendat. tempor. lib. 5. says, The first book of the
Maccabees is Opus eximium.
An excellent work. Again, Tu praestantiam loujus libri jamdudum scis.
You knew long since full well the great worth of this book, says he, in his
epistle to Drusius. And Albericus Gentilis most exquisitely disputes in
defense of the first book of Maccabees (so little regarded in these times) and
answers every objection which is brought against it. I could say more in
defense of other books Apocryphal; but I recall my self to handle that
particular which caused this diversion. How many wide mouths have been made?
how many scandalls taken? how many aspersions of horrible untruth and lying
have been fastened on that blessed Angel who guided Tobias the younger in his
long and dangerous journey, because he said, (though he gave old Tobit a nick,
for that he would enquire his name, immediately after) Tob. 5.12. I am Azarias,
the son of Ananias the Great, and of thy brethren; whereas you may expound
the words by this rule, That he who sustains another person, may call himself,
or be called according as the person himself. As the Angel, who appeared to S.
John, Rev. 22.9. saying, I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the
Prophets; and, perhaps, took one of their shapes at that time. Likewise in the
undoubted Canonical, the Angel Gabriel is called The man Gabriel, Dan. 9.21.
because he appeared in the similitude of a man. Thus may the place of Tobit be
expounded: and, without such favorable interpretations, Familiaris and
quotidianus sermo non cohaerebit, says Cicero, Pro A. Caecinna. Secondly, you
may expound the words thus, I AM AZARIAS, that is, the help of God: THE SON
OF ANANIAS THE GREAT; NOW ANANIAS signifies the grace, or the gift of God. And
this is verified by the actions of the Angel, who helped indeed both the
Tobiahs, by the especial grace of God. Add to this, that the Angels true name
was Raphael, Tob. 12.15. which is by signification, the medicine, or physic of
God: as indeed he did make whole young Tobie his wife, and healed also old
Tobie, Tob. 12.3. All which being laid together, remove all inconvenience from
the words, if we say, The Angel by those names of men, Azarias and Ananias, did
signify, that the help which was to come from him to them, came to him from
God. For even this way draws nigh unto that Lexicall exposition, as
Bibliothecae sanct. 3.
Sixtus Senensis phraseth it; which I will not wholly exclude.

Secondly I answer, If these were no Angels, but very men; and these some of
those Many who arose out of their sepulchers: yet clear it is, they ascended
not with Christ, nor ascended they at all, for ought that can be gathered; but
upon the performance of this their last errand, their bodies might again
embrace the dust.

4. Lastly, this may have a place of a probable argument: As Elias, when he was
rapt into heaven in a fiery chariot, by a whirlwinde, (being even therein a
type of the resurrection) let fall his mantle from him, 2. King. 2.13.
perchance as a token that he needed it no more: so Christ, when he raised
himself, left his grave-linen in the grave, the linen clothes by themselves,
the napkin that was about his head wrapped together in a place by it self, John
20.7. out of doubt, to show that death should have no more dominion over him.
In which regard also he arose, the tomb being shut, and the tombe-stone
sealed, and observed narrowly with a watch: for the removing of the tombe-stone
by the Angel, was not to help Christ to arise, who entered in to his disciples,
januis clausis, the doors being shut, and came forth of the grave, sepulchro
signato, the monument being sealed: but that the women might go in, and see
that Christ was before raised, Mark 16.3. etc. (and the stone was not rolled
away propter Christum, sed propter mulieres, for Christ, but for the women,
says Hierom ad Hedibiam) whereas contrarily, when Lazarus was raised, the
tombe-stone was first removed, and Lazarus arose, tied with the grave-clothes;
and his face bound with a napkin: yea, came forth bound hand and foot with
graveclothes, Joh. 11.44. by a new miracle, walking being bound, and bound with
grave-clothes; to show, that though he did live, he did live to die again. In
which respect also, perhaps, the graves were opened at Christ's passion, when he
yielded up the ghost; and continued open till his resurrection (yea, till the
ends of their rising were fulfilled:) and after his resurrection, many bodies
of Saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves, Matthew. 27.52, 53.

O Blessed Lord God, who have commanded that we shall not add to thy Word, nor
yet take from it, Grant (I beseech thee) that I may neither think thy certain
true Scriptures to be doubtful, nor the uncertain to be Canonical: but
possess me with awful and reverent thoughts concerning thy holy writ, that I
adoring the fullness thereof, may avoid all hasty, supine, forced, and
uncharitable expositions, and fetch my little light, and candle of knowledge,
from that first shine, and prime rays of thee the only Light, my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.
CHAP. XVII.
1. The place of Matthew. 27.53. is diversely pointed; and, according to the
pointing, is the diversity of meaning. The first implies, that the Saints
arose with Christ, though their graves were opened before. This interpretation
is not so likely, though received generally.

2. The second infers, that they arose before Christ, though they went not
into the city, till after his resurrection. This is favored by the Syriack,
and is more agreeable to reason.

3. That the raised Saints died again, proved by reasons, and Hebr. 11.40.

4. Christ the first fruits of the dead, and of the raised. Angelical assumed
bodies were seen and heard; much rather should men's bodies ascending with
Christ.

5. S. Augustine, Aquinas, Hierom, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Euthymius, Prosper,
Soto, Salmeron, Barradius, Pererius, Valentian, affirm that the raised Saints
died again. Franciscus Lucas Brugensis holds it likely.

THose last cited words of Matthew. 27.53. being differently pointed, will bear a
double and different interpretation. Our late Translation has it thus, The
Saints came out of the graves after his resurrection, (there is one pause) and
went into the holy city, (there is another pause:) so is it in the Vulgat, and
in most Greek copies. This sense in those words is involved, That the Saints
arose not till Christ arose, and that their resurrection was a little after, or
almost contemporary with Christ's: which also is evidently foretold, Isaiah
26.19. (if the prophet prophesies there of Christ, or speaks in Christ's
person) Thy dead men shall live; together with my dead body shall they arise,
etc. For Christ's body arises not from the earth at the general resurrection;
and therefore they punctually sign out the resurrection of other Saints with
Christ, and with his dead body. But if Isaiah speaks of his own
resurrection, and not of Christ's; nor in Christ's person, but in his own: by
these words and the words following he points out the general resurrection:
and so Vatablus, Hierom and Lyra expound the place. Now, if he point at the
last day of the world, the argument is demonstrative, that either Isaiah arose
not with Christ (though he was the most Evangelicall Prophet, and in no
likelihood to be secluded from those benefits, which other Prophets are said to
enjoy:) or if he arose, that he died again to rise with others at the day of
judgment; which they who ascended bodily into heaven, did not: Therefore
Isaiah is not bodily ascended into heaven; and if not he, why others?

2. The second way of pointing that place of S. Matthew, is this; Many bodies
of the Saints arose: (there is one Colon) (...) and coming out of the graves
after his resurrection went into the holy city. there is the full period, and
no other pointing of the words. And thus it is read in the edition printed at
Geneva by John Vignon, 1615. and illustrated with Casaubon his notes: but I
take it, that a pause should be immediately after the word Graves: and then
they might arise before Christ; but not enter into the holy city till after
his resurrection. I am sure, the Syriack, translated by Tremellius, thus
reads and points it; and Lucas Brugensis disliketh it not; Et egressi sunt,
and post resurrectionem ejus ingressi sunt in urbem sanctam.
And they came forth, and after his resurrection went into the holy city. In
the Syriack you have these steps, Obdormierant; surrexerunt; egressi sunt; and
post resurrectionem ejus ingressi sunt in urbem. From which second reading the
resultance is, That those Saints arose before Christ arose. Neither is it
against reason: for at Christ's passion the graves were opened, verse. 52. Shall
the graves be opened, and nothing be raised? No: for it is added immediately,
Many bodies of Saints were raised. Shall the bodies be raised; and either lie
down, or sit still in the graves? To what end? Many bodies arose of the Saints,
which HAD SLEPT; (...). It is in the preterperfect tense; Now were they waked,
now were they raised, now went they forth out of their monuments: and between
the time of Christ's passion and his resurrection, perhaps, the raised conferred
with themselves; perchance, they communed with others without the city; or,
being rapt with divine speculations, might either on mount Olivet, or rather on
mount Calvarie, spend that time in solitary devotions, expecting the triumphant
return of their captain Jesus Christ from hell and the grave; and after his
resurrection they came into the holy city.

3. The sum is, These reliving Saints arose at Christ's passion, and before
him; but none ever arose before him unto an eternal resurrection: for in that
regard Christ was the first fruits of them that slept, 1. Corin. 15.20. and it
is Christ's privilege, which the Apostle touches at, Romans 6.9. That Christ
being raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominion over
him: (of which hereafter, though I have spoken of it also before) Death had
power over others, who were raised before him: Therefore they ascended not into
heaven with their bodies; nor were partakers of the eternal incorruption and
immortality. Let me add, That as the sepulchers were opened, that they might
come forth; and continued open till the resurrection, and perhaps after: so in
that they were opened to their hand, and did not shut again, I take it as a
figure, that they did (as it were) expect the return of their bodies; and as a
probable argument, that they did lie down again in their old repositories, or
dormitories. And that you may the sooner give credit unto this, in the next
place consider the general law, That all of us shall have glory and
immortality together; for Hebr. 11.40. God has prepared a better thing for
us, that they without us should not be made perfect. If you expound this of the
Fathers of the Old Testament, and of the stola animae, the robe of honor for
the mind; yet you shall find Revel. 6.11, that in regard even of stola
corporis, the glorious garment of the body, the Saints themselves are
commanded to rest yet for a little season, until their fellow servants also,
and their brethren (either then alive, or perchance not then born) that should
be killed as they were, should be fulfilled.

Now against this general rule you must not make a particular exception,
without express warrant from the word of God: But there is no testimony at all
from the word of God, either direct or inferentiall, that any of those Many who
arose, arose to glory or immortality, or ascended into heaven: Therefore we
may boldly conclude, They died again. This argument is of such force, that
Suarez leaves it unanswered, and untouched. Lastly, if the bodies of these
Saints ascended into heaven; either they ascended after Christ, or before him,
or with him. If after him; When and how long after? and why after him? They
ascended not presently after him: for the Apostles who looked steadfastly toward
heaven, even after he was taken out of their sight, might have then perceived
their bodily ascent. If you say, So soon as the Apostles left their serious
viewing, and hearkened unto the Angels, then they ascended: I answer; I would
say so also, if I saw any proof, or if I could think that God sent the Angels
just at that moment, to hinder the Apostles from seeing the Saints mount up to
heaven, which would have been so joyous a sight. Briefly, there is no reason to
say they ascended long after Christ ascended; and certainly less reason is
there to think they ascended before him.

4. Moreover, Christ as man shall be Judge at the last day: and God has given
assurance of it to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead, Act.
17.31. If any other were raised up in the same manner before him, or with him,
to an eternal resurrection; what assurance does God give by this place of S.
Paul, that Christ shall be the Judge, rather then others? But indeed the
raising of Christ was more then ordinary, was more then temporary: Let him
have the preeminence in all things: Christ is the first fruits of them that
slept, 1. Cor. 15.20. The first fruits of them that are raised, verse. 23. He is
Primitiae mortuorum, Revel. 1.5. and resurgentium, Act. 26.23. Christ is the
first who shall arise from the dead, viz. to an eternal resurrection: his
body opening, as it were, the gates of heaven for our bodies; which if Enoch
and Elias did by privilege especial anticipate (though these were not
properly raised, but rather taken up;) yet, if more, if so many should before
him arise to an everlasting resurrection; it destroys the nature of a
general rule. Gratia quae omnibus datur, non est gratia, sed natura; and
privilegium gaudet paucitate.
Grace given alike to all, is no longer grace but nature: and a privilege is
properly confined to a few. That they ascended not with Christ, I proved
before: and for a Corollarie do repeat this, That if assumed and Angelical
bodies were to be seen, and were seen and heard at Christ's ascension; out of
doubt the bodies of Saints had been visible, yea seen, if they had then
ascended.

5. If any desire to see more reasons, let him read S. Augustine, Epist. 99.
ad Euodium; and de Mirabilibus Sacrae Scripturae; whose reasons In tertia part
Summae, quaest. 53. artic. 3.
Aquinas prefers, and subscribeth unto.

You may now perceive that I am gently fallen upon the second head; in virtue
of which I undertook to prove, That the Saints, who miraculously arose, and
here arose, did not ascend into heaven, but died again: for the second head,
was Authority. Among Authors you have already two of the chiefest for depth
of learning, Augustine and Aquinas. Hierom is of their mind, on Matthew. 27.
Chrysostom, Hom. 89. on Matthew. compares those Saints resurrection unto Lazarus
his rising to a mortal life; though Beza directly contradicts it. The same
Hierom, Epist. 150. ad Hedibiam, again confirms it. To the same purpose,
Theophylact on the place, and Euthymius, chap. 67. on Matthew. so Prosper in his
book de promissionibus and praedictionibus Dei. In the middle school, you have
Soto, in 4. lib. Sentent. Distinct. 43. quaest. 2. artic. 1. Yea, even among
Jesuits, Salmeron and Barradius are on this side; and Pererius on the 6
chapter of the Revelation, Disput. 24. and Gregory Valentian, Tom. 4. Disput.
2. Quaest. 5. where he sleighteth Cajetans arguments, and says that our is the
more probable opinion, and that Aquin, from Augustine, does most excellently
confirm it. In the last place comes that learned Franciscus Lucas Brugensis,
who having set down the ends why these Many were raised (to wit, To be
praecones, criers, or trumpetters of Christ's resurrection, which was
experimentally evidenced by their own; and that Jesus was that Savior, and
that he ought thus to suffer, and thus to enter into his glory) closes in
these words, Hoc officio quando isti defuncti fuerant, verisimile est cos
iterum dormivisse, and in sepulchris suit quievisse, quemadmodum Aloses.
When they had performed this duty, it is likely that they slept again, and
rested in their sepulchers like Moses. Yea, say I, much rather did they sleep
in their graves, then Moses: for though he was buried, yet being raised, he
appeared in glory, Luke 9.31. which apparition being in body principally (for
his soul was not seen) we may not imagine, that a glorified body is so subject
to corruption, or a second dying: which Brugensis himself will not say of these
raised Many; for he has an odd crotchet, and singular conceit, That those
Many were raised, neither to an immortal, nor to a mortal life; but to a
middle and mean betwixt both; not to a perpetual one, nor yet to a terrene
life; but heavenly, without the use of meats or drinks, without fear or pain of
death.

O Fountain of mercy inexhaustible, sweet Jesu, who being the Son of God,
did become Man, that we the sons of Men, might be the sons of God; who
did die, that we might live; suffering for our sins, and rising again for
our justification; Have mercy, O, have mercy upon me; pass by my
transgressions, I beseech thee, and present me blameless to the Throne of
Grace, for thine own merit sake: to which I ascribe all power, and from which I
expect all my glory. So be it.
CHAP. XVIII.
1. The arguments of the contrary opinion answered. Suarez, and especially
Cajetan, censured.

2. That by the holy City, Jerusalem below was meant, proved at large.
Josephus and the Jews erring about the name of Jerusalem. Hierom uncertain.

3. How the raised appeared. A difference between appearing as men, and
appearing as newly raised men. Franciscus Lucas Brugensis rejected.

4. An argument of Maldonat answered by the prodigious Legend of Christina, who
died twice. No hurt is to man, if God will send his soul from an heavenly
place, to live a while on earth again.

5. No harm to die twice. The difference between death complete and incomplete.

6. God can dispense with his own Laws.

THus having beaten down the opposite authorities (if they were fully on that
side) with weight and number; the third and last point, which I propounded to
handle, was the answering of all their reasons and arguments. Some are so weak,
that I need not to answer. For Suarez himself, who alleges them, confesses
their weakness, and answers them. These three proofs following he alleges;
but answers not. First, It was decent and behovefull, DECUIT (says Suarez)
that Christ, who had both body and soul, should have companions of his glory,
in their bodies as well as in their souls: For his delight is to be with the
children of men, Proverb. 8.31. Which Suarez (it may be) took as an hint from
Cajetan: for he, on Aquin. part prima, quaest. 53. art. 3. has it thus,
Rationale videtur, quod sucrexerint perfect ad vitam penitus immortalem; ut
beatitudo corporis in Christo haberet socios: minus enim corporalis felicitas
aliquid habere videretur, it desit corporalis societas: est enim homo secundum
vitam corporcam animal sociale, etc.
It stands with reason, that they arose perfectly to a life fully immortal,
that the bodily blessedness of Christ might have some fellows: For the bodily
happiness seems not perfect and complete, if bodily society and company be
wanting: for man is, according to the corporeal life, a sociable creature, or
good fellow: not only for want of necessaries unto life, as happens in this
world; but for natural delight, consisting in bodily conversation, says
Cajetan, dissenting in this from the great Summist his master. I answer, that
Cajetans argument is ridiculous: for it holds chiefly in children, or babies,
in fools and in striplings, who love play-mates; or in worldly factours, whom
business forces into society and commerce. But that the Saints in heaven,
yea Christ himself, the all blessed Savior of the world, both God and Man,
should not have the full of delight, or have too little of bodily felicity, if
other humane bodies be not present, savoureth rather of the Turkish Coran and
the Arabian school, then of the sacred Text: and that Christ in heaven, is
animal sociale, naturally delighting in bodily conversation (for so much the
application of that Axiom imports, or else he says nothing to the purpose)
does imply his brutish conceit of our most holy Redeemer. The sweet singer of
Israel says, Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right
hand are pleasures for evermore. If this befall other holy Saints; much more it
belongs to Christ, from whose fullness all the whole body of his Church
receives comfortable influences. But grant we, that such bodily company might
be desired by Christ: yet he needed not these Many; but he might have had Enoch
and Elias, or Moses and Elias, with whom he conferred at his transfiguration.

Secondly, unto Suarez his words Barradas his fellow-Jesuite answers, Christ
needs not men endued with bodies now in heaven. As for the place of the
Proverbs, the precedent words give light unto them, I rejoiced in the habitable
parts of the earth, says the Text: So his delights were with the sons of men
in and upon the earth: but of his delight in them with their humane bodies in
heaven Before the last resurrection, there is no inkling or intimation given.
Suarez argues thus secondly, Animae gloriosae connaturale est, etc.
It is very natural for a glorified soul to be united unto an immortal and
glorious body: But their souls were glorious: Therefore their bodies also: And
the glory of a blessed soul, of its own nature redounds upon the body. I
answer, It does so naturally, if it be not hindered. But the blessed souls of
these Many Saints were in bodies, not immortal, not blessed, not glorious, for
a few days or hours, and that by miracle, says Barradius.

Besides, whilst Christ lived on earth, unless at his Transfiguration, or
some such especial occasion, the glory of his most happy soul, which was
then beatified as much as any of the souls of the Saints are now, and more, did
not impart visible glory to his body: but it was passible and mortal; for it
died. Then why may not these Saints have the glorious light of their souls
eclipsed from their bodies?

Again, the assumed bodies of blessed Angels ever did resolve into their first
principles, when the ends why they assumed them, were fulfilled: the like might
be in the Saints, whose souls were hindered from communicating incorruptible
and glorious qualities to their bodies; and so they were partakers not of the
perfection of the last eternal resurrection, but of the imperfections incident
to the temporary and mortal resurrection.

Thirdly, says Suarez, Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, are in hell with their
bodies: therefore some, to show Gods mercy, must now be in heaven with their
bodies: and therefore these Many. I answer, that both the sequences are lame,
though we should grant the ground or antecedent of the Argument. For first, was
not Gods mercy seen in heaven, from the hour of Corah and his companies
descent into hell, till these Many ascended? Then why may it not still be seen,
though these ascended not? especially, since that Christ is there in a most
blessed incorruptible body, as they are in hell in cursed bodies, which would
take corruption for a favor. Lastly, why must these Many Saints be the
counter-pattern in heaven, rather then Enoch, or Elias, or Moses, being the
Magistrate against whom Corah and his accomplices combined themselves?

2. Others there are who object, It is said, THEY ENTERED INTO THE HOLY CITY:
But the holy city is the new Jerusalem, Jerusalem above, Revel. 21.2.
Therefore they died not, but went into heaven. I answer, Jerusalem below, the
material Jerusalem, the seat of the kings of Judah, because of Gods worship
there especially to be performed in that glorious Temple, was also called the
holy city. GLORIOUS THINGS ARE SPOKEN OF THEE, THOU CITY OF GOD, Psalm. 87.3.
Amongst others, thou art styled holy. Rev. 11.2. The holy city shall the
Gentiles tread under foot: but the Gentiles shall never trample on the new
Jerusalem above. On the one side of a shekel of the Sanctuary, which once I
saw, was stamped in Hebrew characters, Holy Jerusalem. Again, Tobit. 13.9. O
Jerusalem, the holy city, he will scourge thee: but he will never scourge
Jerusalem above, which is the Mother of us all: therefore Jerusalem below must
needs be this holy City.

Bellarmine himself, de Pontifice Romano, 3.13. accords with us, and
interprets the strife of the two Witnesses against Antichrist, in Jerusalem
below. And before him, Hierom in his answer to the eighth question of Hedibia,
Tom. 3. fol. 50. says, Of these words, THE SAINTS ENTERED INTO THE HOLY CITY,
we must take THE HOLY CITY to be Jerusalem; Ad distinctionem omnium civitatum,
quae tunc idolis serviebant.
to distinguish that city from other cities, all which did then give
themselves to idolatry: applying it to the material Jerusalem, which (says
he) from the time of Vespasian and Titus, was no more called THE HOLY CITY.

Moreover, Paula and Eustochium, or rather Hierom in their names, ad Marcellam,
Tom. 1. fol. 59. citing the place of Many Saints etc. add remarkably, Nec
statim Hiercsolyma coelestis, sicut plerique ridicule interpretantur, in hoc
loco intelligitur; cum signum nullum esse potuerit apud homines, si corpora
Sanctorum in coelesti Jerusalem visa sunt.
You must not presently understand the celestial Jerusalem, as most have
ridiculously interpreted this place; when it could be no sign nor token among
men on earth, if the bodies of the Saints were seen in the heavenly Jerusalem.

May I annex to this, That, if the whole land of Jurie be to this day called
The holy Land, nor will have other estimate of diverse Nations, in some regards,
till the worlds end: then certainly the Metropoliticall city thereof, the
famous and eminent Jerusalem, might in those days be dignified with the title
of The holy city, for many just regardable causes.

Again, when it is said, Act. 6.13. This man cease not to speak blasphemous
words against this holy place; they that said so, were not in the Temple; but
in their Councel-house in the city: and the words have a true reference to the
city, as well as to the Temple; yea more, because the Temple was within the
city, and not e contra. Now their Councel-house was distant a good way from
any part of the Temple, and was built close by one wall of the city; and was
called GASITH in Hebrew; wherein seventie Senators, or ordinary Judges,
called SANHEDRIM, determined weighty causes: and here they examined the
Apostles, Acts 4.7. and S. Stephen, Act. 6.13. and 7.1.

The city which before was called Solyma, was by Melchizedech named
Hierosolyma, that is, The holy Solyma, says Josephus, de bello Judaico. 7.18.
Let Josephus justify upon what grounds he mongrelleth the name: for, neither
did Melchizedech speak Greek; nor does the Hebrew incline to that sense: yet is
even that hotch-potch better to be digested, then the impious and sottish fable
of other Jews, That Melchizedech having named the city Salem, and Abraham
having called the mount Moriah in or about Jerusalem, JEHOVA JIREH, The Lord
will see, or provide, Genes. 22.14: God himself being unwilling to suffer a
debate between the holy Melchizedech and Abraham the father of the faithful,
umpired the business, and of both their attributes, or appellations,
compounded one word, or name, and calls it thereafter, Jerusalem.

Perhaps, S. Hierom can hardly prove what he says in his epistle to Dardanus,
de Terra promissionis Tom. 3.24. that the city was first called Jebus; and
thencefrom Jerusalem, rather then Jebusalem, Euphoniae gratia, that it might
have a fair sound and good pronunication. For there is mention of Jerusalem,
Judge. 1.8. yea before that, Josh. 10.3. long before David expelled the
Jebusites: and in the days of Melchizedech, it was called Salem: for
Melchizedech was King of Salem, Hebr. 7.1. Now that the Jebusites inhabited
Jerusalem before the time of Melchizedech, or that he should be King of the
Jebusites inhabiting that place, or that he should expel the Jebusites there
commorant before him, or how they repossessed it till David's time, or indeed
that the name was given as S. Hierom opineth, are matters only of conjecture,
as not being backed with proofs sufficient.

Lastly, if we be led with reason, as I said before, What should be the end of
these Saints ascending to heaven? Christ had no need of bodily service; and we
may not think that they were to bear witness in heaven of Christ's
resurrection: for the triumphant Saints need no such proof, or witnesses; their
beatificall vision and fruition exempteth them from doubting. The living had
more need to know by these Many, the resurrection of Christ: but by them the
living knew nothing at all, so far as can be proved; if this going into the
holy city be to be interpreted of the supernall Jerusalem. But that the words
are to be expounded of Jerusalem below, the passage immediately following
demonstrateth; They went into the holy city, and appeared unto many.
Certainly, if they had gone into heaven, they must have appeared unto all
there: for as Coelum est singulis ^otum, omnibus unum.
No corner of heaven is hid from any; so there all things present are seen face
to face; their matutine knowledge infinitely surpasses our vespertine; all and
every one see all and every one present.

3. Yet even from these very words, They appeared unto many, Maldonat
gathers, that they did not appear commonly, or indifferently, or generally
to all: from whence he infers, If they arose to die again, they would have
appeared not to many, as the Evangelist said they did; but vulgo omnibus,
promiscuously to all. I answer; They appeared to all; viz. All that met them,
saw them, and saw them as men, and as other men; but not as newly raised men;
for so only they appeared to Many; as Christ himself did appear Testibus
praeordinatis a Deo, Unto witnesses chosen before of God, Act. 10.41. so did
they, to such only as God had appointed.

To evince this distinction, let it be considered, whether every one who saw
Lazarus after his resurrection, saw him as a raised man, or as an ordinary man.
But if Lazarus might appear commonly to all men, and yet appear unto Many
only, as a man raised lately from the dead; these Saints also might be seen,
and were seen of all that passed by and looked on them (apparuerunt vulgo
omnibus, they appeared ordinarily to all;) and yet they might be seen not by
all, but only appear to Many, as persons raised of purpose for holy ends. And
this opinion I hold to be more probable then that of Franciscus Lucas Brugensis
on the place, That only unto some the raised did aliquando apparere, aliquando
disparere, sicut Jesus, Sometime appear to some, and sometimes vanish, as our
Savior did. I answer, he had said somewhat, if the resurrection had been of
the same nature with Jesus his resurrection. And as I dislike him not, if by
disparere he means that they did not always converse with the same men, but
changed company: so if by it he understands a sudden vanishing from the sight
of men, and implies that the Many raised had a power to be visible and
invisible at their pleasure; till he bring proof to evince it, he shall give me
leave to parallel it to the fiction of Gyges and his ring: whose broad beazil,
or insealing part, if he turned to the palm of his hand, he was forthwith
invisible, yet himself saw all things; but if he turned it to the back side of
his hand, he was as conspicuous as an other man. So Cicero in the third book of
his offices, out of Plato.

4. The same Maldonat presses us sore with an other argument: What should they
do here, living again in mortal bodies, who had a taste of Gods glory? surely
they had been in worse condition, then if they never had been raised out of the
bosom of Abraham, where they were quiet, to come to a turbulent life again.
Because this Maldonat is an importunate snarler at our religion, I give him
this bone to gnaw upon: and for my first answer, I will call to mind the
prodigious Legend, which diverse eminent men of their own side have recorded of
one Christina, called by them, by way of eminency, Mirabilis.
Wonderful. To omit what Surius and others relate, I will speak in the words
of Dionysius the Carthusian: Cum defuncta esset in pueritia, -- ducta erat in
paradisum, ad Thronum Majestatis Divina: -- Domino congraiulante, ineffabiliter
gavisa est: Dixitque Dominus, Revera; hac charissima filia est.
Christina died young, -- and was carried into paradise to the throne of the
Divine majesty: -- and she was ineffably glad, God congratulating with her. And
the Lord said, Truly this is my dearest daughter. And then he tells, That God
gave her choice, either to stay with him, or to return unto her body, and by
penitential works to satisfy for all the souls in purgatory, and to edify
those who lived, and to return to God, Cum meritorum augmentis.
with increase of her merits. She answered the Lord presently, that for that
cause she would return to her body: And so she did: and because sinful men
by their stench did too much afflict her, (O tender-nosed virgin!) she did
fly, (or the Papists did lie) and sit on the top-boughes of trees, pinacles,
or turrets; (since noisome smells ascend, it had been her far better course,
to have crept into some dens, and caverns of the earth, or vaults and tombs,
as he said she did sometimes) and when her neighbors, or kindred thought her
mad, and kept her from meat, she prayed once to God, and milk came out of her
breasts, (was not she an intemerate rare virgin!) and so she refreshed herself.
This, and a great deal more has that Carthusian, (holy and learned above many
of their side) de quatuor novissimis part. 3. Artic. 16.

Let censorious and maledicent Maldonat ponder these things well; and it will
stop his mouth for ever from barking at the belief of us, whom they style
Hugonets, Calvinists, Heretics; though none of us think, or say otherwise,
then the good Pacianus did of old, in his first epistle to Sempronius,
CHRISTIAN is my name, and CATHOLIC is my surname. The Turks indeed have some
strange figments of this nature: but though the Mahumetan priests have devised
and feigned many superstitious miracles concerning their great Saintesse
Nafissa, as is confessed by Joannes Leo in his African history, lib. 8. yet
the Papists have surmounted both this and other their impostures, with this
their mirabilarie Christina.

Secondly, concerning these Many raised, I answer unto Maldonat, They continued
not long in this life, but (as I guess) shortly after Christ's ascension, laid
their bodies down to sleep again in the earth. Thirdly, what thinks Maldonat of
Lazarus? Was not his soul in Abraham's bosom (as well as the other poor
Lazarus his soul) who was so tenderly beloved of Christ, and his Apostles? and
yet he lived long after: and whatsoever can be objected against these Saints,
holds stronger against Lazarus. Fourthly, I deny that they by their return
into the flesh, were in worse condition. Lorinus on Acts 9.41. says, Non
affert molestiam, ut Deo vocanti mortuus obtemperet reviviscendo.
It is no trouble to a man, if being dead he obey Gods call, and live again.
And Salmeron says, No reason, but holy men at Gods command may put on and put
off their own bodies as well, and as contentedly, as the Angels do their
assumed bodies: which I do the rather believe, because I do say with Tostatus,
on the 2. King. 4. Quaest. 56, Though it cannot be certainly proved, yet it is
probable, That none of those that ever were raised, did perish everlastingly,
nor that any reprobate had the favor of an extraordinary resurrection: for a
separated soul that has been partaker of these unspeakable joys, will esteem
worse then dung, or salt that has lost its savor, all the pleasures and
profits of this life; though their several excellencies were distilled into
one quintessence of perfection. So that, as Lorinus says well in the place
above cited, Whosoever has once escaped the peril of damnation, he shall not
come into the same danger again.

5. The last objection that I have met withal is this, That to die the second
time is no favor, but a punishment; and a punishment iterated. I answer, If a
righteous man should die thrice, or oftener; death is no punishment unto him;
yea to pass seven times through hell, to come once and everlastingly to
heaven, a despairing soul would hold to be a cheap blessedness. Secondly,
Suarez himself says, It is no punishment to die the second time, no more then
it was to Moses, to die twice; as says Augustine, de Mirabilib. Scripturae
3.10. though others dissent from Augustine. Nay (says Suarez) To lay down
their bodies the second time, is more acceptable and pleasing to God. To this
does Peter Martyr agree in 1. King. 4.22. If by man's hurt, or loss, God be
glorified; it is no injury to man. But in truth it is no hurt, or loss to
man: for, says Barradius, Perchance, without any pains they might redeliver
their carcases to the earth: And if the pains be any; the pains both of the
latter and former death, may be so tempered and diminished, that they both
shall not exceed the pains of one death, says Peter Martyr, ibid. Which
learned Peter Martyr out of S. Augustine de Mirabilib. Scripturae 3. ult. has
an excellent observation or two. First, That to every man is settled and
appointed a prefixed time of death. Secondly, That before the last prefixed
time some do die, that they that raise them up to life may be more famous, and
God more glorified. And this is proved by the very phrase which Christ used
concerning Lazarus, John 11.4. This sickness is not unto death: Yet did he
die; and besides the time intercedent between his death and his burial, he was
four days buried. But his sickness was not Ad mortem plenam, in qua Lazarus
maneret.
to an entire death, in which estate he should remain. Neither is that so
properly called death, Quando praeoccupat ultimum terminum.
when it is abortive, and comes before its time. So, Luke 8.52. She is not
dead, but sleeps; and yet verse 55. her spirit came again: Therefore it was
gone, and she was dead. So that we may shut up this point with this perclose,
and with a distinction out of Peter Martyr, from S. Augustine; Death is so
termed, either properly, or improperly; completely, or incompleatly. If you
take death properly, and completely, for that separation of the soul, which
cannot admit an other conjunction or union with the body till the general
resurrection: then no man ever died but once, or was come ad plenam mortem, to
that prefixed period and last hour of life; but their former death was only
improper, preparatorie, and abortive. Now if you take death improperly and
incompleatly, for any manner of true separation, which indeed is the commonest
acception; a man may die twice, and diverse have died twice; yea, all they that
ever were raised in the Old and New Testament (except our Savior only, who
cooperated to his own resurrection) all they, and every of them, died the
second time.

6. Paucorum praerogativa non officit legi Naturae, ut aliquoties monet
Origines.
The privilege of a few checketh not, offends not the law of nature, as
Origin observes more then once, says Erasmus on the 1. Thessal. 4. or in
Hieroms phrase, Singulorum privilegia legem efficere non possunt.
The prerogatives of singular men establish not a law: or, in the way of
Augustine, Privilegium paucorum universali legi non derogat.
The privilege of a few does not derogate from the general law. Though it be
ordinarily appointed for all men once to die, yet extraordinarily, some may not
die at all, and some must die twice. For, Potens est Deus cum statuto communi
dispensare.
God may and can dispense with a common statute of his own, says Holcot, on
Wisdom the 2. His hands are free, who has manicled the whole world by his
laws: he is not tied by Stoicall fatal necessity, who is Agens liberrimum, a
most voluntary free agent.

HOly, holy, holy, Lord God of Hosts, I humbly implore thy favorable
protection: strengthen me, O gracious God, against all mine enemies, bodily and
ghostly; and when I have by thy power fought a good fight, when I have finished
my course, take me, I beseech thee, from being a member of thy Church militant,
in this Jerusalem below, to be partaker of blessedness with thy Church
triumphant, in Jerusalem above, the Mother of us all: which petition I
earnestly present unto thy Sacred Majesty, in the name and mediation of my
only Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.
CHAP. XIX.
1. Strange conceits concerning Nero, from Suetonius, Tacitus, Hierom,
Augustine. Nero supposed to be Antichrist.

2. An other incredible relation of the Armenian, who is said to have lived at
Christ's passion. The Armenians have their holy frauds.

AS I began with two or three strange histories, having some relation to the
propounded question: so I hold it not amiss, to end with two or three, which
shall give some light to some other parts of this question, or at least by
their strangeness shall afford delight; though I end in a fable.

Suetonius, in Nerone cap. 27. toward the end, thus historifieth; Non defuerunt
qui per longum tempus vernis aestivisque floribus tumulum Neronis ornarent; ac
modo imagines praetextatas in rostris proferrent, modo edicta, quasi viventis,
and magno inimicorum malo reversuri. -- Denique, cum post viginti annos,
adolescente me, extitisset conditionis incertae, qui se Neronem esse jactaret;
tam favorabile nomen ejus apud Parthos fuit, ut vebementer adjutus, and vix
redditus sit.
There were some who for a long time did deck the tomb of Nero with flowers,
both of the spring and summer: and sometimes did bring his statues and
resemblances adorned with long purple imbroydered robes, into the pleading
places; now and then they would proclaim his Edicts, as if he had been alive,
and would shortly return to the damage of his enemies. To conclude, After
twenty years when I was but a youth, when there appeared on the stage an odd
fellow, who bragged that he was Nero; so great respect was showed to his name
and credit, that he had great helps and aids, and with much ado was delivered
up. So far Suetonius. Tacitus also, Histor. 2. reports, that many did believe
Nero did live long after he was dead. S. Hierom to Algasia, de undecim quaest.
quaest. ultima, makes Nero a forerunner of Antichrist, and he gives this sense
to these words, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. J^m mysterium operatur miquitatis: Multis malit
and peccatis, quibus Nero impurissimus Caesarum mundum premit, Antichristi
parturitur adventus. etc.
NOW THE MYSTERY OF INIQUITY WORKS: By those many harms and sins, (says
he) by which Nero, the worst of all the Cesars, oppresses the world,
Antichrists coming is breeding and ready to come to light: and what Antichrist
shall do hereafter, Nero now in part accomplisheth. S. Augustine his relation
goes one step further, Nonnulli illum resurrecturum, and futurum Antichristum
suspicantur. etc. de Civit. 20.19
Some do suspect and imagine (says he) that Nero shall rise again and be
Antichrist: Others think that Nero was not slain, but was withdrawn, when they
thought he was murdered; and that he lies hid, living in the vigor of that
age, wherein he was when they thought he was slain. Which story when I read,
it recalled to my mind a more uncouth relation of an other dive-dopper. And
this it is:

2. In Matthew Paris, on the eleventh year of Henry the third, anno Christi
1228. in his greater history printed at London, page 470. it is said, That an
Archbishop of Armenia came into England in pilgrimage; was entertained at S.
Albans Abbey: Being there asked touching that Joseph, of whom there was a common
speech, that he was present when Christ suffered, and spoke with him, and that
he yet lives as a firm proof of the Christian faith; the Archbishop answered,
That he knew Joseph well; and the Antiochian (who was the interpreter to the
Archbishop) told the whole story thus to Henry Spigurnel his acquaintance,
and the Abbots servant, That before the Archbishop came out of Armenia, Joseph
used to be at his table; that at the Passion when Christ was haled from before
Pilate to the cross, the said Joseph (then called Cartaphilus) being usher of
the Court, did most scornfully punch Christ on the back, as he went out of the
door; and mocking said, Go faster Jesus: Go, Why stayest thou? But Christ
looking back with a stern eye and countenance on him, said, I go indeed, but
thou shall expect, or stay till I come: As if he had said, The Son of Man
goes indeed, as it is written of him; and must be crucified, and die, and
shall live again: but thou shall abide, and not die, till my second coming.

It is further added, that this Cartaphilus was, at the time of Christ's death,
about thirty years old; and so often as he comes to one hundred years, he is
taken with a seeming incurable disease, and is as it were in an ecstasie: then
growing better, redit redivivus, returns young, lively and lusty, to the
state of thirty years. After Christ's death he was baptized by Ananias (who
baptized S. Paul) and was called Joseph: he is reputed to be a man of a most
austere and continent life, humble, and patient; and lives in both the
Armeniaes, among Clergy men. Thus far Matthew Paris; who was a Monk of Saint
Albans, at that time. And in the like words the story is reported by Thomas of
Rudbourn, a Monk of Winchester, in his Chronicle, which is a manuscript; as the
great searcher of antiquities Mr Seldom, my very worthy friend, assured me.

If this Joseph redit redivivus, he has not died twice only, but very often.

I have recounted these narrations for their pleasant varieties; perhaps (I may
say) rarities: But as S. Augustine branded the former story, and the believers
of it, saying, Multum mihi mira est hae^ opinantium tanta praesumptio.
The great presumption of these opinionists makes me much marvel: So I will
not be afraid to tax the latter of imposture: both because of the variety of
Names, by which he is called, as you may find in the learned Mr Seldens
illustrations on Polyolbion, page 15. where he also cites the incredible fable
of Ruan, which is cousin-german to the relation of the Eastern Cartaphilus; and
because the Armenians, as well as the Romans, have their holy frauds: as was
seen by our men, laughed at by the Turks, and believed by the silly Laics of
Armenia, whilst their Priests would strive to fetch false fire from Christ's
sepulcher on Easter even. See Mr Sands in his third book, page 173.

Lastly, if this story of the Armenian could be an undoubted truth; the Greek
Church would ere this have produced him, to justify the practice and opinions
of the Eastern Church against the Western, wherein they dissented: But no such
thing was ever attempted: And therefore let this be cast into the number of
fables.

Soli DEO gloria.
FINIS.
MISCELLANIES OF DIVINITY. THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I.
1. Many Papists are very peremptory, that all and every one must die.
Melchior Canus is more moderate. The words are only indefinite, not universal.

2. Objections brought to prove, that universally all shall die. Their answers.
General rules have exception. Even many learned Papists have acknowledged so
much. The point handled, especially against Bellarmine.

3. Indefinites have not the force of universals. Even universals are
restrained.

4. Salmeron brings many objections to prove an absolute necessity that
every one shall die. All his objections answered. Man's living in misery is a
kind of death.

THe third question is, Whether Adam and his children, all and every one of
them, without privilege or exception, must and shall die? It arises also from
the same fountain from which the two former questions did proceed: It is
appointed unto men to die.

The answer consists of three parts: That there may be an exception of some;
That some have been excepted; That others shall be excepted. And so the answer
is returned with the negative, thus, All and every one shall not die: For
though it be appointed for men to die; yet the appointment may be, has been,
and shall be reversed.

Neither fear I the saying of Aquinas, part. 3. quaest. 78. artic. 1. Est
communior and securior sententia Theologorum, Vnumquemque moriturum.
It is the more common and more safe opinion of the Divines, That every one
must die. And this opinion is maintained with stiff and peremptory obstinacy,
by our adversaries the Papists. Bosquier in his Terror orbis, Salmeron upon the
1. Thessal. 4. Gregory de Valent. with others are resolute, That none can be
dispensed withal, but all mankind, and every child of Adam must die. But
Melchior Canus is more moderate; Locorum Theologic. 7.2. Number. 3.
Though it be appointed for all men to die, (says he) yet that one or two out
of that general law by privilege be exempted, is not so against Scriptures,
that it may not be questioned. And, Locor. Theol. 7.3. Numer. 9. he proves
that it is no way against Scripture, That the thrice-blessed mother of our
Lord, may by singular privilege be exempted, (he had erred if he had said, Is
privileged) from the universal law of all being born in sin; and further
confirms it by this instance, Because the Scriptures say in general, Exodus
33.20. NO MAN SHALL SEE ME AND LIVE; and John 1.18. NO MAN HAS SEEN GOD AT ANY
TIME: yet Moses and Paul saw God. And though ordinarily there is no return from
death to life, and the Saints come not back again from heaven to dwell on
earth; yet Augustine says, in lib. de Cura pro mortuis, Cap. 15. Mitti quoque
ad vivos, aliquos ex mortuis, ut Mosem ad Christum: sicut e contrario, Paulus
ex vivis in Paradisum rapius est, Divina Scriptura testatur.
The Scripture witnesses that some from the dead have been sent to the living,
as Moses to Christ: and on the other side, Paul being living was carried into
Paradise.

Again, I say the words of the Apostle are only indefinite, not general: it
is not said, (...), It is appointed to all men: but, It is appointed unto men:
whether all, or only some, is not here determined.

Now because this place wants its strength and nerves, to prove that point; and
neither in the Greek, nor Vulgat, nor Syriack, is the universal expressed; the
Jesuits have amassed up together many places of Scripture to confirm their
opinion.

2. What man is he that lives, and shall not see death? Psalm. 89.48. In Adam
all die, 1. Corinthians. 15.22. Death is the house appointed for all living, Job
30.23. Death passed upon all men, Romans 5.12. He shall be brought to the grave,
and remain in the tomb: The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him, and
every man shall draw after him, as there are innumerable before him, Job 21.32.
MORTE MORIERIS, Thou shall die the death (Genesis 2.17.) was threatened to Adam,
and all his: and therefore God, who cannot lie, will see it accomplished.

To the last place I answer first: It is well rendered and expounded, Mortalis
eris, Obnoxious eris morti; Thou shall be mortal, and subject to death, as Lyra
and Vatablus have it. Beda on Genes. 2. Morti deputatus eris, Thou shall be
condemned to death. Chrysostom, on John, Homil. 27. Adam mortuus est, si non
Re, tamen Sententia.
Adam died by guilt and judgment, though execution was suspended. And to say
truth, In the midst of life we are in death: Man is dying, till he be dead.
Infirmities and sickness pursue men till they perish, Deuteronomie 28.22. The
wicked shall find no ease nor rest, but shall have trembling hearts, failing
of eyes, and sorrow of mind, verse 65. Thy life shall hang in doubt before
thee, and thou shall fear day and night, and shall have no assurance of thy
life, verse. 66.

To all the other alleged places of Scripture, one answer fitly serves: viz.
That the holy Writ speaks of the ordinary course of Nature, and has no
intent to limit Gods power, or to bind the Lawmaker; but he may exempt from
death whomsoever he pleases. For general rules are not without exceptions. It
is most true, what Aristotle, de Histor. Animal. 7.10. generally avoucheth,
(...).
No child cries in the mothers womb: and yet extraordinarily it may be true,
what Libavius in lib. de vagitu uterino, and Albertus Magnus lib. 10. de
Animalibus, and Solinus in his third chapter, report; to wit, Quosdam embriones
plorasse in utero, That some Embrioes have wept and cried out in their mothers
womb: As on the contrary, what Livie lib. 24. records; namely, Infantem in
utero matris IO TRIUMPHALE clamasse, That an infant in the mothers womb sang
the Outcrie used in triumphs: And what Appian of Alexandr. de bellis civilibus
Roman. lib. 4. almost in the beginning relates, That a child spoke so soon as
it was born: which was a prognostic of sorrow, against the erection of the
TRIUMVIRI. Petrus Pomponatius, in lib. de incantationibus, cap. 10. goes one
step further: and though it be a little out of my way, yet suffer me to follow
him: Haly Aben-Ragel scientia syderum scivit praedicere, puerum natum statim
prophetaturum, sicut refert Conciliator.
Haly Aben-Ragel (says he) by Astrology knew and foretold that a new born
child should presently prophecy; as Conciliator relates. So the universal
law of all men's dying, may stand in full force and virtue, and yet be abridged
by some extraordinary exceptions, through the unlimited command of the most
free Lawmaker. My proofs that universal propositions do not always exclude
some particular contraries, shall be of such general rules as are limited by
the Papists themselves: because the controversy now in agitation, is only
against them.

The great master of Controversies, Bellarmine himself, de Purgator^o 1.12.
speaking of the taking up of the good thief into Paradise, says, Privilegia
paucorum legem uon faciunt.
A few men's privileges establish not a law.

Gerson, that learned Chancellor of Paris, in his Sermon on the birth of the
thrice blessed Virgin, the third part, thus settleth; Constat, Deum
misericordiam salvationis suae non ita legibus communibus traditionis
Christianae, non ita Sacramentis ipsis alligasse; quin, absque praejudicio
legis ejusdem, possit puero^ nondum natos intus sanctificare, Gratiae suae
baptismos vel virtute Spiritus sancti.
It is apparent, that God has not tied his merciful salvation to the common
laws of Christian verity: no not so to the Sacraments themselves, but, without
prejudice of that law, he may sanctify children in the womb, with the
baptism of his grace, or power of the holy Spirit.

Matthias Felizius, page 184. acknowledges, that extraordinarily the souls of
good and bad men do sometimes come out of heaven and hell: yet are there
general statutes and the ordinary course opposite and contrary.

By an argument drawn from special privilege, Petrus Thyraeus, de locis
infestis, part. 1. cap. 9. maintains, That humane souls may return out of
Purgatory; yea, out of Hell. Bonum publicum Legislatori semper propositum est:
hoc si, lege praeterita, obtineri potest, legis ratio magna non habetur.
The Lawmakers (says he) has an eye still aiming at a general good: which
general good, if it take place and succeed without the law, it is no great
detriment or wrong to the law.

Cardinal Tolet, on John 1.3. Aliquando solemus generatim loqui; ad
mul^itudinem significandam; quamvis non omnes parts multitudinis
comprehendantur.
Sometimes we speak generally, to signify a numerous multitude: though we do
not mean to comprise all and every parcel of that multitude. 1. Cor. 9.25.
Every man that striveth for the masterie, is temperate in all things: But
neither do all abstain, nor do they, who abstain, abstain from all things.
Which truth in the mouth of Tolet, might be confirmed at large by the Fathers.
Let S. Hierom only give in his verdict; Hierom, Tom. 3. Epist. ad Damasum, de
Prodigo, thus, Canon Scripturarum est, Omnia non ad totum referenda, sed ad
maximam partem.
It is even a rule in Scripture, that the word ALL has not reference to the
whole (comprehending every singular particular) but to the greatest part. And
as OMNIS, All, so likewise NVLLVS, None, is restrained, 1. Kings 18.10. where
the words No nation or kingdom, extend not through the whole world; but are to
be reduced and confined to those Nations or Kingdoms which were Achabs
subjects or tributaries, to whom he might and could administer an oath: which
he did not, could not do in the dominions of other absolute free Princes.

I must yet come up closer to Bellarmine. Genesis 7.18. Repleverunt aquae Omnia in
superficie terrae, as it is in their Vulgat: though it be not so, either in the
Hebrew, or Greek. And, All the high hills that were under the whole heaven were
covered, verse. 19. Yet Bellarmine, in lib. de Gratia primi hominis, cap. 4.
excepteth Paradise, which, being on earth, was not overflown.

Genes. 7.21. All flesh died, -- and every man: and verse. 22. All in whose
nostrills was the breath of life -- died: and verse. 23. Every living substance
-- both man and cattle, etc. Yet for all these generalities, Bellarmine, in
the place cited, excepteth Enoch, who then lived upon earth, in Paradise, as he
imagined.

Romans 5.12. Death passed upon all, for that all have sinned. But, Praeventa
fuit Maria singulari gratia and privilegio Dei, ut simul and esse and justa
esse inciperet.
The Virgin Mary was prevented by Gods special grace, so that she was free
from sin so soon as she had any being, says Bellarmine, Tom. 3. de amissione
great. and statu peccat. 4.16. He exempteth her by special privilege from
sin. Why may not we, by the force of his reason, exempt an other from death?
Moreover, Enoch and Elias, at what time S. Paul wrote these words, were not
dead; though the Apostle speaks of things past: nor are dead yet, as the
Papists hold. Gorran on the place answers appositely, Death went over all,
REATV, non ACTV; by way of guiltiness, not actually.

1. Corinthians. 15.51, etc. We shall all be changed at the last trump: Yet
Bellarmine, de Romano Pontifice, 3.6. says that Enoch and Elias shall die and
rise again before the general resurrection: till which time the last trump
blows not: And Christ was risen before; though the words be large: and not
Christ alone; but (if Holcot be not deceived, on Wisd. 2.5.) De Matre Christi
benedicta, pie credit Ecclesia, quod sit in ea resurrectio completa.
It is an holy belief of the Church, that the blessed mother of Christ has
obtained a full and perfect resurrection. Which words suffice to cross other
Papists, who deny that any exception is to be made to the general axioms;
though by us they are held as fables.

3. Let us take a view of some indefinites, and we shall not find them to be
universally applied.

The Prophets are dead, John 8.53. yet Enoch was a Prophet, Jude verse. 14. and
Elijah was chief among Prophets: Notwithstanding, these were not dead. Revel.
14.13. The dead rest from their labors; yet diverse have been raised from a
true death, and have returned again into this world of labor. My very Text is
fertile of more particulars to this purpose, It is appointed unto men to die
(...), S^MEL; UNO TEMPORE, as it is in the Syriack, word for word: yet some
have died twice. It is appointed unto men once to die, and after that comes
JUDGMENT: but Christ was not judged after he died. That he was judged in the
particular judgment of souls, cannot be; since himself is there the Judge. So
shall he also be judge in the general judgment.

But let us return to the universalls. Matthew. 26.33. Though all men shall be
offended because of thee, yet will I never be offended: yet was he a man: and
if the words there be restrained to all Christ's Disciples or Apostles; yet
Peter accounts himself none of that all; and exempts himself from the number of
them that would be scandalized. 1. Corinthians. 15.27. He has put all things under
his feet: But when he says all things are put under him, it is manifest that
he is excepted which did put all things under him. Heb. 11.13. These All died
in faith: Yet Aquinas truly there excepteth Enoch.

Aquinas, in 4. lib. Sentent. did. 43. artic. 4. thus, By the same reasons by
which we showed that all should arise from the dead, may we show also, that all
shall arise A CINERIBVS, in the general resurrection: unless by especial
grace the contrary be granted to some; as the hastening of the resurrection is
granted to some. Where Aquinas confesses that some are dispensed withal, both
for incineration, that their bodies should not be turned into dust; and some
also shall have a speedier resurrection by an especial grace. Why then, by the
especial grace of the same God, may not some be freed from the stroke of death?

4. Salmeron tuggeth it out hard by the teeth, to uphold that none shall be
acquitted from death; but, without exception, all must die. Hearken to his
reasons.

Si Christo and matri Christi mors non pepercit, cui parcet?
If death spared not Christ and his Mother, whom will death spare? I answer,
Death spares none; so that no one can say, I will not die. Death spares none:
but he that has the power of death, may spare whom he pleases. Fire and water
have no mercy: yet the three children were preserved in the fire, and S. Peter
walked upon the sea. The rivers have divided themselves; yea, the Red sea
gathered it self together, and was as a wall on the right hand and on the left,
in the passage of the children of Israel toward Canaan. God, above the pitch of
humane reason, may free whom he will from death; and shut up the mouth of the
grave, that it shall not swallow some, as he did the mouths of the lions, when
he saved Daniel.

Again says Salmeron, Qui cum Christo mortui non sunt, non resurgent, nec
erunt membra ejus.
Who die not with Christ, or as well as Christ, shall not arise, nor be members
of his body. All the Jesuits in the earth cannot demonstrate that proposition.
If they use S. Augustines reason, Resurrectio est solummodo mortuorum: At omnes
resurgent: Ergoomnes morientur.
Only the dead shall arise: But all shall arise: Therefore all shall die: I
answer with S. Augustine, and many more (what is handled at large in the third
part) Immutatio erit vice resurrectionis.
Change shall be a kind of resurrection: and in the proposition, The dead are
not taken strictly; but largely, for any such as have changed their first life.
But take we the dead properly and natively, for such only as indeed have died;
the proposition is false, and must be denied; since we shall not all die, but
some shall be changed; and yet both the one and the other sort shall be raised.

Salmeron again, on 1. Cor. 15. thus objecteth; Tardante Sponso, dormitaverunt
omnes, and dormierunt.
While the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbred and slept, Matthew. 25.5. Did
not Salmeron sleep, slumber, and dream, when he produces these words to prove
that all shall die? when the words have apparent reference to the supine
security of their minds; and perhaps, if you will, to their bodily
sluggishnesse, drowsinesse, and sleep, if there were any realitie in the
parable. Death was never meant in these words: for Christ does not there, that
is, at the resurrection, tarry; but he that shall come will come, and will not
tarry, Heb. 10.37. He continues objecting thus; Stulte, quod seminas non
vivificatur nisi mortuum fuerit: Ergo Omnes mor^entur, quia Omnes
vivificabuntur.
THOU FOOL, THAT WHICH THOU SO WEST IS NOT QUICKENED EXCEPT IT DIE, 1. Cor.
15.36. Therefore All shall die, because All shall be quickened. I answer, The
Apostles drift in that place is, not to show whether any shall remain alive, or
all die: but he only proves by natural reason, that resurrection may grow
out of putrefaction. Secondly, even they themselves who say All must die,
cannot take the words exactly as they sound. For then as the seed has time to
rot, and rotteth ere it quicken: so the bodies of men should suffer corruption
and putrefaction, as the seeds do; which they dare not say. Lastly, seeds do
not die properly; there is no separation of a soul from a body: they die
analogally and improperly: and so do even those who shall not die, but shall be
changed.

An other objection is, Genes. 3.19. Dust thou art, and unto dust shall thou
return. Peter Martyr answers, Id est, Quamdiu orbis durare pergat, and nisi
dies judicii cursum naturae intercipiat.
That is, whilst this world lasts, and till the day of judgment break off
the course of nature. But I say, that even such as maintain that every one must
die, will not say they shall reverti in terram, Be incinerated and turned into
dust and earth: for they allow a very short time, till the bodies reunion.

If any will still urge the generality, and press the extent of the words, and
force of the decree, It is appointed unto men to die: I answer with Bellarmine
himself, Decreto satisfieri videtur, si omnes Adae posteri, morti obnoxi^ sunt.
Tom. 3. de amissione great. and stat. pec. 4.15.
The decree is performed, if all the posterity of Adam be obnoxious to death:
Or as S. Augustine answered the Pelagians, concerning those which shall be
alive at Christ's coming; Satis est, illos fuisse morti destinatos (...) quae
subsecuta esset, si seculum processisset. Quod eximantur a morte, erit casus;
neque privilegium paucorum universali causae derogat.
It suffices that they were appointed to die: and die they should if the world
had endured. By casualty they are freed from death, nor does the dispensation
with some particular ones infringe the universal cause, as I vouched in the
second book. And (as S. Augustine goes on) when they have lived a life full of
misery, and calamity; who can say, they have not tasted death? especially,
since thirst, hunger, cold, heat, infirmities, crosses, sicknesses, are nothing
else but a daily dying. In which regard the wise woman of Tekoa, in her subtle
oration says not, We shall all, and every one die; but 2. Sam. 14.14. We die
(MORIENDO MORIMUR; so runs the Hebrew) and are as water spilt on the ground;
when immediately, both before and after, she had spoken of outward crosses.
Etiam dum crescimus vita decrescit.
Even whilst we are growing, our life decreaseth, says Seneca: Which S.
Augustine, in libro Soliloq. cap. 2. thus enlarges, Vita mea, quanto magis
crescit, tanto magis decrescit; quanto magis procedit, tanto magis ad mortem
accedit.
My life in going forward, grows backward: and by how much it advances
forward, by so much it makes a nearer approach to death. As the fire it self
consumes its fuel, and is nourished by the consumption of it: so man's age is
fed and nourished by the consumption of his life, and of the age he lives in.
Man at the same time begins to live, and die: for LIFE is but the way tending
to DEATH: Nascendo morimur, imo long ante nativitatem morimur.
In our birth we die; yea long before it. From the instant of the souls
infusion, we begin to die. Lastly, I say, in that Christ died for all, Although
some be extraordinarily dispensed withal, every one may be said to die; Christ
by the grace of God tasted death for every man. Hebr. 2.9. Thus much shall
serve for the first part of the answer.

O Blessed Savior, who art life in thy self, and the fountain of life unto
others, Grant, I humbly beseech thee, that when I shall pass from this present
world, from this dying life, or living death, I may evermore live by Thee, in
Thee, and with Thee. Amen. Amen.
CHAP. II.
1. The third question resumed, Whether every one must die? The second part of
the answer unto it, That some have been excepted, as Enoch and Elias. The
controversy has been exquisitely handled by King James, and Bishop Andrews.

2. Bellarmines third demonstration, that Antichrist is not yet come,
propounded. The place of Malachi 4.5. expounded by Bishop Andrews: and enlarged
by my additions. The Papists objection answered.

3. The place of Ecclesiasticus 48.10. concerning Elias, examined.

4. Another place of Ecclesiasticus, 44.16. concerning Enoch, handled at large
against Bellarmine. Enoch was never any notorious sinner, in some men's
opinions: Others, otherwise. Their arguments for both opinions are only
probable; and answered. My opinion: and it confirmed. Some think E. noch died.
Strange and various opinions concerning S. John the Evangelist, his living,
death, and miraculous grave. More miracles, or else mistakings, in the Temples,
of Christ's Sepulcher, and of his Assumption, about Jerusalem. S. John did die.
Enoch did not die, but is living. Mine own opinion of the place Genes. 5.24. Et
non ipse: and it confirmed. A comparison between Enochs, Elijahs, and Christ's
ascension. The posture and circumstances of Christ's ascending.

5. Bellarmine and others say, Paradise is now extant: In the earth, or in the
air, says Lapide the Jesuit. The old translation censured. The heaven, into
which Enoch and Elias were carried, was not Aerium, nor Coeleste; but
Supercoeleste. The earthly Paradise is not extant, as it was. Salianus with
others say truly, The material remains, not the formal: Superest quoad
Essentiam, non quoad Ornatum: The Place is not removed, but the Pleasure, and
Amenitie. Salianus his gross error, That Enoch and Elias are kept by Angels,
within the bounds of old Paradise on earth.

6. Enoch shall never die, as is proved from Hebr. 11.5. Three evasions in
answer to that place, confuted. Melchizedech, and strange things of him. The
East-Indian language has great affinity with the Hebrew. An error of moment
in Guilielmus Postellus Barentonius. Elias was not burnt by that fire which
rapted him. Soul and body concur to make a man, says Augustine from the great
Marcus Varro. Vives taxed. Moses at the transsiguration, appeared in his own
body. An idle conceit of Bellarmine, concerning Moses his face; and good
observations of Origin upon that point. It is probable, that Elias was changed
at his rapture, and had then a glorified body. An humane soul may possibly be
in a mortal body in the third heaven. Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, are in their
bodies in hell, properly so called; and alive in the hell of the damned. Ribera
and Viegas confuted. Our Doctor Raynolds was not in the right in this matter.
Some kind of proofs, That Enoch and Elias are in glorified bodies in heaven.
The place of Revel. 11.7. concerning the two Witnesses, winnowed by Bishop
Andrews. Enoch and Elias are not those two witnesses.

THe main third question being, Whether all men, and every one must of
necessity die? the first part of the answer was, That there was no absolute
necessity, but there might be an exception. The second part of the answer
touched at, was this; That some have been excepted, who never did die, nor
shall die. If I be further demanded, Who they be? I will only insist in Enoch
and Elias. The controversy concerning which two men, is so exquisitely handled
by the most learned Monarch, our late Sovereign King James, in his monitory
Preface; and by his Second, the reverend Bishop Andrews, in his answer to
Bellarmine his Apology, cap. 11. that the most scrupulous inquisitour may be
satisfied.

After I have selected some matters of moment from that unanswerable Prelate, I
will take leave to glean after the gathering of their of their full sheaves;
and to discover a few clusters, after their plentiful vintage; and to bring to
your taste some remarkable passages concerning Enoch and Elias, which (perhaps)
they thought fit to omit, as affecting brevitie, or tying themselves most
strictly to the question; whilst the nature of my Miscellanies give me license
to travel far and near.

2. Bellarmine, Tom. 1 de Romano Pontifice 3.6. makes it his third
Demonstration (as he calls it) that Antichrist is not yet come, Because Enoch
and Elias are not come; who yet do live, and must oppose Antichrist.
Bellarmines first place, is from Malach. 4.5, and sixth verses; Behold, I will
send you Elijah the Prophet, etc. The Bishop, page 255. from Chrysostom well
observes, that most Greek and Latin copies misreade it thus, Ecce, mitto ad
vos Eliam Thesbitem: Behold, I send unto you Elias the Tishbite: and so,
because the Baptist was not Elias the Tishbite, we might expect the Tishbite
after John. Indeed the Septuagint, turned by Hierom, and in Theodoret on
Malachi 4.5. have it, Eliam Thesbitem; And Codex Vaticanus so has it, (says
Christopher Castrus on the place) and all the Greek Fathers, and Tertullian,
and Augustine de civit. 20.29. But in the Hebrew it is not Elias the Tishbite;
but Elias the Prophet: and so it is in the fair great Bibles of our
Adversaries, of Vatablus, and others. Ribera the Jesuit is bold (as other
Jesuits were before) to find fault with the Bibles of Arias Montanus: Male
atque vitiose in Bibliis Regiis scriptum est, in Translatione 70, Ecce, ego
mittam vobis Eliam Prophetam.
In the King of Spains Bibles it is vitiously and erroneously written, in the
translation of the Septuagint, BEHOLD, I WILL SEND UNTO YOU ELIAS THE PROPHET:
as if there had not been diversity of copies: and as if those copies which are
most agreeable to the Original, were not to be preferred, or were ill and
erroneous: as if we were to bring and bend the Original to the Septuagint; as
Carafa professes to reduce the 70 to the Vulgat.

There is an error also, says Bishop Andrews, Cum Graeci utrobique legant,
ascendisse Eliam, (...) non In coelum, (quod expresse^ tamen habetur in
Hebraeo) sed, Quasi in coelum.
When the Grecians in both places read, that Elias ascended AS INTO HEAVEN;
not INTO HEAVEN, (which is expressly in the Hebrew) but, AS IT WERE INTO
HEAVEN. I doubt not but the Bishop had good ground to write so. But the
Septuagint of Vatablus on 2. King. 2.11. has it, (...), Even into heaven: so
also it is read by him, on 1. Maccab. 2.58. with whom agrees the 70, of
Montanus, on the Maccab. so also Drusius both reads it, and expounds it,
ASSUMPTUS EST IN COELUM USQUE, He was taken up even into heaven: confirming it
also in his notes on the place. So these read it, not (...) but (...), not
Quasi but Vsque: which reading affords no patrocinie to them, but helps our
sides.

Bishop Andrews further proceeds to this effect; That concerning the words of
Malachi, Christ, both of his own accord (Matthew. 11.10. --) and being questioned
(Matt. 17.10. -- and Mark 9.12. --) affirmed, That that prophecy was complete;
That John did do what Malachi said Elias was to do. And because John came in
the virtue and power of Elias, Christ expounding Malachi, says, Elias is come,
Mark 9.13. Brugensis a Papist, on Malachi 4, says, What is spoken of Elijah by
the Prophet, seems properly to be expounded of John the Baptist. And Vatablus,
ibid. says, The place is to be expounded of Christ's first coming. So Arias
says, from the wise interpretation of the ancient Scribes, That The terrible
day has not reference to the last day of judgment, but to the coming of the
Messiah; Christ both approving, and proving it. The same Arias interprets The
smiting of the earth with a curse (Mal. 4.6.) by laying it waste and desolate,
as Judea has been from the time of Titus.

The reverend Bishop thus recollecteth: Elias was to be sent before the coming
of Christ, Malachi 4.5: Before the first coming none was sent in the spirit of
Elias, but John: The first coming is to be understood, and not the second, by
the confession of our learned adversaries. Elias was called the messenger or
Angel, Malac. 3.1. so is John called, Matthew. 11.10, Mark 1.2, Luke 7.27. Elias
was to come, Matthew. 17.11; but, This is Elias which was for to come, Matthew.
11.14; and, Elias is now come, Matthew. 17.12. Elias shall turn the hearts of the
fathers to the children, Mal. 4.6. John the Baptist shall go before him, in the
spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children,
Luke 1.17. Let me add these things, That Elias is called the Prophet, Mal.
4.5. and, He shall prepare the way before the Lord, Mal. 3.1. So John the
Baptist, parallell-wise, Luke 1.76. is called the Prophet -- which shall go
before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways: Yea, More then a Prophet,
Matthew. 11.9. S. Hierom, on Matthew. 11. draws out the parallels to more length:
John came in the virtue and power of Elias; Et eandem Spiritus sanc^^, vel
gratiam habuit, vel mensuram: sed and vitae austeritas, vig^rque mentis,
Heliae, and Joannis, pares sunt, etc.
Elias and John had both the same grace and measure of the holy Ghost, and were
equal in austeritie of life, and vigor of mind: Each lived in the
wilderness: each was girded with a leathern girdle. Elias was forced to flee,
because he reproved Ahab, and Jezabel: John was beheaded for finding fault with
Herod and Herodias. And yet, to speak truth, the same S. Hierom is not constant
to himself; but crossing what he said on Malachi, and otherwhere, he, on Matthew.
17.11. thus expounds these words, Elias quidem venturus est. Ipse qui venturus
est in secundo Salvatoris adventu, juxta corporis fidem, nunc per Joannem venit
in virtute and Spiritu.
EIIAS INDEED IS TO COME: He who is bodily to come in the second coming of our
Savior, is now come by John Baptist in Power and in Spirit. Which I much
wonder that the two great scholars of the world, either did not see, or would
not ingeniously confess; but towing at the rope of contention, each of them
would have S. Hierom to be wholly on his side, when in this point he is on both
sides.

Again, the first coming of Christ is necessarily to be understood by Malachi.
For the messenger, and the covenant whom ye delight in, are coupled together,
Mal. 3.1. but no covenant, that we delight in, comes at the second coming of
Christ, but did come at the first approach of the Messiah, even the covenant of
peace. Moreover, what offerings of Judah and Jerusalem shall be pleasant to the
Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years, Malach. 3.4? shall such
offerings be after Christ's second coming? And, if such were; yet after all
this, he says, Mal. 3.5. Christ will come near to you to judgment; Shall we
have an other judgment after the second, which the Spirit of God calls the
Eternal judgment, Heb. 6.2. and is the last judgment, by an universal
agreement? Besides, as the last day may be called, and truly is, a terrible
day; yet the righteous are then to hold up their heads, Luke 21.28. and it
shall be a day of joy and rejoicing to them; though it be dismal to the
wicked: So the day of Christ's first coming, though it was accompanied with good
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people, Luke 2.10. yet was it also
a dreadful day to the wicked and disobedient men; worse, then if he had never
come: and it was doleful also to the evil spirits, whom he then vanquished,
cast out, and tormented before their time, Matthew. 8.29. triumphing over them in
his own person, and trampling them down, and breaking them in pieces with his
rod of iron, in their own kingdom: and therefore may justly be called, in
respect of them, a terrible day. The Prophets testimony reaches home, for
confirmation hereof, Isa. 61.2. He has sent me to preach the acceptable year
of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn.
Which Prophecy Christ himself (Luke 4.18, etc.) applies to his first coming,
and adds remarkably (verse. 21) This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your
ears. The day of vengeance (you see) is threatened in Christ's first coming: And
is not the day of vengeance unto such, to whom vengeance passively belongs, a
terrible day? Which truth is also confirmed by that admirable similitude
fore-prophesied in the law of Moses, and applied to Christ in the law of Grace;
concerning Christ's being, not only a chief cornerstone, 1. Pet. 2.6. and the
head of the corner, Psalm. 118.22. Elect and precious, says S. Peter: a tried
stone, a sure foundation, Isa. 28.16. and for a sanctuary, Isa. 8.14. and
whosoever believes on him, shall not be ashamed, Romans 9.33: But also, Christ
is compared to a stumbling stone, and a rock to make men fall, Romans 9.32, 33:
or, as Isaiah has it, a stumbling stone, and as a rock to fall upon: -- and as
a snare, and as a net: -- And many shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and
snared, and taken, Isa. 8.14. etc. Whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be
broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder, Matthew.
21.44. And is not such a stone terrible to such as fall on it? or on whom it
falls? and is not that time terrible, when it falls? This is prophesied of
Christ's first coming; and so his first coming is truly said to be a terrible
day unto some.

Lastly, it is insinuated, that Christ, when he comes, may smite the earth
with a curse: which must be understood of his first coming: for after his
second coming, after the day of judgment, the earth is not to be cursed, but
rather blessed: For there shall be a new heaven, and a new earth; ^no sorrow,
nor crying, nor pain, Revel. 21.1, 4. Upon which reasons, and others, I have
wondered that the divine Drusius should be so caught with the Jewish fable, as
to doubt whether Elias be come, or no. Drusius, in his castigations or notes on
Ecclesiasticus 48.11. thus, Hodie multorum ^pinio est, credentiu^ istud
Malachiae vaticinium ex part tantum in Joanne completum fuisse^ Hi tenent,
venturum abhuc Eliam in propria persona, sub adventum Domini, quem vocant
alterum, sive secundum; hoc est, ante extremum judicium: Quae vera, an falsa
sint, non decerno: H^c tantum, Judaeos etiamnum, cum suo (...), expectare
Eliam, de quo hi^ sermo est: unde dicunt, Cum venerit Elias, ipse docebit nos
omnia.
To this day many think and believe that this prophecy of Malachi was only by
the Baptist in part fulfilled: and they hold that Eliah shall personally and
bodily appear, toward the second coming of our Lord, before the last
judgment. Whether these things be true or false, I determine not: This only I
will say, The Jews do as yet, and to this hour look for Eliah to come with
their Messiah: and of him they have this saying, WHEN ELIAH COMES, HE SHALL
TEACH US ALL THINGS. I reply; What part, what syllable in Malachi concerning
Elias, was not fulfilled by John the Baptist? If many do now believe otherwise,
they are such as are Jews, who neither believe the words of our Savior, who
said Elias was come; and therefore think Elias shall come, because they think
their Messiah is not come at all: or at least they do Judaize in this point,
whosoever they be that expect the personal coming of the Tishbite.

Christopher Castrus the Jesuit, on Malach. 4.8. concludes, That the true
Elias shall yet come, because it was the voice of the Jews, and the expectation
of the Scribes and Pharisees; who said in the same places, that Elias should
come Ante Christum gloriosum, ut super Matthaeum ass^rit H^eronymus.
before Christ's glorious appearing, as S. Hierom writes on Matthew. First, I
answer, that the Jews did expect the coming of their Messiah, to be glorious in
all worldly pomp. Secondly, I call not now to mind, that the Scribes,
Pharisees, or Jews, ever expected a second coming of their Messiah. Thirdly,
whereas our Savior says, Matthew. 17.11. Elias truly shall first come, and
restore all things: though these words were spoken after John the Baptist was
beheaded, yet Christ means not, that Elias shall come corporally; but in
answering his disciples, he propounds the objection of the Jews, which they
before alleged more briefly, and speaks according to their opinion: Elias
indeed shall come; and then* in the verse following, Christ says unto his
disciples thus in effect, by way of correction, Whatsoever the Scribes say or
affirm concerning Elias his bodily coming, is not literally to be understood;
BUT I SAY UNTO YOU, THAT ELIAS IS COME ALREADY. And what he says to his
disciples here, he says to the people, Matthew. 11.14. If ye will receive it,
This is Elias which was for to come. He fore-knew that some would not believe
him; and therefore he said, If ye will receive it, This is Elias; This John,
who then did live, this John is Elias; not which shall come (this is the
exposition of the Jews:) but this John is that Elias which was to come, and now
is come, and the prophecy fulfilled. He that has ears to hear, let him
hear.

The last words (as Hierom well observes) do evince, that the former, to wit,
If ye will receive it, This is Elias, are mystical, and hard to be understood;
no plain sense, or manifest sentence. Whence I infer, that plain and easy it
would have been to the Jews, if he would have said, as they did think, That
Elias should come bodily; although the Baptist did resemble him in virtue and
power, and was equal unto him. But here is the mystery, That Malachi never
intended, that Elias should live on earth corporally, against Christ's second
coming: but that the Baptist was prefigured in Elias; and whatsoever was
prophesied by Malachi of Elias, was accomplished by the Baptist: and no other
Elias to come, but the Baptist in virtue and power of Elias, and not according
to the outward letter. Here is a mystery, here is depth, which the Judaei, and
Judaizantes haeretici.
Jews and Jewishly addicted heretics (as Hierom styleth them) will hardly
believe.

3. Bellarmine, de Romans Pontif. 3.6. draws the second and third part of his
third demonstration from two places of Ecclesiasticus: The first is, Chap. 48.
verse. 10. Who wast ordained for reproofs in their times, to pacify the wrath
of the Lords judgment before it brake forth into fury, and to turn the heart
of the father unto the son, and to restore (or establish) the tribes of
Israel. First, I may answer, Ecclesiasticus is not held Canonical, but
Apocryphal; even by such as, for the many divine and admirable things in that
book, could wish (if it were no sin to wish) that it were truly Canonical:
And Apocryphals are not held sufficient to settle a point of controversy.
Secondly, it may be also said, that Jansenius maintains, this place evinceth
not that Elias shall come personally; because Ecclesiasticus wrote according to
the received opinion of those times, which, from the words of Malachi, believed
that Elias was to come in his own proper person. Bellarmines reply upon
Jansenius, is shallow in this point, saying, Si it a est, ut Jansenius dicit,
sequitur Ecclesiasticum errasse, and falsa scripsisse.
If Jansenius says truth, it follows that Ecclesiasticus has erred, and
writ some false things: as if he, who writes the opinion of others, may not
relate an error, and write false things; though he err not himself, nor
believes the false things. S. Matthew, chap. 2.6. wrote what the Jews said
concerning the place of Christ's birth; the things were miscited, and yet no
error or fault in S. Matthew. The Spirit of truth has written, that The fool
has said in his heart, There is no God. Because the fool thought foolishly and
untruly, God forbid that we should turn fools also, and think that the holy
Ghost did err, because he truly records an untrue opinion, or an untrue
thing, true only in the relation. This have I said, to defend both Jansenius
and Ecclesiasticus, against Bellarmine. Thirdly, I might answer, Only these
last words have the shadow of an argument, To restore, or to establish the
tribes of Israel: which because John did not do, Elias must do hereafter. For
indeed it is but a shadow; since as John the Baptist did turn the heart of the
father unto the son, (as was before proved) so he may be also said, to
establish, or restore the tribes of Israel; not to any temporal kingdom,
which cannot be proved to be intended by Ecclesiasticus, (for in Malachi there
is altum silentium, not a word spoken concerning this point:) but to the true
service of God, from which they were fallen: for he preached unto some of all
sorts; of the two tribes, of the ten tribes, yea of the Gentiles. There went
out unto John, Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan,
Mat. 3.5. and Jordan divided Galilee from Judea: yea Christ himself came from
Galilee to John to be baptized, Matthew. 3.13. And he taught both Publicans and
Soldiers, and Herod, and some of all sorts thereabouts, Luke 3.13, 14. etc.
and thus did he restore, or establish the tribes of Israel. The Bishops Bible
has the controverted words thus; To set up the tribes of Israel. So Coverdale.
Vt constitueres tribus Jacob, says Tremellius; according to the Greek, (...),
translated also by the Interlinearie, ad constituendum: or as Vatablus, ad
constituendas tribus Jacob, to establish the tribes of Israel. Many are the
significations of the word (...), but no where does it signify, to restore
unto a dispersed people their lost kingdom; which is the hope of the Jews, or
the exposition of the Jewishly affected: nor is the word (...) so expounded
otherwhere, either in the Septuagint, or in the New Testament, or in any
classical Author. It is rendered usually, by constituere; Restituere, is a
black swan.

But mine own opinion is, that Ecclesiasticus prophesies not, what should be
thereafter, viz. after the day of his writing, either concerning John, or
Elias; but only relates what was past: and it is an Eulogie, and laudatorie
of Elias his worth; as appears by the antecedent, and consequent narratives;
where all runs in terms designing out times passed and gone, none touching at
the present tense or time, much less at the future: and so it can be no
prophecy concerning Elias personally to come hereafter; especially since there
is never a passage in Ecclesiasticus concerning Elias, which Elias did not
accomplish before his assumption: and more particularly, he reconciled God to
his children the Israelites, and turned their hearts to him. Thus did he
restore, or establish the tribes of Israel, in his time: for, 1. King. 18.21.
Elias said unto all the people (that were gathered out of Israel) How long will
ye halt between two opinions? if the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal, then
follow him: And then by miracle under God, he established them, or restored the
tribes to the right religion, from which they were fallen by idolatry, the
fall of all falls fowlest. Even Bellarmine himself expounds Restituerunt, they
restored, by Converterunt, they converted, in this very chapter: thus far
truly proving, that Zuinglius and Luther were not the Enoch and Elias
prophesied of; because Elias was to convert the Jews, and indeed converted
many, (as I proved before) which neither Luther nor Zuinglius did, for ought
that I have read.

4. The second place insisted upon by Bellarmine, is Ecclesiasticus 44.16.
Enoch was translated, being an example of repentance to all generations. The
Septuagint have it thus, (...), Translatus est, exemplum poenitentiae
generationibus, He was translated, being an example of repentance to following
generations, says the Interlinearie: Nationibus, to the nations, says
Vatablus: Vt det Gentibus sapientiam, that he may give wisdom to the Gentiles,
says the Vulgat edition, printed by Petrus Santandreanus, 1614; and it has in
the margin Poenitentiam, repentance. But to leave that variety: the Vulgat is
not properly translated; for it is not, (...), Gentibus, to the Gentiles, as
opposed to the Jews; but (...), Posteris, or Generationibus, to future
posterity. And if it were Gentibus, as Bellarmine reads it; yet it makes
the more against him, who would have Enoch, and especially Elias, do greater
things for the Jews, then for the Gentiles.

Lastly, it is not so much as intended by any word of Ecclesiasticus, that
Enoch shall hereafter appear in the flesh personally, and then die; and be an
example of repentance to the Nations: for after he had so long pleased God and
walked with God in this world, and after he was taken by God from amongst men
(and no doubt, much more, then pleased God, and walked with God) if he should
come again into this world, here to live; should he sin again, that he might
be an example of repentance? The conceit is vast, harsh, and improbable, if the
supposall should have a certain accomplishment: but that this, and all other
controverted points of moment, concerning Enoch, or Elias, may be the better
cleared, let us examine these questions:

1. Whether Enoch in his lifetime, was ever any great sinner?

2. Whether Enoch did ever die?

3. Whether Enoch and Elias now live in and with their bodies, in Paradise?

4. Whether ever they shall die; or do live with glorified bodies in the
highest heavens?

Concerning the first, Whether Enoch in his lifetime was ever any grievous
sinner? First, I answer and say, I speak not of the first Enoch, the son of
Cain, the grandchild of Adam and Eve, in honor and memorial of whom, Cain
built a city, and called the name of the city after the name of his son,
Enoch, Genes. 4.17. but of the second and younger Enoch, the son of Jared,
Genes. 5.18. of the posterity of Seth.

Secondly, I question not, but that this latter, best Enoch, was a sinner; and
in his own estimate, a great sinner: and he might have said, and doubtless did
say in effect, as David did, and as Adam, and all his offspring (except Christ)
Have mercy upon me, O God, Psalm. 51.1. and, Create in me a clean heart, O God,
Psalm. 51.10. O Lord pardon mine iniquity, for it is great, Psalm. 25.11. And in
the balance of God (setting aside mercy) he might have been weighed, found
light, and accounted for a main delinquent. But this is the Quaere, Whether
comparatively, and in respect of other men, even of such whose lives ends also
pleased God, he was so notorious a sinner, that he alone was the fittest
example of repentance to succeeding generations? My answer is negatively: for I
am sure, Adam, and, as I think, Noah, and Lot, and diverse other holy
Patriarchs, might as well, yea rather, be an example of repentance to future
times, then Enoch; especially, if we measure sins by the records of
Scripture: for the holy Writ has more amply insisted upon their sins, then
upon Enochs; and no part of the Canonical Scripture touches at any thing that
was extraordinarily offensive in Enoch; but magnifieth his goodness, Genesis
5.22. and his faith, Heb. 11.5. Yet, because the divine Writ might omit the
offenses of Enoch; and because I cannot think that Ecclesiasticus wrote without
some ground; let us search what other Authors have conceited, or written, for,
or against Enoch.

Some think that Enoch, all the course of his conversation amongst men in this
world, lived unblameably, and walked with God. Some Jews held, that Enoch was
an incarnate Angel; Vixit, dum vixit, laudabiliter.
Whilst he lived, he lived worthy of praise, says Drusius. Others write, that
in his youth he was very wicked; but after repented, and turned heartily to
God, redeeming the time. Drusius proves, that Enoch was a good man still, by
these arguments. Josephus, Antiq. 1.5. at the end says, Seth was a virtuous
man, and left Nepotes sui simile^.
issue like himself; and they were all good men: therefore Enoch was so. The
posterity of Seth, according to the best Interpreters, are called Filii Dei,
the sons of God, Genes. 5.2. Filii Dei sunt, judicio Augustini, qui secunditm
Deum vivunt.
Augustine accounts that they were called the sons of God, who pleased God.
Hischuni also, an Author cited by Drusius, says, Because Enoch was just, the
Scripture, Honoris cau^a.
to dignifie him, used a new phrase concerning him, saying, HE WAS NOT. And, It
is a probable reason, that Enoch was not any time so ill, as some imagine;
because he lived with Adam 308 years, and ministered so long unto him, as it is
in libro JOH ASIN, says Drusius.

On the other side, Sunt qui insimulan; eum levitatis and inconstantiae: nam
aiunt modo justum, modo improbum fuisse. Id relatum in Genesi magno.
Some say he was light and inconstant: sometimes just, sometimes wicked; as is
recorded in the great Genesis (a book called in Hebrew, BERESITH RABBA) made by
one Ibbo: so relates Drusius in his book called Henoch, chap. 5. If Ibbo had
said, Henochum fuisse modo improbum, modo justum, That Enoch was now and then
wicked, now and then just; I should far rather have consented: for every just
man, except Christ, was sometime wicked. But that Enoch, after he was once
just, turned to be extraordinarily wicked, I can never believe. For the Spirit
would never have given him this testimony, that he pleased God, and walked
with him; if he had after returned as the dog to his vomit, or as the sow to
her wallowing in the mire. Rabbi Levi the son of Gersom thus, Enoch ambulavit
in viis Domini, postquam genuit Methusalem, annos 300.
Enoch walked with God after he begat Methusalem, 300 years: whereby he
intimates that he walked, Non in viis domini, sed in viis seculi sui.
Not in the narrow paths of the Lord, but in the high ways of the world: and
by that account he might be wicked sixty fiye years of his age, or
thereabouts. The arguments of either side are but weak, and may be easily
answered. Seths posterity might do some notable wicked acts; and most heartily
repent, and be both holy, and accounted the sons of God. The phrase used
concerning his being taken out of this world, evinceth not, that all the former
passages of his life were just. Thirdly, he might live in Adams time, yet not
near him: and he might live with him, and yet not minister unto him: and he
might minister unto him, and yet be wicked before he ministered; yea, even for a
time whilst he ministered unto Adam. Many godly parents have lived to see
wicked ones of their offspring: and it may be that Adam converted him not, till
after some time that he ministered unto Adam, and had seen evident signs of
Adams own great repentance and holiness.

On the other side, Ibbo writes like a fabler; and his words were before
rejected, as improbable. Rabbi Levi, alleging nothing but conjecture, wants
weight for an argument.

Now, as there is nothing certain, either pro, or contra; so, if my opinion be
asked, I shall manifest my self to think, that Enoch was sometimes a grievous
sinner; and after, a most contrite repentant, and a most holy man. My reason
is, Because I ascribe more to the books called Apocryphal, then to any humane
Author: for they alone are, and have been many hundreds of years, joined with
the Canonical Scripture, and read in all Churches, except the Jewish, at set
times, as well as the Canonical; as no other writings of any other are. And if
no part of them were divinely inspired: yet were the men that wrote them, both
holy and learned; and the Churches of God have dignified them above all other
writings.

Now, though the undoubted Canon mentions not any evil act or acts of Enoch
(as millions of millions of matters are omitted, both in the Old and New
Testament;) yet some passages of the Apocryphals bend me to think, that Enoch
was sometimes a great sinner: for he was an example of repentance unto
posterity: therefore, in likelihood, his sin was exemplarie, and his
repentance proportioned in a sort unto it.

When Christ said, John 13.15. I have given you an example, that ye should do
as I have done to you; the precedent actions demonstrate, that he showed great
humility, and brotherly love, to which he exhorted them. When S. James says,
chap. 5.10. Take the Prophets for an example of suffering affliction, and of
patience; it may be justly inferred, that they suffered great affliction, and
were very patient. So when Ecclesiasticus says, Enoch was (...) (which is the
same word, that is used in both the former places) an example of repentance;
the resultance is fair; Enoch was a very great penitent; otherwise he was unfit
to be an example unto others; since exemplarie men and actions have always
somewhat above ordinary in their kind, and are so excellent therein, that they
are seldom or never out-gone by any that follow them. As the picture (though
taken to life, as they call it) comes short of the lively body; and
artificials of naturals: so does the exempla. tum, the duplicate, or
counterpain, of the exemplar, the pattern, or original. We attain not to that
perfection which S. Paul had, though he commanded us to follow his example: nor
he to the entire perfection of Christ, whom S. Paul set before himself, as the
example to imitate.

Let no man nicely insist, that exemplum and exemplar do differ. I profess,
that I weigh not matters to scruples, or half-scruples; but, though I know some
take exemplar for the man from whom the example was taken, yet I use the words
promiscuously: Enoch was an example of repentance; therefore he was sometimes a
great sinner: since as there needs no repentance where is no sin; so he is
Stoically mad, who thinks that there needs as great repentance for small
sins, as for great. Degrees of sins ought to have proportionable degrees of
repentance. The sacrifices were more chargeable for heinous crimes, then for
little offenses. Indeed one may charitably think, that Enoch was no chief
delinquent; but did (as tender consciences will) repent much, even for smaller
sins: and an inference may be thus made; If Enoch so much repented for a few
motes, for sins not unto death; how fit is he to be an example of repentance
to us, who have sinned a thousand times worse, and have beams upon beams in our
eyes, and repent a thousand times less? But I rather think, according to the
use of the phrase in other places, that his being an example of repentance,
proves, both primarily, that he was a chief penitent; and secondarily, that
there was some proportion between his repentance and his sin. Which I rather
embrace, because of another place, viz. Wisd. 4.10. He pleased God, and was
beloved of him, so that living among sinners, he was translated: and verse. 11.
Yea, speedily was he taken away, least that wickedness should alter his
understanding, or deceit beguile his soul: and ver. 13. He being made perfect
(consummated or sanctified) in a short time, fulfilled a long time.

My first observation is this, That these verses are meant of Enoch; since the
Apostle seems to have alluded to the place, Heb. 11.5. which I marvel that
the learned Holcot and Lyra did not so much as once touch at; but apply the
words, with violence, to the generality; though the narration be in the passed
time, not in the present, much less in the future.

With mine opinion Drusius agrees, expounding the words of Enoch: and the
margin of Vatablus, and of the old Bishops bibles, and of Coverdales, and of
our last Translations, do design, and as it were with the finger point at the
story of Enoch. The second point is in confesso, clear and evident, That
Enoch was assumed whilst he was in an holy estate. The third, That he was
sometimes wicked; as may be intimated from these passages:

First, That he lived among sinners: which all men else did, as well as Enoch,
unless the place be meant of notorious sinners: and though an Abraham may be
in Ur; a Lot, in Sodom: yet even both of them in those places contracted some
corruption. They who walk in the sun, are somewhat sunne-burnt. Noscitur ex
socio, qui non cognoscitur ex se:
Who by himself is hardly known,
Is known by his companion.
David cried, Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, and that I dwell in the tents
of Kedar, Psalm. 120.5. The Prophet justly complains, That he dwelt among a
people of polluted lips, Isai. 6.5. If one scabbed sheep infect a whole flock,
an unsound flock may infect one good sheep. Sin is like a gangrene, a
leprosy, and the plague; of a spreading and infectious nature. A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump, 1. Cor. 5.6. Christ himself could not do the good
which he would have done, where the peoples unbelief was exceeding, Matthew.
13.58. but he went otherwhere, Mark 6.6. There are as well popular sins, as
epidemicall diseases; and holy ones have been tainted in both kinds.

Secondly, It is not said, He went out from among the wicked, he separated
himself, or fled from their sight or company, which had been fitting in such
dangerous places; but, God translated him: it was Gods act, not his.

Thirdly, says the Text, He was speedily taken away: presuppose, as Lot was by
the Angel pulled out of Sodom by the hand, Genes. 19.16. or Habakkuk by the
hair of the head; or as the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, Act. 8.39.

Fourthly, This was done, Lest that wickedness should alter his understanding,
or deceit beguile his soul. Voluntas hominis deambulatoria est usque ad mortem,
etc.
The will of man has a power to be changed, even till death: his understanding
unsettled, and easily to be deluded with apparances: the souls of men in this
(...), theater of temptations, stand upon the ice, consist in lubrico, and in
ancipiti, in slipperie and doubtful places: they who stand, may fall: who have
fallen, may recover. He was taken away speedily, to the intent he might not
sin: which the all-seeing eye needed not to have done, if he could not have
lost his station: and in likelihood, would not have done, but that Enoch before
that time had both turned and returned, was both bad and good; which, in the
last place, the thirteenth verse seems to confirm: as if his holiness had
continued but a short time; but yet was so intense, and so consummate and
perfect, even almost ad perfectionem graduum, to the highest perfection in this
life; that in a short time he fulfilled a long time.

Justus erat Enoch; at mente levis, ut facile redire potuerit ad vitam
improbam: ideo properabat Deus eum tollere.
Enoch was just; but apt to return to wickedness: therefore God hastened to
translate him, says Rabbi Solomo. Procopius Gazaeus Sophista in his
Commentary on the place, thus; Si tum demum, postquam genuit Methusalem,
placuit Deo Enoch, certe antequam gigneret, ut Scriptura docet, non gratus and
acceptus erat Deo. Quod igitur amore complexus est eum Deus, poenitentiae, quam
egit, imputari debet.
If then at last Enoch pleased God, after he had begot Methusalem, certainly
before he begat him, as the Scripture says, God did not like him, nor accept
of him: Therefore it is to be ascribed to Enochs repentance which he performed,
that God made so much of him, and loved him. Though Salianus says of this
testimony, that Nescio quomodo animus aversatur.
his mind was against it: yet there is no impossibility, no nor
improbabilitie in it; and howsoever it be not apodicticall, yet it is not
inepta, foolish, as Salianus censureth it. He adds, Perhaps Philo the Jew was
of that opinion: for in his book de Abrahamo, speaking of repentance, etc. he
brings Enoch in, as an example. And it seems (says he) that he followed
Jesus the son of Sirach, in the words cited: viz. (...), Ecclefiastic. 44.16.
And though he slubbereth over the words and matter (which are to him
Canonical) and says, that The mind of the Scripture in that place is; that
Enoch shall be an exemplarie penitent, not as David and Manasses, Peter or Mary
Magdalene; but as John Baptist: yet, I answer:

First, no Ancient ever said, John Baptist was an example of repentance, and
did repent of any enormous sins; but was always holy, and most austere,
preventing great sins, rather then repenting; and not so much bemoaning his
own offenses, as dehorting other men, and crying out against their iniquities,
with a charge, almost enforcing them to repentance: whilst himself showed a
sign of his being sanctified and illuminated, even in his mothers womb.

Secondly, there is as much joy over a repentant, and God is as much glorified,
for point of mercy, in a Marie Magdalene, or a Peter, as in a Baptist, or just
man, that needs no repentance; if not more. Procopius Gazaeus, who imagined
the worst of Enochs former part of life, till he begot Methuselah; yet speaks
very good things before, of Enoch, thus; God rested on the seventh day, when he
had made the world; Et nunc ille idem Deus, generatione septima, accipit (ceu
symbolum consummationis seculi) Enochum, ut primitias rationalis creaturae, etc.
and now the same God in the seventh generation of the world, assumeth (as a
sign of the ending of an age) I say, assumed Enoch as the first fruits of the
reasonable creature. He was out of Gods favor for a while; but when he pleased
God, he was extraordinarily assumed. Thus in effect Procopius, which the Jesuit
had not much cause to find fault withal. Let this suffice for the first
question, Whether Enoch were at any time a very wicked man?

The second question is, Whether Enoch did ever die?

Diverse Rabbis maintain that he did die: So Rabbi Solomon on the fifth of
Genesis. Aben Ezra says, His death was sweet, and he felt no pain: which
opinion, the Jesuit Cornelius a Lapide ascribes also to Calvin; whether truly
or falsely, I enquire not; but the matter gives me the hint of an excursion.

Moses said from God, Genes. 6.3. Man's days shall be an hundred and twenty
years; and Moses himself died, when he was 120 years old, Deuteronomy. 34.7. David
said, The days of our years are threescore years and ten, Psalm. 90.10. and
he himself, who prayed to God to teach him to number his days, died the same
year (being the first lesser climactericall year, after that great one of
nine times seven, that dangerous threescore and third year:) for, He was
thirty years old when he began to reign; and he reigned forty years, 2.
Sam. 5.4. Both these were most certain Prophets of their own deaths; and,
perhaps, had more especial reference to their own times; designing those
years out in the more general, which were more appropriate to their own
persons in particular. Let me add two heathen examples, by way of imperfect
parallels.

That most exquisite work of nature, her glory, pride, and masterpiece, Julius
Caesar, preferred a swift and sudden death, in his choice, before any other
kind. Suetonius, in vita Julii Caesaris, in fine, thus of him, Quondam, cum
apud Xenophontem legisset, Cyrum ultima valetudine mandasse quaedam de funere
suo, aspernatus tam lentum mortis genus, subitam sibi celeremque optavit
mortem: and pridie quam occideretur, in sermon nato, super coenam apud M.
Lepidum, Quisnam esset vitae sinis commodissimus; repentinum, inopinatumque
praetulerat.
When Julius Caesar had sometime read in Xenophon, that Cyrus in his last
sickness ordered some things concerning his funerals; he hating so lingering a
death, wished that himself might have a sudden and quick end. Again, the day
before he was slain, as he was at supper with Marcus Lepidus, a question
arising, Which death was most commodious, and to be wished for; Caesar preferred
a sudden, unlooked for, and unthought of end. And suitable to his choice and
desire, in that respect, did a sudden and unlooked for end befall him.

Likewise, that wonder of Fortune, that darling of terrene happiness,
Augustus, the successor unto the Dictatour, Fere quoties audisset cito and
nullo cruciatu defunctum quempiam, sibi and suis (...) similem precabatur.
Almost as often as he had heard (says Suetonius in Augusto, in fine) that any
one had died speedily without long pain or great torment; he would pray that
the like easy departure might befall himself, and his friends. And, says he,
Sortitus est exitum similem, and qualem semper optaverat, etc.
He died according as he always desired, parting, as in a complement, with his
most familiar friends; Et repent in osculis Liviae defecit.
and gave up the ghost amidst the kisses of Livia. This story has brought my
Miscellanie home to that point, which the Rabbin said of Enoch, That he died
without pain.

The New Testament also is thought to afford us such an other example. De
Joanne Evangelista dicitur, quod dolorem in moriendo non sensit.
It is said of John the Evangelist, that he died without any pain, says Holcot
on Wisd. 2.5. and by that instance, says, concerning those who rose about
Christ's resurrection, Non sequitur, quod, si iterum moriehantur, moriebantur
cum poena, vel sentirent etiam poenam.
It follows not, that if they died again, they had or felt any painful
death. But because of the strange opinions which are held concerning S. John
the Apostle, let me enlarge my discourse a little concerning him.

Melchior Canus, Locor. Theolog. 7.2. says, We may hold, or deny, Salva fide.
without prejudice to our belief, either that he is living, or that he is dead.
The reason, why some thought S. John lives, was, because Christ said to Peter,
John 21.22. If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Neither
does it satisfy them, that John himself says, ver. 23. Jesus said not, He
shall not die: for they expound that exposition, John shall not die, namely,
till that time that Christ does come.

Dorotheus, speaking of S. John, has it thus; John lived 120 years: which
being expired, he living as yet (the Lord would so have it) buried himself. The
story is enlarged by S. Augustine, Tract. 124. in Joannem, thus; Some report,
that in certain Scriptures, though Apocryphal, it is found, that S. John,
being in health, caused a grave to be made, and laid himself in it, as in a
bed, and presently died: or, as some think, lay down as dead, but not dead; and
being thought to be dead, was buried sleeping: and that he shows his being
alive, Scaturigine pulveris.
by the ebullition of the dust of his grave; Qui pulvis creditur, ut ab imo ad
superficiem tumuli ascendat, flatu quiesoentis impelli.
which dust is believed to arise and to be forced from the bottom of the tomb
to the top by his breath. And truly, says Augustine, We heard not this of
light credulous men. Whereupon he advises, Viderint, qui hunc locum sciunt,
utrum hoc ibi faciat terra, vel patiatur, quod dicitur.
Let them who know the place consider whether the earth spring up there, so as
is reported. If it be so, says he, (if the earth or sand bubble up like water;
and, that being taken away, other arises and boyleth up in the room) it does
so, either to commend the precious death of that Saint; or for some other
reason, which we know not. So far Augustine.

Some such thing, in another case, is recorded by S. Hierom. Hear his own
words, Tom. 3. de locis Hebraicis, out of the Acts of the Apostles, Cum
Ecclesia, in cujus medio sunt [vestigia] rotundo schemate, and pulcherrimo
opere conderetur; summum tamen cacumen, ut perhibent, propter Dominici corporis
meatum, nuilo modo contegi, and concamerari potuit; sed transitus ejus a terra
ad coelum usque patet apertum.
Mount Olivet is situated on the East of Jerusalem, parted by the stream of
Cedron, where the last footsteps which Christ set upon this earth, are
imprinted on the ground, and even to this day are to be seen and showed. And
whereas the same earth is taken away daily by the believing Christians,
nevertheless the same holy footsteps presently and immediately recover their
old form and fashion. Who also in the same place adds another strange thing;
Mons Oliveti, ad Orientem Hierosolymae [situs est] torrente Cedron
interfluente* ubi ultima vestigia Domini humo impressa, bodieque monstrantur.
Cumque terra eadem quotidie a credentibus hauriatur, nihilominus tamen eadem
sancta vestigia pristinum statum continuo recipient.
Whereas the Church, in the midst whereof these footsteps are, was built of a
round form with most exquisite workmanship: yet the very top of that Church, as
people report, could by no means ever be covered or vaulted over, by reason of
our Saviors bodily ascent into heaven: but Christ's passage and way by which he
mounted from earth even to heaven lies open, and is visible. But our late
traveller M. Sands relates, That the footstep is on a firm natural rock, and
the passage open at the summitie or top of the temple of the Ascension, is to
receive light into that sacred place. For that is covered as the sepulcher (or
rather, as the temple of the sepulcher) whose round is covered with a CVPVLO,
sustained with rafters of Cedar, all of one piece, open in the midst, like the
Pantheon at Rome; whereat it receives the light that it has, and that as much
as suffices. Just in the midst, and in view of heaven, stands the glorified
sepulcher. So far M. George Sands. M. Fines Morison says, On the top of
mount Olivet, the highest of all the mountains that compass Jerusalem, in a
Chapel, they show in stone the print of Christ's feet, when he ascended into
heaven.

It did a little amaze me, that these our two countrymen, both being learned,
and both being there eyewitnesses, do differ so much: the first mentioning a
footstep, in the singular number; the other, feet, in the plural; (Antiquity
says, On the Earth; late Writers, On a Rock;) which makes me rather bear with
the good S. Hierom, who relates from others, that the top could by no means be
covered. Open, perhaps, the top was left, and open purposely, by some exquisite
workmen; whose skill some credulous ignorants could not discern; and they might
report, that what was done, could not be done otherwise. But of this in either
of our countrymen there is not one word. I return to the old matter.

Sixtus Senensis, Bibliothecae sanctae lib. 6. Annotat. 93. says, Many most
grave and worthy Authors have written, that S. John the Evangelist yet lives.
But Chrysostom, Hom. 66. in Matt. reports, Illum violenta morte obtruncatum
obtisse.
That he was put to a violent death: and he brings in Christ, speaking these
words to the two sons of Zebedee (of whom S. John the Evangelist was one,
Mark 10.35.) Calicem meum bibetis, (Matthew. 20.23.) id est, Martyrii corona
potiemini, and violenta morte, sicut and ego, a vita discedetis.
YE SHALL DRINK OF MY CVP, and shall be put to a violent death, and be crowned
with martyrdom, like unto me. Euthymius also testifies, that Chrysostom, in
two other places, says that S. John the Evangelist was slain in Asia: which
makes me wonder, that George Trapezuntius (if he be truly alleged by Sixtus
Senensis, ibid.) should interpret Chrysostoms words, of the martyrdom and
violent death which John (forsooth) should suffer with Enoch and Elias, under
the last persecution of Antichrist: especially since Chrysostom so punctually
designeth out the time past, and tells what was done to John, and where.

Hippolytus, Portuensis Episcopus, in his short Tractate de mundi
consummatione, says, As Christ's first coming had John the Baptist his
forerunner; so the second shall have Enoch, and Elias, and John the Evangelist.
This comparison is very lame, and halteth: for it may be applied as well to
any, as to John the Evangelist. Others use not so foolish a similitude; but yet
embrace a wilder opinion: for they say, that S. John died, and rose from the
dead, and was assumed into heaven. Nicephorus, 2.42. adds, DECEBAT, It was
fit, convenient, decent and requisite, that he, who kept Christ's mother, and
was so beloved of Christ, should be so assumed, as Christ's mother was. O man,
how proud art thou, to judge, what is convenient, or inconvenient for God to do!

Baronius, Tom. 2. Anno Christi 101. numero marginali 2. thus, Sixty eight
years from Christ's death, S. John died at Ephesus, as Hierom has it de
Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, in Joanne. And Polycrates, a most ancient Divine,
writing to Victor, then Bishop of Rome, as Eusebius has it, 1.25. says of S.
John, Ephesi obdormivit.
He died at Ephesus. Tertullian, Obiit Joannes, quem in adventu Domini
remansurum, frustra fuerat spes; in lib. de Anima, cap. 5^.
S. John died, of whom some conceived a vain hope, that he should live till
Christ came again. Eusebius, 3.33. says, There were two John's in Asia: John
the Apostle, and John the Disciple; and both their sepulchers were at Ephesus.
Chrysostom, Homil. 26. in Epistolam ad Hebraeos, says, The sepulcher of S.
John is manifest, as of other Apostles: therefore he speaks of S. John the
Apostle: But, Non nisi mortuorum solent esse sepulchra.
Sepulchers belong properly to them who are dead, as Baronius well infers.
So much obiter, concerning some unusual passages about S. John, occasioned by
Holcots testimony of the strange relation of his painlesse death: but this I
shall by Gods grace handle much more plentifully in my succeeding books,
wherein against Cardan, and his Indian apples, the procurers of death without
any pain, as he says; I shall (I say) under the tuition of the Almighty, prove
that the separation of the soul from the body is painful: that all death is
bitter, in one degree, or other.

And now I return to our Enoch; whom the Jewish Rabbin feigneth to have been
dead without any pain; against whom, and all other Jewishly-affected, I hope to
demonstrate, that Enoch did not die, but is now living: Heb. 11.5. (...), Enoch
was translated that he should not see death: Ad non videndam mortem, says
Montanus; Ne videret mortem, says the Vulgat. The end, why he was translated,
was, that he might not die: and the reason is annexed, why he did not die; for
God translated him. Shall God intend to keep Enoch from death: and did he yet
die? shall God be frustrated of his end? shall things come to pass contrary to
his will? where is then his Omnipotency? It holds firmly, God translated
Enoch, that he should not see death; therefore he died not, but lives as yet.

A second argument (though not so sharp-pointed) is this; Of the other
Patriarchs it is said, They died: so it is recorded of Adam, Mortuus est,
Genes. 5.5. of Seth, verse. 8. of Enos, verse. 11. of Cainan, verse. 14. of
Mehalaleel, verse. 17. of Jared Enochs father, verse. 20. of Methuselah Enochs
son, verse. 27. of Lamech Enochs grandchilde, verse. 31. even of the whole holy
Genealogy from Adam to Noah, of every one it is said, Mortuus est, He dyed:
except only, when mention is made of Enoch, and then it is not said, He dyed;
but it is remarkably varied thus, verse. 24, Et non ipse: which our later
translation has, And he was not: which words, you must not take in too strict
a sense: for if he had died, yet had he had a being; but consisting of soul and
body, we may truly say, He was. How then shall we interpret, Et non ipse? I
named you the Rabbin, who expounds it, He died not with pain, as other men; but
died sweetly. Others thus, He was not on earth, after the same manner, as he
was before. This is true, and well strengthened, Ecclesiasticus 49.14. Upon
earth was no man created like Enoch; for he was taken from the earth; DE TERRA
SVBLIMIS ASSVMPTVS EST, He was lifted up on high from the earth, says
Vatablus. This is also certain, that from the diverse expressions used
concerning Enoch, and of others, in the same Chapter, that were not translated
but died, there is more signified of Enoch, then of others; and in that
special unusual phrase some special unusual thing is involved concerning
Enoch; But no special unusall thing is spoken, if it be only meant of him, as
it is of others, that he died: Therefore certainly Enoch died not.

I will not recount more diversity of opinions; In all humbleness, I will
present before you mine own conjecture. First, I say that there is an hiatus in
the Hebrew; and somewhat to be understood. The Spirit would leave some things
doubtful, and put us to the search. Secondly, a supply must be made one way or
other, if we will fix any sense on the place. Thirdly, I would have wary, and
probable supplements; not of imagination, and air only. Scaliger, Exercitat.
81. Parag. 2. says thus, In tabulis Mosis fractis, dimidiati Samech pars
altera erat in extrema ora tabulae, altera in aere videbatur.
In the tables which Moses brake, one half of the letter Samech was in the
utmost brink of the table, the other part of it was seen in the air. Or else
Scaliger told an untruth, say I: give me fair likelihood, and not the vastnes
of a fancy. Fourthly, I say, the words, Et non ipse, may commodiously be thus
interpreted, He was not found. If any one ask, where I find ground for this
Commentary; I answer, first, it is in the seventy, Genes. 5.24. (...) Non
apparuit, says the Interpreter, in Vatablus; or, as himself commenteth,
Nusquam comparuit: but it is better rendered, Non est inventus, He was not
found. And so it is rendered Hebr. 11.5. where S. Paul has taken the same
words, letter for letter, from the seventie, (whose authority, by themselves
considered, I esteem somewhat above the ordinary humane) and made them divine;
By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death; And was not found,
because God had translated him.

Concerning Enoch, these things I do further observe with some of the Fathers,
with Aquin, and Cornelius a Lapide; That he was a type of Christ; so also was
Elias: and both their raptures, or translations, were figures of Christ's
ascension. Again, Hebr. 11.5. Enoch, before his translation, had this
testimony, that he pleased God. He did not only please God; but it was
published, and proclaimed, and, as it were, letters testimonial from heaven,
or a divine certificate was made, that he pleased God. And therefore I hold it
very probable, that as Elijahs assumption was known beforehand to the sons
of the Prophets, that were at Beth-el, 2. Kings, 2.3. and to the sons of the
Prophets, that were at Jericho, verse. 5. as well as to Elishah himself; so was
the translation of Enoch also, known to those of his time, unto whom God
testified that Enoch pleased him. And it is conformable also to the Antitype;
because Christ before told his Disciples concerning his departure, John 14.28,
etc. John 16.5, etc. and verse. 16, etc. and more punctually, concerning his
ascension, John 20.17. I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my
brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to
my God, and your God. Which words Christ spoke, after his resurrection from the
dead, unto Mary Magdalen. Yea further, let me expatiate, in showing the
correspondence between Enoch in the law of Nature, and Elias in the law of
Moses, and our all-glorious Savior in the law of Grace. Even as Elishah saw
the carrying up of Eliah 2. Kings, 2.12. yea, and fifty men of the sons of
the Prophets beheld the same, (as it is likely 2. Kings, 2.7, 15, and 16
verses:) so it may very well be, that God was pleased to give bodily sight, and
evidence of Enoch, at his translation, to those unto whom he gave testimony
before his translation, that he pleased God. And even this fraction the
substance of our Saviors ascension does strengthen and enlighten. For, He was
seen, not only after his resurrection, of Cephas; then of the twelve: after
that, he was seen of above 500 brethren at once, 1. Corinthians. 15.5, etc. but in
the act of his ascension, Act. 1.9. While they beheld, he was taken up, and a
cloud received him out of their sight: And, they looked steadfastly toward
heaven, as he went up, verse. 10. They stood gazing up into heaven, and they did
see him go into heaven, verse. 11.

If any one be so curious to enquire, in what posture Christ was seen
ascending; I think it is pointed at, Luke 24. ver. 50, etc. He lift up his
hands, and blessed them: And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was
parted from them, and carried up into heaven: (...). Dum benedictionem nondum
absolvisset.
Before he had finished his blessing, says Lucas Brugensis, on the words. The
blessing which he began upon them, and with them, with words and gesture, he
continued ascending; that is, with his hands lifted up, not so much upright to
heaven, whither, perhaps, his heart, hands, and eyes were sent in prayer to God
a little before (for prayer is a prime part of all spiritual blessing;) but
with his hands lifted up over the Apostles; Non habitu precantis Deum, sed
habitu quasi impartientis and infundentis benedictionis gratiam.
Not in a posture, as if he were praying to God; but as if he were dispersing
his grace, and pouring out a blessing. So Levit. 9.22.
Aaron lift up his hands toward the people, and blessed them. So Simon the
son of Onias used a most solemn form of holy service and benediction, Ecclus.
50.20. where it is said, He lifted up his hands over the whole congregation of
the children of Israel, to give the blessing of the Lord with his lips: And his
lips conveyed it by his hands toward them into their hearts, by a Ministerial
Sacerdotall exhibition. Thus, (...), Sustollebatur, vel ferebatur, non volantis
more, aut gradientis; at ita ac si alior^m manibus g^status, and panlatim
su^sum portatus fuisset
Christ was taken, not as birds fly, or as men go: but so, as if he had been
carried in men's hands, and by little and little lifted upward, says Brugensis:
Corpori^ statu recto, paulatim in coeles ten dens.
With an upright posture of body leasurely ascending into heaven, says
Barradius. (...), Ferchatur, n^n alieno adminiculo, sed propria virtute.
He was mounted, not by any other outward help, but his own power, says
Cajetan: Vel per potentiam divinam, vel per agilitatem, dotem humanit atis.
Either as he was God: or else by the agilitie which is proper to glo^ified
humane bodies, says Barradius. Yet Aquin well observes, that as Christ is said
to rise by his own power, and yet he was raised by the Father; because their
powers are one: so may he be said to ascend by his own power, and yet be
elevated, or assumed by the Father. Elevatus est in coelum, non scandend^
gr^diens, sed totus simul elevatus est.
He moved not (says Cajetan) leg after leg, nor seemed to climb, or go^ but
all parts alike, and he wholly together was lifted up. And, for the greater
Majesty, a cloud received him, Descending even to his feet, in the form of a
Throne, on which he sat, says Abulensis. As the royal Chariot declares the
King; so (says Chrysostom on Acts 1.) there was sent to Christ, REGALE
VEHICVLVM: which cloud was rather carried up by Christ, then he by it. When
Aquinas says, part. 3. quaest. 57. artic. 4. Nubes non praebult adminiculum
Christo, per modum vebicul^.
Christ used not the cloud as men use a coach or chariot, to help them in their
want. I understand him of ADMINICVLVM NECESSARIVM, A necessary support or stay
(for Christ had no need of such an one:) yet it might be ADMINICVLVM SOLENNE, A
ceremonious aid, and solemn free assistance: he might assume it as a token of
his Majesty: Apparuit signum Divinitatis.
There was seen the sign or seal of his Divinity, says Aquin himself. Nor is
it against the glory of Christ's Divinity, to make use of a cloud, or clouds.
He shall come with clouds, Revel. 1.7. With the clouds of heaven, Dan. 7.13. In
the clouds of heaven, Matthew. 24.30. This same Jesus which is taken up from you
into heaven, shall so come, in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven,
says the Angel, Act. 1.11. This one cloud might be so great, as many lesser
clouds when he ascended; as all the clouds shall be, in which he shall descend
at his second coming: or else, more clouds were about him; but one more
eminent, on which he sat, and with which he ascended. And the
extraordinarinesse of this cloud might testify his Divinity; in which regard,
to discriminate him from his forerunners, the Apostles worshipped him, Luke
24.52. which was not, in any likelihood, performed to Enoch or Elias: for they
were not carried up in a cloud or clouds. But there appeared a chariot of fire,
and horses of fire: -- and Elijah went up by a whirlwinde into heaven, 2. King.
2.11. To which is added the fiery nature of the whirlwinde it self, Ecclus,
48.9. He was taken up in a whirlwinde of fire. The manner of Enochs assumption,
I confess, is uncertain. Aquila his Alphabet says, Deus subduxit Enoch in
turbine, sicut Eliam.
God took up Enoch in a whirlwinde, as he did Elias: So says Rabbi Menachem,
and the Zoar, on the fifth of Genes. Drusius in his Henoch, cap. 13. says,
(...), Tulit eum Deus, God took him, (which are the exact words of Scripture,
concerning Gods taking away of Enoch, Genes. 5.24. both in the fair Hebrew
Bibles of Stephanus in octavo, and in the Interlinearie, and in Vatablus;
though Drusius a little vary the middle word (...)) Sane in Gematria valet,
by a Jewish gamboll, is all one with (...), Cum vento tempestatis ascendere
fecit eum.
In a tempestuous wind did he make him to ascend: including an intimation,
that in a whirlwinde they were both rapted. If the Scripture had used the very
words in describing the nature of Elias, I should the sooner have liked the
conceit; but the Rabbinicall speculations conclude not; therefore I will.

Lastly, it is improbable, but diverse of the Disciples or Apostles who saw
Christ's ascending, might, and would have sought and looked for him; but that
they were, in a sort, dehorted by two Angels, who told them, That Christ was
taken from them into heaven, Act. 1.11. and therefore it was vain to seek him
any longer on the earth. And most certain it is, that when the sons of the
Prophets saw Elijah snatched up, and Elishah parting Jordan with Elijahs mantle;
they said unto Elishah, There be with thy servants fifty sons of strength;
let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master, 2. Kings 2.16. and accordingly,
they sent fifty men, and they sought three days, but found him not, verse. 17.
Semblably, we may well imagine, that some also did seek for Enoch, after he was
translated; yea, it approaches nearer to belief, then to imagination, upon
this fair resultance; He was not found, say the Septuagint; He was not found,
says the Apostle: therefore he was sought after; therefore he was searched
for: TV NON INVENTA, REPERTAES, I have found thee, whom I could not find when
I sought thee, says the old Poet: but it is harsh to say, TV NON QVAESITA,
REPERTA ES, Thou art found, and wast never looked after. Finding implies
precedent search, or going after, most ordinarily: but Not being found,
necessarily implies a former inquiry: Elias was not found by Ahab; therefore
Ahab sought for him. Enoch was not found; therefore they made inquiry after
him. So much be spoken in defense of my Comment upon the words, Et non ipse:
which I have supplied from the Septuagint, and most especially from the
Apostle, (...), and he was not found. And with it, is also ended and terminated
the second Quaere by me propounded, Whether Enoch did ever die: with its
Answer, That Enoch died not, either a sweet death, or a sour; an easy death,
or a painful.

5. The third Question follows, Whether Enoch and Elias now live, in, and
with their bodies, in Paradise?

Bellarmine is for the affirmative, That Paradise is now extant, and Enoch and
Elias live in it. More particularly concerning Elias, Rabbi David, in his
Comment on 2. Kings 2. reports it, as the common opinion of the Jews, That
Elias went with his body into Paradise, and there lives in the same estate
that our Parents did before the fall. Others have taken upon them to describe
and circumscribe exactly the place of Paradise, in an Island now called Eden,
not far from Babylon, as certain Nestorians of the Greek Church have fabled:
I say, fabled; because millions of learned men, both Heathen, Jews, and
Christians, have seen Babylon, and lived in it, and round about it, who never
had such a thought, or belief, or tradition, so far as may be gathered by any
ancient extant records. Of which Paradise whosoever desires to see more at
large, let him have recourse to my learned friend M. John Salkeld, in his
Treatise of Paradise. I will only add somewhat, which he omitteth.

Salianus (the great Annalist, from the creation of the first Adam, to the
death of the second Adam, or rather to his resurrection and ascension) Ad annum
mundi 987, says, Cyprian, Ambrose, Hierom, Tertullian, Gregory, Epiphanius,
and Hippolytus, acknowledging the translation of Enoch and Elias, are silent
concerning the place of their being. Augustine leaves it as doubtful, and
disputable. Chrysostom and Theodoret like not the inquiry. Rupert says, The
Scripture is silent: neither are the words of Paradise, or Eden, in the place
of Ecclesiasticus 44.16. in the Greek text; but only in the Vulgat. So far
Salianus.

But indeed, first me thinks, that the old Translatour should have been
constant to himself, and adding somewhat to the words of Ecclesiasticus 44.16.
should not have added In Paradisum, as he does, without any shadow of ground
from any other place: but, In coelum; because it is so written, 1. Macc. 2.58.
Elias was taken up into heaven, (...), In coelum receptus est, as the Vulgat it
self has it. Secondly, the Jesuit Salianus is somewhat too favorable in that
point; for S. Ambrose, in lib. de Paradiso, cap. 13. says expressesly, Enoch
was Raptus in coelum.
caught up into heaven: and S. Hierom on Amos 9. says, Enoch and Elias were
carried into heaven.

Bellarmine, and other Papists, distinguishing COELVM into AERIVM, COELESTE, ET
SVPERCOELESTE, Aeriall, heavenly, and supercelestiall, say, Enoch was carried
into the aeriall heaven. I must confess, that the region of the air, that
Expansum, the aeriall orb, is sometimes called Heaven: The Lord thundered from
heaven, 2. Sam. 22.14. God gave us rain from heaven, Act. 14.17. and birds are
called the fowls of the heaven, Psalm. 104.12. The Lord cast down great
hailstones from heaven, (Josh. 10.11.) and they were more which died with
hailstones, then they whom the children of Israel slew with the sword. These
hailstones came from the middle region of the air. I confess also, that Enoch
was carried up into the aeriall heaven; but with this distinction, He was taken
into it, as his way, not as the end of his journey, not as his habitation, or
resting place. The case of Enoch and Elias is so like, so one in this puncto,
that you are not to marvel, if sometimes I use the name of one, sometimes of
the other: what is said of one, is meant of both; Qui unum recte norit, ambos
noverit.
Who knows one, is not ignorant of the other. Chrysostom in his oration of
Elias, is express, that he rests not in the air: and brings in Satan, as
wondering at Elias his riding through and above the clouds: neither is his
reason to be contemned. Elias is not there where the devil is Prince: and what
should he do among lightning and thunder, hail, snow, storm and tempest? This
is the portion of the wicked to drink. If you flee to the miraculous omnipotent
hand of God; why may not I say the like, concerning Gods extraordinary clothing
him with immortality, and that by dispensation unusual, in the act of
translating him? God did not let him continue on the earth, or in the air; but
assuming him into the highest heaven, did glorify his body. For concerning
coelum coeleste, Bellarmine will not say that he rests there: nor did ever
any afford patrocinie to that conceit. Indeed Seneca, De consolatione, shows
that the Stoics thought, that the souls of men departed hovered about their
bodies, and in the end were carried up Ad ipsos orbs astr^s ornatos.
to the starry heaven. And Cicero, De somno Scipionis, places that heroical
soul among the stars. Besides that the conceit is heathenish, it nothing
concerns our question of mortal bodies. But if Enoch and Elias are in the
orbs, and among the spheres, which is the coelum coeleste; they should be
hurried with diurnall motion, from the East unto the West: unless you place
them upon the Poles, to stand there immoveably: which Poles are as imaginary,
as their being there. If there they be in mortal bodies; what strange
influences would the heavens pour forth upon them? since, the nearer the
Object is to the Agent, the more effectually the Agent works. If they have
the same unaltered bodies, either in the air, or in the coelo coelesti; what
meat, what clothing have they? The natural mortal body of Elias, yea of
Christ himself, after forty days fast, was hungry, whilst he lived on earth.
Augustine, De peccatorum meritis and remissione, 1.3. says, They either live
without meat; or, as Adam did, by the tree of life. But Cornelius a Lapide
renounceth the latter clause; since Paradise, and the tree of life is starved
and dead. S. Hierom, ad Pammachium, and Epiphanius, Haeres. 64. say, They live
without meat. The forenamed Jesuit flees to a miracle; and that is always an
help at a dead lift: but he deals most injuriously with Epiphanius, cutting
him of by the skirts, and mangling his opinion. The words of Epiphanius are
these, Vivunt spiritualiter, and non animaliter, propter translationem; suntque
in corpore seu carne spirituali, and non o^us habente, ut per corvos
nutriantur; sed nutriuntur alio spirituali alimento.
They live, since their translation, spiritually, and not as they were wont to
do on earth: their bodies and flesh are spiritual, having no need to be fed by
ravens; but are nourished by other spiritual food. If the Jesuit will grant
they have spiritual bodies, he will let fall his position, and the position of
his fellows, That Enoch and Elias shall die.

I reassume the interrupted point, concerning Paradise; Which, Cornelius says,
was taken away by the flood; and, The place continues not, says Pererius;
directly contradicting Bellarmine: and with Pererius stand Salmeron, Sa, Del
Rio, and many other. I will help them to this argument: If Paradise did, and
does continue on earth, as it was then; Noah, and his family, and all the
beasts, might with less ado, and more soon, have been brought into Paradise,
and there have lived; especially, there being no great distance between the
place where Paradise was, and the abode of Noah when he builded the Ark, if
Divines aim right. If Paradise had been on earth in Christ's time, would not
Christ once have gone into it? Or would the Angels, or could they have kept
Christ out? Much, very much more might be said; but Salianus has saved me all
that labor, who, page 66. of the first tome of his Ecclesiastical Annals,
writes thus, Ridiculum est existimare, Paradisum esse in aere supremo; aut in
lunae concavo collocare: codemque flumina, quae in terris visuntur, transfer.
It is a folly to think that Paradise is in the highest part of the aeriall
orb; or to place it by the moon. The rivers mentioned to be in Paradise, are on
earth: how shall we convey, or transchange them to those places? And it is
easier to say, then to prove, that the Angels kept Paradise from being
overthrown with waters.

Thus does he reconcile those, which said, Paradise is extant; and those, who
deny it; with a true and good distinction, as I conceive it, in this manner:
Let us say that the region and soil, the MATERIALE PARADISI, the place of
Paradise, is yet extant; for ONE GENERATION PASSES AWAY, AND ANOTHER
GENERATION COMES; BUT THE EARTH ABIDES FOR EVER, Ecclesiastes 1.4. For, HE
LAID THE FOUND ATIONS OF THE EARTH, THAT IT SHOULD NOT BE REMOVED FOR EVER,
Psalm. 104.5. Again, Psalm. 119. verse. 90. THOU HAVE EST ABLISHED THE EARTH, AND
IT ABIDES. And says he, The place is not far distant from Euphrates, and
Tigris. But the delicacies, trees, elegancie, delight, order and distribution,
ordained for innocence, are decayed; that it is not to be wondered at, if we
cannot find so much as the footsteps of them: So he. Perhaps, says Eugubinus,
as Jerusalem, and Sion the mountain of God, and the Ark of God; so Eden also
Vetustate contabuit.
is grown writhled and wrinkled with age; He does well to add, Perhaps; for
indeed, it is more likely, that it was not paulatim, but suddenly, and wholly
defaced, when the Angels left the custody of it, when the flood washed away
its beauty, and bemired it, just like to other places. Paradisus quoad
essentiam, non quood ornatum, quem olim habuit, superest.
The same ground and the essential place on which Paradise was seated,
remains still: the beauty, adornation, and delight is vanished, says Del
Rio: And the beds of the rivers are changed; and the fountains break forth in
other places; as Gregorius de Valentia well collecteth. Thus far,
excellently, Salianus.

Now, as I have approved him for saying, Simpliciter fateamur; istum Paradisum
plane nullum esse.
Let us ingenuously confess, That that garden of God, is now no where; the
extraordinary beauty and commodities are vanished; though the ground thereof
yet remains: so have I just cause to laugh more at him, then he did at his
fellows for their opinions; since he is so strangely conjecturall, as to say,
We may say that Enoch and Elias are placed within the boundaries, which
environed Paradise of old: and are kept there by the ministry of Angels: yet
so that no man can see them: as Christ now and then among the Jews made himself
invisible. Against this I thus argue. First, whosoever placed Enoch or Elias in
Paradise, placed them there, as in a place of extraordinary pleasure and
delight. Paradise was ever, by all, taken for locus amoenitatis (...), an
extraordinary place of pleasure; and accounted the garden of God till now: But
now there is no such unusual pleasure, says Salianus; Therefore they are not
now in Paradise.

Even Aristotle, Ethicorum 9.9. could say, (...).
An happy man is not to be made an Anachoret; or rather thus, An Hermit cannot
be an happy man. And in the same chapter; (...).
No man would enjoy the whole world, on condition to have none in the earth
with him. For man was born for civil conversation. And, Pol. 1.2. (...).
Man by nature is a sociable creature. Whereupon he well concludes, A blessed
man is not solitary. For (...), Eth. 99.
he has whatsoever is natural; but to delight in company is natural;
therefore he must needs enjoy it. The great S. Augustine, perhaps, met with the
same place; I am sure these are his words, De Civit. 19.3. Vitam beatam etiam
socialem perhibent esse, quae amicorum bona propter seipsa diligat flcut sua,
eisque propter seipsos hoc velit quod sibi.
They say that an happy life is a sociable life; which loves the welfarre of
friends as it does its own good, and wishes as well to others as to it self.
Ludovicus Vives, on the place, says, They were the Stoics, who said so: but I
rather guess, they were the Peripateticks; and Aristotle, their chief
Chaunter. Which blessed life the heathen meaned not of eternal blessedness
after the resurrection, but of a blessed natural life in this world, and on
this earth: such an one cannot Enoch and Elias have, though they were in
Paradise; because they have no more company of their kind. Enoch, more
especially, had less happiness, by this argument (if he be supposed to be in
the earthly Paradise) because he was long by himself, ere Elias came to him; by
the space, I say, of above two thousand years.

To the further illustration of the former point, I may truly say, If Adam and
Eve had lived in Paradise by themselves alone, without any other company, at
any other time; I should not much have envied, or wished that felicity; yea,
though he had not fallen, whereby he became Radix Apostatica, in the phrase of
Augustine. Yea, such a blessedness there is in communication of happiness; that
the all-blessed, onely-blessed, ever-blessed Deity of the Unity would not be
without the conjoined happiness of the Trinity: The singlenes of Nature would
not be without the plurality of Persons.

Thirdly, do they see those men and women, and their actions, who now live in
the bounds of old Eden, whilst themselves, in their bodies, are invisible?

Fourthly, here is a multiplying of miracles daily; that Angels shall keep
them, yet so, that they cannot be seen. From Enochs assumption, which is now
above 4000 years since, have Angels kept him, that he has not been once seen?

Besides, no one place of Scripture Canonical says, they are in Paradise: and
it is so far from a favor, as it is rather a durance and captivity, if they
be kept from all other parts of the world, within the bounds of old Paradise;
since many places are now more delightful then the place or places whereabouts
Salianus himself now holds Paradise to be situated. Moreover, Elijah was
taken up into heaven. Suppose that to gratify Bellarmine, we grant, Coelum
aerium is there meant: yet must he needs be taken up from the earth, and so not
abide on earth, in the circuit of old Paradise, as Salianus foolishly
conceives. Likewise Ecclesiasticus 49.14. Enoch was taken from the earth,
(...). so Vatablus has it, and renders it, De terra sublimis assumptus est,
He was taken up on high from the earth: the Vulgat has it, Receptus est a
terra^ E^terra had been more pithie. When the Apostle says, He was translated,
Heb. 11.5. was he left on the same earth, on which he was before? Or, after he
was in heaven did he come again on the earth? It was an excellent and true
observation of our learned Whitaker, That Bellarmine sometimes confuting his
fellows answers, confuteth far better answers then himself brings. And I
will be bold to say of Salianus, though he does justly deride them, who make
Paradise in the air, as Cornelius a Lapide, and Bellarmine; or in the orb of
the Moon, as others: Yet his crotchet is as foolish, as any of theirs. For, in
what part of Paradise were they kept when the flood was? or was not all the
earth overflown? The Angels then kept them in the air; or else, by an other
miracle, kept the water from overflowing that place. That the Angels kept
people from entering into Paradise, I have read: that they kept any from going
out of it, and kept them in it, I have not read. Nemiui conspicul esse possunt.
None can see them, says Salianus: They may (say I) by the same divine power
by which they are invisible; if invisible they be. Can they be seen by none?
How was Elias seen by our Savior, and his three Disciples, at the
Transfiguration? Or were all they within Paradise? or was Elias out of the
bounds of the old Paradise, when Christ was transfigured on the mount? But
these and greater inconveniences must these men run into, who will maintain
against Scripture, that Enoch and Elias are in earthly or aeriall Paradise:
that they may uphold an other crotchet worse then this; namely, That Enoch and
Elias shall hereafter die, and be slain by Antichrist; and are not In coelo
supercoelesti.
in the highest heaven, which is the last question.

6. Let us speak of them severally, then jointly. Concernning Enoch, the first
of them who were rapti, it seems to me, that the Apostles words, Heb. 11.5.
not only do reach home to that point, unto which before I applied them, viz.
That Enoch died not: but evince also that he shall never die. For it is not
said, Enoch was translated, that he should not die for a good while; but he was
translated, that he should not, or might not see death: Therefore he cannot, he
shall not die hereafter; since the holy Ghost has expressed, and signed out
the end of his translation, Ne videret mortem, That he should not see death.

Some may answer to that place of the Apostle, first, that he speaks of THE
DEATH OF SINNERS: as if he had meant, with the book of Wisd. 4.11.
Wisdom, to say, NE MALITIA MVTARET INGENIVM EJVS, LEST HE SHOULD BE CHANGED
TO THE WORSE: for sinners are called DEAD MEN, according to that saying,
Improbi, dum vivunt, mortui sunt.
WICKED MEN, EVEN WHILE THEY LIVE, ARE DEAD; So far Drusius. To whom let me
add, that Christ says, Luke 9.60. Let the dead bury their dead. And 1.
Timoth. 5.6. She that lives in pleasure, is dead whilst she lives. And to
the Angel of the Church of Sardis, the Spirit says, Revel. 3.1. Thou have a
name that thou live, and art dead. In all which places wicked men are taken
for the dead: yet in the place of the Apostle it cannot be so: for he was
speaking of the true lives and deaths of Gods Saints. And if the literal sense
can be admitted, we must not flee to the mystery: but here is no inconvenience
in the letter. Moreover the same God, who mercifully placed him in the state of
Grace, could as easily have kept him so, without inflicting death on him.
Lastly, the Apostle said, Hebr. 11.4. Abel is dead; and then descending to Noah
and Abraham, at the 13. verse, These all died in faith. I hope no man will say,
the word died is here taken for sinned: but it is taken literally, that their
souls were parted from their bodies: So the words, That he should not see
death, prove that Enochs soul was not parted from his body. Indeed he is one
of them that are mentioned between Abel and Abraham; but yet singled out by
express words, That he was translated, lest he should, or might see death: and
therefore he is exempted out of the compass of that word All, by special
dispensation; and only Abel, Noah, Abraham, are the All there meant.

Secondly, says Drusius in his Preface, It may be said, the Apostle spoke De
morte calamitatum, and agritudinum; ut sententia sit, Ne videret mortem, hoc
est, ea incommoda, quae mort^m comitari solent.
of calamities, crosses and sicknesses, which may be accounted as a death: as
if he had said, Lest he might see death, that is, THE DISCOMMODITIES AND
INCONVENIENCES, WHICH ACCOMPANY DEATH. For, who are continually sick, are
accounted as dead. First, I say this is a forced interpretation; Enoch was
translated lest he should see death, that is, lest he should be continually
sick; and, that he might not feel the discommodities, which accompany death.
Secondly, that opinion leads Enoch to death, but not the dolorous way to it:
which indeed rather beggeth the question, then proves any thing against me.
Lastly, there is no circumstance inducing us to think, that the Apostle, by the
word death, aimed at the large and extended signification of it, for
calamities, or sickness. Sure, about Enoch his time, there were no such notable
calamities upon the Saints: and the generations of the world were then strong
and healthful.

Thirdly, says Drusius in the same place, It may be said, Enoch died not;
because the Scripture, when it mentions his rapture, mentions not his
death: so the Jews say, Jacob is not dead; because the Scripture uses the word
of EXPIRING, not of DYING. This is ridiculous; for, what is expiring, but
dying? Genes. 49.33. Jacob yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto his
people: does not either of these phrases, do not both evince that he died? Oh,
but the Jews say, Jacob non est mortuus; I am sure, the Apostle, Hebr. 11.21.
speaking of Jacob, says, (...), as he was dying, he blessed his children; or,
when he was a dying, as it is in our last translation. It evinceth, he died
within a while after. And I am sure again, that Christ, Luke 20.37. from the
testimony of Moses, proves, that Jacob died. I am also sure, that S. Stephen
says, Act. 7.15. Jacob went down into Egypt, and died. Surely these crotchets
of misbeleeving Jews should not have the least countenance against pregnant
proofs both of the Old and New Testament.

Drusius yet inforceth this third answer, thus; The same Apostle says of
Melchisedech, Heb. 7.3. HE WAS WITHOUT FATHER, WITHOUT MOTHER, WITHOUT DESCENT,
HAVING NEITHER BEGINNING OF DAYS, NOR END OF LIFE. Wherefore? without doubt,
because in Scripture there is no mention of his parents, and kindred, of his
birth, or of his death.

I answer. First, If it be said of all, whose progenitors, issues, kindreds,
birth, and death, are unrevealed in Scripture, that they were without father,
mother, descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life; we should
have many, very many more Melchisedechs in those respects; Demetrius the
silversmith, and Alexander the coppersmith, and troops of the wicked; Daniel,
Sidrach, Misach, and Abednego; Nathanael, and Joseph of Arimathea; S. Mark, and
S. Luke, and diverse others. For, what mention is there of their parents, their
children, their genealogies, their birth-dayes, or of their deathdayes, in the
sacred Writ? Therefore these words may be said of Melchisedech, without any
reference at all to that reason: and the words may not be said of others,
though the divine Scripture omitteth as much, as it did of Melchisedech.

Secondly, if we grant, that it is in part the reason, why he is said to be
(...), without a father, etc. yet it may be said also, because no other record,
before S. Paul's time, no sacred or profane Author, no tradition, no book
Apocryphal, historified his parents, or issue (so far as yet appears:) And
because S. Paul, who knew the names of Jannes and Jambres some such way, or by
revelation immediate, and by no such way knew Melchisedechs pedigree, he might
say as he did.

Thirdly, Erasmus says, Melchisedech came of obscure parents, not worthy to be
named. Before him, Eustatius Antiochenus said the same: and perhaps it may be a
reason why David called his Nephews, Joab and Abishai, the sons of Zeruiah,
2. Samuel, 19.22. (for Zeruiah was David's own sister, 1. Chron. 2.16.) and
omitted their father, for his unworthiness; yea, the Divine history, where
David is silent, often mentions Joab and Abishai, with the addition of their
mothers name; but always omitteth the fathers name. This I cannot think to be
Melchisedechs case: for being a King, and so glorious a Priest, both in one; it
is most unlikely, that he had obscure and poor parents: yet he might descend
from cursed Cham; as well as Christ, from Moabitish Ruth, or from Rahab the
harlot of Canaan.

Fourthly, the Jews say, He was a bastard: But it is sooner said, then proved;
for never bastard attained as called by God, to those two highest conjoined
titles, of King and Priest. Many men have thought him to be Noah; and more, to
be Sem, Noah's son; as some Jews; Lyra, and Abulensis: when indeed he can be
neither. Quidam admodum stulte opinantur, Sem esse Melchisedechum: V^rum id
impossible est: supra enim, cum ejus genealogiam explicaremus, patuit, quod
nec Tharrae tempora assequi potuit.
Some very foolishly think that Sem was Melchisedech (says Procopius:) But
that is impossible: for when I set down his genealogy, it appears that he
lived not to the time of Terah, or Thara, Genesis 11.24. So he: who hitteth the
truth, that Melchisedech was not Sem: but is out in the genealogy; for both
Noah and Sem lived in Abraham's time. See Cornelius a Lapide, on the Hebrews;
and the learned Helvicus. Noah, says Helvicus, died the 57 year of Abraham;
and Sem outlived Abraham.

That neither Noah nor Sem could be Melchisedech, is demonstrable from Hebr.
7.6. Melchisedechs descent, or pedigree is not counted, says the Apostle,
Hebr. 7. from Levi, or Abraham, or their Progenitors, who came from Arphaxad,
the son of Sem, the son of Noah. Secondly, both Noah, and Sem, and their
genealogy and generations, are perfectly and exactly set down: but
Melchisedech is without descent, or pedigree, or genealogy, Hebr. 7.3. as
undescribed, say they. Thirdly, we know, Sems father was Noah; Noah's father was
Lamech; but Melchisedechs father is not known. Fourthly, Noah died, Genes.
9.29. and Sem lived not 603 years, as it is apparent, Genes. 11.10, etc.
Helvicus makes his death fall on his six hundredth year; but there is no end
known of Melchisedechs days. Origin, in likelihood, foreseeing the
inconveniences accompanying the fore-recited, and commonly received opinion,
inventeth a new trick, That Melchisedech was an Angel. After him ran Didymus.
But no Angel was ever a temporal earthly King: no Angel was ever a Priest,
offering up bread and wine, and receiving tithes; or had an order of Priesthood
annexed to any of them: no Angel had ever pedigree from Abraham, or any other.
But Melchisedech, though he had none at all from Abraham or his ascendents,
none at all mentioned in any authentic records or tradition; yet had he one or
other; of which hereafter.

There was one Theodotus, says De praes^riptione, cap. 53. in fine.
Tertullian, and he brought in a novel opinion, and held, That what Christ does
for men, Melchisedech does for the Angels. But this cannot be; for the good
Angels needed not any Mediator of Redemption; no, not Christ himself; nor ever
had, nor ever shall have. This Arch-heretick had other Melchisedechians, who
taught, that Melchisedech was a certain virtue, or power, greater then Christ;
because Christ is said to be a Priest according to his order: So Epiphanius
relates, lib. 2. Haeres. 55. Yet this holds not for the majoritie, or
betternes; but for the prioritie, or typical resemblance.

Some have held, that Christ was a Priest according also to the order of Aaron;
and then, by that argument, the Aaronicall Priesthood should be better then
Christ's; which is plainly confuted in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Christ
accomplished every type of him, and according as they signified, did he
fulfill: This does not prove their betternes, or efficacy, greater then his:
no more does his being a Priest according to the order of Melchisedech, either
magnify Melchisedech above Christ, or any way vilify Christ.

Variety of conjectures have been manifold; I hold it probablest, with
Josephus the Jew, with diverse late Writers, with the ancient Fathers, Coelestis
Hierarchiae cap. 9.
Dionysius, Haeres. 51.
Epiphanius, In Genes. quaest. 63.
Theodoret, Procopius and others, that Melchisedech was one of the Kings of
Canaan, and came from Cham, not from Sem. And this God might ordain purposely,
that the Gentiles might not despair of salvation: but, though Christ came of
the seed of Abraham, and the Jews were Gods peculiar people; yet Christ himself
was a Priest according to the order of Melchisedech, who descended from the
cursed seed.

That Melchisedech was the holy Ghost, was a mad opinion, now forsaken of all.
That he was not an Angel, nor a virtue greater then Christ, I proved before:
but a man, a mere man: whose pedigree is not to be reckoned from Abraham, or
his predecessors: for Abraham's predecessors dwelt in Vr of the Caldees,
Genes. 11.28, and 31. and, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in
old time, Joshuah 24.2. that is, Beyond Euphrates Eastward, even unto the
East Indies, did Sems posterity reach and multiply; propagating true religion,
with the histories both of the Creation, and of the Deluge. In the East-Indian
Shaster (which is the Canon of their devotion, esteemed by them, as the sacred
Bible is by us) there are now many fables intermixed, savouring more of humane
invention, then of faith: yet their rational traditions make nearer approaches
to the divine truth, concerning the creation, then the more ignorant Theology
of the Romans, till Christ's time; and as good laws and precepts have the
East-Indians, for morality, and government Oecomenick and Political, if not
better, for a settled State. And I hold it a most remarkable thing, that the
East-Indian language, to this day, has far more affinity with the Hebrew,
then any one of our Occidentall languages; yea, then all of them put together.
And those Indi Aurorae, or, as one calls them, Indi Diei, have scarce a word,
but it is found in the Caldee, Arabic, or primitive Hebrew: and by perfect
knowledge in the Hebrew, one may easily attain to the knowledge of all other
the Eastern tongues. Whence we may conclude the prioritie of the Hebrew tongue.
See the learned William Postell, in his alphabet of twelve tongues, different
in characters: and more specially de Indica lingua. One great error I cannot
omit in the said learned Postellus, in his Tractate de lingua Samaritana; for,
from S. Hierom, in prooemio libri Regum, and with him, he maintains, that it
is certain that Esdras, after the instauration of the temple under Zerubbabel,
invented other letters, which now we use; and that the characters of the
Samaritans and Hebrews were all one till then: and withal, himself found out a
very probable specious reason, why Esdras should forsake the old characters,
and framed new: and yet he brings in the characters of Hebrew now in use, as
delivered by God in the tables given to Moses: whereas (if he would be constant
to himself) either God gave to Moses the Samaritan letters, and Esdras invented
new ones: or, if God gave these now in use to Moses, the Samaritans may be
thought to invent new characters, that they might differ from the Hebrews, and
make their schism more irreconcilable, by the strangeness of misfigured
letters. Moses was far more ancient then Esdras; and the Samaritans, who
received no Scripture but Moses his writings, in all likelihood used the
letters and characters used by Moses: and so, in conclusion it will arise, that
the Samaritan letters and the Hebrew were all one a long time; which Postellus
confesses: and that they were exactly the same which God gave to Moses; which
Postellus denies: and after that, Esdras might invent new characters, upon the
ground which Postellus framed, and the Jews (as he says) approved: and these
commonly we enjoy. I cannot omit, that you shall find other characters of the
alphabet of that language which was used beyond Euphrates, different from the
Samaritan, but more from the Hebrew: And it is in the Hebrew Grammar of Abraham
de Balmis, Prout inveni in libro vetustissimo.
As I found (says he) in a most ancient book: and he says, It was Scriptura
transitus fluvii.
the writing used beyond Euphrates. The characters of both which, I would have
described exactly, if I had been sure our Printers had the stamps; for others
have not: In regard of which defect, Mr Seldom, in the preface to his book
called Marmora Arundeliana, excuses his printing of the Samaritan, the
Syriack, and Arabic words and passages used in his Commentary, by the Hebrew
letters, rather then by their own proper characters.

I am come back to Jerusalem, where Melchisedech reigned. And though he was a
most holy man, and an extraordinary type of Christ; yet, I say, he came of the
cursed seed. For Cham possessed all Canaan; and it was called the land of
Canaan, from Canaan the son of Cham. And he was one of the Kings in that
land: for it had many Kings, Genes. 14. Melchisedech, and Job, and many other,
in the old Testament, do prove, that God was not the God of the Jews only, but
also of the Gentiles.

This place of the Apostle, Hebr. 11.5. concerning Enoch, Ne videret mortem,
has occasioned much discourse; but I cannot leave Enoch yet. Indeed it is
said, Genes. 5.24. God took him; Id est, abstulit eum Deus per mortem.
that is, God sent for him by death, says Aben Ezra: and so the word (...) is
taken, Ezechiel 24.16. Ecce, ego aufero (...) te desiderium oculorum tuorum.
Behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes. Salmanticensis
Judaeus, in lib. Johasin, 98.2. says, Mortuus est Rabbi Emmi, quia rapuit eum
mors.
Rabbi Emmi died: for death snatched him away. And so it is in the Latin
phrases, Rapio, and Aufero, what in the Hebrew is (...).

Quis Deus, Octavi, te nobis abstulit? --
-- and te
Raptum, and Romanam flebimus historiam.
What God, Octavius, Took the away from us?
We will bemoan the death of thee, And of our Roman history.
So far Drusius in the preface to his book called Henoch. But this is no good
exposition, since God took away by death all the rest of the Patriarchs, as
well as Enoch; and yet it is most singularly spoken of Enoch, He was not found,
for God took him. By death, says the shallow Jew: but our divine Apostle
says, He was translated, that he might not see death. What Christian or
rational man will doubt, but we are to incline to the Apostle?

Again, the third answer brought by Drusius (against his own opinion, as
himself professes) to prove, that VIDERE MORTEM, To see death, does not
signify to die a natural death, where there is a true separation of the soul
from the body: and that, NON VIDERE MORTEM, Not to see death, on the contrary,
does not signify To be kept alive from death, (which I, with Drusius, do say,
was the true intent of the Apostle) draws to this head, Enoch saw not death,
that is, died not; because the holy Scriptures, where they make mention of his
rapture, mention not his death. I answer, If all were true, yet it follows
not, that Enoch is dead, or shall die; which is the point questioned.

Moreover, if Enoch were dead, or to die; the wisdom of the Divine Inspirer,
would never have singled out such a phrase, among so many other thousand, as
should lead men to think the clean contrary. He was translated, that he should
not see death. For there rests the period. If it had been meant, he should
die; it would have been added, He should not see death, for a long time; or, He
should not see death, till toward the end of the world; or the like. But, He
was translated, that he should not see death; Therefore he shall never see
death.

Suarez, in tertiam partem summae, quaest. 59. artic. 6. sect. 1. says
directly, S. Paul meaned, that Enoch should not die in that place, into which
he was translated. True; But why should he die in any other place? or indeed
why should he die at all, who, above other men, was rapted purposely, That he
might not see death? Surely, the deferring of death, for a time, is not so
great a favor; The exempting one wholly from death, is a blessing, above
ordinary. Again, it is said of Enoch, Genes. 5.23. All his days were 365.
(where days are taken for years, as otherwhere in Scripture:) But these are
not all his days, if either he remove from one place of the earth into an
other, (which Salianus fondly imagined) or live now in a mortal corruptible
body.

It is said of our blessed Savior, Hebr. 5.7. He poured out prayers in the
days of his flesh; that is, whilst he lived on earth the life of nature, in
an elementary, terrene, humane, passive body. And of some other Patriarchs,
All the days of them were such, and such, Genes. 5.17, 20, etc. that is, all
the days while they breathed on the earth the breath of life in mortal
bodies. Therefore even from the very phrase concerning Enoch, All his days
were 365. we may infer, He lived not in a mortal body any longer on the
earth, He lives not now any where in a mortal body.

Somewhat must I say also of Elias severally. Rabbi Solomon, on the 5 of Genes.
says, When Elijah was hurried up in a fiery chariot, his body was burnt up of
that fire: and, Other Jews agree with him, says De Romano Pontifice 3 6.
Bellarmine. For my part, I say, I will not embrace an unlikelihood, though it
run toward my opinion. I think, the cloak might have been burnt, as well as
his body; and Elishah could not have escaped scorching, when the fire parted
them. Again, the ashes might have fallen, as well as his mantle. And the Jew
would account it no great favor, to be burnt alive. That fire, certainly, was
rather conservative, then destructive: not penal, and consuming, as the fire
from heaven drawn down by Elias, 2. Kings, 1.12. not punitive, and conserving,
as the fire of hell, Everlasting, Matthew. 25.41. Unquenchable, Mark 9.43. but
like the fiery furnace, in which the three children sang, Daniel 3.25. or the
fire in the bush, Exodus 3.3. harmless, yea gracious: or the fire at the
consummation of the world, which one calls Ignem rationalem. The phrase then,
2. Kings 2.11. imports no less: Elijah went up, by a whirlwinde into heaven;
Elijah, All Elijah, Whole Elijah, Soul and body. His soul had no need of a
whirlwinde; Elijah went up. It is varied, 1. Maccab. 2.58. He was taken up into
heaven. His rapture excluded not his willingness: his willingness had been
insufficient without his rapture: his ascension being grounded on assumption:
the power being Gods, not his: or, his passively, and Gods actively.

If it be true what Bellarmine avoucheth, That some other Jews agree with Rabbi
Solomon in this, that Elijah was burned; Yet I am sure, Bibliothe^^ Sanctae
lib. 2. page 65.
Sixtus Senensis cites the opinion of other Jews, to the contrary. For they
said, that the length of time, from the beginning of man till the end of the
world, has been, and shall be measured by the several lives of seven men:
and, that there was never hour from man's creation to the general
resurrection, but some one of these seven men did or shall live in it. Adam
lived to see Methuselah; Methuselah was alive in Sems time: Sem died not till
Jacob was born: Jacob lived till Amram Moses his father was born: Amram expired
not till Ahijah the Shilonite lived: Ahijah lived with Elijah: Elijah shall
live till the end of the world: Therefore they thought Elijah was not burnt, is
not dead. But first, the Papists themselves say, that Elijah shall be slain by
Antichrist, before the end of world: Therefore this makes not for them.
Secondly, the Jews might have tucked up the time shorter, on this fashion: Adam
lived in the days of Enoch; and Enoch to the end of the world. And so their
number of seven might be reduced unto two. But let us leave these Rabbinicall
speculations concerning Elijah; and say somewhat of him, not as he was in a
Paradise of fancy, but as he was with our blessed Savior on the mount, at
that glorious transfiguration. And this I set down for certain; No passage in
the Gospels proves demonstratively, that his body was immortal. It is true,
it is said of Elijah and of Moses, (...), they appeared in glory: which
apparition I hold to be true, and real; though temporary. They were Visi in
gloria.
seen in glory, says Montanus. I add, that the glory of their souls could
not be seen by the bodily eyes of the Apostles; and that the Apostles could not
know them by their souls, but by their bodies. And, questionless, the bodily
glory was meant, and aimed at. Yet none of this can extort a necessary
argument, that the bodies of Moses, or Elijah, were immortal, or impassible.

First, concerning Moses, Del Rio, Magicarum Disquisitionum 2. Quaest. 26.
Sect. 2. says, It is not improbable, but that Moses appeared in an aeriall
body. Indeed Tertullian comes somewhat near to Del Rio (though the Jesuit
cite him not) Moses apparuit in imagine carnis nondum receptae: nam a part
potiore facieuda est denominatio.
Moses appeared in the similitude of flesh which he had not received: for the
denomination is taken from the better part. But, He is called Moses from his
soul, which being the better part, and present, gives the denomination, says
Del Rio. True, say I, where both matter and form are joined in one: where there
is a COMPOSITVM, An unity framed of a dualitie, A (...). All the souls which
came into Egypt, etc. Genes. 46.27. is spoken of such, as then consisted both
of souls and bodies.

Secondly, I confess, Abraham, Dives, and Lazarus are so called, though their
bodies were separated then from them. Yet let Del Rio give me a Scripture
instance, where ever any one man or humane soul in an aeriall body, is called
that party whose soul it is. The trivial objection of Samuel I purposely balk
(because I am so far flown out already) standing upon this, that either true
Samuel appeared not; or, if he did, he appeared in his own body.

The question which Alexander asked of the first man of the Gymnosophists, was,
Whether the dead or the living made the greater number? He answered, The
living: For the dead (said he) are no more men. The reason of his answer, is
grounded on these Aphorisms; That the soul is not man: That the body is not
man: That both soul and body do concur to make a man. Neither does Christ's
divine reason contradict any part of this, when he avoucheth, That God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living. For Christ spoke of the souls only, or
of souls which should have bodies at the resurrection; and the Gymnosophist, of
men consisting of souls and bodies, who are properly to be termed living men:
whereas separated souls, though living, are not truly living men.

Augustine, de Civit. Dei, 19.3. has it thus, out of the great Marcus Varro:
In the nature of man are two things; soul, and body: That the soul is far
better and more excellent then the body, he doubts not: but whether the soul
only be the man, so that the body is but as the horse is to the rider, he
enquireth. For the horseman is not the man and the horse, but the man only:
yet he is called an horseman, in reference to the riding of his horse.
Ludovicus Vives comes in like a busy body; and he, from Gellius, Marcellus,
and Servius; and they, from Ennius and Virgil, will maintain that an horseman
is taken for an horse; and an horse, called an horseman. I answer, Virgil
followed Ennius his antique phrase; and both of them Poetical license. But
Varro used proper Philosophical terms; whilst their language is improper, and
in it self both absurd and untrue. S. Augustine out of Varro still proceeds;
Or whether the body only be the man; being semblable to the soul, as the cup
is to the potion: For the cup, and the potion contained in the cup, are not
together called the cup: but the cup only is called a cup, because it is fit
to hold the potion. Vives here again comes in with his over-nice exception,
and criticism: Est etiam poculum id quod potatur, praesertine apud poctas.
That which men drink (says he) is termed a cup, especially by the Poets:
Poculaque inventis Acheloia miscuit uvis: his meaning being, that he did mingle
wine in the cups of Acheloius his framing. I answer, that the cups in that
place, are exactly distinguished from the wine in them, and are not taken
(quatenus pocula) for the liquor in them. Secondly, if any one has at any time
so used the word; it is Metaphorically, and not in propriety of language. For
he could not mingle wine with, but in the cups: nor did he properly mingle the
cups with the wine.

I pass from the second interruption of Vives, to S. Augustine, out of Varro
still; Or whether neither soul alone, nor body alone, but both togeher, be
man: of which man one part is either the soul or the body; but he wholly
consists of both, to be a man: as we call two horses joined together BIG AS;
whereof either is part of the pair or couple; but neither is the pair or
couple, but both harnessed together. In the end, Varro resolves, says S.
Augustine, That neither the soul, nor the body, but both soul and body
together is the man. And so the chief blessedness of man consists in the
good both of soul and body. Which opinion is a divine truth; and S. Augustine
approves it, as may be gathered by his whole discourse, and by the beginning
of the fifth chap. of that book. So it was not the true Moses, unless the very
soul and the very body of Moses were present.

Yet Aquinas, 3. part. quaest. 45. thinks that Moses appeared not in his own
body: which Suarez confuteth by these authorities; S. Hierom, on Matthew. 17. S.
Augustine, de Mirab. sacrae Scripturae, 3.10. which is followed by Sotus, in 4.
senten. distinct. 43. Hieronymus Natalis the Jesuit, thinks he strikes all
sure: for amongst his curious costly pictures upon the four Gospels, he
picturing out the transfiguration of our Savior, brings in Moses with horns
on his head; to design, that it was the same Moses, and the same body which
Moses had on the mount; according to the Vulgat, Exodus 34.29. Ignorabat Moses
quod cornuta esset facies sua: that is, according to Natalis his opinion, Moses
knew not that he had horns: and verse. 30. Viderunt filii Israel cornutam faciem
Mosis: that is, according to the same man's fancy, The Israelites saw Moses
his horns: though intruth the words may be far better translated. And so
verse. 35. Was not the Jesuits face made of horn, or rather of brass, who
published in so seeing and cleare-sighted an age, such an ignorant conceit,
with such boldness; when indeed the words in the Original, as they are
translated by their own interlinearie, are only thus, Promicuisset cutis
facierum ejus, The skin of his face was sleek: and in the margin is,
Resplendebat, did shine: which is also used in the Translation of Vatablus?
Likewise, in the two other before-recited places, the same phrase is used. The
Septuagint have it, (...). Ignorabat Moses quod glorificatus esset aspectus
faciei ejus.
Moses knew not that the splendor of his face and countenance was glorified,
as Vatablus translateth the Seventy; Which, he says, more fully expresses the
Hebrew, and is accordingly followed by the Apostle, 2. Cor. 3.7. for the glory
of his countenance. Indeed the Original (...), does properly signify an horn:
from whence (...), is splendere, radiare, fulgere, to shine. Because (says
Vatablus from a learned Jew, when man beholds earnestly, and intentively, the
Sun, or any luminous body; the rays seem to be sent forth of it, like
horns, in some sort. But (says Vatablus) out of the false, or ill-understood
version of the Vulgat, they, who were no linguists, made the people falsely
believe, that Moses had two horns on his head; which is most false. So far
Vatablus, though a man of their own, against the brainsick faction of the
Jesuit; who will maintain the people in any error, if it be old; rather then
suffer reformation. The Caldee has it, Multiplicatus est splendour gloriae
vultus Mosis, The brightness of Moses his face increased in glory more and
more: Cornelius a Lapide the Jesuit, though he strive for the truth of the
Vulgat, yet says, Moses had no horns in his forehead; Vti affingunt ei
pictores.
as painters place on him. Little perhaps did he think, that his fellow-Jesuit
Hieronymus Natalis was one of these painters; yea and that in one of the
costlyest editions of the story of the Gospels, that ever was set forth. But
the wiser and more succinct Sa, has it, HORNY, Cornuta, id est, radios
emittens; Hebraice, radians.
that is, glistering: in the Hebrew, resplendent. And Cajetan, better then he,
Nihil cornutum, ad literam, sign^ficatur etc.
In the litterall signification we have nothing to do with horn, though
perchance there is some allusion to it by a Metaphor.

Concerning which Moses his face, I will end with two observations.

The first is a very idle one, out of Bellarmine, De Sanctorum reliquiis 2.4.
Valde credibile est, Mosis corpus, licet mortuum, conservass^ adhu^ splendorem
vultu^, and decorem quem antea habebat; si^ut multis Sanctorum accidit.
It is very credible, that the dead body of Moses preserved the radiant
comeliness and beauty of his face, which he had in life: as it has happened
to many of the Saints. But he names no Saint: And if he did, we should hardly
believe him. And Moses himself died privately: and was buried secretly: no man
saw him dying or dead. I acknowledge that some of the Ancients have inclined to
this, viz, that Moses his face did shine all his life time, when he spoke to
the people. So Ambrose, in Psalm. 118. Quamdiu vixit Moses, and alloquebatur
populum, velamen habuit i^ facie.
So long as Moses lived, and spoke to the people, he had a vail before his
face: not after death, as Bellarmine thinks probable. Besides, the Apostle, 2. Corinthians. 3.7. terms it (...), the glory of his countenance, which was to be
done away: Therefore it continued not after death; if it did till then,
whenever he spoke to the people. And our late translation seems in part to
accord, Exodus 34.33. Till Moses had done speaking with them, he put a vail on
his face: Yet the word Till, is not in the original: but it may be probably
expounded, That when Moses had done speaking, he put a vail on his face (for so
the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin run:) And though Moses ordinarily put off the
vail, when he went to speak with God; and put it on, when he returned: yet
once, and at the first of all, he might speak unto the people with face open,
for more reverence and majesty.

The second observation is from Origin, Homil. 12. in Exodus circa medium; and
it is a good one. In the Law (says he) Moses his face was glorified, though
veiled: but his hand put into his bosom WAS LEAPROVS AS SNOW, Exodus 4.6. In
vul^u ejus sermo legis; in manu opera designantur.
In his shining countenance was a figure of the Law: by his hands are works
signified. Now because no man can be justified by the works of the Law, his
hand was leprous. -- His face was glorified, but veiled: therefore his words
were full of knowledge; yet secret, and hidden. -- Yea, in the Law, Moses had
only a glorified face: hands and feet were unglorified: -- for Moses also put
off his shoes, that an other, in after times, might have the bride: Et illa
vocar^t^r domus discalceati usque in hodiernum diem.
and she be called to this day the house of the unshod. -- In Evan^eliis autem
Moses totus glorificatur ex integro. Gaudere ^tiam mihi pro hoc videtur Moses,
quia and ipse quodammodo nunc d^^ ponit velamen, conversus ad Dominum, cum
evidenter, quae praedixit, implentur.
But in the Gospels all Moses is wholly glorified. -- It seems also to me,
that Moses rejoiceth in this point: because himself in a sort, now lays aside
his vail: being converted to Christ, when those things are plainly fulfilled,
which he foretold.

By which glorification you cannot necessarily interpret such a glorification
as the Saints shall have after judgment, which never shall have end, where 1.
Cor. 15.53.
corruptible shall put on incorruption immutable: but only of a temporary
glorification: for Moses laid down his body again, as is held most probably.

The author of that book, which is entitled Altercatio Synagogae and
Ecclesiae, cap. 21. (S. Paul and Gamaliel being interlocutours) thus; Jesus
Christ after his transfiguration Mosis corpus sepulturae commendavit.
buried Moses. A strange honor, (if true) that the same, who was buried by God
himself in the Old Testament, should be thus glorified for a while, and after
buried by Christ himself in the New Testament.

Furthermore, that there is no absolute necessity, that either Moses or Elias
(though they were seen in glory) had immortal and impassible bodies by the
transfiguration, appears by this, That our blessed Savior himself, after
that his transfiguration, had a mortal body, and did die: especially, if we
consider, that his glory was greater then theirs; as the Masters is above the
Servants; and the Lords, above the Attendants.

Barradas on the transfiguration, says, Transfigurationi suae transfiguratos,
gloriaque ae singulari majestate ornatos, voluit Christus adesse servos suos:
sic solent in nuptiis festisque aliis diebus nobiles viri, pretiosis ornati
vestibus, Regibus adesse.
Christ would have his servants present, transfigured as well as himself, and
adorned with singular glory and majesty: as at marriages and other festival
days, the nobility richly clad do wait on Kings. Tertullian, adversus
Marcionem, cap. 22. says, Moses and Elias were seen In consortio claritatis.
equally bright and glorious. Luke 9.29. (...); As he prayed, the fashion of
his countenance was altered. Nemo putet, Salvatorem veritatem corporis
amisisse; externam tantum speciem permutavit splendore.
Let no man imagine (says Hierom) that our Savior lost the nature of a true
body; only he converted the outward form and fashion all into brightness. The
like may I say of Moses and Elias; if they had their glory by redundance from
Christ's glory, as Suarez maintains: and then there is no necessity, nor
indeed great likelihood, that Christ's glorious transfiguration should leave to
himself a mortal body; and they should be by him then invested in eternal
tabernacles of incorruptible flesh.

Now as I have clearly declared my judgment, that it holds not
demonstratively from any puncto, that Elias at the transfiguration had an
unchangeably glorious estate of body: so I hold it very probable, that Elias
did never die properly; but was changed at his rapture; and, at his ingresse
into heaven, enjoyed a truly glorified body; and both unto the time of Christ's
transfiguration, and then, and ever since enjoys, and lives in flesh
incorruptible; not Animal, but Spiritual, as the blessed Saints shall have
after the end of the world.

If any one think to choke me with my former words, That Christ's glory was
greater then the glory of his servants; And therefore, if Elias had an
immortal body, Christ must have one also; which he had not: I answer, That
the hypostaticall union of the Divine Nature to the Humane in Christ, was at
all times of greater glory, then the glorified estate of the Saints shall be
after the resurrection.

Secondly, as intensively Christ's glory was greater then Elijahs, though it
was eclipsed by Christ's voluntary condescent, that he might accomplish the
work of our redemption: so extensively, at the instant of the transfiguration,
I doubt not, but the bodily glory of Christ was as far above his servants
glory, as the light of the sun surpasses the light of lesser stars.
Therefore, all things considered, Christ's bodily glory was greater then
Elijahs, though Elijahs was immortal, and Christ's then changeable and mortal.

Bellarmine, in his Apology against the judicious Monitorie preface of King
James, esteems it as Valde admirandum.
much to be admired at, that the learned King said, Enoch and Elias are now
glorified in heaven. Many things indeed might Bellarmine learn by his Majesty,
which are and laudanda, and valde admiranda, both to be praised and wondered at:
but, taking valde admirandum in the worser sense, I say, his wonder is full of
ignorance and malice. Wherefore, omitting much of what that really-unanswerable
Bishop has copiously alleged, I say, It is no such strange matter; to say, or
believe, that Enoch and Elias have glorified bodies. And yet here, first of
all, I will ingenuously confess that a man, both in soul and in a corruptible
body, may be in the third heaven: because S. Paul else might have known, that
himself was not in the third heaven in his body: but his doubting and
nesciencie (2. Cor. 12.2, etc. Whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether
out of the body, I cannot tell; God knows) proves that either might have
been. The disjunctive might else have been spared, if it could have been done
only one way: Therefore it is possible unto the Almighty, that Elias might or
may have a passive mortal body, though he were rapt into heaven, and there be
at this present. But, A posse ad esse non valet consequentia: and the reasons
and authority which place Elias in heaven, in an unpassible body, are more
ponderous and numerous, then theirs which embrace the contrary.

If it be objected, that Elias went not up into the third heaven, because he
was carried up in a whirlwinde: and whirlwindes reach not to the third heaven:
I answer, By the same cavil they may say, Our Savior ascended not into
heaven, when a cloud received him out of their sight, Act. 1.9. because clouds
pierce not to the highest heaven. But we must distinguish between things
ordinary and extraordinary. Both the whirlwinde and the cloud had somewhat in
them above the common level of nature, and were not merely elementarie; but
adapted to higher and diviner uses, then common clouds or whirlwindes.

I remove this passant tabernacle of discourse from an objection unto the
standing mansion of our great Adversaries confessions. Suarez, in tertiam
partem Sum. quaest. 53. artic. 3. confesses in this manner: Sunt in inserno
aliqui homines, corpore and anima, ante generalem resurrectionem; ut Dathan,
Abiram, and similes.
Some men are in hell both soul and body, before the general resurrection: as
Dathan, and Abiram, and the like. He is seconded by Peter Morales, another
Jesuit, in his fifth book on the first chapter of S. Matthew, Tract. 11. This
opinion is somewhat minced by Ribera, upon the words, Revel. 19.20. These both
were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone: who has his second
also, viz. Blasius Viegas; for they say, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram were
swallowed up alive; but then the earth closed, and they died, and their souls
only were carried into hell. The like they say of Antichrist, and his
forerunner. But this nicetie is contradicted by the Vulgat, which to them is
authentical: Number. 16.33. Descenderunt vivi in infernum: so also in the
thirtieth verse; and so the Interlinearie rightly reads it, according to the
Hebrew. And if infernus did signify the grave, in the case of Korah and his
accomplices, as it does not (for then it had been no such extraordinary miracle,
for people alive to be swallowed up by the earths rupture; since many people,
yea, whole cities have often been so punished, and came to destruction: but
they were for a sign, Numb. 26.10. that is, for an example; that others should
not murmr and rebel against Gods Ministers; as the Genevean Note on the
place, soundly, and pertinently, and deeply interprets:) yet concerning
Antichrist and his falseprophet, mentioned by them, it cannot be so: for it is
said most punctually, Revel. 19.20. (...) Vivi missi sunt hi duo in stagnum
ignis ardentis, and sulphuris, These both were cast alive into a lake of
burning fire and brimstone, as it is in their Vulgat. Montanus varieth it thus,
In stagnum ardens in sulphur, Into a lake burning in brimstone. They did not
descend Ad sepulchrum, ad infernum, ad stagnum ignis exclusive.
to the grave, to hell, to the lake of fire, exclusively; coming only to the
brink: but, Descenderunt in infernum, in stagnu^ ignis.
they descended into hell, into the lake of fire, they were plunged into it.
Therefore they did not die by the way, or at the gates of hell; but actually
and really entered into those fiery mansions, or burning chambers. For both
Ribera and Viegas will be ashamed to say, that the grave burns with fire and
brimstone; which they must be forced to say, if they continue to hold, that
Antichrist and his forerunner leave their bodies in the grave.

Andreas Caesariensis (says Viegas on Revel. 13.) thinks that Antichrist and
his forerunner shall not die; Sed incorrupto corpore, vivos ad infernum
descensuros.
but with incorruptible bodies shall descend alive into hell. And as concerning
Korah, and his fellow-mutiners; though some think, it cannot be understood
literally, of the nethermost hell; because it is said, Numb. 16.33. They, and
all that appertained to them, went down alive into the pit: but their goods,
and their houses went not to hell: therefore not their bodies: Yet I answer,
The Text is too much wrung, and strained: for by the like wrench, they may as
well prove that their houses and goods were alive: the letter will bear one as
well as the other, if they ground on some translation of the Seventie; for of
the Original I shall speak anon. But the true meaning is, They, and all their
things, came to that destruction, which in their nature they were capable of:
their tents and goods were swallowed up and consumed; their bodies were hurried
to their own places; not of rest (as is the common death of all men, till the
judgment general) but extraordinarily, they endured present punishment.

Our learned Doctor Raynolds, Tom. 1. de libris Apocryphis, praelect. 81. page
973. relates, that Epiphanius, in Ancorato, held; Korah, Dathan, and their
rebellious troops, D^scendisse viventes in orcum; non corporibus solutis, neque
reliquiis traditis, aut part; sed totis ipsis, cum corpore and anima, traditis
in supplicium.
descended living and quick into hell; their souls not disunited from their
bodies; no remnant or part left behind: but they all and wholly, souls and
bodies, were delivered up to torment. And thus that most learned Professor
discourses, Descenderunt ipsi, cum omn^bus quae ipsorum erant, vivi in
infernum; quomodo babetur in Hebraico contextu. Quae sunt illa omnia?
Tabernacala, and domus, and cpes ipsorum. Atqui non dicent (credo) Pontificii,
domes little and facultates omnes in lscum animarum descendisse, sed in locum
corporum.
They descended, with all things that were theirs, alive into hell, as it is in
the Hebrew. What is meant by those words, All things? Their Tabernacles,
houses, and goods. But I believe, the Papists will not say, that their houses
and goods descended into the place of souls; but into the place of bodies.
Therefore Moses denotes the place of bodies, not of souls. The honored
Doctor might also have considered, that it may be as well said, that their
bodies went to hell, as their souls to the sepulcher; if the place of their
descent had been understood only of the receptacles of bodies, and not of
souls. Secondly, (as I touched before) may not as well their bodies go to hell
alive, as they, and all that appertained to them, went down (as the Seventie in
Vatablus have it) alive into the pit? Thirdly, did their tabernacles, houses,
beasts, and goods go down into their graves? Graves are not the proper places
for tents, beasts and goods? but for humane bodies. Those terms of locus
corporum, are obscure; and culled out purposely, for a starting-hole: whereas,
if he had said, Moses denoted their sepulchers only, and not hell (which he
does in effect afterward;) we may press him with this, That they are much
happier then other: for whereas others bring nothing into this world, nor
carry any thing out of it; these men went not to hell, in Moses his meaning;
but carried with them, out of this world, their beasts, their goods, yea their
very tents. But their misery and curse extraordinary is described, and not
their happiness.

Lastly, I could wish that the worthy Doctor had thoroughly weighed how
divinely the Holy Writ discriminateth several matters. Moses prophesied Numb.
16.30. If the earth swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and
they go down quick into the pit, etc. where you must interpret it, as if he had
thus said, The earth indeed shall swallow and cover alike both them and all
their goods: but the persons themselves shall go down alive (VIVENTES, living,
as the Interlinearie has it; vivi, as Doctor Raynolds) lower; even to the
pit. And accordingly it came to pass, verse. 32. The earth swallowed them up,
and their houses, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their
goods: where you see, the earth swallowed all alike; the chief leaders, and
their goods; the associates of Korah, and all their goods. Yet for the persons
themselves, it is said in the next verse, by way of distinction, remarkably;
They, and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the pit: which you
cannot possibly interpret of their goods, and tabernacles: (for they never were
alive; and never could go down alive, no not to the grave, or to any pit
whatsoever) but of the principals, and the accessaries; viz. the chief rebels,
and their partakers: for diverse men appertained to them, as is apparent verse.
32. and therefore, what our English translation has somewhat dubiously, and
ambiguously, They, and all that appertained to them, (where it is not
significantly enough expressed, whether men only, or men and goods are
comprised under the words) the Interlinearie has exactly, and truly
determined, Descenderunt ipsi, and omnes, qui eis, viventes in infernum.
They descended, and all the men which lived with them, alive into hell: and
Vatablus, Descenderuntque ipsi, and quo^quot ad eospertinebant, viventes in
infernum.
And both they descended and as many men as were their partakers, living and
quick into hell: the quot quot having reference to men only, not to other
things: for then it would have been viventia, and not viventes: and therefore
in the margin of Vatablus, it is thus varied, Omnes, qui eis.
All they who belonged to them. Where the masculine gender designeth out the
men only to go alive into the pit. To be plain, I care for no opinion, as it
is an opinion of Bellarmines, or of the Pontificians; but if they light upon a
truth, I will accept of it, not as theirs, but as true: Amicus Socrates, amicus
Plato; sed magis amica Verita^.
Socrates shall be my companion, Plato my friend, truth my familiar friend: and
Vel veritas, vel -- Virtus and in host probatur.
Or truth, or any virtue do I like,
Even in an enemy that would me strike.


And I hold Bellarmines opinion true, That Korah, his partisans and company,
descended alive into hell. And that (...) in Numbers 16.30, and 33 verses,
signifies hell properly. Ex manifestis loci circumstantiis intelligetis,
notari a Mose locum subterraneum, corporum, non animarum.
You shall discern by the manifest circumstances of the place, that Moses
means some place under the earth fitted or appointed as receptacles of
bodies, not of souls, says Doctor Raynolds.

Herein I must needs dissent. And first, I say, What is this Locus corporum.
place of bodies? It must be either the grave, or hell; or let him design us
out a third place. A third place he cannot name; especially for humane bodies.
Some held concerning infants, That in regard of their innocence they are to
have eternal life: but because they were not baptized, they should not be with
Christ in his kingdom. But Augustine says, That Christ himself confuted --
istam (nescio quam) medietatem. De peccator. Merit. and Remis. 1.28.
this new-invented middle or third mansion: and as he said a little before,
more generally, Nec est ullu^ ulli medius locus, ut possit ess^, nisi cum
diabolo, q^^ non est cum Christo.
It is impossible for any man to be in any middle place, but he must needs be
with the devil, who is not with Christ: so do I say of this Locus corporum, It
is either hell, or the grave: Tertium locum penitus ignoramus, We know no third
place. The Papists err, to establish a Purgatory for the soul, besides hell
and heaven: And Doctor Raynolds does not well, to mention so often a Locus
corporum; where he ought to name, Where it is, and What bodies go into it.

Secondly, it is plain, that their souls did sin, their souls were punished,
and went down to hell. Does not the Apostle S. Jude (verse. 11.) speak of such,
as perished in the gainsaying of Korah; -- to whom, not the woe of a sudden
death is denounced, but (verse. 13.) the blackness of darkness for ever is
reserved? does not the place stand fair for the damnation of Korah and his
fellows? Though Doctor Raynolds minceth it in this doubtful manner: Non
inflcior, quin eorum auimae, si sint mortui pertinaces in scelerata sua
obstinatione, adjudicatae sint inferis, cum Divite.
I deny not but their souls, if they died obstinate in their wicked rebellion,
were adjudged to the hell where Dives was. Again, when the Scripture says, Si
creationem creaverit Dominus, (Numb. 16.30.) If the Lord shall make a new
thing, or a strange thing, as new almost, as strange to sight almost, as is the
creation (for I take so much to be employed in that unusual phrase;) what
reason has that grave Doctor to say, Illud quod proprie notatur in verbis --
Descenderintque viventes in infernum, nihil est aliud, quam, horribile and
tremendum judicium Dei divinitus illis inflictum iri: ut, cum alii prius
moriantur quam sepeliantur, ipsi quasi vivi sepeliantur.
That which is properly meant by the words, IF THEY GO DOWN QVICK INTO HELL, is
nothing else, but that the horrible and dreadful judgment of God, divinely
shall be inflicted on them, viz. in such sort, that whereas others first die,
and then are buried, these shall be buried (as it were) alive. Why so
reservedly and cautelously is it added, As it were, alive? Again, Locus fuit
corporum, non animarum, in quem descenderunt Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.
It was the place of bodies, and not of souls, into which Korah, Dathan, and
Abiram descended: (as if their souls were in the place appointed for bodies)
which he further parallelleth with the burying alive of the deflowred Vestall
virgins: though he ought to distinguish between the extraordinary miraculous
hand of God, and the ordinary justice of men in such cases. And the Vestall
virgins were far longer ere they died, then Korah and his company, ere they
were swallowed up.

Let the judicious reader ponder these words of that famous Doctor, Is nothing
else: and Shall be buried, as it were, alive: and, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram
descended not into the place of souls (though the souls of all wicked men do
so: and their souls, by his reason, should have more privilege then other
wicked men's:) and, I dare say, he will think that Doctor Raynolds might more
safely have held the other opinion, That their souls and bodies went alive to
hell properly so called.

That Moses denotes the place of bodies, I deny not: for even that place is
in hell, for all the bodies of the wicked in due time, and for these men's
bodies, extraordinarily, before the general judgment.

But I am loath to say, Moses meant not the place of souls: I am loath to
entertain a thought, That the Rebels themselves did repent; for, if they did
so, they are saved: I would be loath to flee from rationable probability, to
possibility; which has a farre-stretched almighty arm; and to say, as he
does, Fieri potest ut quidam eorum aut offines illi culpae non fuerint; aut si
fuerint, poenitentiam egerint.
It may be that some of them were not faulty; or, if they were, repented. That
they repented who were swallowed up alive, seems not agreeable to S. Jude, who
(ver. 11.) pronounces a fearful woe against such as are like unto them, and
perished in the gainsaying of Korah: In which woe, not temporal bodily
punishment alone, but eternal torment of the soul is included. Compare the
words with 2. Pet. 2.12. Moreover, none dares deny the possibility of
repentance; but who can think it probable, That God would send such an
extraordinary punishment on such as were innocent, or repented; when as the
children of that Luciferian Arch-rebel Korah, were exempted from that
destruction? Numb. 26.11. Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not: yea,
were eminent and famous among the Levites; Were over the work of the service,
keepers of the gates of the Tabernacle, and their fathers were over the host
of the Lord: -- and the Lord was with them, 1. Chron. 9.19. etc. And they were
either excellent Musicians, or Singers, or Penmen for Divine Service; as may
be collected from many Psalms, entitled, To the sons of Korah; as, Psalm.
42. Psalm. 44. Psalm. 87. And when the Scripture says, They descended alive into
the pit, I would be loath to vary the phrase as he does, Si sint mortui
pertinaces.
If they died in their obstinacy. I deny not, but in a large sense, they may
be said to die: and the Scripture says, They should not die the common death
of all men, Numb. 16.29. yet also, They descended alive into the pit: which
cannot be better reconciled, then to say, The state of their bodies was
changed; immortality swallowed up their mortality, in the act of their
descending, or passion rather, if you will so call it. There was no true
separation between their souls and their bodies; and therefore they died not:
their change notwithstanding may be reputed for a death; which perhaps also
shall be the case of all the wicked, who shall be alive at Christ's second and
glorious coming; and shall be certainly the estate of the righteous, who shall
be alive at that great and dreadful day.

I would be loath also to say, That nothing else is noted by the words, but
that, Whereas others die first, and then are buried; these men were buried
alive, or as live men: that I may pass by his amphibolous phrase, Non
inficior, quin eorum animae, si sint mortui pertinaces in seelecata sua
obstinatione, adjudicatae sint inferis cum Divite.
I deny not, but their souls, if they died obstinate in their wicked
rebellion, were sentenced to hell with Dives. Why does he not specialize where
those inferi are? and in what place Dives is? or did they go to a parabolicall
hell? for he could not be ignorant that many hold that history of Dives to be
but a parable.

The truth and sum of all is this; By divine power extraordinary, the
houses, or tents, the beasts, and the goods of Korah and his accomplices, were
separated and secluded from the use of men; were swallowed up, and covered in
the earth, and came to that end and destruction which they were capable of: No
word of God says expressly, no inference or reason evinceth, no probability
induces us to think, that their tents, household stuff, or utensils were
alive; or that they, yea, or the beasts of these conspiratours, went into the
graves of them, (if graves they had any;) much less, did such trash descend
into hell, that place of torment, that Tophet prepared for wicked men, that
Deep, excruciating and affrighting both the Devil and his Angels. That tents,
goods, and faculties should go thither, to what purpose were it? but God does
nothing, unless it be to some great end or purpose: therefore to the lowest
hell their goods descended not. But as concerning the men themselves, it is
plainly said, That both the earth did open its mouth, and swallowed them up,
(even as it did their tents, or beasts, or goods:) and after that, most
distinctly; that they went down alive into (...): but their souls could not go
into the graves, and there reside; and their bodies might go into hell, and
there reside; therefore (...), must needs there be expounded, not of the
grave, nor of locus corporum (as Doctor Raynolds phraseth it) but of the hell
of the damned, of the locus animarum; which place also must be the receptacle
for all humane bodies of the wicked, after the day of doom and retribution; and
may be the prison of those reprobate both souls and bodies, whom God
miraculously thither adjudgeth, as he did this rebellious rout.

Though Lyra, cited by Doctor Raynolds, thinks the grave is meant, because it
is appointed for all men to die, and after that comes judgment: yet I have
many ways proved, that by especial dispensation, and by extraordinary
privilege, some may receive favor, beyond the common rule or course of
nature: and contrarily, I doubt not, but upon so great a commotion, and furious
rebellion, God could, and did, by way of exemplarie punishment, punish these
men bodily, before the usual time; and sent their bodies to hell, before the
general judgment.

If Cajetan, and Hieronymus ab Oleastro, cited by that Reverend Doctor,
expound (...) for the grave; yet they want both weight and age, to put down
Epiphanius, before recited, and many other Ancients, who place their bodies in
hell.

I accept then of Suarez his confession before mentioned; and agree with him,
That Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, are now, both in souls and bodies, in hell. And
upon this ground, I thus work: If they be there, they are there to be punished,
and are punished: if they burn in hellfire, they have no longer mortal
bodies: But as at the last day, the bodies of the wicked, that are alive then,
shall put on immortality; so the bodies of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, were not
properly separated from their souls; but were changed, and fitted for such
places of punishments, in the instant of their descent: and so they descended
alive into the pit of hell.

Then why may not Enoch and Elias be in immortal and glorified bodies, since
they were assumed up into heaven? especially, since Suarez himself again
ingenuously confesses, Animae gloriosae connaturale est uniri corpori
immortali and glorioso.
It is convenient, yea proper to nature, that a glorified soul should be united
to an immortal and glorified body. And the souls of Enoch and Elias are now
glorified, by the like acknowledgement of our learned Adversaries.

Again, where the souls of Enoch and Elias are, there also are their bodies:
But their souls are in the highest heaven. For our Savior says, John 17.24.
Father, I will that they also, whom thou have given me, be with me where I am.
And John 12.26. Where I am, there shall also my servant be. But Christ is in
the highest heavens: Therefore both Enoch and Elias are, with their bodies, in
the third heaven: unless you can say, They were not given by God to Christ,
and were not Christ's servants. Now since they are there in their bodies; it is
very unlikely, that they should be there some thousands of years in bodies
mortal and unglorified. Hierom, ad Pammachium, avoucheth, Fruuntur divino
consortio, and cibo coelesti.
They enjoy and have the fruition of the Deity, and are fed with heavenly
food: which is not meat for mortal bodies.

Besides, S. Hierom, Tom. 3. Epist. page 189. in Epistola ad Minerium and
Alexandrum, cites Theodorus Heracleotes, instancing in Enoch and Elias, as
carried to heaven, and as having overcome death. And Apollinarius fully agrees
with the other, with this addition only, that Enoch and Elias have now
glorified bodies. Dorotheus, in Synopsi de Elia, thus, Qui humi iucedebat;
instar spiritus, cum Angelis in coelis agit.
Who was on the earth as other men; now, as a spirit, lives in heaven with the
Angels: therefore he has not a mortal body.

Again, in most of the general promises that God has made, he gives some
instance or other, to be as it were a taste of what shall succeed; lest men's
hearts should fail, in expectancie of that, whereof they see no kind of proof.
As for example, because it was promised, that there shall be a resurrection, it
was figured, not only more obscurely in Isaac his rising up from the Altar; in
the drawing of Joseph out of the pit; in the Whales deliverie of Jonah; in
Samsons breaking from the cords; in Daniels escape from the lions; in the
waters yielding and giving up Moses, to live in the Kings house, and the like:
but more evidently, by the real, and temporary raising up of diverse dead,
both in the Old and New Testament.

Likewise, the glorification of our bodies being determined by God, and by him
promised; yea, Enoch himself prophesying, that God comes with ten thousands of
his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, Jude 14, and 15 verses; which is
not, cannot be executed, without the glorifying of souls and bodies of his
servants; we may well think, it pleased God to give to the old world a pledge
or two of the general glorification of the bodies of his Saints, by the
particular performance of the same to the bodies of Enoch and Elias, whom he
assumed up into heaven, by way of especial favor.

To this I may add, That Enoch and Elijahs raptures being types of Christ's
ascension, since Christ ascended in a glorified and immortal body, the
shadows must be like the substance: and therefore they ascended in glorified
immortal bodies.

Suarez is driven to a great exigent: They were only (says he) -- in statu
merendi, and potuerunt in gratia crescere, etc.
in a state in which they might merit and increase in grace, till the time in
which they were translated: And as they were translated, they were so confirmed
in grace, that they can commit no sin: And to their old estate of meriting
shall they return, when they shall live again amongst men. But who ever heard
of such turnings and returnings in any other men or Angels? or that their
estate shall be changed from A non posse peccare, ad posse peccare.
an estate wherein they cannot sin, to an estate in which they may sin? and
so backward? For supposing they shall live again, and die again; if they can
merit, they can also sin whilst they live among men: and so, when they die,
and have their reward in heaven, this shall be no small part of it, Non posse
peccare.
To have no power to sin. But this opinion somewhat resembles the
diversified estate of devils, who shall be saved after the general judgment,
as Origin feigned and fabled; and which the Church has branded for erroneous.

And now I see I have fallen, before I was aware, upon the fourth and last
question by me propounded, Whether Enoch and Elias shall ever die, or do live
with glorified bodies in the highest heavens? which also I have answered at
large, That they never shall die, but do and shall live in glorified bodies.
Tertullian, I confess, said concerning Elias at the Transfiguration, Apparuit
in veritate car^is nondum defunctae
He appeared in true flesh which had never been separated from its soul: and
more punctually, de Anima cap. 50. Translatus est Enoch and Elias, nec mors
eorum reperta est; dilata scilicet: Morituri reservantur, ut Antichristum
sanguine suo extinguant.
Enoch and Elias were translated: nor is their death recorded, or known; it
being adjourned: they are kept and preserved that they may die hereafter, and
by their blood overthrow and extinguish Antichrist, as Baronius cites him. And
the more common opinion of the Papists is, That they two shall be slain: and
they prove it by Rev. 11.7. When the two witnesses shall have finished their
testimony, the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall
overcome, and kill them. The three other places of Scripture, on which
Bellarmine built his third demonstration, that Antichrist is not come, because
Enoch and Elias are not yet come, are answered before. This last place and
passage of Scripture, used by Bellarmine, de Romano Pontif. 3.6. comes now to
be examined: and you shall find it thus well winnowed by Bishop Andrews, in
his Answer to Cardinal Bellarmines Apology, Cap. 11. That the two witnesses
are the two Testaments, as Beda, Primasius, Augustinus, and Ticonius are
Authors. S. Hilarious rejects Enoch, and puts Moses in his room, and that
very peremptorily: Though many have substituted Jeremie in Enochs room, says
Hilarie on Matthew. Can. 20. S. Hierom, the next Father cited by Bellarmine, is
not constant enough for Elias (which I touched at before:) and Rupertus, on
Malach. 4. testifies so much of Hierom: and Bullinger, in Apocal. lib. 3. v.
3. says, S. Hierom esteems them to be Jews and Jewish heretics, who think
Elias shall come again. Lactantius, cited by Bellarmine, in his Apology,
names neither Enoch, nor Elias. And Chrysostom, Theodoret, Origin, and
Primasius say nothing of Enoch. Hippolytus, for the two witnesses, brings in
three; one whereof is S. John the Divine: and indeed he is more likely to be
one of the witnesses, then Enoch; for unto him it was said, Revel. 10.11. Thou
must prophecy again before many peoples, and nations, and tongues, and kings:
but no such thing was said to Enoch. Others say, Elizeus shall be one of the
two witnesses. Hieronymus, says, Nisi quis spiritualiter intelligat hunc locum
Apocalypsews, Judaicis ei fabulis acquiescendum est. In Epist. ad Marcellum.
Unless a man understand this place of the Revelation spiritually, he must
needs settle and rest on Jewish fables. Maldonate on the 17 of Matthew, and his
learned Interpreter, says, It is so clear a matter, that Moses and Elias
shall come, that none but a rash and impudent man can deny it. Thus much
Bishop Andrews in his Answer to the place of the Revelation, against
Bellarmines Apology; who vaunted of a cloud of Fathers; which cloud is
vanished almost into nothing.

Much more of great worth and consequence has that Reverend Bishop, in the
same 11 chapter, concerning Enoch and Elias, living in glorified bodies; to
whom I refer the Reader. And this shall suffice to have spoken of Enoch, and
of Elias, against Bellarmines third demonstration (as he calls it) that
Antichrist is not yet come. Every part and parcel of which proof is so weak,
and so far from concluding apodictically; that they scarce deserve a place
among probable arguments. And thus is the second main branch of my answers made
good and manifested, That some have been excepted from death, viz. Enoch and
Elias; though it be objected, that It is appointed for men to die. The third
part of my answer follows, That others also shall be excepted.

O Fountain of life, and preserver of men, to whom belong also the issues of
death: I have deserved to die the first and second death, I have provoked thy
long-suffering, I am no more worthy to be called thy son; Lord make me as one
of thy hired servants, and put me to what labor, to what pain soever, within
me, without me, so long as pleases thee: only, I beseech thee for the blessed
mediation of thy dearly beloved only Son, Jesus Christ my Savior, give me
grace not to faint under the burdens appointed; and at the end of the day, at
my lives end, vouchsafe to give me a penie among thy laborers, and eternal
life among thy chosen. Amen.
CHAP. III.
1. Some others hereafter shall be excepted from death. The change may be
accounted, in a general large sense, a kind of death. The Papists will have a
real proper death: Aquinas, an incineration. This is disproved 1. Thessal.
4.17. which place is handled at large. The rapture of the godly is sine media
morte, without death. The resurrection is of all together. The righteous
prevent not the wicked, in that.

2. By the words of the Creed is proved, that some shall never die. The same is
confirmed by other places of Scripture; with the consent of S. Augustine, and
Cajetan. The definitions Ecclesiasticorum dogmatum, of the sentences and
tenants of the Church, leave the words doubtfully. Rabanus his exposition
rejected.

3. The place of S. Paul, 2. Corinthians. 5.4. evinceth, That some shall not die.
Cajetan with us, and against Aquinas. Doctor Estius, and Cornelius a Lapide
the Jesuit, approve Cajetan. S. Augustine is on our side; and evinceth it by
Adams estate before the fall; which state Bellarmine denies not. Salmerons
objections answered.

4. Some shall be exempted from death, as is manifested 1. Corinthians. 15.51. The
place fully explicated. The common Greek copies preferred. The Greek reading
(...), We shall not all sleep, stands with all truth, conveniencie,
probability, and sense. The other Greek, (...), We shall therefore all of us
sleep, and the more different Vulgat, Omnes quidem resurgemus, sed non omnes
immutabimur, Indeed we shall arise, but we shall not all be changed, justly
exploded, as adverse to sense.

5. The Pelagians, though accursed heretics, yet held truly, That some shall
not die. S. Augustine dubious. Others stick in his hesitancie. Yet other
Fathers and late Writers are constant, That some shall be privileged from
death; yet, that change may be called a kind of death.

1. THe third main question being, Whether Adam and his children, all and every
one of them, without privilege or exception, must and shall die? I have first
answered, and proved, that there may be an exception of some, who shall not
die. Secondly, I have instanced in Enoch and Elias, That they have been
excepted, and that they shall not die. I am now come to the third branch of my
answer, That others also hereafter shall be excepted. In the avouchment of this
truth consists the labor, till the end of this Chapter. And first of all, it
must needs be acknowledged, That all and every one of those, who might have
been, or have been, or shall be excepted, may yet be said, in a sort, to die.
Loco mortis erit momentanea commutatio.
The change which shall be in the twinkling of an eye, shall be in the room and
stead of death, says Aretius. In illis qui repent immutantur, immutatio illa
erit species mortis.
The immutation of them who shall be suddenly changed, shall be a kind of
death, says Beza. Bosquier, in his Terror Orbis, makes rapture to be a kind
of death: we may more safely and properly call that sudden change, by the name
of death. For in this it shall be like death, That it shall take away from our
bodies all corruptibilitie and mortality, together with the defects now
annexed to them: and because it alters, if not abolisheth the former state or
nature, it shall go for a kind of death. But because this change does not
separate the soul from the body, does not dissolve the compositum; we are bold
to say, It is not a true, proper, real death.

The Papists will not be content with this immutation; but urge a perfect
natural death, a very disjunct separation of the soul from the body.

Aquinas goes further, and will have an incineration of the bodies; from which
dust and ashes, incorruptible bodies shall arise.

But this is confuted by the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. (...). Nos viventes
relicti, simul cum illis rapiemur in nubibus in occursum Domini in era.
We who remain alive shall be hurried together in the clouds to meet the Lord
in the air, as Montanus has it. The Vulgat differs but in word, not in
sense; Qui vivimus, qui relinquimur, etc.
We which are alive and remain, shall be caught up. That the Apostle speaks
not this of himself, and of his own person, is confessed. Occumenius cites
Methodius his opinion thus; and adds his reason, For S. Paul was not alive
corporally to that time. But it comes more home, if we say (as well we may)
that the blessed Apostle S. Paul knew that himself was none of them, who were
to endure alive on earth, till the day of the general judgment; because he
says, 2. Tim. 4.6. I am now ready to be offered; and the time of my departure
is at hand. Yea, 2 Thessalonians. 2.2. he exhorts the same Thessalonians, That
though seducers should pretend his message, or his letter; yet they should not
believe that Christ's day was at hand. His own time was at hand, but Christ's day
was not. The English translation jumpeth verbally in the contradiction; At
hand; and, Not at hand. The Original varieth but a little; and that not in
sense, nor in the Verb it self, but the Preposition: and Montanus has the
word, Instat, by way of exposition in both places. Sed suam personam verbi
gratia profert.
But he instanceth in his own person, says Methodius. That he speaks it
only of the godly, is also apparent by the context: for the word (...), we the
remainder, shows, that a few shall be left at that time: and if he had spoken
of the wicked; perhaps, he would not have put in himself, and other holy ones;
he would not have said Rapiemur, We shall be taken up; but Rapientur, They
shall be taken up. Again, when he says, Rapiemur cum illis, We shall be taken
up with them; who are meant in those words, save they only who sleep in Jesus,
and whom God will bring with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14? which are not the wicked, but
the godly only. They are the Saints, with whom the Lord comes, Jude ver. 14.

The Rhemists themselves confess, that the Apostle speaks of all the
faithful then living, when Christ comes to the last judgment. Diodorus (as
it is in Hierom) says, The Apostle Apostolus Nos dixit, pro eo quod justos; de
quorum and ego sum numero.
said WE, that is, they who are just: out of whose number I am not excluded. A
powerful reason may confirm this: because the wicked will wish mountains to
cover them, will quake and tremble at that hour, and would not be willing to
come to judgment, if they could avoid it. Therefore it is not likely that they
would spring forth, and put themselves forward to meet the Lord.

The sum is, The godly which shall be then left, and be alive, shall be taken
up into the air. The Papists say, this is not to be done, Sine media morte.
without intercurrent, or intercedent death: whereas the words are express, We
living, and remaining, shall be snatched up. The argument of Gregory de
Valentia has pith in it. For he says, If the live men do die, Sequitur justos
aliquanto post resurrecturos, quam alios: fiquidem morientur, atque adeo
resurgent.
it follows that the just shall arise somewhat after others: for they shall
both die and rise again. Which opinion, because it is against all Divinity, he
minceth and mollifieth thus, Omnes possunt dici resurgere simul, prout simul
fieri dici potest, quod fit sub idem tempus brevissimum.
All may be said to arise together: as that may be said to be done at once,
which is done in a very short time. But this shift cannot serve his turn: for,
(...) (1. Corinthians. 15.52.) in puncto, or in tempore indivisibili, in one
instant, is neither first nor last. But so shall all arise: and Bonaventure,
Sentent. 4. distinct. 43. quaest. 3. proves by six reasons, that Resurrectio
omnium fit simul, and non successive.
There shall be a joint resurrection of all together; and not successive, as
Valentia would have it. The frame may be this, from his confession, The
righteous shall not arise after others: But, by Valentia his acknowledgement,
if the righteous, who shall be alive when Christ comes, shall die; they must
arise after others: Therefore they shall not die at all. Though it be said, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. The dead in Christ shall arise first, yet he says not, he means
not, that they shall arise sooner then other men (much less later, as the
Jesuit would featly excuse it:) for all shall be raised together, good and bad,
at the blowing of the trump: All that are in the graves shall hear Christ's
voice (one voice, one single voice shall be heard of all) and shall come forth:
they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have
done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation, John 5.28, 29. They must not
come forth one by one, or one after another; but all together. And not only
they who are dead, shall all arise together: but at the same time shall both
the dead be raised, and the living changed: 1 Thessalonians. 4.15.
For this we say unto you by the word of the Lord (perhaps, some of the words
which he heard in the third heaven) that we which are alive, and remain unto
the coming of the Lord shall not prevent them which are asleep: And there is no
likelihood that the dead shall prevent the living: Therefore all shall arise,
or be changed together. The Lord shall descend from heaven with a shout, with
the voice of the Archangel, and with the trump, 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. With a great
sound of a trumpet, Matthew. 24.31. The trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall
be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed, 1. Cor. 15.52. All this shall
be done at one time, the change of some, and the resurrection of others. No
preeminence is in that point. Though the Apostle says, The dead in Christ
shall arise first; it is meant, before others shall meet Christ in the air.
Non enim ponit ordinem resurrectionis ad resurrectionem, sed ordinem ad raptum
vel occurrentiam.
For he sets not down the order of their several resurrections, but the
order of their several raptures and meetings with Christ, says the deep
Aquinas. The raised and changed holy ones shall go together: the changed shall
not meet Christ, till first the holy dead be raised.

Again, it is not, Resurgent primi, Shall be the first who arise, which is the
bad translation of the Vulgat; but (...), Resurgent primum, Shall arise first
of all, adverbially; first, that is, before others meet Christ. S. Augustine
was sometimes doubtful of the main point: but what says he, Tomo 4. de octo
Dulcitii quaestionibus, quaest. 3. upon these words, WE WHO LIVE AND ARE LEFT?
I would (says he) hear more learned men concerning these words, and correct
what I have sometimes thought otherwise, from hence; if they can be so
expounded to me, as by them I may understand, that all who live now, or shall
live, shall die. -- But if in these words there can no other sense be found;
and if it be clear, that the Apostle would be understood, according to the
evidence of the words, That there shall be some living in the end of the world,
Qui non expolientur corpore, sed superinduantur immortalitate, ut absorbeatur
mortale a vita.
who shall not die corporally, but be clothed over with immortality, that
mortality may be swallowed up of life; then to this opinion, without doubt, is
agreeable that which in our Belief we confess, That Christ shall come to judge
both quick and dead. So far proceeds that holy Father S. Augustine.

2. And because he has named a second place, and instanceth in the Creed; it
shall be my second argument; and thus do I shape it; The Creed Apostolical
says, Christ shall judge both the quick and the dead. He was ordained of God
to be the Judge of quick and dead, says S. Peter, Act. 10.42. S. Paul has the
same, 2. Timoth. 4.1. Testificor coram Jesu Christo, qui judicaturus est vivos
and mortuos, I testify before Jesus Christ who shall judge the quick and the
dead; And when the Scriptures say so, they understand it De novissimo generali
judicio.
of the last general judgment, says Bellarm. de Purgat. 2.4. Yea the Apostle
expresses so much in the last cited verse of Timothy; Christ shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom. But his Kingdom was not
of this world, and his first appearing was past; Therefore it must be at his
second coming. The groundwork of the words being laid, thus the structure
arises. By the word, dead; you cannot understand the parties as they are dead;
for so Christ judges them not; alive people are the object of his judgment:
But you must needs expound dead for those, that sometimes did die and now are
raised to be judged, and are alive. The word quick, or living, you cannot
interpret, as the Papists do, such as are alive then, and shall die; and then
be raised; and then be judged: for it needed not to have been said, He shall
judge the quick and the dead; but it had been sufficient to have said only one
of them, He shall judge the quick, or the living; for indeed they shall all be
alive: or, He shall judge the dead; for even the living, and the quick shall
die, as the Papists feign. But indeed the Holy Writ divides all mankind into
two sorts: the one part shall be living, and not die, but be changed; the other
are such, as sometimes died: Viventes, and mortuos. And thus there are no
clouds in that article, He shall judge the quick and the dead.

In the Creed there is neither redundancie, nor defect: in the Popish
exposition there is redundancie: for, if all and every one shall die, it might
as well have been expressed, He shall judge the dead: Or, if the dead, as dead,
be not properly judged; it might only have been said, He shall judge the
quick: for, according to the Papists, all the living shall die, and be again
made quick. But, as I said, the specializing of two sorts, quick and dead,
evinceth, that some shall not die, and some have died.

These words of the Creed did much move Cajetan, as himself confesses; and
they are brought by S. Augustine to establish this point, That some shall not
die, but shall be changed: though I confess, the definitions Ecclesiasticorum
Dogmatum, cap. 8. leave it doubtful. For thus they say, Quod dicimus in
symbolo, in adve^tu Domini vivos and mortuos judicandos, non solum justos and
peccatores significari credimus; sed and vivos eos, qui in carne invenien^i
sunt: qui adhuc morituri creduntur, vel immutandi sunt, ut alii volunt; ut
suscitati continuo, v^l reformati, cum ante mortuis judicentur.
What is said in the Creed, That Christ at his coming shall judge the quick and
the dead, we believe does signify, that not only the just, but the sinners
also shall be judged. And even those also who shall be found alive in their
bodies of flesh; of whom our belief is, that they shall yet die, or, as others
think, be changed: that being raised immediately, or changed, they may be
judged with those who died before: And yet, me thinks, another exposition of
Ruffinus is as bad: for quick and dead he understands of souls and bodies; As
if the souls were not sentenced before, in the particular judgment; as if the
bodies were then dead, or to be dead, when they are judged.

3. I have not yet ended with the words of the great S. Augustine: but from the
phrases used by him, out of the Holy Writ, of Expoliari, and Superindui, To be
unclothed, and clothed upon, I thus frame another argument.

S. Paul says, 2. Corinthians. 5.4. (...), We would not be unclothed, but clothed
upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life. He, who is not unclothed,
but clothed upon, holds what he had, lays down nothing, and has somewhat
added to him. But by this garment, Metaphorically, is the body meant, which
shall not be cast off from the soul, or the soul from it; but in the change
shall be arrayed with immortality.

Now if there be not an expoliation, if there be not a separation of the soul
from the body; there is no death: But there is no such expoliation: therefore
they who have other clothing put upon them, shall not die. Cajetan, upon the
words SVPERINDVI CVPIENTES, DESIRING TO BE CLOTHED UPON etc. says, The same
shall truly befall us, Si in die Domini, vestiti corpore, and non nudi, inventi
fuerimus; id est, si tunc residui futuri sumus, and nondum mortui.
if at Christ's coming we shall be found clothed with our bodies, and not naked:
that is, if we shall then remain alive, and not be dead before. And the same
Cajetan confuteth Aquinas his exposition, on the place. Doctor Estius
approves Cajetan; and so does Cornelius Cornelii a Lapide, on the words.

Lorinus on Act. 10. and Justinian upon these passages of S. Paul, will by no
means censure our opinion, as Catharinus and Soto do: and this they profess,
though they be Jesuits. For indeed our opinion is confirmed by S. Augustine, de
peccatorum meritis and remiss. 1.2. Si non peccasset Adam, non erat expoliandus
corpore, sed supervestiendus immortalitate and incorruptione, ut abscrberetur
mortale a vita, id est, ab animali in spirituale transiret.
If Adam had not sinned, his soul had never been disunited from his body, but
he had been clothed upon with immortality, and incorruption: so that the
mortal part should have been swallowed up of life, that is, should be changed
from a carnal life into a spiritual. Otherwhere S. Augustine says, Adam had
a state, by which he might pass from mortality to immortality without
tasting or partaking of death. Bellarmine speaking of Adam, cites this, and
likes it. Why therefore may not they, that shall be residui, left, be also
without death translated into glory? If the Jesuits had had such an argument,
they would have said, It were convenient for God so to do it, yea necessary;
that by plain demonstration mankind might see and know, what estate they had,
and what estate sometimes they lost in Adam; and that all mankind should have
been so translated, if sin had not hindered, and thrust death among us. I
will only say, It may be, that some are therefore kept to be translated, to
show the manner how Adam without death should have been changed.

Salmeron objecteth, Children found alive at that time, if they die not, shall
continue in the same stature: which may not be believed. I answer, he
derogateth from the power of God: as if he were not able to make children to be
men by the change, as he is able by death. Can God make children of stones? and
can he not make men of children? Did he create Adam to be a full grown man, of
earth? and will his hand be shortened in the immutation? God, out of the little
dust of little children, raises up, by Salmerons confession, entire, perfect
bodies of men: therefore the same God may as well, as easily, and perhaps more
easily, (if God does such things more easily, then other) of the same living
bodies of little children, by that mysterious change, produce and ampliate
every member to the full growth of perfect men. God caused the rod of Aaron to
bud; and it brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds,
Numb. 17.8. and yet it was severed from the root; and laid up in the Tabernacle
of the Congregation, before the testimony; free from water, or earth, to
nourish it: and this was done the morrow after it was there laid: though it
would not have born almonds, if it had been still united to the stock; perhaps,
for many months after. Did the same God restore unto Jeroboam, his hand which
was dried up before, so that he could not pull it back to him again, 1. Kings,
13.4. and that on a sudden, at the prayer of the Prophet? And will Salmeron
think, that if children do not die, they shall continue still children,
although they be changed? Who knows not, that the change is as great a part
of Gods power, as the resurrection?

Salmeron again objecteth, If the living or quick at that day, shall not die;
The wicked ones Ignem conflagrationis evadent.
shall avoid the fire of conflagration. I answer first, That the fire of
conflagration shall be after judgment. Secondly, if they should escape that
fire, they cannot flee from the fire of hell. Thirdly, the wicked ones shall
arise with the just, all together. The wicked ones may be changed also at the
same instant, that the just are; and that is, at the same instant of the
resurrection. Christ is the resurrection, and the life, John 11.25. The
resurrection, to them that are dead: perhaps the life to them that are changed,
and die not. The resurrection of the dead Saints, is called the resurrection
unto life; The resurrection of the dead wick^ ones, is called the resurrection
unto damnation, John 5.28. Likewise, say I, The change of the wicked, (if
changed they be, as I hold it most likely) may be called the change unto shame
and pain eternal; as the change of the godly, may be called a change unto
glory. For the wicked shall reap no benefit by that change: nor shall they
meet Christ in the air, by any extraordinary rapture, as I conceive. And
since they die the second death; it mattereth not, if they avoid, either the
first death, by immutation; or the fire of conflagration. Lastly, if they shall
meet Christ in the air, it is to their greater terror: They shall be hurried
to their judge, and haled toward their punishment: they meet him not, as he is
a mild Savior; but as an angry and just God. And this is a sufficient answer
both to the second and third objection of Salmeron; as the learned, who read
him, can testify.

4. Another argument, and that of moment and validity, to prove that some
shall hereafter be excepted from death, is taken from that memorable, diversely
read, diversely expounded place of the Apostle, 1. Corinthians. 15.51. (...), Omnes
autem non dormiemus, omnes autem immutabimur.
We shall not all die, but we shall all be changed; as the Interlinearie has
it. And this is the first, and best reading. Let us examine, first the words,
and the several translations; and so approach to the exposition.

The Greek cited by me at large, is in all the Greek copies: so says Peter
Martyr; and Doctor Estius confirms the same: so likewise does Chrysostom,
and Theophylact read it: and Theodoret, and Justinus ad Orthodoxos, quaest.
61. and quaest. 109. and Origin, in tertio volumine enarrationis Epistolae
primae ad Thessalonicenses, as also in his book against Marcion, Which is a
manuscript in the Vatican, says Estius. So Oecumenius, Prognost. 3.48. So
Theodorus Heracleotes reads it, says S. Hierom, in Tom. 3. Epistolarum, page
198. and in the end of the same Epistle to Minerius and Alexander, S. Hierom
acknowledges, that even in his days the Greeks did not read it as the
Latins. Salmeron on the place, finds fault with, (...), Omnes quidem non
dormiemus, All of us shall not die: Quod, juxta verborum proprietatem, perinde
est ac dicere, Nullos dormituros: non enim dicitur, Non omnes dormiemus, qua
declararet, aliquos non morituros. Est grande discrimen apud Logicos inter Non
omnes dormiemus, and, Omnes non dormiemus.
which, according to the propriety of the words, is as if he had said, NONE
SHALL DIE. For it is not said, NOT ALL OF US SHALL DIE, by which words is meant
and declared, that some shall not die. And there is a great difference among
Logicians between these two propositions, NOT ALL OF US SHALL DIE, and, ALL OF
US SHALL NOT DIE. So far he.

First, I say, Estius a learned Doctor, and Popish Divine, does slight this
subtlety: S^ito sensum non mutari, sive legas, Omnes quidem non dormiemus, qui
ordo verborum est in Graeco: sive, Non omnes quidem dormiemus, quomodo legit
Hieronymus, and plerique Lat ni vertunt.
Know (says he) that the sense is no whit changed or altered, whether you
read it thus, ALL OF US SHALL NOT DIE, as the order of the words is in the
Greek text: or thus, NOT ALL OF US SHALL DIE, as Hierom reads it, and most of
the Latins interpret it.

Secondly, I say, if we should maintain that none shall die of them that are
residui, then remaining alive; but that both good and bad, shall all be changed
without death; I see no inconvenience to arise from that opinion.

Catharinus, in his Commentaries, finds fault with those, who follow the first
reading, (...) but Estius finds fault with him for his fault finding;
condemning him of inconsideration, and rashness. The Arabic accords with the
Greek; Nos omnes non moriemur, sed nos omnes mutabimur, We all shall not die,
but we all shall be changed. The Syriack also is in harmony with both Greek
and Arabic (though Salmerons nicetie may think it a jarre) Non omnes nos
obdormiemus, omnes autem nos immutabimur; Not all we shall sleep, but all we
shall be changed: yea, an old vulgat translation, which is in Basil in the
library of the Predicants (says Erasmus) agrees with our Greek. Aquinas
himself, in the end of his 8. Lect. confesses, that our Greek reading is in
sense consonant to that which the Apostle wrote to the Thessalonians, the first
Epist. 4 chap. and 17 verse. Scriptures sweetly expound Scripture: We shall not
all sleep, but we shall all be changed, says the Apostle here: and to the
Thessalonians, We which are alive, and remain, shall be caught up together. The
very Prefaces have a correspondence in substance, and are more then ordinary;
This we say unto you by the word of the Lord, 1. Thessal. 4.15. and here, 1. Corinthians. 15.51. Behold, I show you a mystery: And then does he in both places
evince an immutation, without death. Therefore there can be no danger in our
opinion; as may be evinced from Aquinas his free acknowledgement. Yea, there is
not only no danger, but great reason for it: for, How excellently does this
agree with that, which presently follows, verse 52. The dead shall be raised
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. Does he not plainly discriminate and
diversifie those, which shall be raised, from those which shall be changed? He
does not say, We shall be raised incorruptible, and, We shall be changed; as he
must have done, if all are to die, and then to be changed: And, to show that
the change is not by laying down of the body, he adds immediately, This
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on
immortality, verse. 53. phrases implying no loss, no decay, no separation; but
a superinduction, and superaddition to what before was enjoyed. And when this
is done, he says most pertinently, verse. 54. Then shall be brought to pass
the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. as if he had
said, When both these things are accomplished, the raising of the dead, and the
change of the living, so that they shall be no more mortal; then shall death
be overcome: O DEATH, WHERE IS THY STING? verse. 55.

So much for the first and best reading, (...). I come to the second (which is
varied by the addition of one letter; but it makes a contrariety in the sense)
(...). Omnes non dormiemus, All of us shall not sleep, says the former: Omnes
dormiemus, All of us shall sleep, says the latter. And this latter way it
seems to have been read in some few copies, even in S. Hieroms time. But this
Greek lection is justly suspected (says the worthy Estius;) the Greek (...)
being so easily turned into (...) by the addition of (...), or a little dash.
And he finds just fault with Acacius in Hierom, for saying it was so read in
most Greek copies; when as, certainly it was read so but in very few copies;
whereof there is scarce one now extant, and not many proofs that ever there
were many copies of that extant. Neither indeed does the reading stand with
sense. For the Apostle solemnly premizeth, Behold, I show you a mystery: and
then subjoyneth immediately, according to this newfangled mis-writing, We
shall all therefore sleep, or die. Is this a mystery, that all shall sleep, or
all die? Does he promise mountains, and bring forth a molehill? Every Heathen
knows, that we shall die; every Christian, Turk, and Jew, that we shall be
raised again. But, when God justly for sin sentenced man to death with a
morte morieris, That some sinful men should be excepted, is a mystery,
deserving such a watchword, as Behold: Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall
not all sleep, but we shall all be changed.

Secondly, from the word (...), I thus argue: That death (if such a death there
be any) which is so speedily begun, by separation of the soul from the body,
and ended (as I may so say) by the swift and momentanie reuniting of the same
soul to the same body, cannot handsomely be called a sleep. Does he sleep, who
in the twinkling of an eye is changed from mortality to immortality? yea,
from being alive, is made dead? and from being dead, is made alive; and that
incorruptibly? Was ever sleep confined to an instant, till now? or may one be
said to sleep, in the midst of these great works? It is not so much as
Analogicall sleep. The greatest sleepers have more then an instant, ere they
can begin to sleep. Sleep creeps or falls on men by degrees; heaviness and
dullness usher it; and the spirits have a time to retire to their forts, and
cittadels; the senses are not locked up, nor do they deposite the use of their
faculties in a moment. And may that be called properly rest, or sleep, which
rests not above an instant, and is as quick as thought? Rest and sleep do
couch upon the bed of time: likewise it is as much as possibly can be done, (if
so much can be done) to awake one in an instant. The Scripture uses the phrase
of sleeping toward them, who rest (as it were) in death, in the earth, in the
grave: Our friend Lazarus sleeps, says Christ, John 11.11. when indeed he
was buried. Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, Dan.
12.2. Let one place of holy Writ be produced, where one and the same instant
begins sleep, and ends awaking; and then I may say, there may be some
shadow for that reading. But here is no pause, no rest, no quiet; therefore no
sleep: therefore the word sleep in this place, is applied to such as died
before; and not to such as are alive, and shall die; as the second lection
implies.

Thirdly, it wants force, to say in the whole conjoined sentence, We shall
therefore all sleep, or die; but we shall all be changed. If the Apostle had
intended any such thing, he would not have used the adversative particle But;
but the implicative word And: We shall all therefore sleep; AND we shall all be
changed. This had been sense, if thus it had been: but not being so, we may the
more confidently shake off the second lection, of (...), as abhorrent from
reason; and cleave to the first, of (...), Omnes quidem non dormiemus, etc. All
we shall not die, but all we shall be changed.

And so, from the variety of Greek copies, I come to the Vulgat, the
Translation in Latin, Omnes quidem resurgemus, sed non omnes immutabimur;
Truly we shall all of us arise, but we shall not all of us be changed.

First, I say, this differs from all Greek copies; whereas, if it had been
according to any sort of them, it might have swayed us much that way.

Secondly, the same argument touched at before, may also give a side-blow to
this translation. The Apostle raises up their considerations, by promising to
tell them a mystery: But it was no mystery to tell them, that they should all
be raised; when he had told it so pithily, so divinely, and so often beat upon
it before, by so many kinds of arguments, as he did.

Thirdly, where the Vulgat says, Non omnes immutabimur; it is not true: for
Omnes immutabimur, We shall all be changed, from mortality to immortality,
from natural bodies to spiritual. If you say, We shall not be all changed to
glory; I say so with you: I add, That is no mystery; all know that.
Therefore the Apostle speaks not of a change to glory eternal in the
heavens; whereunto some only shall be changed; but he speaks of a change
from mortality to immortality, from corruptible bodies to incorruptible;
which even the wickedest men shall have. And perhaps he means, that this
general immutation shall be made, sine media morte, without intercurrent, or
intercedent death, even in the wicked that shall be then alive: yet in the
change, you must always make this diversity: The wicked shall be singled out
to shame, to loss, to punishment eternal, with their raised or changed bodies
(for even in their raising also, there is a change from corruption to
incorruption:) but in the change of the godly, there is glorious incorruption,
joyful immortality, pleasurable eternity.

The word (...) signifies a change of a thing from place to place; as when we
take a piece of wood from the earth, and cast it into the water: Thus the
wicked shall be hurried from their graves to the judgment seat; and shall be
placed on the left hand of our Savior; and, after sentence, shall be haled,
and cast from earth into hell. On the other side, the righteous in their change
shall be mounted up from their graves, or from the earth, into the air, to
meet Christ; and shall be at his right hand; and, after sentence, be carried or
ascend up into heaven, in most glorious manner, to live with Christ eternally.

Fourthly, if we read it with the Vulgat, We shall all arise, but we shall not
all be changed; we must also immediately annex the words, In a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for there is the pause, and stay to be
made; there is the full sentence. The Vulgat has done very ill, to make the
stay and full point at immutabimur: for then the words following bear no
construction at all, if they be considered by themselves; In a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trump. For then comes in new matter; For the
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall
be changed: For this corruptible must put on incorruption, etc. What coherence
subsequent then shall you make unto these words? None at all. The coherence
must be with the antecedent words. But, say I, take the antecedent words, as
the Vulgat has them; and read, as you must, the connection in this sort, We
shall indeed all arise: but shall not all be changed, in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: For the trumpet shall sound, etc. I
say, even in this reading there is little sense also; yea, much untruth. Is it
not certain that we shall be changed in a moment? Or how long shall the time of
change be? There is no way to avoid this foul absurdity, which comes by the
Vulgat edition; unless it be by a greater, that is, by saying that you will
make an Hyperbaton; and include these words, We shall not all be changed, in a
Parenthesis: and then the sense will be, We shall arise in a moment, etc. For,
though it be true, that we shall arise in a moment; yet there is no ground,
that we shall not be changed in a moment. In all likelihood, a change may
rather be more speedy, which is without death; then that change which is made
through death and resurrection. If they may be, and shall be raised, and
changed in a moment; they may in a moment be changed, and not raised.

Secondly, no authority, that I know, runs for such a needless
Parenthesis: and I deem it as a violence offered to the Text, so to strain it,
when the sense will run fairly otherwise, according to the best Greek copies;
We shall not all sleep; but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, at the last trump.

Let this also serve to have been spoken against the Latin Vulgat edition, and
its bad reading, Omnes quidem resurgemus: sed non omnes immutabimur. In
momento, in ictu oculi, in novissima tuba, canet enim tuba, and mortui
resurgent incorrupti, etc. By how much the less sense is in this; by so much
the more are we bound to adhere to the Original, and the most common and best
copies of it.

This I may be bold to aver, That if some shall not die, and yet be changed;
there shall be an infallible, yea demonstrative proof unto sense, That the very
self same body which man had, shall inherit eternal glory. For, if they die
not, they must needs keep and have the same bodies, from which they are not
parted by immutation. Yea, the identicall resurrection of the same very bodies
which were dead, may thus far be proved, That if the changed bodies shall be
still the same in substance, though differing in qualities; the raised bodies
also shall be no otherwise, nor any way different: and Pythagoras will then
disprove his (...).
transmigration of souls into diverse bodies, and his heathenish (...).
regeneration (to which Nicodemus seemed to have an eye, Joh. 3.4.) when every
soul comes arrayed with its own body; and when they, who by change put not off
their bodies, shall come alive to judgment.

5. The Pelagians were wont thus to argue, If sin came in by Adam, then all
must needs die: But some shall not die, namely those, Qui reperientur vivi
who shall be found remaining alive: Therefore sin came not into the world by
Adam. S. Augustine answers this argument very sufficiently otherwise: and it
may easily and briefly be answered, All shall die reatu, though not actu. Yet
that holy Father, and that great just enemy of the accursed Pelagians, In
majorem cautelam.
for the greater and better security and safety, would seem to rest doubtful
of their assumption; which he needed not. Whereupon, de Civitat. 20.20. he
says, Dormitio praecedit, quamvis brevissima, non tamen nulla.
Death goes before; a most short and speedy one, yet a death. And in the same
place, Per mortem ad immortalitatem mira celeritate transibunt.
They shall slip, sail, or pass over by death to immortality with wonderful
speed. Again, de peccat. merit. and remiss. 2.31. Hoc quibusdam in sine
largietur Deus, ut mortem istam repentiua commutatione non sentient.
God at the end of the world shall grant this privilege unto some, That by
reason of their sudden change they shall not feel death. And, Retract. 2.33.
Aut non morientur, aut de vita ista in mortem, and de morte in aeternam vitam,
celerrima commutatione, tanquam in ictu oculi transeundo, mortem non sentient.
Either they die not, or otherwise they glide from this life into death, and
from death into eternal life, as it were, in the twinkling of an eye, by a
most speedy alteration, taking no notice or sense of death. He leaves it
doubtful (as you see) in these his last books: though sometimes before he
thought, That all should die; and otherwhere, as ad Dulcitium, quaest. 3. That
they should not die.

The Master of the Sentences says concerning the question, Whether the change
be by death, or without it, Horum quid sit verius, non est humani judicii
definire.
Man cannot determine certainly which of these is truest. Rabanus, lib. 4. de
sermon. proprietat. having alleged the consent of diverse Fathers to establish
his own opinion, That all must die; yet annexeth this, Because there are others
alike Catholic and learned men, who believe, That, the soul remaining in the
body, those shall be changed to immortality, who shall be found alive at the
coming of our Lord; Et hoc eis reputari pro resurrectione ex mortuis, quod
mortalitatem immutatione deponant, non morte, etc.
and that it stands them in stead of rising from the dead, that they cast away
mortality by change, not by death; Let any man rest on which opinion he
pleases, etc. Which very words also, you shall find in the book de
Ecclesiast. Dogmat. cap. 7. Now though S. Augustine was dubious, and some with
him; and though some also have embraced the contrary opinion: yet equally
Catholic and learned men have been constant to maintain, That some shall not
die, but be changed; as you have heard confessed.

If you please, you may take a view of some, more particularly. The before named
Theodorus Heracleotes, cited by Hierom, in his epistle to Minerius and
Alexander, has it thus; Sancti, qui in die judicii in corporibus reperiendi
sunt, non gustabunt mortem; erunt que cum Domino, gravissima mortis necessitate
calcata.
The Saints, who in the day of the last judgment shall be found to be alive
and remain in their earthly bodies, shall not see death, or taste of it; and
shall be with the Lord, kicking and spurning at death and the greatest
enforcing necessity thereof. Apollinaris, cited in the same epistle, said,
Some shall not die; but be snatched out of this life, that with changed, and
glorified bodies, they might be with Christ. Chrysostom on the 10. to the
Romans, and on 1 Thessalonians. 4. and upon this place to the Corinthians, says,
Some shall escape death. With him agrees Epiphanius, Haeresi 64. saying, Qui
rapitur, nondum mortuus est.
Who is suddenly snatched up, is not yet dead. And before them, Origin, lib. 2.
contra Celsum, so opineth. Theophylact on 1. Corinthians. 15. thus, Etiam qui non
morientur, ad incorruptibilitatem transferentur.
Even they who shall not die, shall be transchanged out of this corruptible
life, to incorruptibilitie: And again, Nonnulli ne morientur quidem.
Some indeed shall not die at all. To that effect S. Hierom in his epistle to
Marcella, quaest. 3. number. 148. and in his epistle to Minerius and Alexander,
brings the saying of Christ (Matthew. 24.37, etc.) of the days of Noah, when
the flood swept them away, as they were eating and drinking; to prove that at
the last judgment some shall not die. Theodoret evinceth the same truth,
producing the passage of Matthew. 24.40. of two in the field; one assumed, the
other rejected. And Chrysostom, in his Sermon de Ascensione Domini, instanceth
in the verse following, of two in a mill; one refused, the other accepted:
which proofs aim at this, That all shall not die. Cajetan is rich in proofs,
That all shall not die: See him on Act. 10. upon Timoth. 4. upon 1. Corinthians.
15. upon 1. Thessal. 4. Tertullians words must not be omitted, in his book de
resurrectione carnis; Hujus gratiae privilegium illos manet, qui ab adventu
Domini, deprehendentur in carne: and, propter duritias temporum Antichristi,
merebuntur, compendio mortis per demutationem expunctae, concurrere cum
resurgentibus.
This gracious privilege belongs unto those, who at the coming of our Lord and
Savior to judgment shall be found alive upon earth: and for the grievous
afflictions and pressures of the times under Antichrist they shall have granted
unto them this indulgence, That they shall not die, but shall be suddenly
changed, and so go to meet Christ together with those which shall then be
raised from the dead.

Salmeron being peremptory, That all and every one shall die properly, upon 1.
Thessal. 4. has a wild crotchet, That all, who shall be alive toward the end
of the world, shall be consumed with the fire of conflagration, which shall go
before Christ; and so dead and raised shall be snatched up. But S. Augustine,
de Civitat. Dei, 20.16. setting down the order of the last judgment, says,
The fire of conflagration shall be after the last judgment.

I will close this point, with the sound and learned words of Calvin, (which
fully accord, with what I rested on, in the beginning of this chapter) upon 1. Corinthians. 15. Cum mutatio fieri nequeat, quin aboleatur prior natura; ipsa
mutatio merito censetur species mortis: sed cum non sit animae a corpore
solutio, non reputatur in morte ordinaria.
Since there cannot be a change (says he,) but the former nature must be
abolished; the very change, on good grounds, may justly be accounted a kind of
death: but since there is not a separation of the soul from the body, it is
not to be reputed as if it were the common and ordinary death. Upon 1.
Thessal. 4. he wittily observes, that they Qui dormiunt, aliquo temporis
spatio exuunt corporis substantiam; qui innovabuntur, non nisi qualitatem.
who are dead, or do die, for some space of time or other (longer or shorter)
their souls put off the substantial clothing of the body or flesh: but they
who shall be changed, shall put off only the quality, not the substance.

The sum of all is this, The third main question, by me at first propounded,
was, Whether all and every one, without exception, must and shall die? The
Papists are obstinate for the affirmative; I have proved the negative, That
some may be, some have been, and some others shall be excepted, and not die.
And so I end my third and last Chapter of my third book of Miscellanies.

O Most gracious Lord God, who have committed all judgment to thy only son,
our only Lord and Savior; I beseech thee to have pity upon me, and for Jesus
Christ his sake, receive me into thy especial favor. O blessed JESU, accept
of these my poor and weak endeavors; and receive my prayers, and present them
with mercy to the throne of Grace: hasten thy coming, and thy kingdom: Come
sweet JESU, come quickly: and prepare my soul, to meet thee with joy. If it be
thy holy will, let me be one of them, that shall be changed, and changed to the
better: from pain to comfort, from sickness, sorrow, and labor, to rest, and
blessedness eternal. Amen. Amen. Amen.
VNI-TRINO DEO LAVS, ET GLORIA.
FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Table of the principal things contained in these three Books
of Miscellanies.
A
ABortion is a curse. Book 1. page 103. Two kinds of Abortives. ibid. page 98,
99. Adams body was created immortal; and how. ibid. p. 11. Adams body was
framed of other dust, then the dust of Paradise. ibid. p. 16. viz. out of the
red earth of ager Damascenus. ibid. p. 85. and Book 2. p. 23. The contrary
disposition of Elements had not caused a dissolution of Adams body, had Adam
stood. Book 1. p. 17, to 28. The natural temper and constitution of Adams body
in state of innocence. ibid. p. 18, and 20. Whether if Adam and Eve had stood
confirmed in innocence, any of their children could have sinned. ibid. p. 44,
to 54. The endowments of Adam in state of innocence, ib. p. 55, 56. Whether
Adam and Eve foreknew their fall. ibid. p. 59. Whether Adam and Eves sin were
the same. ibid. p. 61. Whether of their sins were the greater. ibid. p. 62,
65, to 73. where also of Adams first sin by which he fell. ibid. Adam mourned
100 years for the murdered Abel. ibid. p. 85, 87. Adam was a type of Christ;
therefore saved. ibid. Adam was buried in Golgotha, and his skull found upon
mount Calvary. Book 2. from p. 13, to 29. Whether Adam could naturally
understand all languages. ibid. p. 47, 48. Amphibologie prejudicial to truth.
Book 1. p. 2. Angels fell the second instant of their creation. ib. p. 108, and
126. Christ merited for Angels. ib. p. 189, 190. Angels representing men are
called men in the Scripture. Book 2. chap. 16. Apocryphal books too much
slighted. Book 2. p. 145. They are to be preferred before any other humane
Authors. Book 3. p. 183. Of the diverse Appointment of things by God. Book 1.
p. 2, 3. The Apostles represented the whole body of Christ's Ministers. ibid. p.
147, 148. The Apostles were none of them learned before their calling. Book 2.
p. 87, 88. Aristotle and Plato compared. Book 1. p. 13, 14, 15. The Ascension
of Christ represented in the assumption of Enoch and Elias, Book 3. p. 191, to
195.
B
BEauty desired. Book 1. page 19. The Being, or not Being of a thing may be
said diverse ways. Book 2. p. 77. Bristoll built of old by Brennus. ibid. p.
23, 24.
C
WHence the Capitol in Rome had its name. B. 2. page 18. Ceremonies Leviticall
died at first by degrees; and now they are not only dead, but deadly. Book 1.
p. 3. There is no Chance where Providence reigns. Book 2. p. 71, 72.
Cherubims with real flaming swords were placed in Paradise. Book 1. p. 2, 3.
and why. ibid. p. 23. Christ's beauty in his humanity described, together with
his Passion. B. 1. p. 18, 19, 20. compare ibid. p. 193. Christ does us more
good then Adam did us harm. ibid. p. 185, to 188. Christ saved more in number
then Adam condemned. ibid. p. 188, 189. etc. Whether Christ were in Adam; and
how. ibid. p. 82, 83. The judgment of the essential Church of Christ is
infallible. ibid. p. 148. Circumcision of women by the Turks. ibid. p. 144. A
wicked Companion is very dangerous. Book 3. p. 184, 185. Conception what it is,
and how. B. 1. p. 93, to 99. Confirmation in grace is of two sorts. ibid. p.
48. General Councels are the highest earthly Judges of Scriptures
controversed. ibid. p. 136, 148.
D
DEath is threefold. Book 1. p. 4. Death is common to all. ibid. Death
Natural, and Violent. ibid. p. 17. Sin is the only cause of Death. ibid. p.
26, 27. Death is bitter, because painful. ibid. page 28, 31. Death is sweet to
some men, because God makes it beneficial unto them. ibid. page 32, 33, etc.
Death was inflicted on Adam for one sin. ibid. Death was inflicted for the
sin of the man Adam, not of the woman Eve. ibid. page 36, to 44. Speedy death
by some is accounted best. Book 3. page 187. Whether all Adams posterity,
without privilege or exception, must, and shall die. Book 3. Chap. 1, 2, 3,
throughout. The difference between (...) and (...). Book 1. page 192, 193, etc.
Disciples of Christ were none of them Noble, at least not Nobly bred. Book 2.
page 86.
E
OF the East-Indians and their language. Book 3. p. 204. Of Elias and Enoch,
whether they be yet living or dead. Book 3. Chap. 2. throughout. Diverse
questions about Enoch more especially. ibid. p. 181, 182, etc. Equivocation in
what sense, and in what cases it may be allowable. Book 1. page 165, 167. The
second book of Esdras was never held Canonical. ibid. p. 7. Eve remained an
intemerate virgin until after the sin of Adam. ib. p. 39, 40. Whether Eve
sinned before she talked with the serpent. ibid. page 60. Excommunication was
of three sorts in the Jewish polity. Book 2. page 48, 49.
F
THe word Father is diversely taken in the holy Scripture. Book 1. page 120. and
Book 2. page 113, etc.
G
GEnealogies were ever drawn from the Males. Book 1. page 40, 41.
H
THe Healed by Christ were never a second time cured of any disease. Book 2. p.
8. Heavenly influences, which are noxious, are the causes of much sickness and
destruction. Book 1. p. 17. All languages have some words retaining the
footsteps of the Hebrew. Book 2. p. 45. When the Hebrew points were first
used. Book 1. p. 100, 101, 102. Hebron the city. Book 2. page 19, to 29.
Humility. ibid. p. 161, 162. The humility of S. Paul. Book 2. p. 84, 85. The
Husband represents the wife. Book 1. p. 140.
I
JEr. 10.11. was the only verse of his whole prophecy, that was written in
Chaldee; which every captive Jew was commanded to cast in the teeth of the
Babylonians. Book 1. p. 180. Jerusalem the holy city. Book 2. p. 154, 155,
156. Ignorance threefold. Book 1. p. 60. Interpretation of Scriptures is the
Pastors right, with whom the Laity must consult. ibid. p. 149, 150, 156, 181,
182. and Book 2. p. 63. Interpretation of Scriptures by Anagrams is profane. B.
1. p. 152, 153. Whether interpretation of Scriptures, or judgment of doctrine
do in any sort belong unto the people; and how far. ibid. p. 157, 159. Helps
and cautions prescribed unto the people for interpretation of Scriptures. ibid.
page 160, to page 169, etc. John the Apostle his death. Book 3. p. 187, 188,
189. Joseph was the firstborn of Jacob. Book 1. p. 142, 143. Joseph was a type
of Christ. Book 2. p. 33. A twofold acception of the word Judgment. Book 1. p.
6. Judgment after death is private, of souls; public, of bodies and souls.
ibid.
K.
KIngs represent the people under them. Book 1. p. 183, 184. Of the honor due
unto the King. ibid. Whether Korah, Dathan, and Abiram descended with all their
goods truly into hell. Book 3. p. 214, 215, to p. 221.
L
WHerein the confusion of Languages consisted. Book 2. p. 45, 46. Oriental
languages conduce much to the understanding of Scriptures: therefore necessary
to be studied. ib. p. 48. Of the same languages also. B. 3. p. 204, 205. Of
Lazarus raised by Christ. Book 2. p. 7, 8, 9. Humane Learning is an handmaid to
Divinity. ib. p. 88, 89. Literal sense of Scripture is hardest to be found.
Book 1. p. 149.
M
MAgistrates not to be reviled. Book 1. p. 168, 169, 170. Maran-atha expounded.
Book 2. p. 48, to p. 54. Of Melchisedech, and why he is said to be without
father and mother. Book 3. p. 201, 202, etc. to p. 206. Members of the body
are not all of equal worth. Book 1. p. 63. God is very Merciful unto all. ib.
p. 186, 187. Whether Moses at the Transfiguration appeared in his own true
person, or not. Book 3. p. 208, 209, etc.
O
IN Oaths we must be wary of mental reservations, and unlawful
equivocations. Book 1. p. 166, 167. Opinion. Book 2. p. 83. Original sin.
See Sin.
P
OF Paradise. Book 3. page 194, 195, 196, 197. The Pastors wisdom, both for
the matter and manner of his doctrine. Book 1. p. 158. The Patriarchs were
buried in Sychem. Book 2. chap. 10. Merely Personalls are not propagated. B. 1.
p. 109, to p. 138. S. Peter represented all the Apostles, Joh. 21.15, 16. Book
1. p. 147. The Pope is servus servorum Dei. ibid. p. 132. The Privileges of a
few make not a law. Book 2. p. 160. Whether God may justly Punish the Fathers
for the childrens actual delinquencies. B. 1. p. 119, 120. In what cases God
may, and does punish the children for their Parents faults, either with
temporal, or eternal punishment. ib. p. 118, to p. 124. Every individual man
is justly punished for original sin in Adam. ib. p. 145, 146, 147, etc.
R
REdemption was of a double kind in the Leviticall law. Book 1. p. 143. Of
Relics, Book 2. chap. 12. and the Authors esteem of a true choice Relic.
ibid. p. 130, 131. The Resurrection was typified in Samson; and how. Book 2. p.
31. Compare Book 3. p. 220. at the bottom of the page. Why all men shall rise
again at the last day. Book 1. p. 195. Whether such as have been raised from
the dead did die the second time. Book 2. p. 1, to p. 12. Of holy men there is
a double resurrection. ib. p. 4. The raising of the dead was an act
appropriated unto Christ himself, no way communicated to his Apostles, in his
life time. ib. p. 6, 9, 10. Who they were that rose at Christ's death. ib. p.
12. wherewith compare ib. chap. 8.11, 12, 13, 14. throughout. The raised Saints
ascended not into heaven with Christ. ib. chapter 15, 16, 17, 18. throughout.
Christ's resurrection was typified in Elias, 2. King 2.13. ib. p. 146. The
figure of Rome at its first building. ib. p. 24.
S
THe whole Scripture is but one, though penned by diverse. Book. 2. p. 38, 39.
The Penmen of the holy Scriptures, as such, could not forget ibid. p. 40, 41,
etc. Whether, and how it was necessary that the Scripture should be written
for men's instruction. ibid. p. 68, 69, 70, etc. Whether the holy Penmen of the
Scriptures understood all that they wrote. ibid. p. 80, to p. 86. Whether they
read profane Authors. ibid. p. 86, to p. 90. They did cite Poets, or profane
Authors. ibid. p. 89, to p. 93. Whether they studied the things they wrote
beforehand. ib. p. 92, to p. 96. There was no difference between the Penmen of
the divine Writ of the Old and New Testament in the point of conceiving, and
writing in different languages. ib. p. 96. We must have recourse unto the
allusions of Scripture which are, not rest on what the Apostles conceived in
their minds only. ibid. p. 97. The Penmen of Scripture had no liberty to put
in their own conceits, or, in writing to add, or blot out what they had done.
ib. p. 98, to p. 104. They had no power to clothe their inward apprehensions
with words of their own. ib. p. 104, 105, 106. The Penmen of Scripture wrote
their heavenly dictates in the same language, in which they conceived them.
ibid. p. 107, to p. 112. Whether the holy Penmen of Scripture wrote the
Scripture casually. ibid. p. 71, 72. When the New Testament began first to be
written, and upon what occasion. ibid. page 73. Whether the Penmen of Scripture
were commanded to write. ibid. p. 73, to page 76. Whether the Prophets,
Evangelists, and Apostles were compelled to write. ibid. 76, to p. 80. Whether
Christ wrote any part of Scripture himself immediately. ibid. p. 64, 65, etc.
Why Sin is called Original. Book 1. p. 129. Styles given to original sin.
ib. p. 36. Some sins are greater then other. ibid. p. 62, 63, 64. The
greatness of a sin is two ways considered. ibid. p. 66. Of original sin,
as conveyed unto us from Adam. ib. p. 74, to page 90. Original sin is matter
of repentance. ib. p. 76. How we sinned original sin in Adam. ib. p. 78, 79,
80. Not by imputation only, nor only by imitation. p. 84, 85. Original sin
is propagated to mankind. ib. p. 90, 91. and p. 129. When original sin
begins. ib. p. 91, 92, 93. The manner how the soul is by it made sinful.
ib. p. 103, to p. 109. Adams actual sin was private, and personal, ideall
only, and representative: therefore not imputed unto us. ib. p. 88, 89. and p.
129. The four principal faculties of our Souls, with their several objects,
Book 1. p. 56.
T
A Twofold kind of Temperature; the one of weight, the other of justice. Book
1. p. 18. Tithes are by an everlasting law due to the Priesthood of
Melchisedech. ibid. p. 83. Curses that follow those who sacrilegiously rob the
Church of Tithes. Book. 2. p. 50, 51. The Transfiguration of Christ, with the
manner of it, and how it was not painful to him. B. 1. p. 29. Of the
Translation of them who shall be found alive at the last day ibid. p. 30. The
use of the Tree of life in Paradise unto Adam. ibid. p. 20, and 23. Whether
Adam did eat of the tree of life before he fell. ibid. p. 21, 22.
V
VIator is considered according unto a twofold estate. Book 1. page 51, 52.
FINIS.
The several places of Scripture explained in these three Books of
Miscellanies.
The first book.
Genesis 3.20. page 40. Genesis 4.15. 64, 65. Exodus 13.2. 140. Exodus 20.5. 110, 116,
127, 128. Job 14.4. 95, 96. Ps. 51.5. 92, 93, 94. Ps. 91.11. 25, 26. Ps.
109.14. 121, 122. Ps. 131.1. 161, 162. Isa. 53.2. 18. Verse. 4. 20. Jer. 25.26.
153, unto 157. Matt. 15.14. 174. Joh. 8.44. 37. Joh. 9.2. 132. Act. 23.5. 168,
169. 170, etc. Romans 5.12. 79, 80. verse. 13. 186. ver. 18. from page 190, to the
end of the first book. Romans 11.16. 106. 1. Cor. 3.1, 2. 158. 1. Cor. 7.14. 106.
1. Cor. 15.47. 42. Ephesians. 4.23, 24. 56. Heb. 9.27. from the 1, to the ninth.
The second book.
Genesis 22.5. p. 83. Genesis 31.53. 32. John 8.56. 30, 31. Joh. 20.7. 146, 147. 1.
Cor. 9.16. 78. 1. Cor. 16.22. 48, 49, etc. 2. Cor. 5.14. 78. Gal. 6.11. 67, 68.
Heb. 11.35. 4.
The third book.
Exodus 34.29. p. 210. Mal. 4.5, 6. 174, 175, etc. Matt. 17.11. 177, 178, etc.
Faults escaped in the first Book, thus to be corrected.
Page 18 line 11 for proportion read proportio. Page 20 line margin for (...)
read (...). Page 24 line 2 for tree life read tree of life. Page 29 line 13
for not read no. Page line 39 for ecclipsed read eclipsed. Page 30 line
margin for tran-seuntis read trans-euntis. Page 32 line margin for laborantos
read laborantes. Page 44 line 20 for yae read yea. Page 57 line 20 for he did
for a while read he did fulfill for a while. Page 62 line 22 for Cittien read
Citizen. Page 65 line 30 for Wheter read Whether. Page line 43 for Gensis
read Genesis. Page 82 line 41 for lisienesse read likeness. Page 86 line 20
for this read his. Page 96 line margin for doctus, nec doctus read doctus,
nec indoctue.
In the second Book.
Page 2 line 39 for istance read instance.
FINIS.

