Soli Deo Gloria.
KNow all men by these present, that I Richard Kellicke Professor of Physic
and Chyrurgery, borne in England, and am now lately come from beyond the seas,
having been Trauellor for the space of eig^t years, where I have continu^lly
for the said term, practi^ed and studied with my best indeauors to find out
the nature and property of many or most kind of Minerals, and other things
useful for medicine, by the which practice I have, and through the help of
God, and my poor industry, done many great Cures, as by good Certificate from
diverse Cities and Towns, and from the Lords Grace of Canterbury lisoned to
practice in this prof^ssion for the good of the Commonwealth, as under his
hand and seal, may and does appear, as namely the Falling sickness, Palsies,
Goutes, Dropsies, Lamenesse in any of the limbs, Agues and Consumptions, with a
miraculous kind of curing of the disease called the French disease, never cured
by any that way. Also he draws teeth with such facility, that he puts the
patient to little or no pain. He h^lpeth the pain of the teeth without
drawing, he makes black teeth white i^stantly: Likewise he cures the stone,
and fetches away the Gravel without any pain, or any other kind of disease
whatsoever.

Also he cures blind in the space of half an hour, although they have been
blind ten years.

Also he cures dimnesse of sight, and sore eyes.

He cures thickness or dullness of hearing in half an hour.

He cures the hair or cloven lip.

He cures the ruptors or broken people in a short time.

He takes of VVeanes or warts.

He cures mad people, or those that are melancholy in a short space.

He sets wrie or crooked necks straight in a quarter of an hour.

He sets bones broken or out of joint.

Also he cures Cankers, Fistulaes, or any old soar.

He cures Pollipos Ozana, and Noli me tangeri.

Also he cures the red or ^asflen face.

He cures the worms in Children, in a short space.

These are many other diseases, which are not here spoken of, the Professor
hereof cures by the help of God.

The Professor hereof lodges
God save the King.
AS Also I have brought with me to sell to any that shall need them, diverse
Balsums and Medicines ready made, which will do and perform many strange
cures. More especial, one Venice Balsum, which will cure all diseases coming
of coldness, either pains or aches in the head, deafness in the ears. The
same Balsum being warmed, and anointing the place grieved, and a warm cloth
applied thereunto. And for the ears, to dip a little black woole in the said
Balsum, and stop them therewith. This is also good for the gravel and pain in
making Urine, and the Collicke,) to take the same in a little mutton broth, to
the quantity of a great bean, and drink it every morning fasting, and anoint
the place aggrieued. Moreover, for all cold Agues, drink but half an ounce
before the fi^ comes, in broth. Again, for pain in the Milt, and or the
Mother, anoint the left side therewith well warmed: It cures all aches in
what place of the body soever with a cloth first well warmed, and then anoint
it with the said Balsum being made ^^me, and bind the place with a warm cloth
afterward. It cures also all lamenesse and shrinking of sinews, and all
green wounds sudainly whatsoever.

The Wonderful and extraordinary force and power of the green Salve, of Master
Richard Kellicke.
FIrst, it has pleased God to give such powerful operation to this Balsum for
all manner of Burnings, whether it be by natural fire, or any other casualty,
or by Gunpowder Oil, Water, or any other whereby men by mischief may burn
themselves: tha^ a plaster of this my salve spread upon a piece of brown
paper, or a linen cloth, and laid presently to it, you shall see and feel a
wonderful force of this operation and curing.

Secondly, it is maruaillous good for the Wildfire, a plaster (...) made, and
spread upon a linen cloth, or a piece of brown paper and said thereto,
he^peth and cures it in short space.

Thirdly, for the Scu^ffe wherewith children are commonly troubled in their
heads, they being rubbed with this my salve upon the sore, you shall see or
^oure days his virtue. And if there be any poor are troubled herewith, I will
help them for Gods sake; and take no money of the rich till I have cured them.

Fourthly, for the pain in Women's breasts, there cannot be found a more
sovereign medicine, being spread upon a cabbage lea^e, or linen cloth, and
said thereon ^ureth immediately.

Fifthly, for sore or kyb'd heels which comes of cold and frost, and to make
that they come no more, rub them with this my Balsum or Oil when you go^ to
bed.

Sixthly, for hands which are in winter swollen, chopped or c^ackt, it asswadeth
the swelling* cures the wounds, and makes the hands supple and soft in short
space.

Seventhly, for the hot gout or Flericy, a plaster made and spreap upon a
c^bbage leaf or linen cloth, and laid to the place affected. It is
wonderful good for the emro^ds in men or women, anointing the fundament
therewith morning and evening, it cures them without fail in short time.

Eighthly, it is very precious salve for all burnings, scurffe, and all itchings
in what part of the body soever: for it cures and takes them away in so short
time, that the patient shall have cause to praise God for the wonderful virtue
which it has pleased him to give thereunto.

God Save the King.

