Of the Crinitall Star, which appears this October and November. 1580.
IT seems (gentle Reader) a difficult and hard matter, for any man to write
or do any thing that should be well accepted in these days, especially, when
the opinion of men is grown strange and diverse, accomptyng each thing, either
too white or too black, too sweet or too sour, too worthy or too vilde:
Yet at this time, not respectyng curious opinions, neither regardyng the speech
of the Captious, so much as the request of friends, do set forth this my
judgment touching this Crinitall Star, showing to us the greatness of Gods
goodness, by such a forewarnyng to repentance. But such is the corruption
and hardness of this Age, that we contemn and neglect all tokens in the
Heavens, by respectyng our only security, for the time present. And yet, if
every man would reckon the course of his life past, he should see in him
self great cause to tremble at these things. And also, if we consider what
great rout of euylles does beset us, and way how many has been destroyed, or
what hurtes has been by Lyghtnynges, Earthquakes, Ground openinges, Flooddes,
tempests of the Sea, great Winds, infectious Air, Wars, Mortalities,
Plagues, strange Diseases, and such like, which things, Commettes does
commonly pronounce to ensue: I suppose that the remembrance of such dangers,
would make us not to be altogether cardlesse of these Tokens, threatnyng to us
calamities for our unthankfulness. And therefore, who so ever does make light
account of Earthquakes and gleming Stars, and is not moved at the sight
thereof, with the sear of Gods displeasure: the same people does also as
lightly, and as little regard their own conscience, and amendment of life.
Wherefore it is time that we cease from puffyng up our selves with pride,
letcherie, and envy, and to cleave to repentance, and to lay hold upon
David's Anchor, which is the multitude of Gods mercy: For as it is in
the.xxxi. Psalm, Mercy will muiron them which trust in the Lord.

Now, if any man suppose that nothing can be rightly gathered by Astronomy of
Comettes, he is much deceived, and he is too blind in his heart, that think
it signify nothing: for, touching the last tayled Star, which appeared.
1577. against the face of the great Planet Saturn toward the Southwest, it is
evident, that the effect of his signification was to continue three years, and
did end but a little before Michaelmas last past.

And touching the first year. 1578. the effect was seen Southwarde by Wars,
with the slaughter of Princes. And in the second year. 1579. it brought
forth great irruption of Waters and Floddes. And in the third year. 1580.
the effect of that Commet was dreadful, by a fearful Earthquake, the syxt of
Apryll, between five and six at night: And with Wars against the
Portyngales by the Spaniardes: unto whom that Commet was specially appropriate,
by virtue of his place and term in which it stood: And also with a new kind
of strange disease, as it were a Summer Rewme he has ended his effects.

And immediately upon the endyng of all these effects, there is come to
appearance a Crinitall Star, far different from the other, in place,
situation, and cooloure: which I observed to appear immediately after the new
Moon, the.viii. day of October, placed between the.xii. and.xi. house of the
Heavens, after Sun setting, the Moon first of al receiving the shadowie
vmbration of this Crinita, by a quartyle radiation from Scorpio. Secondly, I
noted the Sun to receive the next shadow by strong aspect, and that the
Sun above all other Planettes, is mostly and woorst radiated, in the time of
the continuance of this Crinita, first with the quartile of Saturn, secondly
with the opposition of Mars: Which thing does signify, in that the Sun and
the Moon (which be Animae mundi) does especially receive the impression of his
evil aspect, that the Sympathy of his influence shall be grievous, with
Plagues, and infectious Air, with calamity among the people, and with
captivity and evil to some persons. And this shall be to the Countries lying
within the eight and nynth clymate.

Also I note, that this Crinita is fixed against a Star of the third
Magnitude, near upon the Dolphyn, of the nature of Saturn and Mars, and is of
a Septentrionall Latitude from the Zodiac: And also, that this Crinita is
fixed under the Sign called Aquarius, being an Ayeryall and Western Sign,
there placed, near unto that ponderous Planet Saturn, possessing his own
house, with the company of Caput Draconis, which portendeth toward the
Northeast, and Northwest Countries; within the time of his effect, great
corruption and infection in the Air, great harm and hynderaunce by ragyng
Winds, Waters, and Flooddes, misery among the people of the said Countries,
Damnum altis hominibus, deceitful deuyses, and great terror to some, with
captivity.

Next to this, I do observe the color of this Crinitall Star, to be
wateryshe, dark, pale, and Saturnine, which is the very color of death:
whereby it signifies sadness, sorrow, Plagues, misery, mortalities, fear,
and hunger, to be among the people dwelling within the eight and nynth Clymate.
And all this for our unthankfulness, unless we repent us of our sins, which
are so ryfe among us.

Farther I note how that the tail of this Crinitall Star, is extended
toward the face of Mars, and toward the Northeast parts, which is the true
testimony of Wars, bloodsheddyng, of sudden irruption of Soldiers, of
Sicknesses, Plagues, Sweattes, blooddy Flixe, and heapyng up of sorrow among
the people in the Northeast and West Countries.

Finally, I observe that this Crinitall Star, is of a thyn substance, and
that it shall last till the Sun has passed under the end of Libra, Scorpio and
Sagittarie, and so long it shall be apparently seen at Sun setting, in the
time of his continuance, to be in the xi.x. and part of the.ix. house, and that
it is in the.xi. Sign from Aries: Which does signify evil conspiracies,
deceitful dealings, and much terror and danger to many men in the
Northeast and West Countries, so that to conclude this first part, the full
signification of this Crinita, is to continue two years and three quarters:
And therefore let us pray, that GOD may divert and turn from us the dangers,
which it signifies, in Plagues, wars, and inundation of flooddes, winds,
and waters. And thus generally of his place, color, and signification: next
follow, what, where, and when, his effect shall fall.

The second part, touching this Crinitall Star.
WHere as I have showed generally what this Crinital Star signifies, it
follows in this second treatise, to declare in what countries the effects
shall be, and at what times. For seeing the earth is divided into four parts,
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, and every one of these comprehend a
multitude of Countries, and every Country is subject to diverse perils of the
heavens, and does dyffer in clymates, and in the obliquitie of the Horizon:
Then it must needs be, that no Comet or tayled Star, can show his effect
generally in all the four divisions of the earth, but properly to those
Countries over which it is placed, according to clymatical and parellell lines.
So then touching this Crinita, waying his ascension, and his Latitude Northerly
from the Zodiac, with the extractyng of his evil shadows upon certain
points of the heavens, with his place and term in which i^ stand, I find by
Astronomical division, that the effect shall not reach into Africa, nor to the
middle Seas, neither to any Countries specially, but to those which are within
the viii. and.ix. Clymate, and properly to those places, Cities, and Towns,
which are under Aquary, Taurus, Leo, and Scorpio, placed in the foresaid
climates. Wherefore to come to proper places, I find that the effect of his
shadows shall be seen in those places which be near to the River of Rhene,
and Danubius, so that Germany shall feel of it.

Also the force and evil shall be showed upon Flaunders, Hollande, Zealande* and
Freeselande, and no less upon Denmark, Danske, England, Scotland, and
Irelande. And in like case to Pollonde, and Belgica in France and Pycardy.
Some of these Countries feelyng it with Plagues, mortalities, some with
blooddie wars, some with the death of great Pears, and other some with
misery by great Floodds, wyndes, and ouerflowes of waters: of which, other
countries Southward, and East, as Spain, Barbary and Italy, Turkey, Greece,
and all which dwell out of the eight and.ix. clymate, shall be free, in respect
of the corruption of air, and grievous harm which is portended by weather,
both by Land and Sea.

Next, whereas I note that the effects of this Crinita, shall appear two
years and three quarters, I observe by the profectional Athazer, and other
circumstances, that the next year. 1581. the effects shall be as follow. First
touching diseases, there shall reign Inflammations, Burning Fevers, Plagues,
Heart burnynges, Blood shotten eyes, Blooddie flyxe, Measles, Pockes,
Pleurisies, heat in the stomach, falling sickness, Phrensies, and the stone:
these be the pryncipal diseases. Also the parts that shall be mostly touched,
be the heart, chest, brain, eyes, back, bladder: but it gives the
signification forcible upon the mind and brain of man, that men shall be
given to be perverse of heart, and that madness, furiousness, phranticknes,
sadness, melancholy, and choleric disposition shall be seen greatly to
abound in men of the foresaid countries the next year, and therefore let us
pray to God, lest for our wickedness he turns us to a reprobate sense. Also
the next year it brings 1581.
forth adrye Summer, that the earth shall be scorched, and waters shall be scant,
and 581.
between ^amma, and Michaelmas, shall the full terror appear in some of the
foresaid countries, in Plagues, Wars, Crafty devises, captiuities to some
estates, and with great sadness to people. And between Simon and Jude, and
Hallowmas week, shall Hollande, Zealande, and many parts of England, be
greatly indammaged and endangered with sudden storms, and flows of great
waters, and grievous weather.

Now touthyng the years following, 1582. and. 1583. mark what two evil years
they shall be for wyndes, rain, and flooddes, and inundations, in the foresaid
countries.

This Crmita shall by his vmbration and course of his signification, bring
forth two 1582.
strange and marucylous Candelmas Terms, 1583.
for evil weather, huge raines or snowes, and wyndes, with inundation of great
waters, and two sorrowful Summers, for abundaunce of wet, rain, and
ouerflowynges, whereby these Months shall be very grievous and hurtful,
February, March. 1582. 1583. and July, August. 1582. 1583. Wherefore seeing
this tayled Star, by his pale color, does signify great losses and
hinderaunce to the Countries aforesaid, by irruption and inundation of great
Flooddes, and by one hard Winter the next year. 1582. and two wette Summers,
to the great indammagyng of many places of the foresaid Countries, and to the
hurt of the Husbandeman and Merchaunt, whereupon myserie, dearth, penury, and
calamity, may grow to some of the foresaid Countries, in the same years:
For that cause, it shall be necessary for us to pray to GOD, that he may stay
his Plagues and Wars the next year, and to give us more moderate years,
then this Crinita signify of. 1582. and 1583. For the special signification
of this Crinital Star, is in brynging corruption in the Air, by unseasonable
weather, the next year. 1581. by Taurus, impressing ariditie and dryness upon
the Earth, with infectuous exhalations, bryngyng plagues and Choleric motions
in the hearts of men. The months the next year of ye appearance of effects,
be Apryl, May, August, September, November. The second year. 1582. the
impression is by Gemini, in procuryng much agitation in the air, and
intemperate times, by great winds, rain, snowes, and floods. The worst
moncthes be February, March, July, Angust, October.

The third year. 1583. the Athazer fall upon Cancer, which shall bring
forth a wet year, much rain, and dark wether, with many flooddes, that the
grounds shall be much harmed, and rottes among the heardes. The woorst Months
of these effects, be February, March, Apryl, July, August, September, October.
Thus thou have (Gentle Reader) my extraction of this Crinital Star, with the
judgment of the Eclipses ^omoyned. Hopyng that thou wylt judge of it,
according to trial, and not by a captious opinion. And so I conclude, wyshyng
every one to fear GOD, and his signs, and to pray that he may turn from us
what evil so ever his Comettes signify, indewyng us with his holy spirit.

Fare well.

F. K.

FINIS.
GOD save and long preserve our most worthy and gracious Queen ELIZABETH.

