THE HISTORY OF CALANTHROP AND LVCILLA.

CONSPICVOVSLY DEmonstrating the various mutabilities of Fortune in their
loves, with every several circumstance of joys and crosses, fortunate
exploites, and hazardous adventures, which either of them sustained before they
could attain the prosperous event of their wished aims.

By JOHN KENNEDIE.

Gratis Corycio, mihi nectar Castalis vndae, Mnemosynes natae, nocte dedere
novem.



EDINBVRGH Printed by John Wreittoun, and are to be sold at his shop a little
beneath the Salt-Trone. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, TRVELIE NOBLE, MAGNANIMOVS, AND worthy Lord, Sir
DONALD MACKAYE, of STRANEVER Knight, Lord Colonel, etc.
MY LORD,
I Have (reposing in your Lordships ingenuous nature) assumed the audacitie for
two respects, to present these my Neophiticall labors unto your Lordship. The
first reason moving me so to do, is this: Each generous mind reputes your
Lordship to be well affected toward every act or aim (being virtuous) of
whatsoever quality. The which report has much imboldned me (though meanly
acquainted) to offer out of the indigencie of my illiterate skull, this little
mite, assuredly expecting (that since it proceeds of a loving and liberal mind,
that your L. will accept thereof (though it be not of such value) even as well
as of theirs (who out of the abundant riches of their prudent and learned
experiences) do usually throw more talents into the The saurie of your
Lordships praeexcellent and admired worth. The second reason inciting me, is
this, That in regard this my Poetical Exordium, is the first perspicuous
invention of my stirile brain: and therefore consequently fearing the
insufficiency thereof, I esteemed it my best to make choice of your Lordship,
as my worthy Mecoenas, whose grandour, and great respect, is of sufficient
power to palliate all the infirmities of this Pamphlet, yea and to shroud the
very same from the impetuous obloquie, and preposterous scandal, of the most
calumnious carper, or Satyricke Inveigher. Therefore since for your Lordship I
did it, and to your Lordship I direct it: then good my Lord vouchsafe to
patronize it. By which means I shall prove fortunate in my attempt, and your
Lordship (as you are of every worthy one already, much respected) shall also of
me be more and more reverenced, and entirely and infinitely affected, as I have
special reason, being tied many ways thereto by dutie-bound obligation: of the
which I esteem this last none of the least, and shall perpetually acknowledge
it so to be, wishing your Lordship (in requital of the same undeserved
benefit) the perfect fruition of each terrestrial happiness here, and
immortal felicity hence, vowing likewise solemnly (during life) to continue,

Your Lordships dutie-bound and obsequious servant, whom your Lordship may
absolutey dispose of, John Kennedie.

TO EACH READER OF whatsoever quality or condition.
IVdicious and Courteous Reader, knowing (by many experiences) that those who
are most prudent, learned, or capable, are generally ever most favorable and
sparing in their censures. I therefore have presumed to commit this Poem to
thy view, entreating thee, that though perhaps it do not give thee every way
content, and that in respect it is void of ornate or elegant phrase, and not of
an Heroicke style: and therefore not answerable to thy expectation, nor my
desire: yet since it is (though not as I would, yet such as I could) allow me
this gains for my pains, that it pass without check. But after the pervsing
hereof, if thou be so benevolently disposed, (though not to commend the work)
yet to approve my aim, I shall for that undeserved favor, ever esteem my
self infinitely bound to thy courtesy. But if thou prove toward me an
invective Critic, I am enforced to tell thee, that Momists are little or
nothing respected. And Zoylus, though through carping at Homerus his works,
acquired the name of Homeromastix (which is Homers scourge) yet was he laughed
at for his pains, because he disapproved the work which he could neither
amend nor parallel. It likewise was reputed a cynical humor in Phocion (though
he was Plato his scholar) to carp at every man that wore shoes, because he
himself went always barefooted. Likewise let me advise thee, if thou be a
Poet, that thou do not, with Theon, satyrickly inveigh at those who are thy
betters, because thou thy self come short of their work, and therefore
can neither merit nor attain the like commendation. Grudge not therefore
because that the Poetical talent is not bestowed upon every one alike, but
rather endeavor through study (if thou be so virtuously inclined) to extend the
Talent thou have allowed thee. But if thou be illiterate, and yet aim to
censure (if thou had understanding) this Poem invectively, I will advise
thee for thy profit (though I have small reason so to do, in respect of thy
malevolentinent) to desist, lest thou give me occasion to say, Ne Suitor vltra
crepidam: or, smiling at thy peevish humor, entreat thee to meddle only with
such things as come within the compass of thy capacity. Yea, though thou be
indifferently well affected, yet if ihou be unlearned, I dare hardly adventure
to come within the circuit of thy censure, lest either through misconstruing
the subject, or maimedly reading the verse, thou value my labor at too low a
rate. But unhappy he (and worthy to be esteemed the Prince of fools) who
willingly consents to undergo the censure of those who are both besotted with
ignorance, and of a Satyrick disposition. Yet expecting the best of every
Reader, because I by those, no otherwise have deserved, I thus conclude, which
every one that is capable must allow, as a Dilemma, that since love ever aims
at a correspondencie, (notwithstanding of the inequality of persons. For as
the old Scottish Adage goes, Love cannot stand on the one side. So Reader, I
whatsoever thou be) according to thy censure of these my labors, rest toward
thee affected, even thus,

Thine as thou meritest, John Kennedie. Philetaeros.

In Authorem Encomiasticon.
NOn Venerem Coam melius puto pinxit Apelles,
Praxitilesve prius Gnidiam de marmore duxit
Nec mage dulce melos, Siculo cita vela profundo
Detinuit, Kenedo fluit hic quam nectar ab ore,
Harmonicisque modis castos describit amores,
Suavis huic patriis manans de vitibus humor.
Rite Caledoniis numeris includere versus
Gestit, and ad patrios modulos been verba refer,
Nec sinit indecores nostras, magis esse Camenas.
Scilicet Aonidum chorus, hunc, super arduae vectum,
Per iuga Parnassi, gelidique cacumina Pindi,
Castalios gustare lacus, vmbrasque subire,
Lauriferi nemoris, seeretaque Phocidos antrae
Permittit, Comitemque sacri iubet ordinis ire,
Inter and illustres nomen meruisse poetas,
Quotquot Hyanteos latices hausere Caballi
Ergo per hunc, veteri Coaque, Gnidoque relicta
Vecta Caledonias Venus aurea venit ad oras,
Barbara nec dici meruit, velut indiga cultus,
Lingua Britanna, suo referens sermon libellos.
Galterus Bellendinus.

Ejusdem aliud.
HIc Venerem Venerisque doces Kennede clientes,
Ore verecundo verba Britanna loqui,
Vlla nec in toto prurit lascivia libro,
Non minus est nobis, pagina, vita, proba.
Galterus Bellendinus

In Kenedum Authorem.
GOrdius a Kenedo laxatur nodus amoris,
Nexibus haud ruptis ense, sed art datis,
Pingitur alma Venus non sic pinxisset Apelles,
Ced cut Naso, splendet amoris Epos.
Nil miri expertum quod cantet amator amorem
Cura quum Musas perpete captus amet.
R. Fairlaeus.

The Map of this Muse.
REader I wish thee henceforth to refrain,
To read the rupturs of mad O vids brain
What can thou find in all these lines of his
But flatrings, smilings, or a baudie kiss,
Vain wenching, ieasting, dallieing, iealousies,
Fainde sights, deceats, and Venus vainities,
But view this pamphlet, and thy wit shall find
Wise precepts and instructions for thy mind.
Sweet peace of thought, the secreet joy of heart,
Chaste modest love, void of all vicious airt,
Rare continence, adornde with virtues shame,
Still lothing love that lechery does name
Lo here are lines of passing pleasant grace,
Which modest maids may read but blush of face
Those are the first fruits of a brave ingyne,
Fortelling what his spirit will prove in time.
Then go brief book and Momus seed defye,
Be not afraid of Critics base envy,
For to thy fame this boldly I relate.
No lines of love shall live a longer date.
Patrick Mackenzie

THE HISTORY OF CALANTHROP AND LVCILLA.
ONE Summers day young Calanthrop sat down
In pleasant grove, hard by a crystal brook,
A Bay by vmbrage, Flora by her gown
Gave such content, that great delight he took:
For here his smell was pleased, so was his sight,
His body safe from Phoebus scorching light.
Zephyrus motion amongst the fruitful sprigges,
Made fall the Cherry, Apple, Prune and Pear:
Feath'red confed'rates sat on tender twigges,
Ready prepared for to please his ear:
These winged Musicians strained their pretty throats,
In diverse Ditties warbling forth their notes.
In yonder rock sits Niobe immured,
Here Philomela 'gins for to lament,
Poenaean Daphne there grows up obscured,
Phaetons sisters likewise do relent,
And with their Amber tears through bark and rine,
Their loss and brothers fall seem to repine.
Look, Adons flower, yet of Vermilion dye,
Reteines the stain received by his blood,
The silver tears fell from fair Venus eye
Upon the leaf stand yet, as then they stood,
For, seeing how the Boar her love had slain,
She weeping kissed, and kissing't weeps again.
Narcissus next, presents it to his view
With drouping head, as he in fountain gazed,
In sign he drencht, yet is it wet with dew,
Without a breach, it is head cannot be raised,
Of color white, small savor does possess,
He foolish fair, his death does well express*
Turning by chance, his eye aside he cast,
And there perceiues a fountain richly framed
Of Iet-black Marble, snow-white Alabast,
Nature nor workman neither to be blamed:
The work was portraits, as I shall descrive,
Through liquid motion seemed (though dead) alive.
There Mars and Venus might you see ensnared
In Vulcans net, still toyling to getout,
Both of them vowing for to be repaired,
In taking vengeance on the polt-foot lout,
Phoebus peepes in, shame sits on Venus cheek,
Iu Scarletroabe, Mars strength is now to seek.
A statue next, Orpheus does represent,
His harp in hand, Sylvanus does approach,
With Sylvans, Fauns, and Satyrs of intent,
To trip and dance the woodie Nymphs incroach,
The tops of trees reverberate the ground,
Who, if they rootlesse were, would dance a Round.
Even as the Ivy does infold the Oak,
Right so Pygmalion can his Statue close,
Twixt breast and arms, that scarce he leisure took
To view it well, for kissing't mouth and nose.
It seems on him to smile with comely grace,
And still the water makes them move apace.
Next, sits Arion on a Dolphins back,
The light-foot Nercids, tripping on the sand:
He plays, the Dolphins tumbling, dancing make,
His special aim is to attain the land.
Twixt sea and shore, him toss they to and froe,
Though not indeed, by water seem they so.
Then greedy Midas, senseless in his suit
To Bacchus made, that what he touched in gold,
Should quickly turn, his Asses ears repute,
Midst gold half starved, he heavens implores, behold,
The response bids go bathe in Pactol's stream,
Thy virtue loss, thy former state redeem.
See how At'lanta and Hippomenes,
By foot-course try most swiftly who can run,
Venus gold apples of Hisperides,
The Less perceives lie glistering against the sun.
First one, an other, before the third she catch,
The Lad prevails, and winnes her to his match.
As Icar soars with artificial wings,
His father cries, Son, keep a lower gate;
Oft-times ambition late repentance brings,
His waxen plumes, shake loose through Titans heat.
Whilst Dedalus an equal course still craves,
The sea his son of flight and breath bereaves.
Grim-fac'd Medusa, next, with Snakie head,
Looks all imbrewd in Serpents loathsome gore,
The vipers seem, by biting, make her bleed,
Such is the water-worke I show before.
Those that beheld her, turned were to stone,
So are they here, save Calanthrop, each one.
Paris on I Would, three goddess him beforne,
Stands doubting which of them to give the ball.
Pallas bids wit, Juno gold, nere forlorn,
Venus fair Helen height, and gained all.
Gold he reiects, Prudence no whit prevailed,
Bewitching beauty so his heart assailed.
Last, Venus son stands hood-winkt, from his bow
He shafts forth sends at randone through the air,
Without respect both whom he hit or how,
If he do hit at all, is all his care.
None can evite all-conquering Cupids sting
The base-borne beggar, nor the royal king.
This grove Gargaphiae justly might be called,
Save that a Dian does it not contain,
Nor Cadmus Oye, whose head with horns impaled,
For timelesse viewing of the chastest train,
Precipitate Acteon of his rutblesse hounds,
For Fatal look, received Fatal wounds.
Whilst Calanthrop thus gazed, him thought he heard
Musickes sweet sound arrest his hearing sense,
He turns and sees approach, a lovely guard
Of Damsels, yet knew not their pretense,
His anxious thoughts import a timorous mind,
Himself he shrouds an Ivie-bush behind.
By this those Nymphs at fountain do arrive,
Their instruments they lay apart, and then
Who can their Mistres first deroabe, they strive,
This takes away her roabes, that comes again.
Through the bush, still Calanthrop does prye,
Their tricks he does with small content espy.
One with a key vnlockes the fountain gates,
And now the fairest does the stream embrace,
She warmes the spring, the spring her heat abates,
Her Iv'rie body does the fountain grace.
She joys to bathe, but Calanthrop's afraid,
Poor malcontent he to himself thus said.
Oh heavens (said he) must I an Acteon prove,
This cursed Dian then is every where:
Infort'nate youth, what fatal chance did move
Thee at this time unto these woods repair.
Remed'lesse grieves, I find are most obscure,
What Fates decree, we humanes must endure.
But oh, if one might possibly require,
Or cite those Fates to render their account
Before great love, what matter then in fire
(If once revenged) in smallest ash be burnt.
But woe (aye me) without control they still
Dispose of us, we must obey their will.
Now there Megaera and Alecto come
For to coact my metamorphosis,
But stay you Furies, sure I will by some
Vn-usuall trick, you disappoint in this.
Now with his sword to rob he does intend
Himself of life, which should his life defend.
And as the point he presents to his breast,
Take courage woeful Calanthrop (said he)
This heart of thine where erst did sorrows rest,
Now at one thrust shall quickly be made free,
And this brave act shall eternize thy name,
Who death preferres before a living shame.
Mean while that maid, whom he Megaera thought
Taking her fellow by the hand, did say,
Cousin, by your advice we here are brought,
Lets turn in time lest in these woods we stray:
Or shall we go and make us pleasant posies,
For here is good store of Violets and Roses.
This their discourse did suddenly denood
Him so of sense, that still he did surmize
He dreamed: for such an unexpected good
As this, he thought could hardly sympathize
With his thrice more then miserable state,
Which winds with groans, would through the world regrate
By this his blood begins again retire,
Yet dare he not allow his eyes their due,
But still he looks, and looking does admire,
This happy change he cannot think be true,
But to confirm what he before has seen,
Even him beside upon a flourie green,
These wel-fac'd Furies who of late dismayed
Him now begin again to recomfort,
So that his furious enterprise he staid,
And rests content to see them make such sport.
For whilst their Lutes, a Base or Tenor sound,
Their voice in Alts sweet music do abound.
Though that a man through melancholy mad
Were so ore-gone, that he could not abide
No company, nor music for to glad
His spirits, yet such Musicians would assyde
Soon banish grief, and by their heavenly voice,
The saddest heart that ever was rejoice.
Now one of those, belike, of special worth,
Her self advances, and her voice does raise,
Her brave intent thus prosecutes she forth,
Which was to sing unto her Mistres praise.
The rest applaud in hearing her rehearse
This Dittie which herself had put in verse.
THE DITTIE OF A MAID.
MAiestick Juno jealous was,
As Io well did find,
Her Cow-heard Argus sight surpass
All men's, yet was made blind.
Through Morpheus aid, and Syrinx note,
Asleep he fell, his charge forgot.
Vulcans fair wife the wanton played
With more then Mars, you know,
At last the Smith her well repaid
For his cornuted blow.
The Cent'nell Gallus he neglected,
So Mars his master him rejected.
Chaste Dian justly may be taxt
Of monstrous cruelty,
Who for one look so angry waxt
As could endure to see.
A man used, unhappy wife
First hornd the man, then took his life.
Jove's braine-bred daughter, much adored
Of Trojans: made descend
From Heavens Palladium, which instor'd
them still, and much defend
Their City: yet for all her wit
The w^^^^ Greek removed it.
There Is one whose beauty well may be
Compared to Jove's Queen,
No envy, nor no jealousy
Is, or has, with her been.
All mortals may her praise proclaim,
LVCILLA is this Ladies name.
Venus was fair, yet had a stain,
Fair Helen had the same,
Into her face a spot some feign:
But such has not this Dame.
Lucilla's fair, without disgrace,
No inchast spot is in her face.
The Huntresse chaste, might well admit
This Lady of her train,
No cruel nor no choleric fit,
Does in her heart remain.
She in this gift, her sex exceeds,
Chaste are her thoughts, her words, her deeds.
If prudent Pallas were on earth,
Her equal should she find
For solid wit: as for rare birth,
Pallas surpast her kind.
Yet had Lucilla Troy protected,
No foreign force had them eiected.
Each goddess for one quality,
You see are still extold
Should then not she, in whom agree
all graces, be inrold
In scrolles of fame? since free from fault,
Let all the earth her thus exalt.
A Juno lacking jealousy,
A Venus stainlesse fair,
A Dian without cruelty,
For wit a Pallas rare.
Luciila's virtues shine as clear,
As Phoebus in his highest sphere.
HER song thus ended, presently one calls,
So they retire their Mistres to attend.
This maid who called, whereas the Spring devalles
Still staid since first Lucilla did descend
Into the Bathe, where she has staid so long,
That they are afraid, her too much bathing wrong
At her egresse, the statues seem to weep,
For woe that fair Lucilla must depart,
Which matchless treasure they would gladly keep.
Now from their eyes the water drops by art.
Likewise the water down her body trilling,
As loath to part: last on her feet stands billing.
Till that the Air, more subtle element,
His place does claim, which yet the water holds,
But now that rain, by Aeols force half spent,
Which yet remains, one in a cloth infolds,
And so leaves Air, and Water, midst their store,
To try whose interest greatest was before.
Quoth Neptune, brother Aeolus, I may
You justly tax, of breach of brotherhood,
Who most enioyes Lucilla night and day,
Not so content, with Vesta you collude,
Still to prevent her wished approach to me,
For Brooks and Springs are mine, as is the Sea.
Then Aeole thus, with boystrous voice replied,
Neptune, Lucilla's not a fish believe,
Nor can with finnes, thy weltring waves divide,
Nor is she Sea-Nymph, therefore do not grieve
She leave thy home, by nature cold and wet,
By me she lives, though Vesta's part were set.
Neptune replies, Lucilla lives by you?
You Will make her then a Salmond fish indeed,
For the Air those fish some say their food allow,
And by report they on naught else do feed.
But she is no fish, nor foul, nor bird that sings,
For as she gills does lack, so does she wings.
My mates (quoth Vesta) may not I as well
Some interest claim into this lovely less,
Since her, and such, for to sustain I feel
Upon my womb the crooked plow often pass,
And soript up, reintegrates with gain
To Bacchus wine, and unto Ceres grain.
Now came Acmonides the Cyclop swift,
And them commands in Vulcans name, leave off
Such friv'lous talk, else by some sudden shift,
His master would them chastise: him they scoff,
And bad him tell his master, they regard
No whit his message, far less such reward.
For (quoth they) though his region be above
Ours placed, yet does he bear no rule ore us,
And no superior save the mighty Jove,
Will we acknowledge, also tell him thus,
Choler abounds most in a furious beast,
But in Lucilla is his interest least.
Yet stay (said Vesta) let us not despise
His power: for, when foolish Phaeton fell,
I got a hot memento, to be wise,
Which yet my scorched Lybia can tell.
For guiltless I tried then, his fiery force,
Choler no reason yields, nor has remorse.
And Aeole likewise you will confess, I hope,
You must give place to Vulcans thundering clap;
Neptune likewise for all his boundless scope.
Is not content such in his bosom wrap,
For sure the habit of immod'rate heat
Will watery Tethys to repine excite.
Now Vulcans self into their hearing roares,
And terribly midst fiery flames appears,
Through the clouds he in his chariot soars,
At such a sight, the hearts of humans fears.
And now twixt Aeole and the god of floods,
He lights, and leaves his Chariot among the clouds,
My friends (quoth Vulcan) will you play me so?
Shall I Have no part in fair Lucilla here?
In rational, and sensitive you know,
And vegitative creatures, still I bear
A part with you: why then not so in this?
Who count before their Host, they count amiss.
But yet you may (perhaps) mistake me much,
To dominiere in such, I do not use,
So then I trust, since that my humour's such,
Me as copartner you will not refuse.
By nature she participates of all
Us four: yet the one must she be most in thrall.
Let Us therefore try who has this rule supreme,
Vesta shall be disburdned of this charge,
Melancholy in her is not extreme,
Nor yet shall he who rules the rivers large.
Bear sovereign rule: so let him not contest,
For phlegm, in age, it self best manifest.
Then Neptune thus spoke in a chafing rage,
I hope one Venus Vulcan may suffice,
Lucilla's wit, her choler does assuage,
Therefore to him does not belong this prize,
To Air then yield her, as we ought in duty,
Since Sanguines only do possess such beauty.
Thus then agreed Vulcan for Aetna makes,
Aeole does still 'bove sea or earth abide,
For he, you know, a local mansion lackes,
Neptune returns, to rule his waters wide:
Vesta prepares herself to give account,
How far her yearly increase does amount.
But now, to fair Lucilla must I turn,
Whom maids, in rich apparel, gladly cloth,
She homeward tends, whereat the woods do mourn,
Calanthrop likewise, wood and fountain both
Bids now farewell, and in Lucilla's quest
He goes, which if attaind, he thinks him blessed.
Over hills and vales, through meads and dales he runs,
No steepie mountain may his passage let:
At last he sees her, and at first two Suns,
Of which the brightest on the earth is set.
He thinks he sees, his object him deceives,
Again he looks, a woman's face perceives.
But such a face, the earth yeeldes not another,
For matchless beauty, and behavior brave:
No Naiad, Driad, no nor Cupids mother,
In loveliness, compare with her may have.
Nature her made in Venus mould to sit,
Amending now, what she did then omit.
LVCILLA HER Description.
Even such she was: Her hairs gold wyre vn^wynd
Resemble right, which carelessly she hung
In green silke-lace, with silver wrought, confynd
Over her shoulders: but her face no tongue
Can give the due: her brow is Cupids throne,
Where he, unseen, delights to sit alone.
Her eyes like sparkling stars in frostie night,
Her nose even such as lovely Leda had,
Her partie-coloured cheeks, graced with delight,
Like Lillies mixed, with Rose, in Crymson clad.
Her lips sweet Rubie-red, box-like enclose
Her pearle-like teeth, till she to smile dispose.
Her breasts as white as those two Swannes which draw
Venus by coach, to Paphos lovely hold,
Her hands like hers, Achilles aeath foresaw,
Yet could not brook the touch of water cold,
For though she dipped the boy the flood beneath,
His heel kept dry, which was in end his death.
Her feet like Thetis which none can remarke,
The print thereof, even where she newly walked,
Her pace like Juno's, when in Ida park
With Pallas, and the Queen of Love, she talked.
In fine, her better Nature never wrought,
Her shape can hardly be conceived by thought.
THis rare admired sole quintescence of kind,
With all her maids, were now come to a place,
Hard by the sea, where as they use, they find
Their Bark and Boat-men waiting, but their pace
Has been so swift, that through great heat even there
They Are forced sit down, to breathe and take the air.
Now Calanthrop approches to be brief,
For Cupid wounded unawares his heart,
He sees their aim, and sees it to his grief,
He finds their Bark: this aggravates his smart.
Yet at the Boat-men does he now enquire,
If they will transport him, and receive his hire.
Whereto they answer, Good sir, please you hear,
This Bark belongs unto the loveliest Dame
That this day lives: who now belike is near
Unto this place, and we her servants came
Her to attend: else willingly we would
Receive you sir, if any way we could.
My friends (said he) tell me where is your course
If so in friendship I entreat you may:
For it is like that by a brief discourse
You give content, and I be pleased to stay,
In court'sie sir, so much will we you show,
To yonder land lies opposite we go.
There comes the Lady, so if you acquire
Her own consent, without reproach we can
Yield you content: so lest the time expire,
Put forth your suit: for be assured no man
Shall you refuse, to trannsport without wage,
For you're but one, and yonder comes a Page.
This Page delivers him two letters sent
By some his friends, which does import great haste,
Yet it is too late: for now his heart was lent
Els-where: for his affections all were placed
In fair Lucilla, who her Bark stands by,
And now to enter does herself apply.
Whilst Boat-men strive to make their Bark cohere
To land: for their fair Ladies greater ease,
A maid comes running, with exceeding fear,
And to her Lady thus spoke, Madame please,
I Have seen a man, or Incubus belike,
And as she spoke, her breast with hand did strike.
Look how a maid confynd in narrow way,
Amongst steepie rocks, finding a Dragon sleep,
How tim'rously she will stand: yet no delay
Her frighted heart can brook, for now to weep
Does naught avail: right so with fear now filled,
She ran away, as though she thought be killed.
But now the Mar'ners to relate begin
Unto Lucilla, how a brave youth sought
By them to have transport her Bark within,
Take what they pleased for hire, he cared naught,
A Gallant brave, a stranger we him think,
Lo yonder comes he 'longst the river brinke.
Now Calanthrop a thousand ways is vexed,
Strange cogitations do him so turmoyle,
He cannot stay, to go he is perplexed,
Lest through presumption he receive the foil.
But, go he must, how ere she him repute,
Love so commands, thus does he her salute.
FAirest on earth, will it please you to allow
Me who is a stranger for to have transport
Into your comp'nie, I solemnly vow,
If you be pleased to grace me in such sort,
In your defense, command so when you list,
I Will hazard life, and if I dye, I Am blessed.
For know, dear Lady, my adoes are great,
Even such wherein consist my bliss or bail,
So, if I stay, the Destinies do threat
Me with such death, as makes my heart to quail,
Even such a death, that whilst I live, I Will dye,
And though I death desire, death will me fly.
Therefore sweet Nymph, since I have told you plain,
Beatifie me, by your generous grant,
So shall I still your servant true remain,
Whereof with credit I may justly vaunt,
For such a Mistress has no mortal wight,
Against Mars himself, I dare maintain by fight.
Lucilla, all this while attentively
Remarkt his speech, and felt she knew not what,
A more entire respect then usually
She heretofore to any bore, whereat
Aggrieved, her self of fondness does reprove,
For she as yet never felt the force of love.
Yet this respect she caries to the youth,
I hope, anon, shall purchase him his fraught,
Now the sweet Organ of her lovely mouth,
Vtters such words, as might have Merc'rie taught:
Which words, from out Loves lethagrie, awake
Young Calanthrop: for thus to him she spoke.
SVch titles sir, I you entreat, reserve
As you give me, for some of more desert,
For, through self-love, many from honor swerve,
As those report in Nature most expert,
And if ambition once the heart subdue,
Honor, wit, virtue, bid that heart adieu.
It may be Sir, that you repute this strange,
That undeserved, many will assume
Prerogatives: and badly do exchange
Virtue with vice, such is ambitions fume:
Those late repentance, make their plumes decline,
Yet they never strive their hum ours to refine.
Let this suffice then, now as to your suite
Sir, you shall know, that we use not permit
Men in our comp'nie, lest through scand'lous bruit
Our spotless names in question come, but yet
Those Mar'ners you perhaps esteem as men,
Yet are they Eunuchs, though in number ten.
But lest your loss through our default accresse,
And we prove guilty of your overthrow,
We will for this time, our strict use repress,
And for your weal, our hazard undergo,
Since you're a stranger, then in charity,
We should you aid, if we may lawfully.
For this, Calanthrop renders thousand thanks,
And on his knee offers her hand to kiss,
Which she refused: now each in their own ranks
Go board the Bark: but o what joy by this
Does Calanthrop conceive! and now their sail
They hoise, for why, they have a prosperous gale.
Now, being imbarkt, Neptune begins to joy
That he has gaind which he of late was reft,
No wrinkling wave upon his brow t'annoy
Them now is seen: no swelling surge is left
Upon the Oceans face, but like to balm
The seas appear now, through a pleasant calm.
Lucilla now the stranger placed hard by
Herself: and seeing he so silent sat,
Smiling, began she to enquire him why
He looked so sad, or what he cogitate.
Whilst he so sat into a silent muse,
Whereat ashamed, himself does thus excuse.
MAdam, by nature I Am melancholy,
Yet do I think by casual accident,
This humor much more is infused in me,
Which if I could, I gladly would prevent;
But so it is, I Am forced to taste the sour
And bittet sap, whilst others smell the flower.
For know dear sweet, the Fates do so ordain,
Whilst others joy, that I in woe must wail,
The blinde-borne Archers shaft, I entertain
My heart within: this makes me look so pale,
And which is worse, with grief I pine and mourn,
She lovelesse lives, mids Cupids flames I burn.
And yet in truth, thus far I must confess,
I silent grieve, for such I never show
To her directly, neither did adresse
My self to suit such, for I thought I knew
Already, that I labor would in vain,
And pour forth plaints to one would me disdain,
Yet since I see that silence will redound
To my great loss, likewise in such a case,
It is not requisite, lest I confound
My self, and so my fortunes all intrace
In grizely lab'rynth of pale-looking woe,
I Will speak in time, heavens aid me thereinto.
The Mar'ners all this time were sleeping near,
And glad to rest, for they out-waked were.
Lucilla's maids applied themselves to hear
The Page discourse, no longer time defer
Would Calanthrop, but since the time so serves*
Proceeds: yet trembling fear possessed his nerves.
For he was feared the Mar'ners might awake,
Or that the maids might to his speech advert,
He likewise feared Lucilla fair might take
Exception by his words, and so insert
His name and hopes in scrolles of pale reject,
Yet he resolves, this speech to her direct.
THrice fairer then the fairest that does breath,
Ortrampe down Tellus by their harmless foot,
More worth to me then life, do not in wrath
This as presumption unto me impute,
That I, sore loue-sick, must thy pity crave,
For thou it is only must me kill or save.
Thou, whose Idea in my heart is fixed
So firmly, that no death can it remove,
Let thy great beauty be with mercy mixed,
Pity is called the ornament of love.
Pity those shrowds, disdain would whip with rods,
It Is pity only, makes us like to gods.
Sweet lovely fair, please you remember right,
When I of you my transport did obtain,
I told you that my stay would mar my spright,
And through transport I should lost joy regaine:
So true it is, for since you show such grace,
You gave me life by looking in your face.
For such like matter I never thought upon,
As of transport, but glad was to conceal
My love, until such time as there was none
Hard by, to hear what I to you reveal:
For since, sweet love, I saw you in the wood,
I still esteemed you my sole earthly good.
Even then when you did richly benefit
The colding spring, with touch of your fair hide,
The fountain bathe within, for to repeat
What joy the whole spectators were beside
Did then conceive, would scarcely purchase trust,
But as for me, appear no way I durst.
For whilst I on the fountain statues gazed,
You marched so swift with all your lovely bond,
That I, by such great beauties much amazed,
Into a bush, hard by, my self abscond,
And all the while you did the bathe inure,
I silent sat with small content I Am sure.
Cause I Diana absolute esteemed
You: for such beauty humanes not possess,
As you enjoy: so wished I be exeem'd
From such like comp'nie: lest that such distress
Might me befall, as him who wore Hearts horn
First on his head, then by his dogs was torn.
But when I saw that dangers all were past,
And that you were a humane creature,
When you were gone, I followed after fast,
Loves fiery faggots so my heart combure,
Such bait gave Cupid on a gilded hook,
I could not stay till I you over-tooke.
So now, sweet heart, since opportunity
Has made me fort'nate, granting me such time,
My love t'impart to your self privately
Grant me your favor, that amidst the prime
Of my young years, I may more joy conceive,
Then Nestor old in all his life did have.
In thy sweet self my spotless love's ingraft,
In thee is placed my joys, and whole content,
Let not disdain by his fastidious craft,
Frustrate my hopes, nor yet my joys prevent.
For Nat'ralists this maxim often observes,
A lovely face grace in the heart conserves.
That Oracle which Delphos did contain,
Sometime, I hope, was held in such respect,
That many did through great expense and pain,
Obtain response, whereon they did erect
All their attempts: so Calanthrop now prays,
Her answer might gree with his hopes always.
Look how a man for capital offense,
Being arraigned, a Jury does sustain,
How pale-faced fear his heart holds in suspense,
Till from the Judge his sentence he attain
Of death or life: even so does he expect
Her answer, which will work the like effect.
But now Lucilla for to solve the doubt,
Which at this time young Calanthrop surpised,
Lifting her eyes, and looking all about,
She looked on him, which look might have intys'de
The coldest minded Saturnist had breath,
To love: and thus her answer did bequeath.
GOod Sir, I marvel you should so advance
Fond love so far, since wise men him deride
Whose power's only foolish hearts t'intrance:
Must they not stray, who have a blinded guide.
Where Cupid reigns, the sense he deludes soon,
Making them see strange visions in the moon.
Some do report the Gods did once conveene,
A Parliament touching prerogatives,
Then of Ambition Envy hatched has been,
Cupid and Folly at debate, she drives
Him back, scratcht out his eyes he might not see,
Therefore appointed was his guide to be.
Since so it is, good Sir, let me entreat
You to renounce such guides as be those two,
For though the heart with joy be full repleate
At first by them, yet in the end comes woe,
A prudent mind in virtue exercysde
Within Loves limits seldom is comprysde.
And as for me, fond Venus and her boy
I scorn, and do 'their Deity still detest,
To talk of love, I think it but a toy,
Lymphatick hearts he only may molest,
Let such adore him, and admire his power,
The higher is their flight, their fal's the lower.
So now she calls her maids, and bids them go
Awake the Mar'ners, for she sees the shore
Is near hand by them, likewise there is more
Billows appear, nor was seen heretofore.
The mar'ners rise, they tackle, veere and tie,
They gain the land, so Neptune they defye.
Her coach is waiting her approach: so now
She and her maids incoach themselves with speed,
They bid farewell to Calanthrop, and bow
Themselves in coach: his grief does now exceed
All men's on earth: yea, it may have compare
To those who in the Stygian shades repair.
Not Sysiphus, who roules the restless stone,
Nor Ixion, who turns the toylsome wheel,
Such grief possess as he: since she is gone,
Whose beauteous presence was his safties seal,
Nor Beliles, who midst infernal fire,
To fill still emptying buckets, do desire.
No nor Prometheus, for his heaven-fire stealth,
By vultures torn alive, midst fiery flame,
Nor Midas King, whose cov'tous heart such wealth
Required, as thereby lost both sense and frame,
No greater grief does any of those try,
Disdain yields heat his harmless heart does frye.
Still starving Tantalus, to quench his thirst,
Standing in water, water craves to drink,
To pull the flying fruit, he does insist,
The fruit eschew, the waters from him shrink,
His babbling tongue justly his pain procured,
But Calanthrop is guiltlesly injured.
While Calanthrop with grief was thus or'e-swaid
His Page suggesteth, that it were the best
To give the Mar'ners coin, who as yet staid,
Belike, expecting some: the which request
He soon fulfild, bidding him give a crown
To each of them, whereat the Page did frown.
Yet ne'rethelesse he must this charge obey,
Therefore he went and called them for to row
Their ships boat, which they did without delay,
On each of ten a crown he did bestow.
They yield him thanks, requesting him in end,
Their service to his master recommend.
He said he would, then to a wood hard by
Directs his course, which way his master went,
When he had walked a while, he saw him lie
Among lofty Pynes, famous for high ascent,
Calanthrop bids him with what have he might
Some where about provide their Innes that night.
As he directs, the Page away does pass,
Yet knew not where this Innes he should provide
At last by chance he meets a country Less,
Who show him that the way longst the wood side
Was best for him: for by yond flowrie spring,
He Will find a way to city will him bring.
Even this same time does Calanthrop bewail
His hard mishaps the Destenies decree,
Even thus I see such Fortune's favors frail,
What gained by month, does in a moment flee.
(O happy I) if I had never proved
The sad effects, affection has moved.
So you sweet Cedars, and you high-rear'd Pines,
I you entreat subvmbrate me by shade,
From mortal eyes, lest spiteful worldlings minds
In joy triumph, to see my success bad.
No, let the earth alive my corpse interre,
Rather then Fortune, thus my joys defer.
Whilst Calanthrop through grief bereft of sense,
Thus tumbles, tosses, welters here and there,
He sees a man, now for his best defense
He seeks his sword, yet found he it no where.
The man salutes him in this courteous form,
Which wrought in him a calm after this storm.
GOod gentleman, please you, came there this way
Of late some Huntsmen, chasing of a Dear?
Or did you hear the shrill-mouth'd hounds, at bay
With fearlesse Boar, or with the crushing Bear?
For from a thicket distant scarce a mile,
We roused a Bear, whom we try to exile.
This hurtful Bear does much unlooked for harm,
In killing men and women, children weak,
His bad embracement raised a sad alarm
Into a neighboring Castle, by a Lake.
Lowering he lies among brambles, briers and bushes,
Waiting his prey: which got, he tears and crushes.
Misfortune great, a youth some twelve years old,
A Cousin to Lucilla (beauteous creature)
This proper youth (aye me) less wise then bold,
Beloved of all, and of a comely feature,
One day would needs himself, by times solace,
With horse and hounds to keep the Bear in chase.
But he a little from his comp'nie singled,
The Div'lish beast perceiving him alone,
Despair with chol'rick fury intermingled
Begot in him revenge, so that anon,
Running amain, he pulled the youth at under,
Then (unresisted) tore his joints asunder.
And ever since the Duke with many knights,
Try by all means, this cruel beast to kill,
Or else expel, but he almost affrights
All his pursuers: for his looks do fill
Their hearts with fear, that they encounter dare
No way, but glad to view the chase a far.
But yet the Duke appointed has a day,
And letters sent to all his bordering mates,
Them in his aid, requesting to assay
Their valorous force, so men of all estates,
Are looked for here, against Tuesday next at morn,
To chase the Bear with horse, with hound, with horn.
This present day, some gallants brave to try,
Which was the place of his foul residence,
Came to this forest, and of late went by
To yonder grove, disturbed his patience.
Rousd the foul monster from his loathsome cave,
Like Martialists, to rob his life they crave.
And since that I am in those woods acquaint,
For long time I thereof have keeper been,
They my advice required e're they attaint
This enterprise: but now I have not seen
Nor heard of them this hour ago and more,
And this makes me inquisitiue therefore.
In truth good friend (quoth Calanthrop) be sure
If I had seen such, I would likewise go
And try the sport: for it should much allure
The hearts of young men, to be baited so,
Therefore let me entreat you to repose
Your self beside me, and that tale disclose.
Touching the Duke, and that same youth was killed,
The fair Lucilla likewise would I know,
And where she lives, that so the earth has filled.
With strange reports, for oft-times many more
Then you, have told me of this Ladies favor,
But still I thought their speech did amply savor
I cannot think her such as they report,
Or that her beauty can so far excel
All other women's: so I you exhort,
Let your relation bear a trustfull smell,
For truth to heavens with sacred wings does fly,
While heaven and earth abhor still those who lie.
Believe me Sir, I Am glad that ye have told
Me such good tale, for now I well perceive
You do desire that I the truth unfold,
The which discourse most truly you shall have:
For I shall you acquaint with all the state,
So now give ear whilst I the same relate.
THE FORRESTER HIS RELATION.
LOng after that the val'rous Greeks had leveld with the ground
The stately walls of Ilium, and Priams race consound,
For rapt of Menelaus wife, even then of happy Greece,
The Diadem was rightly swayd, the scepter ruld in peace,
By Princes of its Provinces, who all as in one mind
Most virtuously for public weal, aptly themselves combynd.
This time Thessalia's peaceful reign, made pleasant Tempe smile:
Two-topt Pernasse and Helicon, the Muses haunt this while.
The spring was wrought by Pegasus the winged horse his hove,
Those thrice three sisters sacred selves were known about to move
The Nymphs with fair disheveld hair, then tript the flowrie meads,
The harmles flocks through vales and dales, and mountains safly feeds.
The skipping Satyrs midst the groves, longst silver brooks did play,
The country maids in rural games to gain the praise essay.
Even then did prudent Philagath over Thessalia reign,
A man whom Fates and Fortune both, more favored than a king.
For by his birth he honored was, through royal right descent,
Of many Kings of Thessaly, as histories comment.
His grandour purchased great respect, his justice made men fear,
His clemenciemade him beloved, of all his name did hear.
And Nature in succession would him also happy make,
In giving him a son which should (when as he pleased forsake)
The Scepter, rule in fathers stead, his countries all defend
From foreign force, if any to invade the same intend.
A comely girl he also had, who as she grew in years,
Her beauty then not paraleld, more lovely still appears.
Her beauty great, fame blazed abroad, in regions round about,
Yea, it I think, was published, almost the world throughout.
So from all countries suitors did, to Thessaly resort,
Where they themselvee might recreate in each desired sport.
But all their aims was to attain, the Ladies wished consent,
Yet all in vain, for still they did return most malcontent.
Yet at the last, as Fortune would not have her dye a maid,
The Duke of rich Calabria himself there soon convayde,
And in short time such success had, as he acquired her love
In honest form, and so they match, which afterward did prove
To both their goods and hearts content, for in a twelvemonths space
She bore to him a gallant girl, which had an Angels face.
This girl was named Lucilla fair, as justly she may be,
The fairest Lady, now alive, inricht most plenteouslie
With rarest gifts, and graces good, that mortals do enjoy,
The Gods likewise in one assent, still shield her from annoy.
But now the Duke her father did, conceive so great delight,
In his new match, and laughter fair, he every day or night,
Esteemed a year till he re^urnd with this his beauteous prize,
Toward his country, for all Greece, his success did despise.
So he took leave of Philagath, the King of Thessaly,
Then homewards hasted with his wife, and all his company:
At home he led a joyful life, sequestrate from all care,
Till envious Fortune grieved thereat, enraged through despair,
Would make him taste the bitter gall, of her satyrick frown,
And make him know the sunshine of her favors, were ore-blowne.
Not fully lived he six years space, with his beloved wife,
When Philagath through sickness great, was thought should loose his life.
Those news, I think, bad music sound, into the Duchess ear,
Now were her senses all apal'd, by sudaine pale-fac't fear.
Yet she resolves to visit him, as she in duty should,
The Duke does strive her to dissuade, but yet no way he could.
Away she goes for Thessaly, with all her lovely train
Of gallant Knights, and Ladies fair, she hastes ore hill and plain.
Through diligence she does attain, her wished iourneyes end,
Even as some weary Pilgrim does, who feeble footsteps spend
In superstitious pilgrimage, before some kinsmans death:
Right so she hastes, as though she could, preserve her fathers breath.
But so it is, death does prevent, too often what we desire,
And our moist nature does combure, with flames of fatal fire.
For ere the Duchess could attain, her loving fathers sight,
Remorselesse Death (unwelcome guest) forced him forgo his sp'right.
Then with great shonts she pierced often the azur'd welkin fair,
And clouds with eechoes did resound, her plaints through empty air
Yet forced she must have patience, mournings do naught avail,
For Death with equal pace, both Prince, and poore-man does assailc.
So she, with grief, her last leave takes, of Thessaly with tears,
And her own brothers eldest son, along with her she bears.
Home to her own Calabria she and her comp'nie go,
From their sad hearts the speach-like groans still seemed to utter woe
Through Epyrus lay their way, where they one night did rest.
But, on the morrow, Phoebus beams them scorchingly oppressed.
So that unto a wood they seek, to taste some cooling shade,
A forest fair they found hardby, whereof they all were glad.
With speedy pace they thither went, but better they had staid
For they had not long soiourn'd there, when they were all afraid.
The Savages those woods did haunt, them furiously assault,
The knights again, with murdring swords, sharply correct that fault.
In little space those wild men were, forced to a sad retreat,
Some killed, some fled, some howlingly, bad successes repeat.
The Duchess glad of victory, intends now to depart,
Yet e're she go, she must endure, inevitable smart.
For as the Knights the Duchess sought, unto her coach to bring,
A monstrous Scorpion lurkt hard by, her pittiously did sting,
Then to the hold returns again, a foot-groome it prevent,
And with a Sable it divides, so frustrates its intent,
The Duchess Surgeon by his balm, and unguents tryes his skill,
His Teriack nor his Mithridate, cannot the venom kill,
His antipoysons have no force, no nor his vipers oil,
Do what he can, the venom strong, the Lady's like to spoil.
Her grievous pain does still increase, her wound grows worse and worse
No cordial nor no cataplasme, against the sting have force,
With sad and woeful hearts her guard, do carry her along,
Against Fates and Fortune they exclaim for this opprobrious wrong,
If poysnous heat made her a thirst, or did the heavens ordain,
Her present aid, no man can tell, but she could not sustain
Such thirst: therefore she called a groom, and bids him go and find
Some colding spring, that she might ease her heart, with heat was pynd
He goes and finds a purling brook, then quickly turns again,
Thereof she drinks, and still she thinks, the lesser grows her pain.
Now from her coach she does dismount, (o admirable thing)
The pain and poison both decrease, by drinking of the spring.
Her knights and guard go both apart, her Ladies bathe her wound,
Through bathing with the helthful spring the Duchess is made sound.
With humble and with thankful hearts they praise the gods therefore,
Who did so soon mirac'lously, their Ladies health restore.
Then to a village bording near, she and her comp'nie went,
But e're they could the same approach, the day was nere hand spent.
For midst the way they find a man, whose clothes were old and worn,
He seemed to be of poor estate, and yet by countrey-borne,
The Duchess askd him, how they called this country, and the wood,
And how they called the happy spring, that yielded her such good.
This country is Epyrus called (quoth he) where we are placed,
Hazardfull forests of Epyre be those, you lately trac't,
The brook is called the healthful spring, through Grecia flies its fame,
Of each of those (fair Lady know) this is the proper name.
Those forests be called hazardfull, cause many one of old
And likewise now, strange accidents in them sinde manifold.
The brook is called the healthful spring, as well it may indeed,
Against poison, venom-ca^kring (...), a sovereign tried remeede.
The man takes leave, they forward went, unto the village right,
Next morning on their journey go, how soon the day was light.
Then in few days to this her home, the Duchess quickly came,
This country her Calabria, it is the very same.
What then it was, so is it now, not subject to decay,
No foreign force, nor homebred iarres, its indwellers dismay.
When that the Duchess lived here home, a while with easeful mind
And former sorrows all were past, as loath to prove unkind.
She caused skild Artificers, erect (to her great charge)
Of marble black, and Alabast, a fountain high and large.
Like to a stately Pyramid, the healthful spring above,
Lest any of ingratitude, her justly might reprove.
In memory of benefit she once did there receive,
Expert Mechanics she causd search, could rightly cut and grave.
Through dext'rous cunning these adorned the happy healthful fount,
With Emblemes framed of Alabast, and marble of the mount.
Of years, two lusters scarce were spent, after this work was done,
When she citations had from death, so had her brothers son.
The Duchess did the gods implore, that they the youth would spare
And pity him of tender years, and expectation rare.
Thessalia's hope, his mothers joy, sole comfort of his Sire,
For doubtlesly if now he died, their lives would then expyre.
As for her self she was resolved, Deaths message to obey,
And that ne' re-yet remitted debt, she is willing to repay.
It seemed the gods did grant her suite, the boy did convalesse,
But she (sweet Lady) found deaths force, her vital spirits distress.
Then called she for her love, and Lord, whose groans proclaimed his grieves
And for her less Lucilla fair, in whom true beauty lives.
Dear Lord and love (quoth she) I find that we must parted be,
The loyal love I to thee bear, does make me loath to dye.
Heavens, Fates, and Death, do all decree, my glass of life be run,
And Atropos now cuts the thread which Lachesis once spun.
So hence I must (o dear sweet love) I pray thee do not weep,
For sure my sp'rite midst highest heavens, the sacred gods will keep.
Lucilla dear, thy mothers joy, come to thy dying Dame,
As Heavens and Nature thee inricht with beauties bravest frame,
Heavens grant that thou do use it well, to thy immortal praise,
Live chastely, yet self-love abhor, pride breeds contempt always.
This one thing do I thee entreat, in memory of me,
Go thrice a year and view the spring thy mother did supply.
When physic, nor no simples could, the venom strong expel,
The water of the healthful spring, in power did precell.
Therefore three times a year do view, that spring by consuetude,
And mother-like (what beasts detests) abhor ingratitude.
Thus said, her happy sp'rite she yields, which to eternal joy
Numberles numbers powers divine, invisibly convoy.
Her funerals once solemntz'd, then does Lucilla fair,
In sable robes of mourning black, with maids so clad, prepare
To go and view the healthful spring, and there bewail her loss,
And mothers death, whose memories, gives her continual cross.
Since she is thus determined, her father likewise send
Shadows of men (Eunuchs I mean) as guardians her to attend.
Those likewise serve as mariners, to rule her bark by sea,
Accompanied by those, and mayds, she does continually
Thrice yearly go and view that spring, a day or two they mourn,
Their regrates being finished, again they here return.
Her father, though he have no son, for to succeed his place,
Loves her so well, he will not wed again in any case.
Yet though he love her, he ore-lookes her with a prying eye,
Love hatcheth care, which care begets respective Jealousy.
The jealous Sire of daughters good, does make her live retyrd,
For which himself of strangers is, ridic'lously admyrd.
Lucilla, since her mother died, is forced to live apart
From company of anyman, which sure must grieve her heart.
For save those Eunuchs, and those maids, who serve her night and day,
And her own Sire, the aged Duke, none else approach her may.
Many a Prince, and gallant Knight, do her in marriage crave,
But through her fathers perswasiues, she none at all will have.
And for to try to speak herself, it is folly, there is no mean
She is so warelie looked unto, none can such good attain.
This aged Duke, and his fair Less, dwell near within six mile,
Where they in diverse sports delight, to posting time beguile.
A castle situate by a lake, in it do they abide,
From thence they see both woods and meads, and ships at anchor ride.
Even from this Castle of the Dukes, about a fourthnight since,
In company of other knights, went the Thessalian Prince,
Retimes they rise, and wind their hotnes, not fearing any foe,
Through desert woods, and unknown paths, they all a hunting go.
But whilst the rest their horses mount, the Prince his horse refuses,
Him to receive, yet would the youth, admit no such excuses.
Twice more then thrice the horse would not, permit the Prince him back,
Prodigious presage which foreshews the riders speedy wrack.
Hard by the lake there haunts a Bear, a monster for a beast,
Who by the space of thirty years, those woods did haunt at least.
This beast among brakes and pricklie thorns, all day still lurking lay,
And when dark night black mantle spread, then went to seek his pray.
The night preceding he had straid, abroad to seek his food,
His late trac't steps (though not by sent) might well be known by blood.
There did the hounds, by fatal chance, find out the recent sent.
With librall mouths against the clouds, their voice they largely spent
This quick approach soon rousde the Bear from out his lothed hold,
The hounds give challenge, he again, gives them encounter bold.
Now huntsmen came, where at the hounds with courage fresh begin
A new pursuit, yet none so bold, as once to tooth his skin.
The knights with darts the Bear so wound, that void of all remorse
This desperate beast (afflicted thus) the young Prince did unhorse.
Their darts are spent, no shot they have, so all their help is vain,
Maugre them all, before their eyes, Thessalia's Prince is slain.
A steepie rock conteines a cave, the Bear long vsd before,
Thither went he (with dogs convoy) of him they saw no more.
Huntsmen with sad and sorry hearts, their clothes they all to rent,
Home with the corpse they sadly move, this hunting they repent.
But when the Duke this object saw (a woeful one indeed)
He and Lucilla all the rest, in sorrow did exceed,
Helpless is their excessive grief, though natural be their moan,
Nature to life can nere restore, whom death has once undone.
But yet the Duke makes narrow search to guerdon the offender,
And still the Bear for this his pains, bad thanks again does render.
For whom the beast conveens withal, may he prevail with rage,
Them makes he smart, without respect, of person, sex, or age.
So this abuse has causd the Duke, still hoping for amends,
Him to assist to kill the Bear, entreat his neighboring friends.
And as I show you we expect them next ensuing week.
So this is all concerning this, I know, or yet can speak.
Yet this I Am sure, some gallants will fearlesly try their strength,
And for their loves courageously abbreviate the length
Of their strong lance, into the Bear, if they may him conveene,
Not caring for his crush, or bite, his choler, rage, or spleen.
But now me thinks I hear a horn, therefore must I be gone,
So, pray you sir, apardon me, for leaving you alone.
Farewell my friend, quoth Calanthrop, good success still enjoy,
I shall not stay here long alone, for yonder comes my boy,
This rare Discourse of yours, has me affoorded such content,
That if hereafter we conveene, you's think this time well spent.
THE Forrester thus gone, now comes the Lad,
And tells his master that he had prepared
An Inn: but (quoth he) I good fortune had,
Else among those woods I doubtless had been snared,
A wench I found, which did direct me right,
The gainest way unto the Cities sight.
A stately City it appears to me,
A goodly Inn, where you may be well easd,
The merriest man that ever I did see,
Is that your Host, Sir if you so be pleased.
Well grounded walls, high, large, and passing strong
The City guard from injury or wrong,
Many brave Knights perambulate the street,
Who come to hunt, as Citizens report,
Some ravenous beast, who badly does entreat
The country people: so that to be short,
Each man provides him horse, and hounds, and lance,
Against the hunts, his honor to advance.
By this discourse now Calanthrop did find
That all was true the Forrester disclosd,
Still does the Page, according to his mind,
Solve all demands his master him proposd.
Now came they to the Cities Eastern wall,
Found patent gates, such fortune did befall.
Then went they to their Inn the ready way,
They supt, and then betook them to their rest,
Next morning early, by the break of day,
Calanthrop called his Page, to him expressed
Some part his mind, gives crowns, and bids him go
Buy horse and lance, apparel black also.
The Page did shortly his desire fulfill,
Returned and show him all that he had done,
Each thing contented him so to his will,
Next morning he intends for to be gone,
And view the hunts, the Duke and Knights condign,
For hunting sport that day did all assign.
When day appeared, each man to palace sought,
The Duke to attend, yet Calanthrop abode
Still with his host, till all were gone, then thought
He best to go: so to the wood he rode,
His courteous host did him such favor yield,
As to conduct him to the hunting field.
But e're they came, the game was well begun
So they retired, expecting the event,
Unto a shade, bright Phoebus beams to shun,
Now does the Bear boldly himself present,
He (fearlesse beast) 'ginnes such encounter give,
His tuskes and paws both hounds and huntsmen grieve.
At this the Knights seem all to be ashamed,
To kill the Bear they all at once conspire,
But this design is worthy to be blamed,
He who intends true honor to acquyre,
His foe with equal number should assail,
Then merits praise, if he do so prevail.
Yet notwithstanding of their multitude,
The Bear persuades them to a shamed retreite,
Many brave Knight he of their arms denude,
Which sight did val'rous Calanthrop incite,
For seeing how each Knight did court'sie strain
Who first should try himself, the Bear again.
Heroic he, impatient of delay,
On his black Courser, from the thicket rushes,
The beast enraged, him meets in middle way,
In his thick hide the lance in pieces frushes,
Yet for all that, mean while the Knight dismounts,
The Bear a trick him taught next time he hunts.
For ere the Knight could well vnsheath his sword,
The Bear him wounds a little on the arm,
But now the gallant quickly him afford
Due recompense for his intended harm,
Florisht his sword aloft, then with a thrust,
He minds to punish cruelty unjust.
The beast perceives his aim, in this hard case,
By shift of body does the thrust avoid,
And for this kindness offers him t'imbrace,
The Knight could not such demonstrations bide:
But sensibly he made the Bear to know
Come was the time, he must his life forgo.
With ore-thwart stroke bravely the Knight divides
The Bears left leg, largely two yards and more
Full from the other: Intrals through his sides
Fall out amain: now in his bloody goare
The beast lies killed by Calanthrops brave hand,
Whereat amazed the whole spectators stand.
Calanthrop quickly now remounts his Steed,
Hastes to the place where he had left his host,
The Duke and Knights admire this noble deed,
Though none of them thereof may justly boast,
Therefore the Duke sends to request the Knight
To come receive the honor of the fight.
But Calanthrop not willing be cognost,
Himself before the message came, absented,
Such loue-sick thoughts his mind so ever crossed,
That smothred groans his hearthad almost rented.
Yet forced content he bears most patiently,
To City went his Host, his Page, and he.
Where we must leave them for a little space,
To show you what content the Duke conceived
By this days sport: but yet the great disgrace
His Knights had got: justly no pardon craved,
Shamed to confess, yet reason them constraind
An unknown Knight, not they, the honor gained.
Most glad in heart, the Duke hastes to his home,
With many Knights, discoursing on this sport,
They all yield praise to one, they know not whom,
The Bear his death did each of them comfort,
Yet envious sp'rites still secret malice ludge,
At stout men's success base minds often do grudge.
For the good Duke to glad his guests withal,
When he came home, causd his fair less be brought
To sup with them: to mind he then does call,
The val'rous act one knight that day had wrought,
Then to Lucilla told in pleasant words,
In audience of Knights, Princes, Earls and Lords.
How that an unknown Knight the Bear did kill,
For after (quoth he) we had roused the beast,
The timorous hounds at bay did keep him still,
Many were hurt, glad to retire, at least
They seemed unwilling any more to try,
Wherein the Bears defense and strength did lie.
But while as yet each knight with other strove,
Who first should dare him to encounter new,
There came a knight from an adjacent grove,
His horse, lance, clothes, were of a pale-black hew,
The Bear in midway meets him on the plains,
As loath to put a stranger to great pains.
With an vnformall welcome does him greet,
Yet on his breast the lance does split asunder,
But e're the knight on ground could fix his feet,
The Bear got up, though he was once at under,
Then e're the knight could half his sword vnsheath,
He runs to him belike, to beg his death.
Which suit the knight seemed willing to obey,
For at one stroke he did the Bear so wound,
The grief thereof his body did o're-sway,
Foure-feet thereafter set he never on ground,
One of his legs the knight quite off did cut,
Then in the sheath his noble sword he put.
Then on his horse he quickly did return
To that same grove, from which of late he came,
Thither where we thought he did then soiourne,
I sent three Lords for to enquire his name,
Desiring him to come where we expected,
Him who so had our countries weal protected.
But he was gone before they could attain
The very grove which we had seen him enter,
Not willing to be known, he did preveene,
Their coming: yet his life for us did venture.
Then since they could not find him any where,
We all thought best home to this place repair.
Thus, daughter, have you heard the very truth
Of our days sport, directly as it was
Acted, by that brave magnanimick youth,
Chastised the monster for his vile trespass:
He, for our safety, and our public good,
Life hazard, honor gaind, yet spent his blood.
Sir (quoth Lucilla) give me leave to speak,
This act, me thinks, precels the labors twell
Of that brave worthy martial minded Greek,
Who dragged three-headed Cerberus, from hell,
He that killed Hector midst the camp of Greece,
Or he who gaind I Will Colchis golden fleece.
When Hercules to fetch his wife did go,
Infernal Phasma's made his courage droupe,
Achilles at advantage struck his foe,
Whilst he to rob dead Patroclus did stoop,
Medea's magic gained the fleece of gold,
For Iasons love she fathers thesaure sold.
Likewise the Argonauts both last and first
Did aid Duke Aesons son in his pursuit,
Oeta's foes did bravely him assist,
Orithia's sons to aid them prosecute,
Winged Calais, and Zethes thither flew,
In their return the Harpyes they subdue.
Desire of gain did Jason most intyse,
Necessity, the other two did move,
For Herc'les must forgo his enterprise,
Else fight the dog, Achilles too must prove
Himself a Coward, if he miss the stroke,
But no such matter did this knight provoke.
No greed of gain, nor yet necessity
Did move this gallant enterprise this deed,
True honor did his mind most qualify,
He likewise saw this country stood in need
Of speedy aid, so for our public weal,
Unarmed alone, he did the Bear appeal.
And, praise to Jove, he happy victor proved,
Dear father therefore whatsoever he be,
Of young and old he ever should be loved,
Of rich and poor, of each sex and degree,
To him erect then, stately Trophies rare,
Who for our safeties would his life not spare.
Though all the min'rals earth contains, were swords,
And all took life were men to use them well,
If Calanthrop, I think, had heard her words,
(Being so set on top of Fortunes wheel)
He would gain-stand them all in open plain,
Though Hydra-like they twofold lived again.
But while Lucilla did Calanthrop praise,
One Philotomp much to her speech adverts,
His name, his naughty humor still bewrayes,
This knight in heart the Ladies words inserts:
For fretting Envy, humor monstrous strange,
Moved him, was no way wronged, to seek revenge.
For Philotomp, that proud ostentive man,
Made search to know where the knight did remain,
Fully resolved to kill him if he can,
Naughty designs are bred in basest brain,
So in dark night he went unto the City,
With heart bent to revenge, and void of pity.
Some say that Philotomp right much affected
The fair Lucilla, and this was the cause,
He hates the knight, doubting to be rejected,
His rival humor could admit no pause,
Lucilla's speech he though had savor kind,
Toward the knight, which did molest his mind.
Now in the City, at the time of rest,
Some knave convayd him to the knight his Inn,
So he and six well armed with him, addressed
Them to the house: now does the fight begin,
Calanthrop and his boy did well assuage
Philotomps choler, and his unjust rage.
Yea Calanthrop alone so far prevaild,
His martial page defending still his back,
That in short time those seven who him assaild,
Through his brave hand were brought to sudaine wrack,
Four of them killed he, two like Cowards fled,
Philotomp captive made, his blood not shed.
The Burgers hearing the vp-rore, conveene,
And both the parties do incarcerate,
But yet in Iayle not willing to detain
Such persons long, lest they extenuate,
Their liberty: therefore they now intend,
Unto the Duke, to know his will, to send.
Their Messenger does to the Duke dilate
The very form of this bad accident,
And how the unknown knight his hard estate
Was much bewaild, when he to iayle was sent.
For what he did, was in his own defense,
But no man knew knight Philotomps pretense.
How soon the Duke had heard him to an end,
To horse he went, with many gallant Lord,
Each one to hear, their itching ears did lend,
What the event should be of this discord,
Wishing the Duke might expiate his ire,
Each Lord and knight him humbly did desire.
But now the Mayor and the Burgers meet
The Duke: then to their justice hall convoy
Him, with great pomp, along their Cities street,
Each one was glad his presence to enjoy,
In each ado, though justice he preferred,
The trial he to witnesses referd.
In this ado there was no need of such,
For Philotomp became so penitent,
That he (unto his shame) confessed thus much,
(Requesting them to haste his punishment)
Against all reason, I sought to confound
This knight, which now has to my shame redound.
Well (quoth the Duke) since thou unjustly sought
To kill this knight, who never did thee wrong,
As he best likes, thou shall to death be brought
And suffer torment short, or painful long.
Calanthrop thankt the Duke right humbly,
For this his just and absolute decree.
But here is the trial of a generous mind,
Who having powerfully to dispose
Of one who sought to kill him, yet could find
In heart, most freely to remit such foes,
Brave martial minds ingenuously forgive
The penitent, Cowards to death them drive.
So now it proved, for Calanthrop remits
All the trespass which Philotomp had done,
Likewise intreates the Duke, who Justice sits,
To liberate the offender to be gone,
Yet Philotomp was sworn, that sword nor knife,
He should not bear, during his loathed life.
Thus then ashamed, he hastes unto a Bark,
Commits his body to the sea some space,
Bids friends farewell, and then when night grew dark,
He went where Tryton rules with forked mace.
Thus was he gone, but no man e're could tell,
What fortune afterward to him befell.
And now the Duke entreats the unknown knight
To take the pains to go with him along
Unto his house, and be his guest that night,
The which request, more sweet then Sirens song
Calanthrop thought: yet seemd he not do so,
Most willing he, unwilling seemd to go.
Now well he knew, he should be once more blist
By happy view of fair Lucilla's face,
And so perhaps, might find time to insist
Opport'nately in some convenient place,
Renew his suite, and make his love more known,
So ripe affections seed where he had sown.
Most sure Loves seed is recompense in love,
And each one aims for to acquyre the same,
Each loyal Lover must this aim approve,
Lustful desires are ever worthy blame.
Calanthrops virtuous thoughts do still aspire
Not subject to libidinous desire.
But now they came whereas the Duke then dwelt,
Then were conducted to the Presence hall,
Lethargick love this time Calanthrop felt,
Yet wisely he his senses did recall.
The Duke well kmowing that this was the knight,
Who had so stoutly killed the Bear in fight.
Intends all honor possibly to give
Unto his worth, as tributarie pay,
Loves lawless passions do the knight much grieve,
Though he for to restrain the same assay,
So since the Duke perceives him malcontent,
He tries all means this humor to prevent.
Therefore he sends for his fair Less in haste,
And all the while he keeps the knight in speech,
For he alone was by the Dukes self plac'tt
Now comes Lucilla, (top of beauties reach)
The love-sicke knight offers to kiss her hand,
Yet (courteous she) his offer does gain-stand.
The Duke said, Daughter, this same knight is he
That killed the cruel Bear before my face,
Defending us from beastly tyranny,
Though Philotomp sought time him to disgrace,
Yet he most freely his trespass forgave
And pardoned him who should no pardon have.
But now Lucilla (smiling) 'gan to speak,
Believe me Sir, if this knight merit praise,
In reason I this claim may also seek,
That I as partner honored be always,
For, last time I the healthful spring did see,
In my return I brought this knight with me.
And is it so, then daughter I request
Each time thou goes to view the spring again,
To fetch'thy father ever such a guest,
As is this knight which now does here remain,
But now the Duke intreates the knight to show
If this tale his Less tells be true, or no.
Believe me Sir (quoth Calanthrop) I came
From Epyre last, amongst a lovely train
Of Ladies, whereof I believe this Dame
Was chiefest: I desired their help to gain
The other shore, a stranger since I was,
They me permitted in their Bark to pass.
And ever since I lay at yonder Town,
Where the malicious knight sought me to kill,
Sometimes I viewd the country up and down,
Which pleasant progress did content me still,
And now I love to my own country go,
Therefore good Sir, I pray you let be so.
Now went they all to dinner, afterward
The Duke, Calanthrop, and Lucilla went
Unto a chamber, others were debard
Where they the afternoon discoursing spent,
They both entreat the knight his name reveal,
Protesting firmly they should it conceal.
Likewise the Duke requests Calanthrop stay,
Whereto Calanthrop forged some bare excuse,
Saying, Good Sir, I needs must go away,
And so the Duke was forced to brook refuse:
Then bids the Duke his Less, her credit try,
Perhaps the knight will not her suit deny.
So went the fair Lucilla to solist
One whom himself more happy did esteem,
Then those who in Elysium everblist,
Obtain ingresse, late traild through Stygian stream,
Fortunes inconstant change, men may perceive,
Who made Lucilla suiterto her slave.
Thus she began, Sir knight, may I entreat
You stay with us, during a month, or two,
For why, my father thinks you a complete
Brave Gentleman: and if that you be so,
I hope you will then obey a Ladies suit,
Lest I should justly you ingrate repute.
At your request I caused once transport
You and your Page both of you, through the sea,
Therefore you should concede in such like sort,
To this my suite, for in the like degree
It should have place, likewise you swore, in right
Me to defend, and to become my knight.
Which I accept before my father here,
If you be constant in your first desire,
How now (quoth she) sweet father, pray you bear
A part, that we our suit may once acquire?
If you will become my knight Sir, take this ring,
You of your promise it will mindful bring.
Madame (said he) I will the same receive,
For I Am persuaded you will not impose
To me, more then in reason you may crave,
Therefore I will my service seal enclose
Within the limits of your gracious will,
Vowing while breath does last, it to fulfill.
Well then (quoth she) the first thing I command,
Is, that you stay at court where we abide,
Therefore now servant, strive not to withstand
My just decree, excuses lay aside.
Then next I do demand your proper name,
Whereof I hope, you need not to think shame.
As to my stay (quoth he) I am content,
And therefore willingly I will obey,
Likewise (Madam) since it is your intent
To know my name, I must it not gainsay,
Men call me Tristius, of Cimerian vale,
For dark disdain me ever does assail.
Now comes a knight and tells the supper's dressed,
Therefore the Duke seeing his Lords attend,
Both to his daughter and her knight expressed,
How that the Lords to supper for them send,
Yet did the Duke and his fair Less conceive,
Great joy, that they had gaind what they would have.
But I believe Calanthrop did enjoy
As much content as any man alive,
For now he does his best wits all employ
To speak his mistres, yet does wisely strive
To hide the same, till time and place do serve,
Though he mean while in love was like to sterve.
To supper went they, after that, to rest,
Lucilla by her maids was then conveyed
To chamber: but Calanthrop now suppressed
His passions great, expecting fort'nate aid,
When Duke, and Lords, and Knights were all asleep,
Sick-thoughts Calanthrop did best comp'nie keep.
Thus then perplexed, he went out at the gate,
Seeking to find some solitary place,
Where he might well, unheard or seen, regrate
His hard mishaps, and woeful black disgrace,
In coverd walk, never to the river side,
Haid by the garden, him sweet Cedars hide.
Ov'rcharg'd with grief, he 'gins for to impart
His lovesick passions, to each senseless thing,
Deepegrounded sighs oppressed his loyal heart,
Which moved him to his Lute this Dittie sing,
The subject was, how Fortune crossed each man
In their loves suite: thus Calanthrop began.
CALANTHROP HIS THRENODIE.
THE silent night summonds each thing to rest,
The schrieking Owl (nights Herald) notes her hours,
In sable robes, when crystal welkin loures,
Each foul an little bird fly to the their nest,
The Hamadriads haste to shadie bowres,
Each beast oppressed with labor, travel, pain,
House, hold, or cave, to rest them in remain.
Now dew discends unseen in silver shoures,
Refreshing scorched plants, flours, grass and grain,
Each thing that lives, this season somway please,
The weary Phlegon in the night finds ease,
Coolding in Tethys bower his fiery waine,
Yet I tormented by a deep disease,
In night find neither rest, nor yet relief,
Pale-fac't disdain is cause of all my grief,
My frowning Fate I no way can appease,
Fortune (aye me) has made me, to be brief,
A gazing-stock of discontented woe,
And still decrees I shall continue so,
Till death exhale my breath by lawless reife.
You whistling winds that ev'rywhere do blow,
Tell all the world how I am forced to prove
The worst of Fortune, in the best of love.
Smooth glyding streams that to the Ocean go,
Show raging Neptune limited above
My restless passions, and heart-killing fears
Move me each hour (as tribute) pay him tears.
(...) blessed Powers above the stars who move,
And when you list to us below appears,
I you implore to abrogate my smart,
Else lend Lucilla her coequall part,
For she as yet what love may be, admires,
Therefore do wound by sweet remorse, her heart,
O Cupid, if I durst, I would demand
Why thou permits her thus thy laws gain-stand,
I wish thou would but touch her with thy dart,
Then should she be subject to thy command,
And pity me who daily for her feel
Grief, pain, and passions, signs of sorrows seal
And thou fair ring often kissed her fairer hand,
(Now drouping sits, and hears what I reveal)
Thou by that mean did much more honor have
Then I thy master, who like bliss did crave,
Old doting Morpheus is most glad to steal
The guerdon which in right I should receive,
Possessing her fair body, he does smile
At wenching Jove, who strives him to beguile.
Why does not death me soon of breath bereave,
Since black disdain affection does exyle,
Satyrs and Faunes which haunt those woods among,
And dancing Driads witness this my wrong.
See how the winds keep silence all this while,
To hear the sad rehearsal of my tongue,
Sea-guyding Cynthia shames to come in sight,
And twinkling stars in clouds obscure their light,
Sweet smelling Cedars straight and passing long,
Thrice happy I, were this my final night.
No, no, I yet must try a weary day,
For, to my grief, the Fates my death delay,
Lest I by death might ease this woeful spright.
O heavens what have I done, that you assay
In my loves quest, each way to give me cross,
Though I much fear to call heavens errors gross.
Yet this abuse my senses so dismay,
I Am sensible of nothing but my loss,
Look how Aurora at my woe does weep,
Clear dewie tears from her gray eyes down leep
On Flora's coat, where gentle winds them toss.
The pleasant brooks a grudging murmr keep,
Fair Phoebus now begins to guild the fields,
And though his beams to all things comfort yields,
Yet since he sees me wrapped in sorrows deep,
Musing a maid can see a man so pyne,
Shamed of my wrong, he now withdrawes his shine.
CAlanthrop having sung this Threnodie,
Sighs strive with tears, and both prevent each word,
Tears wet his cheeks, sighs dry them suddenly,
His matchless grief, deep grounded groans record,
Such woeful passions often suggest despair,
Whose on-wayters be sorrow, shame, and care.
Yet Jove defend, such like should him befall,
Superior powers think it now high time,
That Fortune should in prosperous joys install
Him whom till now she punished without crime.
So, lest perchance he offer might offense
Unto himself, by desperate violence.
Heavens moved Lucilla his complaint to hear,
For such like passions made her to awake
With loving heart, and with a listening ear,
Loves kingly power made her pity take,
For by the consequent one may surmise
Her self was subject to the same disease.
And yet she did most cunningly proceed,
How skild be women in their coying Art?
She well perceived Calanthrop stood in need
Of her sweet aid, to ease his love-sicke heart,
And though she was most willing to extend
Relief to him, yet does the same suspend.
Now over the walk where Calanthrop then lay,
Therestood a gallerie on the garden wall,
To this same gallerie was a privy way
From her bedchamber: here she used to call
Her maids by one dilating there her will,
To those she pleased, whilst all the rest stood still.
Unto this gallerie went she all alone,
For all that night she had received bad rest,
Hearing her knight relate with many groan,
The various ways his urgent grieves increast.
And when Calanthrop had left off to sing,
He slept: which time she dropped on him a ring.
The happy ring this posie did contain,
(Thy chief desire shortly shall thou acquyre)
E're he awoke, she went away unseen,
Then to a secret walk did she retire,
Repenting her that e're this ring she threw
Unto her knight, whereof he nothing knew.
Now being alone, she 'ginnes her self to blame,
That should give place to such an idle thought
As love: even thus, Lucilla now thy shame
Apparent is, which thou regardest naught.
What (fond Lucilla) will thou midst the years
Of tender age, subject thy self to fears?
For Love's a field of fears, of cares, of pain,
Of trouble, sorrow, grief, and ghostly woe,
Since so it is, in time it is best restrain
Such fruitless folly, and such like forgo,
Lest Venus boy thy gentle heart entrap
Making thereof no conquest, but a rapt.
And what is he that thou do thus affect?
A stranger, and perchance of such base mind,
That having got thy love, will then reject
Thee, though at first he seem to be most kind,
Neither know's thou his revenewes, nor state:
Therefore in time rue rather then too late.
But now Loves king once touched her heart again,
So that she now reputes herself ingrate,
Who could permit her lover to remain
So long in grief, and might the same abate.
For which in heart she vows to make amends,
And ere she loose her love, she will loose her friends.
For why she is sure, a knight of so good parts
As is her knight, must loyal be in love,
Deceit never dwells in noble martial hearts,
This maxim skildest Phylosophs approve,
His birth likewise is sure equivalent,
Else her to suite could never be his intent.
Yet she remembers beggar Irus sought
The constant love of chaste Penelope,
Which he among Peers of Ithaca dear bought,
Endymion loved the Huntresse Hecate,
Thus love both Prince and poor man does control,
The gayners joy, the loosers still condole.
But what though love a beggar did provoke
Or yet a shepherd enterprise such aim,
And rich and poor be subject to loves stroke,
And Cupid with one dart both heal and maime,
Like to Achilles lance, whom it did wound,
It self again, naught else, must make them sound.
What then Lucilla? can there be such thing,
As ever love such operation had?
To make a base-borne slave, look like a King,
Though love has power to make one glad or sad,
Love in transformes will not prove so unright,
To make a Heard, or Beggar seem a Knight.
Admetus flocks nine winters Cynthius kept,
And love made Jove in golden shower descend
In Danaes lap, whilst she (fair Lady) slept,
The heat of love those gods made such intend,
Love likewise has made Kings themselves abase,
Yet Indigence still stops Preferments place.
Since so it is, what then should make thee fear?
Yet try if that his love to thee be such
That he esteems no love as thine so dear,
If it be so, thou oughts reward him much,
Thus then resolved she called her chiefest maid,
Sophona named: and to her thus she said.
MY sweet Sophona, greatly need I aid,
And none save thou, I think, can serve the turn,
For, wit and truth with secrecy conveyde,
Must only help me to leave off to mourn.
Her love-sicke heart now secretly does bleed,
Whereat she pausd, as one shamed to proceed.
Which passion wisely Sophona thought good
To stop in time, before it should accresse
To greater height: for now her mistress blood
From face to inward parts had swift regresse.
Whereby it seemed, that love should be the cause
Of her stupiditie, and shame-fac't pause.
Thus therefore spoke she to Lucilla sweet,
How now Madam, belike you me mistrust,
Else sure you would not spare for to repeat
To me your griefs: if I prove false, heavens thrust
Me from their bliss: so Madam do notspare
To show to me the cause of all your care.
Praise to the heavens, I likewise can shut up
A secret in the cabine of my heart,
Neither can Cresus worth my mind corrupt,
For to reveal the same in any part,
Speak what you will, to heavens I here protest
Till time you please, it shall not be expressed.
But give me leave Madam, what if I guess
Your cause of grief? for I did well remarke
While as you spoke, some passion to suppress,
You greatly strove: I doubt it is loves spark,
For why, a timorous pause your speech made fail,
Rose-red first waxt your face, then ashy-pale.
And if Madam, love do your heart possess,
Give Cupid place, his deity is supreme,
Rather then urge an helpless business,
It Is folly great to strive against the stream,
Then be content, and prove not times abuse,
But freely show how I may serve your use.
My dear Sophona (quoth Lucilla thou
Know well that hitherto I ever loved
Thee more then all my maids, and shall, I vow,
For why to me, as yet, thou ever proved
Most faithful, constant, kind, discreet, and wise,
Thee secrets to divulge, none can entyse.
Therefore to thee I Will tell the simple truth,
A tale that scarce my heart dare well commit
The precious secret thereof to my mouth,
Indeed Sophona, thou the mark have hit,
I love (aye me) I love, what shall I do?
The pains of love my heart will rent in two.
Yet let me tell thee, he is a worthy one,
And this last night, I secretly ov'r-heard
His plaint, which might have moved a heart of stone
To pity him, then went I afterward
Along the garden gallerie: he below
Lay fast asleep, so naught at all did know.
In this mean time I took from off my hand
A pretty ring, and dropped it on his cloak,
The posie whereof, if he understand,
Of black despair will quench both fire and smoke,
But though his plaint at first made me relent,
Yet that I threw the ring, I did repent.
For why, I thought, I knew not well his worth,
And to my friends he likewise was a stranger,
Yet love me told, valor (though hid) breaks forth,
For me and mine, he put his life in danger,
In open field, unarmed, and without fear,
Courageously alone he killed the Bear.
Disdain says, Honor pusht him thereunto,
And what he did, was not for my respect,
Love says again, what had he here ado,
But for my sake? should I him then reject?
Reason suggesteth, once he told me plain,
I was his earthly joy, and chiefest gain.
For kind Sophona, this same is the knight,
That came from Epire in our company,
And when we landed here, took his good night,
Believe me woman (faith) the same is he
That came with us last time we viewed the Spring,
This knight I mean, on whom I dropped the ring.
And now Sophona I entreat thee try,
If that his love to me be so entire
As it appears: likewise if thou can spy
Him all alone: I pray thee strive to hear
His words, remark his gesture, and his looks,
By these thou'le know, if he contentment brooks.
Sophona kind, work war'ly I exhort,
For long will I look for thy wished return,
'Cause sure I am, thou will the truth report,
And help to quench the flames my heart does burn,
Madam (quoth she) let me and that alone,
No more, farewell Madam, I will begone.
SInce she is gone, it were no miss to show
What cogitations companied the knight:
For when Lucilla him the ring did throw,
You know he sleeping was, for why his spright,
Whilst he awoke was vexed with grief extreme,
For which in sleep he had a golden dream.
He dreamed he was into a lovely wood,
Where pretty birds melodiously did sing,
Hard by a river, where they also stood,
Trees, herbs, and flowers, which pleasantly did spring,
All sorts of beasts here walked most fearlesly,
Each thing strove here to satiate the eye,
In this mean time came Venus and her boy,
As he surmysd, betwixt them was a Less,
Whom they conduct without guide, or convoy,
Thus, swiftly marched they where Calanthrop was,
Venus then called alowd, brave knight awake,
And turning to Cupido thus she spoke.
Son, long time has this knight our servant been,
And he as yet never had of us reward,
Therefore it is time that he should now attain
The wished aim which he does most regard.
Say son, shall it be so? Yes mother, yes,
He shall anon enjoy his earthly bliss.
(Quoth Cupid) knight, since thou ador'st our shrine,
Richer then Paris shall thy guerdon be,
This spotless virgin shall be thy propine,
Thrice fairer far then Helen was, is she,
In sign that what I speak shall be most true,
Receive this ring from her: so now adieu.
Calanthrop through this ecstasy awakes,
Then blames he Morpheus 'cause he himdeceiv'd,
Rouzing himself, he drowsy sleep forsakes,
And looking round, he quickly now perceived,
The very ring, which he thought whilst he dreamed,
He had received from her he most esteemed.
Dreams are of sundry natures, some reports,
Their reasons diverse, diverse their effect,
Yet those best known, consist but of three sorts,
Of which this first is held in least respect,
It Is named a dream of office by the wise,
When folk in night, dream of days exercise.
The second dream is called natural,
'Cause it proceeds of ones complexion,
As phlegmatikes in sleep will dream they fall
In rivers deep: Sanguines suggestion
Is often of blood: Choler'ans of the fire,
Melancholickes of Devils, which none desire.
The dream of Revelation is the last,
Which still foreshewes a good or bad success,
This taught men divination in times past,
Thus known, of joy or grief it leaves excess
Into the heart, which will not soon remove,
This dream is not of nature, but above.
Belike Calanthrop did this dream enjoy,
When he awoke he was the merriest man,
I think, that lived: his heart void of annoy,
Doubting was it he, he to the river ran,
To view his shadow in the water clear,
But whilst he stoupt, Dirce unseen drew near.
The posie of his ring he often ov'r-read,
Kissing it, sat he on the rivers brinke,
Whilst thus he toy'd, Dirce steals up her head,
Reft him the ring, then under flood did shrink,
And now amazed Calanthrop on the land,
Like those beheld Medusa did he stand.
Yet cried he Dirce, o sweet Dirce, hear,
Now longst the river runs, now does he stay,
Still crying, gentle Dirce, once appear,
For thou wast once a woman, Poets say,
Then pity me, a humane wretch distressed,
Once up she popt, yet to the sea her dressed.
His regrates only serve to show his harm,
She serpent-like hardened her deafned ear,
As when inchanters strive them for to charm,
So careless she, to sea hastes without fear,
No whit regarding Calanthrops offense,
She loves to dive in Neptunes confluence.
Sometimes she sporting would approach the shore,
Then would Calanthrop strive her to invade,
Now would she swim near hand the flood some more,
Then sought he by intreates her to persuade,
But all in vain, for let him do his best,
She kept the ring he held in most request.
Now since he saw, he no way could prevail,
He vows that he anon shall fisher turn,
And empty all the seas of fish and Whale,
Else Phaeton-like he seas and earth shall burn,
But that is impossible: so now therefore
He Neptune, Nereus, Proteus does implore.
Humbly intreates he that they will him befriend,
In causing Dirce him again restore,
Or they will be pleased, the little ring to send
With some such like, he vows he will then adore
Their liquid Deity, large and limitlesse,
Belike those Sea-gods pitied his distress.
For now anon appears a monster great,
Holding the robber firmly by the back,
His looks with death the whole spectators threat,
He toward land the nearest way does take,
But since he sees Calanthrop, he directs
Dirce to go and mend her past defects.
Trembling she went, and does the ring produce,
Craving him pardon whom she had offended,
Protesting never to do the like abuse,
She likewise told him that she once intended
To give that ring unto a kinsman near,
Which Neptune causd her to its owner bear.
Well (quoth Calanthrop) now I see it is sure,
Ambition made thee loose thy humane shape,
Thy strife against Pallas justly did procure
This thy mishape, and though thou death did escape,
Be sure, abides thee yet some greater pain,
If thou hereafter use such tricks again.
So now farewell, for freely I forgive
Thee all my wrong, Neptune still thanks shall have,
Who did thee of thy liberty deprive,
Until such time as thou was forced to crave
Pardon for thy offense against thy will,
Else thy deformed attendant would thee kill.
Dirce to sea, Calanthrop homewards went,
'Cause that the Duke might chance for him enquire,
And finding him that time to be absent,
Thereof to know the reason should desire,
For this cause did he to his chamber go,
So secretly none save his page did know.
He bids his page there leave him for a space,
If any did enquire for him that day
Say he was sick, and see in any case,
That none approacht him, but he should them stay,
For now the passions of loves fiery fume,
His loyal heart was likely to consume.
Likewise his dream reputes he mere deceit
And blames himself that e're did such believe,
Yet when he thinks upon the rings receipt,
Those sorrows vanish, which do most him grieve.
'Cause he admires what blist sp'rite did bestow
So rare a gift to stop his overthrow.
With weeping eyes he does the posie view,
His pale-hewd lips the ring do often kiss,
Sighing he said (O heavens) may this be true,
That fair Lucilla will forthink her miss,
And pity wretcht Calanthrop his estate,
Would sell his life for her at easy rate?
No, no, fond man, be sure it cannot be,
For she has told thy self already, that
She much distasted Cupids deity,
And thought those fools that ever did inact
Their liberties, within his lawless book,
Or in loves mirror sought themselves to look.
Therefore there was small hope of his relief,
Yet willd his Genius him renew his suite,
It might be heavens would some way ease his grief,
Seldom brave minds succumbe in loves pursuit.
And though he died, his ghost should have content,
Since for her love death did his breath prevent.
Unknown to him, Sophona was hard by,
And heard the manner of his whole regrate,
You know Lucilla sent her there to try
His passions which were tedious to relate,
His plaints, Sophona did to stay allure,
For shevnseene looked through a door obscure.
Thereafter went she to his Page, and told,
She much desired to speak with Tristius
His master: therefore wild she him unfold
So much unto him: likewise show him thus,
(Though for the present he be somewhat sick)
Lucilla's maid Sophona would him speak.
His Page acquaints him that there did attend
A Lady fair, Sophona was her name,
To speak with him she gladly did intend,
Since you are sick Sir, she does favor claim
To visit you: some physic for your ease,
Perhaps she brings, will banish your disease.
Chief Dame of honor to Lucilla fair
Is this Sophona, else am I deceived,
Go fetch her quickly, she perchance my care
May ease, which of her mistress I received,
Heavens grant it so: yet what way can I choose
To give her presence, I can not refuse.
Now does Calanthrop Sophona embrace,
Their salutations being finished,
Unto a window they removed a space,
Sighs show his grief is not diminished,
Fair Lady (quoth he) to a loyal heart,
You may your pleasure now at length impart.
Sir Tristius (quoth Sophona) I entreat
You be not wroth, I come to visit you,
Nor for my words repute me indiscreet,
For to my knowledge I most firmly vow,
I will not speak the thing may you offend,
Proceed (quoth he) fair Lady, heavens defend.
I should be wroth at any Ladies words,
And namely those who fair Lucilla serve,
Since I Am her knight, with reason it accords,
I should such duty toward her observe
As strive to do her meanest servants good,
In dangers la b'rinth though I me intrude.
Well then (quoth she) ever since you came here
I have perceived you wonderfully sad,
The reason hereof I do much admire,
Your face declares your heart's in sorrow clad,
To see so brave a knight it grieves me much
As you, so subject unto sorrows touch.
Therefore I here the gods supreme obtest
To witness this my true and kind intent,
That since I see your mind is so oppressed,
If you will show me the cause, I shall consent
To aid you in each loyal endeavor,
With secrecy, and diligence in store.
O blessed Sophona, will thou say me so?
Shall I believe thy Nectar-tasted speech?
Before heavens (quoth she) what ever you me show
I shall keep secret, and I you beseech
If that my pains can stand you in good stead,
Show me your mind, and fearlesly proceed.
Indeed fair Lady, I will then declare
Thee all my grief: Love does my heart molest,
Disdain often drives me very near despair,
Lucilla so bereaves my mind of rest,
Her love, her love, often makes my heart to quail,
For why I see no means for to prevail.
Nor can I find a time to show my mind
Unto her self: so Lady if you do
Be pleased to show me such a favor kind,
As find a mean how I may speak her to,
Of me you shall have such reward allowd,
As you shall think your travel well bestowd.
Sir (quoth Sophona) you shall understand
No gifts can move Sophona to deceive
Her loving mistress: but since your demand
Is so discreet, and sorrows which you have
Are passing great, then be you ruled by me,
I Will show you when you may convenientlie
Speak with my Lady, this advice receive,
This very night some Lords will act a mask,
In the great hall, so when you speech would have,
When they begin, see you for me do ask,
Hard by Lucilla you shall have a place,
And when you please I shall remove apace.
O sweet Sophona, wise is thy advice,
Have here this Jewel for thy kind assent,
As thou have said, so shall I enterprise,
Heavens grant that Fortune thereto give consent,
Now to the end I may avoid rebuke,
I will be gone for to attend the Duke.
Sophona now I think, with merry cheer,
Went to her mistress, who did then expect
Her wished return, yet not without some fear,
Although the message she did much affect,
And when Sophona came into her sight,
Twixt hope and fear vexed was Lucilla's spright.
Hope tells her all is well, be not afraid,
Take courage for thy comfort quickly comes,
Fear says it is not so, which tale dismayed
Her so, that grief her senses all benummes,
And ill advisd to try Lucilla's thought,
At first Sophona seemed bad news to have brought.
How soon she went to try Calanthrops mind,
Lucilla to a chamber did retire,
And there herself most secretly confined,
Whereat her maids did very much admire.
For she in use had never such forms of old,
Yet to enquire the reason none so bold.
Sophona finds her tumbling on a bed,
And making to herself a secret moan,
But at Sophona's sight her passions fled,
Yet every word's prevented by a groan.
Now up she rose, then said with sighing breath,
Sophona sweet what news? Is It life or death?
Madam (quoth she) I went at your command,
To try your knight, his virtue or his vice,
My voyage was like theirs who plow the sand,
Or those who search for fire beneath the ice.
At which Lucilla shrunk right where she stood,
Like to a snow-ball cast into some flood.
Which Sophona perceiving, gript her fast,
Cursing the time that e're she so did jest,
Through her complaints Lucilla woke at last,
Then faintly said, how sweet is death his taste?
And still Sophona pitifully cries,
Pardon Madam, for what I said is lies.
Whereat she faintly heaveth up her head,
Saying, O heavens, sweet heavens, where am I now?
In heaven, or earth, or am I'mongst the dead,
She strives to stand, her feeble sinews bow,
Weakened through fear, but yet she at the length,
Pac't up and down, and so regained some strength.
Sophona now craves pardon for the wrong,
Which she had done her through her misreport,
Lucilla said, Sophona thou art strong
Enough, to glad me by a wished support,
But here before the gods I thee adjure,
That thou thy mistress of the truth assure.
By heavens Madam this is the verity,
This day I Am sure you have the worthiest knight
That lives, or loves, void of infirmity,
I heard his plaints, yet kept me out of sight,
Not so content, I went and spoke him fair,
Whereby I tried him to a very hair.
Blessed gods, what do I hear, what, what, words, what?
Sophona sweet, I pray, do but remain,
And once repeat that Nectar-speech, even that,
Of force sufficient fetch a ghost again
From darkest region of infernal shade,
To Limbus patrum, where all ghosts be glad.
In truth Madam, I pitied his complaint,
When in his waylings he most plainly show
Loves passion made his loyal heart to faint,
And when I did his countenance review,
The figure of disdain, and black disgrace,
Pale discontent had portrait in his face.
Lucilla fair, Lucilla did he call,
Pity dear sweet, pity thy lovesick slave,
For thee who would to death his life inthrall,
A truer love, shall never woman have,
Aye me, aye me, will thou not pity him,
That for thy love the Stygian lake would swim.
When thus I heard him, truth I must confess
I could not choose but sigh: Madam, how now?
I think you strive us t'imitate, unless
You spare those groans, I will the same avow,
No Madam, no, believe me if you please,
You are the author of his great unease.
Now Madam hark me, he did me entreat
That I would move you for to give him ear,
In some convenient place, for to repeat
His plaints, whereby his passions might appear,
Therefore Madam, pray be not discontent,
At mask this night I wild him be present.
Where he shall have a time convenient,
Whilst all the rest are exercysd in dance,
To tell his grief, as is expedient,
To you who may his fortunes best advance.
Say Madam, say dear Madam, shall be so?
Sophona mine, I cannot say thee no.
It shall indeed, I cannot still refuse
To grant my worthy knight some audience,
Else justly may he think I him abuse,
And that I light esteem his good pretense.
But this is worst, small time can we acquyre,
There to discourse, which both of us desire.
Madame (quoth she) can you not then appoint
Both time and place where you and he may meet?
His loyal love with joy you may annoint,
And be your self copartiner repleate.
This is the best, so Madam thus conclude,
If ever you mind to taste contentments food.
My sweet Sophona, thou art passing wise,
In each thing therefore I Will be ruld by thee,
Unhappy she such counsel would despise
As comes of love, sealed with wise secrecy,
The time draws near, therefore let us address
Our selves, and put each thing in readiness.
Each hour a day, each moment seems an hour,
Unto these lovers, till this day be spent,
Delay, of taste, to lovers proves most sour,
The time seems tedious which precurres content,
Yet, day oncespent, then the great hall within,
The trumpets sound before the Mask begin.
The Duke with Lords and Knights went to the Hall,
Next do the Actors of the Mask provide,
Then came Lucilla, with her Ladies all,
Sophona still kept by her mistress side,
Calanthrop does salute the Ladies there,
Past by as though he sought a place elsewhere.
Sophona sees him, therefore does forsake
Her place, went to him as of courtesy,
Saying, Come here Sir Knight, though I should lack
A place, since you're a stranger, I Will supply,
You at this time: he thanks her, she conducted
Him to the place as she before instructed.
Thus she Calanthrop, by Lucilla set,
The rest their rooms were distant a good way,
When they began to speak, lest she should let
A good occasion: she without delay
Removed herself a little from them two,
To her Lucilla said, where do you go?
Madam (quoth she) no way, I Will stay right here,
I do attend the coming of a friend,
And to our speech, lest you perhaps give ear,
I do remove this happy time to spend,
Your knight Madam, I causd to you repair,
He in my absence will of you take care.
Indeed Sophona I did think no less,
For I admired you were become so kind,
As give your place with such a willingness,
Except you had some other plot in mind,
Now there is a jest (quoth she) my life to pledge,
Servant, that Sophona attends your Page.
Sweet Madam (quoth Calanthrop) glad am I,
If I or he can any way her please,
Or any of your servants, because why
I am your knight, who never shall surcease
Both you and yours to serve to my lives end,
My servants therefore should the like intend.
For my dear love, when first I saw thy face,
I vowed my service absolute to thee,
Whose exc'lent beauty, and sweet lovely grace,
Can never be darkened by obscurity,
O were thou pitiful, as thou art fair,
Then would thou ease those sorrows I declare!
Sweet, cruel, fair, is it not now high time
To pity me thy captive wretch forlorn?
By thee disdaind, made captive without crime,
Disdain still moves thee, laugh my love to scorn,
Pity dear love, aye me, how long? how long?
Will thou persist in this thy wilful wrong?
Oh if thou had but only one poor touch,
Of that loves passion, and tormenting pain,
Then sure thou would be moved to pity much
Him, who for thee does hourly such sustain,
The hope whereof, seal in my heart by this,
Lend me of thy fair hand, one sweet sweet kiss.
Believe me servant, that is a poor request,
Faith servant, I much pity thy estate,
For thou appear'st to be by love oppressed,
Therefore in heart I do thy state regrate,
Wishing that thou that humor could forbear,
Which throbbling sighs demonstrate to my ear.
But trust me servant, I thought long ago,
Thou should forget this idle humor love,
Yet I perceive belike it is not so,
Loves wound, some say, does no way soon remove.
With credit therefore may I do thee good,
I swear I shall thee from those grieves seclude.
Servant persuade thy self of my good will,
In any thing with credit I may do,
And if thou love me, thou my honor still
Must aye regard, this favor I Will thee show.
In sign whereof I give thee here my hand,
Thou shall enjoy my presence at demand.
So when you do desire to speak with me,
Send you your Page unto my trusty maid
Sophona: she shall show him secretly
When you to me may fittest be convaid.
The Maske's at end, for this time must we part,
Yet take this secret kiss to ease thy smart.
Madam (quoth he) I never can repay
This favor, past the value of the earth,
Though I could dye for you ten times a day,
And (with Deucalions stones) live without birth,
Or Hydra-like revive when I were slain,
My blood could never counterpoyse my gain.
Now comes Sophona, tells them of a match,
Betwixt her and the Page, the morn at night,
How they had plotted to deceive the watch,
Steal forth at gates, by help of Phoebe's light,
He runs (quoth she) the water-walke against me,
Madam, you and your knight our Judges be.
Truth (quoth Lucilla) if I could unseen,
I would most gladly view that pretty sport,
What say you servant, will you then conveene?
Yes Madam, yes, I will in any sort
Be present* then (quoth she) take you a care
To bring your Page, I Will bring Sophona there.
At two a clock in night see you attend,
For she and I will come the garden way
Through the gallerie, and the stairs descend,
Take heed the watch be unto you no stay,
No Madam, we in time for that shall guard,
And never yield them thanks for their reward.
The Mask now ends, the Duke and Lords them sped
Unto their chambers, for to take some sleep,
Lucilla and her Ladies go to bed,
Though one intent did not them comp'nie keep,
Her maids did mind of nothing but their rest,
But she (sweet Lady) was by love oppressed.
She set an houre-glasse, nights hours to recount,
And often cried Sophona do thou hear?
To what a clock does now the hours amount?
Or pray thee tell me what a night do make?
How tedious is the time that does prolong
Lovers content? whose absence proves too strong.
The night wore out, so likewise did the morrow,
When it grew late, Calanthrop and his boy
Went forth at gates, lest that unto his sorrow
Their stay might turn, for it would much annoy
Him to be frustrate of such sweet solace,
Therefore before the time he kept the place.
By ten a cloak he did approach the walk,
The time appointed was the hour of two,
Now with his Page he secretly does talk,
At last he walked a little way him fro,
Where he the sweetest harmony did hear,
That ever was presented to the ear.
From out the garden gallerie came the sound
To a basse Lute, the trebble sang some voice
Palinode-like, the subject seemed refound
Tribute to Cupid, and therein rejoice.
It was Lucilla, whom love did constrain.
By this her Palinode her mind t'explaine.
LVCILLA HER PALINODE.
MAny one rashly give, reasonlesse censures toward love,
But those as I believe, his mighty power did never prove,
Why should they speak, were never love-sicke
Of Cupids power or might,
Blind folk should not, judge colors but
Give place to those have sight.
The time was once I thought, as those vain fools do now surmise
And I by all means sought, to move each one his power despise.
But foolish I, did not espy
That Cupid was a God,
Though I was wild, he made me mild
Like babes who kiss their rod.
It Is more then madness great, to rail against affections King,
Be he controlled he will threat, the gods themselves to ruin bring.
Him powers blist, dare not resist
Jove, Neptune, nor Apollo,
Should then not we, who mortals be,
Learn their example follow.
Though Danae was kept close, and strictly watched by matrons guard,
Her father life must loss, by her first borne for his reward,
He knowing that, incarcerate
Her, to pevent the same,
Jove did surmise, gold blindes the wise,
And time make Dian tame.
Such sure is Venus boy, dear bought experience makes me know,
None can on earth find joy, unless themselves his servants show.
Let young and old, let base and bold
Let rich and poor obey,
For who gainstand, Cupids command,
He works their wrack always.
Long since, I must confess, I Venus deity did detest,
And thought it foolishness, in those their hopes so fondly placed,
I called Love blind, and now I find
He wounds without respect,
Yea, all alike, his darts do strike,
With love or pale reject.
But where as I before, transgrest' against Venus and her son,
I vow now to adore, their sacred will till life be done.
No bad pretense, but ignorance,
Made me their laws forsake,
So Jewels rare, some fools will spare,
And yet a feather take.
Love all things overcomes, to Love Lucilla does give place,
Their senses he benummes, who strive his deity to disgrace.
Or seek his foil, or honors spoil,
Therefore I thus resolve,
In life or death, whilst I do breathe,
My love shall never dissolve.
CAlanthrop in this song took such delight,
He now remaind the gladdest man that lived,
Her happy words he registrate in spright
Whose force from death to life could have revived
The saddest malcontent that lived, or loved,
To see how Princely love disdain removed,
The time appointed came, Lucilla fair,
And wise Sophona, though the night was dark,
Came both so softly down the gallerie staire,
None of her guard them absent did remarke,
They shut the privy gate themselves behind,
Thereafter shortly whom they sought, they find.
Madam (quoth Sophona) to this advert,
Remember when you speak your knight, this clame,
For men in love are cunningly expert,
As yet you know not Tristius proper name,
Is It possible (quoth she?) Madam, it is true,
Then (quoth Lucilla) I Will that suit renew.
Now see they other through a lowering light,
For envious Cynthia gave unwilling shine,
'Cause why she knew that Cupids day was night,
Lovers convents move chastity repine.
Yet told Lucilla Phoebe to her face,
Endymion saw her smile with better grace.
Thus do they meet, Calanthrop by the arm
Took fair Lucilla, paicing so along,
The night was dark, yet was the season warm,
He calls to mind Lucilla's sugared song,
Whereby love told him plainly to conclude,
Lovers late meetings aims at further good.
Therefore he was most loath for to neglect
Such good occasion: And so he desired
Her, whom on earth his sp'rite did most affect,
Unto a parle: she again required
Sophona and his Page to try their game,
Of foot-course, which to view she thither came
The which they did, the match Sophona gaind,
For, midst the course the Page through fierceness fell,
So they him looser merrily ordained,
But yet the Boy their censures did repel,
Alleging, that since Fortune gave the cross,
They could not justly say his was the loss.
Thus merrily discourst they on the sport,
Calanthrop took Lucilla fair apart,
Sophona did the Page be pleased exhort,
Who seemed to take his loss in evil heart.
Whereat he smiling, rounded in her ear,
To make them sport he did so sad appear.
Sophona and the Page were quickly gone,
Toward the utmost end of this same walk,
Calanthrop since he found himself alone
With his sweet love, he thus began to talk,
First craving pardon if he should offend,
This speech to her sweet ears he did commend
O Bravest frame that ever Nature wrought,
Rare quintescence of beauties honored frame,
Fairer then she to Troy whom Paris brought,
Thou who art stain to Cupids smiling Dame,
Poor lowering Cynthia shames her shine to show.
Because she sees thy fairer face below.
Each gazing eye do homage to thy beauty,
The fairest Nymphs as handmaids will thee serve
Each heart adores thee, in all sovereign duty.
Yet Phoebus fair midst envy's like to sterve,
For why, black clouds eclipse his light divine,
Thy fairer rays not subject to decline.
The sparkling stars much imitate thy eyes,
When chilling frost does clear the azur'd sky,
In thee alone true virtue lives and dies,
My life and love on thy sweet self rely,
Look how the Lizard feeds on humane sight,
Right so thy face both yields me life and light.
The Salamander lives amidst the fire,
Not burnt thereby, nor choked by the fume,
So do I live 'midst flames of hot desire,
Thy looks my heart do fire, yet not consume.
Likewise thy words inchant my listening ear,
Like Sirens songs, when ships their rocks drew near.
Since thou bewitches, dear sweet use me so,
As Circe did of Ithaca the king,
When he by sea late-sacked Troy came froe,
By magic spelles him to her I Will did bring,
Yet through loves force, when she her conquest viewd,
She yields herself to him she late subdued.
But if thou will not imitate a witch,
Let virtuous Dido thy example be,
Who though she was most infinitely rich,
Sea-tost Aeneas kept she company,
And though you justly may to me object.
That he was false: I Am free of that defect.
Therefore sweet love, while as the season fits,
Once make me fort'nate in my loves attempt,
Are they not wise their secrets most commits
To senseless things, from fear they are sure exempt,
Winds, rivers, trees, herbs, flowers, nor grass can tell
What we coact, so let our joys excel.
No hindrance have we, if thy self be willing,
Come dear sweet love, come seal it with a kiss,
Then shall we look like pretty Doves a billing,
If thou withdraw thy head, thou robst my bliss.
O let me suck the Nectar from thy lip,
Where loves Idaea still delights to skippe.
Midst fervent passion, he does softly crush
Her whiter hand then snow that is lately blown,
He pulls, she holds, this moved a modest blush
Possess her face, yet second by a frown,
Which so him frighted, that he could not speak,
Whereat (she smiling said) and clapped his cheek.
SErvant, you men have a deceiving wit,
When you your mistres favor would acquire,
No sugared sentence do you then omit,
Some lying sp'rite does so your hearts inspire.
For when you seek to foil poor women's fame,
Under a loves pretext, serve you not blame?
It Is said that women when they list can weep,
And men in love can when they please look pale,
What passions, plaints, grief, groans, and sighs you keep
In store for to obscure a fained tale,
Likewise you will mourn like Crocodils with tears
For aid, while as your false intent appears.
With sweetest songs like Marmaids, you will inchaunt
The chastest ear when nothing else can do it,
Blessed are those women who in time dis-haunt
Such smooth-tongu'd Sycophants who move them to it,
When plaints, sighs, groans, tears, songs, cannot prevail,
By truthlesse praises you our sex assail.
One swears his Nymph is more than Venus fair,
When one would think her Aethyopian borne,
Jove's Queen to her most sure has no compare,
Squint, drouping looks, her gesture so adorn.
How meek she is, most lovely is her grace,
When fie on her, she has Alectoes face.
Now Dian must not be so chaste as she,
Though Lais-like she have a loving heart,
Pallas I guess, no way so wise may be,
For she can skill of Mopsa's hood-winkt art.
Penelope so constant none did find,
As she whose Thain-like thoughts move with each wind
And he will maintain, she secrets can conceal,
Though scarce so well as babes, who late got use
Of blabbing tongue, 'who all they hear, reveal,
Yet in one thing she merit may excuse,
Proud is she not, perhaps against her will,
Cause to attain the same, she lacks skill.
Her golden hairs (though crow-black) will he guild,
Her starre-like eyes, look sleepie, yet must glance,
Her snow-white cheeks, an Amber color yield,
Her proper nose, huge great, and crook't perchance,
Her Rubie-lips, remain of purple dye,
Her pearle-like teeth, like Currall men espy.
Her Ivorie hands are wrinkled like a frogge,
Her comely breasts are such as babes forsake,
Her heavenly voice sounds like a barking dog,
Her breath perfumed, would make a whole head ache.
In end, his mistres pardon he exhorts,
Cause of her worth he sparingly reperts.
And if we will not trust you, then you will swear,
The cursed'st oaths that ever mortal heard,
By this mean do you banish all our fear,
Which to our loss often turns afterward,
That this is true, servant be you assured,
Yet heavens defend that each man were perjured.
But come, sweet servant, pray you tell me this,
Can there be love where that the truth's conceald?
Some special reason may excuse that miss,
Madam (quoth he) though love by truth be sealed
Yet if a man can yield no reason good.
Their mistress justly may their suit exclude.
But Madam, I entreat, if that you can,
Show me the woman that such wrong has got,
Or what is the name of that disloyal man,
That has his honor staind with such a blot.
Servant (quoth she) my self the woman be,
And you the man that did the wrong to me.
Did I (Madam) did I? yes servant, you,
Yet shall it never be publish to your shame,
O grieve not servant, till I tell you how,
Is not my knight called Tristius to his name?
Whereat he blushed, what (quoth she) is it not so?
I Will make you then speak true before you go.
So if thou love me, presently declare,
Thy proper name, and what reason thou had,
For to conceal the same, and so to spare
The truth: for truth with honor's ever clad.
Madam, my life I weigh not to your love,
Therefore this is the truth by heavens above.
When first to you I did present my suite,
(Heavens know my mind to you was ever true)
Yet you, a fool or mad man me repute,
For why, as then of love you nothing knew.
So naught regarding me, you took good night,
And left me (God knows) with a grieved spright.
Since for your love I had my country left,
My parents, friends, and all my royal state,
Your heavenly beauty so of sense bereft
Me, that ashamed I cursed my cruel Fate.
Likewise I cursed those contrary aspects,
In birth bear rule, in life work bad effects.
Shamed to return to my own native soil,
Because that I was tied eternally
Unto your beauty, and had given the spoil,
To you of all my former liberty,
For this cause in these woods and unknown ways,
I Hermit-like resolved to spend my days.
Thus then resolved, I to the forest went,
A little after I came from your bark,
My Page to seek some Innes for me I sent,
When he was gone, a grove I did remarke,
There lay I down, and there bewaild my grief
To senseless things, which could yield no relief.
Incontinent a man I did perceive,
To me he came, and asked if that way
There came some huntsmen, I again did crave
In any sort he would be pleased to stay,
And show me how they called this country where
I now remaind: at my request even there
He told me all that I desired to know,
Thereafter went in truth I know not whither,
Most glad in heart of that he did me show,
I rousd my self, and then my Page came thither,
And told me that my Inn he did provide
Into a town where many knights abide.
Expecting on the hunting of a Bear,
Who had the country people much abusd,
Then for thy sake, my love, and dearest dear,
I thought I merit blame if I refusd
To hazard life, and that if I were slain,
My worth unknown perpetual might remain,
For this cause I my proper name forsook,
That likewise if I perished through disdain,
Under the name of Tristius I might brooks
Oblivion, which in death was all my gain.
This was the reason which did most me move
Obscure my name, lest I succumb'd in love.
But since thou have commanded me to tell
My proper name, I shall the same impart.
Dear love, thou know the country where the well
Once easd thy mother of a poysnous smart,
Of rich Epirus, and that healthful Spring,
Thy knight and servant Calanthrop is King.
Thou therefore who have long my love inthrald,
Since time so serves (dear sweet love) be not coy,
With Epires crown thy head shall be impald,
Each earthly pleasure shall thou there enjoy.
I care not for thy father, nor thy friends,
So I have thee, let them go crave amends.
I'mesure it grieves thee much to be confined
Continually in chamber: does it not?
(Aye me) dearesoule, that thou should be so pined
And captive made by him who thee begot.
Kiss me (sweet love) and I shall make thee free,
My Epire ships through sea shall carry thee.
My Calanthrop (quoth she) could thou acquire
My fathers grant, it would my mind much ease,
Then blameless might I grant thee thy desire.
Children should strive their parents wrath to appease,
Yet I Am afraid, if thou propone such thing,
It thy design to hindrance great do bring.
High walls are scald when Canons cannot wrong,
Import'nate suites in end are often past
Continual battrie, though the fort be strong,
Will force the keepers render at the last,
The stone by water's penetrate at length,
By often falling rather then by strength.
Lucilla so no longer could resist
His strong assaults, nor yet could she reject
His loyalllove, prescrive then as he list
She will obey: for why she does affect
Him so, that both her honor, state and fame
He may dispose at pleasure of the same.
YET though (quoth she) thou now have gaind the field,
I le tell thee one thing (pray thee set thee down)
To Tristius, not to Calanthrop, I yield,
Lest thou should think the guerdon of a crown
Had wrought the match: no, faith I Will this expreeme,
Thy self I do more then thy state esteem.
By heavens (quoth he) I never other thought,
Therefore I here accept thee for my wife,
In sign whereof, this ring which nere was wrought,
By mortal hands, which I esteem as life,
I Will give to thee, Dian to Arcas dame
It gave, and this way to my hand it came.
When as Calisto, one of Dians train
Admitted was, the chaste Queen much did fear
The wanton Less long chaste should scarce remain,
Therefore she gave her this ring you have here,
Whose virtue will preserve ones chastity
So long as she that bears it does aggree.
The chaste ring it is called, you may behold
Its name is written on its inmost side,
The greatest leacher, furious, strong or bold,
That ever lived, though by a maid he bide,
Have she this ring, he can do no offense
Against her will, to her through violence.
Yet wily love did court Diana's maid,
Who from her mistress got it for this use,
And when love had enjoyed her, as was said,
She lost this ring by sloth, or by abuse
Into a forest of fair Arcadie,
When as the god enjoyed her company.
Where, out of question, it lay many years,
Yet heavens would not have such a jewel lost,
Unto an Epirot one night appears
It, who was shipwrackt on the Morean coast,
Like to a glow-worme he perceives it shine,
Like Fairies candle, or some light divine.
The passenger, because the night was dark,
Was much afraid: for still he did admire
What it might be: at last he did remarke,
That neither bush, nor grass, burnt had this fire,
Then took he courage, swore he should it see,
Found it a ring, and brought the ring to me.
When I had got the same, I causd demand,
Apollo's Oracle what it portended,
The response told, that to the fairest hand
The world did yield, this ring should be extended,
And that its owner should the virgin wed,
And have her home to his right royal bed.
Likewise dear love, it told me whose it was,
With all the circumstances of the state,
And how that it was lost by yond same Less,
The virtue thereof thus it did dilate.
Now this is all, of it I know no more,
But that it is better placed then of before.
In truth (quoth she) this is a strange report,
That you have told me here, about this ring,
Yet may it purchase truth in every sort,
But now me thinks the Lark begins to sing,
Yet sweet heart, see thy Page, how he does fleepe,
And good Sophona must him comp'nie keep
Let us awake them, for we must remove,
Clear day compels us for to bid farewell
Black clouds, which hid the welkins face above,
Bright Phosphorus makes now, for shame to steal
Close out of sight, Aurora's dewie head,
Hathdrops dispersed over hill, vale, wood and meade.
So each thing tells us that it is time to part,
Lest Phoebus self us absent do proclaim,
Those things composd by Nature, not by Art,
Bid us beware of Envies scandalous blame,
A virtuous name is much to be esteemd,
But if once lost, hardly again redeemd.
Dear heart (quoth Calanthrop) we shall not stay,
Do only show me when you will ready be,
For presently my Page without delay.
Shall from Epirus bring a ship for thee.
My Calanthrop (quoth she) when e're you will,
I Will go with you, and your desire fulfill.
For though one man might absolutely dispose
Of all the earth, and were in suite of me,
In my affection thou might safe repose,
As heavens me bless, such is my love to thee,
Though love would suite me with the gods convoy,
Calanthrop shall Lucilla sure enjoy.
O sentence blessed, more blessed yet that tongue
Which moved the speech: come, let us them awake
Up boy, get up, for thou have slept too long,
Yet first Sophona to her mistressespake,
Sweet Madam do you think it time to go?
Yes, yes, Sophona, do not you think so?
Now servant (quoth Lucilla) stay you here,
My maid and I will go a secret way,
Toward my chamber, for I greatly fear,
Some of my guard us absent find to day.
Which heavens defend, I rather choose to dye,
Then any should our secret meeting spy.
Heavens know (quoth he) Madam that I much more
Respect your honor, then my life or blood,
So may you well persuaded be therefore,
Your smallest grief will me of joy denude.
Much more the scandal of your honored name
In my default, would make me still exclaim.
Therefore farewell, but o what did I speak,
Ambitious tongue, dare utter such a word,
The thought of farewell makes my heart so sick,
That twenty tongues its grief cannot record,
Yet thy departure necessare I find,
Then go in peace, though much against my mind.
When she was gone, Calanthrop presently
Went to his Page, and summar'ly directed
Him toward Epyre to go instantlv,
And see that he the fairest ship elected,
And brought with him unto that self same land,
Where now they were: the boy went at command
Unto Epyre, and there he did prepare
Into the City of Nicopolis,
A stately ship, strong, swift, and passing fair,
And likewise looked that nothing was amiss,
Skild mariners he got, who would take pain
To rule the ship, then hastes he back again.
This time Calanthrop better did attend
The Duke then ever he before had vsd,
Since his intent was ne'rea wished end
No kind of pains, nor travel he refusd,
Could yield the Duke in any sort delight,
Yet minds to serve him with a short good night.
Lucilla was not idly exercysde
For how soon she had showed her loving Maid
Who her knight was, together they devysd
Time to eschew, yet women are so fraid
In such attempts, that though desire abound,
Each weak design their weaker wits confound.
For now they think, what if the guard awake
When they are gone, and follow after fast,
And finding them, with shame should bring them back,
The thought hereof makes their fraid hearts aghast,
And now anon love courage them affoords,
To strampe their foes, though all their foes had swords.
Thus long time were they much perplexed with thought,
Of their escape, Calanthrop being alone,
His Page returned, and show him he had brought
The ship to shore, and all that he had done,
Into a port, Tarento's gulf beside,
Your ship (quoth he) and mariners abide.
Sweet boy (quoth Calanthrop) thou have done well
To help thy master out of this distress,
Go to Sophona, and to her reveal
Thy diligence in this our business.
Likewise do ask her, when she thinks it meet,
That I her mistress to be gone entreat.
By chance Sophona now stood by the gate,
The Page salutes her, tells to her comfort,
He brought a ship, then willd he her dilate
What time his master fittest might resort
To take them hence, and lib'rate them of thrall,
Stay then (quoth she) and quickly that I shall.
She swiftly went, returned again and told
Him, that the time was best the second night,
And willd him to his master such unfold,
That Luna's change would then prevent her light,
Therefore it is best when that the night is dark,
That we (quoth she) our selves with speed imbarke.
Shortly the Page did to his master show
The second night Lucilla had required
Him to attend the garden wall below
By twelve a clock, for then have they conspired
To come away, so Sir, take you choice horses,
Then need we not to fear pursuers forces.
Calanthrop at the time appointed came
Unto the place, where soon he got a view
Of his sweet love Lucilla, beauteous Dame,
Accomp'nied only by Sophona true,
Jesting (quoth he) fair Ladies you're too blame,
To walk abroad so late, do you not shame?
Friend (quoth Lucilla) what do you expect?
For robbrie sure, and for no other thing,
Indeed I should have been more circumspect,
For why you little trunk my maid does bring,
If rightly searched, more worth it will be found
Then of good English coin twelve thousand pound.
But you to prove a kingly robber now,
Belike intend, who take our selves and all,
No, stay my friend, what mind you? how now? how?
Is It so indeed? you will force me then to call
For aid: yet rather I Will conceal my state,
Then folk should know I were abroad so late.
Thus merrily they talked, to horse they went,
Then to their ship the ready way they took,
Ere they attained the shore the night was spent,
The Page by chance did over his shoulder look,
And there he saw a sight he did not please,
Yea it his master likewise did unease.
The Dukes whole guard and knights came over a plain,
On horse and foot where then Lucilla lay,
But ere they came, Calanthrop though with pain.
Imbarkt the Ladies, yet was forced to stay
Himself on land his Lady to defend,
Against all those who her return intend.
One railing knight cries, Yield, you villain, you,
And render those fair Ladies you have stolen,
Else by the sacred gods above I vow,
I shall cut off thy head: with rage so swollen
Calanthrop was, he could not speak a word,
But yet with courage he vnsheathes his sword.
The knight confronts him, reaching him a blow,
Then to his guard returns for his defense,
The wound was not so great as was the show,
Yet Calanthrop did yield him recompense,
Telling him first that he must now forgo
His life, the which immediately proved so.
The knight thus killed, the rest beset him round,
His noble sword now stood him in good stead,
Lucilla ever shrunk when he got wound,
Each blow he got her tender heart made bleed,
Yet among his foes, he strokes so strong did lend,
That each were glad their wages to suspend.
Lucilla seeing Calanthrop had killed
Great numbers of her native country men,
Her heart with pity toward them was filled,
Their cries and dying groans so grieved her when
Their life expired, that she was forced to cry
Thus to Calanthrop when she saw them dye.
Stay, stay thy murdring sword, sweet heart (quoth she)
And suffer some of those my people live,
Not for themselves, yet do for love of me,
Their looks and wretched state my heart does grieve,
Spare them, dear love, for they my people be,
They do repent that they offended thee.
Her gracious words did penetrate his ear,
That now his heart with pity did relent,
He spares his blows, and does himself retire,
His weary arms, to rest give their consent,
Till that he saw some boats go to assail
Those in the ship where they might soon prevail.
But then he quickly in a boat did leap,
Where that three ships-boyes, and two knights abode,
The knights he killed, the boys for fear did weep.
Yet to his ship where she lay in the road,
He made them row, though much against their will,
Through fear or force he moved them to it still.
First sight he saw when that he went aboard,
A mariner before his face lay slain,
To him that killed him he did thanks afford,
That he thereafter never tasted pain.
But when his foes his valor well did note,
He was most happy that could gain a boat.
For like a mad man went he up and down,
Making great numbers welter in their blood,
Others for to eschew his sword did drown
Themselves for fear into the raging flood,
In end the ship he emptied of the rest,
Then to Lucilla he himself adrest,
She and her maid Sophona her beside,
Sat vndere ore-lap in a quiet place,
Calanthrops Page his masters wounds most wide
Bathed and bound up, then with a pleasant grace,
To hoise their sails, he Mar'ners did entreat,
Thereafter went he to Lucilla sweet.
Madam (quoth he) what thought you of this sport
We had to day? was it not a goodly game?
Sweet love (quoth she) it nothing did comfort
Me for to see you exercise the same.
For though my father, or my lover gain
The victory, I looser must remain.
But since that one of you must victor prove,
I love my father well I must confess,
Yet neither him, nor life, to thee my love
I do respect, this much I must express,
But ah, my country people are forlorn
This day for me, they to their graves are borne.
But yet there is one thing that does grieve me more,
As (God knows) I most special reason had,
To sit and see thy blood diffusd in store,
In my default: what marvel I be sad?
But come (quoth she) thy wounds I will untie,
For I some Balsam thereto must apply.
He tells her there is no need, yet still she urged
Him to untie them, for (quoth she) I Am sure,
It Is best your wounds be mundify'd and purged,
Though you will not admit no other cure.
His Page unties them, Sophona betwixt
Them stepped, and faind as she some unguents mixed.
Go hence (quoth she) Sophona let me see
Those wounds, else nothing can remove my fears,
She viewes them well, yet with a weeping eye:
For she infusd in stead of Balsam tears.
Madam (quoth he) I very much admire,
This Balsam which you use should be so clear.
I Am glad (quoth she) sweet heart to see thee so,
Thy joyful humor will my tears restrain,
This liquid unguent did proceed of woe,
She oynts his wounds, and binds them up again,
Now came a boy, and told them that right near
The I Will of Sason did to them appear.
And that the Pilot sent him to enquire
If they intended for to view the I Will,
For this day you can no way gain Epyre,
And little Sason is within a mile.
Likewise it is best that we a harbor find
In time, for now it blows a mighty wind.
Then (quoth Calanthrop) to the Island go,
If that you fear the tempest will increase,
For now I trust we need not fear no foe,
If seas and winds desist us to oppress.
The boy acquaints the Pilot that he should,
Sail toward Sason with what haste he could.
Hard by the Island in an harbor brave
When Sun was set, they made their anchors fall,
To land Lucilla would Calanthrop have,
Where they erect Pavillions large and tall,
Amidst a wood, and there that night they staid,
For why, the storm the Ladies much dismayed.
But on the morn the storm was so decreast,
That it was turned to a new extreme
For such a calm both Seas and Air possessed
Their Ship could no where sail, and they esteem
The I Will so pleasant, that they now resolve
Themselves some further in the wood t'involve
So for their disport, after they had dyn'd,
Calanthrop and Lucilla walked along
From all the rest, unto a place refyn'd,
Where pretty birds by their melodious song
Gave such content, that on a little mount
They laid them down, hard by a pleasant fount.
This hill with Cypress trees was all inclosde,
With Myrtle, Bay Tree, and such sort of wood,
On blooming boughs the birds their ears reioyc'd,
Sweet smelling Cypress did their brains much good,
Each various object by their several dies,
As trees, herbs, flowers, delighted much their eyes.
The pleasant murmr of the crystal spring,
Suggests Lucilla that she should desire,
Calanthrop to be pleased some dittie sing,
The which she did, and does her suite acquire,
For to a Mandore she brought from her tent,
He sung this Poem, wishing her content.
CALANTHROP HIS PANEGYRICKE.
ABove the skies where gods do move,
Each sevrall deity honors Love,
And entertain the same.
Likewise the powers of fire and air,
In concord keep their motions rare,
Despising hatreds name.
The liquid powers of groundless sea
A sympathy affect,
And earthly powers nat'rally
Sweet amity affect.
Day bright Sun, night shine Moon,
And stars which twinkling shine,
Planets tell, and signs twell
Loves Deity is divine.
The airie Fowls, and Birds which sing,
Through love are moved to welcome spring
at his desired return.
Apollo and the Muses nine,
On Parnasse still without repine,
In mutual love soiourne.
The fish and monsters of the flood,
Through love, their kind supply,
Beasts wild and tame find love so good,
They love to multiply.
The three Fates rule the states
Without jar of our life,
Graces three, do agree
Vnitely without strife.
The Faunes and Satyrs of the woods,
The Sylvans, Dryads, each concludes
To reverence Venus Boy.
Vallonia and the Nymphs of plains,
Limoniads which in meads remains
A kind of love enjoy.
The Oreads which the mountains haunt,
love toward other have,
The Nymphs which of their beauty vaunt
They Venus aid do crave,
The Furies and Fairies,
Which trip each pleasant green,
With Naiads and Nereids,
Do all adore Loves Queen.
Trees which in thickest woods do grow,
And deepes which neither ebb nor flow,
to love their kind appear.
The flowers which beautify the fields,
And virtuous herbs which physic yields,
Do fructify each year.
Nature makes plants through Sympathy,
Affect their mother Earth,
And Earth she makes in like degree
yearly renew their birth.
And floods when you see then
By confluence they meet
Void of harms, each in arms,
Embrace, and other greet.
Since sacred gods do Love adore,
And each immortal power, therefore
Let humanes him obey.
Since the Calestiall Firmament
And every several element
Love, reverence night and day,
Since Sun and Moon, who yield us light
and stars transparent clear,
Since the twelve signs, and planets bright,
at name of Cupid fear,
Fowls and fish, Muses wish
Monsters of sea and land,
Fates and Graces, with sweet faces,
And beasts, Loves Deity stand.
Since Gods and Nymphs of woods and meads,
Of hills and vales, and those exceedes
All other Nymphs in beauty.
Since Nymphs of Seas and Rivers too,
And Furies, Fairies likewise do
To Love confess a duty,
Since trees, brooks, rivers, herb and flower,
And all which serve man's use,
Since all which live, or move, each hour
May man to love induce,
Should not we, then who be
Most subject unto reason,
Condescend, to extend
Loves power in the season*
But oh, what reason then have I
Whom Gods and men do both envy
For my Lucilla fair,
To honor Cupid and his dame,
And evermore their praise proclaim
Where ever I repair,
Who have so richly me possessed
of the most beateous creature,
That eye has seen, or tongue expressed,
and of most comely feature.
In each art, I Will impart
Her beauty, Natures praise,
For her sake, I shall make
Homage to Love always.
THus having sung, he renders to his dear
The little Mandore she of late him lent
Entreating if his song dislik't her ear,
To pardon him, for such a bad intent
He swore never harbored in his loyal breast,
The which to witness, Venus he attest.
Sweet servant (quoth she) you do still preveene
Me by your court'sie, which I much admire,
In right I must, if any wrong had been,
Remit it freely, for I did require
You for to sing, which since at my request
You did: To yield you thanks it is the least.
Now waxt it late, Phoebus was gone to rest,
And Herds their flocks drove to their wonted fold,
The singing birds went chirping to their nest,
The Owl sat skrieking in an Hollyne old
Therefore those lovers now forsook their place,
And to their tent they walked a comely pace.
When they had new refresht themselves with food,
And each one minded for to go to bed,
One came and told the wind was marv'lous good,
And therefore willd them every thing expede.
So loath to let such good occasion slip,
Each one went presently aboard the ship.
They weigh their ankers, and they hoyse their sail,
And now they lanch forth quickly in the deep,
A west north-west yields them a prosperous gale,
The ship upon the tops of waves did leap.
But on the morrow by the break of day,
They saw a sail make toward them right way.
Yet they (sweet folk) their course kept without fear,
Still toward Epire, as they had intended,
Little knew they this was a man of war,
And though they had, they could not have defended,
He gained the wind-ward, emptied all their sheets,
Then with a brasse-peece rudely he them greetes.
They by no mean were able to resist,
Again he shootes, yet never speaks a word,
Force must they yield, think of it as they list,
His ship then theirs was taller by a board.
In end he offers peace if they will render,
Which they accept, for each their life did tender.
The Pyrat boords them, took what he thoughtfit,
At last by chance he looks, and does espy
The Paragon of beauty weeping sit,
And kind Sophona doing so, her by,
Seeing them weep, he nearer does resort,
With good intent the Ladies to comfort.
Calanthrop all this while was kept fast,
For he had killed two when they first did enter,
Down in the room the Soldiers had him cast,
Six did attend him, for they durst not venture
To leave him, fearing he himself would kill,
Therefore they stayed to know their Captains will.
But whilst the captain by the Ladies stood,
Earnestly viewing fair Lucilla's face,
Her beauty wounds him so, that to conclude,
He at his captive'gins to suite for grace,
Which she (wise Lady) would not flat refuse,
Lest that he might the prisoners abuse.
Now came a Sergeant, willd the Captain show
What was his will concerning him they kept,
For he has killed your best commanders two,
As for the rest, you them to grace accept.
Since (quoth Lucilla) of no bad pretense
That man those killed, but in his own defense,
In this respect (good Captain) I entreat
You him to pardon, whatsoever he be.
The Captain, since her suit was so discreet,
Said to his Sergeant, bring him here to me.
And Lady (quoth he) for thy sake he shall
Not die I swear, though he had killed them all.
Calanthrop to their Captain they present,
He pardons him, his love did so abound
Toward Lucilla: likewise gave assent
That all the rest of captives there were found,
Went to their ship, all such as pleased to go,
For, save the Ladies, he would keep no more.
The Captains ship was by some blind-rocke brusde,
To land they must, before the breach they mend,
This voyage all the robbers much confusde,
Yet since to land they must, they all intend
Toward Zacyntus Pirates harbor sure,
Whose wooddie tops, their toppe-masts will obscure.
There they amended all their ships defect,
But yet the greatest fault they have not seen,
The fault was this, the ship did not eiect
Those miscreant robbers which she did contain.
But thieves as well as merchants sail the flood
Even as the Sun does shine on bad and good.
Calanthrop here dismissed his Epirots,
And faind as though with robbers he took part,
Yet he a secret time to them denotes,
When they should see him, which reioyc't their heart.
They toward Epire, Pirates to the sea,
Were quickly gone, glad of their late supplea.
And now the Captaine'gins again to suite
The fair Lucilla, who did still reject
His kindest offers, then by golden fruit
He thinks to move her, him for to affect.
But since he saw that nothing could allure
Her for to love, or his content procure.
By force he mindesto give himself content,
So he desired to speak with her alone.
But now the chastering frustrate his intent,
And his assaults the virtue of its stone
When he applyd his strength, did make him quail,
And still he marveld why his strength should fail.
Now he esteems Lucilla for a witch
For why no perswasives allure her could,
Nor yet could gifts, which might her much enrich,
Nor could he gain by force the thing he would.
Therefore by threats he seeks her to persuade,
For this his last repulse had made him mad.
Sometimes he had remarkt her kindly look
Toward Calanthrop: this incenc't his ire,
Fornever Rival yet could other brook,
Though only lust had set their hearts on fire.
Therefore if she will not his suite allow,
To kill her he does execrably vow.
And lest (quoth he) thou think I do dissemble,
I Will first cause kill the knight that is with you here,
(Oh how her heart at this sad tale did tremble)
That by his death (quoth he) thou death may fear,
Thus sent he Sergeants waiting on him there,
To bid the knight for death himself prepare.
No, stay (quoth she) for by the heavens I swear,
If you do harm him, you shall nere acquyre
My love: therefore it is best in time forbear
Such cursed intent, if ever you aspire
To gain my favor: therefore do not grieve
Me so; for I behind him will not live.
And is it so (quoth he?) Im'e for you then,
Faith all the earth now shall not save his life,
Yea though the world could yield no other men
Then now are here, for sure you are his wife.
So whilst he lives, my will I Will nere effect,
But being dead, I may some good expect.
By heavens (quoth she) my husband is he not,
Yet since you will kill him, pray you kill me first,
That he (sweet soul) by me may be forgot,
Shortly dispatch, since for our blood you thirst.
No (quoth the Captain) it is my desire,
His breath that lets my joy, do first expire.
But whilst his wretch't intent he prosecuted,
The gods (belike) would no way have it so,
For by a thundering noise they him refuted,
And sudden storm, that each were glad to go,
Prepare themselves for death as well as he,
The captain feardest of the company.
The storm increast, Boreas (it seemed) had sworn
To pull up Neptune from his watery Cell,
The raging seas on wings of winds were borne,
Minding Vulcanus from his reign t'expell,
The swelling Surges of the seas profound,
Our gallant Captains courage did confound.
For on those seas he Pyrate did remain
Twelve years before, yet never saw such storm
In all his life, nor never shall again,
Just heavens revenge, when men will not reform.
Many nights past, yet came this worser day,
Which made the Pirates (not in use) to pray.
But urged devotion does not often prevail,
So proved it here, for still a Northern wind
Them to the coast of Africa does hail,
And which was worst, no harbor could they find.
In end Neptunus bore them on his back,
Unto the greater Syrtis, where they wrack.
There died the Captain and his cursed mates,
And Calanthrops kind Page there also died,
If they had time they would revile the Fates,
Calanthrop got a board, but now he spied
Lucilla by him, fleeting on a wave,
So from his board he went, her life to save.
A little he could swim, not very well,
At last he caught her, set her on his board,
Now though he died, he thought he would not feel
No pain, since that the heavens did him afford
Such happiness, as to preserve her breath,
Whose beauteous presence had astonished death.
Through fort'nate chance they did acquire the land,
Hard by the high and woodie Cephalas,
Which Promontorie does directly stand
Where Syrtis does begin: but or they pass
Any where further, they Calanthrops Page
Dead do perceive, for now the storm did swage.
On sands he lay, (oh how his face looked pale)
Lucilla could not choose, but now she wept
His master does his timelesse death bewail,
Yet when he minds himself had almost slept
In Nereus mansion, he left off to mourn,
And to Lucilla did again return.
Now since he is dead, they do themselves apply
To find Sophona, dead, or else alive,
And as they seek amongst the rocks to try
For her, they see her ready to arrive,
The Fates with happy fortune so her blessed,
She came to land upon her mistress chest.
They welcomed her, then altogether went
And with sad hearts interred Calanthrops boy,
When they had done, they all with one consent,
Each other toward Cephalas convoy
Where they in silence spent that weary night,
Longing to see fair Phoebus come in sight.
When day appeard, and that the night was past
They went to find some village, or some town,
For, against their will they kept a two-dayes fast,
The weary Ladies by the way sat down
To rest themselves: Calanthrop found a boy
Who said he would to Tapra them convoy.
Riding he was, a spare horse in his hand
He held, whereof Calanthrop was most glad,
Yet at the boy he humbly did demand
For money leave to ride: to which the Lad
Gave good attendance, telling him for pay
He should them horse to Tapra all the way.
Calanthrop gives him coin, the boy alights,
And told him likewise that he had some bread,
If they were hungry, to refresh their sprights.
Likewise some wine, if they thereof had need.
The bread and wine Calanthrop from him takes,
Thereof for Ladies (noble banquet) makes.
When they had done, Calanthrop much admired
A barbarous boy to them was so discreet,
To know his name therefore he much desired,
The which the boy did willingly recite,
My name (quoth he) Sir is Philodespot,
Likewise by birth I am an Epirot.
I Am glad (quoth Calanthrop) for so am I,
(At this Lucilla could not choose but smile)
But (quoth Calanthrop) pray thee tell me why
Thou in Barbaria loves to stay this while?
Sir (quoth the boy) our ship was run a-ground
By this late storm, where my sweet master drowned.
And now since I a master lack, I go
To Tapra, for to try if I can find
Some ship, going for Greece, that I may so
Transported be, which much will ease my mind.
Please thee (quoth Calanthrop) I Will give thee wage,
If thou will stay with me, and be my page.
I am content (quoth he) Sir, if you please,
Yet much I long my native soil to see,
But yet it will my mind most greatly ease,
To serve or be in honest company.
So horse those Ladies, I shall be their guide,
Behind you one, the other me shall ride.
Forwards they iourney'd toward Tapra City,
But by the way (misfort'nate accident)
The vilest tyrant, lecherous, lacking pity,
That breathed, or moved beneath the firmament,
They met with all, Anxifer was his name,
Of Cyrenaica king: yet lacking shame.
This shameless tyrant, when that he perceived
Such matchless beauty have so slender guard,
He and his comp'nie bea stlily behaved
Themselves, not caring what came afterward.
For many wounds they to Calanthrop gave,
Thereafter of his Ladies him berave.
Two great misfortunes Calanthrop did prove,
For first the Ladies were bereft him there,
Next, was so wounded, that he scarce could move,
But yet the loss of his Lucilla fair,
More then his wounds did aggravate his grief
Though his kind Page did yield him great relief.
For he on horse set him, when they were gone,
So, through great labor, they the City gained.
But oh! to hear what woeful wailing moan
The Ladies made, when as they were constrained
To part with Calanthrop, and he so wound,
That sight the gladdest heart might have confounded.
Calanthrop through his wounds was forced to stay
In Tapra City for a week or two,
Then toward Epire he without delay
And his kind Page, addressed themselves to go,
Minding a navy shortly for to bring
Toward Corena, and besiege the King.
For in Corena did this king abide,
This Anxifer, who did Calanthrop wrong,
In Cyrenaica hard by the sea side,
Corena stands, a City matchless strong,
The tyrant to this town the Ladies brought,
Where many times he villainies had wrought.
Now must we leave Calanthrop in Epire,
Levying his forces with what haste he can,
And speak of those fair Ladies who were here
Kept in Corena by this div'lish man.
This Anxifer, that monster for a King,
Who sought the Ladies to dishonor bring.
For when he was (as pity were) returned
Unto Corena, he made shut each gate,
Toward Lucilla he in lust so burned,
That he waxt careless of his own estate,
Save only that he loved to be secure,
Till time he might his vile content procure.
Therefore he to a chamber quickly went,
Taking Lucilla with him all alone,
Minding for to effectuate his intent,
Which he (I think) might easily have done,
Had not the virtue of the Ladies ring
Him disappointed of his cursed design.
But when he saw that strength could not prevail,
Nor that he could not purchase her own grant,
Another way he minds her to assail,
And that was this: Some Sorcerers did hant
Much in that palace, for those has he sent,
And bids them make that Lady be content
To bed with him: or else show him a cause
Why he could not do what he did intend,
Or else he swears that without any pause,
Their wretched souls to Pluto he shall send,
They him request some space them to allow.
To morrow this time (quoth he) else I vow
You all shall hang: thus Anxifer dismissed
Those graceless Sorc'rers, who in one accord
Their master invocate, and so insist
Continually, till he sent them this word,
Lucilla fair, she keeps Calisto's ring
On her left hand, whose virtue lets your King
Unto the King the morrow went they all,
And told him that a ring was all his stay,
On her left hand she keeps it, they it call
Calistos ring, (quoth they) therefore assay
If you can any way that ring acquire,
Then are you sure t'accomplish your desire.
Of this the King was glad, gave them reward,
Charging them that to none they should impart
What they had told him, then without regard
Of honor, went he with a merry heart
Unto Lucilla's chamber, whose estate
No heart so hard, but must the same regrate.
She and Sophona bitterly did weep,
Yet nothing did the tyrants heart relent,
Why do you thus (quoth he) a mourning keep?
Fair Ladies do not so: O be content,
For thou whose beauty gave my heart its wound,
Upon thy head (quoth he) I Will set my crown,
Which if thou will not willingly receive,
Then shall you both be vylie prostitute
To each base villain, and each filthy slave,
Then to the death I shall you persecute.
Yet e're you dye the hangman shall abuse
You both, if thou to be my wife refuse.
Sir (quoth Sophona) pray let us advise
Some little space, which choice of those to take,
For who so does a marriage enterprise,
Should well advise before the match they make.
So Sir remove, and do appease your wrath,
For be you sure, each flesh abhors death.
The King went to his Sorcerers, and told
How that by threats he hoped to attain
The Ladies love: and to them does unfold
That for their magic they should still remain
With him, and honored be as men of worth,
If their advice good success now brought forth
But now Sophona to her mistress said,
Madame (quoth she) bewailes do naught avail
You see with tyrants, and I am afraid
That he with beastly fury us assail,
If that he see his hopes are each way spent,
Therefore it is best you seem to be content
For I am sure before the time be long,
Calanthrop will see his Lucilla fair,
And then most sure he will revengeour wrong,
Our losses all he likewise will repair,
To wed the tyrant therefore condescend,
For sure your ring your honor will defend.
Lucilla likewise thought this course the best,
Their present shame and danger to prevent,
By this the tyrant came, and did request
Them now to show him what was their intent,
Lucilla told him, much against her mind,
She would become his wife, if he were kind.
Whereto he swore, that he should so her love,
That after-ages should admire the same,
And each one should his loyalty approve,
And for the wrong he penitent became,
Which he had done her: then he causd conveene
His barbarous nobles for to see his Queen.
The very morn must be the wedding day,
He longs so much his fair Queen to enjoy,
The heat of lust can hardly brook delay,
His barbarous Lords to morrow him convoy
Unto a Church, where he his Queen did wed,
Would see him hanged, e're she with him would bed.
In diverse sports they spent the afternoon,
Never was bridgrome more joyful or more glad,
Unto their chamber are they quickly gone,
Never was Bride more sorrowful or sad,
Yet in her ring she specially reposd,
Not knowing that its virtue was disclosd
Unto the tyrant, by a div'lish art,
Else all the world could not have moved her go
To keep this tyrant company apart,
No fear of death could her have frighted so,
As to involve her honor in such danger,
To be alone with such a barbarous stranger
Now being alone, the King his Queen intreates
To come to bed. which suite she does deny.
How so (quoth he) then summarly recites
He all her promises, and asks her why
She does refuse, since that she is his wife,
To bed with him, as she should all her life?
Then lifting her left hand, he faines to kiss
The same, and she no other did expect
But treach'rously he did her more amiss
At unawares: for he without respect
Of tears, or cries, pulld from her fairer hand
The chaste ring, which she no way could gainstand,
So on the bed he fair Lucilla threw,
Fully resolved his pleasure to fulfill,
He finds that once the Sorc'rers have proved true,
And yet he must be frustrate of his will.
For why Lucilla did the heavens implore
To save her honor though she died therefore.
The gods (it seemed) did grant the Ladies suite,
For such a shaking did the King possess,
That his design he could not prosecute,
Just heavens do still such villainy repress,
When earthly means the virtuous minded fail,
Then sacred Powers by their strength prevail.
For though Lucilla could no way resist
This tyrant king, heavens pitied her estate,
And so those heavenly powers ever blist,
In time gave aid, whilst she her grief relate,
For now the tyrant vile began to bleed,
And soon thereafter on the floor fell dead.
This sight amazed Lucilla's tender spright,
So that she called the guard for to appear
Then up they came, for they had watched all night,
But when they saw the King was dead, such fear
Possessed them, that they scarce could well take hold
Of fair Lucilla, who the truth them told.
Yet ever thinking she the king had killed,
Their wrath and fury did so far abound,
That both the Lords and Citizens have wild
The guard to putin prison most profound
The Lady that this murder did coact,
Until such time as she confessed the fact.
Her maid begged leave to keep her company,
And then the guard to Iayle did them commit,
Lucilla fully is resolved to dye
What death they please, e're she thus imprisoned sit.
But now (sweet Lady) void of all comfort,
She to Sophona spoke in this same sort,
How now Sophona, had it not been good
That in Calabria we as yet had staid?
Then had our friends not spent for us their blood,
Nor we thus imprisoned, been for death afraid,
Just are the heavens who though into their ire,
They punish me with flames of sacred fire.
Even me who have my fathers will represt,
Despising counsel (Natures kind respect)
By which I brought grief to his aged breast,
Who me (vile wretch) entirely did affect.
Sweet heavens (quoth she) to dye for my offense
I Am glad, so death my miss can recompense.
But yet, (aye me) Calanthrop my sweet knight.
Could I refuse to go away with thee?
Since in thy self is placed my whole delight,
Likewise thy joys I Am sure are fixed in me,
Therefore I vow, that death, or greatest pain
I can for thee endure, shall be my gain.
Sweet Madam (quoth Sophona) well resolved,
Though spiteful Fortune at this time us cross,
And us in woe has guiltlesly involved,
Yet if with patience we can brook our loss,
We pay her home: for none can more iniure
Fortune, then patiently their cross endure.
And for your knight, though you great grief sustain,
Most sure the like him likewise does annoy,
For, till he see Lucilla fair again,
I Am sure his heart will never peace enjoy,
Our griefe's at height, then Madam be content,
For, vehemencies are not permanent.
Whilst thus they spoke, the Iaylor did them call,
Told them that presently they must compeare
Before the Judges in the Justice hall,
So with him went the Ladies, (void of fear)
Lucilla to the Judges did dilate
The simple truth of all the present state.
Yet for all that, she was adiudg'd to dye,
And so to Iayle the Ladies did return,
But oh! just heavens, have a disposing eye,
Which often relieve the woeful hearts that mourn,
For, now they sent the Ladies aid from sea,
Who can and shall their wretched state supplea.
The morn, alive midst fire, to yield their breath
Were they condemned: this was their punishment
The one as accessarie to his death,
The other as the actor eminent,
But yet, Calanthrop lately came ashore,
E're they do so, I trust will ask wherefore.
For now he sent Philodespot to town,
To try if he could with the Ladies meet,
The Page knew all the country up and down,
Therefore his master does him now entreat,
To try what news he heard, or where the strength
Of all the town lay: so the boy at length
Went and returned: then to his master show
The town was all in arms, and much aghast,
So, of the Ladies he could get no view,
For they into a Dungeon deep were cast,
The King was dead, and every one reports
Two Ladies had him killed who were consorts.
At this report enraged Calanthrop swears,
He will besiege the town: that is not the best
(Quoth diverse of his Lords) for it appears
Since they are in arms, for war they are addressed,
Therefore let us some stratagem invent,
Them to ov'r-throw, and frustrate their intent.
Sir (quoth a Captain old) I pray you hear,
Your Page tells that the execution place
Is distant from the town a mile right near,
To morrow when they come, in any case,
Let us obscure our selves by the sea side
Till they come forth: our forces then divide.
Your forces are some eighteen thousand strong,
Of beaten Soldiers, well expert in war,
Who vow to dye, or else revenge your wrong,
To morrow then when Citizens appear,
See you attend the place where as they mind
To kill the Ladies: some shall stay behind,
And go betwixt them and their Citie-gates,
By this mean shall we stop them to retire,
Then let them rail on Fortune and the Fates,
And when they cry for mercy, stop your care
Till time they yield their City and their lives
To you: likewise their children, goods and wives.
It Is well advisde (quoth Calanthrop) therefore
I do applaud: our ships are out of sight,
It seems the gods do aid us more and more,
Blessed be those powers who favor still the right,
The morn the Burgers came, who did intend
To kill the Ladies, whom the heavens defend.
Calanthrop and his forces with great rage,
Ov'r-threw the Burgers, who were full of fear,
Still was he guided by his loving Page,
Each in his Army crying still Epire.
Now fled the Burgers for to seek refuge,
Unto their City, where they must not Judge.
For why, Calanthrops forces were betwixt
Them and the town, so forced them back again,
No where about could one their eyes have fixed,
But they should see numbers of Burgers slain,
Heavens (quoth Lucilla) what moves all this stir?
To kill us two, you need small force concur.
At last Sophona gave attentive ear,
For why, she marveld what should move them stay,
Then presently, she hears men cry Epire,
Madam (quoth she) we will not dye to day.
With that Calanthrop cries, untie, untie
Those Ladies, else by heavens you all shall dye.
The which they did, not daring to gain-stand,
Calanthrop does Lucilla fair embrace,
And then Sophona: now he gives command
All who had captives, to remove a space,
Yet see that no man did a Burger kill
Till time they knew what was their Princes will.
Anon the captives they to him present,
He graciously to mercy them received,
The captives then their Cities keys have sent
Unto Calanthrop, seeing he behaved
Himself so meekly, sparing all their bloods,
To him they rendered City, lands, and goods.
Then to the City went he, where his forces
Received him and Lucilla joyfully,
On foot they stood in arms, for now their horses
Were put a part, yet looked to carefully,
So Calanthrop and fair Lucilla went
Unto the Palace with no mean content.
There he directs his Soldiers all in arms
To keep their centries carefully each night,
So should they still be ready for alarmes,
But see how soon that ere the day grew light,
Others, in stead of those should cent'nel keep,
That those who watched already, might go sleep.
When they had supt, and it was time to rest,
The Ladies to their chamber he convoyd,
Thereafter Morpheus so his eyes possessed,
That he in bed, till day, one sleep enjoyed.
Then he arose, and willd his Page go see
If that the Ladies loved have company.
Or if the Ladies sleeping were, or not,
Or if they counted all their sorrows past,
And if their bypast grief was all forgot,
For he with them intended break his fast.
The Page went and awake Sophona found,
But sweet Lucilla, yet was sleeping sound.
Sophona to the Page most softly spoke,
Asking what rest that night his master got,
Yet through their speech Lucilla did awake,
And seeing that it was Philodespot,
She called him to her, asked him for his Lord.
He told her he was well, and every word
Even as before his Lord did him direct.
Tell him (quoth she) he banished has my sorrow,
And that I do his presence here expect
Whilst thus she spoke, Calanthrop gives good morrow,
To her, and to Sophona, for no way
His page so stayed, he could endure to stay.
Cousin (quoth she) pray who has sent for you
To come into my chamber you're too bold.
Madam (quoth he) I cannot help that now
If I return not: then in arms he fold
His sweet Lucilla, who forgave his miss,
And in her bed disdaind not him to kiss.
As thus they sport, a Lord to him was sent,
By all the Princes of the Royal blood,
Entreating humbly he would be content
To cause interre their king, for it was good,
Since he was dead, that he were had to grave,
And so his last honor of them receave.
The Sepulcher without the Cities wall
Was built most richly all of Marble stone,
Like to an Obeliske: thither went all
The Lords, and Burgers, yet with no great moan,
The corpse they carry, burial to enjoy,
Calanthrop likewise did the corpse convoy.
But by the way huge fear all those possessed,
Who bore the corpse, the Coffin did so shake,
A thundering noise, midst lightning, then expressed
Heavens wrath, which made the stoutest heart to quake.
So each removed, expecting the event,
In end, before their eyes, the Coffin rent.
Out of the which there came a fearful beast,
Like a Chimera was this monster wrought,
Framed like a Lion, was it is head and breast,
The body thereof like a Goat was thought,
And like a Dragon, was it is filthy tail,
This beast the whole spectators did assail.
And so ran raging whersoere he lists
Amongst those frighted people to and froe,
Till that brave val'rous Calanthrop resists
Him, giving him upon the back a blow,
Which moved the beast, finding it self to bleed,
Unto the Lybian forests run with speed.
The beast thus gone, Calanthrop and the rest,
(Whose hearts in admiration did abound)
Now to interre the corpse they thought it best,
But when they came, no corpse was to be found,
A scroll they found, the which they did unfold
And found those following verses writ in gold.
THis metamorphose heavens do right impose
On wretched Anxifer, who it deserved,
This scroll you read, is sent for to disclose
That cause this tyrant still from honor swerved,
Who was a king, and so bare rule above
Others: yet cherisht vice, never would reprove.
For this cause to Chimera is he turned,
Whose Lions crest resembles cruelty,
And cause in lust (not love) he ever burnd,
His Goat-like body imports lechery,
His Dragons tail does evidently show
Unlawful actions often in end bring woe.
Therefore let his example teach each one
In Rulers places, who conspicuous sit,
Beware of tyranny: for still the moon
Of poor oppressed people, heavens admit,
And justly, when oppressors least expect
Pour forth their wrath on those who wrong effect.
If much before, each one now more admired,
For why they find Lucilla had not killed
The king, as they supposd: so they rety'rd
Unto the City, where the Princes willd
Calanthrop to accept the noble Crown
Of Cyrenaica, which should much redowne
Unto his honor, yet he did refuse,
Telling them that he never did such merit,
Yet will they not admit of his excuse,
For why, they swore, none else should it inherit.
In end, into a place most eminent,
They crowned Calanthrop with his own consent.
Thereafter was Lucilla crowned Queen,
To recompense the wrong she had received,
Fortunes inconstancy may well be seen,
In this: for why, those folks who lately craved
To take her life, now as their Queen most fit,
In one accord Lucilla they admit.
Thus lived Calanthrop and his Ladies here
Into Corena for a pretty space,
At last Lucilla longed to see Epire,
Yet er'e Calanthrop moved from that same place,
In favors of the nearest of the blood
Royal, did of the crown himself denude.
So did Lucilla to her endless praise,
But yet they ever tendered this respect,
That Cyrenaican kings of them always
Should hold their crown: and likewise should elect
(If that the royal race were dead or gone)
Ever their kings, by their advice alone.
Those Articles the Princes all have sworn,
Likewise they vow, their dearest bloods to spend
In his behalf, as if he had been borne
Their native king, they vow him to defend.
Thus they convoy Calanthrop to the sea,
Giving rich gifts to all his company.
Now from the coast of Africa they go
Toward Epire, with great celeritie,
Smoothly their ships divide the Ocean so
The way they went, cannot discerned be,
Sweet Southern winds afford them so good way,
Comarus hav'n they gained without stay.
Then in Nicopolis a day or two
They stayed, then went they to Vallonia,
Calanthrop now not fearing any foe,
Embassdours sent unto Calabria,
Entreating that the Duke without delay
Would come to Epire against his wedding day
Where many Princes of no mean degree,
Earls, Lords, and knights, would likewise there expect,
And give their presence, each as well as he,
Hon'ring the nuptials with a great respect.
The Duke tells them, his presence he should give,
They thank him humbly, then they take their leave.
So to their King Calanthrop they return,
Told him their answer, whereof he was glad,
Now in Vallonia did the King soiourne,
Where'gainst his Nuptials he provided had
Each in his court, horse, clothes, and armor brave,
And each thing requisite their hearts could crave.
Amongst those Courtiers was one gallant knight,
He to Calanthrop Cousin-german was,
(Likewise the King in him took great delight,)
This knight did love Sophona that sweet Less,
Sophona likewise did the knight affect,
For why, no wench his carriage could reject.
Sophona Aunt was to Lucilla fair,
In birth his equal, and such like in love,
Therefore the King, the Queen, and all were there,
Applaud this match, and willingly approve
Their equal choice, so king and Queen consent
They wedded be with them, to their content.
O what inestimable joy and pleasure
These lovers by this promise did conceive!
I think they brookt it in the greatest measure
Imag'narie that mortal creatures have.
Thus they, swift sliding time in pleasure spend,
Yetlongingly the nuptial day attend.
Now when this day that every one desired
So much, was come, and Princes, Earls and Lords
Were present, each one whom the King required,
Unto them all Calanthrop spoke these words,
Yet to Calabria's Prince he did direct
His speech in special, unto this effect.
MY Princely brethren (quoth he) I entreat
You think not hardly I in Arms am clad,
Nor that my Queen stands maskt: for I Will repeat
The reason hereof, which yet makes her sad,
Till she be wedded, sheel'e not show her face,
Nor I unarm my self in any case.
This is the cause: Of late in Africa
By chance I was (O fort'nate adventure)
When as the King of Cyrenaica
A tyrant vile, did many one iniure,
Heavens struck this tyrant with a lethargy,
So that no physic could his grief supply,
This Lady you see here, was then his Queen,
Yet wedded to him much against her will,
He wasfound dead upon the wedding even,
So each one thought the Queen the king did kill.
Therefore the Queen and this her waiting maid
Who likewise must be maskt, as I have said,
Until she wedded be, imprisond were,
Thereafter were they both adiudg'd to die
Before the counsel would their king interre,
This time a boy acquaints me privilie,
That two the fairest Ladies that did breath,
For no offense this day must suffer death.
I hearing that, having an Army strong
Hard by Corena, for a special use,
'Cause that dead king before had done me wrong
I longed for to revenge that old abuse.
So I, in spite of his, releiv'd at length,
Those Ladies two, by stratagems and strength.
Thereafter homeward I my journey took,
Those Ladies needs would bear me company,
Since for my sake they Africa forsook,
It had in me been great discourtesie,
Their kindness to reject in any sort,
Wherein I took thereafter great comfort.
For when I had with admiration gazed
Upon this Ladies beauty stands me next,
Her lovely face my spirits so amazed,
That ever since my joys in her are fixed,
Likewise, because she thinks I saved her life,
She is content now to become my wife.
Now you the reason may perhaps admire,
Why she is pleased be wedded under veil,
It is their country fashion (though not here)
Those that be widows, ever to bewail
Their husbands death, with maids in like attire
Till they do wed, their husbands then require
Them usually, for to leave off to mourn,
Likewise for to cast off their mourning weed,
The which they do, and so again return
To love the quick, and to forget the dead,
This is the cause why those their face obscure,
My Princely brethren hereof be you sure.
But now you may in reason likewise ask,
Why I thus armed desire to wed my Bride,
I else have shown you why the Ladies mask
Their face: so likewise know, I armed abide,
Because the martiallkings of Epirus
Who wan theirwives by Arms, were wedded thus.
This other forme'they ever likewise vsd,
Some foreign Prince their Queen must to them give,
Which ancient custom none have yet abusd,
Nor shall by me: for why, it would me grieve
To abrogate such worthy fashions old,
Ordained by my ancestors stout and bold.
For this cause I most humbly do request
You, noble Prince of rich Calabria,
Do me the honor before all the rest
Of Kings and Lords of famous Grecia,
'Cause you're a foreign Prince, as to bestow
This Queen on me, which all the rest allow.
Sir (quoth the Duke) if that can can do you good,
Your Queen I shall deliver unto you,
Therefore it is best you presently conclude
To go to Church: for to the gods I vow,
I Will honor you in any thing I can,
For why, I love each martiall-minded man.
The king did yield him thanks, and so they went
To Church, whereas the parties all were wed,
The Duke knew nothing of the Kings intent,
When to the armed king his Less he led,
For this same Duke had vowed, during his life,
With his consent, his Less should nere be wife
The Palace Royal stood amidst the town,
When there they came, Calanthrop went apart,
And on Lucilla's head he set hiscrowne,
Disarmed himself, then with a joyful heart
The King, the Queen, Sophona and her Lord
Unmasked, or armed, returned with one accord.
Before the Princes in the dyning hall,
The King, the Queen, and Sophona there craved
Pardon on knees for their offencesall,
Of the Calabrian Duke. When heperceav'd
His daughter and her maid, likewise her knight
Was king of Epire, he with great delight
In arms embraced and kissed Lucilla fair,
Next her the king, and last her maid likewise,
Then he intreates Calanthrop to declare,
The pret'rite fortunes of his enterprise,
With every several success good or bad,
And joys and crosses which in love he had.
For (quoth he) I remit all your trespass,
And every wrong you toward me have done,
Since thus you haveacquir'd my lovely Less,
I likewise must account you as my son,
Therefore be pleased the truth for to relate
Most punctually, of all your former state.
At his request Calanthrop did express
His passedlife, even as the Duke desired,
With all the circumstances, more and less,
That heretofore he had through love acquired.
To his discourse, exult they in assent,
And much approve his resolute intent.
The nuptials celebrated were with joy,
Which did continue for a five-weekes space,
In end Lucilla of a goodly Boy
Was brought to bed, the wedding more to grace,
Which moved her father stay til she amended,
Then home he went, as he before intended.
So did each Grecian Prince: when all were gone,
Calanthrop called Sophona, that sweet maid,
She and her husband, by the king alone,
After this fort the king unto her said,
Lady (quoth he) as yet no recompense
Of thy deserts, through my benevolence
To thee has been extended: wherefore now
I here to thee and to thy husband give
The province of Thesprotia, likewise you
May in the City of Pandosia live,
Which lands with you and yours shall still remain,
And not return unto the crown again.
This now Sophona shall be thy reward
'Cause in my love thou ever did me aid,
Thee and thy husband likewise I Will regard
Next to my Queen, thus shall thy love be paid,
Since thou with us wast partaker in woe,
In prosperous state good reason thou be so.
They on their knees do thank him rev'rently,
He them embraced, then a Herald called,
Before his Queen he causes presently
Them in The sprotia's province be instald,
Well (quoth the Queen) who serve (I do perceave)
A loving master, need their wage not crave.
In great content thus lived they many years,
Till that there came a messenger and told
The Duke was sick, and (quoth he) it appears
He shall not live, for he is very old,
Therefore it is good you to Calabria go,
If you intend to see him die, or no.
The King, the Queen, and the young Prince their son
Toward Calabria do their journey take,
Sophona likewise would with them be gone,
Likewise her husband went, for comp'nies sake,
They to Brundusium sail the ready way,
For near that town the Duke diseased lay.
When they were come, the Duke was marv'lous sick,
For now his latter end drew very near,
Yet seeing them, he straind himself to speak,
The which they all desired him to forbear,
Only they loved to know his final will,
Which all of them were ready to fulfill.
He finding that his days were near an end,
The little Prince he took into his arm,
My child (quoth he) the sacred gods defend
Thee still, and save thee every way from harm,
My feeble hands shall crown thee, my sweet boy,
That ere I dye, my seed my crown enjoy.
For it will give my dying sp'rite content
To see my offspring in my place succed,
Whilst I yet live: therefore to this intent,
I set Calabria's crown upon thy head,
And with my crown receive my blessing here
Before thy father and thy mother dear.
The Prince thus crowned, the dying Duke commends
His people unto Calanthrop the King,
Then for his whole Nobility he sends
Delivering them to him: but now the sting
Of death, even then did penetrate his heart,
Which forced him say, Farewell, and so depart.
Now since the Duke was dead, Calanthrop stayed
Only to see the funeral welldone,
Which being ended, he no time delayed
But to Epirus with his comp'nies gone,
Yetdoth his woeful Queen with tears lament
Her fathers death, which many more repent.
Thus was the Crown of Calabrie annexed
Unto Epire, which many years endured,
Till long time after they Epirots vexed
Through their revolt, and many times injured
Their Messengers, when they their tribute sought,
Which twixt the kingdoms great wars after wrought.
For, since they saw Calabrians refusd
To pay their tribute as they ought to do
Unto the Epirots, and still abusd
Each messenger that came Epirus froe,
They then resolved to make them know by force
Their duty, and thereafter use them worse.
To this effect the Epirots did raise
An Army great Calabria to invade,
Each Prince in Greece to their immortal praise,
Did them assist, and likewise did persuade
Them for to prosecute what they resolved,
Lest they, through stay, themselves in shame involved.
Therefore they went with all their Army great,
And so rebellious Calabrie assaild,
Which frighted folk, with death their Army threat,
In end, those Grecian forces so prevaild,
That they a Province won, and brookt in peace
Long after that, which yet is called Great Greece.
Now, lest I from my history digress,
I will acquaint you with Calanthrops death,
And his fair Queens, whose lives in happiness
Both in one day expired, through lack of breath.
During Calanthrops days, brave martial man,
Nor yet his sons, rebels revolt began.
And when Sophona heard of this report,
Calanthrop and Lucilla both were dead,
Grief on her tender heart seasd in such sort,
No physic earthly could yield her remead,
She folds her arms, and then with fixed eyes
Upon her husband, she (sweet Lady) dies.
Calanthrops son, Epirus Annals tell,
Was first, and father of the Castriots,
Whose val'rous race still lineally befell
For to govern the martial Epirots.
George Castriot, Scandarbeg, last king remained,
After whose death, the Turks, Epirus gaind.
FINIS.

