THE RECANTATION OF MASTER PATRIK ADAMSONE, sometime Archbishop of
SAINT-ANdrowes in Scotland.

1598.

Pseudoepiscopomastix. THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
AFTER that the just copy of this Recantation, good Reader, came sundry times
to my hands in writ, I was moved at last, for the great benefit of many, to
put it in print, as a worthy monument of Gods mercy toward his Church, in
justifying the righteous cause thereof, and in condamning the crooked course of
all sorts of adversaries, and that so plainly and mightily, that it can not
be denied bot to be done by the very fingar of GOD him self, and not by the
wit or policy of man. For howsoever some evil affected persons,
adversareis to Christian Discipline, surmise this Recantation to have been
craftelie procured, or rather violently enforced by the policy of the
contrary party (as they speak) yet the credit of the worshipful and
faithful witnesses, yet alive, that testify the truth hereof by their
hande-writtes and subscriptions, according as the thing with the haill
circumstances thereof was done in their sight and hearing, as hereafter truly
is set down, plainly proves the work to be of God, and not of man. Which
thing as it ought to move the godly to an earnest thanksgiving, for so rare
and great a benefit: so it should worthily terrify the adversareis of all
sorts, from further striving against the truth of christian Discipline, no
less justified here by their own mouth, as it were, then was David's
innocence by the mouth of Saul, when he said: Is this thy voice, my son
David: Thou art more righteous then I: which more cleared David, and condemned
Saul, then if either David himself or any of his friends or fellows, by
word or writ had taken upon them to make his Apology. For this recanter was
no mean adversary to true Discipline, or one of the common sort, but a chief
Ringleader, and one that as in style mounted to the hiest Antichristian (if not
heathenish after the manner of Flamine and Archiflamine) digniteis in Scotland:
so in will, diligence and all industry negotiating against true reformation,
none either did or was able to match him. Whose extorted and constrained
confession by the hand of God, though volu^tarie in regard of me^, as wrasted
out of the mouth of one of the chiefest in name of all the rest, should
worthily move all of his coat and accomplices, to kick no more against pricks,
least otherwise continuing with Saul in persecuting David, against their own
consciences, they be brought (in Gods righteous judgment) at last to some
tragical and miserable end in this life, and to eternal torments in the world
to come: which is spoken not so much in regard of such grave and learned
fathers, as not of ambition, but through the injury of the time, for holding
out evil persons from those dignities, who would make hauoke of the Church,
and for staying the fury of the storm of persecution of the brethren, which
otherwise no doubt would ensewe, are cotented (being called) for the quietness
of the Church to accept for an interim and time, till God send further
reformation, that vnpure and monstruously mangled Ministry of things that
otherwise are mere asustata, as we say, and not competent in one person, to
wit, a co^temptible ministerial service, making men to be compted the
ofscourings of the world, and a lordly pompeous government like to that of
the nations plainly forbidden by Christ in these words, vos autem non sic, but
e shall not be so: To these men I say, who will be ready upon all occasions, to
farther reformation, the former threatenings apperteineth not so much as to the
malicious persecutours of the true Ministry under the name of fathers of the
Church, for maintenance of their ambition.

8. Aprilis 1591.
BRETHREN, understanding the proceedings of the Assembly in my contraire, and
being now withholden by seiknes from presenting my self before you: that I
might give confession of that doctrine quhairin I howp that God sall call me,
and that at his pleasure I might depairt in ane unity of christian faith: I
thowght good by wreitt to utter the samyne to our wisdoms. And lykewayis to
crave our godly wisdoms assistance, noth for the restitution of any warldlie
pomp or preeminence, quhilk I little respect, bot to remove from me the
slanderis quhilkes are raised in this country concerning the variance of
doctrine, specially on my pairt, quhairin I protest befoir God, that I haif
only a single respect to his glory, and by his graice I sall abyd heirin unto
my lyves end.

FIrst, I confess the true doctrine of christian religioun to be publicly
tawght and rightly annuncied within this Realm, and deteistis all papistrie
and superstition, like as (blissed be God) I haif detested the samine in my
heart, the spaice of 30. eires, sen it pleasit God to give me the knowledge of
the treuth, quhairin I haif walkit vprightlie asweill heir as in other
countries, as the Lord beires me record, until these last days, quhairin
partly for ambition and vain glory, to be preferred befoir my brethren: and
partly for covetousness, I haif possessed the pelf of the Kirk: I did undertake
this office of Archbishoprike quhairwith justly the syncerest professors of
the word haif funde fault, and haif condemned the samine, as impertinent to
the office of a sincere pastor of Godis word. And albeit men would colloure the
samen, and the imperfections thairof by diverse clokes, it the samine can noth
be conciled from the spiritual eyes of the faithful. Nether it can the men of
God, quhen they are putt to their conscience, dissemble the samine.

Nixt, I confess, that I was in ane erroneous opinioun, that I belived the
gouvernment of the Kirk, to be likevnto the kingdoms of the earth, plain
co^trairy to the commandment of our Master Christ, and the monarchy
quhairby the Kirk is governed, not to be only in the persoun of our Savior
Christ (as it is) bot in the ministeris, quho are nothing bot vassalles under
him in an equality amang tham selfis.

Thirdly, That I married the Earl of Huntle, contrair to the command of the
kirk, without the confession of his faith, and profession of the sincere
doctrine of the word, I repent, and craves God pardon. That I traveled both by
reasoning and other ways to subject the kirk-men unto the Kings ordinance, in
things that aperteine to ecclesiastical matters, and things of conscience, I
ask God mercy, quhair-vpon grait enormiteis haif fallen forth in this
country.

That I belived and so tawght, the presbitreis to be a foolish inuentionne,
and would haif it so esteemed of all me^, quhilk is ane ordinance of Christ, I
crave God mercy.

Forder, I submit my self to the mercy of God, and judgment of the Assemble,
not measuring my offenses by my own self, nor infirmiteis of my awin ingine,
bot unto the good judgment of the kirk, to the quhilk always I subject my
self, and beseekis ou to make intercessionne to God for me, and to the King,
that I may haif sum moyane to live, and consume the rest of this my wretched
time, for winning of quhois favors (quhilk foolishlie I thoucht thairby to
obtain) I committed all these errors.

As quhair I am burdened, to haif ben the settair forth of the buke called The
Kings declaration, quhairin the hol ordor of the kirk is condemned and
traduced, I protest before God, that so I was commandit to wreitt the same by
the Chancellair for the time, bot chiefly by N. (an other grait courteor) quho
him self penned in the second act of parliament, concerning the powar and
authority of Iudicator to be absolutely in the Kings powar, and that it should
not be lawful to any subject to reclame fra the famine, under the penalty of
the act, quhilk I suppose was treasoun.

Item quhair it is alleagit that I should haif condemned the doctrine annunced
and taught by the Ministry of Edinburgh, and to have allowed only concerning
obedience to the Prince, I confess and protestis before God that I never
vnderstud nor it knew any thing bot sincerity and vprightnes in the doctrine
of the Ministeris of Edinburgh in that point, nor in any other.

Forder, I confess I was the author of the Act, dischargeing the Ministeris
stipends, that did not subscribe those acts of Parliament quhairwith GOD has
justly recompensed my self.

As for any violent course, it is knawen well enough quho was the author
thairof, and my pairt was tried at the imprisonment of Master Nicol Dalglische,
May. Patrik Malvill, M. Thomas Iak, and vthers.

Moreover I grant I was moir bussie with sum Bishops of England in prejudice
of the discipline of our Kirk, partly quhen I was their, and partly by our
mutual intelligence sensyn then, became a good christian, mikle less a
faithful Pastor.

Nether is their any thing that moir eshameth me then my often disceauing and
abusing of the Kirk heir to foir by confessionnes, subscriptionnes,
protestationnes, etc. quhilk be far from me now and evir hereafter, Amen.

Sic subscribitur, our Brother in the Lord M. Patrik Adamsonne.

AS quhair our wisdoms desires to haif mine own opinion concerning the buke of
the Declaratiun of the Kings intentioun, the samen is at moir length declared
in the confession quhilk I haif exhibit already, quhairin I haif condemned all
the hole artikles thairin contained, like as by these presents I condemn
them.

As quhair e require quhat became of the bukes of the assemble, all quhilkis I
had preserved hole unto the returning of the Lords and Ministry out of
England, and if I had noth preserved them, my Lord of Arrane intendit to haif
maid tha^ be cast into the fire: and upon a certane day in Falkland, befoir
then war, delivered to the Kings Majesty. The Bischope of N. accumpanied with
M. Henry Hamiltonne rent out sum leafes, and destroyed sic things as maid
agains our estaite, and that not without my awn special allowance.

As for the bukes quhilk I haif set forth, I haif set forth no thing except a
commentary upon the first chapter of Paul to Timothy, quhilk I did direct to
the Kings Majesty, and kept no examplar beside me, and understands that M.
Iohnne Geddie gat the samyn from the King, and lent it to M. Robert Hebpurne.

Farther I wrote nothing, but only maid mention in my preface upon the
Apocalypse, that I should write a buke called Psyllus, quhilk (being prevented by
disease) God would not suffer me to finishe, and the little thing that was done,
I cawsed to destroy it.

And likewayes I haif set forth the buke of Job with the Apocalypse, and the
lamentationnes of Jeremy, all in verse, to be prented in England: as for my
intention I am not disposed or in ability to writ any thing at this time,
and if it pleased God I were restored to my health, I wald change my style as
Caietanus did at the council of Trent.

As for Sutcliuins buke agains the form and ordour of the Presbitreis, so far
am I from being partenar in that warke, that as I know noth the man, nor had
never any intelligence of the warke befoir it was done: so if it please God to
give me days, I will wreit in his contrary to the mantenance of the contrary
confessioun.

Prays the Brethren to be reconciled and to be at unity and peax with me, and
in toke^ of their forgiveness, because health sufferis me noth to go over to the
College quhair e are presently assembled (quhilk I would gladly do to ask
God and ou forgivenes) that it would please ou to repair hither, that I may do
it heir.

Moreover, I condemn by this my subscription quhatsoeuer is contaned in the
Epistle Dedicatorie to the K. Majesty, befoir my buke on the Revelation, that
is either slanderous or offensive to the brethren: Also I promise to satisfy
the brithren of Edinburgh or any other Kirk of this Realm, according to a good
conscience in quhatsoevir they find thamselfes justly offended, and contrary
to the word of God in any of my speeches, actions, or proceedings quhilk haif
passed from me.

And concerning the commentary upon the first Epistle of Paul to Timothy,
Because there are diverse things thairin contained offensive, and that tendis to
allow of the estait of Bishops, vtherways then Gods word can suffer, I
condemn the samen.

The pages befoir written, dytted by me Master Patrike Adamsone and written at
my command by my servitor Master Samuel Cunninghame, and by his hand drawin
in the blankes, I subscribe with my own hand, as acknawlegeit by me in
sincerity of conscience in the presence of God, Befoir these witnesses direct
to me from the Synodal assembly, because of my inhabilitie of body to repair
toward them, James Monipenny onnegar of Pitmillie, Andro Wood of Stravithie,
David Murray Portionare of Ardeit, Master David Russell, Master William
Murray Minister at Disart, Master Robert Wilkie, David Fargusonne, with vthers
diuerss.

Sic subscribitur, Master Patrik Adamsone.
David Fargusoun witness. Master Nicol Dalgleische. James Mompenny of
Pitmillie, witness. Andro Wood of Stravithie, witness. Master Robert Wilkie,
witness. David Murray with my hand witness. Master David Russell. Master
David Spenss. Master Iohnne Caldelewth. Master William Murray.

8. April. 1591.
Master Patrike Adamsones owen answer and refutation of the Buke falsely
called The Kings declaration.
IHaif interprised of mere remorse of conscience to wreitt against a buke
called The Declaration of the Kings Majesty's intention. Albeit it conteanith
little or nothing of the Kings awin intention bot my awin at the time of the
writting theirof: and the corrupt intentionnes of sic as for the time were about
the King and abused his minority. Of the quhilk buke and contents their of
compyled by me at the command of sum chief courteours for the time (as is
befoir wrettin) I sall shortly declair my opinioun, as the infirmity of
sickness and weakness of memory will permit.

First, In the hole buke is no thing co^tamed but assertionnes of lies,
ascribing to the Kings Majesty that quhairof he was not culpable: For albeit
as the time went, his Majesty could haif suffered these things to haif been
published in his Realm, it his Majesty was nevir of that nature to haif
revealed any manes persoun, or to vpbraid any man with calumneis, quhairof
their is a number contained in that buke.

Secondly, In the Declaration of the second act of Parliament their is
mention made of Master Andro Melvill, and his preachinges most wrangfullie
condemned in special, as factious and seditious, albeit his Majesty has had
a livelie trial of that manes fidelity and truth in all proceedinges from
time to time. True it is, he is earnest and zealous, quho can abide no
corruption (quhilk most vnadvisedlie I attributed to a fyrie and salt humor)
quhilk his Majesty finds by experience to be true, for he allows weil of
him, and knawith things that were alleged upon him to have been falls and
contruved treachery.

Their ar contained in that second act of Parliament diverse vtheris falls
intentions for to defame the ministry, and to bring the Kirk of God in hatred
and invie with their Prince and Nobility, burdening and accusing the
Ministeris falsely of sedition and other crimes quhairof they war innocent, as
likeways it is wrettin in the samen Act and Declaration thairof, that soverane
and supreme powar, partaineth to the King in materis ecclesiastical, quhilk is
worthy to be condemned, and not to be contained amang christian acts, quhair
the powar of the word is to be extolled, above all the powar of Princes, and
them to be brought under subjection to the samen.

The ferd act condemned the Presbiterie as ane judgment not allowed by the
Kings law, quhilk is a very slender argument, for as concerning the authority
of the presbytery we haif the samen expressed in the Gospel of Saint Matthew,
cap 18. quhair Christ co^mandes To show the Kirk, quhilk authority, being
commanded by Christ, and the Acts of Parliament forbidding it, we should rather
obey God than man. And it the pres-byterie lackith nevir the Kings authority
for the allowance thairof from the beginning, save only at that hour of
darkness, quhe^ he was abused through evil company.

As for any other thing that is contained in this act agains any order or
proceeding of the presbytery, it is to be esteemed that no thing was done by
the presbytery, without wisdom, discretion and judgment, and so has
received approbation again by the Kirk, quhairvnto also I understand his
Majesty has given allowance, ratified and approvid the same, quhilk should be
a sufficient reason, to repress all men's curiosity, that ather have or it
would find fault with the samme.

The last article contains the establishing of ane Bishop quhilk has no
warrant of the word of God, but is grunded upon the policy of the invention of
man, quhairvpon the primacie of the Pope or antichrist is risen, quhilk is
worthy to be disallowed and forbidden, because the number of the Eldership that
hes jurisdiction and oversight as well of visitation as admission, will do the
samyn far mair authenticklie, godly, and with greater zeal, then a Bishop,
quhoise cair commo^lie is not upon God and his dewtie, bot upon the world,
quhairvpo^ his chief attenda^ce is. Consider how that office hes been used
these five hudreth eiris begone, with quhat cruelty and tyranny it has been
exercised, e sall find it to haif been the chief cause that has in every
country suppressed the word of God: quhilk salbe evident to all that read the
history of the Kirk. As for my awen opinion, it seems to be nearest the
truth and fordest from all kind of ambition, that the Brithren in equal
degree, assemble tha^selfes under their head Christ, and their every man
discharge his office cairfullie as he is commanded. And because weakness of
memory and seiknes suffer me noth at length to discourse these matters, as I
would, I must request the good reader, to assure him self, that I haif written
this without co^pulsion or persuasion of any man with ane upright heart, and
haif delivered the same with a perfect sincerity of mind so far as infirmity
of flesh and blood does suffer, as God shall judge me at the latter day, and
that the same reader account of quhat soevir things are omitted, that then are
to be imputed to my imbecillitie of memory, and the present sickness, and not
to my goodwill, quhilk was (I protest) to half condemned every point, ea evin
to the false narration of the Bankit, and all the rest contained in that little
treatise called The Kings Majesty's intention, according as (I acknowledge) yen
deserve to be condemned by the censure and judgment of the Kirk, To the quhilk
always I submit my self in quhatsumevir thing I haif either in word or wreitt
attempted, either in that forsaid Declaratioun or vtherwayes. By these
presents subscriuit with my hand. At Santandr of the xij. of May 1591. Befoir
these witnesses, Master David Black, Minister at Sanctandrof, Master Robert
Wilkie, principal of Saint Leonardes College, Master Iohnne Aittoun of
Emnathe, Master William Russell.

Sic subscribitur, Patrik Adamsone.
Master David Black, witness Georg Ramsay. M. Iohnne Anthinlek. William
Lermouth. Patrik Guthire. Charles Watsonne scribe.


I Master Patrik Adamson, declaires that this confession and declaration
befoir written, is my awen confession, given with my heart, and subscriuit with
my hand, Befoir the witnessis under witte^, vndersubscriuing with inc at my
request and desire, At Sanctandrof, the tent day of Inni, the eir of God jx vc
four score ellewin.

M. P. Adamson.
David Carnegy of Colluthie, witness. William Scot of Abbotishall, witness.
Alexander Bruce of Erlishall, witness. Borthirk of Gordonshall. M. William
Russell. William Lermouth, Thomas Kingzo. M. Robert Wilkie. M. Andro Moncreif.
M. David Black. M. Andro Huntar, scribe of the Provincial Assembly.



