A DEFENSATIVE against the Plague: Containing two parts or treatises: the
first, showing the means how to preserve us from the dangerous contagion
thereof: the second, how to cure those that are infected therewith.

Whereunto is annexed a short treatise of the small Pox: Showing how to
govern and help those that are infected therewith.

Published for the love and benefit of his Country by Simon Kellwaye Gentleman.

Ecclesiasticus. cap. 38. God has created meddesens of the earth, and he that
is wise will not contemn them.

AT LONDON, Printed by John Windet, dwelling near Powles Wharfe at the Sign
of the Crossekeyes, and are there to be soulde. 1593.

To the right Honorable, Robert Deuorax, Earl of Essex and Ewe, Vicount of
Hereforde, Lord Ferrer of Chartley, Borcher, and Louayne, Master of the Queens
Majesty's Horse, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, and one of her
Majesty's Honorable privy Counsel, your Honors dutiful and loving servant
Simon Kellwaye, wishes a long and happy life, with increase of honor and
virtue.
PLato (Right Honorable) learnedly, (I might say Deuinely) wrote, that men were
not borne (only) for them selves, but for their Country, their parents, and
friends. The Stoikes in his time held, that all things that were created, had
their being for man's use. Men (alone) were begotten, to be mutual helps each
to other. The Romans when their estate most flourished, accounted him amongst
the number of the unfortunate, that during his life did not manifest (in some
one public benefit or other) his affection and thankful heart, to the
place wherein he first breathed, insomuch as Marcus Otho the Emperor, and
Marcus Curtius a Roman Knight, as well to free them selves from the
mallconceiued opinion of the people, as to make known to the world, that they
were their countries devoted friends and welwillers, willingly and voluntarily
thrust them selves into inevitable dangers, in which they offered the sacrifice
of their lives for the safety of their Country, and finished their sorrowful
tragedies with the general applause and admiration of all men. If these
Heathens (having none but nature for their guide) proceeded so far in such
exceeding love and zeal toward their Country, as they preferred the
tranquillity and peace thereof, before their private commodities, liberties,
and lives, how justly may they condemn us (that challenge the name of
Christians) since our good actions and endeavors want weight to balance down
theirs. But it is no marvel, for in this declining and dotage of the world,
the most part of men are prone to follow their own preferments, delighting in
self-love, and greedely snatching at the top of fickle fortunes wheel,
(wherein the worlds summum bonum is fixed) which with the least touch
ouerturnes, laying the heedles climer in the dust, as they have greater regard
and respect unto their private proffit and advancement (be it never so
worthless) wherein they fondly distrust the providence of God, then to the
good of their country (how necessarily soever it require their help) wherein
they show their neglect of d^tie, and stayne them selves with the filth of
ingratitude, then which nothing (in a reasonable creature) can be more faulty,
for creatures unreasonable naturally abhor it. The consideration whereof,
has animated me (amongst many thousands the unworthiest) in this dangerous
time of sickness (not unlikely to prove more dangerous, the worst season of
the year approaching) wherein God has already drawn his sword against us,
and stricken some few, and except we cause him by our speedy repentance to
sheath it, he (no doubt) has determined to strike us at the quick, how
fearfully the wrath of God consumes, if his indignation be once kindled, we
all know: but who shall be able to abide it? let us therefore that have not yet
felt his fury, become wise by the view of others miseries, the burnt child
shuns the fire, but we (far more foolish then children) cast our selves
headlong into the flame, notwithstanding we see the ashes of our friends burnt
before us. To publish for the benefit of al peopl that list to read it, and put
it in practice, a treatise containing a method to preserve us from the Plague,
as also how to order, govern, and cure those that are infected therewith:
Collected out of the authorities of the most excellents, both former and later
writers, and for the greatest part thereof observed, and tried by mine own
experience: this being the first public bud that has sprung of my labors,
and the orphant of my studies, I present unto your Lordship as a pledge of my
zeal and humble duty toward you, and your honorable and matchless virtues,
de^iued in part from your noble Father, but more plentifully enriched with your
invincible mind, and peerless endeavors, wherein you manifest to the eye of
the world, the true Idea of perfect nobility, leave to succeeding posterity,
a memorable remembrance of your never dying fame, and give encouragement to all
noble minds, to imitate (though unable to match your honorable resolutions.)
If your Lordship deigne to patronize my endeavors, (far unworthy so honorable
a Patron) I shall be securely protected from the venomous teeth of all carpers,
bear (with ease) the burden of their reproaches, waieng as light as wind: and
with a favorable aspect from you, (as from the worlds bright eye) disperse all
the foggie mistes of their false conceived thoughts. My labors want not their
reward, if they win your good word, nor my mind his desire, if you vouchsafe
to favor. Thus wishing your Lordship as many happy years as virtues, and no
fewer virtues then the firmament affords lights, commending my labors to your
honorable protection, I humbly take my leave, this 25. of March. 1592.

Your Honors most dutiful Servant to command, Simon Kellwaye.

To the friendly Reader.
WHen I considered with my self (gentle Reader) the great calamity, misery,
and most distressed state of our Country, on which it has pleased God to
inflict the heavy scourge of his wrath, by imposing on them that poisonous
infection the plague, I therefore (as one partaker of their grief and sorrow)
seeing also the same contagion so generally dispersed throughout this land, and
not finding any english author that has to my content written the means how
to preserve and keep us from the contagion thereof, have thought it good to
publish this small treatise under the title and name of a defensatiue against
the Plague. Which work I have collected and drawn from sundry both ancient
and later writers, the which being shaddowed under the calm shroude of
ancient consent, and strengthened with the abundant sap of late experience
(as well mine own, as others) I here present the same, not so exquisitely
plotted with so orderly a method, or so finely pollished with so filed an
eloquence, thereby to breed a delight to the learned, which would be a
loathing to the unlearned, I have therefore thought best to disclose it, even
in the playnest manner I could devise, whereby the simpler sort might reap the
commodity thereof, whose safety I tender, and for whose sakes I have taken
this pains. I doubt not but that some ( Aristarchus or other) whose filthy
stomachs being inflamde with malice, will attempt to nip off the crop of my
future hope, obiecting the barrennes of my soil wherein it first took root,
and my want of skill in trimming and proyning it as it would require to be
such, as small hope of fruit is to be looked for to proceed thereof, but high
disdain wills no man good, I give them leave to gloss as they list, knowing
it most frivolous to afford unto such an answer, seeing in stead of reason
there comes nothing from them but either a disdainefull smile, or a
scornful mock (but it skilleth not) since many of my ancients have tasted of
their malice, whom I may justly compare to Antiphilos, that peerless
pickthancke. Only upon this hope do I rest, that as in good will and love I
have done it, so the well disposed will censure it in the best sort, and where
defects are (as I doubt not of many) they will in friendly and charitable
manner correct and amend the same, which may occasion me to take some further
pains hereafter. Farewell. From my house this 25. of March. 1593.

Thine in all friendly love, S. K.

George Baker, in commendation of the Author.
AMongst all the heinous offenses that ever were, none were in time past so
sharply punished, nor more strayter laws made, then for ingratitude: and in my
judgment nothing can more grieve an honest mind (especially where good is
deserved) then to be recompenst with evil. I do not think that this book
can pass clean away with the good liking of every one, but that it will
drink of the same envious cup, that other famous works heretofore have done.
I could rehearse a number that have complained thereof, whose eternal fame
shall never be extinguished. The Author of this treatise, his good and zealous
intent, and sufficiency in his profession, I know to be such, as deserves
well. His willing and godly mind to do his country good, (not only this book)
but also many people both rich and poor that have already received help at
his hands, can and will testify the same. This which he has written is no new
invention, but the ground thereof allowed, both of ancient and later writers:
and besides he has considered that in every place a good Physician is not to
be gotten at all times, so that the party infected may be dead before any such
help can be had, (yea) and the most part of the best of them will not hazard
them selves in so dangerous an enterprise: he considering the same, has here
taught the most easy and approved medicines, with the whole order of the cure,
not only for such as are infected, but also have to preserve them that are
sound. What does he deserve that thus has done, let the better sort judge:
for the rest, I think if either they have the fear of God, any spark of
honesty, or judgment in any thing, they will for shame hold their peace,
least their ignorance and hatred bewray their folly, and so deserve the same
punishment which the wisest sort have already set down, which I hope none
will so wilfully hazard to incur. Now, considering his zealous intent, it is
the part of every good mind, to encourage him in so godly, and good an
enterprise, whereby others may be animated to do the like: and therefore
considering the goodness of the matter, and necessity of the cause, the whole
common wealth is to embrace him, who looks but only for a thankful
acceptance in lewe of his travel, which is the least may be yielded him.
Farewell. From my chamber at the Court this 6. of April. 1593.

G. Baker.

The Author to the Reader.
FOr that there are diverse Receats in this book which are written in Latin,
because in some of them many things which enter therein can not be brought into
an apt english phrase, neither are they to be had, but only at the
Apottycaries, and because their quantities are written according to the Latin
order, I have here set down what the signification of every weight and
measure does mean.

A handful is written thus M.j. Half a handful thus M.ss. A little handful
thus P.j. A Scruple thus.j. A Dram thus.j. An ounce thus.j. Half an ounce,
or half a dram thus.ss. --.ss. An ounce and half, thus.j.ss. A Grain thus
G.j. The number of any thing, thus no. j. etc. A Pound, is thus l.j. So much as
shall suffice, thus q. 5. (Ana) is of either of them. xx. Graynes make a
Scruple. iij. Scruples, make a Dram. viij. Drammes, make an ounce. xij.
Ounces, make a pound.
To the Reader.
ANd for such faults as by the Printer are omitted, let me crave this favor
at thy hands, that before thou enter to read this Book, to bestow a little
pains with thy pen to correct them, so shall thou make the true meaning and
sense of the matter the more plain unto thee, and such faults as by a
scarborrowd ouer-reading I have found, as also the correcting of the same, I
have here following specified.

Farewell, from my house at Kingsmill in Deuon the 8. of April 1593. Thine in
all friendly love, S. K.

Faults escaped in Printing.
Fol. line. fault. Cor. 4. 38. forsyrrop the syrrop 30. 7. venomous matter the
venomous matter 39. 64. pockes were fo^nd pockes are found

A defensatiue against the plague: The first treatise.
Cap. 1. What the plague is.
THe ancient physicians in times past have greatly doubted what the essential
cause of this disease, which we commonly call the plague, or pestilence should
be: yet all do agree that it is a pernicious and contagious fever, and reckned
to be one of the number of those which are called Epidemia, chiefly proceeding
of adusted and melancholic blood, which may be easily perceived by the
extreme heat and inflammation which inwardly they do feel that are infected
therewith, first assalting the heart, and astonishing the vital spirits, as
also by the exterior Carbunkles and botches which it produces: whose
malignitie is such, both in young and old, rich and poor, noble and ignoble,
that using all the means which by art can, or may be devised, yet in some it
will in no sort give place, until it has by death conquered the party
infected therewith.

Cap. 2. Cause of the plague.
THere are diverse causes whereof this disease may proceed, as sundry writers
do aledge, as by over great and unnatural heat and dries, by great rain and
inundatyons of waters, or by great store or rotten and stinking bodies, both
of men and beasts, lying upon the face of the earth unburied, as in the time
of wars has been seen, which does so corrupt the air, as that thereby our
Corn, Fruits, Herbs, and waters which we daily use for our food and
sustenaunce, are infected: also it may come by some stinking doonghils,
filthy and standing pooles of water, and unsavory smelles which are near the
places where we dwell, or by thrusting a great company of people into a close
narrow, or straight room, as most commonly we see in ships, common Gayles,
and in narrow and close lanes and streets, where many people do dwell
together, and the places not orderly kept clean and sweet. But most commonly
in this our time it is dispersed amongst us, by accompaning our selves with
such as either have, or lately have had the disease them selves; or at least
have been conversant with such as have been infected therewith. But for the
most part it does come by receiving into ^ur custody some clothes, or such
like things that have been used about some infected body, wherein the infection
may lie hidden a long time: as has been too too often experimented with
repentance too late in many places. It may also come by dogs, cats, pigs, and
weasells which are prone and apt to receive and carry the infection from place
to place. But howsoever it does come, let us assure our selves that it is a
just punishment of God ^ayde upon us, for our manyfold sins and
transgressions against his divine Majesty: for as Seneca says, quicquid
patimur ab alto venit, what crosses or afflictions soever we suffer it comes
from the Lord, either for a trial of our faith, or a punishment for our
sins. Wherefore; to distinguish any farther thereof, I think it needless:
for my intent is in brief sort so exactly as I can; to show the means how to
prevent the same, as also how to cure it when we are infected. But before I
enter to entreat thereof, I think it not a miss to show what forewarninges
and tokens are given us before hand of the coming thereof, thereby the better
to prevent the same by prayer and repentance.

Cap. 3. Warninges of the plague to come.
AVicen a noble Physician says, that when we see the natural course of the
air, and seasons of the year to be altered, as when the spring time is cold
clowdie, and dry, the harvest time stormy and tempestuous, the morninges and
euenings, to be very cold, and at noone extreme hot, these do foreshew the
plague to come. Also, Fiery impressions.
when we see fiery impressions in the firmament, specially in the end of
summer, as commets and such like, and that in the beginning of harvest we see
great store of little frogs, Frogs and Toades.
red toades and myse on the earth abounding extraordinarily: or when in summer
we see great store of toades creeping on the earth having long tails, of an
asheye color on their backs, and their bellies spotted and of diverse colors,
and when we see great store of gnattes to swymme on the waters, Gnattes.
or flying in great companyes together, or when our trees and Herbs do
abound with caterpillars, spiders, Trees and Herbs.
moathes and such like, which devour the leaves on the trees, and herbs on
the earth, it shows the air to be corrupt, and the plague shortly after to
follow. Also, Beasts.
by the beasts of the field, we may perceive it, (especially sheep) which
will go mourning with their heads hanging down toward the ground, and
diverse of them dying without any manifest cause known unto us. Children.
Also when we see young Children flock them selves together in companyes, and
then will feign some one of their company to be dead amongst them and so will
solemnize the burial in a mournful sort, this is a token which has been
well observed in our age, to foreshew great mortallitie at hand. Ryuers.
Also, when we see ryuers of water to ouerflow without any manifest cause, or
soddenly vanish away and become dry; and when clear wellspringes do suddenly
become foul and trobled. Also, when the small Pox does generally abound,
^oxe.
both in young and old people, all these do foreshew the plague to come.

Cap 4. Shows how to prevent the plague.
THere are three principal means, how to prevent this contagious disease: the
first and chiefest is to acknowledge our manifold sins and wickedness unto
almighty God our heavenly father, with a hearty repentance and amendment of
our former sins committed against his divine majesty.

The second means is to fly far off from the place infected, and as
Rondoletius says, not over hastily to return there again, for fear of an
afterclap: which saying is confirmed by Valetius, in these words, non enim
morietur in bello, qui non est in illo: and the farther from it, the safer
shall we be, yet were it a very uncharitable course, that all which are of
abillytie should so do: for then how should the poor be relieved, and good
orders observed: but for children it were best to send them far off from the
place, because their bodies are most apt to receive the infection, as also for
that they cannot so continually use antidotes and preservatives, which by their
great heat may endanger them almost so much as the disease it self.

The third means consists chiefly in three points, which are these: Order,
Diet, and Physical helps. For the first you must have a care that your houses
be kept clean and sweet, not suffering any foul and filthy clothes or
stinking things to remain in, nor about the same: and in summer season to
deck your windows, and straw you^ floores with sweet and wholesome herbs,
flowers and leaves as Mintes, Balm, Pennyriall, Lauender, Time, Mar^oram, red
Roses, Carnations, Gellefloures and such like, for your windows, your floores
to be strawed with green Rushes, and Mynts, Oken and willow leaves, Uine
leaves and such like: your windows which stand toward the North and East,
do you always keep open in the day time, (if the air be clear and that no
infected and unsavory smell be near the same) as fogs, doonghils, and such
like, and every morning before you open either your doors or windows, as also
in the evening when you go to bed, cause a good fire to be made in your
chamber, and burn some Odoriferous or sweet perfume in the midst thereof, as
hereafter I will show you, or in steed thereof, some Juniper, Herbs good for a
perfum^.
Frankincense, Baye leaves, Rosmary, Lauender, Marioram, or such like, which
you must always have dried in a reddynes, and so in the fume or smoke thereof,
to breath and perfume the clothes which you are to wear.

A good perfume in summer season.
Rose water and vinegar, of either six sponefulls. Rindes of sour Citrons and
lymons Baye leaves
of either: the weight of two pence which is j.. Camphire the weight of iij.
pence which is half..


The herbs and rindes must be dried, and put altogether in a perfuming pan,
or in steed thereof a pewter dish set on a chafer of coals, will serve the
turn.

An other good perfume in winter.
Red roses Marioram and Myrtles of either a little handful. Callamint Iuneper
berries of either one. which is the weight of vij. pence. Ladanum of either
one. which is the weight of vij. pence. Benjamin of either one. which is the
weight of vij. pence. Frankincense of either one. which is the weight of vij.
pence.
of either one. which is the weight of vij. pence.


The herbs, berries, and roses, being dried, must be made in gross powder, as
also the gummes, and so mixed together, and when ye list, cast some part
thereof on a chafer of coals, and receive the fume thereof.

Cap. 5.
NOw having received the fume as aforesayde^ before you go forth of your
chamber, eat some Cordial electuary or preservative, as hereafter you shall
find choice, which I have always used with good and happy succes, after
taking of the Cordial, wash your face and hands with clean water, wherein
you must put a little vinegar, and then if you list, you may break your fast
with some good bread and butter, and in winter season a poycht Egg is good
eaten with some vinegar: and for plethoricke and melancholicke bodies, it were
good to drink a drafte of wormwood wine, Wormwood wine commended.
in the morning fas^ing, because it resists putrefaction in the pletho^icke,
and purges bilous matter in the melancholic.

An excellent good preservative; which I have always used with good success.
Conserve of Roses and borrage flowers of either two ounces. Minardus,
Mitridat, Andromachus triacle of either half an ounce. Dioscordium, two
drammes. Dialkermes, one dram. Powder of the seed of Citrons pilled one
dram. Syrop of lymons and sower Citrons of either half an ounce.


Compounde all these together, in the form of an opiat you may eat hereof
every morning, the quantity of three beans, and drink a drafte of Rennish
wine, beer or ale, after it: but for Children and such as are of tender
years, so much as a bean thereof is sufficient, and give them only beer or
ale after it: the taking hereof every second or third day will suffice, if you
go not into any suspected company.

An other excellent good preservative.
Kernels of walenuts and figs, of either four ounces. Leaves of rue one ounce
and half. Tormentill roots iiij. drammes. Rind of sour Citrons one dram.
Right Bolarmoniake vj. drammes. Fine Mirre ij. scruples. Saffron one scruple.
Salt half a dram. Syrop of Citrons and Lymons, iiij. ounces.


The herbs, roots, and rindes must be dried, the nuttes must be blanched, and
the bolarmonyake must be made in fine powder, and then washed in the water of
scabios, and dried again, you must pound the figs and walenuts in a stone
mortar severally by them selves very small, all the rest must be made in fine
powder, and so mix them altogether in the mortar, and then add thereto Syrop
by little and little, and so incorporat them all together: you may give this in
the same quantytie, and in like sort as the other before.

An other very good
Of the confection a foresaid made with Nuttes, iiij. ounces. Minardus
mitridat, iiij. drammes. Andromachus triacle, ij. drammes. Fine terrae
Sigillatae, iiij. scruples. Syrop of Lymons, one ounce.


Compounde all these together in the mortar, as the other before, you may give
hereof the weight of a groate or vipence, every second or third day, and drink
a draft of Rennish or White wine after it in winter season, but in the heat of
the year, Sorrel water is best, and in the spring Scabios or Cardus benedictus
water.

Also, so much Triacle of Andromachus description eaten every morning as a
bean, with a little conserve of Roses, is a very excellent good preservative.

Valetius, does greatly commend the taking of three or four grains of the
Bezoar stone every morning, in a sponefull of Scabios water.

I cannot here sufficiently commend the electuary called Dioscordium, which is
not only good to resist the infection but does also expel the venomous matter
of those which are infected, being taken every morning and evening, the
quantity of a bean, and drink a draft of Rennish or White wine after it, in
winter season, but in summer a draft of beer or ale is best.

In strong and rusticall bodies, Garlic good in rusticall bodies.
and such as are daily laborers, Garlike only eaten in the morning with some
Butter and Salt at breakfast, drinking a cup of beer or ale after it, has
been found to be very good: which is greatly commended by Gallen, who calls
it the poor man's Triacle: but in the sanguin, dainty, and idle bodies, it may
not be used because it over heateth the blood, causes headache, and universally
inflameth the whole body.

Cap. 6.
NOw when you have taken any of the foresaid preservatives, it were good and
necessary to wear upon the region of the heart, some sweet bag or quilt that
has power to resist venem, and also to carry in your hand some sweet
Pomander, Nodule, or Nosegaie, that will comfort the heart, resist venem, and
recreate the vital spirits, as here following is specified and set down.

An excellent quilt or bag.
Arsenike cristaline, one ounce. Diamargaritum frigidum, ij. scruples.
Diambrae, one scruple.


You must grind the Arsenike in small powder, and then with some of the
infusion of Gum Draggagant in Rose water, you must make a paste, then spread it
on a cloth which must be six inches long, and five inches broad, and spread it
thick: then cover it with an other cloth and so quilt it together, which being
done, fasten it in an other bag of Crimson taffetie or Sarsnet, and so wear it
against the heart all the day time, but at night leave it off: and here you must
take heed, that when you sweat, you do take it away, for otherwise it will
cause the skin to amper a little. There are some writers which do utterly
forbid the wearing of Arsenike: but thus much I can say; that I have given this
bag unto diverse to wear, with most happy and good success, for never did I
yet know any one that has worn this bag, and used any of the electuaries
aforesaid, that has been infected with the plague, but for any inconvenience
or accident that has happened thereby, I never found any hitherto, other then
the ampring of the skin as aforesaid.

An other bag.
Ir^ios, half an ounce. Calamus aromat Ciperus, of either one dram and
half. Storax, Calam, root of Angelica of either three drammes. Cloves, Mace,
of either one dram. Red roses dried, iij. drammes. Pellemountaine, Peniriall,
Callamint, Elder flowers, of either one dram and half. Nutmegs, Cinnamon,
Yellow sanders, of either one dram. Nardi Italicae, one dram. Amber greece,
and musk, of either six grains.


You must pound all these in powder and then quilt them in a bag of Crymson
taffatie as aforesaid.

A Pomander good in the summer time.
The rind of Citrons, Red Roses, Nenuphare roses, Yellow sanders, of either
half a dram. Storax liquid, Benjamin, of either one dram. Myrre, two
scruples. Ladanum, one dram and half. Musk and amber, of either six
grains.


Powder all that is to be poudred, and then work them together in a whote
mortar, with a whote pestell, adding unto it in the working some of the
Musselage of draggagant dissolved in sweet rose Water, or rose Vinegar, and so
make your Pomander.

An other good one for the winter time.
Storax liquid, Benjamin, Storax calamint, Ladanum, and Myrre of either half a
dram. Cloves, one scruple. Nutmegs, Cinnamon, of either half a scruple. Red
roses, Yellow sanders, Lignum alloes and Irrios. of either half a dram.
Calamus aromaticus, rind of a Citron. of either four grains. Amber greece,
Musk, and siuet, of either six grains.


You may make up this, as the other before, with some Musselage of the infusion
of Gum draggagant, infused in Rose water.

A good Nodule for the summer season.
Flowers of Violets red Roses and Nenuphare. of either one dram. Red, White,
and Yellow sanders of either half a dram. Camphire, xij. grains,
Cause all these to be beaten in gross powder, then knit them all together in a
piece of Taffetie and when you will use it, then wet it in rose Water and a
little Vinegar, and so smell to it.

Another Nodule for the winter season.
The dried leaves of Mintes, Marioram, Time, Peniriall, Lauender,
Pellemountaine, and Balm,
of either a little handful. Nutmegs, Cloves, Cinnamon, Angelica roots, Lignum
alloes,
of either one dram. Saffron, two scruples.


Cause all these to ^e infused in rose Water and Vinegar, one whole night, then
wet a sponge in the liquor thereof and knit it in a piece of Taffatie, or your
handcarchiefe, whereunto you must smell often times.

A Nosgaie for the same purpose.
Herb grace, three branches. Rosmarie, Marioram, Myntes, and Time, of either
one branch. Red rose buddes and Carnations, of either three or four.


Make your Nosegay herewith, then sprinkle him over with rose Water, and some
rose Vinegar, and smell often unto it. Also, when you suspecte to go into any
dangerous or infected company do you always carry in your mouth a piece of
the root of Angelica, the rind of a Citron dried, or a great Cloue, which
must be first infused or ^^eeped one whole night in rose Water and Vinegar.

Cap. 7.
FOr that there is not a greater enemy to the health of our bodies then
costiunes, both in the time of the plague and otherwise, I have here set down
how and by what means you may keep your self solyble, which you must use
once in four and twenty hours, if otherwise you have not the bennefit of
nature by custom.

A suppositorie.
Take two sponefuls of Honey and one sponefull of Baye salt, small pounded,
boil them together until it grow thick, always stirring it in the boiling,
then take it from the fire, and if you list you may ad one dram of (Ihera
picra simplex) unto it: and so stir them well together, and when it is almost
cold, make up your suppositories, of what length and bigness you list: and when
you minister any you must first annoint it with butter or Sallet oil: you may
keep these a whole year if you put them in Barrowes morte or grease, and so
cover them up close therein.

A good Glister.
Mallows, Mercury, Beets, Violets, Red Fennel,
of either one handful. Seeds of fennel, Annis, Coriander,
of either one dram.


Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of Water, until half the water be
consumed, then strain it, and keep it in a glass close stopped, until you
need, for it will keep a whole week. Take of the same decoction, a pint.

Mel rosarum, or common Honey, one sponefull. Oil of Violets or oil of
Olives, three ounces, S^lte, one dram, The yolke of an Egg or two.
Mix all these together in a mortar and so give it warm in the morning, or
two hours before supper: and if ye add unto this one ounce of Diacatholicon
it will be the better.

Raysins laxatiue how to make them.
White wine, three pintes and half. Senuae, half a pound. Fine white sugar
one pound. Currantes, two pounds.
You must infuse the Senue in the wine, in a pot close stopped, and let it stand
in a warm place, four and twenty hours, then strain it, and add to the
strayning the Currants being clean picked and washed, and lastly the Sugar,
boil all together on an easy fire, until the wine be consumed, having care
that you do always stir it about in the boiling for fear of burning, then
take them from the fire, and put them up into a clean galley pot, you may eat
one sponefull or two of them a little before dinner, at any time.

A good Ointment to keep on Sollible.
The gaul of an Ox, Oil of violets, of either one ounce. Sheep tallow,
six drammes.
Boil them together on a soft fire until they be incorporated, then take it
from the fire, and add there to.

Alloes cicatrine, one ounce. Baye salt, half an ounce.
The Alloes and Salt must be both made in fine powder, before you put them
into the Oil, then stir them together until it be cold, and when you are
disposed to have a stool, then annoint your fundment therewith, both within
side and without, and if you annoint your navel therewith, it will work the
better.

Good pills to keep one Sollible and do also resist the pestilence.
Alloes, Cicatrine, one ounce. Chosen Myrre, three drammes. Saffron, one dram
and half. Amber greece, six grains. Syrop of limons or Citrons, so much as
shall be sufficient, to make the mass.


You must grind the Alloes, Myrre, and Saffron into small powder, severally by
them selves, then incorporat them altogether, with the syrope: you may give
half a dram or two scrupls thereof, in the evening half an hour before
supper twice or thrice in a week: Rases, would have you to take half a dram
or two scruples of these Pills every day, without using any other preservative
at all, and he has great reason so to esteem of them, for Galen, Auicen, and
all ancient writers in Physic, do hold opinion that Alloes does not only
comfort but purge the stomach from all raw and chollericke humors, and does
also purge and open the veins cal^ed Miserayice, and resists putrefaction:
Myrre does altogether resist, neither will it suffer putrefaction in the
stomach: Saffron, does comfort the heart, and has also a propriety in it to
carry any medicine that is given there with unto the heart, but to conclude,
these Pills will purge all superfluous humors in the stomach, and principal
members: and preserves the blood from corruption.

Cap. 8.
I Must here give you to understand that the infection does often times lie
hidden with in us, with out any manifest sign or knowledge thereof at the
first, and therefore were it good for sanguine bodies and such as do abound
with blood, in the summer season to draw six or eight ounces of blood out of
the basillica vain in the right arm, which is a good means to prevent a
further danger, (as Auicen witnesses) but for full and plethoricke bodies, it
were best to purge them selves once in seven or eight days with some easy and
gentle purgation, as hereafter I will show you: but for lean and spare
bodies; once in fourtene days will be enough at most: for wisely says
Rondoletius, yt it is not only the ve^nemous and contagious air which we
receive that does kill us, but it is the present communicating of that
contagion, with some superfluous humors in our bodies, as in his treatise De
peste appears: therefore now will I show you how to purge the body.

Pills good to purge.
Alloes Cicatrine, ten drammes. Aggaricke, of the whitest, four drammes.
Myrre, Masticke, of either two drammes. Saffron, two scruples.


Make these in fine powder, Phlegm.
then compound them together in a mortar, with so much Oximell simplex, syrrop
of Lymons, or of Sticados, as shall be sufficient, you may give one dram, or a
dram and half of these Pills, half an hour before supper: but for a
chollericke body, Choler.
you must leave out two drammes of the Aggaricke in making of the receipt, and
in place thereof add two drammes of Rubarbe, and for the melancholic,
Mellancholye.
two drammes of Epithimum and give the same quantity in weight.

A good purging potion.
Raysins, the stones picked out and washed, of either one ounce. Polipode of the
oak: Elecampane root dried roots of wild small sorell Succorie roots
cleansed. of either half an ounce. Leaves of Borrage, Buglos, Burnet, Scabios,
Morsus diaboli, Flowers of Borrage, Buglos, Rosmarie, Violets, Broom,
of either a little handful. Seeds of fennel, sour Citrons. of either two
scruples, Shauing of a hearts horn, half a dram.


Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of fair water until half be
consumed, then strain it. Take of the decocti^n aforesaid, three ounces.

Rubarbe, two drammes and half, Cinnamon, half a dram,
Slice them both, and put them with the liquor in a close cup, and so let it
stand to infuse in a warm place, twelve hours, then strain it out strongly,
and add thereto one ounce of the Syrrop of maiden hear, and so drink it
warm, in the morning about six of the clock, and refrain from meat, drink
and sleep two hours after it, this is good in lean and spare bodies: you
may, for a phlegmatic body add in the infusion one dram of Aggaricke
Trosciskated.

A purging powder for such as cannot take Pills.
Alloes cicatrine, one ounce, Myrre, Cinnamon, of either two drammes. Saffron,
one scruple.
Make them all in fine powder, and give one dram, in a draft of white wine.

Flowers stopped, how to provoke them.
For that weemen which have not their natural course on them, are most prove
to receive and take the infection, I have here set down good Pills, which I
have always found excellent, not only for that purpose, but will also resist
the danger of infection.

Alloes cicatrine, one ounce. Roots of Gentian Aristolochia rotunda Dittander,
Saffron,
, of either half a dram. Roots of garden madther, Mitridat,
of either one dram.


Cause them all to be ground in small powder, then mix it with the Mitridate
and some syrrop of Artemesia, or mugworte, give one dram of these Pills
every morning twelve days together, or until her terms break.

Issues commended against the plague.
IN plethoricke and full bodies, I have found nothing more safer in the time of
the plague, then to make them an artificial issue, either in the leg or
arm: for never hitherto have I known any one which has had an Issue, or
Ulcer running on him, that has been infected with the plague. Palmarius, and
Forestus; do both affirm i^ to be true and certain, but here some ignorant
people do hold opinion, that having once an Issue, he must be constrained to
keep it always, which (...) most erroneous for then those which have had
Ulcers running upon them, some six, ten, yea sixetene years, may not be cured
without some Issue to be made in some other place, but therein they deceive
the^ selves, for my self by good proof have often found the contrary in
diverse people which I have cured, some six, some ten, yea sixtene years past,
and yet to this day do remain in perfect good health without any Issues.

Cap 9. What diet we ought to keep.
FOr our diet as Hipocrates teaches us, we must have a care not to exceed in
eating and drinking, but to keep a mean therein, and in any case to beware of
surfeting and drunkenness, which are enemies both to the body and soul, but
as we may not exceed in eating and drinking, so to endure great hunger and
thirst is most dangerous, our meat ought to be of a facile and easy
digestion: partly tending to a drying quality: as Cocks, Capons, Hens,
Pullets, Partridge, Feasants, Quayles, Pigeons, Rabbets, Kydde, Ueale, Mutton,
Birds of the mountains, and such like, but Beef, Porcke, Uenison, Hare, and
Goats flesh is to be refused, and so are all water fowls as Ducke, Swanne,
Goose, Widgen, Teale, and such like, because they are hard to digest, and do
increase ill blood and naghtie Juice in the body: Lambs flesh, because of his
exceeding moisture, F^sh.
is also to be refused, Eggs in the summer not good, but in winter
tolerable: all fishes which are of a hard flesh, whether they be of the sea or
fresh ryuers, are to be allowed. In fresh ryuers the Perch, Barble, Gudgin
Loche, Cool, Troute, and Pyke, are good, and for sea fish, the Gilthed,
Turbet, Sole, Rochet, Gurnard, Lapster, Crabbe, Praunes, Shrimpes, Whiting, and
such like eaten with vinegar. There are some authors which hold opynion that
fish is more better to be eaten then flesh in the great fervent heat of the
year, because they do make a more cold blood in the body then flesh: another
reason is because they do live under the water, they are not infected with any
contagion of the air, as beasts and ^yrdes may be, and therefore more
wholesome, but in my judgment flesh is more wholesome, because it does breed a
more pure and fine Juice in the body, then any fish whatsoever: your bread
ought to be made of pure wheat, not too new, nor (...) old, but of one days
baking, or two at most is best, rye bread is to be eschewed, because of his
great moisture: your drink is best, beer, or ale, not too strong or new, but
the staller and clearer it is, the better: at your meals a draft or two of
Clarret wine is tolerable, but in who^e weather it were good to delay it with
a little water, for (...) does warm the stomach, help digestion, and comfort
the heart

For your pottage you may take in the summer.
Parsley, Lettis, Sorrel, Endive, Succorie. Sperage, Hop-buds, Burnet, Borrage,
Buglos, Time, Myntes, Ysop,
But in winter.
Balm, Bi^taine, Time, Marigolde, Isoppe, Marioram, Mynts and rue are good,
For your sallets, take
Pimpernell, Purslane, Myntes, Sorrel, Horehounde, Young cole, Hop-buds,
Sperage, Time, Tops of fennel Tarregon, Lettis, And watercresses are good.
Capers.
Capers are greatly commended being preserved in Vinegar, and eaten with a
little Oil and Vinegar, and so are Olives very good also.

For your sauce, the Juice of a Lymon Citron or Orrenge is best, Sauce.
the Juice of Sorrel and Uineger is also good.

All raw fruits are to be refused, except those which tend to a sour taste,
Fruits.
as Pomgarnards, dammaske Prunes Pippins, red and sour Cherries, and Walenuts,
Quinches and Pears, preserved are very good eaten after meals.

Pulse.
All kind of pulse is to be refused, as Beans, Pease, and such like, because
they increase wind and make raw humors and ill Juice in the body.

Refrain from Garlike, Onyons, Leekes, Pepper, Musterd, and Rocket, because
they do over heat the body, make adustion of the blood, and cause fumes to
ascend into the head.

Cheese is not good because it does engender gross and thick humors. Milk and
Cheese.
Milk is also to be refused because it does quickly corrupt in the stomach.

Cap. 10. Shows what exercise and order is to be kept.
YOu must beware of all vehement and immoderate exercise, which does provoke
sweat, as is tennis, dancing, leaping, running, footeball, hurling, and such
like: because they do overmuch heat the body, and open the pores of
respiration, whereby the enfected air has the more scope to enter our bodies,
but moderate exercise is very convenient, Whote houses
the use of whote houses at this time, I think very dangerous because it does
too much open the pores.

Walk not into the open air in the morning, before the son has had some
power to cleanse and clear the same, and in any case go not abroad when great
fogs and mystes are upon the earth for it is dangerous: but if urgent occasions
move you: Walking.
then before you go forth of your doors be sure to eat some preservative
first, and then take some good and Odoriferous pomander, Nodule, or Nosegaye in
your hand, as before is showed you. The extreme heat of the day is likewise
to be refused to walk in, because it chafeth the blood: as also in the evening
after the sun is set, for then unsavory and unwholesome Fogs arise out of the
earth: and in any case if you can avoid it come not near any place infected,
but use to walk in the open air and dry ground.

Use Venus combats moderatly, but none at all were better the best time to use
them is three or four hours after supper, before you sleep, and then rest
upon them.

Beware of anger, fear, and pensiuenes of the mind, for by their means the
body is made more apt to receive the infection.

Use pleasant and merry recreations, either with music, pleasant company to
talk with all, or reading some good books.

Beware of sleeping at noone, but specially in the winter season, but in
summer, to take after dinner a nappe of half an hour, or an hour is
tolerable in elderly bodies.

Watch not long in the euenings but two or three hours after supper is a good
time to take your rest.

Cap. 11. Teaches what orders magistrates and rulers of Cities and towns
should cause to be observed.


















wherewithal to buy necessary food, that there to extend their charitable
and godly devotion: for there is nothing that will more increase the plague,
then want and scarsitie of necessary food.

To command that all those which do visit and attend A good cau^at.
and when it is staide, then to cause all the clothes, bedding, and other such
things as were used about the sick, to be all burnt, although at the charge
of the rest of the inhabitants, you buy them all new, for fear least the
danger which may ensue thereby, do put you to a far greater charge and
grief: all these foresaid things are most dangerous, and may cause a
general infection, to the distroying of a whole City, and therefore do wish
that great care be had thereof.

Cap. 12. Does show what you must do when you go to visit the sick.
FIrst before you enter into the house, command that a great fire be made in
the chamber where the sick lies, and that some Odoriferous perfume be burnt
in the midst of the chamber, and before you go to him, eat some Cordial
preservative, and smother your clothes with some sweet perfume, then wet your
temples, ears, nose, and mouth, with Rose water and Ui^egar, mixed together,
then ^a^e in your mouth a p^^ce of the root of Angelica, the rynde of a sour
Citron, or a Cloue, prepared as before is showed, and have some Nosegaye,
Nodule, or Pomander, appropriat, in your hand, which you must always smell
unto, so may you the more boldlier perform your intent: but herewithall you
must have a special care, that during the time you are with the sick, you
stand not betwixt the sick body and the fire, for that is dangerous, because
that the fire of his nature draws all vapors unto it self, A good caveat for
Chirurgions and Barber.
but keep you always on the contrary side, so as the sick may be betwixt you
and the fire and for such as are to let any sick infected body to bleed, yt
were good they did cause the keeper of the sick body, to lay open that arm
or leg which is to be let blood before he approach near? the reason is, for
that most commonly all that are sick in this contagious disease, are for the
most part in a sweat, and therefore soddenly to receive the breath thereof
would be very dangerous.

Now when you have been with any one so infected. Before you go into the
company of any whole and sound people, What we must do when we have been with
the sick.
it were necessary you do stand by a good fire having all the clothes about
you which you did wear when you were with the sick, and then turn and air
your self well thereby, so shall you be sure the less to endanger others by
your company. Thus have I as briefly as I can devise set down all the ordinary
means which my self have used, and by others known to be used, for
preserving you from this contagious and dangerous disease, which in the most
part of people will suffice, but for such as dwell whereas they may have the
counsel of a learned Physician, I do wish them to take his advise, specially
for purging and letting blood, because none can so exactly set down in writing
the perfect course thereof (which may be understood rightly of the common
sort) so well as he which has the sight of the body: for that many bodies are
often times troubled with some one humor abounding more then another, which
here to treat of would be too tedious, neither can it proffit the common
people, for whose sakes I have taken this pains: and now will I show the
signs to know when one is infected therewith, as also which are the laudable
signs and which are the contrary, and lastly the means (by God his
assistance) how for to cure the same.

Cap. 13. Shows the signs of infection.
THe signs and tokens hereof are diverse, as first it is perceived by the
soddaine weakness, loosing, and overthrowing of our natural strength without
any manifest cause thereof going before and sometimes it does begin with a
gnawing and biting in the mouth of the stomach, the pulse will grow weak,
feeble, and unequal, with a great straightnes and heaviness about the heart, as
if some heavy burden or weight were laid thereon, with shortness of
breathing, vomiting, or at least a great desire to vomit, great pain in the
head: insatiable thirst, proceeding of their great interior heat: sluggishnes,
and universal fayntnes of all the body, with a great desire to sleep, and an
astonishment of the mind and vital spirits: and for the most part, they
complain of a great pain which is felt in some one place or places of their
bodies, where the botch or blaine is by nature intended to be thrust forth, yet
some at the first have them appearing: and for the most part, they are taken at
the first with a sharp and rigorous fever.

Good signs.
When the botch or carbunkle comes out in the beginning of the sickness, with
a red color, and yellowish round about it, and that it does quickly come to
maturation, the fever to cease, and the party finds himself eased of his
grief, and quickened in his spirits, these are good and laudable signs of
recover.

Evil signs.
When the botch at the first comes out blackish, or black in color, also
when the botch is opened, the flesh within does look blewe, and that then
there appear not any matter or quitture in the (...), but as it were a spume
or froth issuing out thereof, are ill and deadly signs.

When the botch waxes so hard that by no means it will come to suppuration,
but resists whatsoever is done unto it for the farthering thereof, and so
returns in again into the inward parts soddenly, is a token of soddaine
death at hand, and so is it if either before or after it is broken it look of
a bluish color, or of diverse colors like the raynbow round about it.

Carbunckle.
When the carbunckle or blaine does soddenly dry up, as if it were scorcht with
the fire, and that the place round about it does show to be of a wannish blew
color, is a deadly sign, if in the skin appear green or black spots,
the excrements of diverse colors with worms in it, either dead or living,
having a vile stinking savor, and spitteth stinking and bloody matter, does
betoken death.

When the sick complains of great and extreme heat in the inward parts, and
yet cold outwardly, the eyes staring or weeping, the face terrible, the said
excrements, or vrin passing away and the party not knowing thereof, are evil
signs.

When in the fourth or seventh day, they are taken with a frenzy or do fall
into an extreme bleeding at the nose, or have a great flyre, with a continual
vomitting, or a desire to vomit and do it not, extreme pain at the heart,
watchfulnes, and the strength clean gone, are deadly signs.

When the party being very sick, Infallible signs of death
yet says he feels him self well, his eyes sunk deep into his head, and
full of tears, when he seems all things does stincke, his nails looking
blew the nose sharp, and growing as it were crooked the breath thick and
short, with a cold sweat in the breast and face, and turning and playing with
the clothes, the pulse creeping or s^arsly to be felt, and grievous unto him
to speak, these are infallible signs of death at hand.

Some before any of these signs are perceived do dye, The vncertinty of the
plague.
and some likewise which have diverse of them appearing, and yet do escape,
such is the uncertainty of this disease: there are many other symptoms which
do happen in this contagious disease, which would be too tedious to declare
them all, but these as the chiefest have I made choice of, which may suffice
you.

The end of the first Treatise.
THE SECOND TREAtise showing the means how to Cure the plague.
Cap. 1.
WHen we perceive any to be infected with this co^tagious disease, we must
with all possible speed seek all the means we can how to prevent the
malignitie thereof, whose property is at the first, to assalte the principal
part which is the heart, and therefore requires present help: Seek for help
in time.
for unless some thing be done within eight, or four and twenty hours,
little will it then prevail to attempt it, for by that time nature is either
subdued and clean overthrown, or else has thrust the same to the exterior
parts, or otherwise digested it: yet may we not neglect at any time to use all
the means we can in helping and farthering of nature to the uttermost of our
endeavor, because we do often times see nature so wearied and weakened in
expelling of this venomous matter, that unless some help be added to assist
and comfort her, the party for lack thereof dies, which otherwise might be
saved, for I have often times seen by dilligent helping of nature, that to be
effected and brought to good pass which I have judged most desperate. There
are four intentions required for the curing thereof: that is by blood letting,
Cordials, sweat and purging: but the manner how to excecute the same great
contention has been both amongst the old and later writers, 4. Intentions to
cure the plague.
which here to treat of were too tedious, for unto the learned it were
needless, and for the communaltie, little would it prevail them, therefore in
brief sort will I show you, what I have observed touching the cure.

First if it be in a plethoricke, sanguine, Who is to be^ let blood.
and strong body and has pain in the head, great heat at the heart, thirsty,
the pulse strong and laboring or beating strongly, and has great and large
veins appearing: these ought presently to be let blood, in that side where ye
perceive the grief does proffer it self to come forth and not visibly
appearing, tending to maturation. For then we may not draw blood but use all
other means we can devise in helping nature to expel it, neither may you draw
blood, Where a flixe is* draw not blood.
if the party have a flixe or laske (which is an evil sign) in the beginning
of the disease, for by that means you shall hinder nature greatly, but only
give the party Cordials; neither may you stop the flixe, in the beginning, but
if it be extreme and that it stay not the second day, then must you give some
purgatio^ which may leave an asstringencie behind it, as hereafter in the cure
of the flixe shall be showed. For as Hypocrates in his first book, and one and
twenty aphorism does admonish us, we must consider and mark how nature does
incline her self, for that will teach us what we are to do.

Now if you perceive the botch or carbunkle to appear underneath the chinne
about the throat, Botch in the throat to cure it.
then presently draw blood in both veins under the tongue, and immediately
after that apply a cupping glass with scarification i^ one side of the neck
next unto the sore, Chickens how to apply them.
thereby to draw it from the throat, for fear least soddenly it chooke him up,
and then apply Chickens rumps, or Hens rumps to the botch, the feathers being
f^rst plucked away from the rump, and a grain of Salt p^^ ^^to the ^^well, and
so ho^de the bare place to the grief (...) the chicken d^ie, which will be
within half an hour and then apply another, and so continue in changing them
so long as they do d^ye, and lastly apply a mollificatiue cataplasme or plaster
to the same place: as in the fifth chapter following is showed, which is made
with Unguentum basillicon, Botch in the neck.
and to the botch apply the Epithemation and cataplasme in the seventh chapter
following. But if it be in the neck^ he does complain, then let him blood in
ye Cephallica vain in the arm, of the same side where he complayneth

Botch in the stomach.
If in the greynd or f^ancke he do complain, then let him blood in the foot
on the same side, and open the vain called Maleola, or Saphena, the quantity
must be according as the age and strength of the party requires, but at most
draw not above six or eight ounces. For Auicen wills us to preserve blood as
the treasure of nature:

VVeake and spare bodies may not bleed.
But in a weak, spare, and cachochimious body, (as Galen teaches us) we may
not draw blood at all, for thereby should you greatly endanger the patience,
but help such by cordials and sweat.

And here you shall understand that unless Phlebetomy be done at the first,
When blood is to be drawn.
that is with in six or eight hours at most, it will be too late to attempt it,
neither may you do it, if the sore do appear up in ^ight ten^ing to
suppuration, for th^n should you hinder na^^re, which like a diligent workman
ha^h discharged and thru^^ forth that venomous matter which otherwise would
have kilde us.

A good caveat.
And here touching Phlebetomy or blood letting, you must have this special
care, that you draw not blood on the opposite side, as if it b^ on the le^^
side the sore appear, then draw not ^loud on the right side, if it appear in
the flancke then draw not blood in the arm but in the foot: for otherwise
you shall draw that venomous matter from the ignoble unto the noble parts, and
so kill the body.

And although the party complain not more in the one side then the other, A
good obse^uation.
yet by the pulse shall you perceive on which side the venem lies hidden: for
on that side where nature is oppressed, there shall you find the pulse more
weak feeble, and uneven, greatly differing from the other side.

And here you shall understand that in some it has been seen that nature of
it self at the first, Note.
has thru^^ out that venomous matter in some place of ye body, with a botch
appearing high and tending to suppuration, or a carbunckle, or spots called
purples. Now here, if you draw blood, you do then greatly endanger the body:
but in this case you must only give Cordials, and use all the means you can to
bring it outward, either by maturation or euaporation, as hereafter shall be
showed you.

And here you shall farther understand, that where the age, constitution, nor
strength of the party will permit that Phlebetomy be done, yet for the better
help of nature you must apply Uentoses, with reasonable deep scarification,
unto the next place adjoining, Ventoses when and where to apply them.
where the party complayneth thereby the more speedily to draw the venomous
matter unto the super^^ciall parts, and there to apply the rumps of Chickens
as before is taught you, and so apply to the place some strong maturatiue and
attractiue plaster or Cataplasme as hereafter shall be showed you. If the grief
be in the head or throat then apply Uentoses to the neck, if it be in the
emunctuaries of the heart, then apply them to the shoulders: if in the
emunctuaries of the liver, then apply them, to the buttockes or thies, now
when this is done, either by Phlebetomy or Uentoses, then within an hour or
two at the most after it, yo^ must give the sick some good Cordial medicine,
which has power to comfort the heart, resist the venomous matter, and also
procure sweat, which here following you may make choice, as you list.

An excellent good powder to expel the plague and provoke sweat.
Take. Roots of Gentian, Bittaine, Petasitis, of either one dram. Roots of
Tormentil Dittander, of either three drammes. Red sanders, half a dram, Fine
Pearl, and been of both sor^es, of either one scruple. Fine Bolarmoniack
prepared. fine Terra sigillata, of either six drammes. Rindes of Citrons, Red
Correll, Roots of Zedoiar, Shauing of Ebory, bone of a Stagges heart. of either
sixtene grains. Fragments of the 5. precious stones, of either half a
scruple. Shauing of a Unicorns horn, Succini, of either half a scruple.
Leaves of Gold and Silver. of either one and half in number.


Make all these in fine powder, every one several by him self, and then mix
them all together, and give thereof one dram, or four scruples, more or
less as occasion requi^reth, either in Sorrel, Scabios, or Cardus benedictus
water, two or three ounces, Bolarmoniake how for to prepare it.
whereunto you must add a little syrrop of Lymons, or sour Citrons, and give
it warm, the Bolarmoniake must be pounded small, then washed in Scabios water
and so dried.

An other good powder.
Take. Leaves of Dittander called dictami cretici, Roots of Tormentil,
Bittaine, Pimpernell, Gentian, Zedoair, Terra lemnia, Alloes Cicatrin, ^ine
Myrre, Rindes of sour Citrons,
of either one dram Masticke, Saffron,
of either half a dram. Bolarmoniacke prepared as beforesaide. two drammes.


All these must be made in fine powder, and so mixed together, you may give two
scruples or one dram thereof with any of the foresaid waters.

A good Opiat to expel venem and provoke sweat.
Take. Co^serue of the flowers of Borrage, Buglos, Violets, Bittaine, of either
two ounces. Vennes Triacle, two ounces. Red Terra sigillata, Terra lemnia,
Mitridat, of either one ounce. Shauing of Eburni, And hearts horn, Orient
Perles, Roots of Tormentill, of either one dram. Shauing of unicorns horn,
Root of Angelica, of either half a dram. Syrop, of the Juice of small
Sorell and Buglos, of either so much as shall suffice.


Mix all these together, in the form of an Opiat, then take of the same
Opiat, one dram and half.

Scabios water, Balm water, of either two ounces.
Dissolve the Opiat in the waters, and drink it warm, then walk a little
upon it, and then go to bed and sweat,

An other excellent good means to expel the venem, and procure. sweat.
Take a great white Onion, and pick out the coare or myddell of him, then fill
the hole with good Uennes triacle or Andromachus triacle, and Aqua vite, then
stop or cover the hole of the Onyon again, and roast him in the whote ashes
until he be soft, then strain it strongly, through a cloth and give it the
sick to drink and the rest that remains pound it small, and apply it to
the soar, and sweat upon it.

Now when he has taken any of the foresaid Cordials if he chance to vomit it
up again, In vomiting what is to be done.
then wash his mouth with Rose water and Vinegar, and then give him more of the
same again, which must be proportioned according to the quantity vomited, for
if all were vomited, then give so much more: (if less) then according to the
quantity vomyted, and if he vomit that also, then give him more, and so
continue it to the third or fourth time if cause so require, but if at no time
he do retain it, then is there small hope of recover: I have known diverse
which have vomyted their Cordials three or four times, and at last, giving
the Juice of the Onyon as aforesaid has kept that, and sweat upon it and so
cover their sickness.

Also Minardus triacle, or Andromachus triacle being taken two scruples with
one scruple of Dioscordium, and dissolved in three or two ounces of this water
following or Cardus benedictus, Sorrel, and Scabios water, has been found
excellent good and auailable, both to procure sweat and expel the venomous
matter.

An excellent good water against the plague, and diverse other diseases, which
is to be made in May or June.
Take. Angelica, Dragons, Scabios,
of either three handfuls. Wormwoode, Sage, Sallendine, Mugworte, Rue,
Rosmarie, Varueyne, Endive, Myntes,
of either one handful. Tormentill, Pimpernell, Agremonie, Bittayne,
of either two handfuls. Sen John's worte Fetherfewe, and Pionie,
of either a little handful.


You must mix al these herbs together, then bruise them in a stone mortar
grossly, then put them into a clean vessel of glase or earth, and add thereto
a pottle of White wine, or three quartes, a pint of Rose water, and a pint of
Vinegar: then mix them well together and press down the herbs close
together with your hands, then stop the pot close, and so let it stand to
infuse two days and two nights then distill it in a stillytorie, this water
has been found excellent good, both to preserve one from the plague being
drunk three or four sponefuls of it in the morning fasting, as also to expel
the disease, being drunk with any of the Cordials aforesaid.

Cap 2. Shows what is to be done after taking of the Cordial.
NOw so soon as the party has taken his Cordial, (if he be able) cause him
to walk upon it in his chamber a pretty while, then lay him into his naked
bed, being first warmed, if it be in cold weather: and so procure him to
sweat, but in any case have a special care to keep him from sleep all that
day, because thereby the blood and vital spirits are drawn to the inward
parts, and there does hold in the venomous matter about the heart, but if the
sore appear, or be perceived to present it self in any place near the heart:
then to defend the malignitie thereof, before he sweat it were good to annoint
the place betwixt the region of the heart and the sore with triacle, or with
this unguent following.

A good defensatiue unguent.
Take. Triacle, half an ounce. Take. Terra lemnia, Red Sanders, of either one
dram.
Mix them together with a little Rose water and Vinegar in a mortar, to the
form of an unguent and so use it as aforesaid.

And unto the sore place apply Chickens rumpes, as before has been told you,
and then annoint the place grieved with Oil of lillyes: and then Epithemat the
heart with any one of these Epithemations following.

Epithemation.
Take. The powder of Diamargaritu ^Frigidum one scruple, Triasandalum, six
drammes* Ebeni, two drammes. Saffron, half a scruple. Lettis seed, one
dram. Waters of roses, Buglos, and Sorrel, of either six ounces. Vinegar,
two ounces.


Boil them all together a little.

An other
Take. The waters of Roses, Balm, Buglos, Cardus benedictus and White wine, of
either four ounces. Vinegar of roses two ounces. Powder of red roses, Cinnamon,
Triasandalum, Diamargaritum, Frigidum, of either half a dram. Mitridatum,
one ounce. Triacle, half an ounce.


Boil them together a little, and being blood warm, Epithemat the heart
therewith, which being done then procure him to sweat, and after sw^ate, and
the body dried then apply this quickly to the heart.

A quilte for the heart.
Take. The flowers of Nenuphare Borrage, Buglos, of either a little handful
Flowers of Balm, Rosmary, of either three drammes. Red sanders, Red Corrall,
Lignum alloes, Rind of a Citron, Seeds of Basil, Citrons, of either one
dram. Leaves of ditta^der, Berries of Juniper, of either one scruple. Bone of
a stags heart, half a scruple. Saffron, four grains.


Make all these in gross powder and put them in a bag of Crimson taffatie, or
Lincloth, and lay it to the heart, When you must procur^ sweat.
and there let it remain. All these things being done then procure him to
sweat, having a good fire in the chamber and windows close shut, and so let
him sweat three or four hours, more or less or according as the strength of
the sick body can endure, and then dry the body well with warm clothes,
taking great care that the sick catch not cold in the doing thereof* and then
give him some of this ^ulep following, and apply the foresaid quilte or bag
to the heart.

A cordial Iulep.
Take. Waters of Endive, Purslane, and Roses, of either two ounces. Sorrel
water, half a pint, Juice of Pomgarnards, and for lack thereof Vinegar,
four ounces. Camphire, three drammes. Sugar, one pound.


Boil all these together in the form of a Iulep* and give three or four
sponefuls thereof, at a time.

An other Iulep.
Take. Syrrop of Ribes Sorrel, Nenuphare, of either one ounce. Juice of
limons, one ounce. Sorrel water, eight ounces.


Mix all these together, and take two or three sponefuls thereof often times,
which will both comfort the heart and quench thirst.

And if in the time of his sweat he be very thirsty, then may you give him to
drink a Tysane made with water, Thirst to quench it.
clean Barley, and Lycoris scrapt clean and bruised, boil them together, then
strain it, and unto a quarte of the licquor ad three ounces of syrrop of
Lymons, and give thereof at any time, small beer or ale is also tolerable, or
you may give a sponefull of this Iulep following at any time.

A Iulep to quench thirst.
Take. Sorrel water, four ounces. Take. Borrage water, Scabios water, Sirrop
of lymons, and sour Citrons, of either one ounce.
Mix all these together and so use it as occasion requires at any time:
Fainting o^ sounding to help it.
and give often times a cake of Manus christi, made with Perles, for him to
eat. But if in the time of his sweat, you see the sick to fainte or sown,
then apply to his temples, and the region of the heart, this mixture following.

Take. Conserve of Roses. Borrage, Buglos, Broom flowers, of either one ounce.
Take. Mitridatum, four ounces. Take. Triacle, one ounce. Take. Flowers of
violets Pellamountaine, Red roses, of either one dram, Take. Roots of Irrios,
one dram. Take. Musk, Siuet, of either eight grains.
Mix all these together with a quantity of rose Vinegar in the form of an
Opiat, this must be spread on playsters, and applied, to the heart and temples,
and to the souls of the feet apply this plaster following.

Take of the foresaid Opiat two ounces, unto the which you must put so much
more of an Onyon, Plaster for the feet.
which must have the middle part thereof taken out, and the hole filde with
Mitridat, and Aqua vite, and so roasted in the ashes, and then mix it with the
Opiat, and apply it to both soales of the feet.

Now when all this is done, and that one hour is past after his sweat and
body dried as aforesaid: it were good you did give the sick some good
comfortable broth, although he vomit it up again, then let him rest two
hours, and then offer him more, which you must do often times, and but little
at a time.

And if after all this done he continue still weak and fainte, without any
amendment, then give him an other Cordial, as ye did at the first and so
cause him to sweat again so long as his strength can well endure it, and
after sweat, give more of the Iulep aforesaid, for by this means you shall
often times see the sore which did offer it self to come forth will be clean
discussed and consumed away: but if it do not by this means go away, then
use all the means you can to bring it unto Suppuration and then open it with
some causticke, or insition, as hereafter shall be showed you at large.

Sleep when it is tolerable.
The next day after his sweat, you may tolerate him to sleep one hour or two
in the forenoone, whereby to prevent pain, or lightness of the head which may
chance through want thereof: and if after his sleep, the party be sick and
faynte, then immediately give him some good Cordial, according as the state of
his body requires, Faintnes after sleep.
either in temporat or extreme heat, as before is showed: and in one hour
after that give some comfortable broth made with Ueale, Mutton, Chicken, or
such like: wherein some borrage Buglos, Pimper^ell, and a little Isop, with
some Parsley roots the inner pith taken out, must be boylde, whereof he must
take a little at a time, three or four times a day, and betwixt times in
taking of his broth, give him three or four sponefuls of this Iulep following,
which does resist vennenositie from the heart, and also quench thirst.

A Iulep to quench thirst and resist vennenositie.
Take. Water of Scabios, Borrage, Sorrel, of either two ounces. Sirrop of
Limons Sour Citrons, and the Juice of Sorrel, of either one ounce.


Mix all these together, and give thereof, as cause requires.

Then at night he may sleep three or four hours more, You may not Purge till
the third or fourth day.
and the next day, being the third or fourth day of his accubet, you may purge
him with one of the purgations here following, but in any case you must take
heed that you do not purge with any strong, or Scamniat medicine, because it
may bring an extreme flixe which will be most dangerous because it will overmuch
weaken the body and hinder concoction, for most commonly in this disease the
body of it self is subject to flixes.

A good Purgation in a strong body
Rad, Cichoriae,.iiij. Rad, petasitis,.ss. Fol. Scabiosae. Card. b.
Pimpinellae, Acetosae,
ana. M. j. Florum, Cord. P. j. Prunorum da^mas no. x. Sem. Coriandri.. ss.
Aqua font.. ix.


Boil them until a third part be consumed, then strain it.

Decoct. col.. iiij. Fol. Senuae.. iij. Rhab. elect.. iiij. Spikj. G. iij.


Infuse them together twelve hours then strain it strongly, and add thereto
these things.

Sir. de Cichoria. cum Rhab..vj. Oxisacchari. Simp.. ij.
Mix them altogether and drink it in the morning refraining from meat,
drink, and sleep, three hours after and then eat some good broth.

An other in a plethoricke and full body.
Fol. Scabiosae. Buglossae. Card. b.
ana. M. j. Florum Cord. P. j. Rad. Tormentillae,. iij. Rad. Fenic, ana.. iiij.
Cichonae, ana.. iiij. Passularum enucleat.. j. Prunorum dammas, no. vj. Sem.
anisi, Coriandri, Oxialidis.
ana.. j. Sennae, Polipod. q.
ana.. j.


Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water, until half the water be
consumed, then strain it, and keep it.

Rhab. elect.. ij. Agarici, tros.. j. Croci.. ss. Aquarum scabiosae,
Borraginis, Card. b.
ana.. iiij.


Infuse these together twelve hours in a warm place, then strain them
strongly: and add thereto.

Sir. ros. lax. Mannae Calabriae,
ana.. j. Decoct. col.. ij. vel.. iij.
Mix all these together, and take it as the other before.

A good Purgation for a weak body.
Fol. sennae,. iij. Rhab elect,. j. Sem, anisi,. ss. Schenanthi,. ss. Aqua
Acetosae,. v.
Boil them a little, then take it from the fire, and let them stand infused
together twelve hours then strain it out strongly, and add thereto.

Sir. ros. lax.. j,
And then drink it as the other before.

An other gentle Purgation.
Aquarum scabiosae, Card. b. Aqua ad pestem,
ana.. j. Rhab elect,. ij. ss. Cinamomi,. ss.


Infuse them together twelve hours, and strain the^ strongly, then add to
the strayning.

Sir, ros, lax,. j. Sir, de limonibus,. iiij.
Mix them together and so drink it as the other before, you may either add,
or diminish of the Rubarbe unto any of these potions as you ^^st.

After purgi^g give a Co^dial.
Now when you see the Purgation has done working, then give the sick some
Cordial thing, as hereafter follows, which he must also take the next
morning following.

A good Cordial to be taken after Purging.
Conserua Borrag, Buglos, Mali Citri, ana.. iiij. Confect Alkermis,. j. Boli,
Very,. ss. Specieru^ diarhod abb,. ij. Diamarga, frigid,. j. Manus ch^isti
perlati,. j. Sir, de lymon,. iiij.


Mix all these together, and give the sick thereof so much as a chestnut at a
time, you must often times eat thereof, if the sick be in no great heat.

An other good Cordial to be given where great heat is.
Conseruae Borag,. iiij. Conseruae fol, acetosae,. j. Bolarm, very,. j. Manus
christi cum perlis,. j, Sir, de limonibus, q. 5. miss.
You must often times give of this, where great heat is, so much as th^ee
beans at a time.

A good Cordial potion.
Aquarum buglossae, Acetosae, ana.. j. Pull, diamarga, frigi,. ss. Take.
Confectio alkermis, G. ij. Take. Sir, de aceto, Citri,. j. miss. Take. Vel de
limon,. j. miss.
All this you may take after purging, as aforesaid, at any time.

Note.
And here you must understand, that if it be in a plethoricke body full of ill
humors, it were good that you purge him again the next day.

Cap 3. Shows what Simptoms often chance and how to help them.
FOr that in this contagious disease there are diverse dangerous simptoms which
do oftimes chance I will here show you good means, how to help the same.

For lightness of the head through want of sleep.
Hordei mund, P. j. Amigd, dull, depilatum,. j. ss. Sem. 4. Frigid, ma, mund,
ana.. j. Aqua font, q. 5. fiat decoctio. Decoct col. l. j. Sir de limombus, de
Papa. ana.. j. ss. Sacchari perlati,. j.


Boil them together a little, and then keep it to your use, you must often
times give two or three sponefuls thereof to drink, and annoint his temples
with this ointment.

Ointment to provoke sleep.
Unguent, popillionis,. iiij. Unguent, Alabastrini, Ol, Nenuphariae miss,
ana.. ij.


This ointment is not only good to provoke sleep, but will also ease the
pain of the head, if the place grieved be anointed therewith.

For rauing and raging.
If the party rave, then give him one scruple of the powder of a hearts horn
burnt, with half an ounce of the sirrop of Uiolets, and Lymons, and apply
this sacculus following to the head.

A good Sacculus for rauing and raging.
Florum Nenupharij, P. j. Cort: Pap,. ij. Santali, Rub, Citri, albi, ana.. j.
Florum ros. rub, P. j. Florum Viol. P. ss. Florum chamomil, Betonicae, ana.. j.


Shread them all small, then pound them grossly, and quilt them in a bag, and
apply it to the head, and it will help you.

Aphtham to help it.
In this contagious disease, there does chance an vlceration of the mouth which
is called Aphtham, it comes by means of the great interior heat which the
sick is oppressed with, in the time of his sickness, which if it be not well
looked unto in time, it will greatly endanger the body, for remedy whereof use
this Gargaris.

A good Gargaris for the mouth.
Take. Clean Barley, one handful. Wild daysie leaves, Planten leaves,
Strauberie leaves, Violet leaves,
of either one handful. Purslan seed, one scruple. Quinche seed, one scruple
and half. Licqueris bruised, four drammes.


Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water until the water be half
consumed, then strain it, and take one pint and half thereof and add
thereto.

Syrrop of roses by infusion And Syrrop of dried roses, of either four drams.
Diamoron, two ounces,
Mix these together, and Gargaris and wash the mouth therewith often times,
being warm, and it helps.

Vomitting extremely how to help it.
If it come in the beginning of the disease, as most commonly it does, there is
no better means to stay it then by giving of Cordials and by sweating, by
which means that Uennemous matter which is the cause thereof, is expelled and
breathed out, but if after Cordials given, and sweat, it does not stay, it is
a very il and daugerous sign: yet what means I have used to stay the same, I
will here show you.

A good bag for the stomach.
Take. Dried leaves of Mints, Elder, Orgaine, Wormwoode, Calaminte, Mugworte
Time, Balm, Pellemountaine, Tops of Dill,
of either a little handful. Seeds of Cardus benedictus, Fennel, Annis,
Roots of Ciperus, Calamus aromaticus,
of either four drammes. Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace,
of either half a dram.


Make all these in gross powder, then put it into a linen bag, which must be
made so broad and long as will cover the stomach: then take Rose water, and
strong Vinegar, of either ten sponefuls, wherein do you dissolve one ounce of
Mitridat, then must you first wet the said bag in two parts of clean water
and a third part of White or Claret wine, and let him sooke therein a little
while, the lyquor being first warmd on a chafer and coals, and then wet him in
the Rose water and Vinegar being warm, and so apply it to the stomach, and
when he waxes cold, warm him therein again, and let him remain half an
hour in all, and then take him away, and dry the stomach with a warm cloth,
and then annoint it with this ointment following.

Take. Kimicall oils of Rosmarie, Take. Sage, Take. Vinegar, Take. Mitridat,
of either one dram.

Mix all these together, and so use it, and if the party be costiue, then
were it good to give him a glister wherein dissolve two drammes of Mitridat, it
is also good to apply Uentoses unto the buttockes and thighs.

Yoxe, or yexing to stay it
R. Dill seed, two scruples and half. White poppie seed Purslan seed, of
either one scruple and half.


Bruise them a little then knit them in a fine Linen cloth and let it sooke in
the drink which he uses, and when you give him drink, wring out the bag
therein, and let him drink it and that will stay it, also the order aforesaid
to help vomitting, is good to stay the yoxe or yexing, but if nether of them
prevail, then will the sick hardly escape death.

Flyxe how to stop it.
You must first give the patient this purgation following, which does not only
purge away those flymie humors which is the cause thereof, but does also leave
an astringencie behind it.

Rhab, elect,. iij. Cinamomi,. ij. Aquarum, Endiuae, Borraginis, ana..ij.


Infuse them together twelve hours then strain it out strongly, and add
thereto one ounce of syrrop of roses Laxatiue, and so drink it warm
refraining from meat, drink and sleep three hours after it: and at night
when it has done working, give this confection following.

Conseruae, ros,.iiij. Dioscordij,. j. ss. Pull, diatragag, frigid,. j.
Dialkermes, G.x. Sir, de limon,. ij, miss.


When you have given this confection then do you ^pithemat the regio^ of the
heart with this Epithematiue following.

Epithemation for the heart
Aquarum, Buglossae, Borrag, Rosarum, Oxialidis, ana.. iiij. Troschiscoru^ de
camphera,. j. Pull, diamargarit, frigid,. j. Aceti alb,. j. Ossa de cord
cerui,. ss. Santal, rub, Coral, rub, miss, ana.. j.


With this you must Epithemat the region of the heart warm, a quarter of an
hour, and if by this means it stay not then the next day give some of this
confection following, which I have found excellent good for the stopping of
any flixe whatsoever.

Conseruae ros, sicca,. i. Pull, Rhab, troschiscat,, j. Terrae lemniae,. ss.
Lap, Hemattitis, Saug, Draco, Bolarmoni, ana.. ij. Mitridati, miss,. j.


You must every morning and evening give two drammes hereof, and drink some
Planten water after it.

A good cauiat
Now here you must understand, that if the flixe come in the beginning of the
sickness, and that no botch, carbunckle, nor spots appear in the body: then in
any case you may not go about to stop it, but suffer nature to discharge it
self and only help nature with Cordials, and Epithemations applied to the
heart, but if by the continuance thereof the patient grow very weak and faint
therewith, then is it to be repressed as before is showed, but it must be the
third day before you attempt to do it.

But if this flixe come, When aflixe is dangerous
when the botch or carbunkle does appear and tending to maturation, then is it
very dangerous, for by that means, vennemous matter is drawn back again
into the principal parts, and so kills the patient.

Cap. 4. Shows the general cure of a botch when he appears outwardly.
FIrst give Cordials, and use the defensive before taught you in the second
chapter, thereby to keep it from the heart, and then bring it to maturation as
follows.

A good maturatiue.
Take a great Onyon and roast him in the ashes, then pound him with some
powder of white Mustard seed, and for lack thereof some triacle, and pound
them together, and so apply it to the grief warm, and renew it twice a day,
which within three or four days at most will bring it to Suppuration.

An other.
Take. White lilly roots, Enulacompane roots, Scabios, and Onyons,
of either two ounces.

Roast all these together in a cole leaf, or a wet paper, then pound them with
some sweet butter and a little Uennes triacle, whereunto do you add some
Galbanum, and Ammoniacum dissolved in Vinegar, and strain from the fesses and
dregs, and so mix them altogether and apply it, renewing it twice a day.

An other, where no inflammation is.
Take. Vnguentum basillicon, four ounces. Sour Leaven, two ounces. Oil of
lyllies Sweet Butter, of either four drams. Triacle, one dram and half.
Yolckes of two Eggs.


Mix them together, and so apply it and when it is come to Suppuration then
open it in the lowest part either with a potentiall causticke, or by insition,
but the causticke is best, and when you have opened it, if no matter flow out,
then apply the rumpes of Chickens to the sore as before has been showed:
after that put into the wound a digestive as follows.

A digestive.
Take. The yolcke of an Egg, Clear Turpentine, four drammes. Clarefied
Honny, two drammes. Mitridat, or Triacle, half a dram.


Mix all these together, and use it in the wound, until it be well digested,
which you may perceive by the great quantity of white and thick matter that
will flow out of it* and upon the sore lay this Cataplasme until it be
digested.

A digestive Cataplasme.
Fat Figs and raysins the stones picked out, of either two ounces. Sal,
nitrum, four drammes. Sour Leaven, three ounces. Honny, one ounce. Oil of
chamomill one ounce and half.


You must shread and pound the Figs and Raisins very small, then commixe it
with the rest in a mortar in form of a pultis, and use it.

And when it is digested then you must mundif^e it, Mundif^cati^^
with a mundificatiue, to which purpose, Unguentum viridum, or Apostolorum
mixte with Unguentum basillicon will serve and when it is clean mundified, then
to encarne and heal it up, do you only annoint or stricke it over with a
feather, Emplestrum Kellebackeron you shall find made with ma^ster Bakerone of
her Majesty's chirurgio^s.
wet in Arceus linament, which must be molten in a saucer, and over all, lay a
plaster of Diacculum, or a plaster of Kellebackeron, which is excellent good
in all appostomes and tumors, and in this order do you proceed, until the
grief be whole.

Cap. 5. Shows how to bring the botch out, that lies deep within the body
or flesh.
FIrst you must consider, that often times the botch or carbunkle, does offer
it self to come forth in some place of the body, and yet no apparent sign
thereof, but lies deep hidden within, because nature is not of sufficient
strength to thrust it forth: which is easily perceived by the great and almost
intolerable pain, that by some is felt in the place where nature entends to
expel it: which in the most part of people, is by bloudletting, Cordials, and
sweat, is clean taken away and euacuated: but if after all this done it go
not away, then unto these you must use all the means you can to bring it to
the outward parts. First by giving to the sick often times some Cordial
electuary to keep it from the heart, then, (if no great pain in the outward
part) you must apply a cupping glass, with Scarryfication, directly against
the place where the grief is felt, and let it remain thereon a quarter or
half an hour, then take it away, and presently apply the rumpe of Chickens,
Hens, or Pigeons to the place (as before has been showed) that being done,
then lay some Attractiue and Maturatiue plaster or Cattaplasme to the place
which here following is showed, and every sixth hour you must apply the
cupping glass, as also the rest, until such time as you have brought the
venomous matter to the outward parts, there to be visiblie seen, or at least
by feeling to be perceived, which commonly is effected at the second time, then
use no more cupping, but only apply a maturatiue to the place.

A good Maturatiue cataplasme.
Rad simphyti, Liliorum, Ceparum, Allium,
ana..j. Fol, Oxialidis, M.j.


You must pound all the^e together a little, then wrap them in a cole leaf,
and so roast them in the whot embers, then pound them in a mortar, whereunto
add.

Ol, liliorum, Auxungiae porc, ana.. j. Fermenti acris,. vj. Mitridatij,. j.
Mix them altogether in form of a Pultisse, and so apply it warm, and renew
it twice a day.

An other.
Galbani Apopanacis, Ammoniaci,
ana.. iiij.

Dissolve these in Vinegar, if the botch be whote and inflamde (but if it be
not) then dissolve them in Aqua vite, and being dissolved then strain it from
the dregs, and add thereto. Unguent, basilici, Mitridat, Fermenti acris,
ana.. iiij.

Mix all these together, and apply it.

An other which is sooner made.
Take a great Onyon, make a hole in the myddle of him then ^ill the place with
Mitridat or Triacle, and some leaves of Rue, then roast him in the whote
embers, and when it is soft, then pound it with some Barrowes grease, and
apply it to the sore, and that will rypen it in short time then open and ^ure
it as in the Chapter before.

But if the pain and inflammation in the place be so great that the party
cannot endure cupping glasses to be used, the must you apply a Uessicatorie to
the place, in the lowest part of the grief.

A Vessicatorie.
Take Cantarrides bruised in gross powder half a dram, sour Leaven two
drammes, mix them together in a mortar with a little Vinegar, and apply it,
which within twelve hours will raise a blister, which you must open and then
lay an Iuie or coleleafe to the place, and upon all, apply any of the
Cattaplasmes aforesaid, and dress it twice a day, and once a day at least
give the patient some Cordial, and when it is come to a softnes and that you
perceive it is impostimated, then open, it and so proceed to the cure as
before is showed.

When the botch will not come to Matur^tion, but continues always hard.
Sometime it is seen that the botch although it appear outwardly, yet will it
not come to maturation, which commonly is accomplished with in three or four
days, but will resist whatsoever you apply to it, and remain and continue
always hard, now here you must presently open it either with a Causticke, or
by insition, for fear least it strike in again, or at least grow to
gangrena, but before you open it you must Epithemat the grief with this
Epithemation following, and every morning and evening give the sick some
Cordial, and betwixt the sore and the heart annoint it with the defensive
before in the second chapter*

An Epithemation.
Take. Leaves of Mallows, Violets, Chammomell, of either one handful. Flowers
of Dill, Mellilot, of either one ounce. Hollehock roots, four ounces.
Linseede, two ounces.


Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water until half the water be
consumed, and then wet some wool, or flax therein being first well beaten and
picked clean, and warm lay it upon the sore, and as it cools do you take it
away, and lay on another warm stewse, and so continue it half an hour
together, and then open it as before said, and immediately apply to the wound
Chickens, or Hens, as before in the first chapter has been showed you. And if
you cannot get Chickens, nor Hens, then a Whelpe, or a Pigeon cloven a sunder
by the back and so applied warm, Pigeons or whelps insteede of Chickens.
will suffice which must be renewed so often times as cause requires, and when
that is done, then apply unto the wound a digestive, made as follows.

A digestive
Take. Terpentine, half an ounce, Take. Honny two drammes. Take. Mitridat, or
Triacle, half a dram. Take. The yolcke of a new laid Egg,


Mix all these together and use it in the wound and upon all lay the digestive
cattaplasme beforesaid, which is made of Figs, or a plaster of
Kellebackeron, or of Diaculum magnum, and dress it twice a day and every
dressing, Epithemat the grief as before said, when it is digested, then
mundyfie, encarne and sigillate it as in the chapter before is showed you.

Cap. 6. Shows what is to be done, when the botch strikes in again.
SOmetimes you shall see the sore will appear outwardly, and suddenly vanish
away again, which is a very dangerous and deadly sign, now when this does
chance, then presently give some good Cordial that has power to expel the
venem, as in the first chapter of this treatise you may find choice of, and
immediately apply this pultis to both the soales of his feet, which must be
made with Culuer doong and Vinegar mixed together, A good pultis.
and spread on a cole lea^e, and so applied, you must give the Cordial every
third hour, and immediately after the first giving of the Cordial, you must
Epithemat the heart with the Epithemation before expressed in the second chapter
of this treatise, and when that is done then cause the sick to sweat if you
may, and after his sweat, and the body well dried, then give him an easy
Glister, the ne^t day purge him with some gentle purgation as before is showed
you. And if by these means you prevail not, then small hope of life is to be
expected, yet Petru^ Forestus, wills you first to give a Glister, and then
within two hours after it to draw some blood in the same side where the grief
is, and to annoint the place grieved with Unguentum resumpt^^um mixed with some
Oil of chammomell, and then two hours after it to give a Cordial and procure
sweat upon it, and so following the rest of the orders aforesaid, did recover
diverse.

Cap. 7. Shows how to draw a botch from one place to another, and so to
discuss him without breaking.
FIrst you must apply a cupping glass next adjoining to the lower part of
the sore, on that side where you would have him to be brought, and next unto
that glass apply another so nere the first as you can, and if that be not so
far as you would have the sore to be brought, then apply the third glass,
and let them all remain a quarter of an hour, then take away, the last
glass, but suffer the first to remain, then presently apply him again and
let it remain a quarter of an hour more, and do so three or four times
together, but always suffer the first glass next the sore, for to remain,
now when you have thus done, then take all the glasses away, and presently
apply ^ vessicatory to the place where the last and uttermost glass did
stand, suffering it to remain there twelve hours, then open the blister and
lay an Iuie or cole leaf to the place, and upon all lay a plaster of
Kellebackeron, or Diacculum magnum, and dress it twice a day, the longer you
keep it running the better it will be, and at length, heal it up as other
ulcers are cured.

Now so soon as you have applied the Uessicatorie you must presently epithemat
the botch with this epithemation.

Epithemation.
Take. Mallows, Violets, Chammomill, Dill and Mellilot, of either one
handful. Hollehocke roots, three ounces. Linseede, one ounce and half.


Boil all these in a sufficient quantity of water until half the water be
consumed, in this decoction you must wet some unwashed wool, or flax made
clean and well beaten, then being wrong out a little apply it warm to the
place, and renew it every hour during the time that the Uessicatorie is in
working, and when you have opened the blister which is made thereby, then only
apply this Cataplasme to the botch it self.

Take. Mallows, Take. Violets and Chammomell Take. flowers,
of either one handful.

Boil them in water until they be tender, then cut them very small with a
shreading knife, and add thereto.

Oil of chammomel and Lillies, of either two ounces. Barrowes morte, two
ounces. Wax, one ounce.
Melt the wax in the Oils, and then put it to the herbs and boil them
together a little, then take it from the fire, and add thereto Barley, and
Bean flower a handful of either of them, and so mix them all together, and
apply it to the grief, renewing it twice a day, which within three or four
days will resolve and discuss the botch, but if it do it not by that time,
then use all the means you can to bring it to suppuration as before is
sufficiently showed you.

Cap. 8. Shows how to know a carbunkle or blayne as also the cure of the
same.
THe carbunkle or blaine, does first begin with a little Pustule or wheale: and
some times with diverse Pustules or wheales together, with a great burning and
pricking pain in the place which Pustules are like a scalding bladder, seming
to be full of water or matter, yet when you open it, little or nothing will come
out of it, and when they are broken will grow to a hard crust or a scarre, as
if it had been burnt with a whote iron or causticke, with a great ponderositie
or heaviness in the place. In some it comes in the beginning without any Pustule
at all to be perceived, but with a hard black crust or a scarre, sometimes it
lies hidden in the inward parts without any outward appearance at all,
Carbunkle in the Lungs.
as if it be in the lungs, then there is a difficulty of breathing, with a
cough and foul spitting.

If it be in the liver or spleen, Carbunkle in the liver or spleen. Carbunkle
in the bladder or Kidneyes. Carbunkle in the brain.
then the party feels a great pain and pricking in the same side, if in the
kidneyes or bladder it does chance, the^ is there suppression or stopping of the
urine, or great pain in ye making of water, if it be in the brain, then a
delirium follows, but howsoever it chance to come the party infected
therewith has a fever, with other accidents as before in the 13. chapter of
the first treatise is declared: if it begin with a green, black, or blewe,
color, or of diverse colors like the raynbowe, Ill signs.
then is it a deadly sign, and so is it, if once it appear and then suddenly
vanish away: but if it be red or yellowish, so it be not in any of the
principal parts, Good signs.
or eniunctuaries of the body, as ye heart, stomach armpit, flanck, Jaws or
throat, the^ is it laudable, otherwise in any of these places very desperate and
dangerous to be cured, but wheresoever it does chance, unless it may be
brought to suppuration it is deadly,

The cure of the carbunkle.
First the universal means must not be neglected, as bloudletting, Cordials,
Epithemations, sweet, and gentle euacuation by purging, as the time and cause
requires, which before in the beginning of this treatise has been showed at
large, and the same order which is used for the cure of a botch, is also to be
kept in the cure of a carbunkle, also to rectyfie the air of the house by
straining it with vine and willow leaves, red Roses and such like, as also to
sprinckle the floor with Rose water and Vinegar, and cause the sick often
times to smell unto a cloth wet in rose water and Vinegar is very good: these
things being done, then use all the means you can to bring it to Suppuration,
for which purpose this Cataplasme following is very good.

A maturatiue Cataplasme.
Take. Fat Figs, four ounces. Musterd seed, one ounce and half.


Pound the seed small by it self, the Figs must first be cut very small,
and then pounded likewise, and then add thereto so much Oil of lyllies as
will suffice to make it in the form of a stiff pultis, and apply it warm,
renewing it twice a day, this must be continued until the scarre begin to grow
loose and moveable, and then apply this following to remove the scarre.

Take unsalted butter, the yolcke of an Egg* and wheat flower, mix them
together, and apply it until the scarre do fall away, then do you mundifie
it with this mundificatiue.

Mundificatiue annodine.
Take. Clear Terpentine, four ounces. Syrrop of red Roses, one ounce. Honnie
of roses, four drammes,


Boil them altogether a little then take it from the fire and add thereto
Barlie and wheat flower of either six drammes, the yolke of a new laid egg,
and mix them all together and apply it three days, and then use this
following.

Another Mundificatiue.
Take. Clear Terpentine, three ounces. Honny of roses, two ounces. Juice of
smalege, two ounces. Barlie flower, one ounce and half.


Boil them all together saving the Barley, until the Juice be consumed, then
take it from the fire, and when it is almost cold, add the Barley thereto and
mix them together, and use thereof to the grief until it be clean
mundified, and the^ incarne it with Unguentum basillicon, and lastly sigilate
it with Unguentum de cerusae decocted.

Some time you shall find a little pustule to appear, without any elleuation
of the parts adjoining, or outward hardness. Now here to bring it outwardly, you
must apply this Cattaplasme.

Take. Lilly roots, Onyons and sour Leaven,
of either one ounce.

Boil them in water until the water be consumed, then bruise them in a mortar
and add thereto.

Musterd seed, Culuer doong, White Soap, of either one dra^me and half.
Snayles without shelles, vi. in number. Mitridat Triacle, of either half a
dram. Yolckes of four Eggs.
Mix all these together and apply it warm to the grief renewing it thrice a
day: this order must be continued until you see the place elleuated tending to
suppuration, then apply a maturatiue, and so proceed as next before this is
showed you, and during the whole time of the cure, I hold it better to use
rather Pultises then playsters, because they do not so much stop the pores, but
give more scope for the venomous matter to breath out.

When the carbunkle does come with great pain and inflammation, how to help
it.
You must first bath and soke the place well with this bag following, and
then presently apply the Cattaplasme ensuing, for by this means you shall not
only ease the pain and abate the inflammation and fever, but also prevent
the danger of gangrena which may chance thereby.

The botch.
Take. Mallows, Violets Plantine. Liblong, of either one handful. Fat Figs,
one ounce. Holliehock roots, Lilly roots, of either one ounce. Linne seed,
one ounce.


You must shread the herbs grossly, and cut the Figs, and roots small, then
bruise them in a mortar, and mingle them altogether, then put them into two
little bags, of Lincloth, and boil them in a sufficient quantity of clean
water, until the water be half consumed, then take out one of the bags and
wringe out the water a little and apply it to the grief warm, and when it is
cold take it away and lay on the other, and do so half an hour together
every dressing, which must be twice a day, at least.

The Cataplasme.
Take. Mallows, Violets, Sorrel Liblong. of either two handfuls. Henbane, a
little handful.


Wrap them all in a ball together and roaste them in the ashes, then bruise them
in a mortar and add thereto.

Mel rosarum four ounces. Triacle, one dram and half. Saffron in powder,
half a dram. Yolckes of five Eggs.
Mix them together with the rest, adding some Barlye flower thereto to thicken
it, and apply it warm, renewing it always before it grow dry and stiff,
and every dressing you must Epithemat the grief first with the bags
aforesaid, and this order must be continued until the pain and inflammation
be gone, then to bring it unto Suppuration, if you add to the foresaid
Cataplasme some Oil of lillies and sweet butter unsalted, it will be very
good or you may make this Cataplasme following.

Take. Soote of the chimny, three ounces. Baye salt, one ounce and half.
Yolckes of two or three Eggs.


Mix all these together in a mortar, and apply it to the grief warm, which
must be always renewed and changed before it grow dry and stiff, this order
must be continued until the sore come to suppuration, the^ to remove the
scarre and finish the cure, do you follow the order prescribed in the
beginning of this chapter.

There are other dangerous accidents which do sometimes chance in the botch or
carbunkle, which here to treat of would little prevail the vnexpe^t people,
because they know not the means how to execute the same, but if any such
thing chance, then do I wish you to seek the help of some learned Physician,
or expert Surgeon, whose counsel I do wish you to follow.

The end of the second Treatise.
A Short treatise of the small pockes, showing the means how for to govern and
cure those which are infected therewith.
CAP. 1. Shows what the small pockes and measels are, and whereof it
proceeds.
FOR that oftentimes those that are infected with the plague, are in the end
of the disease sometime troubled with the small pockes or measels, as also by
good observation it has been seen that they are forerunners or warnings of
the plague to come, as Salius and diverse other writers do testify: I have
thought it good and as a matter pertinent to my former treatise, to show the
aids and helps which are required for the same.

I need not greatly to stand upon the description of this disease, because it
is a thing well known unto most people, proceeding of adusted blood mi^e with
fleagme, as Auicen witnesses, which according to both ancient and later
writers does always begin with a fever, then shortly after there arise
small read pustules upon the skin throughout all the body, which do not
suddenly come forth, but by intermission in some more or less, according to
the state and quality of the body infected therewith for in some there arise
many little* pustules with elleuation of the skin, which in one day do
increase and grow bigger, and after have a thick matter growing in them, which
the Greeks call exanthemata or exthymata: and after the Latins variola, in
our English tongue the small pockes: and here some writers do make a
difference betwixt variola and exanthemata: for say they, that is called
variola when many of those pustules do suddenly run into a clear bladder
as if it had been scalled, but the other does not so: yet are they both one in
the cure, they do most commonly appear the fourth day, or before the eight
day, as Auicen witnesses

What the measels or males are.
Auicen says, that the measels or males is that which first comes with a
great swelling in the flesh, with many little pimples, which are not to be
seen, but only by feeling with the hand are to be perceived, they have little
elleuation of the skin, neither do they grow to maturation or end with
vlceration as the pocks does do, neither do they assault the eyes or leave
any deformity behind them as the pockes does do, neither are they so swift in
coming forth, but do grow more slowely: they require the same cure which the
pockes have: they proceed of choleric and melancholicke blood.

The cause of the pockes and measels.
The primitive cause as Valetius says, is by alteration of the air, Primative.
in drawing some putrified and corrupt quality unto it, which does cause an
ebulition of our blood.

The cause antecedent, is repleasion of meats which do easily corrupt in the
stomach, Antecedent.
as when we eat milk and fish together at one time, or by neglecting to draw
blood, in such as have accustomed ^o do it every year, whereby the blood does
abound.

The coniunct cause, is the menstruall blood which from the beginning in our
Mothers wombes we received, Coniunc^.
the which mixing it self with the rest of our blood, does cause an ebulition
of the whole.

The efficient cause, is nature or natural heat, which by that menstruall
matter mi^ing it self with the rest of ou^ blood, does cause a continual
ve^ing and disquieting thereof, E^fic^ent.
whereby an unnatural heat is increased in all the body, causing an ebulition
of blood, by the which this filthy menstruall matter is separated from our
natural blood, and the nature being offended and overwhelmed therewith, does
thrust it to the outward pores of the skin as the excrementes of blood: which
matter if it be hoate and slimy, then it produces the pocks, but if dry and
subtle, then the measels or males.

But Mercuriales an excellent writer in Physic, in his first book de morbis
puerorum, cap. 2. agreeing with Fernelius in his 2. de abditis rerum causis,
cap. 12. does hold opinion that the immediate cause of this disease does not
proceed of menstruall blood, but of some secret and unknown corruption or
defiled quality of the air, causing an ebulition of blood, which is also
verified by Valetius, and now does reckon it to be one of the heredytable
diseases, because few or none do escape it, but that either in their youth,
ripe age, or old age, they are infected therewith. The contention hereabout is
great, and mighty reasons are oppugned on both sides, therefore will I leave
the judgment thereof unto the better learned to define: but mine opinion is,
that now it proceeds of the excrements of all the four humors in our
bodies, which striving with the purest, does cause a supernatural heat and
ebulition of our blood, always beginning with a fever, in the most part: and
may well be reckoned in the number of those diseases which are called
Epidemia: as Fracastorius in his first book, de morbis contag. cap. 13.
witnesses this disease is very contagious and infectious, as experience
teaches us: there are two special causes why this disease is infectious: Why
the pocks is infectious.
the first is, because it proceeds by ebulition of blood, whose vapor being
entered into another body, does soon defile and infect the same: the second
reason is, because it is a disease hereditable: for we see when one is infected
therewith, that so many as come near him, (especially those which are allied
in the same blood) do assuredly for the most part receive the in^ection also.

Cap. 2. Shows to know the signs when one is infected, as also the good and
ill signs in the disease.
THE signs when one is infected are these, first he is taken with a hoate
fever, and sometime with a delirium* great pain in the back, furring and
stopping of the nose, beating of the heart, hoarsenesse, redness of the eyes
and full of tears, with heaviness and pain in the head, great beating in the
foreheade and temples, heaviness and pricking in all the body, drynes in the
mouth, the face very red, pain in the throat and breast: difficulty in
breathing, and shaking of the hands and feet, with spitting thick matter.

When they do soon or in short time appear, and that in their coming out
they do look red, Good signs.
and that after they are come forth they do look white and speedily grow to
maturation, that he draws his breath easily, and does find himself eased of
his pain, and that his fever does leave him, these are good and laudable
signs of recovery.

When the pockes lie hidden within and not appearing outwardly: Ill si^^es.
or if after they are come forth they do suddenly strike in again and vanish
away, or that they do look of a black* bluish and green color, with a
difficulty and straitness of drawing breath, and that he do often sown, if
the sick have a flixe or laske, when the pockes were found double, that is one
growing within another, or when they run together in blisters like scalding
bladders, and then on the sudden do sincke down and grow dry with a hard
black scarre or crust as if it had been burnt with an hoate iron, all these
are ill signs.

Auicen says there are two special causes which produce death unto those
that have this disease: Two special causes of death
either for that they are choked with great inflammation and swelling in the
throat called Angina, or having a flixe or laske which does so weaken and
overthrow the vital spirits, that thereby the disease is increased, and so
death follows.

How to know of what humors this disease comes.
If it come of blood, then they appear read, Blood.
with general pain and great heat in all the body.

If they come of choler, the^ will they appear of a yellowish, Choler.
red and clear color, with a pricking pain in all the body.

If they come of fleagme, Fleagme.
then will they appear of a whitish color and scaly, or with scales.

If they come of melancholy the^ will they appear blackish with a pricking
pain. Melancholy.


Cap. 3. Shows the means to cure the pockes or measels.
THere are two special means required for curing this disease: the first is
to help nature to expel the same from the interior and principal parts unto
the e^terior: the second is to preserve both the interior and exterior parts,
that they may not be hurt thereby.

For the first intention, if the age and strength of the sick will permit, and
that the pockes or measels appear not, it were then good in the first, second,
or third day, to draw blou^ out of the Basillica vain in the right arm, if he
be not under the age of fourteen years, but the quantity must be at the
discretion of him that draws it, either more or less as occasion is offered:
but for children and such as are of tender years, C^ildren may not bleed in
the arm*
and weak bodies, it were not best to draw blood out of the arm, but in the
inferior parts, as the thighs, hams, buttockes, and the hemeroydall veins,
specially if the party be melancholy: or else to apply ventoses to the
loins, buttockes, or hams, which may boldly be used both before and after
they do appear, either with scarification, or without; as cause requires,
which is a special good means to draw that Ichorus matter from the interior
to the exterior parts, but for sucking children it were best to apply
bloudsuckers unto any of the foresaid places, which is a thing that may be
used with more ease then ventoses, neither do I wish either of the^ to be used
unless necessity require it, which is when the matter lies lurking in the
interior parts, not offering it self to appear outwardly: otherwise I hold
it better to leave the whole work unto nature, specially in sucking children:
for when we see that nature is ready or does endeavor to expel the malignity
which is in the interior parts, to the exterior, which may be perceived by
reviving of the spirits and mitigating of the fever: here we ought not to use
any means at all, but leave the whole operation unto nature, Give nature leave
to work.
which we must only help by keeping the sick body in a reasonable heat, being
wrapte in a scarlet, stammell, or red cloth, which may not touch the skin,
but to have a soft lynnen cloth betwixt them both, and then cover him with
clothes in reasonable sort, and keep him from the open air and the light,
(except a little) and also from anger, using all the means you can to keep
the sick in quietness, and if the body be very costyue, then to give an
easy Glister.

Glister.
Take Barley, two handfuls. Violet leaves, one handful.


Boil these in three pintes of water, until half be consumed: and strain
it, then take of ye same decoction twelve ounces. Oil of Violets, iij. ounces.
Read Sugar, and Butter, of either one ounce.


Mix them together and give it to the sick warm, you may increase or
diminish the decoction or engredience according as the age of the party
requires: but if the sick have great heat, then may you ^dde one ounce or
four drams of Cassia newly drawn unto it: and when he has expelled the
glister, then rub the arms, hands, legs, and feet, softly with a warm cloth,
which is also a very good means to draw that I chorus matter from the
interior to the exterior parts, when all this is done, then if the body be
inclined to sweat, you must further the same, by covering him with warm
clothes, having a care that you lay not more on him then he can well endure,
for otherwise you may cause faintness and sownding, which are ill in this
case, yet must you always keep the sick warm and suffer him not to sleep,
or permit very little until the pockes or measels do appear: and here you
must have a special care to preserve the eyes, ears, A good caveat
nostrels, throat and lungs, that they be not hurt or offended therewith, as
hereafter shall be showed you, which you must use before he sweat, and also in
the sweat if need be.

Eyes how to preserve them.
Take Rose water, Plantine water, of either two ounces. Sumacke, two drammes.


Let them boil together a little, or stand infused a night, then mix therewith
half a sponefull of the oil made of the white of an egg, then wette two
clothes five or six double therein, and then lay them upon either eye one
cold which must be always kept upon the eyes until the pocks be all come
forth, and as they grow dry wette them in the same licoure again and apply
them, Pai^e burning in the eye, to help it.
but if there be great pain and burning within the eye, then must you also
put a drop of this musselage ollowing into the eye: take quench seed half a
dram, bruise it a little, then let it stand infused in three ounces of Rose
water a whole night, then strain it, and put one drop thereof into the eye
three or four times a day at least: or take of this water.

Take Rose water, two ounces. Woman's milk, one ounce. Myrre finely poudered,
vj. graynes.


Mix them together, and use it into the eye as before is showed: this does
ease the pain, resists putrification and preserves the sight.

For the ears, you must put a drop of oil of Roses warm into them before he
sweat. Ears to preserve them.


For the nostrels, cause him oftentimes to smell to the vapor of Rose vinegar,
Nostrels to preserve them.
or else vinegar, red roses and sanders boiled together.

For the throat, let him always hold a piece of white sugar candy in the
mouth, Throat to preserve it.
and as it melts, swallow it down.

For the lunges, give the sick oftentimes some syrrope of quinches, or
conserve of Roses a little at a time.

Lungs to preserve them.
And for his drink the decocted water of barley boiled with a little l^coures
is best* being mi^ed with the Juice of a Limon, citron, pom^^a^nard, or rybes:
which the sick best l^keth* for either of them is very good.

D^ete.
And for his d^^te he must re^ray^e from all sa^t, fat, thick and sharp
meats: and from all sweet things either in meat or drink, his meat must
be of a facile and easy digestion, and that has a cooling property in it, as
broth wherein borrage, buglos, sorrel and such like are boiled, and for
ordinary drink, small b^ere or ale is best.

Cap. 4. Teaches what is to be done when the pocks or measels are slow in
coming forth.
NOw when you perceive the pockes or measelles are slow and slack^n coming
forth, then must you help nature, with cordials and by sweat to thrust it out
from the interior and principal parts, unto which purpose I have always
found this drink to be excellent good, here following.

R. Hordei mund. M. j. Lentium. excort. P. j. Ficuum. No. x. Fol. capil. v.
Ana. M. ss Lactucae. Ana. M. ss Fol. acetosae. M. j. Florum cord. P. j. Semen
fenic.. ij. Semen. 4. frigid. ma. ana.. ss. Aqua font. ll.iiij.


Boil all these together until a third part of the water be consumed, and
then strain it.

Decoct. col. ll.j. Succus granatorum vel ribes^. iiij.


Myxe all these together, and give the sick four or six ounces thereof to
drink every Morninge and evening, which will provoke sweat and expel the
disease, and if you cannot get the juice of Pomegarnards, nor rybes, then you
may take so much of the syrrope of either of them.

Another good drink to expel the pockes or measels.
Take a quarte of posset-ale, a handefull of sennell seed, boil them together
till a third part be* consumed, then strain it, and add thereto one dram
of Triacle, and one scruple of Saffron in powder: mix them together, and give
two, three or four ounces thereof to drink every morning and evening as cause
requires.

But if it be for a strong and elderly body, you may give any of the
expelling electuaries which are used to expel the plague, as in the first
Chapter for the curing of the plague does appear.

But if the sick be so weak that he cannot expel the disease in convenient
time, then were it good to epithemate the heart with this epithemation following.

Epjthemation for the heart.
Aquarum ros. Melissae Card. b. Buglos. Morsus diaboli, Vini alb.
Ana.. iiij. Aceti Ros.. ij. ss. Pull. Ros. rub. Trium santal. Cinnamon. i.
Elect. diamarg. frig.
Ana.. ss. Mitridati,. j. Theriackae,. iiij.


Mix all these together and let them boil a little, and so warm Epithemat
the heart: and when you have done it then give some expulsive drink or
electuary as cause requires, and then cause him to sweat upon it, for by this
means you shall obtain your desire, by Gods permission.

Thirste how to quench it
Now if in the expelling of the pox, the sick be very thirsty and dry, then
give this Iulep to drink, morning and evening, which I have found very good.

Take. Syrrop of Iuiubes, Nenuphare, and Borrage of either four drammes Take.
Waters of borrage, Cichore, and Buglos, of either two ounces.


Mix them together and give the sick one half thereof in the morning, and
the rest at night, and cause him often times to lick of this mixture following.

Take. The conserues of Nenuphare Violets, and Borrage, of either six drammes.
Manus christi made with Perles, four drams Syrrop of Nenuphare, and Ribes, of
either one ounce and half.


Mix them together: and with a Licores stick clean scrapte and a little
bruised in the end let the sick lick thereof.

Cap. 5. Shows what is to be done when the pockes are all come out in the
skin.
FOr that often times the face and hands which is the beauty and delight of
our bodies are often times disfigured thereby I will show you what means I
have used with good and happy success for preventing thereof: which is, you
may not do any thing unto them until they grow white, and that they are
come to maturation, which when you perceive, then with a Golden pin or
needle, or for lack thereof a Copper pin will serve, do you open every
Pustule in the top, and so thrust out the matter therein very softly and
gently, with a soft linen cloth, and if you perceive the places do fill
again, then open them again as you did first, for if you do suffer the
matter which is in them to remain over long, then will it fret and corrode the
flesh which is the cause of those pittes which remain after the pockes are
gone, as Auicen witnesses: now when you have thus done then annoint the places
with this ointment following.

Take. Elder leaves, one handful. Maregoldes, two handfuls. French Mallows,
one handful. Barrowes morte or grease, six ounces.


First bruise the herb in a mortar and then boil them with the grease in a
pewter dish on a chafer and coals until the Juice of the herbs be consumed,
th^n strain it, and keep it to your use, the best time to make it is in the
middle or later end of May.

You must with a feather annoint the places grieved, and as it dries in,
annoint it again, and so continue it often times, for this will soon dry
them up and keep the place from pitting and holes, which remain after the
pockes are gone.

Also if you annoint the pockes only with Oil of sweet Almons newly drawn,
three or four times a day, which you must begin to do so soon as the pockes
are grown white and come to maturation, it will cure them without pittes or
spots, and eases the pain and burning and helps excoriation.

Some do only often times wet the places with the Juice of Marigoldes in the
summer season, and in winter the Juice of the roots will serve: and by that
only have done well.

Mercuriales, does greatly commend this decoction following, to be used, after
the Pustules are opened.

Take. Barley, one little handful, Red roses, a handful. Red sanders, White
sanders, of either one ounce. of either one ounce. Saffron, two scruples.
Salt, four drammes. Clean water, three pound.


Boil all together until a third part be consumed, you must often times
touch the sores therewith, with a fine cloth wet therein, and as it dries in,
wet it again, this in a short time will dry them up.

I have heard of some, which having not used any thing at all, but suffering
them to dry up and fall of them selves, without picking or scratching, have
done very well, and not any pittes remained after it.

When the pockes after they come out, do not grow to maturation, how you
shall help it.
Sometimes you shall find that it will be a long time before those Pustules
will come to maturation, or grow white: now here you must help nature to bring
it to pass, which you may well do with this decoction.

Take. Mallows, one handful, Figs, twelve in number. Water, a quarte.


Cut the Figs small and boil it altogether, until half and more be
consumed, and then wet a fine soft linen cloth therein, and touch the place
therewith often times, which will soon bring them to maturation, and also ease
the pain (if any be).

Vlceration to help it.
If in the declining of the pocks they chance to grow unto Ulcerations, which
is often times seen: then for the curing thereof use this order here following.

Take. Tamarinds, Leaves of lentils Mirtils, Buddes of oke^ leaves, Red roses
dried,
of either a little handful.

Boil all these in a pottle of clean water until half be consumed the^
strain it, and with a fine cloth wet therein do you wash and soke the place
well, then wipe it dry with a soft and fine linen cloth, and then cast into
the place some of this powder following.

Take Frankencense, Masticke, Sarcocoll, and red roses,
of either two drams.

Make al these in fine powder severally by themselves, then myxe them together,
and so reserve it to thy use.

A very good unguent for the same purpose.
Take. Oil of Roses, vj. ounces. White wax, one ounce. Ceruse washed in rose
and planten water, one ounce and half. Clear turpentine, iij. drams.
Camphire, half a dram.


You must first melte the wax in the oil, then put in the ceruse by little
and little, always stirring it with one iron spalter, and let it boil in a
gentle fire of charcoles until it grow black, but stir it continually in the
boiling for fear least it burn: then take it from the fire and add thereto
the camphire, and lastly the terpentine: this unguent is good both to mundifie,
encarne, and sigillate.

For extreme heat and burning in the soles of the feet, and palms of the
hands.
Petrus Forestus, wills to hold the hands and feet in warm water, and
that will ease the pain and burning and may boldly be used without any danger.

For to help the sorenes and vlceration of the mouth.
Sometime it chances in this ^isease, that there is a great v^ceration or
excoriation in the mouth and ia^^s called Aptham, which if it be not well
looked unto in time, will grow to be cankers: now to cure and prevent the same
this gargaris is excellent good.

Take Barley water, a quarte. Red Roses dried, a little handful. Sumach and
rybes, of either two ounces. Juice of pomegarnards. iii. ounces.


Boil the^ altogether saving the juice of pomegarnards, until a third part
be consumed, then strain it, and ad thereto the juice of pomegarnards, with
this you must often wash and gargarise, as also hold some thereof in the mouth
a pretty while.

To prevent sorenes of the mouth.
Also to prevent the same, the kernel of a pomegarnard held in the mouth is very
good, and so is it excellent good to lyck oftentimes some diamoron, or juice of
a pomegarnard.

For inflammation and pain in the tonsiles and throat.
Take Planten water, a pint. Syrrope of pomegarnards. ij. ounces.


Mix them together, and gargarise therewith oftentimes b^eing warm.

An other.
Take Nightshade water, a pint, Seeds of quenches, iiii. scruples.


Boil them together a little, then strain it, and add thereto two ounces of
the syrrope of pomegarnards, and garg^rise therewith oftentimes.

How to open the eyelids that are fastened together with the pockes.
Sometime the ey-lids are so ^ast joined together that you cannot open them
without great pain and danger: the^ to open the^, you must foment or ^ath the^
well with a decoction made of quench seed, mallows and water boiled together,
wherein wet some fine linen clothes ^iue or six double and apply the^ warm and
continue it until you may easily open them, and then if you perceive any web or
filme to be grown over the sight, then thrice a day do you put some powder of
white sugar candy into the eye, or if you list you may dissolve the sugar in
rose water, and so use it in the eye, which will fret it away and preserve the
sight.

A good Collery for a web or vngula in the eye.
Take The Juice of rue, Fennel, Salendine, Mallows,
of either two ounces.

Boil them together in a vessel of glass, or pewter, over a chafer with
coals, and skumme away the froth that does rise thereof, then add thereto
the gaul of an Eyle, one dram and let them boil together a little, then put
thereto 4. scruples of white coppres, and one scruple of verdegreace in fine
powder, boil al together a little, then let it run thorough a fine linen
cloth, and keep it in a glass, you must every morning and evening put one
drop thereof into the eye, provided that first due euacuation be made so well
by phlebetomy as purging.

Cap. 6 Teaches how to help diverse accidents which chance after the pockes
are cured and gone.
For rednes of the face and hands after the p^cke^ are (...) how to help (...).
Take Barley, Beans, Lupins,
of either one handful.

Bruise them all in a mortar grossly, and boil them in three pintes of water
until it grow thick, like a ielly, then strain it and annointe the face and
hands therewith three or four times a day, for three or four days together,
and then you must wet the face and hands so often times a day with this water
following.

Take Vine leaves, two handfuls. Bean flower, Dragons, Wilde-tansey, of either
one handful. Camphire, three drams. Two Calves feet. The pulpe of three
limons. A pint of raw cream.


You must shred the herbs small, as also the limons, and break and cut the
calves feet small, then mix them altogether, and distill it in a glass still,
also the water of May deawe is excellent good for any high color or rednes of
the face.

For spots in the face remaining when the pockes are gone.
Take the Juice of Lymons and mix it with a little bay Salt and touch the
spots therewith often times in the day for it is excellent good.

A good ointment for the same purpose.
Take. Oil of sweet Almons Oil of white Lillies, of either one ounce. Capons
grease, Goats tallowe, of either four drammes. Sarcocoll, half a dram.
Flower of Ryce, and of Lupins, of either one dram. Litharge of gold one
dram and half. Roots of Brionie, and of yr^ios, of either one scruple.
Sugar candy white, one dram.


Make powder of all those that may be brought in powder and searce it through a
sarge, then put them all in a mortar together and labor them with a pestle,
and in the working do you put the waters of Roses, bean flower, and of white
Lillies, of either a great sponefull, which must be put in by little and little
in the working of it, and so labor the^ all together until it come to an
unguent.

You must every evening annoint the face therewith, or hands* and in the
morning wash it away in the water wherein Barley, Wheat branne, and the seed
of Mallows has been boylde.

For holes remaining when the small pockes are gone.
For helping of this accident, I have used many things, yet never could find
any thing that did perfectly content me, but the best means that I have tried,
is one day to wash the place with the distilled water of strong Vinegar, and
the next day with the water wherein Branne and Mallows have been boylde, and
continue this order twenty days, or a month together.

Running of the ears how to help it.
Sometimes the ears do run very much in this disease, which in any wise you
may not go about to stop in ^he beginning, but suffer it so to run, and the
ears to remain open: but if there be great pain in them, Pain in the ears.
then wet a sponge in warm water and Oil of roses mixte together, and lay it
upon the ears.

For stopping of the nostrels, to help it.
Sometimes the Nostrels are greatly pestred by stopping them with the pockes
growing in them, which does oftentimes cause vlceration in them, therefore to
prevent the same take.

Red rose, and planten, of either one handful. Mirre in powder, half an
ounce.
Boil all these in a quarte of water until half be consumed, and so being
warm cause the sick to draw the fume thereof into his Nostrels often times.

Also if the sick does often times smell unto Vinegar, it is good.

For horsenes, remaining when the pockes are gone.
Take. Licores, Sebesten, Iuiubes, of either two ounces. Fat Figs, four
ounces. Clean water, four pintes,


Boil all these together until half be consumed, then strain it, and give
one sponefull thereof to the sick often times, and it helps.

For filthy and moist scabbes, after the pockes are gone.
Take. Lapis calaminaris, Litharge of gold, and of silver. of either two
drammes. Quick brimstone and Ceruse, of either two drammes.


Bring all these in fine powder, and then labor them in a mortar with so much
Barrowes mort or grease as shall be sufficient to make up an vnguentum and
annoint the place therewith every morning and evening.

FINIS.
A Table or Index.
A.
ANgelica root, to prepare it, fol. 7. Aptham, how to help it, fol. 26.
B.
Blood when and where it is to be drawn, fol. 17, 18.40 Bolarmoniake, how to
prepare it, fol. 19. Botch, in the throat, to cure it, fol. 17. Botch, how to
know where it will be, although no sign appear, fol. 18. Botch, the general
cure thereof, fol. 30. Botch, that is hard, and will not come to maturation,
how to help it, fol. 32, Botch, how to draw it, from one place to another,
fol. 34 Botch, when he strickes in again, how to bring him out. fol. 33.
Botch, how to draw him from one place to another, fol. 34.
C.
Carbunkle or blayne how to know him, as also to cure it. fol. 35. Carbunkle
with pain and inflammation to help it, f. 36 Chickens, how to apply them,
fol. 17. Cordial preservatives, fol. 4. Cordial, to be taken after purging,
fol. 26. Costiuenes, how to help it, fol. 8.9.
D.
Digestive for a botch, how to make it, fol. 30.31.33. Diet to be kept in time
of the plague, fol. 11. Diet, for them that have the small pockes, fol. 41.
F.
Ears, how to preserve them from the pockes, fol. 41: Ears running of them,
what you must do to it, fol. 47, Epithemation, to comfort the heart, fol.
2.42. Epithemation, for a botch, fol. 34. Exercise and orders to be kept in the
plague, fol. 12. Eyes, how to preserve them from the pockes, fol 41: Eye,
pain, and burning therein to ease it, fol. 41 Eye, perle or web therein to
help it, fol^ 46 Eyes, fastered and clong together, to help it, fol. 46.
F.
Faynting and pounding, to help it, fol. 23. Face, how to preserve it from
deformiting, in the small pockes, fol. 43. Face, spotes therein and rednes,
after the pockes are gone, to help it, fol* 46: Feet, extreme heat in them,
with the small pockes, to help it, fol. 45. Flowers of women stopped to provoke
them, fol. 10.11 Flixe, how to stop it, fol^ 25.
H.
Hands and feet, extreme heat in them with the small pockes, to help it,
fol. 45: Head lightness and pain therein for want of sleep, f. 25 Holes in the
face, with the small pockes, what is to be done to it, fol. 47: Hoarsnes,
remaining after the pockes are gone, to help it. fol. 48:
I.
Issues, commended against the plague, fol. 11. Iuleps, Cordial, to make them,
fol. 22. Iulep, to quench thirst, fol* 23.24.
L.
LAske, or ^^ixe, how to stop it, fol. 25. Longs, how to preserve them from the
pockes, f. 41.
M.
MAturatiue, to ripe and rot a botch, fol. 31.32.35. Mouth, vlceration therein,
called Aptham, to help it, fol. 26. Mouth sorenes and vlceration therein, with
the small pockes how to prevent, and cure the same, fol. 45. Mundificatiue, for
a carbunkle or blayne, fol. 36.
N.
Nodule, against the plague, fol. 7. Nosgaye, against the plague, fol. 7.
Nostrels how to preserve them from the pockes, fol. 41. Nostrels, stopped and
vlcerated with the small pockes, to help it, foll. 47.
O.
Opiat, good to expel the plague, fol. 19. Ointment, to keep on sollible,
fol. 8. Ointment to provoke sleep, and ease pain of the head, fol. 26.
Ointment, to keep the face from pitting, in the small pockes, fol. 43.
P.
Parfumes against the plague, fol. 3 Pills, to keep one sollible, fol, 9.
Pills, to purge the body, fol^ 9. Plague what it is, fol. 1. Plague, cause
thereof, fol. 1. Plague, forewarnings thereof, fol. 2. Plague, how to prevent
it, fol. 2: Plague, how to cure it, fol. 16. Plague, how to expel it, fol. 18.
unto. 21* Pomanders, against the plague, fol. 6. Potion, to purge the body,
fol. 10. Potion, to expel the plague, fol. 20. Preservative, against the
plague, fol. 4. Powder, to purge the body, fol. 10. Pouders, to expel the
plague, fol. 18.19 Po^kes, and measels, whereof they proceed, fol. 38: Pockes,
and measels how to cure them, fol. 40: Pockes, why they are infectious, fol.
39: Pockes, how to maturate them, fol. 44. Pockes, or measels, that are slow
in coming forth to help it, fol. 42. Pocks and measels, how to use them when
they are come forth, fol. 43. Pockes vlcerated how to cure it, fol. 44.
Purgation for a strong body: fol. 24 Purgation for a plethoricke body, fol. 24.
Purgation for a weak body, fol. 25. Purging, when it is tolerable, fol. 24
Q
Quilte, against the plague, fol. 5. Quilte, for the heart after sweat, fol.
22.
R
Rauing and raging, to help it, fol. 26. Raysins laxatiue how to make them,
fol. 8*
S
Signs to know when one is infected with the plague, f, 15 Signs of recovery
in the plague, fol. 15 Signs of death in the plague, fol. 15* Signs to know
when one is infected with the small pox, f. 39. Signs laudable, and ill signs in
the small pockes, f. 39. Scabes which chance to come after the pockes are gone
to help them, fol. 48. Sleep when it is tolerable, fol. 23. Sleep, an
ointment to provoke it, fol. 26. Sounding how to help it, fol. 23.
Suppository, how to make it, fol. 8.
T
Thirst, a Iulep to quench it, fol. 23.24.43. Throat botch therein, to help
it, fol. 17, Throat how to preserve it from the pockes, fol, 41. Throat
vlceration therein to help it, fol. 45.
V
Ventoses, when and where to apply them, fol. 18. Vessicatorie, how to make
it, fol. ^2. Ves^catorie of the sick, fol. ^4. Unguent, defensatiue against
the plague fol. 2^* Vlceration of the small pockes, to help it, fol. 44.
Unguent, for spots, and rednes of the face, fol. 47. Vomiting extremely, to
help it, fol. 28.
W
Water, good against the plague, fol. 20 Water, for spots and rednes of the
face, after the small pockes are gone, fol. 46.
Y
Yexing, or yoxe, how to help it, fol. 28,

