(...) (...) For he told me when he forth went:
That thou should come back again incontinent.
To bring me to supper where he now is:
And thou have played by the way and they have done by this
But no force I shall thou may trust me:
Teach all naughty knaves to beware by thee.

Careaway. Forsooth mistres if you knew as much as I:
You would not be with me half so angry.
For the fault is neither in my master, nor in me, nor you
But in another knave that was here even now.
And his name was Ienkin Careaway.

Dame Coy. What? I see my man is disposed to play.
I ween he be drunken or mad I make God a vow:

Careaway. Nay I have been made sober and tame I now.
I was never so handled before in all my life:
I would every man in England had so beaten his wife,
I have forgotten with tousing by the hear:
What I devised to say a little ere.

Dame Coy. Have I lost my supper this night through thy negligece:

Careaway. Nay then were I a knave saving your reverence.


Dame Coy. Why? I am sure that by this time it is done:


Careaway. Yea that it was more then an hour agone.


Dame Coy. And wast not thou sent to fetch me thither:


Careaway. Yes and had come right quickly hither.
But that by the way I had a great fall:
And my name, body, shape, legs and all.
And met with one that from me did it steal:
By by God first be and I some blows did deal.
I would he were present now before your gate:
For you could pummel him ioylyly about the pate.

Dame Coy. Truly this wagpastie is either drunck or mad:


Careaway. Never man suffced so mucke wrong as I had.
But mistres I should say a thing to you:
Tarry it will come to my remembrance even now.
I must needs use a substantial premeditation:
For the matter lies greatly me upon.
I beseech your mistreship of pardon and forgiveness:
Desyring you to impute it to my simple and rude dulnes.
I have forgotten what I have thought to have said:
And ain thereof full is apaid.
But when I lost my self this mischaunce also fell:
I lost also that I should you tell.

Dame Coy. Why thou wretched villain does thou me scorn and mock:
To make me to these folk a laughing stock.
Ere thou go out of my hands thou shall hanesome thing
I will rechen better in the morning.

Careaway. (...) beat me maistres (...) you:
(...) none of your servants now.
^^er I is now your page:
(...) longer in your boudage.

Dame Coy. Now walk precious thief get thee out of my sight:
And come no more in my presence this night.
Get thee hence and wait on thy master at once:

Careaway. Mary sir this is handling for the nonce.
I would I had been hanged before that I was lost:
I was never this canuased and tossed.
That if my master on his part also:
Handle me as my mistres and the other I do.
I shall surely be killed between them three:
And all the devils in hell shall not save me.
But yet if the other I might with me have part:
All this would never grieve my heart.

Iugler. How say you masters I pray you tell:
Have not I required my merchant well?
Have not I handled him after a good sort:
Had it not been pity to have lost this sport.
Anon his master on his behalf:
You shall see how he will handle the Calfe,
For if he thoroughly an angered be:
He will make him smart so mote I thee.
I would not for the price of a new pair of shoon:
That any part of this had been undone.
Well, since that now revenged is my quarrel:
I will go do of mine apparel.
And now let Careaway be Careaway again:
I have done with that name now certain.
Except peradventure I shall take the self same weed:
Some other time again for a like cause and need.

Boungrace. Why then dare thou to presume to tell me:
That I know is no wise possible for to be?

Careaway. Now by my truth master I have told no lie.
And all these folk know as well as I.
I had no sooner knocked at the gate:
But straight ways he had me by the pate.
Therefore if you beat me til I fart and shite again:
You shall not cause me for any pain.
But I will affirm as I said before:
That when I came near another stood at the door.

Master Boungrace. Why thou naughty villain dare thou affirm to me?
That which was never seen nor here after shall be?
That one man may have two bodies and two faces?
And that one man at one time may be in two places?
Tell me, drankest thou any where by the way?

Careaway. Beshrew me if I dranck any more then twice to day:
Til I met even now with that other I:
And with him I supped and drank truly.
But as for you if you gave m^ drinck and meat:
As oftentimes as you do me beat.
I were the best fed page in all this Citti^,
But as touching that you have o^^^e no pity.
And not only I but all that do you serve:
For meat and drinck may rather starve.

Master Boungrace. What you saucy malapart knave:
Begin you with your master to prate and rave?
Your tung is liberal and all out of frame:
I must needs cumure it and make it tame
Where is that other Careaway that thou saydst was here

(...)
