A present consolation for the sufferers of persecucion for ryghtwysenes.

All that will live faithfully and purely in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecucio^. ij. Timothe. iij. If any will follow me, let him renounce him
self and take upon him his cross daily and follow me. Luke. ix. Blessed be
they that suffer persecucion for well lyuinge and justly doing, spekinge or
wrytinge: for theirs is the kingedome of heaven. Matthew. v. Uerely I say unto
you. That easier shall it be to the land of the Sodomytes and Gomorreans in
the day of judgment then to that land and cite, which now thrust away the
gospel and preachers, offered and sent unto them. Matt. x. The Preface.
WHen Christ was come^ into the region of the Matthew. viij.
Gadare^s, and had casten the legyon of deuillis out of the naked wild man,
and at these deuillis desyer permitted them to go into the herd of h^gges, at
whose entresse, the swyne tumbled al hedlongs into the meare and were drowned.
The Gadare^s hea ringe of this miracle, come^ forth and beholdinge Christ,
were greatly afraid of him: and desyered Christ to go out of their region.
Which Gadare^s all be it they did ungodly and greatly agenst their own
salvation, to desyer him to avoid from out of their region which came to cast
out their deuillis, to heal and to save the^, yet showed they them selves more
ientle and humane unto Christ the^ these princes magistrates and common people, to
who^ the worcester de of god the gospel of their salvation now mercifully offered
them, yet cruelly and violently they thrust it from the^ with fagots fire and
sword, blaspheminge it with a legion of deuilysshe horrible new names. But
yet, as the Gadarens were beter content to have had still emonge the^ this
mischeuose mad man possessed of so many deuilis then Christ to have dwelled in
their loud. Even so li^fer had these hoggishe Papists and cruel persewers of
the gospel and of the professors thereof, to have dwellinge still in their
dioceses chirches and regions many legions of deuylisshe rytes, supersticiose
ceremonies, dirtye tradicions and heythen ydolatrye, then Christ and his pure
word should once set in foot among them freely and faithfully to be
preached. And why? Christ has drowned their swyne, say they. And if he should
tarry long emonge us he would drown us to, say they. Siche an answer made some
polytyke gredy Gergesens of late possessed verily of legions of deuyls dryuinge
the^ yet hedlongs into the meare of almaner of mischief, murder, lechery,
dronkenes, glotony pride ambicion envy etc. refrayned with no shame no
reverence, with no fear nor law nether of god nor man, like mad wild men
cryinge out in their pulpits and common tauerus. That if this new lerninge and
Lutherane gospel (for so call they gods holy word) should come in freely to be
preched, oh what an innouacio^, commocions and mutacio^s would it make in this
realm* What sedicio^s, tumults and hurl burlis should we have a none in this
now so peaceable a regio^? Beter it were therefore each of us all were still
possessed and laden with legions of deuyls, fetered still in all idolatry and
false religion, then that Jesus Christ with his word should here tarry any
longer.

Hereof may ye se what a preposter fear and sinister judgment there is now in
this world. Men to be more afraid of Christ and his gospel of salvation to
dwell with them, then of a legion of deuyls ready to rende them in peses. Be you
(oh papystes) sewerer (think ye) under the devil then under Christ: Do ye
promise your selves to be more quiet in Satan's service the^ in Christ's
peaceable religion? What harm (I pray you) has our lord Jesus Christ and his
gospel done to you, so that if ye walk in his wais and receive his gospel,
ye should fear any such perels of batail sedicions and tumults to fall upon
you? He has drowned our swyne (say you) he is not the author of evil say I. He
came to drown and to mortifye your swynisshe filthynes and bestly affectis and
to bless you and yours with increase. He is the author of peace and not of
sedicion batail and tumult. Your selves thrustinge him and his word away from
you so truelly persecuting him in his preachers and professors be the very
autors and cause of all batail sedicions trouble morin of your beastis derthe
famyn and pestele^ce. And forbecause you fear so sore these evils to fall upon
you for receiuinge and retayninge Christ with his gospel, therefore be ye
sewer, all these heuey heaps of calamities and yet greter and grenoser plages
shorteli to be powered forth upon you.

But here obiecteth the unfaithful cruel Gadarens saying. We se it daily
that where this new lerninge is preached, there follows myche trouble,
inquietnes tumult sondri sects diverse opinions. Truth it is. For never was
the sead of gods word sow^e and begane to arise, Satan being a sleep. And
therefore trede down this blessed sead with your filthy feet, suffocate it,
burn it, thrust it from you with sword and fire, and nourisshe still emonge
you rather a legion of deuilis co^pellinge men to recant and renye the truth
openly and often preched, orels burn them. Compel them to sayt. This is a
realm of rightwijsenes where in is ministered all inste execucion and uo perse
cucion. For where the head and gouerner professes Christ there can be no
persecucion. Nether is Christ (tell it the^) per secuted but emonge the Jews
and gentiles. Unto this I answer. That the gospel preched is the word of the
cross, Paul to witness. i. Cor. i. And the true preachers thereof, Chrystsendeth
as lombes emonge wolves, Matthew. x. Wherefore where as ye have chased away and
suppressed the word of the cross there can be no persecucio^ thereof, and
where as be no lo^bes sent emonge wolves, there ca^ not the wolves deuou re any
lombes. And thus briefly by your own factis and recantacion words, you have
properly proved your selves nether to have the gospel nor any true prechers
sent among you purely and freely to preach it, which as it is the most evident
token of gods heuey wrath to take away his word and preachers from you, so is
it the present token of his favor to send us the^. Also where so ever is
Christ our head, there are his members. And what the world and Satan did to
our head and father of the household, the same do they Mat*
yet still to his members and faithful servants. If the high preistes and
bisshops Caiphas and Annas with the pharisais persecuted our head Christ so
shall their successors persecute his members, for persecucion is as common to
the body as to the head. And therefore said Paul, Col. i* I now rejoice in
mine affliccio^s for your sakis. For I supple that at yet remains and shall
ever endure in the affliccions of Christ in my flesh for his body which is
the church. Here is it plain, Christ in his members to suffer persecucions
unto the worlds end until his adversaries be slain with the breath of his
mouth, wherefore take away persecucion out of England, and so take ye away
the word of the cross even the gospel, the church of Christ and all true
preachers. Which all gone, there must the persewers and thrusters out of Christ
and his word be possessed with legions of deuyls. For never was there any
church so little, so hole and perfect, but it had an aduersarye to persecute it.
Christ was ever to many mo a stomblinge stone and a sign to be agene Luke. ij.
said, then to be believed and to rise at him. Then begins Satan to rustle
when a strouger armed inuadeth his realm. Orels what should he do but lydowun
and laugh or sleep to se his realm in tranquilyte and in a paceable
possession? Caiphas Annas the bishops, scribes and pharisais were holy
religiouse gostely fathers (but no lords) till Christ begane to preach and
reveled him self very god and man, and the beleuers in him only to besaued.
The Jews were the people of god agreinge in their religion, waitinge for
Messiah, kepinge their ceremonies rites etc. quiet^1 and in peace till Christ
was comen and had preched his gospel, yea Christ is not so sone borne but he
has an Antichryst, as soon as he preched he had a Judas. And shall there any
man preach this gospel now in England, only faith to iustifye our work is
not to deserve grace remission nor heaven, or against images to stand in the
place of worshippinge, or against invocation of the dead saints, or prayinge
for the dead or against the popis supersticiouse rytes and cere* yet maytained
in the chirches of England, or against their prophana^io^ of the lordis souper,
and of his baptism or agenst the wyuelesse unchaste chastity of the preistes
and their unlawful vows, and estape persecucion?

If these blind buzerds and wealy vepers whelps would but look bake unto the
ark of Noah ever tossed and inquie^ed upon the vehement troublous sourges, and
yet never into any place of it receyuinge any water, or would they consider the
persecuted heuey state of Jacob, Genesis xxviij. what rest and lodging he had
when he fownd out the place of the house of god. Or would they behold the
perellouse sharp situacion of the temple compassed about with her haythen
adversaries builded upon the north este side of the mount Syon, ever open and
ready to receive, all the north east storms and wyndes, which be most rolde
and bitterreste. Again look with what difficultye and resistance, and how long
it was ere it could be builden again after the first destruction and end of the
Babylonike captivity y would they (I say) behold the figures of Chrystis
church in the old testament they should sone se the heuey face and troblouse
state of the church of Christ all though them selves as they never were of
this church, so never suffered they any persecucion for the gospel. Solomon in
his balets described the situacion of Cant. ij. ^. v.
Chrystis spouse to be as a lyle emonge thor^es. And whiles she is in sekinge
her spouse, she is fownde of siche kepers as are our bisshops and their
inquisitors in their questes and woluesshe honters for christen lombes blood,
which says Solomon, do smite and wound this pore sely spouse and little
fearful floke of Christ, and they take away her best garment, that is to
say. These bisshops which should keep defend and edifye the walls of
Jerusalem, are become very thieves and cruel murderers of the church of
Christ, taking away her best garments, even the holy Bybles, Testaments the
word of our faith and salvation, storuinge the pore Hongrye sowlis with
famyn, verefyinge the prophetye of Amos. They were these builders Amos. viij.
that rejected Christ the foundation stone of his church, which name
edificantes our bisshoply builders have usurped so long till they have now
worthily destroyed all theirs, throne down their abbeis, and shortly shall they
throdowne their own bishoprykes to. The scriptures, the prophetis as Daniel
and the Apocalypse paynt forth christ's church in far other blody colors of
affliccion and persecucion then do our wealy proud bulls of Basan which as
they never felt trouble for the truth, so know they not what the church of
Christ is. There is nothing that so miche displeases god, as when wealy idle
men sittinge in securite and ease, pite not the persecucion of the pore
church, as Amos complayneth saying. Woe be to Amos. vi.
the wealy rich etc. which be not moved with heaviness and pity to se Joseph,
that is the people of god broken slain persecuted etc.

But yet do our bisshops compel men to recant saying. That where the head and
gouerner professes Christ, there can be no persecucion. Nether is Christ
persecuted but among the Jews and gentyls. Ah subtyle serpentyne sead. Will
ye yet make us believe the gospel not to have been persecuted of you in
England? What thing (I pray ye) was it, that in the Cardynall Thomas wolsaye,
his days, and in that traitor sir Thomas More his time, being chanceler, and
in Johan stokisly bishop of Londons time, you persecuted, when ye presoned,
undid and brent so many and chased away ^oo for bringinge in, for readinge and
for having the new Testament and other bokis of prayers out of the scripture
in English: What thing persecuted you when ye brent at Paulis cross 500
Testame^ts with* wother holy bokis in Englisshe? What thing persecuted ye,
when ye com pelled doctor barnes, Master Bilney ^ master Artur to bear fagots
for preching against the popes falsely usurped primarye, against his purgatory
and pardons? Joan Fyssher bishop of Rochester, after ward a traitor, then
preachinge openly at Paulis cross, and efte a another called doctor Ridleye,
stokisleis chaplen and person of fulham, both extollinge the po pis power
supremite defendinge and mayntayninge his pardons purgatory and his falsely
usurped power? Well I wot, that I my self was then by the bishop of Lin colne
called la^gley, by bishop West of Ely, by Johan asshwell last priour of Newn
ham abey besides bedforde, and by sir William Gascoyne knight and tresurer to
the cardinal, persecuted and chased out of the realm, compelled to lose my
college a perpetual sufficient lyuinge, ^ all that I had, for saying. That
any simple sir Johan had as great power to been de and to lose (if he could
preche the gospel) as had the pope him self that never preched it. They had
then brent me to for prechinge against their pelgrimaginge to posts and
stones, for saying that only faith justifies before god, and good workis to
declare owr faith, our obedience to god, and our love to god, and to our
neighbors, for saying that it was godlier the bisshops, priours, abots and
preistis to ha ue their own wives then so openly to keep other mennis, and
because I affirmed the pope, cardinals, bisshops and all the ecclesiastike
sort to be by gods word subject to the seclare ordinary powers as to their
emprowr and their own kings, for thus prechinge and saying, they had brent
me to, if I had not fled out of the loud. Now I report me to your sell ues
whether was this your execrable exe cucion, or else your pestelent persecucion?
And whether may there not be persecucion where the head professes Christ? ^
again whether not in England there has been and is yet persecucio^ or only
emonge the Jews and gentyls? Will ye yet thus contend to kouer and cloak your
own open trayterouse towches? Would ye set us to seek persecucion emonge the
Jews and Turks whiles your selves most traitorously at home persecute not
only your own floke the kings subiectis but also your head and gouerner even
the kings majesty him self. By whose preuey ^oniuracions, secret
conspiriso^s in auriculare co^fessions and crafty consultacion were so many of
the nobles of the north and lyncolne shyer set on fire Master Ask made the
captain to lead forth so rebelliouse a sort of traitors against our
prince? Were they not the bishops, abots and preistes which were the autours
of that sediciouse insurreccion and persecucion of their own king? And how
say you, my lordis, was it just execucion or persecucion that ye would have
prosecuted ageynsty our own head and gouerner at that time if ye might have
had your day so long looked fore? To put you therefore out of dout, your own
worthei punisshme^tes and plages hitherto justly executed upon you and your
abbayes, and your destruction at hand shall no notherwyse certify you to have
had then persecuted your head and his subjects then did the terrible example
and worthey punisshment of the sons of Chore of Dathan and Abyro^, the earth
deuoweringe and swallowinge in the^ quy^e down a live into hell, declare the^
to have persecuted Moses their most mylde head and godly gouerner constituted
of god to have led the^ out of that yerney furnace of bondage from Pharao. And
this is lo, the humble obedient service and love that siche ingrate rebels
render to their so louinge and ie^tle princes. Now I ask the^ again whether
the first church which co^sisted of Ada^ Eve Cain and Abel, had not Adam a
godly gouerner professinge that blessed sead Christ promised? and yet did one
brother under the same head persecute the the other, Cayn slew Abell, and now
tell me my lordis, was Cayn a Jew or a gentyle? Under Isaac a godly gouerner
and head of his familye and church, Esau persecuted Jacob. Was Esau a Jew or
a gentyle? And as it was then so is it now, says Paul, even one brother to
persecute another, under Abraham, Ismael persecuted Isaac, under Moses the head
gouerner of gods church was there no persecution? Read the book of nowmbers.
xij. and. xvi. Chapters, and ye shall see even the chief bishop with his wife
Maria, Dathan and A^yron with their wicked accomplices to have persecuted their
head Moses murmuryng against him for that he was so high in favor with god,
enuyinge him for his prophecing and interpreting so highly gods ple sure and
mind, and was it execucion ore persecucion that they prosecuted against Mose^?
Lo here may y^ see the Christen persecuted of his own subiectis one Jew to
persecute an other, one brother a no there, one gentile another, one crystian in
name a another, one englissh man a another as Christ said, Matt. x. One brother
to betraye a another unto death, the father his sone, the sons their parents
for my names sake says Christ. Now ye se that persecution is where so ever
the gospel ^ Christ be freely preached, whether it be in England, France or in
Germany etc. and not only emonge the Jews and gentiles as our bishops would
have men believe it. They say they be the Jews and Turks that shall persecute
you. But Christ says they shall be our own familiare false bro therne the
bisshops and the priests to per secute their head and us to which should
tender defend and feed us. This is lo their old wont facion, to set us to
look and beware of the Jews and gentyls persecucions, whiles them selves burn
us for the gospel. As did the thief cry to the people keep the thief, whiles
him self might rune his way the frelyer. And if there be no persecucion in
England, why pray ye in your new lytanpes and suffrages, god forgive owr
persewers and persecuters and turn their hertes, and to be desyuered from
them* Why pray ye ^he same in the most part of your Psalms every hay sunge
and red in your chirches?

I meruell of what lerninge and religion these bisshops be, that grant the
gospel to be in England, and not to be persecuted. The scripture techeth
plainly, Matthew. xvi. that emonge men, there was, and shall be ever, diverse
and sondre opinions of Christ and his religion and the word of god ever to be
agene said and persecuted as long as this world stands. Who resisted Moses
bringinge gods message and gospel into Egypt but the preistes of Egipte? In
Israel, Helias prechynge gods word, had he not the preistes of Baal his
adversaries and per sewers? The false prophets resisted Ieremye* The Pharisais
persecuted Christ. And not only the false Apostles but also the hole world
persecuted the trwe Apostles. Of this lecte, said they to Paul we know it to
be ageyn said and persecuted every where. After the Apostles Act. xxviij.
time the word of god was not only resy^ted with the persecucion of tyrants,
but also with the wicked doctrynes of heretics. In the popis kingdom, until
Erasmus, Ioha Hasse and Wycleue, Martyn Luther, and other men begane to write,
there seemed to be a good quiet concord of the christen religion, as long as
men believed in the pope to be head of Chrysts church, received his false
doctrine, rytes cere, tradicions, pardons, satisfaccio^s, merits, prayed for the
dead and to sayuts, and for the souls in purgatory, pelgrimaged, worshipped
stocks and stones, and his miss as a sacrifice for the syunes of the quike
and dead. Which was eue^ the same that Christ said in his gospel. As long as
the strong armed keeps his fore court and castle gates, all things are in
peace and salf guard that he has. For where Satan has the rule and dominion
over the common doctrine and techers there takes he diligent heed lest any or
many externe dissensions or tumults arise, nether stereth he up there many
herespes, no not in the Turks nor Jews chirches in these days, because he
has them sewer at his pleasure being lord head and king openly over their
religion. And eue^ so, in the popis kingedom has he kept and pet does he
keep his fore castle gates, that those things which he yet possedith might
continewe in peace. Unto this Satan's peaceable possession have our bisshops
brought, orels entend they to bring ageyue their church of England lo, so
that now, thanked be their father Satan, all is in peace without persecucio^
(say they) turned into just execucion after their own crafty construccion and
execrable exposicion.

But when the stronger armed comes upon him, then rustleth Satan his har^es,
then stereth he up tumults, then blows he forth bataill, sedicions,
conspirisons, insurreccions, rebellions, among his bishops and priests that
yet by these means were it possible, he might keep still his kingdom and be not
thrust out of his castle. So that there is no certayner argument and more
evident token of the gospel to be utterly oppressed, and of Satan to reign in
peace, as to se the public concord of, and in the religion. And there is no
toke^ so certain manifest and evident of the word of god arysing and cominge
forth into sight, as when ye se a common public discord in, and of the
religion. For and if ever men should have looked and trusted for any open and
general concord of, and in the religion in the world, at the revelling and
open prechinge of the gospel, it should have been at that time when our lord
Jesus Christ him self reveled and preached it emonge the Jews. He is the sone
of god by whom al things were created, no aposte, nor prophet to be compa ^ed
to him. And yet when he should preche forth with great honor and created the
prince of all Egypt. Job lost all his good but double was restored him. David
was cast out into exile of Saul, but yet was he called home again and exalted
into the regal majesty. Daniel was cast in to the lions, and a non made the
prince of the Persians. And as ye se, that if our god in this world promoueth
his, out of affliccion and persecucion into glory honor and felicite, miche
more translateth he his derely beloved chosen out of these miserable and heuey
present persecucions into that heavenly perpetual joy and felicite in the
other world. And the longer it is differred the more sweter it is when we have
it, our lord god yet counfortinge us with his assewered promises saying. I
shall deliver mi people from all their tribulacio^s. Sooner shall heaven and earth
pass away then mi wordis to pass unfulfilled, hills and mountayns shall be
shaken down but my mercy shall not go fro me, and the covenant of mi peace shall
not be moved says the lord god most merciful. Look upon Christ the sone of
god which aftir he was dejected unto the death of the cross, was he not
exalted into the most high honor and glory, and had given him a name above al
names so that in the name of Jesus every since boweth down both in heaven earth
and in hell? and what is done in the head shall not the same be done in the
members? Wherefore the more affliccion and persecucion the word of the cross
brings to us, the more felicite and greter joy abides us in heaven. But the
worldly peace, idle ease, welthey pleasure and this present transitory felicyte
which the ungodly imagine to procure them selves here by persecutinge and
thrustinge away the gospel, shall be turned here into their own trouble
bataill (as ye now this day see it) and at last into the horrible
destruccions and mutacions of their realms, and aftir this (if they repent
not) into there own perpetual infelicite, perdicion and dampnacion. And if our
lordely prowed bishops would consider and measure the state of the christen
church by the acts of the Apostles, they should see in how greuouse
persecucion it was, when the most nowmber of disciples Act. vi.
increased. Again if they would read the stories either of the holy or haithen,
they should see that when the church was in most welthe and ease, the prelates
in idleness aspiringe for riches and honor, then entered into it, the most
pestele^t poison and destruction of all godly doctrine, then increased all
ydolatry heresies supersticion, and men's deuilyssh tradicions as ye may see in
constantyne the emperors days, and in gregoryes the great his time, how
Christ's religion then began to dekaye. And sone aftir, or in Heraclius time
how the devil did put forth his two little great Antichriste^ horns Mahumet
and the Pope of Rome. So that where as is no persecucion of Christ's religion
but all in securite and rest there is that church lykely not to continewe
long in the trwe faith. For Christ is no where borne, be he never so little
without tumulte and blodshedinge of innocents as it is written, Matthew. i^.
Trowth it is that Huldrike Zwing lius said. In blood is the gospel planted,
with blood therefore must it be conserved and defended.

Let us therefore (christen brethren) be constant in obeyinge god rather then
men, although they slay us for the verite. For our innocent blood shed for the
gospel, shall preach it with more fruit (as did abelis, steuens etc) then
ever did our mouths and pens. Consider the beginning of the christen
religion, and the first fruits of the prymitiue church, and we shall se
innumerable innocents slain, as it has been these. 20. years paste, for the
preachinge and bringinge in again of the gospel. For never did the ^aythe nor
innocent lyuinge more flor^sshe then in those days. Let us therefore rejoice
and thank* God that it would please him to use our bodies and blood unto his
glory and promouinge of his word and edifyinge of his church. For the lordis
field when it wexeth dry, lea^e and baryn, it must be watered, made fat,
dunged and composed with the innocent blood and bodies of his faithful. For
what profit, said David, comethe Psalm. xxix.
of my blood if it be laid down with my body in grave to be corrupted? Is it
not beter spent powered forth upon the lordis field to be there with made fat
fe^unde and fertyle* Now thou see christen reader, that they that wrote and
pre^hed, persecucion to be a perpetual inseparable companion of the gospel,
erred not, as it was well vere fyed of them selves being compelled to recant
this manyfeste verite. But of whom were they compelled? verily of them that yet
believe not the gospel to be the word of the cross even the very enemies unto
the cross of Christ, of the^, I say, that laugh Christ and his word to
skorne, which yet sit in the chayer of the perverse pestelent skorners, to whom
(as to the wise gentilis of the world) the gospel of Christ is but
folisshnes, and (as it was ^o the Jews) a sclaunder and* stomblinge stone:
where at they now fallen have provoked the wrath of god upon the^ Deus
misereatur nostri et benedicat nobis: vt cognoscamus in terra viam sua^, Ame^.
I thought not (when I began) to have digressed so far. I return therefore to
our Gadarens. Of which some there be feeble saythed, a fraid greatly of the
loss of their little pigges; saying. Yet we set siche as profess Christ and
his gospel to be cruelly handled and to suffer miche misery, presone,
affliccions, persecucion and loss of all they have. And therefore although we
know it to be the trwth which is now restored by prechers brent, and books
banisshed and restrained, yet be we more a fraid of Christ for fear of the
loss, of our little goodis and disquietinge of our mortal bodies in this
transitory life, then of a legion of devils drawinge us by little and little from
hearing and readinge the word of this cross unto vanites, lies fables, and
to this flateringe welthey world. Unto you therefore, which yet do not cruelly
resist nor wetingly persecute Christ in his members and in his gospel, but
for fear, for weakness, and as it were iently with the Gadarens pray Christ
with his Bible and books to pass from you: and also unto them which have
fermely received and constantly profess Christ and his word now suffering for
their sakes the cross of persecucion, even the inseparable companion of Christ
and his word: do I write this counfortable book, by the grace of our almighty
god to animate and to acourage you in your affliccions, to desyer Christ to
dwell still with you and not to take his word of trwth at any time out of
your mouths, to strengthen you with his holy spyryte, to confirm and counfort
you in these your heuey affliccyons and greuouse persecucyons, ioyously and
patiently to bear them, as the sweet cross and light burdens of ou^ most
merciful louinge father, there by to be facioned and formed like unto his own
sone our savior Christ, that we might with joy and felicite be also
glorified with him in heaven. So be it.

EXcept the faithful, as many as have been from the begi^ni^g of the worl de
excercised and whetted with diverse affliccio^s, had been casten against
innumerable perels and tribulacions: we might worthily (christian brethern) now
lament our heuey state, miserable chance and sorrowful condition. Yea we might
well accuse, and with Job curse these our troublous corrupt and blody last
days of this world. In which most gilties, we for only the trwthes sake and
for Christ's name suffer persecucio^, sustain most bitter and cruel hatered,
we be afflicted, scourged, caste^ out of our country* And even we which seem
to some men to be best at ease, yet be we no where at any time sewer and quiet,
but as sheep be we appointed to be slain. For even our own false brethren
spekinge fayer to our faces. pretendinge to be chased out of their country for
the same gospel, in nothing at all following it, but openly slaundering it, vex
us, molest us belie us, depra ue us, slander and hurt us, no less cruelly
persecutinge us then the open papists. Which thing verily is even the same
that our lord and master Christ told us before, saying our own brothern and
most familiare to be our most deadly enemies, one brother to betray another.
Ion^. xv i
And the time to come where in who so Marc. xiij.
slays us shall think them self to do high service to their god even there
own bellyes until their sins yet at rest Mat. x.
lyinge with Cayns murder in securyte, shall be laid open in the gates before
Genesi. iiij. ij. Tim. iij.
all men. For these deceitful false brethern shall under the vysar of
hypocrisye goforth worse and worse, whylis they both lead wother into errors
and err also their own selves renye god in their dedis Tit. i*
being abominable, inobedient, reprobated cast awayes and yet with their
mouths confess they god. Wherefore (dear brothern) we be happy which have
the trwthe all though before the world we seem to be the most unhappy and
miserable. For unto us that persevere in it there is laid up promised of god the
most ioyouse and plentuouse reward. I know how grievously many men be tempted
and troubled for that they not reme^bringe the old examples, or not well taught
in the law of god, do measure the treuth of christ's religion and faith*
both by the most part, and also by the felycyte and prosperouse present
success of the world thynkinge the veryte to stand upon the (...) multitude,
and on their sydis which have the victoryes, live in sauegarde at their own
lusts, which have the praises and reverent salutacions of men, and them to be
but liars heretics ungodly etc. which as they be contempned, punished,
persecuted and exyled, so be they but a few simple sely pore lombes. But so
far from mannis reason are the iugements of god, that even the Prophetis
often times contended with god and reasoned with him in this matter. Abacuck
thus Abac. i.
saying how long lord shall I cry and thou will not hear? Wherefore have
thou Psalm. xxxvi. and xxxvij.
reserved me into these wiked and unjust days? Wherefore beholdest thou these
despysers and hold thy peace whiles Psalm. lxxiij.
the wyked treddowne the man iuster them him self. For this cause is the law
torn in pesis whylis the ungodly thus prevail sendynge forth perverse
iugements actis, laws and antichrysten instruccions.

Trew^h it is that god promised his blissinges unto them that harken to his
Deute. vij. xviij xxviij.
voice, believe his words and keep his commandments. Saying I shall set the
above all the nacyons of the earth: And all these blessinge shall come over
the. Blessed shall thou be in town and field. Blessed shall be the fruit of
thybodye, the fruits of thy grwnde, of thy catell, of thy sheep oxen etc.
Blessed shall be thine almery and store house. Blessed shall thou be, whether
thou goist forth are come in. The Lord shall smite thine enemies, that rise
against the, yea and that before thy face shall he smite them down. They shall
come against the one way, and fly away from the seven wayis. All things
thou take in hand shall be blessed, that is to say, they shall increase and
have a prosperouse success etc.

Again these be his curses and plages which god threatenethe and casts upon
them that harken not to his voice, believe not his wordis, nor keep not his
commandments saying.

Cursed shall thou be in field and town. Cursed be thine Almery and store
house. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, the fruits of thine heardes of
neat and flockis of sheep. Cursed be thine incominge and out goinge. I shall
send the skarsnes derthe honger and all things to go to naught, what so ever
thou goiste about, vty^l it be utterly destroyed and waasted yea and that
shortly and suddenly, for thy nowne wicked inuencions by which thou haste
forsaken the lord. I shall cast pestelence upon the* with famyn, pouertye,
fevers, swellings cold, heat burnings, corrupt ayers, blastings and with
^aiaill shall thou be consumed until thy loud now so fertyle and pleasant
has spewed the forth all together etc.

But (oh Lord says Ieremye) albeit Ier. xij.
thou beiste to just a dealer and to ^^we a promiser then that I should reason
with the tell me. Why (as it mesemeth) contrary to thy promises, do the ungodly
enjoy thy blissingis, and the good men be plaged with thy cursinges? But yet
let me common with the (oh Lord) of ryghtwi^^enes or of thy iugements. How is
it that the way of the ungodly thus prospers and that all these shameless
sinners live yet in welthe and in their own lustis unpunished? Thou have so
planted them that they be deep roted, they profit and be rich. Thou art ready
at their lips to give them their desyers, albeit their hertes be far from
the.

Asaph likewise being offended at the prosperity of the wyked, and at the
curses casten upon the godly men complained to god on this manner saying. My
fefe verily were almost gone, mifotinge begu^ne to fail me, wellnyghe fallen
into a fond angrye mind, zelouse to follow the wyked, when I did see all
things so prosperously to succeed with the ungodly. They bear no deadly
burdens, but sit fast in all ease and riches. They be not oppressed with the
mortal myseries of men another punyshed like other men. And therefore are they
thus puffed up with pride, that they be drowned in mischief and iniurye. So that
for their wealy riches they be given over unto all lusts following their own
hertes desires to do violence and tyranny. All things they abhor and
dysdayne, save those only which their selves say enacte and decree, yea and
that so proudly. Their eyes can not se for fat, they speak from a loft eue^
against the most highest. They stretche forth their mouths unto heaven but
their tongues walk upon the earth, where fore their folk shall fall into their
service and all for great lucre. Tusshe say they, does God know this? can the
most highest see us? Lo said I, they are the ungodly that enjoy these rich
blessings in this world: In vain therefore do I cle^ se mine heart: In vain
wasshe I my han des in innocencye: wherefore should I then be thus punysshed
every day, and chaste ned all the night long: whiles (I say) I thus
considered with my self, I had al almost slipped away from the felowshipp of
thy floke. Then thought I, how might I understand this thing: It was to hard
for me to know it. And here goth Asaph and Jeremy into the secret holy place
of the Lord, where stood the arc and the propye^a^orye, which is Christ, even
that blessed ^eade in whom we be all blessed, although he was made the curse
to bless us. Here at him and his word they fetched the answer to certyfye
owr flesshly judgment of the will of God in this matter. Here were they boden
to mark the end of these ungodly so gretely prosperynge with Gods
blessings, and also the end of the godly which seemed to be under the curses.
For how soever manys fond reason iugeth of God, that he should either neglect
his promyses, or to be the author of evil, yet is he just in all his ways and
holy in all his works, his ways are not like ours, nor his thoughts as be
owrs, another his counsels and mind correspo^de^t to owr reason. Christ Psalm.
exlv. Isay. lv.
answered the murmurer, at his unlike payment to the laborers in his vine
yard, saying: Friend I do the no wrong, I will do with my nowne what my list.
Matthew. xx.
But beware thou, that iugest of God after thy nowne reason to do evil, lest
the same thing that thou iugest to be evil, being right good in deed,
because God does it, be turned into thy damnacyon, for so peruersely iugynge of
the most best goodness. For what or how so ever the claye iugeth and reasons
with the potter, yet will the potter have the vyctory. Psalm. li.
Beware (I say) lest thine eye, that is thy best reason be evil, because God
is good and does good, when thou thynkest and iugest him to do evil. Beware
lest by thy nowne folyshe corrupt reasonynge with God for his hardenynge of
Pharao, and leadynge men into temtacio^, and geuynge his blessings to the
wicked contrary to his promyses (as to the natural man it appears) and his
curses to the good: and breakyng of his vesseles of wrath* to declare his
justice and glory, thou turnest his just and well doing into thy nowne hurt.
But hear thou reuerentlye with fear the dyuyne oracle and answer of God at
this propyciatory and stole of his mercy, Asaph, David, and Jeremy there
fetching it, warnyng the, not to be moved nor offended at the felycyte and
prosperity of the ungodly. But to mark the end of the^, for he has so set
them a loft in a slybery place to cast Psalm. lxxiij.
them down suddenly. Oh Lord, how suddenly are they gone, consumed with diverse
deaths? No notherwyse (says he) then a dream, when the man waketh, doist
thou away their image out of the cite* For suddenly like hay or grass are
they smyten down and wy^hered. The scripture lykeneth them to grass, which
the higher if grows the more present is the syith to kut it down. They be
compared to smoke, which the higher it ascends, the more it vanyssheth away.
They are Psalm. xxxvij.
lykened to the euenyng shadow of a man, which the longer it reaches and
wexeth on the earth (the son going down) the sooner suddenly is it gone. They
be lykened to the fresshe baye tree that roteth so deep and spredeth so wide,
which suddenly cut down, no man seith wheere it stood. And again in the Psalm.
xci. Oh Lord, how excellent clear are thy works, beyond all mesure so
profounde are thy counsels. An unwise man comprehends the^ not, another the
folysh understands the^. That is to weite when these mischeuouse blody
tyraunts grow up flourisshinge like the flowers and grass in the field, into
this end do they so flourisshe that they might be cut down and cast into the
fire for ever. Agene Psalm. xxxvij. At the wealy prosperity of the ungodly
cruel, be thou not moved once to turn thy foot into his steapes. For suddenly
like the grass is he smyten down and as the grieve he^bes is he withered
away. Also unto Ieremey thus did god answer. That he did put these great
steres into his rank fat pastures, that as soon as they be fed to the
higheste they might be brought to the slaughter house. Thus have ye the answe
re of god wherefore he gives his blessings to the wyked, commandinge us not to
follow their stepes, nor yet zelously to envy their prosperity, but patiently
to abide a little, and then they shall be taken away suddenly. And death shall
lie gnawinge Psalm. xlix.
and fedinge, upon them as does the floke upon the pasture. But the just
shall be in the light when the treasure of the ungodly shall be consumed and
hell shall be their perpetual hospital. Be not afraid therefore when thou
seist siche a man made rich and the bewtye of his palaces increase. For at his
death nothing of the^ all, shall he karye away with him, nether shall his
gloriouse po^pe follow him. But yet whilis he lives he is called graciouse and
happy, he is praised whiles he is in prosperity. But when he shall pass his
way to his fathers familye, he shall neuermore see light. Thus lo, when a man
is in prosperyte and honor he is without understanding, compared unto the
brute beasts, for that he is even like the^. God therefore casts his
blessings upon the wyked that yet fight against him, to excercyse our faith,
sendinge us in our afflic cions unto his propiciatory Christ and to his word
there to search out, as ye here see, the cause of their prosperity, and of our
own affliccions into owr present co^solacion, declaringe unto us how vile he
estemeth these riches, these welthy prosperities and transitorye blessings of
the world, especially in unthankful tyrants, techinge us how terrible are
his iugements, so high to lift a man up, to thentent he would suddenly cast him
down the more grievously. Here gave he the rich gloton his heaven, here aftir
to have his hell. Here he gave Lazarus his hell, after this to have his heaven.
Rejoice we therefore, (afflicted Christen brethern) in owr trowblouse
persecucions and heuye exyle. For if we here pacie^tly, suffer with christ, we
shallbe also glorified with him in heaven. Nether do I (says saint Paul) repute
To. viij.
the affliccio^s of this world worthei of the glory tocome which shall be openly
given us. Unto us therefore his childern the curses are become his blessingis
and sweet cross which our father laith upon us to follow his dear sone owr
savior Christ, that we might be trwly fasshoned unto his image once lost in
paradise. For as we have borne the image of the erthy Adam, so must we bear
the image of our heavenly Ada^ Christ. He thus spekinge i. C^^^n. xv.
unto us. My childerne neglecte not my correccion, nore faint not when ye be
chastened, for whom I love, them I chaste^, and beat every child whom I
receive. If ye patiently suffer my chastysinge. I will offer my self unto you
alouinge father. For what child has the father who^ he corrects not? If ye
should be fre fro my correccion so were ye not my childerne, but bastards. Now
by faith and this knowledge are the curses turned into our blessed and sacred
crosses joyfully and gladly to be borne aftyr Christ, for our correccion, lest
we be condemned with the wealy wyked world, God workinge in us a strange
work to work his own, as Isay says. This is the rok whom god showed Isay.
xxviij.
to Moses Exo. xxxiij. aftir he was ta ken out of the water of affliccio^, upon
the which rok god comanded him tosto^de whiles his glory was in passing
foreby, where he did set Moses in the riftes of the same rok defending him
with his almighty hand and koueringe him, until his hand taken of, he showed
him his hinder parties even Christ him self and his members at last to come
by, and through the cross to enter into his glory. And to exclude his and our
merits for so suffeirnge he told him, for all that he spoke so famyliarely
with him, that he would be merciful, to who^ he listed to be piteous. Here
also behold the tree which when Moses Exo. xv. did put into the bitter waters
of marath, auo^ they were made sweet, so that the people of god might well
drink of them. Behold the bitter passion of Christ hanginge upon the cross
of tree sufferynge for thy sins: and what water of tribulacio^ is so bitter to
the, but in him, and for his sake layinge it upon the, is not sweet and
joyfully dronken of? yea it is to the turned into the sweet wine so changed
from water at the merry meriage. What child Joan. ij.
of god will think him self so innocent that he is worthei no chastement? Let
us therefore (christen persequnted brethern) ascend patiently into this secret
holy place even owr mercy seat Christ, beholdinge all these heuye curses to be
caste^ upon him beringe away all our sins and sustayninge the pains dew
unto To. iij. Gal. iij.
them for owr sakis and salvation, made for us the curse and execracion to
redeem us from the curse of the law, made for us the malediccion, that through
him they might be turned into our blessings, made (I say) for us
vnrightwysenes and sin, that we through him might be rekened of god ryghtwyse
and iustyfyed or absolved from sin. Thus be we blessed in owr savior whilis
we suffer persecution for his names sake, here aftir to hear Mat. v.
it of his own mouth openly calling us saying. Come ye my blessed and
possede the kingedom prepared for you from the Matthew. xxv.
beginning.

Now therefore let us patiently suffer dependinge upon our fathers pleasure
whiles his adversaries persecute us for preachinge and wrytinge unto them the
trwth: let us constantly suffer to be exyled for that we abhor their idolatry
their antichrysten rytes and supersticious ceremonies, let us fly in holy
derkenesse out of Babylon into the deserte with our pore lawful wives rather
then wykedly to suffer our selves violently contrary to gods law to be
separated, who^ god has joined. This is owr crown and praise (as Peter says)
unworthily to suffer with a good conscience for the trwthes sake, and not as any
malefactors. Happy be we which have the word of owr counfort, the doctrine
of our faith, confidence hope and joy in the holy ghost to bolden and to
confirm us in these our heuye affliccions for well doing. And woe be unto the^
which have taken away the word of consolacion from the lay people which
soernestly in their anxt thirste for it and instead of the same have thruste
into the co^gregacions erroneouse doctrine, idolatrye, supersticion, and
deceyuable sermons and institucions into the dampnacion of many men. Them
selves not only seducinge the unlearned, but also with their sinful and
dampnable lyuinge drawinge many aftir the^ unto perdicion. Whereby they declare
the^ selves to have dronkenin that pharisaicall blodye tyrannouse spirit which
may not abide to hear the verite. Which serpe^tyne sprite went ever about to
take and trap Christ in his wordis, deprauinge every fact, miracle, and word
which he wrought or said yea although their own consciences told it the^,
the same to be done and spoken of the holy ghost very god. This did they to
bring Christ and his doctrine into the hatered of all men, to be detested and
abhorred as an heretic, a deceyuer, a sediciouse person and traitor against
the emperowr belyinge him most deadly and most shamefully. For when in
judgment Pilate affirmed him innocent and to have fownde no capital crime in
him, there this pharisaicall spryte rored out furiously krying. He makes
co^mocion and sedicio^ thorowt all Iewrye and Galile. Away with him cru^ifye
crucifye him. And eue^ so is our pore afflycted church vexed and oppressed
with the (...) calamities, injuries lies ^ tyra^nie. The same rebukes unjust
ver^rious and cruel persecucio^s do we suffer this day. But let us be of good
chere, saying we suffer all this for rightwisenes and well doing. For what
thing do they persecute us? verily for no another cause then that we desyer to
know, and to teache the pure clear knowledge of Christ and the very way of our
salvation and of the christian religion, that we and other might se the imme^se
riches of the mercy, rightwysenes, life and health which we should have and
possess through our faith in only Christ. We thirste entirely to hear the
pure gospel freely and faithfully preached whereby we obtain rightwysenes and
salvation, when eue^ the angels desire to behold and under stand those thing
is which are preched in the gospel of christ. And for this our godly i. Petr. i
desire, Satan roreth and is wode with us and stereth up his impes the popish
bishops and preistes thus tyra^nously to handle and hon^e us from place to
place. But and if we would li ue so viciously so prowdly so prodigi^usely and
so profanely in all manner of idolatry sin and wikednes approuinge their
pestele^t popish doctrine and wink at their leche rouse licencyouse living,
and rebuke not their open whoredo^, ypocrisy dampnable doctrine with their
infinite frauds where bye they seduce both princes and their subiectis then
were we at peace with the^ and Satan with his serpe^tyne seade would favor
exalt and defend us. But becau se we desyer a christen life and a purer
doctrine in owr clergy whereby we and alme^ might know the benefit of Christ's
pas sion, and false religion might be known and estiewed, therefore this
Satanike spirit of the spiritalty can not abide us. We have through our lordis
grace and help forsaken his Satanike fraternite and synagoge, and casten of
his da^pnable yoke, and said him adieu, and therefore has he stered up this
hatered envy and persecucio^ of the pharise is against us. Nether is this any
new thing. For it is the wont craft and deceytfull deuelry of the old
serpent now most fyercely excercesed and whetted whiles he seith his kyngedom
almost at an end and his heuey judgment at hand, manis wikednes being al
most at the rypiste and higheste.

But let us be strong minded and constant in our lord god, knowinge that this
unclean spyrite of the spiritualty shall be compellled to avoid and give place
to the finger of god. And even now begins the finger of god to work with
us and to stretche forth his almighty arm. For it is the most sing lare
inestimable be nefit of god, that there is now to counfort us in our
persecucion, sprongen up ^ given the most clear confortable light of the
gospel. Whereby we know the prince of Derkenes, we espy and may avoid his
craftye fraudele^t seduccions and preu^y enginnes. And hereof is it that he
roreth and his impes the clergy weep for anger and fight so cruelly, and
grinne ageynste us and gods anointed with his word, for this cause they
threaten they persecute, they faget they preson they bur ne andtc. here we
must arm our soulis with the word of god lest in this bataill we shrynke
and fall, here must we fight manfully in faith in our master Christ and so
have we in him, and for his sake, the victory of these owr spiritual enemies.
But verily this may we not do unless we be continually counforted and
confirmed with the ferme everlasting word Roma. xv.
of god. For all things that be written, are written for our doctrine that
through patience and consolacion of the scriptures we might have hope. There be
yet many of us which have not herd the gospel openly and freely preched which
bear good zele thereto, but yet are they but tender and weak and not waxen so
strong branches in the vine yard of Christ as some whother be: which must
with great dilige^ ce cure and study be planted watered and roted with
continual readinge and teachinge till they be strong and constant. Satan
Satan.
is old and subtyle, and knowth which part of Christ's church is weakest
and with what kind of tentacio^ he may sonest overthrow us, and where he sees
us most weak there with most violence and craft World.
he fyercely inuadeth. The world is full of slanders and examples of the most
sinful and abominable lyuinge with the prouocacyo^s unto almaner myscheif and
vice and pluckinges from godliness and vertewe. The flesh is faint and
febleferefull, and unsteadfast Flesh.
prone unto desperacion. But as soon as we be tempted either of Satan, or of the
world, or of our flesh so ferefull and feeble: let vsflye unto the word of
god knowinge it and understanding it fermely that it is the merciful will and
most best counsel of god, and eue^ the most certain testimonye of his
graciouse divine beneuole^ce towerde us so to excercyse and to prove our faith
patience hope love etc. and that al these sharp assawtes of our enemies shall
be turned into our salvation. Let us ever have it before our eyes for who^ we
suffer and for what gospel we be thus persecuted, remembering his fatherly
promise so full of co^solacion and so often promised us in Christ. And the^ shall
we find a mighty and present counfort. For it is decreed in the immutable
eternal counsel of god that who^ god has foresene chosen in Christ, the
same has he predestined to be made like the image of his son, that he might
be the first begoten emonge his many brethern.

Now we see and feel the benign and merciful will of god towerde us, sending
us tribulacio^s and castinge us under his cross, not to leese us but to prove
and try us and to declare us to be his very own sons. As ye know it,
Christ by the cross to have had entered into his glory, even so the feithful
of Christ has god ordined by his most best and inscrutable counsel first to
try and prove the^ by the cross and then at last to glorifye the^. God now
calls us by his gospel to make us just and salfe, and to seperat and call
us from this sinful world overwhelmed with syn that we might be made the
vessels of glo rye. For whosoever believe not the gospel of Christ, they shall
contine we the vessels of shame and of his wrath unto everlasting da^pnacio^.
For this our graciouse vocacio^ let us incessantly give god tha^kis committing
our selves gladly to his pleasure willingly giving our selves over into his
ha^dis to fasshion us by his cross to exercise whet, hew, square and
polisshe us at his benign will to make us like his sone our savior. If we
will be justified of him, be must blot out take away quench out and pardone all
our sins. If we will have him to give us a beter life then is this present,
he must nedis take us away and deliver us out of this world and life
replenisshed with all mischief mysery and sin. Which thing is very hard
and* sharp unto our fleshely nature, fithe we be from our yeughth even from
our birthe evil corrupt and prone to syn Genesi. viij.
against gods will. This old man must dye in us that we might be a new
creature in Christ, of which thing, Baptism is the sign, sacrament and
figure. For Romans vi
into Christ's death be we baptized to dye with him and to rise with him aftir
owr sins be buried in his wounds so to walk in a new life to glorifye our
father in heaven. This our old man is crucified with Christ, to abolisshe the
body of syn, so that here after we be no more bond men unto sin.

Once were we with great pains perells anxt and heuines brought forth into
this world, but this carnal birth brings not forth else then sinners and the
chylderne of Adam iuged to eternal death and dampnacion. It is therefore
necessary that we be borne agene of the spirit from above orels we may not
come into the kingdom of god. This our the other spiritual birth and regeneracion
brings forth just and faithful, even the sons of god ordined and
predestined unto eternal life and salvation. But as in our natural natiuyle
before we be borne, there are not else but sorows heuines anguisshe affliccio^s
pa^ges and perels even the image of death: Eue^ so must it be with us in this
our spiritual regeneracion before we be fully regenerated of the holy ghost,
as Christ Ioa^. xvi and* iij.
testifies. For he that shall be borne agene of the spirit, must have his old
man mortifyed, be made a new man, dead from syn and from this world trustinge
nothing to his own strength nor meritis, attributinge nothing to him self,
abnyinge him self renown^inge the world, with all his pleasures, only to
follow Christ. And thus doing we incense and provoke the world against us:
Whose hatered and wrath we must contemn. And if the calling of god requires
it, father and mother, wife and childern, house and londis body and goodis all
must be forsaken rather then we should falbak from Christ and from the
doctrine of his gospel. All temporal and corporal tranquillite and quietness,
commodities, be they never so pleasant and great, all lucre and profit,
friends kinsfolk must be forsaken gladly for the trwths sake, yea all things
must be left rather then the trw religion, worship and doctrine of Christ should
be forsaken dissembled or r^canted, all things must be cast away for the
verite and glory of Christ. Wherefore we must be borne ageyn if we will be
saved, we may not now live aftir the will and mind of the flessh, but the
spirit of god must reign and dwell in us. Owr old man with his co^cupisce^ses
must be crucified in the worl de, we must rune our course unto the end emonge
vipers and s^orpions and emonge our* most deadly and cruel enemies. We which
be regenerated of god may not look for our paradise upon this sinful earth. We
may not look here to live in peace tranquilyte securite in riches commodities
and pleasures. For this is not the chance and fortune of the very godly upon
this earth, but we must be excercised here with many affliccions, calamities,
persecucions, smyten through with anguisshe henines and sorows right greuouse,
pressed down with the cross, laid forth open against many pereles. Which
cross is a very bitter herb unto the flesh. For the flesh would gladly be
at ease and salf in rest with out sorrow pain and trowble. When calamities
perels affliccious fear and persecucio^s arise and even the image of terrible
death is present, then the flessh tre^bleth and quaketh, ^he staggereth and
flyethe bak, falls down faint and feeble, so impacient and angrye is she
under the cross. For she had liefer dwell ever in her old skin then to be
renewed namely when she sees them thus cruelly to be handled which embrace the
gospel and must be thus borne a new. Here, here, therefore it behooves the
consolacion and exhortacio^ of the scriptures, which bolden and animate us
with the most ferme and present counforte, confirminge our heriis so, that
evermore we may endure constant in faith, ferme in hope, glewed unto the
gospel, to persevere in this strong ieoperdouse bataile against Satan, the
world, and against owr own selves.

The first consolacion is. That Christ himself has also suffered.
FIrst of all, we that be in trouble and heaviness for the trw^h, must set the
example of Christ before our eyes (I mean not our bodily eyes fastened upon any
image forboden of God) but before the eyes of our faith, seeing his passion
painted and engraven in his holy word Paul thus exhortinge us saying, In
patience let us run in this bataill before us having respect unto the goyd
of our faith and fiuissher of our bataill even Jesus Christ, which beholdinge
the joy set forth before him suffered the cross (all shame despised and set a
part) and is sitte^ down on the right hand of the seat royal of god.
Consider and look well upon him, for it was he that sustained and suffered so to
be ageyn said, that you should not faynte and be feeble minded. Here we see
Christ the sone of god, even the power of god to suffer for us, how he would for
our sakis be humbled and dejected under all men even unto the death of the
cross to exalt us into the most high dignity and to lift us up into the
glory celestial. And therefore did god exalt him into so high glory. If
Christ therefore our lord has sufferd for us, so many, so great obprobries,
calamyties ignominyes reuylinges shames injuries sorrows and even the most
bitter and ignominiouse death, what delicate softlings be we if again, for his
sake, we refuse through like affliccions to go to him by the same way? For
verily we be called unto the same pathe, peter thus affirminge. Christ to be
^courged and afflicted for us, leauinge us an example to follow his steapes,
even to suffer affliccions also in this world. The world hated Christ, and no
doubt but it will never love his members, but with the same bitter hatered
persecute us which be Christ's floke. The world loves his own. And because
we be not the worldis, but Ioa^. xv.
chosen out of it, therefore does the world hate us. Let us not forgete these
words of owr savior Christ. The servant is not beter then his master. If they
have persecuted me they shall persecute you also. Wherefore and if there be no
persecucion at any time in England, so is there nether Christ nor any of his
members.

This therefore is unto us all, the most greateste counfort. That if we suffer
with Christ for his names glory: sewer and certain be we that god loves us
and has chosen us to be his sons and ayers of the ij. Tim. ij.
celestial kingedom, and that he has put us a part from this sinful
dampnable world, that we should not be dampened with the wyked, but glorified
with Christ. Thus did Paul send his sone Timothe i. Tessa. iij.
to the Thessalonions to counfort and confirm them in faith, exhortinge the^
to constancye in their affliccions and persecucions which their own countrymen
and kynsfolke brought upon them: thus wrytinge to them. Your selves know it,
that we be ordined unto this use. For when we were with yon, we told you
before in our sermons that we and you should suffer trouble and persecucion.
Also when Paul and Baruabas came to listram Iconiun and to Antioch to confirm
the brethern, they exhorted them to persevere in faith and not to be plukt from
Christ with no threats no fear, nor persecucion telling them that through
many tribulacio^s we must enter into the kingedom of God. But se only that
none of you suffer and be troubled as a murderer, or a these, or i. Petr. iiij.
as a malefactor and a b^^ye body to curiose in other men's matters. For if any
suffer and be punysshed as a crystiane, Pro. xi. Ier. xlix Ezec. ix. Lu. xxiij
let him not be asshamed, but glorifye god in so suffering. For the time is
come that the judgment or plage must begin at the house of god. Which sith
it begins at us, what shall become of the^ that believe not the gospel of
God? And if the just be saved by siche difficultye, where shall the ungodly
appear? Wherefore they that be persecuted and troubled at the will of god, let
them lay up, and commit their souls unto their faithful maker in well doing.
Let us set before our minds all the constant faithful martyrs which have
confessed god and for Crystes sake forsaken the glory of the world honors
riches pomp, yea and their own lives to. If these men through Christ have
ouercomen the world and might have suffered so miche, wherefore shall not we
trust, god with his grace to strengthen us and to be present to confirm us
and to deliver us from all these calamyties and to imparte unto us his glory?
He never yet forsook any that faithfully trusted in him and suffered for his
gloriouse names sake.

But yet if our minds be but weak and we so false hert^d as to think, that
Christ for that he is very god might well suffer and have the victory, and
also give his holy martyrs like grace, and as for us because we be men and
sinners fayntly faithed, we cannot therefore but fear and ^lye from this
persecucion and mar^yrdom being not able to abide it. When this tentacion come
over us, then let us ru^e to the scriptures which shall counfort us
meruellonse strongly ministringe to owr soulis si^he help, and addinge to us
siche inuin^ble strength and alacryte of mind with so great constancye, that
we shall suffer all things gladly and bear away the most gloriouse victory
into our felicite most ioyouse through Christ.

Here folowth the second consolation. That Christ him self ij
is present with his help for his faithful.
THis also hold fast in mind. That Christ is given us not only for an
example us to suffere with him but also an helper a defender and preserver in
all our affliccions and troubles, and will not at any time forsake us, nor
leave us a lone in our bataill and perell. But who so touches us, he touches
the apple of his eye, and he that does us iniurye does injury to Christ, as
he said to Paul. Saul, Saul, why persecutest me* He persecuted Act. ix.
the crystians whom Christ estemeth and calls as him self, and reputeth the
same persecucion done to his own person which is done to us.

Let every faithful here consider with him self, how great a faithful helper
we have of Christ whiles for his sake we suffer persecucion. For if we belene
in Christ and suffer for his sake, we are verily crystia^s and the sons of
god. And if god be our father, Christ our lord, our head and our brother, no
doubt, god beholds us tenderinge us as diligently as any father may love his
own derely beloved son, as the Psalm witnesses. Owr help to be of the
lord which has made heaven and earth. He shall not once suffere our feet to
slide. He sleapeth not that keeps us. The eyes of the lord are set upon the
rightwyse and his ears enclyned to their prayers. When we cry he hears us
and delivers us from al our Psalm. xxiij.
troubles. He is present with us troubled in heart, and saves the humble in
spyrit. Many trybulacions come over the just, but the lord delyuereth us from
the^ all. He keeps all our bones, so that not one of them be broken. In the.
xl. Psalm the Prophet complayneth to god of his trouble but anon he says* The
Lord is tender and takes the cure over me. Agene, Behold the eyes of the
lord are bent upon them Psalm. xxxiij.
that fear him and trust unto his mercy, it is he that delyuereth owr soulis
from death and fedeth us in time of famyn. We therefore depend upon the Lord
for he is owr helper and defender. In him our hertes rejoice and in his holy
name is our trust, also David counforteth himself in this word. The Lord is
my light and my sauinge health, whom shall I fear? The lord is the defender of
my life, of who^ then Psalm. xxvi.
shall I be afraid? If never so great an host so strongly appointed be bent
agenst me, yet shall not my heart be afraid, If bataill rise agey^st me, then am
I most sewereste. For the aungel of the lord compasses the^ rownd about that
fear him, to deliver them. Blessed is the man that trusts in him. And if I
walk (faith he) in the middis of the shade we of death, yet fear I non evil:
For thou (Lord) art with me: The sons of Korath sing also Psalm. xxij.
thus. God is owr refuge and strength unable to be expressed. Wherefore we
fear not although the hole earth be turned Psalm. xlv.
up se down and the mountayns be deuolued into the mids of the sea. These be
doutlesse the most ferme promises of the mighty help and presence of god with
us in our affliccions. Which can not deceive us. All the faithful had and have
experience of this help never to have failed them. And saying god is thus
present with us, wherefore should we be a fraid of death? or be troubled in myde
as me^ with out hope or counforte? If god be on our side, who can be against
us? Which spared not his own son but delivered him To, viij.
up to death for us all. And how then may it be other wise but that with him
he must give us all things? Who shall lay any crime to our charge saying we
be the out chosen of god? It is god that justifies us, what is he that may
conde^p^e us? It is Christ that dyed for us, yea it is he that is risen again for
us and sits at the right hand of god making intercession for us. What
consolacion may we have more plentuouse more present and effectuouser then
this? Where he said. God is on our side, god fyghteth for us. How almighty is
god one alone for us al sufficient: What is the world in his ha^dis? All
nations are nothing in his ha^dis, says Isaye. Isay. xl.
If the world can do nothing against his might not her in taking away nor
mi^^sshing his glory, nor to put him from his celestial trone, so can it not
hurt any one of his childern without his godly will. Let us therefore (oh dear
brethern) behold how great a consolacion this is. That god is on our side to
fight for us, to tender, defend and to preserve us. He has given us his own
sone Christ. Can he the^ deny us thingis of less valewe sith he has given
us so rich a treasure? Who co^sideringe these inestimable benefit is can be
careful, heuye, false herted and hopeless? If many worldis were against us,
and all the wiked spirits of helleet lose to deuou ^e us, yet is there no
perell towerd us, if Christ be on our part. Through Christ have we peace. For
this his derely beloved sons sake god our father loves us. For the preciouse
blodis sake of his own innocent sone, we obtayn remission of al our sins, and
also victory agenst death and satan. For where as sin has no dominion there
bear death no rule, there has Satan lost his power. What the^ should we fear?
should we fear this temporal death. No. For that is now to us but a sleep
and rest. For Christ has so ouercome^^t, Isa. xxv. Act. vij. Joan. xi Ose.
xiij To. viij.
that unto us which be his faithful, death is become an ingresse unto
salvation and life eternal. For Christ has abolesshed and destroyed the body
of syn to then^e^t we should be led into life. Wherefore let us with constant
faith cleave unto our lord Christ, besechinge our father in heaven for Christ's
sake to augment our faith. Which thing if we do it, so be we salfe without
all fear and perell, sewer enoughe against all stormye tempests. If our
Consolacion against our sins. i. Cori. i.
sins fear and trouble us, let us set up against them the invincible
innoce^cye and infinite rightwysenes of our Lord Jesus Christ, given us of his
father to be our rightwysenes. Which once done, our sins a non vanisshe away
as does wax against the fire. For Christ verily Psalm. iiij
is by an holy oath co^stituted of the father to be an everlasting king and
preiste, which for our sins offered up him self the very sacrifice of our
reconciliacion and Hebre. i.
expiacion by the shedinge of his preciouse blood and sits on the right
hand, of the divine high majesty, there making intercession for us, he
being our lord almyghtye, all things subject unto him, Consolacion a geynst
death.
both angels and powers celestial at his bek. i. Pet. iij. If death fears
us. Let us remember Christ to be our life. It is he that once dyed for our
sins, and is risen Romans x.
again never more to dye. It is he that has swallowd up death and has casten
Isa. xxv
it under his foot for ever. If aftir this life there were no another, then
might we worthily sorrow and fear, then were we the most miserable of all
creatures. But i. cor. xv
for asmiche as our life heginneth aftir this is here ended, let us be laid
down in body to sleap in the ferme hope of our resurreccion, and be never
afraid to dye. Christ our head is risen, we being his body and members must
follow our head. Which said. I am the resurreccion which is life. Who so believe
in me, he shall live yea although he were dead. And all that believe in me shall
never dye. We verily know and believe the resurreccion of our bodies and to
have life eternal promised in Christ and for christ's sake. And therefore our
faith cannot be frustrated. For he that believes in criste has life eternal.
These be crystes own words which is Joan. iij
the verite and may not lie. What now can death to us in his most furye?
Uerely nothing else then for a little time separat our bodies from our soulis,
and so send owr soulis out of this miserable sinful life combred with all
calamites unto that most blessed felicite. Our bodies cannot be so utterly
destroyed but they shall be once restored gloriously unto our soulis. Nether i.
cor. xv
may they slaye our soulis: for they be immortal. They can not take our bodies
Mat. x.
nor soulis out of the ha^dis of god. Which if we be kept in the ha^dis of god
as in the bosom of our most loving father, and if we abide in Christ and
Christ in us; sewerly we shall live for ever. Christ thus affirminge. Joan. x.
My sheep he are my voice, I know them, they follow me, and I give them
everlasting life. Nether shall they be lost: nor noman shall pluk them out of
my handis.

Wherefore let the wiked haithen and unbelievers be afraid, tormented, and be
with out hope at the sight of death which know not god in Christ, which when
they know not Christ to be their very rightwysenes, their life and their only
savior nor believe not in him, they must nedis abide and perisshe in their
sins, in death and in eternal dampnacion. But we ought not to fear nor to
be heavy and tormented in mind, as do they which have no hope, for we se a
beter life aftir this abydinge us. Which the ignorant unbelievers in Christ
know not. And albeit here for a time we pass forth laid against many perells,
molested and whetted with diverse and many greuouse affliccio^s, yet at last,
all the laboriouse myseries of this life passed over, the glory of the sons
of god shall be showed and declared upon us, even as we here upon earth have been in hope salfe and blessed. Now we weep and be heuye, but the day of our
gladness is not far of in the which our Lord God shall wype away the tears
from the chekis of us that believe in him, and shall happily change our heaviness
into an infinite perpetual joy: then to singe this triumph. Death is
swallowed up into victory. Oh death where is thy stinge? Oh hell where is thy
victory? Oh syn where is now thy might? Thanks be to our God and father which
has given us the victory, by our Lord Jesus Christ. i. Corin. xv.

If the fear of dampnacion and perpetual Consolacio^ against the fere of
da^pnacion.
death should vex us, then let us remember our selves to have been baptized
into Christ, ingraffed into his death, owr sins buried in his wounds, and
risen with him into glory and life. And so is there no condempnacion, To. viij.
as saint Paul says, unto them which are thus by faith ingraffed into Jesus
christ, which walk not after the flesh but aftir the spyrite. In this our
sweet and plentuouse vynestok, if we as lively faithful branches abyd by
constant faith, our sins are never more imputed unto us. By this faith we
be made the sons of god and the ayers of eternal life, even the fellow ayers
with Christ. If we have Christ in us, (by faith we feel him present in our
hertes) so fear we no condempnacion. For Christ is our life and our sauinge
health eternal, dwellinge in us, against whom nether hell nor death nor sin
can prevail. Let us thefore abide by constant faith in our savior Christ
walkinge in him roted and framed upon him, perseueringe in faith constantly
cleauinge to him, committing our selves hole unto his goodness and mercy, and
let us with heart mouth and life testifye and declare our faith obedience and
thankfulness unto him for his inestimable riches of his gospel now given us.

What can I more say? We have our celestial father, our father (I say) of an
infinite clemency goodness and mercy, which can no less forget us then any
erthely father his own derely beloved sone or any mother her own tender
fruits of her own body soukinge at her breasts. And were it in case that the
mother perchance might forgete her young little infant, yet shall our merciful
father never forgete us, Isay. xlix.

We have a redemer and a delyuerer, even the most myghtiest Lord Christ Jesus
to whom is given all power in heaven and earth. Which reigns our all, he
loves us, he has taken us to be his brethern, we are his members, he has
deserved for us all goodness and all felicite. He has given us the glory
which his Joan. xviij.
father gave him that we should be all one in Christ and in the father, as the
father and son be one, out of the which unite all the treasures of the
divine goodness, of rightwysenes, life, consolacion and health be given unto us.
Through owr faith in Christ and for Chrystis sake we are one that is to say,
of one consent mind and fellowship with the father and the son and the holy
ghost, so that as the sone cannot be diuidid from the father, nor the holy ghost
from them both, no more may we being the faithful in Christ, be separated
from Christ. For Christ would that where so ever him self were, there should
we be with him, which thing aftir our Joan. xvij.
departure is as certainly trwe as is him self the verite which so said it,
prayed for it and obtained it for us of his father.

Furthermore. If our faith be yet to weak to apprehende fermely these infinite
so rich benefits, the^ let us fly unto the promises of god, which as they be
right many, so are they the most trwest and certain, which ought to be depely
printed into our hertis never to be forgoten* Owr hertis verily are ^o narow
and to skant to receive the greatness and the multitude of these rich tresures
and goodness. For these benefits be immense and infinite. And therefore let us
thus think, that right great and mighty is he which promises these riches to
us, and that he is the very god him self, even owr god. Which in, and for his
own only begoten derely beloved son, has he promised us this life
everlasting. For all the promises of god are made in, and for Christ's sake to
be ferme and fast and inviolable Certain ij. cor. i.
it is that god sent us his son in that full appointed time as the prophets
had prophesied it, ^o fulfill these his clear and gloriouse mighty rich
promyses. This is trwthe. For we have them confirmed and sealled wi^he his own
spirit of trowthe with his gospel preched and with his own blood shed in his
passion, and autorysed with his own gloriouse resurrection which is owr head
and reigns above all both in heaven and in earth and in hell. And how then
may we his members, for whose sake all these things he has done and suffered,
^arye in sin and in death?

There may nothing more certainly The ver tewe of the x^.
stablisshe and confirm our myndis, our selves to rise again immortal both in
body and soul, then the resurreccion of eryste. surreccion.
We can have no fermer nor stronger argument of our resurreccion, then the
resurreccion of our Lord Christ which is the most certain and sewerest. The
very son of god is made man, and took our nature unto him self, which
willingly and not constrained suffered death for us upon the cross. But yet he
arose again, and would aftir his resurreccion be seen, handled his wounds
seen and felt, herd spekinge and teachinge his disciples eatinge and drinkinge
with them, of the which his re surreccion, his disciples were so certain that
aftirward, with their own deaths they confirmed it. And if Christ be risen
from death, so be we certain that our sins be cle^sed and death deuicted.
Wherefore in the Lord we ought to rejoice for ever and to give him high thanks
immortal for these inestimable immense benefits. Let Satan with his wyked
whelps freat, fume and gry^ne with all his idle emnio^s impes whom eternal
dampnacion abides. But let us abide in the faith of the gospel, and so abide
we the lively members of Christ. And then where so ever is Christ, there are
we also. Death cannot pluk us from Christ. For we are the members of his body
out of his own flesh and bones, Ephe. v.

But and if our ferefull infirm consciences doutinge of these so certain
promise^ An obieccion.
for that we be all sinners, cast away all hope, thinkinge our selves
therefore to have lost all these benefits promised us, saying with owr selves.
We hear god ^o have promised us all these rich benefits, but because we so
syn daily and fall from him doing no good thing perfitly we are vnworthei to
have the^. With siche though it is verily satan tempts and troubles many a
good man. But this do I answer. That if our rightwysenes and salvation
Thanswer.
should stand upon our own good works and worthynes, then sewerly had we lost
in every minute all these rich benefits of god, then might we be vncertay ne
of all these promyses, and of any remission of our sins and life eternal, if
life and remission were promised us upon siche a condition, that is, if we
fulfill gods preceptis and so by owr good dedis merit our salvation, so were we
without all hope of salvation. For we are every hour sinners and all our best
works are imperfect, yea they be (as Isaye says) corrupt and sinful, if they
should be expended and tried in the rigor of gods law and exammed at his
straight judgment. If the hope of our salvation should stand upon the merits
and worthiness of owr workis, we must nedis despeyre never to have peace in our
consciences, when there is no man so holy and perfect of lyuinge which may
verily glory him self at altymes so to have had fulfilled the law as it ought
to be fulfilled. But praise be unto god our most merciful father which has
so intyrely loved us for Christ's sake, that he has taken our salvation out of
owr own feeble handis and has set it upon a sewerer and more certain
foundation, that is to weit even upon his mere grace and mercy promised in
Christ, our faith reachinge it unto Christ's blood wasshinge away al our
sins. If we believe this promise so be we justified, absolved and saved.
Nothing else requires he of us concerning our remission and salvation, then
thus to believe in Christ even him self by his death to have obtained us
remission an life eternal. Wherefore when siche temptacions assawte us, then
let us cry for faith to believe these promyses in Christ. And suffer not our
selves to be thruste from them. Of the which thus To. iiij.
says Paul. For owr faith, is the heretage given us, that freely of grace and
favor, ferme fast and sewer should the promise stand unto all the sead, not
to it that is of the law only, but unto them that are of the faith of Abraham.

This is our consolacio^, this is our hope only. Who so reaches this promise
with his faith he shall never despeper. For certain it is, the some of our
health to stand upon faith in Jesus Christ upon this growndsole is the door of
our salvation turned and returned. Let us therefore apprehende with our faith
this divine promise which we another may nor can deser ue, and we have all
these celestial benefitis, even remission of our sins, the holy ghost and
eternal life. All these has god promised us in Christ and for Chrystis sake.
In this promise consists all our co^solacion, our hope, our rightwysenes,
reconciliacion and health. Believe god to be trwe of his promise, and cast not
away the gospel of his sone preched unto the, but receive it thankfully with
all thy heart, enbrace it with both thine arms, and dout it not, this gospel
to be as well thine, as Paul's and Steuens, and as mightily to save the, as it
saved them. Doubt not of the grace mercy power and trowth of God, and thou art
justified and as salfe as is Abraham and all the sayntis in heaven. To do good
works commanded of god study and endeavor thy self ernestly with all
diligence, so that thou doiste nothing else but well. Study to excel almen in
innocencye of lyuinge, in al^ose dedis doing, be merciful, counfortable,
piteouse and helping all men, yea and even thine enemies. But use these deadis
continually as thy duty and service dew unto god as testimonies of thy
faith and obedience unto his laws. Evermore aknowledginge them to be far
inferior vnpurer weaker and vnperfitter, then that thou may of them rejoice
and glory before god or by the^ to deserve any rightwysenes. Think thy self an
unprofitable servant, yea when thou haste done all, which is but thy duty and
no deserving. And beware lest thou think thy workis to be meritis of right
wysenes and health before God. For this opinion and persuasion is an ungodly
blasphemy against Christ. For in the cause of our salvation we may not trust
in any part to our own workis but only by faith cleave to the promises of
God in Christ. The workis and merits of Christ only give us freely our
salvation and not ours, nor yet the works of any creature else. Let us therefore
with faithset fast hold upon the promyses of god in the gospel, nether be we
diuelled from them by any engyne of tentacion or persecucion. Let us consider
the verite of God to be inviolable promisinge and geuinge unto us his faithful
in Christ life eternal for Chrystis sake. It is he only that has deserved
it for us. It is his only benefit, unto him only must we ^^^der the thankis.
Unto him only must we cleave by faith. And so shall we with stand all
temtacions, wrestle out of, and overcome all difficulties. If the promise, as
concerning us, should not be out of favor freely made, so could it not be
ferme and certain because our workis and obedience to the law of god be so
vnpure, miserable, filthei and so imperfit and naught if they should be
compared and laid against the severe judgment and extremite of the law of god,

Thus therefore does the holy ghost counfort us vtwardly in the holy scryptures
and inwardly with this lively testimonye of the spirit, as Paul affirms To.
viij.
saying. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again unto fear: But ye
have received the spirit of adopcion by whom we cry father father. The same
spirit witnesses unto ours that we be the sons of god. If we be his sons,
so be we the ayers of god, and even the fellow ayers with Christ if we suffer
with him to be also glorified with him. Which con firmeth us also in Christ, for
it is god that ij. Cor. i.
has anointed us and sealled us up and given us the pledge of his spirit in
ou^ hertis, Agene says Paul. Aftir ye had believed the gospel of your
salvation ye were up sealed with the holy promised spirit, Ephe. i.
which is the pledge of our heretage into the redemption of our purchased
possession, into the praise of his glory. Also the spirit helps our
weaknesses. For trewly, To. viij.
the thing that we should prayfore and how to ask it, we know not. But the
spi rit him self makes intercession for us with sythes unable to be expressed.

Nether is it any less counfort, which our god and father has ordined for us
in his great fellowship emonge the faithful congregacio^s of whom mention is
made emonge the articles of our faith. We beleuinge the^ to be the holy
catholyke church. Which all, be our members, we all together being one
body, as techeth us Paul right counfortably, i. Cor. xij. One member to be
careful for a another, of which, if one of us suffer, all the rest have
compassion, and if one of us be hole and well, all the other members rejoice
with the fame. So that we being thus k^it to gither with the bondis of love,
have all thing is hothe mierth and sorrow, heuines and joy, common. And if one
of us suffer for Chrystis sake in England, all the trwe brethern and sisters in
the same land, in France, in Germany orels where, suffer the same. And where
one of us being p^^ sent cannot counfort another, yet being never so farrof,
we pray incessauntly one for other unto god our father to be counforted with
his holy spirit, and that it would please his goodness for Christ's sake to lift
up, to restore and confirm our persecuted brethern and syste^^, and to make
the^ constant in all Christian patience, strongly in faith to endure in our
affliccion to persevere and ^o bear away a gloriouse victory. And if the
prayer of one faithful man may do so miche with god as the scripture teaches,
of how mighty efficacye Jacob. v
must then be the common prayers of all the hole holy congregacions joined
together in faith and love? Uerely we are not a love in our affliccions, we
wrestle and fight not aloue in these labors, nether suffer we a lone
persecucions. But even Christ suffers with us. For who so thus per secuteth
and molesteth us he iniuriethe and persecuteth Christ and all the hole chirches
of Christ. For we be al one body, having one head even Christ, and one holy
spirit with all his spiritual giftis common to us all. And whiles we thus
pray together, we doutles be herd of god. For we have the most grave and
plentuouse, yea many, and that the most present promises of god, full of all
consolacion, that he will hear our mutual prayers, and be present with his
help in all our distresses need and trouble. If we should here a lone wrestle
and buckle with Satane, we were all to weak and should despayer ouercomen in
our affliccions, which is our own pusilla^i^ite and natural fear. But since
we be sewer to have Christ with all the hole church of Christ on ower sides
to fight for us with their mutual and continual prayers, yea and all the
angels of heaven defending and fightinge for us, how can we shrink, fall and
perissh in this batail: Sith Christ is present, we must nedis have the
victory. And where soever is Christ, there be all his faithful, yea and all
his angels, wherefore we being his chosen must nedis be with them. The
angels of the Lord pitche their tents rownde about us. The angels deliver
us that fear the Lord, Psalm. xxxiiij.

The third consolacion. Owr cause is goddis cause, and it is the most just
cause.
FUrthermore this thing ought to confirm and counfort us most especially: for
that we have so just, so good and so godly a cause, for it is not our cause
wherefore we suffer, but is is goddis cause even his own holy gospel, by Christ
and the holy ghost sent us from heaven. For as for us, we never thought to do any
man iniurye nor hurt, we take no man's goodis from him. But we study to monishe
and to profit all men unto their salvation. We desyer only and receive the
infinite and inestimable riches of the gospel with joy at gods hand. In
which word not else then the mere grace, rightwisenes, peace delyuerance from
all evils help and health are promised and given us in Christ and for his sake
to as many as believe in him. And this same so rich and inestimable glory of
the grace of god in Christ, we would it purely and freely to be showed, tought,
preched and written to all men unto the glory and sanctifyinge of the name of
god, for the right wysemakinge and salvation of many men. For the Romans i.
gospel is the power of god unto salvation to all them that believe. For this
study, for this owr duty in spekinge and wrytinge and good willis to profit
and to sa ue all men, and to bring the^ to the knowledge of god in Christ, do
the world render to us the same thanks which were once rendered to Christ and
his apostles, and paynteth us with the same sediriouse and obprobrious names.
For whilis we wysshe preach and write to them eternal peace, they accuse us
of the most ha^^ouse crime of sedicion. When we teache them the most certain
verite out of gods own mouth, they call us heretics notinge and slaunderinge
us with all the^ most infamy and ignominye they can imagine, then they rage
and raze, runinge upon us like wild beasts and wode dogs, enforcinge to
throdowne to subuerte and extinguisshe both Christ and all christen faithful
with the gospel to. And yet make the bisshops of England men to recant that
there is any persecucion in the realm, but all is just execucio^. As though
it were now the same paradise alredye which first was created, upon the
which earth, there dwelt ^o ^^o but Adam and Eve in the state of innocencye
before any serpentyne sead tempted the^. And as though England were the same
paradyse and land of the perpetual lyninge immortal bodies now risen again
whereof Peter says. Rightwysenes to i^. Petr. iij.
dwell upon it, even the same new earth kouered with a new heaven and new
elements purged with fire mentioned of I say and Johan in the Apocalypse.

There is mention in Luke and Matt. of a standing water called a Mear, which
Luke viij
was a common passage out of Galile into the land of the Gadarens, which
Chrystis disciples and all men passed often over without any perell. But when
they chanced (...)to, are the bisshops of England ^e^ ^owpled and c^^fede^ed
with the bishop o^ Romes bisshops and his whe^^is in ^ew^ Iudi. xv
the sonde, as once were Sampsons foxes tails tied together with fire brandis
Psalm. ij.
against the Lord and his audinted to burn up the Philynstens good
vyneyardis, even the pore sely persecuted church of Christ. But let us not be
abashed no^ yet afraid it is the truth that we set forth. It is the eternal
and immutable will and counsel of god, that Christ should make sinners just
and salfe out of his mere grace, and that this should be reveled and preached
before all the world. This matter would he to consiste in and upon faith that
who so believe in Christ should have forgeuenes of his sins and lyfeeternal
not for his own, but for Christ's merits. This glory of our fathers divine
mercy ought to be preched and setforthe before all men, that through Christ
they might come unto the father, which has set Christ at his right hand and
made him Lord of the angels, of men, and of all creatures celestial and
terrestrial, and to be judge over the lyuinge and dead and to reign in the
glory of the father with all the faithful and chosen in Christ. This is the
constant and immutable will of god. This is his eternal sentence, God will
therefore defend and fight for his own cause, another may any man resist him.
Christ will reign and put all his enemies under his feet. And who shall let
it: He is of an infinite almighty power, and will sone defend his cause eue^
against all the power of the spiritual antichristis, and let them take all the
seculare swerdes and the devil to, to help them. If this our cause might be
either weakened or ouercomen so were God and Christ febled and ouercomen. But
Christ is allmighty unable to be ouerthrone and abides for ever, where fore
this his cause and owrs and his gospel and all that believe it shall stand for
ever invincible. For who so believe in him Isa. viij.
shall never be confounded. Mightier is Christ and his word then all the
world and Satan to, with all his preistly prelates, and shall bring them all
into an heuey dampnable destruction whiles they enforce to subuerte us and
Crystes gospel.

For Christ is verily the stomblinge stone, at whom whosoever stomblethe, he
hurts him self grievously. But this stonne it self is not hurt, nor once
moved, but stands ferme and fast against all his adversaries assawtes
unhurt. And who Matthew. xxi.
so falls at him is all to broken, and upon whom this stonne falls he is
all to pressed and grownden into powlder. Singe and read we the. ix. x. xi.
and* xij. and siche like Psalms, and there let us seek and fyn de consolacion.
Nether let us cesse at any time to hear and read the scriptures, and the
sweet promises let us engraue into our breasts and clean to them consta^tly.
For they be the most certain and assewered consolations to us in this heuey
exyle and hard persecucion. Faithful is our Lord God and true in all his
wordis. Psalm. c. xv.
But as in England the realm of ryghtwisenes lo, there is no siche stonne to
stomble thereat, so be there non that sto^ble at Christ, but they leap quyte
over him. He falls there upon noma^, our noman upon him. There is no
persecucion but all just execucion lo. And therefore is there no siche
co^solacion nor Psalms nor scripture to lift them up agene. But in a full
heuey state be they that be fallen and dedely hurt, and yet believe they the^
selves to stand upright hole and sow^de. Full woe, and ferefull may our
adversaries be which have so unjust, so evil, and the most ungodly cause
defendinge the most open errors and manifest idollatrye, and so false a
popisshe religion. And even there own consciences tell them selves, their
cause to be so unjust and so manifestly wyked their doctrine and faith so
false that they be both asshamed and affrayd there of and dirste never teache
nor preche it op^ ly unless they were sewer of the seculare sword to defend
it and them selves to. For they be afraid to iustifye their own books with
their own tytles and names. But our doctrine and the confession of our faith
be not afraid to stand forth in the face of emprowrs, kings and princes of the
world, yea and is offered to be looked upon and judged of all the hole world,
our doctrine fereth not the light, al beit prince ceasers and all the world
stand with naked swerdes agenst it to slaye the professors thereof, so far
of be they to defend it. Owr doctrine and faith desyereth to be t^yed and
examined at the trwe twiche stone of the holy scriptures. But the doctrine and
faith of owr antichristen adversaries, refuse and are a fraid of the
scriptures, and fly unto long customs, popish fathers, cano^ laws, coun
sels of popes and so persecution of us, and to deuelisshe doctors, and when
all these will not serve, then fly they to the seclare policye of the realm
and unto their princes sword and actis af parlements thereby to be helped and
defended. But all the prophetis of god constantly affirm it, and ernestly
threatenthe these their weak reedis and roten staves to be now shortly all to
broken.

When the emprowr and the godly learned with the nobles of Germany did sit
last at Auspurgh consultinge and enquiring of the religion and faith: Meu did
ernestly desper our adversaries to give us forth the account, rekeninge and
confession of their faith and religion in wrytinge: but they could not get
it they dirste not write it, they were asahamed or afraid to let their faith
come into light, orels they could not write it. A goodly godly faith I warant
you, that so miserably feared, and was asshamed to be seen in wrytinge of so
many noble and learned men. But they be to wise, to suffer siche a gross
carnal shameless religion and so weak and incoustant a faithsesse faint faith
to come into wrytinge. And therefore they there desyered instantly to dispute
with us with fagots fire and sword, and even a certain blody cardinal, offered
him self to write us an answer with our own blood. Oh blodye beasts abhorred
and detested of god casten up into a reprobate mind worthy to be perpetually
dampened. This was all their importune labor and blody dryfte at that cownsell,
and has been ever sense, to devolue peaceable assem bles for the reformacion
of the chryste^ religion unto bloudye batai^es. And now this day have they
through Satan and Paul the third, Pope of Rome with his blody bisshops brought
their blody purpose to pass in that they co^federed with the Tur ke, had
leifer the Turk to invade and ouerrune al Chrystendom then the gospel of
Christ should have any fre course in any one of their dicions and dioceses.
This is lo, their deuilisshe dryft, when they cannot defend their false
religion and faith by no word of god. It would have abhorred any christen man
to have seen the sinful and viciouse conversation of these papisti ke prelates
with their patrones in that town at that counsel, how openly they kept their
whores how lordely they looked how dronken they went every night to bed, how
beastly they banketted, vomited and spewed out their sweet sinful surfettes.
And yet would the belly bawdy be astis there stoutely and gloriously dispute of
fasting of chastity, of temperancye a^l. of sobriety, to fulfill the
schriptures saying. In the last days, there shall come ij. Tim. iij.
upon you perellouse times for there shall be men all for their own lusts
louinge themselves, couetuouse, pu^t up with pride, mischeuouse bitterly
cursinge, false of their promise, unjustly vexing good me^, lecherouse,
glotenouse dronkerdes, arrogant, the lovers of their own lusts rather then of
god. Having a show of godly religion, but the very trwe religion it self they
have utterly ab^yed and renownced it. And these men avoid estiewe beware of,
and thruste the^ out of thy sight.

The. iiij. consolacion. Owr adversaries understand not this great and godly
cause. Nether shall, nor may they at any time defend it with any ferme
arguments.
ANd nowyet for our more counfort, let us consider how weak are owr
adversaries eue^ they that be yet called the most prudent and would be seen the
high learned, misshape^ or bisshapen bissho pis. What thing have they (I pray
you) to fraye us? have they any wysedo^? But craftynes, subtyle serpe^tyne
frauds apparent sophistical reasons without scripture, malice and mischief
they have to miche^bu^ as for any godly understanding, good lerninge, and trwe
wisdom they have ^on at all. They write preach and speak so childysshe, so
fond, so inconstant impertinent and repugnant things in so ^aigh^y a cause:
and wreste the scriptures so violently to stablisshe their errors and recyte
them so folisshely* that the very b^^es in the grammar stoles, and the ploughe
men, shomakers and wives spinninge at their rockis ieste one them and Isay.
xxix.
laughe them worthily to skorne, so that the prophecye of Isaye is now well
verifyed upon them, wysedom shall perisshe in the wise and the understanding
of the prudent shall be put out, their wysedom and koninge shall be rejected of
god and come all to naught. So that it is asked of them into their own shame
and confusion of Paul. Where is now your i. Cor. i.
wise man? where be now your writers for your pope and his religion? Where are
your disputers for your faith? have not god made the^ all folis? They consult
miche and often together, they imagyne enforce and tempte to prove many and
diverse wais, they conspire, they conjure and cluster upon heaps, they write,
they send, they run to each other. They have their secret conuenticles,
open conuo^a^ious, conciliables and counsels, they furnesshe and uphold their
popisshe preistes, schools and universities. They hyerd Rochester, sir Thomas
More and promoted Eccius, Emser, Cocleus, Piggius, Latomus with like drafe and
dregs to write against us their lyinge and fond bokis full of threatis
mockis tauntis and reuylings. But of their blodye counsels to destroy the
parties of Germanye which have received the gospel. I will not now speak
thereof. But what (I pray ye) have they gotten by all these cruel means? The
gospel stands and shall stand nevertheless, and will be spread into all the
world according to gods ordinance which no enforcements no counsels of men,
nor power may let it, nor tarry it, although these papists would break their
beastly bellis therefore.

At Auspurgh and at Batisbone, their drift was to have utterly extinguysshed
the gospel, and what success had their wyked enforcements? Uerely in both
the same cities and in all the country about, their own fylthey fasshons and
cruel conversation so promoued it, and stablisshed it that they shall never be
able to que^che it. For every man saw how fond and weak were their reasons
and foundacions, they espied their cruel false and subtyle dryftis to depresse
gods wordis. All men saw their abominable shameless lives, they perceived how
gretely they were afraid to let their faith and doctrine come into light. Many
wise and noble men there were which merueled greatly to se these men so
fyercely and so furiously to take on with the gospellers reuilinge and
spittinge out their venom at them as at the most pestelent heretics and so
calling them, prechinge and affirminge so boldly the popes cause and his
doctrine to be the trwe just and godly religion. And when they should both
come to the tryoll treatinge and disputinge of the causes, then were they
asshamed to bring forth their popisshe doctrine or to write their religion
openly, which they so gloriously and so stoughtly had bosted before to be the
very trwe catholic faith and doctrine of god and of their holy mother the
church unable to be resisted or once spotted. Even here begane many good men
and even the lay people to doubt and mistrust their doctrine so highly craked
of, and bosted before, even here perceived the people there doctrine and
religion to be stark naught, uncertain and false, for that when a rekening
thereof was asked them, they feringe the light, sought blody shifts and leet
their own religion lie still lurkinge in derke dens. Then said the nobles
and common people, who shall believe their doctrine, sith the defenders thereof
dare not let it be seen in wrytinge, but seek how to defend it with violence
and murder? Sewrly (said they) this their cause can not be just and good as
they boste and crake it. Trwly the verite flies not from the light but dare be
seen tried and iuged of all men. And even thus said many which came out of al
cooltes, as out of Spain, Italye, Portugale and out of the nether Germanye and
out of the other parts of Europe to these counsels, which before were
thought to stand of the papystes side. Which when they had seen and herd owr
doctrine and red it, every where mightily confirmed with the testimonies of the
holy scriptures clearly and justly alleged, and also approved with the hole
consent of the old holy doctors of the church immediately after the
Apostles, saying the christen men consta^tly offeringe up this owr faith
religion and doctrine before all the world, and that their ad uersaries could
not by no scriptures truly taken, convince and ouerthroe owr doctrine, but were
both asshamed, confownded and afraid: they repented them selves that ever they
had other mayntayned it, or believed it so long. Then all these nations
returned home, applied them selves to readinge and hearing the scriptures and
sought out learned and faithful preachers, so that sense that time, they have
in many countries cast away the Pope with his Autichrysten relygion and by
Gods grace are they called unto the very gospel. And now is it openly known
with what, and how blody counsels, with whom they conspyred, whom they
encensed to murder the holy innocent chyrches of Christ and violently with
sword and fire to oppress the gospel of Christ, so that all the world sees
all their hope and shote ancore of their health not to stand in the arm of
god, but their hole confidence to consist in the multitude of papists in
worldly power and policye in a flesshely arm, and in lordis and princes whom
they so persuaded with all manner kinds of flaterye, obsequye, carnal
pleasurs and reasons and with the most shameful lies encensinge them that
their own patrones and pylars, if they were not bewitched and blind, might
perceive them openly to go about to stablisshe and defend the very tyranni of
Antichryste. If their doctrine were godly and right wherefore should they hyde
it? what need they against us sword and fire? But all the world sees it to
be false and ungodly for that they seek siche crafty tyranny and violent engyus
to defend it. For the verite defends her self with hi^ own weapen even
with the sword of the word of God. Now ye se what soft solgiers and cruel
knights they be, and unto what bataill (them selves laid down to sleep) they
stere up other men to fight for them, but praised be god our almighty Lord one
alone for us sufficient, out of whom proceeds our victory, Proverb. xxi.

But here peradventure will some say. How should we but fear their violent
power and greuouse threats, saying they be so many, so mighty, so rich and so
high exalted above us so few so pore weak and feeble? I answer. That in the
apostles time very small was the nowmber of the crystians compared unto the
haithen and infidels all the world then being full of gentyles yet not
converted to the faith. Skant one e^o^ge a thousand then dirst profess Christ
even emonge the people of god which were the Jews. And sone aftir that the
faith begane to take rore emonge the gentyles, what else did the tyrannouse
emprowrs of Rome but play the bochers in slayinge the Christians. Nethelesse
yet with no kind of torments (were they never so cruel sharp and terrible)
nether with their insaciable blod thirstinge, could the persecutours put away
and quench the christen faith. But the cruellier they persecuted the faith in
Christ, the wyder it spread, the deper it roted, and the higher it grew and
increased, and the more and mightier was the nowmber of the crystianes. This
was verily a meruelouse thing. But it was god which assisted defended and
animated his church, the lord faught for them mightily, Deuter. xx.

The gentyles had slain so many and that so cruelly for the gospel that they
being weary of tormentinge might martyr Li. viij. and. ix.
no moo, as witnesses Iosephu^. For the mo the tyrants killed, the mightelier
the christianes increased under their handis, even as the king Pharao of Egypt
the greuouslier that he oppressed and slew the Israelitis the more were they
multiplied, in so mich that he was afraid of the^ at last. The world ever
contendeth to pluke the crystians from the trwe worship unto idolatrye and to
papistrye now with fayer promises and then with greuouse threats and bitter
terrible deaths. But the chosen of god shall ever stand constantly and the
sewerer in Christ unable to be ouercomen, whose christian constancye so angreth
the ungodly that their fierre furye rages into wodenes madness and murder.
Whose fyerce madness when it rages most tyrannously, yet can it not slaye the
soul but only our mortal bodies, wherefore the very crystians do laughe at
their threats and torments. For we be persuaded certainly in our faith,
Christ to have ouercomen death for us, so that death is no death to us but a
joyful end of sin and a glad passage to perpetual life. We are sewer that
our bodies shall rise again gloriouse and immortal, unto the which gloriouse
immortalyte we daily aspire and clyme, knowinge that this corporal death is
not else then a nightis sleep to us that believe in Christ, and so at last to
be with Christ in joy both body and soul. This faith and hope of any other
life aftir this have not our cruel haithen persewers, albeit they speak it
with their lips, and therefore they fear fly and abhor death so miche. But
we have the word of our Lord and god, that he has for us taken away broken
and ouercomen the power and stinge of death. This our victoriouse Lord and
destrier of death, to animate to confirm and to counfort us in all our perels
and calamities says unto us. I tell Luke xij.
you my friends, be not afraid of the^ that slaye your bodies, and then can
the^ do no more to you. But I shall show you who^ ye shall fear, fear him
which aftir he has slain your bodies, he has power to cast both body and
soul into hell fire. There is not so little a bird that di^the without our
fathers will, he has told all the hears of our headis of which not one
shall be brent without our fathers will. And are not we of a rycher price then
sparows and hears? But I shall t^ll you says Christ. Whosoever confess me
before men I shall aknowledge him before my father and all the angels in
heaven. Rejoice ye therefore. For I have ouercomen the world, and your heuines
Io. xvij.
shall be turned into gladness which no man shall take from you. Chrystis
victory is owrs. If we believe in Christ, our i. Joan. v.
faith is the victory that ouercometh the world.

Our persewers think to hurt us miche in killing our bodies, and we think
and know it, thereby to have great lucre as says Paul: Christ is to me life,
and death Phili. i.
is to me lucre. And albeit our flesh be infirm and weak, yet a godly mind
in his inward man desyereth with Paul to be dissolved out of this miserable
sinful world and to be with Christ. For Christ has so promised me to be
where so ever him silf is, and has obtained it me by his prayer of his father.
What now can all the antichriste^ ungodly do ageynste us? verily nothing at all
unto our hurt, they can not take faith and Christ from our hertis, they may
with violence kut out our tongues, but from our hertis may they not take our
faith our profession and praise of crystis glory. And yet what so ever they
do, it is by the sufferance of god for our salvation and into their own
dampnacion. They may take away our corporal and transitory goodis, which we
set not miche up, saying for the^ god gives us goodis eternal and celestial.
They kill our bodies, but they send our souls into the handis of our heavenly
father, and make our death preciouse in the sight of god. When their deaths
shall be most horrible and terrible to depart from so many pleasures into
perpetual tormentinges. Wherefore Paul exhorting us unto constancye bids us
to help each other with prayers that we might with a manly faith fight in the
gospels quarrel, being not afraid of our adversaries. Unto whom that at is to
them the Phili. i.
cause of their own perdicion, the same is unto us the cause of our salvation,
yea and that of god. When our adversaries and persewers think to slaye us,
they slaye them selves body and soul with the death of everlasting
dampnacion. Is not this then a miserable and an execrable power at which our
persewers enjoy and rejoice so detestably into their own everlasting
destruction and dampnacion? This is sewer that all the faithful departed
constantly professinge Christ, live with him now in joy. But where be now the
enemies of Christ and the persewers of the crystia^s? Where is decius which so
cruelly persecuted the exystians? Where is Dioclesiane which proclaimed all
holy bokis to be brent, and all that professed Chri ste to be cruelly slain?
where be now Ua lerius, Maximinianus, Maximius, Lucinius, Iulianus? where is
Aurelius caesar with all the other tiraunts? And if we shul de descend into our
days, we might ask where be now the popes, cardinals, bisshops with their
coniured papistike accomplices against the gospel and Bible to be brought in
translated into Englisshe? where are they that brent so many new testaments at
Paul's cross and so many learned men and trwe crystianes which preched and
professed constantly gods holy word? where is Thomas wolsaye cardiuall bishop
of York, where is Johan stokesley bishop of London? where is west of Ely, fox
of Herforde, doctor London all the abbots, priours, friars, commissa^ies. Sir
Thomas More, and Johan Fissher bishop of Rochester, with all the cloisters
and abbeys, monks and preistes which have these. xvi. years persequuted the
gospel? Are they not all which believed not the gospel condemned with Satan
and his angels unto everlasting dampnacion? now lyinge in most greuouse
tormentinges? what hurt then did their transitorye persecucion and cross to
the martires of god? Again what now profits them their transitory pleasure
in kyllinge and burninge the pore innocent lombes of Christ? Are they not now
tormented in hell in perpetual fire for burning gods word and the professors
thereof?

They labored by temporal death to pluke pore men from god and his gospel
facinge and fering them in their courts and ingement seats under their
canopeis but shortly comes the great terrible day in which they must all
stand before the judgment seat of Christ in great fear and tremblinge, dead
for anxt and heuines, there to receive their general and last sentence of
eteruall dampnacio^ both in bodies and soulis. Then shall it be verifyed Sapi.
iij iiij. v.
of us both which is written.

The souls of the just are in the handis of god and the torments of death
shall not touch them They apered to the eyes of the folisshe ungodly to have
dyed, and their death to have had been an heuey pain, but they went quyetly
into relte. And albeit before men they suffered torments yet was their hope
full of immortaly^e. Their ^exacion was to them a sweet cross, for they had
ample benefits. For God tempted them and fownd them worthei for him self. Then
shall the rightwyse stand in great constancye before their oppressers and
reuylets. Who^ when they behold, they shall be smyten with soden great fear
and be astonned at their soden salvation. Then they touched with penance, and
wailinge for anguishe of mind, shall thus say with the^ selves. Is not this he
whom we once laughed to skorne, iested upon him co^tumeliously: foles that we
were then our selfs and had went his life to have been madness and to have dyed
an heretic. And see he is nowmbred emonge the sons of god haninge his
reward emonge the rightwyse? We we our selves then erred from the way of
trwthe, the lyhht of the trwe form of iustificacion did not shine upon us,
nether did the son of the trwe understanding of the scriptures spring unto
us. We weried our selves in the way of wykednes walkinge as it were in an hard
wilder^es but the way of the Lord we knew it not. What did our pride and high
lokis pro fit us? what got we by our bragginge and bosted forth riches? As a
shade we and a runner on post all these thing is be passed away never to come
agene. In our own mischief be we consumed. These are the words of the dampened
in hell. Which have persecuted us now lyuinge perpetually with Christ. Thus
do the god for our sakes arm him self to punisshe our persewers to be avenged
of his enemies.

These things shall sewerly come upon them. Wherefore let them rage and bewode
as dogs into their own destruction. They think here to reign and rule, to
save and to slaye, to change and transpose what they list for ever, and to
excercyse their tyranny and their lusts: but oh wretched mortal men ye be
gretely deceived, full nighe in the twinklinge of an eye is your soden fall and
heuey death at hand, when ye lest think there upon, albeit you readinge this
monicio^ will laughe swetely thereat, kindlinge and encrea singe your cruel
mischief agenst us. But he that sits in heaven laugheth you to skorne. Oh
miserable feeble mad men oh folisshe, oh blind beasts, oh mischenouse
tyrannouse fyercenes of miserable creatures ageyust their own almightye maker,
whose power is almighty and everlasting unable to be resisted. It is he that
throith down your proud lokis.

All the power and enforcements of the Danie, iiij.
world against us and Christ are but vain and frultrate, for our capital
enymye Satan is ouercomen God has given us his own most strong weapens
against all his enginnes openinge unto us his holy scriptures where in we find
redye all manner of strength ready ways and how to resist and to overcome
him, eue^ the sewer verite to confute all his lies and the sharp sword and
sewer bukler of faith constantly to put of his falshed and to wype it clean
away. Let us not therefore now (christian brethern, be to sewer idle and
sloughisshe in owr giftis received, but pray incessantly god to increase in us
faith in Christ. Let us abide in the faith of his gospel cleuinge unto it
ernestly. And so be we with out perell in all salfgard and sewertye. Faith
glueth us and Christ together never to be diuelled. And if we have Christ, so
can there no thing hurt us nether sin nor death, nor hell, nor yet Satan,
nor all his ministers in the world.

The fifte consolacion is. The reward and end of the faithful in Christ is
life everlasting.
FYftly let us be conforted and confirmed in our hertis whiles yet we live in
our persecucion. For that there abides us the most inestimable and most
joyful felicite promised us of god, if we constantly contine we and persevere
under this our cross unto the end, for a transitory light pain we be sewer
of an everlasting ferme joy. What pains, what travels and perels do the
merchant man take both by sea and Land to gather and get him but transitorye
and sone lost goods? And shall we either with fear be dejected, or for a little
pains taking be repelled, from that inestimable joy and felicite which as no
man can take it from us, so shall we enjoy them everlasting. Owr tresure for
which we travel and are sewer to obtayur it, no mortal eye ha ue seen it, no
care may hear it, nor heart may comprehend it, which treasure god has
prepared for us that love him. And as for the affliccions and persecucions of
this time says Paul, they be not to be compared To. viij.
as worthei the glory which shall be openly given us here aftir. For the
transitory lyghtnes or easynes of our gre uouse afflliccions above measure,
brings forth unto us the everlasting weighty glory, whylis we behold not
things seen but thing is not yet seen. For the things ij. cor. iiij
seen, are transitorye, but the things not seen are eternal. Now if the
world take so great pains and labors puttinge it self into so great
perels, sufferinge and trauellinge from place to place for transitorye shadews
even riches shortly to be lost and left, in whose gettinge men be oftentimes
cast behind, and their hope frustrated, and if they be gotten they be but for
a little time kept and possessed and that with great care inquietnes* trouble,
and fear, and at last, lost and forsaken with miche more heaviness sorrow and
affliccion of mind, what chryste^ faithful will not constantly with the most
pains perels and afflliccions and even with many sharp deaths sufferinge,
con tend and aspire with the most assewered hope unto his eternal joys and
felicite promised and reposed for him in heaven, even to be made the son and
ayere of god there to line for ever and ever? Sewerly all the affliccions,
heuynesses and persecucions here, are very light and little to us, if we well
ponder owr felicite and blessed ioyouse state shortly to come. The Lord
might illumyn the eyes of owr understanding that we might learn what is the
hope of our vocacion, and what be the riches of the glory of the heretage of
the faithful. So be it.

Now (most dear brethern) do I warn and warn you yet again to beware and
estiewe the leauyn of hipocritis, that is their false erro^ use dampnable
doctryues. And let us not curse and cast our adversaries into hell pit, but
let us rather pytie their miserable blindness, remembringe in what a dampnable
state they stand tormented in mind bownd (...)For I remember the woundis of
my savior, which is wounded for mine infirmities. What sin is so unto
death, which by Crystis death may not be forgeuen? When I therefore remember
so effec tuouse and so mighty a medicyne, there can no sinful sykenes make me
afraid. And therefore he erred and sinned grievously which said. Greater is my
iniquity then godis mercy may forgive it. But that man, as he was non of
crystis members, so did not crystis meritis and his satisfac cion pertain unto
him. But I shall with confidence in faith call them my merits, my rightwysenes,
my reconciliacion and my satisfaccion with my faith fermely to setholde upon
them even as they were my nowne good. But yet do I challenge and receive them
out of the bowels and breast of my Lord, even those things which I have not
of my self. For his holy body dropeth out, yea it flows forth mercy and
forgeuenes, nether wa^teth there any holes wherbye they may flowforth aboun
dantly and iucessantly. For with the eyes of mi faith in continual
rememberance I see his ha^dis and feet dug through, and a spear pearsinge
his side. Through these sweet holes, I souke me hou^y out of the rock and oil
out of the hard stonne. Here I taste and feel (oh my father) how sweet is my
Lord Christ Jesus. To who^ with my father and the holy ghost be glory praise
and thankis for ever and ever.

So be it.
LEt us (dear brethern) take it for Jacob. i.
great joy as often as we fall into son dry tentacious and troubles knowinge i.
Pet. i.
that it is for the tryoll of our faith and it brings forth patience. Unto
good minds regenerated of the spirit all perturbacions, temptacions and
affiliccions be good and profitable to exercise patience, increase constancye
and faith, and to prove owr hope to kindle love and to nour^^re us in crystis
religion For owr faith and all the gifts of god be increased by this use and
excercyse. Which thus encre ased, are also by affliccion and the cross
defended. Unto which pertains. That Exo. xiij and. xiiij i. Cor. x.
our fathers all were under the cloud and passed through the sea, and all were
bapti sed into Moses in the cloud and in the sea. Whereby the apostle shewth in
how great fear were the Israelits, the sea lyinge before their eyes and their
mortal enemies the Egipcians being at their heelis. It was a fearful sight
to see them in this distress passinge down into the botome the sea, the
waters like heuey walls swellinge up one echesyde lykely ever to ouerwhelme
them. But yet here were they baptized into Moses scole him to be their teacher
and scolemaster to take them for the from under the law that they and we also
at last might be baptized into Christ to do him upon us perfitly enstructe and
confirmed in the faith of his promises reveled and performed under the grace of
the gospel. So that by this baptism even the face of our perpetual
repentance, we be taught and warned of our Christian profession that is to take
the cross of Christ upon us and to follow him by patiently sufferinge, into his
perpetual glory. So be it.

1544 in September. G. I.


