Lady Pecunia, OR The praise of Money.

Also A Combat betwixt Conscience and Covetousness.

Together with, The complaint of Poetry, for the death of Liberality.

Newly corrected and enlarged, by Richard Barnfield, Graduate in Oxford.

Printed by W. I. and are to be sold by John Hodgets dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard a little beneath Paul's School, 1605.

The Authors first Epistle Dedicatory.
LEd by the swift report of winged Fame,
with silver trumpet, sounding forth your name
To you I dedicate this merry Muse,
And for my Patron, I your favor choose:
She is a Lady, she must be respected:
She is a Queen, she may not be neglected.
This is the shadow, you the substance have,
Which substance now this shadow seems to crave.
Richard Barnfield.
To the gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen, being encouraged through your gentle acceptance of my Cynthia, I
have once more ventred on your courtesies: hoping to find you (as I have done
heretofore) friendly. Being determined to writ of something, and yet not
resolved of anything, I considered with my self, if one should write of Love
(they will say) every one writes of Love: if of virtue, why, who regards
virtue; To be short, I could think of nothing, but either it was common, or
not at all in request. At length I beethoght my self of a Subject, both new
(as having never been written upon before) and pleasing (as I thought) because
Man's Nature commonly) loves to hear that praised, with whose presence, he is
most pleased.

Erasmus (the glory of Netherland, and the refiner of the Latin Tongue) wrote a
whole Book, in the praise of follye. Then if so excellent a Scholar, writ in
praise of vanity, why may not I write in praise of that which is profitable?
There are not two Countries, where Gold is esteemed, less than in India, and
more then in England: the reason is, because the Indians are barbarous, and our
Nation civil.

I have given Pecunia the title of a Woman, Both for the termination of the
Word, because (as Women are) she is loved of men. The brauest voyages in the
World, have been made for Gold: for it, men have ventured (by Sea) o the
furthest parts of the earth: In the pursuit whereof, Englandes Nestor and
Neptune (Hawkins and Drake) lost their lives. upon the Deaths of the which two,
of the first I writ this: The Waters were his winding Sheet, the Sea was made
his Toombe,
Yes for his Fame the Ocean Sea, was not sufficient room.
Of the latter this: England his Heart, his Corpse the Waters have,
And that which raisd his Fame, became his grave.


The Praetorians (after the death of Pertinax) in the election of a new
Emperor, more esteemed the money of Iulianus, then either the virtue of
Seuerus, or the valor of Pessennius. Then of what great estimation, this Lady
Pecunia, both has been in the world, and is at this present, I leave to your
Judgment. But what speak I so much of her praise in my Epistle, that have
commended her so at large, in my Book; To the reading whereof, (Gentlemen) I
refer you.

Lady Pecunia. OR The praise of Money.
I Sing not of Angellica the fair,
(For whom the Palladine of France fell mad)
Nor of sweet Rosamond, old Cliffords heir,
(Whose death did make the second Henry sad)
But of the fairest fair Pecunia,
The famous Queen of rich America.
2
Goddess of Gold, great Empress of the Earth,
O thou that can do all Things under Heaven:
That do convert the saddest mind to Mirth:
(Of whom the elder age was quite bereauen)
Of thee I Will sing, and in thy Praise I Will write;
You golden Angels help me to indite.
3
You, you alone, can make my Muse to speak;
And tell a golden tale, with silver tongue:
You only can my pleasing silence break;
And add some Music, to a merry Songue;
But amongst all the five, in Musicks Art,
I worst can brook the Countcr-tenor part.
4
the Mean is best, and that I mean to keep,
So shall I keep my self from that I mean;
Lest with some Others, I be forced to weep,
And cry Peccaui, in a doleful Scaene.
But to the matter which I have in hand,
The Lady Regent, both by Sea and Land.
5
When Saturn lived, and wore the Kingly Crown,
(And Jove was yet unborn, but not vnbred)
this Ladies fame was then of no renown;
(For Gold was then, no more esteemed then Lead)
then truth and Honesty were only used,
Silver and Gold were utterly refused.
6
But when the World grew wiser in Conceit,
And saw how men in manners did decline,
How Charity began to lose her heat,
And One did at another good repine,
Then did the Aged, first of all respect her,
And vowed from thence-forth, never to reject her.
7
Thus with the World, her beauty did increase,
And many Suitors had she to obtain her:
Some sought her in the Wars; and some in peace;
But few of youthful age, could ever gain her:
Or if they did, she soon was gone again,
And could with them, but little time remain.
8
For why against the Nature of her Sex,
(That commonly despise the feeble Old)
She, loves old men: but young men she reiects,
Because to her, their Love is quickly cold:
Oldemen (like Husbands jealous of their Wives)
Lock her up fast, and keep her as their lives.
9
The young man careless to maintain his life,
Neglects her love (as though he did abhor her)
Like one that hardly does obtain a wife,
And when he has her once, he cares not for her,
She, seeing that the young man does despise her
Leaves the frank heart, and flies unto the miser.
10
He entertaines her, with a joyful heart,
And seems to rue her undeserved wrong:
And from his presence, she shall never part,
Or if she do, he thinks her absence long:
And oftentimes he sends for her again,
Whose life without her, cannot long remain.
11
And when he has her, in his own possession,
He locks her in an yron-barred chest;
And doubting somewhat, of the like Transgression,
He holds that yron-walled Prison best.
And least some Rusty sickness should infect her,
He often visits her, and does respect her.
12
As for the young man (subject unto sin)
No marvel though the Devil do distress him;
To tempt man's frailty, which does never linne,
Who many times, has not a Cross to bless him:
But how can he incur the heavens Curse,
That has so many Crosses in his purse?
13
He needs not fear those wicked sprights that walk,
Under the couerture of Cole-blacke Night;
For why the Devil still, a Cross does baulke,
Because on it, was hangde the Lord of Light:
But let not Mysers trust to Silver Crosses,
Least in the end, their gains be turned to losses.
14
But what care they, so they may hoord up gold?
Either for God, or Devil, or heaven, or hell?
So they may fair Pecuniaes face behold;
And every day, their Mounts of Money tell.
What tho to count their Coin, they never blin,
Count they their coin, and counts not god their sin?
15
But what talk I of sin, to Usurers?
Or look for mendment, at a Mysers hand?
Pecunia, has so many followers,
Bootlesse it is, her Power to withstand.
King Couetise, and wariness his wife,
The parents were, that first did give her life.
16
But now unto her praise I will proceed,
Which is as ample as the world is wide:
What great Contentment does her presence breed
In him, that can his wealth with Wisdom guide?
She is the Sovereign Queen of all Delights:
For her the Lawyer pleads, the Soldier fights.
17
For her, the Merchant ventures on the Seas,
For her, the Scholar studdies at his book;
For her, the Usurer (with greater ease)
For silly fishes, lays a silver hook;
For her the Townesman leaves the contry vilage
For her the Plowman gives himself to Tillage.
18
For her, the Gentleman does raise his rentes,
For her, the Seruingman attends his master:
For her, the curious head new toys inuents;
For her, to sores, the Surgeon lays his plaster.
In fine for her, each man in his Uocation,
Applies himself, in every several Nation.
19
What can thy heart desire, but thou may have it,
If thou have ready money to disburse?
Then thank thy Fortune, that so freely gave it,
For of all friends, the surest is thy Pursse.
Friends may prove falls, and leave thee in thy need
But still thy pursse will be thy friend indeed.
20
Admit thou come into a place unknown,
And no man wots of whence, or what thou art:
If once thy fair Pecunia, she be shown,
Thou art esteemd a man of great Desert:
And placed at the Tables upper end,
Not for thine own sake, but thy trusty friend.
21
But if you want your Ladies lovely grace,
And have not wherwithall to pay your shot,
Your Hostis presently will step in Place,
You are a Stranger (Sir) know you not:
By trusting Diverse, I am run in Det;
Therefore of me, nor meat nor Bed you get.
22
O who can then, express the worthy praise,
Which fair Pecunia justly does desarue?
That can the meanest man, to Honor raise:
And feed the soul that ready is to starve.
Affection, which was wont to be so pure,
Against his golden Siege, may not endure.
23
Witness the Trade of Mercenarie sin;
(Or Occupation, if you list to term it)
Where fair Pecunia must the suite begin;
(As common-tride Experience does confirm it)
Not Mercury himself, with silver Tongue,
Can so inchaunt, as can a golden Songue.
24
When nothing could subdue the Phrygian Troy,
(That City through the world so much renowned)
Pecunia did her utterly destroy:
And left her fame in dark Oblivion drowned.
And many Cities since, no less in fame,
For Love of her, have yielded to their shame.
25
What thing is then so well beloved as money?
It is a special comfort to the mind;
More fair then women are, more sweet than honey:
Easy to loose, but very hard to find.
In fine, to him, whose purse begins to faint,
Gold is a God, and Silver is a Saint.
26
The time was once, when Honesty was counted
A Demie-God, and so esteemed of all:
But now Pecunia on his Seat is mounted;
Since Honesty in great disgrace did fall.
No state, no Calling now, does him esteem;
Nor of the other ill, does any deem.
27
The reason is, because he is so poor:
(And who respects the poor, and needy Creature?)
Still begging of his alms, from Door to door;
All ragd, and torn, and eeke deformd in feature.
In countenance so changde, that non can kno him,
So weak that every vice does overthrow him.
28
But fair Pecunia, (most divinely bred)
for sundry shapes, does Proteus self surpass,
In one Land, she is suited all in Lead,
And in another, she is clad in Brass;
But still within the Coast of Albion,
She ever puts her best Apparel on.
29
Silver and Gold, and nothing else is current,
In England, in fair Englands happy Land,
All baser sorts of Metals, have no Warrant,
Yet secretly they Slip, from hand to hand.
If any such be took, the same is lost,
And presently is nailed on a Post.
30
Which with Quicksilver, being flourisht over,
Seems to be perfect Silver, to the show:
As Woemens paintings, their defects do cover,
Under this false attire, so do they go.
If on a woollen Cloth, thou rub the same,
Then will it straight begin to blush, for shame.
31
If chafed on thy hair, till it be hot,
If it good Silver be, the scent is sweet:
If counterfeit, thy chafing has begot
A ranke-smelt savor; for a Queen unmeet:
Pecunia is a Queen, for her Deserts,
And in the Deck, may go for Queen of hearts.
32
The Queen of hearts, because she rules all hearts;
And has all hearts, obedient to her Will:
Whose Bounty, fame unto the World imparts;
And with her glory, all the World does fill:
The Queen of Diamonds, she cannot be;
There was but one, Eliza, thou wast she.
33
And thou wast she, O Sacred Sovereign;
Whom God did aid with his Al-mighty hand:
Blessing thy People, with thy peaceful reign;
And made this little Land a happy Land:
Thy peace on earth begun, in heaven made pure,
There cround with lasting joy: o joy most sure!
34
The time was once, when fair Pecunia, here,
Did basely go attyred all in Leather:
But in Elizaes reign, it did appear,
Most richly clad; in Gold, or Silver either:
Nor reason is it, that her Golden reign
With baser Coin, eclipsed should remain.
35
And as the Coin she did repurifie,
From baser substance, to the purrest Mettels:
Religion so, did she refine beside,
From Papistrie, to truth; which daily settles
Within the Peoples hearts; though some there be,
That cleave unto their wonted Papistrie.
36
No flock of sheep, but some are still infected:
No piece of Lawne so pure, but has some fret:
All buildings are not strong, that are errected:
All Plants prove not, that in good ground are set:
Some tares are sown; amongst the choicest seed;
No garden can he cleans'd of every Weed.
37
But now more Angels then on Earth yet wear
Her golden Impresse; have to Heaven attended
Her Virgin-soule; now, now she soiornes there,
Tasting more joys then may be comprehended.
Life, she has changde for life (oh countlesse gain)
An earthly rule, for an eternal Reign.
38
Such a Successor leaving in her stead,
So peerless worthy, and so Royal wise;
In him her virtues live, though she be dead:
Bounty and Zeal, in him both soueranize.
To him aloue, Pecunia does obey,
He ruling her, that does all others sway.
39
Bounty, that when she sickned, cras'd and fainted,
And when she left the earth had almost died;
Hoping with her, in heaven to have bin sainted,
And among the rest an Angels place supplied:
This King has cherisht, and his life assured,
And of a long consumption, Bounti's cured.
40
Plenty and Peace upon his Throne attend,
Health and Content, upon his person wait:
Conquest and Fame, his Royalty defend,
May all good Planets smile upon his state.
By whom all-drooping-vertues are revived,
And dying-Bounty, made again long lived.
41
The hand of Heaven still take him to his keeping,
Him, in no danger, in no doubt forsaking;
A thousand of his Angels guarde him sleeping,
And all the host of heaven protect him waking.
That he in safety, peace and rest, may reign,
whilst the two Poles, the frame of heaven sustain
42
But now to her, whose praise is here pretended,
(Divine Pecunia) fairer then the morn:
Which cannot be sufficiently commended;
Whose sun-bright Beauty does the world adorn.
Adorns the world, but specially the Pursse;
Without whose presence, nothing can be worse.
43
Not fair Haesione (King Priams sister)
Did ever show more beauty in her face,
Then can this lovely Lady, if it list her
To show her self; admyr'd for comely grace:
Which neither Age can wear, nor Time conclude
For why, her Beauty yearlie is renude.
44
New Coin is yearlie stamped in the Tower,
But these fair days of joy, adds alteration:
In fair Elizaes reign, none had that power;
But kingly glory, clothes her new in fashion,
Ads beauty to her beams, by adding more
Then grayest hairs in life, ere saw before.
45
Stand forth who can and tell, and truly say
When England, Scotland, Ireland and France,
He ever saw Pecunia to displaie
Before these days; O wondrous happy chance.
Nor does Pecunia only please the eye,
But charms the ear, with heavenly harmony.
46
Like to another Orpheus can she play
Upon her treble Harp, whose silver sound
Inchants the ear, and steals the heart away,
That hardly the deceit thereof is found.
Although such Music, some a shilling cost,
Yet is it worth but Nine-pence, at the most.
47
But Ireland alone, this Musicks sound
Being clad in Silver, challenge for their coin,
What though amongst us much thereof be found,
Authority, no subject does inioyne
Above his worth to countenance the same,
Then men, not coin, are worthy of that blame.
48
Had I the sweet inchaunting Tongue of Tully,
That charmed the hearers, like the Sirens Song;
Yet could I not discribe the Praises fully,
Which to Pecunia justly does belong,
Let it suffice, her Beauty does excel;
whose praise no Pencan paint, no Tongue can tell.
49
Then how shall I describe, with artlesse Pen,
The praise of her, whose prais, al praise surmounteth?
Breeding amazement, in the minds of men;
Of whom, this present Age so much accounts.
Variety of Words, would sooner want,
Then store of plentious matters, would be scant.
50
Whether ye list, to look into the City,
(Where money tempts the poor beholders eye)
Or to the Country Towns, deuoyde of Pity;
(Where to the poor, each place does alms deny)
All things for money now, are bought and sold,
That either heart can think, or eye behold.
51
Nay more for money (as report does tell)
Thou may obtain a Pardon for thy sins:
The Pope of Rome, for money will it sell;
(Whereby thy soul, no small salvation winnes)
But how can he (of Pride the chief Beginner)
Forgive thy sins, that is himself a sinner?
52
Then, since the Pope is subject unto sin,
No marvel tho, divine Pecunia tempt him,
With her fair beauty; whose good will to win,
Each one contends; and shall we then exempt him.
Did never mortal man, yet look upon her,
But straight way he became, enamourd on her.
53
Yet would I wish, the Wight that loves her so,
And has obtained, the like good will again,
To use her wisely, lest she prove his foe;
And so, in stead of Pleasure, breed his pain.
She may be kislt; but she may not be clipped,
Lest such delight in bitter gall be dypt.
54
The joyce of grapes, which is a souerai gne Thing
To cheer the heart, and to revive the spirits;
Being used imoderatly (in surfeiting)
Rather Dispraise, then commendation merits,
Even so Pecunia, is, as she is used:
Good of her self, but bad if once abused.
55
With her the Tenant pays the Landlords rent:
On her depends the stay of every state;
To her, rich Pressents every day are sent:
In her, it rests to end all dire Debate;
Through her, to wealth, is raisd the Country Boor;
From her, proceeds much profit to the poor.
56
Then how can I sufficiently commend,
her Beuties worth which maks the world to wonder?
Or End her praise, whose praises have no End?
Whose absence brings the stoutest stomach under,
Let it suffice, Pecunia has no peer,
No wight, no Beauty held more fair, more dear.
FINIS.
The Authors prayer to Pecunia.
GReat Lady, fith I have compilde thy Praise,
(According to my skill) and not thy merit:
And sought thy Fame above the stars to raise,
(Had I sweet Ovids vain, or Virgils spirit)
I crave no more but this, for my good will,
That in my Want, thou will supply me still.
The Combat betwixt Conscience and Covetousness, in the mind of Man.
NOw had the cole-black steeds, of pitchie Night,
(Breathing out Darkness) banished cheerful light,
And sleep (the shadow of eternal rest)
My several senses, wholly had possessed.
When lo, there was presented to my view,
A vision strange, yet not so strange, as true,
Conscience (me thought) appeared unto me,
Clothed with good Deeds, with truth and Honesty,
Her countenance demure, and sober sad,
Nor any other Ornament she had.
Then Covetousness did encounter her,
Clad in a Cassock, like a Usurer,
The Cassock, it was made of poor men skins,
Laced here and there, with many several sins:
Nor was it furd, with any common fur,
Or if it were himself he was the fur.
A Bag of money, in his hand he held,
The which with hungry eye he still beheld.
The place wherein this vision first began.
(A spacious plain) was called The mind of Man.
The Carle no sooner, Conscience had espyde
But swelling like a Toad, (puffed up with pride)
He straight began against her to inuey;
These were the words which Couetise did say.
Conscience (quoth he) how dare thou be so bold,
To claim the place, that I by right do hold?
Neither by right, nor might, thou can obtain it;
By might (thou know full well) thou can not gain it
The greatest Princes are my followars,
The King in Peace, the Captain in the Wars;
The Courtier, and the simple Countryman:
The Judge, the Merchant, and the Gentleman:
The learned Lawyer, and the Politician:
The skilfulll Surgeon, and the fine Physician;
In brief all sorts of men me entertain,
And hold me as their Souls sole Sovereign,
And in their quarrel they will fight and die,
Rather then I should suffer injury.
And as for title, interest, and right,
I Will prove its mine by that as well as might.
Though Covetousness, were used long before,
Yet Judas Treason made my fame the more;
When Christ he caused, crucifide to be,
For thirty pence, man sold his mind to me:
And now adays, what tenure is more free,
Then that which purchased is, with Gold and fee?
Conscience.
With patience, have I heard thy large Complaint,
Wherein the Devil, would be thought a Saint:
But wot ye what, the Saying is of old?
One tale is good, until another told.
Truth is the right, that I must stand upon,
(For other title has poor Conscience none)
First I will prove it, By Antiquity,
That thou art but an vp-start, unto me;
Before that thou wast ever thought upon
the mind of Man, belongd to me alone.
For after that the Lord had Man Created,
And him in blisse-full Paradise had seated;
(Knowing his Nature was to vice inclynd)
God gave me unto man to rule his mind.
And as it were his Governor to be,
To guide his mind, in Truth, and Honesty.
And where thou say, that man did sell his soul;
That Argument J quickly can control:
It is a fained fable, thou do tell,
That, which is not his own, he cannot sell;
No man can sell his soul, although he thought it:
Man's soul is Christ's, for he has dearly bought it.
Therefore usurping Couetise, be gone,
For why, the mind belongs to me alone.
Conciousnesse.
Alas poor Conscience, how thou art decayed?
As though of senses, thou were quite bereaud.
What will thou say (that thinks thou can not err)
If J can prove my self the ancienter?
Though into Adams mind God did infuse thee,
Before his fall, yet man did never use thee.
What was it else but Avarice in Eve,
(Thinking thereby, in greater Bliss to live)
That made her taste, of the forbidden fruit?
Ofher Desire, was not I the root?
Did she not covet? (tempted by the Devil)
The Apple of the Tree, of good and evil?
Before that man used Conscience, she did covet:
Therefore by her Transgression, here I prove it,
That Covetousness possessed the mind of man,
Before that any Conscience began.
Conscience.
Even as a counterfeited precious stone,
Seems to be far more rich, to look upon,
Then does the right: But when a man comes near,
His baseness then, does evident appear,
So Couetise, the Reasons thou do tell,
Seem to be strong, but being weighed well.
They are indeed, but only mere Illusions,
And do enforce but very weak Conclusions.
When as the Lord (fore-knowing his offense)
Had given man a Charge, of Abstinence,
And to refrain, the fruit of good and ill:
Man had a Conscience, to obey his will,
And never would be tempted thereunto,
Until the Woeman, she, did work man woe.
And made him break, the Lords commandment,
Which all Mankind, did afterward repent:
So that thou see, thy Argument is vain,
And I am proved, the elder of the twain.
Conciousnesse.
Fond Wretch, it was not Conscience but fear,
That made the first man (Adam) to forbear
to taste the fruit, of the forbidden tree,
Lest, if offending he were found to be,
(According as Jehouah said on hie,
For his so great transgression, he should die.
Fear curbd his mind, it was not Conscience then,
(For Conscience freely, rules the hearts of men)
And is a godly motion of the mind,
to every virtuous action inclind,
And not enforced through fear of Punishment,
But is to virtue voluntary bent:
then (simple trul) be packing presently,
For in this place, there is no room for thee.
Conscience.
Aye me (distressed Wight) what shall I do?
Where shall J rest? Or whither shall J go?
Unto the rich? (woes me) they do abhor me:
Unto the poor? (alas) they, care not for me:
Unto the Olde-man? he, has me forgot:
Unto the Young Man? yet he, knows me not:
Unto the Prince? he; can dispense with me:
Unto the Magistrate? that, may not be:
Unto the Court? for it, I am to base:
Unto the Country? there I have no place:
Unto the City? thence, J am exilde:
Unto the Village? there I am reuilde:
Unto the Bar? the Lawyer there is bribed,
Unto the War? there, conscience is derided:
Unto the temple? there, J am disguised:
unto the Market: there, I am despised:
thus both the young and old, the rich and poor,
against me, silly creature shut their door.
then since each one seeks my rebuke and shame,
Jle go again to Heaven, from whence J came,
this said, me thought, making exceeding moan,
She went her way, and left the carle alone,
who vaunting of his late-got victory,
aduaunc'd himself in pomp and Majesty;
Much like a Cock who having killed his foe,
bricks up himself and then begins to crow.
So Couetise, when Conscience was departed,
Began to be proud in mind, and hautie hearted:
And in a stately Chair of state he set him,
(For Conscience banished) there was none to let him,
And being but one entry, to this Plain,
(Whereof as king and Lord, he did remain)
Repentance called, he causd that to be kept,
Lest Conscience should return, whilst as he slept:
Wherefore he causd it, to be watched and warded
both night and Day, and to be strongly guarded:
To keep it safe, these three he did entreat,
Hardness of heart, with Falsehood, and Deceat,
And if at any time, she chaunc'd to venture,
Hardness of heart, denid her still to enter.
When Conscience was exilde the mind of Man,
Than Conetise, his government began.
This once being seen, what I had seen before,
(being only seen in sleep, was seen no more,
For with the sorrow, which my Soul did take
At sight hereof, forth with I did awake.
Finis.
The Complaint of poetry, for the death of Liberality.
1
WEep heuens now, for you have lost your light,
Ye Sun and Moon, be are witness of my moan
the clear is turned to clouds, the day to night,
And all my hope, and all my joy is gone:
bounty is dead, the cause of my annoie:
bounty is dead and with her did my joy.
2
O who can comfort my afflicted soul?
Or add some end to my increasing sorrows?
Who can deliver me from endless dole?
Which from my heart eternal torment borrowes.)
When bounty lived, J bore the bell away,
When bounty did, my credit did decaie.
3
J never then, did write on verse in vain;
Nor ever went my Poems unregarded:
Then did each Noble breast, me intertaine,
And for my labors J was well rewarded,
But now good words, are stepped in Bounties place,
Thinking thereby, her glory to disgrace.
4
But who can live with words, in these hard times?
(Although they came from Jupiter himself?)
Or who can take such Payment, for his Rimes;
(When nothing now, is so esteemed as Pelf)
T is not Good words, that can a man maintain;
Words are but wind; and wind is all but vain.
5
Where is Mecoenas, Learnings noble Patron?
(That Maroes Muse, with Bounty so did cherish?)
Or fair Zenobia, that worthy Matron?
(Whose name, for Learnings love, shall never perish)
What tho their Bodies, lie full low in grave,
Their fame the world; their souls the heavens have.
6
Vile Auaricia, how have thou inchaunted
The Noble minds, of great and mighty Men?
Or what infernal fury late has haunted
Their niggard purses? (to the learned pen)
Was it Augustus wealth, or noble mind,
That everlasting fame, to him assinde.
7
If wealth? Why Croesus was more rich then he;
(Yet Croesus glory, with his life did end)
It was his Noble mind, that moved me
To write his praise, and eke his Acts commend
Who ere had heard, of Alexanders fame,
If Quintus Curtius had not pend the same?
8
Then since by me, their deeds have been declared,
(Which else had perished with their lives decay)
Who to augment their glories, have not spared
to crown their brows, with neuer-fading Bay;
What art deserves such liberality,
As does the peerlesse art of Poetry?
9
But Liberality is dead and gone:
And Avarice Vsurps true bounties seat.
F^^ her it is I make this endless moan,
^^^^ose praises worth no pen can well repeat)
Sweet Liberality adieu for ever,
For Poetry again shall see thee never.
10
Never again, shall J thy presence see:
Never again, shall I thy bounty taste,
Never again, shall J accepted be:
Never again, shall I be so embraced.
Never again, shall J the bad recall:
Never again, shall I beloved of all.
11
Thou wast the Nurse, whose Bounty gave me suck,
Thou wast the Sun, whose beams did lend me light:
Thou wast the tree, whose fruit J still did pluck:
thou wast the Patron, to maintain my right
through thee J lived; on thee I did rely;
^a thee J joyed: and now for thee I die.
12
What man, has lately lost a faithful friend?
Or Husband, is deprived of his Wife?
But does his after-daies in dolor spend?
(Leading a loathsome, discontented life?
Dearer then friend, or wife have I forgone?
then marvel not although I make such moan.
13
Fair Philomela, cease thy sad complaint;
And lend thine ears, unto my doleful Dittie:
(Whose soul with sorrow, now begins to faint,
And yet J cannot move men's hearts to pity:)
thy woes are light, compared unto mine:
You watrie Nymphs, to me your plaints resign.
14
and thou Melpomene, (the Muse of Death)
that never sing'st, but in a doleful strain;
Since cruel Destiny has stopped her breath,
(Who whilst she lived, was Virtues Sovereign)
Leave He^^on, (whose Banks so pleasant be
and bear a part of sorrow now with me.
15
the trees (for sorrow) shead their fading Leaves,
And weep out gum, in stead of other tears;
Comfort nor joy, no Creature now conceiues,
to chirp and sing, each little bird forbears.
the silly Sheep, hangs down her drooping head,
and all because, that bounty she is dead.
16
the greater that I feel my grief to be,
the lesser able, am J to express it;
Such is the Nature of extremity,
the heart it som-thing eases, to confess it.
therefore Jle wake my muse, amidst her sleeping,
and what I want with words, supply with weeping.
17
Weep still mine eyes, a River full of tears,
to drown my Sorrow in, that so molests me;
and rid my head of cares: my thoughts of fears:
Exiling sweet Content, that so detests me.
But ah (alas) my tears are almost dun.
and yet my grief, it is but new begun.
18
Even as the Sun, when as it leaves our sight,
Does shine with those Antipodes, beneath us:
Lending the other world her glorious light,
And dismal Darkness, only does bequeath us:
Even so sweet Bounty, seeming dead to me,
Lives now to none, but smooth-Tongd Flattery.
19
O Adulation, Canker-worme of Truth;
The flattering Glass of Pride, and Self-conceit,
(Making old wrinkled Age, appear like youth)
Dissimulations Mask, and follies Beat.
Pity it is, that thou art so rewarded,
Whilst Truth and Honesty, go unregarded.
20
O that Nobility, itself should stain,
In being bountiful, to such vile Creatures,
Who, when they flatter most, then most they feign:
Knowing what humor best, will fit there Natures.
What man so mad, that knows himself but poor.
And will believe that he has riches store,
21
Upon a time the crafty Fox did flatter
The foolish pie (whose mouth was full of meat)
The Pie believing him, began to chatter,
And sing for joy, (not having list to eat)
And whilst the foolish Pie, her meat let fall,
The crafty Fox, did run a way with all.
22
Terence describes under Gnatoes name,
The right conditions of a Parasyte:
(And with such Eloquence, sets forth the same,
As does the learned Reader much delight)
Showing, that such a Sicophant as Gnato,
Js more esteemed, then twenty such as Plato.
23
Bounty look back, upon thy goods misspent:
And think how ill, thou have bestowd thy money:
Consider not their words, but their intent:
Their hearts are gal, although their toongs be honey:
They speak not as they think, but all is fained,
And only to the intent to be maintained.
24
And herein happy, I areade the poor;
No flattering Spaniels, fawn on them for meat:
The reason is, because the Country Boore
Has little enough for himself to eat:
No man will flatter him, except himself:
And why? because he has no store of wealth.
25
But sure it is not Liberality
That does reward these fawning smel-feasts so:
It is the vice of Prodigality,
That does the the banks of Bounty ouerflo.
Bounty is dead, yea so it needs must be,
Or if alive, yet is she dead to me.
26
Therefore as one, whose friend is lately dead,
J will bewail the death of my late friend,
Upon whose tomb ten thousand tears i will shed,
Till drearie Death, of me shall make an end:
Or if she want a Toomb, to her desert,
On then, i will bury her within my heart.
27
But (Bounty) if thou love a Tomb of stone,
Oh then seek out, a hard and stony heart,
For were mine so, yet would it melt with moan,
And all because that J with thee must part.
Then if a stony heart must thee interr,
Go find a Step-dame, or a Usurer.
28
And since there dies no Wight, of great account,
But has an Epitaph composed by me,
Bounty, that did all other far surmount,
Upon her Tomb, this Epitaph shall be:
Here lies the Wight, that Learning did maintain,
And at the last, by Avarice was slain.
29
Vile Avarice, why have thou killed my Dear?
And robbed the world, of such a worthy Treasure,
In whom no spark of goodness does appear,
So greedy is thy mind, without all measure.
Thy death, from Death did merit to release her,
The Murderers deserved to die, not Caesar.
30
The Merchants wife; and Tender-harted Mother:
That leaves her Love; whose Sonneis pressed for war:
(Resting the one; as woeful as the other)
Hopes yet at length, when euded is the jar;
To see her Husband; see her Son again:
"were it not then for Hope, the heart were slain.
31
But I, whose hope is turned to despair,
Nere look to see my dearest Dear again;
Then Pleasure sit thou down, in Sorrows Chair,
And for a while thy wonted Mirth refrain.
Bounty is dead, that whylome was my Treasure:
Bounty is dead, my joy and only pleasure.
32
If Pythias death, of Damon were bewailed;
Or Pillades did rue, Orestes end:
If Hercules, for Hylas loss were quailed:
Or Theseus, for Pyrithous Tears did spend:
then do J mourn for Bounty, being dead:
Who living, was my hand, my heart, my head.
33
My hand, to help me, in my greatest need:
My heart, to comfort me, in my distress:
My head, whom only J obeyed, indeed:
If she were such, how can my grief be less?
Perhaps my words, may perce the parcae's ears:
Jf not with words, Jle move them with my tears.
34
But ah (alas) my Tears are spent in vain,
(For she is dead, and J am left alive)
Tears cannot call, sweet Bounty back again:
Then why do I, against Fate and Fortune strive?
And for her death, thus weep lament and cry,
Since every mortal wight, is borne to die.
35
But as the woeful mother does lament,
Her tender babe with cruel Death oppressed:
Whose life was spotless, pure, and innocent,
(And therefore sure, it soul is gone to rest)
So Bounty, which her self did upright keep,
Yet for her loss, love cannot choose but weep.
36
The loss of her, is loss to many a one:
The loss of her, is loss unto the poor;
And therefore not a loss, to me alone,
But unto such, as go from Door to Door.
Her loss, is loss unto the fatherless:
And unto all, that are in great distress.
37
The maimed Soldier, coming from the war:
The woeful wight, whose house was lately burnd:
the silly soul: the woeful trauelar:
And all, whom Fortune at her feet has spurnd:
Lament the loss of Liberality:
"Its ease, to have in grief some Company.
38
the Wife of Hector (sad Andromache)
Did not bewail, her husbands death alone:
But (since he was the trojans only stey)
the wives of troy (for him) made aequall moan.
She, shead the tears of Love; and they of pity:
She, for her dear dead Lord; they, for their City.
39
Nor is the Death of Liberality,
(Although my grief be greater than the rest)
Only lamented and bewaild of me;
(And yet of me, she was beloved best)
But, since she was so bountiful to all,
She is lamented, both of great and small.
40
O that my Tears could move the powers divine.
That Bounty might be called from the dead:
As Pity pierced the heart of Proserpine:
Who moved with the Tears Admetus shed)
Did send him back again, his loving Wife;
Who lost her own, to save her husbands life.
41
Jmpartiall Parcae, will no prayrs move you?
Can Creatures so divine, have stony hearts?
Hapless are they, whose hap it is to prove you,
For you respect no Creatures good Deserts.
O Atropos, (the crueldst of the three)
Why have thou taken, my faithful friend from me?
42
But ah, she cannot (or she will not) hear me,
Or if she do, yet may not she repent her:
then com (sweet death) O why do thou for bear me
Aye me! thy Dart is blunt, it will not enter.
Oh now J know the cause, and reason why;
I am immortal, and I cannot die.
43
So Cytherae a would have did, but could not;
When fair Adonis by her side lay slain:
So I desire the Sisters, what J should not;
For why (alas) J wish for Death in vain;
Death is their servant, and obeys their will;
And if they bid him spare, he cannot kill.
44
Oh would I were, as other Creatures are;
Then would I die, and so my grief were ended:
But Death (against my will) my life does spare;
(So little with the fates I am befrended)
Since, when J would, thou do my suit deny,
Vile Tyrant, when thou will I will not die.
45
And Bounty, though her body thou have slain,
Yet shall her memory remain for ever:
For ever, shall her memory remain;
Whereof no spiteful Fortune can bereave her.
Then Sorrow cease, and wipe thy weeping eye;
For Fame shall live, when all the world shall die.
A Comparison of the Life of Man.
Man's life is well compared to a feast,
Furnished with choice of all Variety:
To it comes time; and as a bidden guest
He sits him down, in Pomp and Majesty.
The three fold age of Man, the Waiters be:
Then with a earthen voyder (made of clay)
Comes Death, and takes the table clean away.
Finis.
A Remembrance of some English Poets.
Live Spenser ever, in thy Fairy Queen:
Whose like (for deep Conceit) was never seen.
Crowned may thou be, unto thy more renown,
(As King of Poets) with a Laurel Crown.
And Daniell, praised for thy sweet-chast verse:
Whose Fame is engraved on Rosamonds black Hearse.
Still may thou live: and still be honored,
For that rare work, The White Rose and the Red.
And Drayton, whose well-written Tragedies,
And sweet Epistles, soar thy fame to skies.
Thy learned Name, is equal with the rest;
Whose stately Numbers are so well addressed.
And Shakespeare, thou, whose honey flowing vain,
(Pleasing the World) thy Praises does contain.
Whose venus, and whose Lucrece (sweet, and chaste)
Thy Name in fames immortal Book have placed.
Live ever you, at least in Fame live ever:
Well may the Body die, but Fame die never.
Finis.

