THE RIGHT AND IVRISDICTION OF THE PRELATE, and the PRINCE. OR, A TREATISE OF
ECCLESIASTICAL, and REGAL authority.

COMPYLED BY I. E. STVDENT IN DIVINITY for the full Instruction and appeaceme^t
of the consciences of English Catholics, concerning the late Oath of pretended
Allegance. Together with a clear and Ample declaration, of every clause
thereof, newly reuewed and augmented by the Authoure.

Reddite ergo omnibus debita: cui tributum, tributum: cui vectigal, vectigal:
cui timorem, timorem: cui honorem, honorem. Romans 13.

Render therefore to all men their due: to whom Tribute, Tribute: to whom
Custom, Custom: to whom Fear, Fear: to whom Honor. Honor.

Imprinted With license of Superiors. ANNO DOM. 1621.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE. To the most renowned, and constant English
CATHOLICS.
THIS LIFE OF OURS, (Right Honorable, Worshipful, and worthy Catholics (is a
Raze, and course, in which we are to run for the winning of a goal. (1. Cor.
9.) It is a Wrestling for a garland of eternal glory. (1. Cor. 9.) It is a
Warfare, in which we are to fight against three mighty, known, and professed
enemies, for no less then a Kingdom of Heaven. Our life, (as JOB says cap.
7.) is Militia super terram; A warfare, in which we stand always upon our
guarde, always in our armor, always with weapon in hand: but it is a warfare
on earth, for in heaven it is a peace; a labor here, a rest there; a sowing in
tears here, a reaping in joy there; a storm here, a calm there; a
troublesome sea here, a quiet haven there; a battle here, a triumph there;
and there fore the Church is called militant here, triumphant there. Wherefore
as the husbandman labors in the field, rests only at home: The wayfaring
man trauelleth in his ware, takes his ease only in his Inn: The Romans
tryumphed not in the same place, in which they waged war, but made war in
foreign Countries for Towns, Provinces, and Kingdoms, and tryu^phed only in
Rome: So we must not look for ease, peace, triumphs, and garlandes in this
life; but here we must prepare our selves to skirmishes, encounters, combats,
and battles, and in Heaven only expect our Triumph. The children of Israel
got not the land of promise, but by the dynt of the sword, by many encounters
and bloody battles: neither shall we obtain heaven, unless we fight for
it. Regnum coelorum vim patitur, and violenti rapiunt illud, (Mat. 11.) The
Kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent bear it away. If we
will win this City, we must lay siege unto it by watching and praying. If
we will enter it, we must make a breach by the battery of good works. If we
will take quiet possession of it, we must make war for it.

2. So that the Church militant, is an army, and an army always raunged in
battle array. Terribilis vt Castrorum acies ordinata. (Cant. 6) Terrible as
the army of a Camp set in array: In which you shall see nothing but choros
castrorum. (Cant. 7.) Companies of Camps. In which army, the King is Christ;
his General, is his chief Vicaire; His Coronelles, are Patriarchs, Bishops,
and other Prelates; His Captains, and inferior Commanders, are inferior
Priests and Pastors; His soldiers, are the rest of Christian troops, and
Companies. To the furnishing of this Army, all the Sacraments of the new law
are instituted and ordained. Matrimony peopleth this army, and furnishes it
with men. Baptism presses and enrolleth them. Confirmation armeth them, and
gives them their military Mark and liuerie. The Sacred Eucharist vittaileth
the Camp, and furnishes it with munition bread. The Sacrament of Order
creates Coronelles, Captains, and such as are to command. The Sacrament of
Penance heals, and cures the soldiers, who in this war are wounded, and
even reuiueth them, who are slain and killed. Extreme unction riddeth them,
even of the relics of the wounds and diseases. And so all Christians are
pressed to the war, and ordained to fight. the whole Church is a raunged
Army, and every Christian ought to singe that song, which DAVID sunge against
GOLIATH Benedictus Dominus Deus meus, qui docet manus meas ad praelium. and
digitos meos ad bellum. (Psalm. 42.) Blessed be our Lord my God, who teaches my
hands to battle, and my fingers to war.

3. In this Army, you, (o valiant and constant Catholics) are placed, as in
the most dangerous, so in the most honorable rank and place. For as the
General places there his most expert and hardy soldiers, where the enemies
Canon plays oftenest, the darts and arrows fly thickest, the pikes are
planted like a wood most terriblie: so our King CHRIST JESUS, under whose
banner and colors you fight, knowing your undaunted courage to be such that
(absit verbo inuidia) you are the most valiant soldiers of the present Church
militant: he has placed you against a wood of Pikes, against a shower of
Bullets and Pellets, against the most furious assault, that the common enemy
gives to the Christian Army, and Church militant of Christ.

4. For whereas Christians amongst the Turks, can buy their liberty of
Conscience for money, you by no tribute can purchase such a favor. And whereas
in Holland, and other countries, the Magistrate lays hands on Priests and
Catholics, only when he finds them at Mass, or divine service; you are
searched for more diligently then thieves, murderers, and public harlots, and
are apprehended, even in the streets and fields. And although in France and
the Low Countries, Catholics have heretofore endured intolerable pillages,
cruel deaths and torments, yet that fury lasted only a while, whilst the
fury of heresy raged in her hoate beginning: but against you the like fury
has long continued. That cruelty was practiced only by way of tumult, but
against you the like sharpnes has bin used, under the color of law, and show
of justice: So that no Nation, no people Christian endures at this day for
Christ his Church, and her Pastors authority, that which you have endured for
these many years, without interruption. And whereas the more raging the
Tempest is, the sooner it is appeased: and the more furious and bloody the
battle is, the sooner it is ended: you have this long time suffered a violent
and furious persecution, and yet you see no end of this fury, yea, no hope of
an end, by humane means, oulde statutes being still renewed, new enacted. So
that you are placed in that place of Christ's Army, which is exposed to the
greatest fury of the Enemy: yea, you are set as a Butt or mark, against
which, the enemies of Gods Church, are permitted to discharge all their
Artillarie, and to empty the quiuers of all the pearsing arrows of
afflictions, against you: and fo you may say as JOB did (Job. 16.) Posuit me
quasi signum. He bath set me to him selue as it were a marck to shoot at. And
seeing that he bath been so long a spectator of these shottes, and furious
assaults, it seemech he takes delight and pleasure, not in your enemies
cruelty and fury, but in your dexterity in warding, constancy in keeping
your standing, patience in suffering and enduring.

5. And truly your afflictions seem to me, neither inferior, nor unlike to
those of JOB, and your patience seems to match and to aequalize his; only the
order of your afflictions seem different. For he was assaulted first in his
goods, the^ in his person; you co^trariewise, first in your bodies and lives;
now in your goods and livings. The Sabeians have rushed in upon you, as well as
on JOB, and have spoiled many of you, impouerished the rest. Irruerunt Sabei,
tuleruntque omnia. (Job. 1.) The Sabeians came in violently, and have taken all
things from you, the fire also of God, fell from heaven, and striking the
sheep (of JOB,) and the servants has consumed the^. (Job. 1.) and a fire not
from heaven (unless by divine permission) but from earth, yea, from hell, and
the unquenchable thirst of having, has consumed all your substance. The
Chaldees made three troops to invade the Camels of JOB, and stroke his
servants with the sword. (Job 1.) So have they by three troops, to wit,
Concupiscentia carnis Concupiscence of the flesh. (1. Joan. 2.) Concupiscentia
oculorum, concupiscence of the eyes, and Superbia vitae, pride of life, invaded
you: because to satisfy their lust and carnalitie, their avarice, desire of
riches, and all that may be seen by the eyes, their pride and ambition of
greatness, they have made havoc of all you have. A vehement wind blowing
boysteroussly from the country of the Defert, shook the four Corners of Jobs
house, which falling, oppressed his Children. (Job. 5.) The like whirle wind,
from the North, and desert of heresy, has shaken your houses, and by their
fall, has ruinated your families, oppressed your persons, your wives and
children.

6. And least the devil should exprobate unto you, as he did to JOB, that
hitherto your goods have rather suffered, then you; and that therefore if God
would touch your body, and corporal life, he should soon see you break out
into impatience ( because skin for skin, and all things that a man has, he
will give for his life, Job. 2, God has permitted Satan, by his ministers, to
have power over your bodies, and corporal life also, as appears by the
prisons, in which some of you have rotted, some have statued, some have been
choked with stinking airs, as may easilye be seen by the rackes, in which
your joints have been dissolved, by the Tyburnes, on which you have been
hanged, and under which you have been most butcherly quartered, and
vnbowelled. Yea, to augment your affliction, many of you have not wanted a JOBS
wife, carnal and worldly love, to busse in your ears that Carnal counsel,
Benedic Deo and morere, (Job. 2. (Curse God and die; Do against thy
Conscience, frequent heretical service, take the oath of pretended
Allegiance, rather then undo thy self, thy wife and Children: Yet you have
not failed with JOB, to reprehend such a wise, and tell her that she has
spoken like one of the foolish women. (Job. 2.), as Sir THOMAS MORE told his
wife, that she was a foolish merchant, to counsel him to sell eternity, for
short and uncertain time. Many also of you have not wanted heretics of your
blood and stock, prefigured by JOBS false and fained friends (Job. 2.) who
have gone about to persuade you, that these miseries, which oppress you, are
befallen you for your obstinacy in Religion; and yet you have repelled such
deceauing friends; yea, you have cast from you such scandalyzing eyes, that is,
you have shaken off such friends, though otherwise as dear and necessary unto
you, as your eyes, and have chosen rather to go to heaven blind (Matt. 8.)
then to be directed by such ill-guyding eyes.

8. But seeing that God has not permitted Satan to have power over your
souls, but only over your transitory goods, and mortal lives, loose ye not
either heart or courage. Satan indeed, by his Ministers (as one tells you)
has broken down the walls of your house, as no marvel, it was but of clay,
but he could not lay hands on your soul (the good man of the house) that
being forbidden him; he has broken the chest of your body; and no marvel,
it was but of rotten board; but he could not finger the treasure of your faith,
Gods grace, and such like Jewels, they being locked up in the Cabinet, of your
conscience, of which God and you only keep the key. And therefore be ye not
dismayed, for the loss of your temporal goods, livings, and liberty, yea,
corporal life, seeing the principal (the soul) is safe, so long as you will.
But for all temporal losses, give God thanks, and say with JOB, Dominus dedit,
Dominus abstulit, sit nomen Domini benedictum. God gave all this, and he has
taken all away, be he praised as much for the taking away, as for the giving.

8. And do you not imagine, that God has forsaken you in permitting this
pillage of your goods, and sackage of your estates, for such goods are common
to the good and bad: rather take it for a sign of his father^ie love, in
giving you patience to bear with alacrity all those oppressions; and persuade
your selves that necesse erat, quia accepti eratis Deo, vt tentatio probaret
vos. (Tob. 12.) It was necessary, because you were acceptable to God, that
this tentation should prove you. God has indeed cast you into a furnace of
tribulation, but as the Potter does his earthen vessel, to harden it, not to
break it: or as the Goldsmith does his gold, to purge it, not to con^ume it.
He has indeed chastised you, but as his dearest children, not as servants,
and out of his love, more then out of anger, as he has dealt with his
Apostles, his Martyrs, yea, his Mother, yea his Son, and all his dearest. For
it is his manner, to chastise whom he loves, and to scourge every child that
he receaueth. As unto children he offers himself unto you. For wat son
is there, who^ the father does not correct? (Heb. 12.) And when the correction
is done, he will embrace you, and cast the rod into the fire. It is true, he
has wounded you, but as the Surgeon does, to let out the corrupt matter. He
wounds and cures, strikes, and his hands shall heal (Job. 5.) And, the
arrows of our Lord, are in you, (Job. 6.) as they were in JOB, but they are as
tents, which he will pull out, when they have drawn out all corruption. He
has permitted the wind of persecution, to beat furiously upon you, but it is
to blow away all chasse of imperfection, and that the solid wheat of your
virtues may be the purer. He has permitted you to be pilled, polled, and
spoiled of your goods, but that spoiling is but lopping and pruning, that the
tree hereafter may bear his fruits more abundantly.

9. Say not there fore, God has forsaken us, he thinks no more of us; and
if your enemies say, Deus dereliquit eos, persequimini and comprehendite eos,
quia non est qui eripiat. (Ps. 70.) God has forsaken them, follow them and
apprehende them, there is none to deliver them: believe them not, but rather
answer them: Non derelinquit Deus praesumentes de se. (Judith. 6.) God does
not forsake them that presume of him. Tell them that you are of the Church, to
which God promised, quod non vocabitur vltra derelicta and terra, eius non
vocabitur amplius desolata, sed vocabitur voluntas Dei in ea. (Isa. 62.) That
she shall no more be called forsaken, and her land shall no more be called
desolate, but she shall be called, the will of God in her. And when you behold
Englands present desolate state, and compare it with her former glory it had,
weep not as the jews did at the sight of their second Temple. (ESDRAS 3.) For
peradventure, Magna erit gloria domus istius nouissimae, plusquam primae.
(AGGEI 2.) Great shall be the glory of this last house, more then of the first.
And peradventure at this present, England., though all dustie and slurred with
the dust and blood of this battle, in which she fights, is more glorious in
the eye of God, then when she flourished in her Churches, Monasteries, and
Colleges, and shined in her golden peace. Be not astonished at the sight of
the troops and forces, which the enemy has brought into the field against
you, nor do you cry at such a fight with ELIZEVS servant, Heu, Heu, Domine mi,
quid faciemus? (4. Reg. 6.) Alas, Alas, My Lord, what shall we do? for there
are more with you, then with them. Lift up your eyes to heaven, and you shall
see more in that mountain prepared to fight for you, then are in the valley of
this world, that fight against you. You shall see your Genera CHRIST JESUS,
(whom S. Steven saw standing) ready to assist you, who gives courage to your
heart, force to your arm, edge to your sword, and who with his heavenly
troops of Saints and Angels fights for you, and in you; else against such
forces you could never have consisted; much less could you have daiely
increased forces and companies. And yet you see your Seminaries, where your
soldiers are trained, are as full as ever, and now (thanks be to God) new
forces of new Colleges and Monasteries, both of men and women (whose sex is
not debarred from this war) do adioyne them selves unto you, armed with as
great zeal as ever, with as much courage and dexterity in fighting as ever,
as appears by your Atkinso^s, Thulises, Maxfieldes, and Helmes, who even this
year, by dying in the field, discouraged and disco^fited their old Aduer
saries. These troops of soldiers, promise one day a victory: This seed
sown in tears, prognosticateth one day a harvest: These materials so well
hewed and fashioned, assure us, that so wise an Architect as is CHRIST JESUS,
would never have made them so ready for the building, had he not intended the
reedisying of our defaced Temple, and ruinated Church of England.

10. And although your General delay your victory, and suffer you many times
to be ficercely assaulted, yet it is but to make your victory more glorious:
Although, when the storm of persecution blows so boysterously, that your
Ship may seem in danger of Shipwreck, he seems to sleep, and not to
heed you, yet it is but to make you cry unto him with S. PETER, Domine salua
nos, perimus. O Lord save us, we perish: Although he seem sometimes ready to
leave you, and to go from you, yet he does but fingere se longius ire, (Luc.
24.) make sembla^ce to go further, thereby to give you occasion to cry with the
two Disciples, Mane nobiscu^ Domine, quonia^ aduesperascit: Tarry with us, o
Lord, because it waxes with us to watdes night, and the day is now far
spent: Although he seems to have taken all humane means from you, and eue^
that hope, which at the first you put in your Princes presumed Clemency, and
noble disposition, yet it is but to make you rely more on God, and not to put
your confidence in Princes, in the sons of men, in whom there is no salvation
(Ps. 145.) For otherwise, those oppressions of so many Innoce^ts, the equity
and justice of your cause, the impiety and vengeance-crying sins of your
adversaries, the extremity of your miseries and afflictions, do plead for
mercy toward you, justice against them.

11. But howsoever, you must not prescribe God a time, nor set him a day, as
OZIAS did (Judith. 7.8.) nor must you resolve as he did, to deliver up the
City and Church of England, to the Enemy, unless God send you aid or
succor within a certain time: For then Judith will reprehende you, and
demand sharply of you. Qui estis vos, qui tent atis Dominu^? non est iste
sermo qui misericordia^ prouocet, sed potius qui iram excitet, and furorem
accendat. (Judith. 8. What are you that tempt our Lord? This is no word, that
may provoke mercy, but rather that may raise up wrath and inflame fury.
Rather you must expect, in all patience, the time which God has appointed,
assuring your selves, that as he knows your necessities, better then your
selves, so is he more willing to release them, and as able as willing, because
his power is his will; and therefore when it shall be most for his glory, and
your good, he will lend his helping hand, and, as you have expected him, so
he will be your arm in the morning, and your salvation in the time of your
tribulation. Isa. 53.

12. And what can you tell? perchance the iniquities of the Amorrheans are at
their full. (Genesis 15.) and Gods sword is ready drawn, to take a just revenge
of them: perchance the Cup of Englands Martyrs blood, which God expected for an
expiation for the sins of us, and our forefathers, is almost brimful, and so
he will be shortly appeased: perchance your loving Father has almost done the
due correction, and now is ready to lay the rod aside: perchance the
destroying Angel, whom S. GREGORY saw, is putting up his sword, which has
made such a slaughter among you: perchance England, that all this time of
persecution has traveled on Christ, and endured the throws and panges of
Ghildbirth, is now ready to be brought a bed, and that she shall forget her
former pressure, and rejoice to see Christ in England, and England in Christ
borne again, and shall be more comforted at Englands birth to the Catholic
Church, then she has been grieved at her death, by Schism and Heresy:
perchance the cup of tears, which God has given you to drink, as a
medicinable potion, is now almost drunk off to the bottom, and he is ready
to speak these comfortable words unto you: Eleuare, eleuare; consurge
Jerusalem, quae bibisti de manu Domini calicem irae eins; vsque ad fundum
calicis soporis bibisti, and potasti vsque ad faeces. Ecce ego tuli de manu tua
calicem soporis, fundum calicis indignationis meae, non adijcies vt bibas illum
vltra. Et ponam illum in manu eorum, qui te humiliauerunt. (Isa. 51.) Be lifted
up, be lifted up, arise Jerusalem which have drunken of the hand of our Lord
the cup of his wrath, even to the bottom of the cup of drowsinesse, have
thou drunk, even to the dregs. Behold, I have taken out of thy hand the
cup of drowsiness, the bottom of the cup of mine Indignation, thou shall
not add to drinck it any more. And I will put it in their hand, that have
humbled thee. (Is. 51. (perchance tempus misere^di is at hand; perchance prope
est vr veniat tempus eius, and dies eius non elongabuntur (Isa. 14.) it is
near that the time (of your relaxation) shall come, and the days thereof shall
not be prolonged.

13. Only look that there be no ACHAN nor ANATHEMA amongst you (Iosue 7.) for
if there be, God will take your wonted courage from you, and the City of HAI
will prevail against you. For as God is so merciful that he spares some
times a whole City or kingdom, for the merits of a few, as he was ready to
have spared SODOM if he had found teniust men in it (Genes. 18.) for just men
(as S. AMBROSE says lib. 1. De Abraham. c. 1. are a wall to their country,
and their faith saves and defends the rest from destruction) so also is he
so just, that out of his secret, but yet just Judgments, he chastises
sometimes a whole army (as we see in ACHAN, IOSVE 7.) or Kingdom, for the
enormitie of a few. Wherefore (VVorthie Catholics) the best means that I
find to procure you a relaxation from this your so long persecution, is to
follow the counsel, which the Ammonite ACHIOR gave to HOLOFERNES (Judith 5.)
Perquire si est aliqua iniquitas etc. Search if there be any iniquity of
yours in the sight of your Lord God, for if there be, then you may justly
fear least God permit his and your enemies to dominere over you, as he
permitted DANIEL, HIEREMIE, and TOBIE, and many Innocents to be carried into
captivity with the nocent. For as S. HIEROM says episi. 13. Nostris peccatis
barbari fortes sunt, nostris vitiis Romanus fugatur exercitus. By our sins,
the barbarous (heretics and barbarous persecutours) become strong; and the
Roman Army (the Roman Church) is chased, and put to flight by our vices. But,
as ACHIOR said: Si non est offensio populi huius coram Deo suo (Judith. 5.) If
there be no offense of God amongst you, your enemies shall not long prevail,
because God, whose cause you sustain, will fight for you, and in you.

14. As for me (O constant Catholics) when I behold your undaunted courage,
which you oppose against the fury of your Persecutours, and your invincible
patience, wherewith you have hethert^ endured all kind of adversities, I can
not but admire and commend you, and praise God also for you and in you: But
when I consider also what is befallen some of you of late, as I marvel not
thereat, so I can not but feareleast by that, by which you thought to find some
ease of this heavy yoke of persecution, under which you groan, you have
augmented the burden and prolonged your miseries. I marvel not, that after so
heavy oppressions so long endured, you groan with the Israelites (Exodus 2.) I
marvel not, that after so furious assaults so long sustained, some give
back, and forsake their place and standing: for what marvel that in so great
a wind some chasse is blown away? that amongst so many vessels put into the
furnace of tribulation to be hardened, some break in the hardening? for vasa
figuli probat fornax etc. the fornacetryeth the potters vessels, and the
tentation of tribulation just men. (Eccl. 27.) Rather I marvel that in so
great a storm and troublesome Sea, so few do suffer Shipwreck; and in so great
a heap of wheat, so little chasse is found; and amongst so many pieces of
gould, which have been cast into the fire, so few prove light and counterfeit.
Yet I fear also least your late giving back make the enemy with more
bouldnes to press upon you; and that the late Anathema, which is fallen
amongst you, has provoked the wrath of God against you, and has given courage
to your enemy, taken it from you, and has added surie to him, diminished
zeal and fervor in you.

15. You know what I mean: it is the late proposed Oath, which because it
goes under the name of Civil Allegiance grateful to such good subjects as
you are, whom Religion and conscience teaches to obey, fear, love, and serve
your Prince, has deceived some of you, and has made you under this alluring
bayte, to swallow down the hook that galleth even the soul and conscience,
and in this goulden cup to drink your deadly poison and perdition. So that I
may say unto you: Anathema est in medio tui Israel, non poteris stare coram
hostibus tuis, donec deleatur ex te, qui hoc contaminatus est scelere, (IOSVE
7.) There is Anathema in the midst of thee, O Israel; thou can not stand
before thine enemies, till he be destroyed out of thee (or his sin in him)
that is contaminated with this wicked fact. Wherefore, O VVorthie Catholics,
let nothing stick in your hands of this Anathema, that our Lord may be turned
from the wrath of his fury, and may have mercy on you. (Deuteronomy. 13.)

16. You are not ignorant, that modicum fermentum totam massam corrumpit (1.
Cor. 5.) A little leaven corrupts the whole paste. One mortal sin
mortifieth all your former merits, (D. Th. 3. p. q. 89. a. 4.) and he that
offends in one point, especially pertaining to faith and the Churches power
and right, is made guilty of all (Iac. 2.) This one hole, which the
persecutour has made in the ship of your soul, is sufficient to let in that
water which will drown you: this one point of your chief visible Pastors
Authority and power, which (though forced thereunto) you abjure, is sufficient
to disgrace all former constant and glorious Confession. And it will little
avail you to have laid your hand to the plough, if now you look back; to
have run so well hitherto, if now you faint before the goal; to have
resisted hitherto so va iantlie, if now you yield your selves slaves to
tyranny.

17. And although some one persuadeth you, that you may with safe conscience
take this oathe, and therefore are not bound with hazard of your estates to
refuse it, yet believe it, persuasio haec non est ex eo qui vocat vos: this
persuasion is not of him that calls you (Gal 5.) for as S. PETER tells you:
In hoc vocati estis you are called to this, to do well, and sustain
patiently, (1. Pet. 2.) and not to yield in the least point against God and
his Churches right and honor. Wherefore seeing that by this oath the true and
lawful Authoritle of your chief visible head and Pallour is abiured (as this
book will make plain unto, you) imitate the wise serpent, expose body,
livings, liberty, and all, for the defense of your Head: and if your zealous
Pastor and Primat S. THOMAS of CANTERBVRIE, endured banishment, reuilings,
contumelies, injuries, and at length death it self for the defense of the
rights of the Church; how much more should you constantly endure for the
defense of the Head of the Church?

18. And although Widdrington tells you, (and as he would seem, as a friend,
and one that has care of your temporal estates) that you are not bound to
loose any penny for the Authority of the Pope, which this oath abiureth: yet I
desire you to compare VViddrington to those Allens, Card. Allan in his Answ. to
the libeller.
Hardings, Sanders. B^istowes, Stapletons, who had as great a care of your
temporal, and more of your spiritual estates, and yet wrote, and taught, that
the Authority, which this oath abiureth, is to be defended with hazard of
livings and life. To these I'desire you to add the Councils, not only
Prouincial, but also General, which in their decrees have defined this
authority; the Popes so many, so learned, so holy, who have exercized it upon
rebellious Princes; the Kings and Emperors (though most herein interessed) who
have acknowledged it; the arguments also deducted out of Scripture, and
Principles of faith and Divinity, which do convince it, (all which this book
will make known unto you) and lastly the fatherly admonition of your most
Holy Father and chief visible Pastor PAVL by the Grace of God the fifte of
that name, who as by office he has a general charge and care of all Christian
Nations, so has he a particular care, not only of the spiritual, but also of
the temporal estates of all English Catholics, as our Colleges have, and do
daiely experience, and consequently would not expose your temporal estates to
the fury of the persecutour, by forbidding you this oath, if (as he tells
you) it did not contain things, which can not be sworn without evident and
grievous wronging of Gods honor, and which are flat contrary to faith and
salvation. (Paulus 5. in Breu.) And therefore seeing that he, like a wise and
careful Physician, has more care of your health, then of contenting your taste
and humor; and VViddrington contrariewise permits you that which is
pleasing to flesh, and blood, not so much respecting how preiudicious it is to
your souls health; if you will prefer heaven before a temporal estate, and
the soul before the body, you must also preserre your Holy Fathers counsel
and admonition, especially grounded in such authority, before all the smooth
and soothing prescriptions in the world, warra^ted by only Widdringtons, and
some few obscure Authors authority: for although he alleges often the
Doctors of Sotbon, and all the state of France, yet by the late resistance made
by the Clergy, and nobility of France against the like Oath, who sees not
how he abuses his reader and iniureth that noble Monarchy?

19. But put the case you should prefer VViddringtons counsel before your
chief Pastors admonition, and all the authority alleged, neither so (what
soever he bears you in hand) should you save your temporal estates, or
decline persecution. For to omit that if you had at the first jointly and
couragionslie resisted the oath, it is like you should never have been so
hoatlie pressed with it; if now you should all resolve to accept of it, neither
so should you avoid persecution. For (as I have told you) perchance your
yielding in this point has provoked your heavenly Fathers wrath, and induced
him in this his so justly conceived anger, to use or permit still the rodd of
persecution, which otherwise he was ready to have laid aside: and the
persecutour, who proposes this oath, not seeking so much the Princes security
(which rather hereby, as I have showed in the last chapter of this book, is
more endaungered) as the molestation of your Consciences, and the pillage of
your goods, would not, though you should accept of this oath, surcease therefore
from persecution; but if he could not by this means molest your consciences,
and ruin your estates, he would try other means, as to compel you to their
Churches or profane Communion. And this you may gather by his sorrow he
showed, when in the beginning so many of you yielded to take this oath; and by
this also, that many, who have taken this oath, can not so free them selves
from molestation, because nothing but your goods and miseries can satisfy the
insatiable cruelty of bloody persecutours. And so by yielding to this oath,
as you provoke Gods greater anger, so you move the persecutour to no
compassion; rather you make him more insolent, and redouble your own misery.
But suppose you could thus shake of this h^auie yoke of persecution, yet it
being unlawful (as your chief Pastor and ^earnedst Doctors teach you) as
hitherto, rapinam bonorum vestrorum cum gaudio suscepistis, cognoscentes vos
habere meliorem and manentem substantia^, (Heb 10) the spoil of your own
goods you have taken with joy, knowing that you have a better and permanent
substance; so do you persevere and continue. And if God permit the persecutour
to prey, not only on your goods, but also on your lives, yet nolite timere eos,
qui occidunt corpus, animam autem non possunt occidere etc. (Matt 10.) fear
not them that can kill the body, and are not able to kill the soul: but
rather fear him that can destroy both soul and body into Hell.

10. Many things do make this oath unlawful, as you will easily perceive by
the briese examination, which the last chapter of this treatise makes of it;
but if there were nothing but this, that it is an uncouth and unwonted oath,
never yet proposed by any Prince unto his subjects, and proposed also by the
professed Enemies of Gods Church, all Catholics that fear to offend God, or
to do injury to the Church, and her right and authority, ought to hold it
as suspected, and as such to shun it, and avoid it. For it is no new thing
for heretics under color of oaths of fidelity and civil allegiance to
deceive the well meaning and nought-suspecting Catholic. We read in the
history of the persecution of the Wandalles, (Victor Vticen. lib. 3. de pers.
Vand.) how Hunnericus proposed such an oath to the Catholic Bishops assembled
together at Carthage, prete^ding only thereby to assure him self of their
sidelitie toward him and his son, that was to succeed him, which if they
would take, he premised to send them home to their Churches. The oath seemed
^^rie reasonable, and was no other then this: Iurate si post obitum Domini
nostri Regis, eius filium Hildericum desideratis esse Regem, vel si nullus
vestrum ad Regiones transmarinas epistolas diriget: Swear whether after the
death of our Lord the King, you desire that his son Hildericus should be
King: or that none of you will wr^^e or send letters beyond the seas. At this
oath though in show altogether lawful, the Catholic Bishops staggered: and
some of them suspecting all that comes from the Enemies of Gods Church,
flatly refused it: others least the people should say that vitio sacerdotum,
qui iurare noluerunt, non fuerint Ecclesiae restiturae: by the fault of the
Priests, that would not swear, the Churches were not restored, accepted of it.
But by and by appeared the hidden malice of the persecutour: for he took
advantage thereby, as well against those that swoare, as those that refused to
swear. To them that swoare, his officers said: Why against the commandment
of the Gospel have you ^Worne? The King commanded, that you should never
visit your Cities and Churchs again, but that being banished you should take
lands to till, colonatus iure, by right of farmers and new Inhabitants, yet
with this condition also, that you neither sing service, nor pray, nor carry
book to read, nor Baptize, nor give orders, nor reconcile any. To them that
refused to swear, they said: quia regnum filii Domini nostri non optatis,
idcirco iurare noluistis etc. Because you desire not that the son of our Lord
the King should reign after his Father, therefore you would not swear. For
which cause you are commanded to be banished into the ^e of Corsica, to hew
trees for the Kings buildings. So that in extraordinary oaths the heretical
Magistrate has sinister intentions and hidden meanings, and under fair
pretenses coucheth malice: and therefore all such oaths are by zealous
Catholics to be suspected: much more this oath, which in so plain words
abiureth the Popes lawful authority, which Councels, and chief Doctors do
give him, and which he has practiced so many years without contradiction of
all, saving heretics, schismatikes, and some few obscure authors, ought to be
houlden as suspected, and as such of all timorous consciences to be avoided.

21. Wherefore, worthy Catholics, use the benefit of persecution for that your
good, to which by God it is ordained or permitted: let it serve for a wind to
blow away your chafe of Imperfections, not to scatter the solid wheat of your
faith, charity, zeal, fervor, and constancy: let it serve for a red sea to
pass to the land of promise with the Israelites, not to drown you with the
Aegiptians: let it serve for a gale of wind to set you onward to the haven of
heaven, not for a boisterous blast to drive you on the rocks of scandal: let
it serve for a blast to enkindle, not to blow out your fire: let it serve for a
fire to purge you like gould, not to melte and consume you like wax or lead; to
harden you as vessels sit to receive Gods spirit, and to carry his name, not
to break you in the heating. And my dearest. (I use S. PETER'S words) nolite
peregrinari in feruore, qui ad tentationem vobis sit, quasi aliquid vobis
contingat. (1. Pet. 4. Think it not strange in the fervor, which is to you
for a tentation, as though some new thing happened unto you. It is no new thing
for the servants of God to suffer persecution: but comfort your selves that in
suffering for Instice, you are companions to Christ, the Prophets, Apostles,
and Martyrs. Take heed that none of you suffer for disloyalty or ill
demeanor: but whosoever suffers as a true Christian, that is, as a
Catholic Roman (for these two always go together) let him not be ashamed,
but let him glorine God (1. Pet. 2.) for such suffering is but to purge him, to
try him, to associat him to Christ and his faith, to mark him for one of
Christ's soldiers, to conform and configurate him here to Christ patient, that
he may be co^figurated in heaven to Christ triu^phant. Wherefore pluck up your
hearts, and call to mind your former victories, hitherto you never encountered,
but you overcame and proved stronger the^ all the Tibornes, rackes, and
Gibbets, then all the Engines and Ministers of cruelty: do not now by
dastardie and cowardlike yielding obscure your former glory, and mortify your
former merits: but seeing that you have of humane frailty yielded in this one
point, let this your disgrace and foil received thereby, serve for a busset of
Satan to humiliate you with S. PAVL (2. Cor. 12.) least the greatness of your
revelations (as it is a revealed doctrine to count it honor and fel^^itie to
suffer for Christ) might extol you: let it serve for a memorial to put you in
mind, that heretofore by Christ and his graces, not by your own force you
overcame: let it serve as a Monitour, to admonish you sitting in the triumphant
chariot of your former victories, that you are of your selves but mortal and
frail men: let this fall make you rise with a rebounde to greater courage then
ever; that so all things, even falls, may cooperate to your good. (Romans 8.)

22. But my zeal of your Honor (VVorthie Catholics) has transported me,
and made me not only to exceed the limits of an Epistle, but also to be more
officious, then perchance grateful to some, who may think, that if I knew,
or at least fealt the miseries which they endure, I should rather condesce^d
unto them with VViddrington, then urge them so much to refuse this oath, whose
refusal is so dangerous to their persons, and pernicious to their estates.
But I have for such an answer in readiness, to wit, that I am not ignorant of
your extreme afflictions, and that (as I protest) I never think of your
sufferances seriously, but I suffer with you sensibly, and would, if so I
might ease you, spend my blood, and hazard my life, even for a relaxation from
your temporal miseries: but being persuaded as I am, and standing upon so sure
grounds, as this Treatise will manifest unto you, as that Physician were
unworthy his Profession, that would prescribe only such Physic to his
patient as is pleasing to his taste, not caring how contrary it be to his
health, so if I, with a VViddrington, would seek to soothe, and suit a
worldly humor, and so my speeches be pleasing to flesh and blood, little
regard the health and state of your souls and security of your consciences, I
were unworthy the room I fill, the person I sustain, and the function of a
Spiritual Physician, which I have undertaken. Wherefore if my Physic be
distasteful, refuse it not, it being healthful; neither be you angry with the
Physician for prescribing so bitter a potion, he thereby intending your good:
and if my speeches seem too plain, think they are sincere and spoken out of
love; if sharp and biting, persuade your selves that meliora sunt vulnera
diligentis, quam fraudulenta oscula odientis: (Prou. 27.) Better are the wounds
of him that loves, then the fraudulent kisses of him that hates. This I am
sure, I give you no other counsel, then I would follow my self, who have that
opinion of the unlawfulness of this oath, that I would loose livings, liberty,
and life, rather then take it: not that I would not give that to Caesar, which
is due to Caesar, but that I would not take from God which appertains to God:
not that I neglect a temporal life and state, but that I prefer the
spiritual: not that I despise the Prince, to whom I acknowledge all tempor all
obedience and honor, but that I honor the Pastor, who has the rule of my
soul: not that I regard not the Common wealth, but that I desire to live and
die an obedient son of the Church: not that I fear not them, who can kill the
body, but that I fear God more, who can kill the soul: Matt. 10.

23. And my intention and project (I protest) of dedicating this Treatise unto
you, was not to irritate any Prince, but only to declare his Authority and
office; not to flatter any Prelate, but only to defend his right; not to
increase your persecution, but to rid you of this Anathema, which has
prolonged it; not to add affliction to affliction, but courage to your
fainting, and comfort to your griefs, to help them to rise that are sallen,
and to confirm them that stand, that they may the better keep their standing.
And this being my sincere intention, I hope not only you, but all others, who
shall peruse this book, will make their profit of it, and interpret it in that
good meaning, which the Author intended. Our Lord JESUS, for whose cause you
endure, either ease you of this burden of adversities, under which you groan,
or give you strength to bear it, comfort in bearing, and make me a follower
of your rare examples, an Imitatour of your patience, and partaker of your
merits, as you shall ever be of my poor prayers and small labors.

A Preface. To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I did not think to have set out this little book the second
time, much less did I inte^d to add any thing unto it. And although
Widdrington in his New-yeares gift, has of late here and there glanced
against some words and speeches of mine, where he imagined most advantage, yet
I thought (as I see other learned writers have done) to have quite given him
over, and not to have made the least replye, as not being desirous to contend
with such, as are resolved not to yield, having other businesses to many where
with to occupy my self. But the Printer who first took this book in hand,
and other friends also i^portuning me, to let it come forth again, and
alleging that the copies of the first Edition were all spent, and yet more
demanded; I was content volens, nolens, yielding herein, more to importunity
then to mine own inclination, to publishe it once more, and upon this occasion
of this new edition, to add here and there something, either for a more ample
explication, or for answer to Widdringtons objections. I was willing, I
confess, and forward enough the first time to write of this subject. For
although, as by an accident, I was one of the last, who wrote in the defense,
of this the chief visible Pastors Authority now in England impugned, so I
counted my self amongst the least; yet as when an house is set on fire, some
carry water, others ladders, and every one repayreth thither to show at least
his good will to extinguish it: So in this Co^bustion in which not only
Heretics, but also some of them who make profession of the Catholic name,
do endeavor to put fire, even to the secundarie foundation of God his Church
to wit, the chief vifible Pastors Authority; I thought it the part of every
zealous Catholic to run to the extinguishing of this fire, for though all
have not the like dexterity, yet all may show the like good will. Which I
having performed in the former Editio^ of this little book according to my
ability, I thought to have surceased, had not importunity of friends
overcome me. And therefore after this, as I mean not to dispute any more of
this point with the^, with who^e (as I gather by the repulse which greater men
then my self have received) there is little hope to prevail; so I wish all
Catholics, seeing that they have heard their chief visible Pastors
sentence, to leave of all Disputation touching this his Authority, and simply
and humbly to obey his commandment, and consequently to acknowledge the said
Authority, to refuse the Oath by him condemned, and yet to obey the King our
Sovereign and Liege Lord in all civil and temporal causes, to be faithful to
him and his Royal posterity, and to pray day lie for his majesty's long and
prosperous life, that he may live long to us, always to God, and so reign
long in the Kingdom of England, as he may reign for ever in the Kingdom of
heaven.

The Contents of the Chapters.
BY way of introduction it is showed, that there be two powers in the Church;
the one Civil; the other Ecclesiastical: which are both necessary. Chap. 1.

Some Civil power follows immediately from God and nature; Regal power
proceeds immediately from the peoples election and Donation; mediatly from
Gods ordination; So that after the election of the people and reception, the
king is superior, who may Command and bind in conscience; the people are
subjects bound to obey. Chap. 2.

Ecclesiastical power is also of God, and is distinct from the Civil
Jurisdiction, which also all members of the Church are bound in conscience to
obey. Chap. 3.

These two Jurisdictions and powers. Ecclesiastical and Civil, are compared
and conferred: and the preeminence is given to the Ecclesiastical. Chap. 4.

Ecclesiastical and temporal Peers and Princes are compared together, and
out of the Comparison is gathered, that not only private laymen, but even
temporal Princes, though otherwise absolute, are subject to the Pastors of
the Church, and especially to the Supreme visible Pastor, as is proved by
many arguments. Chap. 5.

That Princes, Kings, yea emperors have no authority to govern the Church, or
to make Ecclesiastical laws, neither are to be accounted heads or Superiors,
but subjects of the Church, though protectours and defendours; and therefore
are modestly admonished of their duty and office. Chap. 6.

Although the Pope be not direct temporal Lord and Superior of the world, nor
of any part thereof, by Christ's express gift and donation, but only of the
patrimony of Saint Peter given him by Constantine the Great, and other
Catholic Princes, and confirmed by the consent of the Christian world: yet by
the spiritual power, which Christ gave him in his predecessor S. Peter.
(10.21. he may dispose of temporal things, and even of kingdoms, for the good
of the church, and conservation of her, and her faith and right, and the manner
how, and in what case he can thus dispose of temporalities, is explicated.
chap. 7.

By diverse places and examples of the old and new testament, it is proved
that the Pope in some case can, not only by spiritual censure, but also by
temporal punishment, and even by deprivation, chastise Princes, who are
rebellious, and do tyrannically persecute, and molest the church. chap. 8.

By Theological arguments, grounded in principles of faith, and the Nature of
the church, as it is an absolute common wealth, the same power of the Supreme
Pastor is proved. chap. 9.

The same verity is confirmed by the practice of the Church in punnishing
heretics temporally, with loss of goods, liberty, and lives. chap. 10.

The same power of the Pope over Princes, is proved by authority of General
Councelles, out of which are gathered, for the same authority, ^uident and
conuincing arguments. chap. 11.

By the facts of the holy and learned Bishops of Rome. especially Gregory the
seventh, the same power is confirmed, chap. 12.

By the number of Doctors, who have embraced the opinion, that gives this
power to the Pope, the same doctrine is proved: betwixt the number, gravity,
and authority of which Doctors, and those who stand for VViddringtons opinion,
there is no comparison to be made. chap. 13.

By the doctrine and practice of heretics the same against them is
demonstrated; and thence is inferred, that the question betwixt us and them, is
not so much, whether the Pope has any such authority, as whether the Pope, or
they have it. chap. 14.

An explication of the late Oath of pretended Allegiance, and of every clause
thereof, deduced out of the former and some other grounds, by which is proved,
that it can neither be proposed, nor taken, without grievous offense of
Almighty God. Chap. 15.

THE RIGHT AND IVRISDICTION OF THE PRELATE, and the PRINCE.
CHAPTER I.
BY WAY OF INTRODVCTION IT IS showed that there be two powers in the Church;
the one Civil; the other Ecclesiastical: which are both necessary.

ALMIGHTY God in the first creation of this material world, Genesis 1.
provided two great lights to illuminate, rule, and govern it: the one he
called luminare maius, the other luminare minus; we commonly call them the
Su^ne and Moon. And no sooner had he created (as it were) the spiritual world
of his Church, but he appointed also two great lights to govern it and direct
it to the end prefixed. The one is the Ecclesiastical power of the Church,
residing in her Bishops and Pastors: the other is the Temporal power of the
Common wealth, Magistrate, or Prince. Both powers are great in their kind, both
of God, both as necessary to humane society, as the Su^ne, and Moon to this
world. Gelas. ep. ad ^mp. Anastas.
Wherefore GELASIVS Pope says: Duo sunt, Imperator Auguste, quibus hic mu^dus
principaliter regitur: Autoritas sacra Pomificu^, Innoc. 3. Cap. Solitae de
mayor. and obed.
and Regalis potestas. Two things there are, O noble Emperor, by which this
world is principally governed: the sacred Authority of Bishops, and Regal
power. And Innocentius the Third using the former similitude says: Ad
firmamentum Coeli, hoc est vniuersalis Ecclesiae, fecit Deus duo magna
luminaria, id est, duas instituit dignitates, quae sunt Pontificalis
Authoritas, and Regalis Potestas. For the Firmament of Heaven, that is, of the
universal Church, God made two great lights, that is he instituted two
Dignities, which are Pentifical Authority, and Regal power. But because the
world now adays abounds, and as it were swarmeth with those kind of men,
who^ the Apostle calls. Animales homines, 1. Cor. 2.
quino^ sapiunt ea quae sunt spiritus, sensual men, who perceive not those
things that are of the spirit of God, and therefore prefer the body before
the soul, this present life before the future, time, in which they are to live
but for a time, before eternity, in which they are to live eternally, and
consequently esteem more of state, then of Religion, of the Common wealth,
then the Church, and of the Temporal power of Princes, then of the spiritual
authority of Pastors: I will by clear and evident arguments so establish
both, that I will also sincerely deliver which of them has the preeminence,
and precedence. For they who seek to deprive us of either of these powers, do
as if they would take from the world the Sun or the Moon, as though both
were not necessary; and they who do so admire the Temporal power and dignity,
that they debase, and misprise the spiritual (though that indeed rules only
the night of Te^porall affairs, this the day of the spiritual state) are like
unto Owls, who are so pleased with the Moon light, that they could be
contented there were no Sun at all.

CHAPTER II.
Some Civil power flows immediately from God and nature; Regali power
proceeds immediately from the peoples election and donatio^, mediatly from
Gods ordination; so that after the election of the people and reception, the
King is superior, who may command and bind in conscience; the people are
subjects and bound to obey.

1. MAn by a natural propension, which God and Nature has ingraffed in him,
desires to consorte in company, and is prone to frie^dship, fellowship, and
society. And therefore Aristo^le says that. Arist. l. 1 Polit. ca. 2.
Ciuitas est ex his quae natura sum: The city is one of those things, which
have their source from nature, and that homo natura civil est animal: Man by
nature is a civil living creature. And he adds: Ibidem.
Qui absque ciuitate est, per naturam, non per fortunam, aut nequam est, aut
potior quam homo. He that lives out of the city induced thereto by inclination
of nature, not by fortu^e, is either wicked, orb^tter then man. Ibidem.
Yea (says he) Qui in co^mum societate nequi^ esse, quique nullim indiget
propter sufficientiam, nulla pars est ^iuitatis; quare aut Bestia, aut Deus. He
that can not live in common society, and needs no man's h^lp, by reason that
he is sufficient of him self, is no part of the City, Wherefore he is either
a beast, or a God. And thence he concludes that. Homo est sociale animal,
magis quam Apes, and quam omne gregariu^ animal. Man is a living creature more
sociable the^ bees, or any consorting living creature. And we see by experience
how all reasonable and living Creatures desire society. The Angels, although
they have no familiar conversation with me^, as being above the ra^ke of men,
and needing no humane help; yet they have Hierarchies and Orders, rule, and
government amongst them selves, and the superior illuminateth the inferior,
and all of them speak, and confer with one another; and in this manner they
live together, which argues a society (...) and though they converse not
visibly and familiarly With us, yet for the charity they bear unto us, and
for the need we have of the^, some of them are our ordinary Guardians, others
are extraordinary Ambassadors sent on divine messages unto us, and all of them
assist us immediately or mediately, and therefore are called Administratorij
Spiritus, Ministering Spirits. Brute beasts, and living creatures deuoid of
reason live also in some society. For Pigeons of one Douecote, beasts of one
heard, bees of one hyue, Connies of one warren, fishes of one finne, birds of
one feather, do willingly flock together: but this their living together,
though it has a similitude of society, because likeness of nature assembles
them together; yet it is not properly society, they having neither speech,
nor any conceit of justice, commodity, or discommoditie, which yet, Arist.
supra.
as Aristotle affirms, are necessary to true society; only man is truly
sociable, because he is propense, and prone to company, for the love of
justice, friendship* and conservation of him self.

2. And because God and Nature do nothing in vain, but all is for some end,
and project; as they have inclined me^ to society: so have they thereby
intended some good and profitt to men, which they are to reap. For if it Were
not for some end, their inclination to society should be in vain; if not for
some good, but evil, God and Nature should have ordained them to their hurt,
which cannot piously be thought of either of them.

3. Wherefore men are ordained unto society for two kind of commodities they
reap thereby. The first is solace, pleasure, and delight: for he that is alone,
has no use of that faculty, which is proper unto him, to wit, of speaking,
and so wants the pleasure which is taken in talking and discoursing, and
imparting conceits to one another, and he cannot contract friendship, which
requires familiarity, and so has none to whom he may open him self, impart
his secrets, communicare his joys and griefs, which yet S. S. Ambro. lib. 3.
de offic. cap. vit.
AMBROSE calls solatium huius vitae, the solace of this life, and that very
pertinenrlie. For as Cicero says; Cic. l. de Amicitia.
Quid dulcius etc. What more pleasant then to have one, with whom thou may
dare to speak as with thy self? what great fruit and profit would be reaped
by prosperity, unless thou had a friend, who might rejoice in it as thou thy
self? and hard it would be to bear adversities without him, who would take
them more grieuouslie, then thou thy self. Secondly, men are inclined to
society for profit and commodity; for he that lives alone, must needs live in
some want: If he be ignorant, he has none to reach him; if he be perplexe, he
has none to counsel him; if he be sick, he has none to cure him, if he be
poor, he has none to relieve him; if he be assaulted, he has none to defend
him; if he fall, he has none to help him up. Eccl. c 4.
And therefore Ecclesiastes tells us that, melius est duos esse simul quam
vnum etc. It is better that two be together, then one; for they have profit of
their Society: if one fall, he shall be stayed up of the other. VVoe to him
that is alone: because when he falls he has none to lift him up. And if two
sleep together, they shall warm each other: one how shall he be warmed?

4. And seeing that men assembled cannot govern them selves, unless some
command, some obey, some direct, some be directed: it follows, that this
society has power to govern it self, and that this power is also of God.
For as God has inclined us to society, and so is the Author of all lawful
societies; so has he given to them power to govern them selves, which power
is called Potestas ciuilis, or temporalis, Civil or temporal power, else in
vain had he inclined us to live in society. And therefore as God and Nature,
in that they give us being, do give us also power to defend our selves, to
repel force by force, and vim vi repellere; so God and Nature being the
Authors of society, do give societies power to rule, conserve, and defend
them selfs, else in vain had they authorized them. And as this world could
not consist, unless God the moderatour by natural inclinations did unite the
parts together, neither could man conserve him self, Prou. 11. D. Thom. Opus.
20. de Regimine princ. c. 1. and insinuat 1. 2 q 90. art. 3. ad 2. qu. 97. a.
3. ad 3. Vict. Rolec. de potest. civil. Suar. l. 3. de leg. c. 1. Sotus l. 1.
de lust. q. 1. a 3. Bellarm. to. 1. l. 3. ca. 9.
if he had not in him self a soul to command one member to help another, and
especially authority to defend the whole; so if in societies there were not
some power to rule, and direct the good of every particular to the common, but
every one should rule him self, and neglect the common good of the society,
there would be but confusion, and confusion would bring dissolution: because as
the wise man says: vbi non est gnbernator, populus corruet: where there is no
Governor, the people shall fall.

5. This power, as Saint Tho. Franciscus a Victoria, Bellarm. Suarez,
Couarruuias, Sotus, and commonly other Divines affirm, resideth first in the
community. For seeing that Nature made all equal, and that there is no more
reason why this power should be in one, then another, it follows that it is
first in the Community. I deny not but that in respect of imperfect societies,
to wit, families, the good man of the house, by law of Nature is superior, and
that at first, all power was in the head of every famelie; but when families
increasing, men met together in Cities and Common wealths, then none in
particular had authority to govern that new community, and so the power was
resident in the community. Some perchance might imagine that this power in the
beginning of the world was in ADAM the first Parent of mankind: but although he
was head of his family, and so had the power called Oeconomica, yet had he no
power of governing a City or Common wealth by creation; and therefore S.
AVGVSTIN well observes that after God had said, Aug. lib. 19. de Ciuit. cap.
15.
faciamus hominem ad Imaginem and similitudinem nostram; let us make man to our
Image and similitude; he added not: and praesit hominibus; and let him bear
rule over men, Genesis 1.
but let him have superiority over the fishes of the sea, the fowls of the
air, and beasts of the earth. And so God at the first made no one man in
particular Governor of Cities; and such great societies, and consequently this
te^porall power of governing was not residing in any one particular man, but
only in the whole community.

6. But although no societies can lawfully meet, but that there must be in them
a civil power to govern them, as is showed: yet the particular manner of
governing depends also of the determination, choice, and election of the
Community. For as Plato and Aristotle affirm, Plato dial. do Regno. and l. d^
R^p. Arist. l. 3. Pol. ca. 5.
there are three parttcular Kinds of government: The first is called Monarchia,
when one as King and Monarch governs. The second is called Aristocratia, when
diverse, but few, and those of the better sort, equal in Authority, do rule;
The third is called Democratia, when many, and those of the Common people rule.
The first government of it self is best, because it is easier to find one
good and wise man, then few, much more hard to find many; and it is easier for
many to obey one, then many; for to obey many, there are two difficulties; the
one in those that obey, and that difficulty is also found in a Monarchy; the
second in the commanders, and this is less in a Monarchy, then in other
governments, because one can better agree then many, and so when one
commands, it is easier for the subjects to agree in one, then when many
command. Vide Bellar. li. 1. de Sum. Pont. c. 2
And hence it is that Tyranny which is opposite to Monarchy, is not so bad as
Faction opposed to Aristocratie, nor Faction of a few so bad, as Sedition of
the people opposite to Democratie.

7. Now therefore, as the Community (as is before declared) has power to
govern it self; so has it power to choose that government which it likes
best, whether it be one of the former three simple governments, or some other
mixed of two, or of all three of them. And if the Community chooses
Magistrates, who shall depend of the whole Community, then the Community is
the chief governor, the Magistrates are but officers and ministers, and so
may be deposed by the people, some times at pleasure, some times only upon some
urgent occasion; and always when the chief Magistrate dies, his heirs
succeed not necessarily, but only they, whom the people make choice of. This
government was amongst the Romans, when they were governed by Plebiscita, and
Senators; and is this day to be seen in the Common Wealth of the Venetians,
the Geneuians, and those of Genua. If the Community make choice of a King,
then the Community despoileth it self of Authority, and becomes a subject,
and as it were a private person, and gives all power and Authority to the
King to govern, not principally for his own private, but for the common good
of the whole Kingdom. And hence it is that the Common wealth cannot depose a
King, as it may a Magistrate, unless it be in case of intolerable Tyranny.

8. Hence appears a great difference betwixt the before said power of the
Community, and the Regal power of the King, because the former power of the
Community follows of necessity the lawful meeting of many in one society,
in so much that it is not in the peoples power to meet with intention to live
together, and not to have that power; and so this power depends not of any
election: but that the King, or Peers, or the Magistrate rule, and govern,
depended at the first of the election, and free choice of the people, in whose
power it was to choose one or many to govern the rest, and so Kingly power is
in deed of God, but by means of election. It is of God, because it proceeded
from the Communities power, which is of God and Nature, necessarily following
the natural inclination, which God has imprinted in us to live in society;
and yet it is in the King by free election, because though the Community have
authority from God and Nature to rule it self, yet that this power is given to
the determinate person of the King, depends of the peoples election.

9. Now some think that supposing the peoples election* God immediately
gives the power. Wid. in Apolog. Rosp. nu. 163. page 128.
This is the opinion of WIDDRINGRON in his Apologetical Answer for the right
of Princes, where he affirms that. Quicunque in supremum Reipublicae
superiorem legitime deputatur etc. Whosoever is lawfully deputed as sovereign
Superior of the common Wealth, although he receive that dedeputation or Title
of power by the free consent of of men, yet the total power of ruling God
only gives unto him by the law of Nature. But VViddringron should have
marked, that the people and Co^munitie, from which lawfully assembled
necessarily flows (as above we have seen) a power to govern it self, and
to appoint governors, not only designeth the person of the King, but also
tra^sferreth her authority from her self to the King, and becomes herself a
subject, and as it were a private person. So that the Co^munitie not only
designeth the person of the King; but also despoiling het self of the power
she had from God and Nature, gives it unto the person chosen and designed by
her for King. D. The. 2.2. qu. 10. a. 10.
And thersore S. Thom. says that Dominion and prelacie (Civil) are brought in
by humane law.

10. VVhorein may be seen a manifest difference also betwixt the Pope and the
King. For the Cardinals, When they choose one of their company to be Pope,
design only his person (as Caietan well observes) but Christ only, Caiet. in
opusc. de Pont^
and not the Cardinals, after this deputation of his person, gives the power
and jurisdiction, it being supernatural, as not only the end, to which it is
ordained, but also the Acts and functions of this jurisdiction do manifestly
declare; and therefore seeing that a supernatural Jurisdiction surpasses the
actiuitie of the Cardinals, they being but moral Agents, and using no
sacrament in the election and creation of the Pope, he being ordinarily Priest
and Bishop before, this Authority must be attributed only to God as the
Author: but the Kings authority is natural, and moral, ordained only of it
self to natural functions, and to a natural end, which is temporal peace and
felicity, and so it not exceeding the Actiuitie of the people, or Communities
power, may, and is given by the people, and consequently not only the
deputation of the Kings person, but also his Regal Authority proceeds
immediately from the people.

11. Whence also may be gathered a difference betwixt the Authority, which
was in the Community before it made choice of a King, and the Authority of a
King, for that Authority of the Community, is immediately of God and Nature
proceeding necessarily from a Community lawfully assembled, in so much that
it is not in the power of the Community to be without this power, unless it
give it to one, or many governors; but the Authority of the King does not
necessarily flow from this Community, because it is in the free choice of
the Community to make election of that government in particular, which it
shall think best; and so if it make election of a Monarchical government, and
consequently of the King, the King is to thank the Community, not only for
the deputation of his person, but also for his Regal Authority, which being a
natural power, and being before contained eminenter, or virtualiter,
eminentlie or virtuallie, in the Communities power (because) as I have said
(the Community at first had authority to choose which government in
particular it thought most convenient) is not to be ascribed immediately to God,
D. Tho. 1.2. qu. 90. a. 3^ and. qu. 105. a. 1 ad 1.
a second cause being found out sufficient to produce such an effect. And so
the Kings authority in particular, and taken determinatlie, is not immediately
of God, or Nature, but comes to him by meantes, not only of the peoples
designation, but also of the peoples gift and donation. D. Th. 1.2. q. 105 ar.
1. ad 1. and 2.2 q. 10. art. 10. Caieta. ib. Bellarm, to. 1. lib. 3. cap. 9.
Suarez l. 3. de leg c. 4. Almai. li. de potest eccl, cap. 1. Prou. 8. Romans 13.
And this opinion is holden by the best Divines both ancient and modern.

But this not withstanding, it is most true, which God says. Per me Reges
regnant, Kings reign by me. To which his Apostle subscribeth sayeing: Non est
potestas nisi a Deo; itaque qui potestati resistit, Dei ordinationi resistit:
There is no power but of God; therefore he that resists the power, restisteth
the ordinance of God: because Kings authority proceeds mediatelie from God,
to wit, by means of the authority of the Community, which proceeds
immediately from God and Nature: and it is also Gods providence that Kings
reign over us, and God as the first cause cooperateth to their election and
creation, and approoueth also the same. But yet for all this the people is a
second cause of Kings authority.

13. If any object that Saul and David were immediately created by God Kings
of the Jews: I answer, that God in this prevented the people for the peoples
good, for otherwise the Jews by law of Nature, had authority to choose and
create them selves a King as is already proved. Neither does it hence follow,
that the people is above the King, or is not bound to obey the King, or can
depose the King at their pleasure, for although the people at the first created
the King: yet they created him not as a simple Magistrate, or officer, but as
an Absolute Prince, and they dispoiled them selves of authority, to give it to
the King, as to one that can better rule, then the confused multitude, and
became (as it were) (...) private person, subject, not superior ^o to King;
and so the Kings power now (...) so long at least as he is not an intolle^able
Tyrant) is not depending of the people; and no marvel; because many effects,
which depend of their causes in fieri, and in their first production, depend
not of them ^n facto esse, and conservation; So the Son ^^ueth after his
Father, and fruit may be extant after the tree is consumed; and we give many
things franckly and freely, which afterward we can not at our pleasure ^ake
away. Wherefore as a freeman sells ^im self freely, but after the sale is so
bound, to his Master, that he can not free him self at his pleasure, but
remains, will he, nill he, a subject, and bondsman, who before was a freeman;
so the people before the election of their King, is free and superior, but
after is a bounden subject and inferior, though by a Civil, not despoticall
subjection, And so supposing this election, the people is bound in conscience
to obey their King as superior, and cannot now depose him, unless it be in case
of intolerable Tyranny, (for then the common opinion holds, D. Thom. Opus.
20. de Regi. Princ. cap. 1. Sotus l. 4 de Just. and Iure q. 1. a. 3. and q. 4.
a. 1. Romans 13.
that the Authority, which the people had in the beginning to create him,
returns again by deuolution to depose him) but must obey him in lawful
things, though he be difficile, and govern not altogether as he should do,
according to that: Omnis anima potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit: let
every soul be subject to higher powers, and again: Itaque qui potestati
resistit, Dei ordinationi resistit: therefore he that resists the power,
resists Gods ordinance. And again: Ideoque necessitate subditi estote.
Which in Greek is; (...), ideo necessit as est subijci: Therefore be subject
of necessity, and yet again: Subiecti estote omni humanae creaturae propter
Deum, 1. Pet. 2.
sieve Regi, quasi praecelle^ti etc. Be subject therefore to every humane
creature for God, whether it be to the King, as excelling etc. And as in the
same chapter Saint PETER commands servants to be subject in all fear to
their Masters, not only to the good and modest, but also to the waiward; so
the people is bound to obey Kings, Vide Lessium li. 2 dei ^st and iure, c. 9.
dub. 4.
though Waiward, and difficile, yea though they be Tyrants, so that their
first entrance be lawful and they not deposed; yea though their entrance were
by unlawful Invasion, so that the people generally did afterward consent and
accept of them as their Princes and superiors; for to a superior, whilst he
remains superiout, and commands lawful things obedience is due; otherwise
be he never so lawful, if he command things unlawful, we must obey God before
men, Act. 5.
and the King before the Viceroy.

14. But against that which I have said of the creation of Kings by the
peoples election, some may object, that nowadaies in all Europe, almost all
Kings are made by succession, as are the Kings of Spain, France, and England.
To this I answer, that though this be so, yet the source and origin of this is
also the peoples election. For at the first ^excepting those Kings, which
extraordi^arilie were given immediately from God to the Jews) the people chose
or approved ^he King, but perceauing what difficulty and danger also of
tumults and sedition would ensue, if after the death of their King, they should
be to seek, and stand upon election of another, they were con^ent that the
lawful heirs of the first King ^hosen, should succeed to his father without
new election, although when the ^ewe King is crowned, the peoples consent is
demanded, and the King is sworn unto them; And in Spain the Archbishop of
Toledo receaueth the Kings oath in the name of the Church and people; In
France the Archbishop of Rhemes, In England the Archbishop of Canterbury; and
so all Regal power, though not immediately, yet originallie comes from the
peoples election and donation.

15. And therefore we see that the Kings power in diverse countries is diversely
limited, as in France and England, where many of the Kings laws are not taken
to be of force, unless the Parliament of states concur to the making or
confirming of them, which limitation VViddrington ascribes to the King, In
Resp. Apol n. 174. pa. 137.
as though he did voluntarily thus limit him self: But who sees not how
unlikely it is that Kings should thus restrain their own power, and tie
their own hands? And if this limitation proceeded from the King, he might at
his pleasure also take it away; which were to give Princes too much scope and
liberty. Wherefore as the people gave the King his authority; so it was the
people that thus limited and restrained him for their own preservation: for to
the same Authority that gives power, it pertains to restrain it.

16. Having thus proved that the King or Prince has Authority from God as
Author of Nature (yet by means of the peoples election and grant) to govern
the Kingdom or Common wealth; it follows that he has Authority, not only
to command priuarelie, or particulerlie, as the Goodman of the house may
command his wife, children, or servants, but also to make laws, which shall
bind the whole Community, or Common wealth, otherwise if he should command,
and the people might disobey, he could not rule, nor direct the people, and so
should not have sufficient Authority.

17. By which may appear how absurd the opinion of our Reformers is, Luth l.
de capt. Bab. Calu. l. 3 Inst. c. 19. n. 14 and l. 4. c. 10.
and how injurious to Princes, yea and to God, that appoints them, who blush
not to say and avouch that all Christians (that is Caluinists) indewed with
faith, are so freed by Christ from all laws, and humane power, that they can
not bind them in conscience.

18. Certes Luther in his book of Babylonical Captivity, and Calvin in his
Institutio^s make it a part of the office of a Redeemer, in Christ, to have so
freed us from all humane Authority and laws, that they can not bind us in
conscience. And the Anabaptists and Trinitarians, who an. 155^. at Alba-Iulia
set forth certain Antitheses of the true and false Christ, in their seventh
Antithesis affirm, that falsus Christus habet in sua Ecclesia Reges,
Principes, Magistratus, gladios; at verus Christus nihil tale in Ecclesia pati
potest. The false Christ has in his Church Kings, Princes, Magistrates
swords; but the true Christ can abide no such thing in his Church. But this
opinion may be evidently convinced by that which is said; for if Princes have
power from God and Nature to rule, they have power to make laws; and if they
can make laws, they can bynd in conscience, else their laws were strawes, and
to little purpose, especially when the subject can avoid by slight the
penalty of the law. Wherefore Saint Paul commands us to be subject to all
lawful humane Authority non tantum propter iram, sed etiam propter
conscientiam: not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Romans 13.
And he adds that he that resists this power which is of God, Dei
ordinationi resistit; qui autem resistunt, ipsi sibi damnationem acquirunt:
resists the ordinance of God; and they that resist, purchase to them selves
damnation: which argues an obligation in conscience. Again the same Apostle
commands Titus to admonish Christians to be subject to Princes and
Potesta^es: Ad Tit. 3.
1. Pot. 2.
Saint Peter commands them to be subject to every humane creature for God,
whether it be King as excelling etc. and he gives the reason saying: for so is
the will of God. By which it is manifest that we are bound under sin, and
under God his displeasure, to honor and obey Kings, and Princes, and
consequently that we are bound in conscience.

19. Let not then our Reformers traduce Catholics as enemies to Princely
Authority, and Idolators of the Popes power; for we acknowledge and reverence
them both highly in their kind: but let the Reformers look to them selves,
Plautus.
because qui alterum incusat probri, ipsum se intueri oportet: he that accuses
another, must look that he him self be free. Joseph. l. 18. Ant. c. 2. Aug.
l. 3. cot. Cross. c. 15. Exira de haeret. c. 4 Anton. 4. p. tit. 11. ca. 7. 9.
Luth. l. de saecul. petest. Trinita. aij supra. Buchan. li. de iure Regni.
Goodma^ l. de obedien. page 203. Beza ep. 78. ad Buchanan. Luth. supra. Calvin
l. 4. Inst. c. 19. 14. Exodus 12.
We Catholics say not with Judas Galilaeus. That no Prince is to be obeyed;
nor with Cresconius, That the Magistrate ought not to punish; nor with the
Beguards. That the perfect are not bound to obey laws; nor with VVickleph,
That the Prince by mortal sin loses his Authority; nor with Luther, That
the Turk is decies probior; prudentiorque nostris principibus, ten times
honester and wiser then our Princes; nor with the aforesaid Trinitarians,
Anabaptists, and Libertines, That the true Christ suffers no Princes, nor
Magistrates in his Church; nor with Buchanan, That the people only is to make
laws, Reges sunt veluti Tabulaeriorum custodes; nor with Goodman, That women
cannot reign, and that therefore Wiat rising against Queen Marie, was no
Traitor; nor with Beza do we call that lawful and worthy Queen Marie, the
Mother of our soue^aine King James, Medaea, and Athalia, as though (as he
says) Nullum illius sceleribus nomen idoneum inueniri posset: no name
answerable to her wickednesses could be found out; Nor with Luther and Calvin,
that Princes laws bynd not the faithful in conscience: But we say and
believe with scripture; Thou shall not detract from the Gods (that is, Princes,
who are called Gods by participation) nor speak evil of the Prince of thy
people. Prou. 8. Mat. 22.
We confess that by God Princes reign: we command to give to Caesar, what is
due to Caesar: we allow of S. IGNATIUS counsel: Caesari subiecti estote in
ijs, Ign. epi. ad Antioch.
in quibus nullum animae periculum. Be you subject to Caesar in those things,
in which is no danger of the soul: we are taught to give to Magistrates (as
S. Eus l. 4. hist. c. 14
POLICARP said) and Potestates appointed by God, that honor, which is not
prejudicial to our souls, or Religion. we worship (as TERTVLLIAN says) the
Emperor, Lib. aduersus Scap. cap. 2.
(the King) sic quomodo and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit; vt hominem a Deo
secundum, and solo Deo minorem: so as it is lawful for us and expedient for
him, as a man second (in Temporal Authority) to God, and only lesser then
God. For whilst the King keeps within his bounds, he has no superior in
temporal matters, but God. And this is the honorable conceit which Catholics
have of their Kings and Princes.

CHAPTER III.
Ecclesiastical power is of God, and distinct from the Civil Jurisdiction,
which also all members of the Church are bound in conscience to obey.

1. Having given to Caesar and the Kingdom, what is due to the^; It follows
that I give to Christ and his Vicaire, yea and Church also, what belongs to
them. I have proved in the former chapter that Civil power is of God and
Nature, because it is necessarily annexed to all lawful societies, to which
God and Nature do incline us: And seeing that the end of all lawful societies
is not only temporal felicity, but also the service and worship of God, (for
we are not only created to speculate the stars, as Anaxagoras imagined; but
also to know the Creator of all, and to adore him) I will go a step further,
and will not fear to auerre, that not only Civil Authority, but also some
Religion and worship of God proceeds from the Inclination and propension of
Nature.

2. Certes we are led hy the light of reason to the knowledge of a Godhead and
Divinity. For who is he that looking upon this admirable piece of work,
which we call the world, thinks not by and by of a God that created it? If as
S. Orat. de Theol.
GREGORY Nazianzen says: Qui Citharam contemplatur, tametsi Citharaedum non
videat, nihilominus affirmaret accurata mentis intelligentia mysticum
instrumentum illud fuisse concinnatum, who so behouldeth an harp, although he
se not the harper, will yet affirm that that mystical instrument was made and
tuned by an exquisite understanding of the mind? If as Cicero says, he that
had seen Archimedes sphere, which imitated the Celestial globes, and
represented all their diverse motions, could not but think of some cunning and
and ingenious Mathematician or Astrologer that composed or devised it: How can
man essentiallie reasonable, be so deuoyd of reason, as to think that the
whole sphere, and globe of the world, in which he sees so great order in so
great variety of things, was composed and effected by chance, or of it self
appeared in such goodly order, and not of one, who is above the rank of
Creatures, which is God? Wherefore all Fathers and Divines affirm that by the
light of Nature, every one, that will not wilfully be blind, (as Diagoras and
Protagoras surnamed (...) were) may discover a Godhead. S. Orat. 2. de Theol.
quae est 34.
GREGORY Nazianzen expressly affirms, that not only the law of Nature, but
also even our eyes do bring us to the knowledge of God. Which point the wise
man touching says: Sap. 13.
A magnitudine enim speciei and creaturae cognoscibiliter poterat Creator
omnium videri: For by the greatness of the beauty, and of the creature, the
Creator of them may be seen to be known thereby. Romans 1.
To whom also S. PAVL subscribeth in these words: Inuisibilia enim ipsius a
creatura mundi, per ea, quae facta sunt, intellecta conspiciuntur, etc. For his
invisible things, from the creation of the world are seen, being understood by
those things that are made, etc.

3. And if by natural reason we may discover a Godhead; the same reason will
teach us, that a Religion is necessary, by which this Godhead should be
worshipped. Whence it is that Lactantius says: Lib. 7. de diu. Inst. cap. 6.
Idcirco mundus factus est, vt nascamur; ideo nascimur, vt cognoscamus factorem
mundi ac nostri, Deum: Ideo agnoscimus, vt colamus; ideo colimus, vt
Immortalitatem pro mercede laborum capiamus: Therefore the world was made, that
we might be borne; therefore we are borne, that we may acknowledge the maker
of the world, and of our selves, God: therefore we acknowledge him, that we
may worship him: therefore we worship him, that we may receive a reward for our
labors. And certes there is such a necessary connection betwixt God and
Religion, supposing that there be any creature, that can worship him (as only
men and Angels can) that if you grant a God, you must needs grant that he is
to be worshipped. For by God we understand the most noble and excellent thing
that is, and Which by creation has a greater superiority over us, then our
Parents have by generation: and seeing that honor and worship is due to
excellency and superiority, supreme honor, which is Religion, must needs
be due to God, who has supreme excellency and superiority. And it is so
deeply imprinted in us, that there is a God, and that he is to be worshipped,
that as Cicero says: Nulla gens est tam fera, Cicero de not. Deor.
nulla tam immanis, cuius mentem non imbuerit Deorum colendorum opinio: No
nation so barbarous, none so fierce and cruel, Plut aduersus Coloton.
whose mind has not been imbued with an opinion of the Gods, and that worship
is due unto them, VVhereto Plutarch adds, That you shall sooner find Cities
without walls, Jaws, letters, coins, then without Temples, and worship of
God, or Gods. Yea says Cicero: Orat. 5. in Verre^.
Omnes Religione mouentur, and Deos Patrios, quos amaioribus acceperunt,
colendos sibi diligenter, and retinendos arbitr antur. All are moved with
Religion, and do think that they must worship and keep diligently their
Country Gods, whom they have received from their Ancestors. And although many
have missed in the right God, whom they should have worshipped, yet thereby they
showed their natural inclination to Religion; because from the Instinct they
had from Nature to the worship of the true God by true Religion, proceeded
their manifould superstitions and Idolatries, to which they would never have
been so obstinately addicted, had they not imagined in them true worship and
true Religion.

4. Wherefore as by the natural Inclination, that men have to live in society,
I have proved in the former chapter, that there is a Civil power, by which
they may govern them selves in society; so by the natural inclination, by
which men are no less prone to honor and worship a Godhead, I may prove that
there is a kind of Ecclesiastical power, which is de Iure Naturae, by which
they might govern them selves in matters pertaining to Gods worship, prescribe
Ceremonies, and the manner how God should be honored; else God and Nature in
vain had inclined men to honor God in society. And so although God had left
us to Nature, and had not ordained us to Grace or Glory; yet in all lawful
societies, there had been two Powers, the one Civil, Vide Victoria. Relect.
de potest. Eccles.
which should have prescribed laws tending to Motall Justice, and conservation
of the people in their temporal states; The other Ecclesiastical, prescribing
laws and Ceremonies for the worship of God. And in this case these Powers had
been distinguished in respect of their diverse acts and ends, and should most
commodiouslie have been committed to diverse persons, or Magistrates and
Priests; but then the Ecclesiastical power had not had the power to exercise
any supernatural Acts, being not ordained in that case to a supernatural
end, and proceeding only from Nature and natural inclination, as is declared.

But if we dispute not of that which might have been, but that which is; then
we must confess that all Ecclesiastical Power, which is now under the law of
Christ, and was heretofore under the law of Moses, proceeds from God his
positive ordinance, Institution, and constitution. For as God prevented the
Jews, and whereas they by law of Nature had permission to choose their
Kings, yet for their greater good, he chose the^ one him selue immediately:
so although by the law of Nature, men otherwise might have prescribed the
manner of worshipping God, and the worship had been lawful, so that it had
been the worship of the true God, and had been free from superstition; yet
because God has ordained us to a supernatural end, and would have our
Ecclesiastical government free from all superstition, he has himself
appointed the manner of government, and has given the Authority. So in the
law of Moses he chose the Tribe of LEVI to serve in the Tabernacle and
Temple, and to menage Ecclesiastical matters; he instituted also sacrifices,
sacraments, and Ceremonies: in like sort in the new law of Grace (under which
we live) he committed the government of his Church to the Apostles and
Disciples only, and their successors; he instituted seven Sacraments, and a
sacrifice; he gave us a law and belief, which first he delivered by
preaching, then by the written Ghospelles, and Epistles of his Apostles; and
other things he committed to the Church, which he had instituted and
established.

5. So that as there is a Civil and Temporal Power residing in the Common
wealth, by which the Prince or Magistrate can govern and rule, and command
for the conservation and promotion of the Temporal good of the same: so is
there a spiritual and Ecclesiastical Power residing in the Church, by which
the Pastors have Authority to preach, teach, administer Sacraments, determine
of matters of Religion, to call Councelles for the better clearing of matters,
and enacte laws which shall be thought expedient unto the honor of God, the
spiritual good of the Church, and every ones salvation. And this is called
Ecclesiastical power, which is distinct from the Temporal in many points.

6. First in respect of the end and final cause: for Temporal power of it
self aymeth only at Temporali Justice, peace, and conservation of the
Temporal state of the Kingdom or Common wealth; Ecclesiastical power
intends in this life the spiritual health of the soul, and eternal rest
and peace in the next. Secondly these powers have diverse Acts, and seeing that
powers are distinct by their Acts, it follows that Temporal, and
Ecclesiastical or spiritual power are distinct. That they have distinct
Acts, it is manifest: for the Temporal power makes laws for this corporal
life, and Temporalle state; but the spiritual and Ecclesiastical power makes
laws for the soul, and her direction: the Temporal power remitteth the
pains only of sins; but the spiritual Power, remitteth the sin it self,
according to that: Joan. 20
Quorum remiseritis peccata, etc. Whose sins you shall forgive etc. The
Temporal power inflicteth and remitteth only Civil and Temporal punishments,
as imprisonment, banishment, temporal death; but the spiritual power, as now
it is, (for in the old law there was not Potestas Clauium) excommunicateth,
suspendeth, interdicteth, which are spiritual punishments and bonds of the
soul, and remitteth not only these pains, but also eternal death and pain
of Hell; for when the Priest remitteth mortal sins, he chau^geth eternal
pain into temporal; yea some times, when the Penitent comes with a great
contrition, he remitteth both Eternal and Temporal. Thirdly they differ in
their obiectes; for the spiritual power disposes not of Temporal things,
but only as they are necessary to the spiritual; The Temporal meddleth not
with spiritual, nor Ecclesiastical matters, according to that of S. AMBROSE:
S. Ambr. lib. 5. ep. 33. ad Marcel. soror.
Ad Impetatorem Palatia pertinent, ad sacerdotem Ecclesiae, Publicorum tibi
maenium ius commissum est, non sacrorum: To the Emperor Palaces appertain,
to the Priest Churches: to thee (Emperor) the right of common Walls is
committed, not of Churches. And NICHOLAS Pope in an Epistle to MICHAEL the
Emperor. Ca. Cum ad veru^, did. 96. Vide etia^ ca. Quoniam, d. 10.
Nec Imperator iura Pontificum arripuit, nec Pontifex nomen Imperatoris
vsurpauit; quoniam Christus sic actibus propriis and dignitatibus distinctis
officia potestatis vtriusque discreuit. Neither has the Emperor taken to him
the rights of Bishops, neither has the Bishop usurped the name of the
Emperor; because Christ has distinguished the offices of both by their
distinct acts and dignities. Fourthlie they differ in respect of the subject
and material cause; for although it be not impossible for these two Powers to
consort in the same subject (for we see they did in Melchisedech, and in the
first begotten of the Jews in the law of Nature, and in the Machabees, who
were Priests and Princes, and consequently had temporal, and spiritual
power) yet as in other things these powers are distinct, so God, not only in
the law of Grace, but also in the law written of Moses would have these powers
placed in distinct subjects and Persons. 2. Paral^ 19.
For in the law of Moses AMARIAS menaged matters of the Church and law;
ZABADIAS governed the affairs of the Kingdom: the Kings and Princes of the
Jews were of the Tribe of IVDA, the Priests of the Tribe of LEVI; and those
governed only the Common Wealth, enacted Temporal laws, waged battle etc.
whereas the Priests ruled it matters of the Tabernacle and Temple, offered
sacrifice, and governed the Synagogue: And now in the law of Grace Christ gave
all spiritual power to the Apostles and their successors, and not to Princes;
for to the Apostles, and their successors it was said: Whatsoever you shall
bynd upon earth, Mat. 18.
shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever you shall loss upon earth, shall be
loosed in heaven: To Princes it was never said so. To the Apostles, and their
successors it was said: Joan. 20.
Whose sins you shall forgive, they are forgiven them; and whose you shall
retain, they are retained: To Princes never. To S. PETER an Apostle and
Priest, it was said: Mat. 16
Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church: To no Prince was
it ever said in that sort: To Apostles and Priests Christ said: Matthew. vlt.
Goinge therefore teach ye all Nations, baptising them in the name of the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost: To Princes never. To Apostles and
Priests Christ said: Joan. 6.
As my living father has sent me, so I send you, that is, to preach, to
minister Sacraments, and to govern the Church: Ephesians. 4.
To Princes never. To the Apostles, Doctors, Pastors, Prophets, Christ
committed his Church to be governed, Act. 28.
to Princes never. To Priests S. Paul gave this admonition: Attendite vobis,
and vniuerso gregi, in quo vos Spiritus Sanctus posuit Episcopos regere
Ecclesiam Dei, quam acquisiuit sanguine suo. Take heed to your selves, and to
the whole flock; wherein the holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. But neither he, nor
any Apostle ever gave that charge to Princes. Fiftelie they differ in the cause
efficient: for the Civil and Temporal Power proceeds from God, and Nature, by
means of the peoples election, as is in the former Chapter declared; but the
spiritual power of the Church, as it implies Potestatem ordinis and
Iurisdictionis in foro interiori, is from God immediately, it being
supernatural, and exceeding humane power: And although the Ecclesiastical
humane power, which inferior Prelates have, proceeded from superior Prelates,
especially the Pope; yet not from the Prince or Common wealth, but from the
Pastors, and Church. So that as the Pope, Priests, and Church do willingly
acknowledge the temporal and civil power of the Prince, Magistrates, and
Common wealth, or Kingdom; so the Prince, Magistrates, and Common wealth must
be content to recognize a spiritual power of the Pope, Bishops, Priests, and
Church, to which obedience is due even of Princes, who are subject to the
Church no less then are temporal subjects to the Prince, yea rather more.

7. This power all true Christians and Catholics acknowledge; none but
Heretics and Infidels deny. The Waldenses, Guido Carmel. in har. VVald.
Turrecr. l. 4. Su^ma de Eccl c. 35. Co^c. Constable. sess. 8. et 15. a. 14 Luth. a.
27. Dan in Bulla Leon. 10 Call l. 4. Inst. ca. 20 n. 6. and 7.
as witness Guido, and Turrecremata; as also VVicleph, and Hus, as the
Council of Constance relates, denied all Ecclesiastical power, and said,
that Popes, and Bishops Decrees, and Canons did not bynd any. The same is
Luthers opinion. Calvin affirms, that neither the Pope, nor his mitred
(Calvin says horned) Bishops can bind men's Consciences, by their decrees and
ordinances: and that for two causes. First because they are no true Bishops,
which yet neither he, nor all his sect, could ever prove. Secondly because
though they were true Bishops, yet they are not legislatours, or lawmakers,
that Title agreeing only to Christ; only he and his grant that they may
inculcate Gods laws, but make no new,

8. Well it is known that is was always the manner of Heretics to contemn
all Ecclesiastical Authority, because it condemned them. But as I have
alleged proofs in the former Chapter for Civil power of Princes; so can I
not want arguments for the spiritual and Ecclesiastical power* when Christ
promised PETER, that he should be the foundation and head of the Church, he
promised this power in, and over the Church: Mat. 16.
for if PETER be head of the Church, he can rule the mystical body, and if he
can rule the same, then can he also make Ecclesiastical laws, for that is
belonging to a superior of every great and perfect community; as is before
showed. Secondly, Christ gave this power to PETER, when after his Resurrection
he said: Pasce oues meas. Feed my sheep. Joan. 21.
For the office of a Pastor may be gathered by the office of a shepherd, who
is to govern his sheep, to feed them, and to defend them from the wolf; and
so a spiritual shepherd and Pastor, must have authority to rule by laws,
to feed by preaching and Sacraments, and to defend by censures and his
Pastoral staff, and coerciue power. Ephesians. 4.
VVhereupon Saint Paul says, that Christ has given to his Church not only
Doctors and Prophets to teach, but also Pastors to feed and govern. And
seeing that the Church has as much need now of a supreme visible Pastor, and
rather more, then at the beginning, it follows, that PETER has a
successor, who has the like Authority: And seeing that all Fathers, all
Councelles, all histories, all practice of the Church, possession and
prescription for 1600. years, stand for the Pope of Rome, he is this
successor, and he it is, that has the supreme Ecclesiastical and spiritual
power after Christ. Thirdly, Mat. 18.
Christ commands to obey the Church, and says, That he that will not give
ear to the Church, is to be accounted as an Ethnike and Publican; which is a
sign, that the Church has Authority and Jurisdiction to hear causes, and to
pronounce sentences, to which obedience is to be given. Fourthlie, not
withstanding that in the old law of Moses God determined almost all by him
self, by his moral, judicial* and ceremonial laws; yet he gave power to the
Synagogue, and her Pastors to interpret the law, to resolve doubts
concerning the law, and to enact some laws as occasion was offered. And
therefore we see with what severity God commanded obedience to the Priests
saying: Deuteronomy. 17
Si difficile and ^mbiguum etc. If thou perceive that the Judgment with thee
be hard and doubtful between blood and blood, cause and cause, leprosy and
leprosy; and thou ^^e that the words of the Judges within thy gate do ^arie;
arise and ge up to the place, which our Lord thy God shall choose, and thou
shall come to the Priests of the Leuiticall stock, and to the Judge that shall
be at that time, and thou shall ask of them, who shall thew thee the truth of
the Judgment. And thou shall do what soever they, that are Presidents of the
place, which our Lord shall choose, shall say and teach thee, according to his
law, and thou shall follow, the sentence etc. And he that shall be proved
refusing to obey the commandment of the Priest, which at that time ministers
to our Lord thy God, and the decree of the Judge, that man shall die: and thou
shall take away the evil out of Israel, and the whole people shall fear, that
none asterward swell with pride. By which we see that the High Priest had
Power not only directive, but also coerciue under pain of death. And we read
how the victory of Judith over Holofernes was celebrated by the Jews with
commandment of a holy day: Judith vlt.
which law was merely Ecclesiastical, made by the Priests, and was not
commanded by God his law. The like festival day was decreed by Mardocheus, and
received by the Jews in memory of their delivery from Amans tyranny by
means of Hester, Hester 9.
which also was no divine, but an humane and Ecclesiastical law, Likewise the
Machabees instituted the feast of the Dedication, 1. Match. 4. Joan. 10.
which Christ afterward observed with the rest of the Jews; and yet this was
not commanded by God his law. Again Christ commands to do that which they
who sit in Moses Chair do say, Mat. 23.
but not always what they do; much more would he have us to do that, Lib. 4.
Inst. cap. 20. n. 21. Act. 15.
which they who sit in Saint Peter's, yea Christ's seat, do command. And we
read in the Acts (which Calvin well saw, but glosseth vntowardlie) how the
Apostles in their first Council made a new law, by which they commanded the
converted Gentiles to abstain from eating of blood and things strangled, which
were now (the old law being abrogated) things indifferent, and not otherwise
forbidden. Fiftlie, Mat. 18.
Christ gave authority to his Apostles to loose and bynd by excommunications,
suspensions, and interdicts; which acts of Jurisdiction are the spiritual
bands and Censures, which the Church lays upon rebellious Christians, as
Divines and Fathers interpret; Which power Saint Paul in his second Epistle to
the Corinthians insinuates saying: If I come again, I will not spare; and
again; These things I write absent, that being present I may not deal
hardly, according to the power, which our Lord has given me unto edification,
and not unto destruction, 1. Cor. 4. 1. Cor. 5. D. Th. in hac loca. Gregor.
Nyss^in orat. aduersus eos qui agree ferunt reprehens. Chrysostom. hom. 60^ ad
pop. Ant. Hieron. ep. 53.
And in his first Epistle he says: What will you? in rod that I come to
you, or in charity and the spirit of mildness? And again* he in absence by
his letters and mandatum, excommunicateth the incestuous person, and delivers
him up to Satan. Out of which words Saint Gregory of Nisse, and Saint
Chrysostom do gather the power of Excommunication: As also does Saint Hierom,
who marueileth that the Bishop, in whose Diocese Vigilantius lived, did not
Virga ferrea confringere vas inutile, and tradere in interitum carnis, vt
spiritus saluus fiat: With an iron rod break that unprofitable vessel, and
deliver him to Satan for the destruction of the flesh that the spirit may be
saved. So S. AVGVSTIN, Aug l 1. de pen. cap. 14.
so all Fathers, so Calvin him self understand this place of the power of
Excommunication, though Calvin will have only the Presbytery and company of
Seniours, not any one alone, to excommunicate, contrary to the express text,
which tells us, that Saint Paul alone absent did excommunicate, and deliver
up to Satan. Where is to be noted, that by excommunication stubbern Christians
are said to be delivered up to Satan, either because they are cast out of the
Church, where Satan domineereth; or else for that they are deprived of the
suffrages and helps of the Church, and so more exposed to Satan's tentations;
or lastely because in the Primative Church, the Devil by and by seized and
took poslession of the person excommunicated.

10. Sixtlie, as because the law of Nature could not determine particulerly of
all particulers, Civil power was necessary to govern the Community, and
enact laws conducing to the Temporal state: so because God his law has not
determined all particulers; it was necessary the Church should have power to
call Councelles, tomake patticuler laws, according to the times and other
circumstances.

11. Seuenthlie, every absolute Common wealth has power in the Prince and
Magistrates to govern and defend it self, to make laws, to punish
Malefactors etc. But the Church is an absolute Common wealth, and more
absolute then a Kingdom, this being subordinate to that, not that to this,
ergo it was to have all spiritual Authority necessary to govern and defend
it self, else Christ had not sufficiently provided for it.

12. Fightlie, we are bound to obey Princes laws and Authority in conscience;
ergo much more the Churches Authority and law, this being spiritual, that but
temporal, this being the subordinant, that the subordinat power, as we shall
see herafter. And therefore if the Apostle will have every soul to be subject
to Authority and higher powers, Romans 13
he will especially that they be subject, if they be members of the Church,
unto her spiritual power: for as SYMMACHVS Pope said once to the Emperor
ANASTASIVS: Si omnis potestas a Deo est, Ep. ad Anastaf. Imp.
magis ergo quae rebus praestituta est diuinis: defer Deo in nobis, and nos
deferemus Deo in te. If all power be of God, much more therefore that power
which governs divine matters; Honor thou God (o Emperor) in us, and we will
honor him in thee.

CHAPTER IIII.
These two Jurisdictions and powers, Ecclesiastical and Civil, are compared
and conferred: and the preeminence is given to the Ecclesiastical.

1. AS the little world Man, called (...), can not consist without body and
soul, nor the great world without the Sun and Moon: so neither can the
spiritual world of the Church flourish any time, unless it be supported, as
by two Pillars, by the spiritual and Temporal power and Authority. But as if
the Moon should or could contend with the sun, and would or could disdain
to receive light from the sun, or would or could encroach upon the suns
right in the government of the day, all would be out of order: so if one of
these powers should be at variance with the other, and would not receive light
and direction by the more lightsome; or would encroach preposterouslie on the
others demaines, the Church could not long flourish. And as if the body should
rebel against the soul, the flesh against the spirit, sensuality against
reason, it would perturbe reasons order, and break the Oeconomie of Moral
life; so if one of these powers should offer injury to the other, the
Mystical body of Christ his Church would be out of frame. Wherefore seeing
that Christ, the Wisdom of God, is the Authout of both, he no doubt, has
disposed them sweetly, Sap. 7.
and consequently has settled some order betwixt them, because. Quae a Deo
sunt, Romans 13.
ordinata sunt. Those things that are of God, are ordered. And for as much as
Pluralitas principatuum non est bona; Plurality of principalities is not good,
Arist. l. 12. Metaph. cap. vlt.
to wit, Unless one be subordinate to the other, no doubt he has subjected
one of these to the other. For which cause in this Chapter I will endeavor to
show, which of these powers takes the precedence, which has the preeminence
and superiority, wherein, and how far.

2. But because Comparisons betwixt so great Powers and Principalities, and
especially in these our corrupted times, are odious, I protest before hand,
that I entend not do detract any right or prerogative from either, but only to
give to Caesar and his temporal power, what belongs unto them, and to God
and his Church, Mat. 21.
what appertains to them. For I confess, and have proved, that both these
Authorities are of God; both are excellent and eminent in their kind; both to
be honored; both to be obeyed within their limits; both so necessary to the
Church of God, that it can no more stand without them, then the world without
Sun and Moon. For take away Temporal power, and who shall defend the
Church, and assist her for the execution of her laws and sentences? Take away
the spiritual power, and who shall direct and correct the Temporal when it is
exorbitant? Take away the Temporal, and who shall draw the sword? Take away
the spiritual, and who shall preach the word? Take away the Temporal, and
who shall have care of our corporal and temporal life? Take away the
spiritual, and who shall have care of the spiritual and eternal life? But
let the one not encroache upon the other; let both help one another, and both
are stronger; as was excellently observed by NICHOLAS the Pope: Nichol. epist.
ad Michael. Imp. cap. Gum ad verum ventum est, d. 96.
Cum ad verum ventum est, neque Imperator Iura Pontificatus arripuit, nec
Pontifex nomen Imperatoris vsurpauit; quoniaem idem Mediator Dei and hominum,
homo CHRISTVS JESUS, sic propriis actibus and dignitatibus distinctis officia
Potestatis vtriusque difcreuit, vt and Christiani Imperatores pro aeterna vita
Pontificibus indigerent; and Pontifices pro cursu temporalium tantummodo rerum,
Imperialibus legibus vterentur: When it came to the understanding of the
truth, neither the Emperor did take unto him the rightes of Bishop-like
authorotitie, nor the Bishop did vsurp the name of the Emperor; because the
same Mediator of God and men, man Christ Jesus, has distinguished the offices
of both powers by their proper acts and distinct dignities, as that Christian
Emperors for attaining eternal life should need Bishops, and Bishops should
use the Imperial laws for the cause only of temporal things.

3. But as both are necessary, so both are not equal, but the one inferior
to the other the one subordinate to the other, else the one would be an
hindra^ce to the other, and both would cause confusion. And certes, if we will
not prefer the body before the soul, heaven before earth, temporal before
eternal life; We must prefer the spiritual and Ecclesiastieall power
before the Temporal, and consequently the Church before the Common Wealth.

4. These two powers, and the preemine^ce of the spiritual before the
Temporal, were prefigured (as Turrecremata has well remarked) by the two
brazen Pillars in the Porch of Salomons Temple The Porch was a figure of the
Church Militant, Turrecr. lib. 4. cap. 87. 3. Reg. 7.
the Inner Temple of the Church Triumphant; because as by the Porch the Jews
entered into the Temple, so by the Church Militant, and by no other way,
Christians have entrance into the Church Triumphant: The two brazen Pillars
that sustained the Porch, signified the Power Temporal and spiritual, which
support the Church Militant: and the pillar on the right hand signified the
spiritual power; the Pillar on the left hand the Temporal power; whence it is
that that must take the precedence of this, and this must be subordinate to
that.

5. And truly that the spiritual and Ecclesiastical power is superior to the
Temporal, and more eminent then it, I prove First by those things, by which
I have proved them in the former Chapter to be distinct. For the end and
final cause of the temporal power, is temporal and natural, to wit,
temporal peace; the end of the spiritual Authority, is eternal and
supernatural peace, the immediate cause efficient of the Temporal, is the
people, the immediate cause of the spiritual, is God: The matters, in which the
temporal power is occupied, are temporal; the affairs, which the spiritual
governs, are Ecclesiastical and spiritual: the functions of the temporal,
are all temporal; the functions of the spiritual power, are all spiritual
and supernatural, as absoluing from sins, ministering Sacraments, offering of
sacrifices, enacting laws for the souls health, excommunicating, absoluing,
etc. The temporal rules especially the bodies; the spiritual, the souls:
that rules the Kingdom, or Common Wealth; this the Church. To the King, the
Keys of Cities are offered; to the Priest and Pastor the Keys of heaven: He
remitteth temporal Mulctes and pains, no sins at all; The Priest and
Pastor remitteth sins, and absolueth from all pains: He can cast out of his
Kingdom by banishement; the Pastor out of the Church by Excommunication. And
therefore, look how far eternal felicity excels temporal, God the
People, supernatural and divine things, natural and humane, spiritual
functions, temporal, souls bodies, the Church the Common Wealth, the Keys
of heaven the Keys of cities, sins civil penalties, eternal temporal
punishment, excommunication banishement; so far the Ecclesiastical and
spiritual excels the Civil and Temporal Authority. By this Argument S.
CHRYSOSTOM (as always) very excellently proves the Priests to be greater
then the King. Chrysostom. homil. 4. de verbis Isaiae, tom. 5.
Mane intra tuos terminos, o Rex. alij sunt termini Regni, alij sacerdotij; hoc
Regnum illo maius est. Rex ea, quae sunt in terris, sortitus est administranda;
caeterum ius sacerdotij e supernis descendit: Regi corpora commissa sunt,
sacerdoti animae: Mayor hic Principatus, propterea Rex caput submittit manui
sacerdotis, and vbique in scriptura sacordotes inungebant Reges: Remain within
thy bounds, O King: others are the limits of the Kingdom, others of
Priesthood: this Kingdom is greater then that. The King has the
administration of the things of the earth, but the right of Priesthood
defcendeth from above. To the King bodies are committed, to the Priest souls:
greater is this principality: and therefore the King inclines his head to the
hand of the Priest: and every where ^n Scripture, Priests did anoint Kings.
Secondly, there is no Christian can deny, but that since God has ordained us
to a supernatural end, to wit, the cleate vision, and fruition of him self,
(as all Scripture witnesses that he has) all our goods also and states are
ordained to the same end, and are not well used, but rather abused, when they
are used to serve our pleasures contrary to that end whence follows that all
temporal things, since the former Institution and ordination of God, are
Media, means, in respect not only of out supernatural end, but also of
supernatural means, as Sacraments, Grace, and supernatural functions, which
are more proportionate, and more near means to that end; and consequently
temporal power, which ordains of these means, is subject to spiritual
power, which principally considers the supernatural means and end. For as
the art of ryding is more noble, Arist. li. 1. Eth. c. 1.
then the art of making bridles (as Aristotle to a like purpose reasons)
because this is ordained to that: so the spiritual power which disposes of
supernatural things, is nobler then the Temporal, this being ordained to
that, and the end being more noble then the means.

6. Thirdly, Philosophers affirm that all habites and faculties are specified
and dignified by their acts, obiectes, and ends, and so Moral Philosophy,
which has virtue and manners, the health of the soul, for its object, is more
noble then the art of Physic, which teaches only to cure the diseases of the
body, and to restore corporal health. Seeing therefore that the objects of
spiritual power are supernatural and heavenly, the objects of Temporal
power, are natural and earthly; the end also of spiritual power is eternal
beatitude, the end of temporal power, temporal felicity; the acts also and
functions of that power, spiritual and supernatural, the acts of this
natural and moral; It must needs follow, that the spiritual power excels
the temporal, as much as the objects, ends, and acts of that do surpass
this.

7. Fourthlie, that power is greater, to which even the Princes them selves are
subject, then that, to which the subjects and people only are subject, not the
Prince (for though the Prince be subject to his own sawes quoad vim
directiuam, yet not quoad vim ^perciuam) but the Prince is subject to the
spiritual powet of the Church, as much as ^he lowest and meanest of his
subjects; ergo ^he spiritual power of the Church is more ^minent then the
Temporal power of the Prince or Common Wealth. The Mayor ^roposition is
evident. The Minor I shall ^rooue in the next Chapter. wherefore the ^onclusion
must needs follow.

8. Hitherto I have proved that the spi^ituall and Ecclesiastical power is
more ^minent and noble then the Temporal, and consequently that the
spiritual is ^igher in dignity; but whether it can com^and, correct, curb, or
restrain the tem^orall, I have not as yet either proved or declared; for many
things are more high in dignity then others, which yet have no authority to
command or punnish: As for example, the Protestants of this time will not let
to grant that the Pope is the highest Patriarch in dignity, yet they say he
can not command out of his particular Diocese of Rome; and all Divines grant,
that the power of the Church is more noble, then any power of Princes or
Emperors, that being spiritual and supernatural, this only temporal, and
yet they say that they that are not baptized, be they Princes or subjects, are
not subject unto it, so as the Church can command or punnish them spirituallie;
And the King of France is more eminent in dignity, then any of the noblest
subjects of England or Spain, and yet has no authority to command or punnish
them for faults committed out of his Realm Wherefore it rests that I prove
that the Church by her spiritual and Ecclesiastical power can command all
Christians, even Heretics that are baptized. And this, besides what has been
said in the former Chapter to the proof thereof, I shall briefly, yet
clearly, show by these ensewing arguments.

9. For first, the Ecclesiastical superiors are true Pastors of the Church;
ergo they can not only direct, but command, and correct, at least by spiritual
pains and chastisements. The Antecedent I prove out of scripture. Pasce oues
meas; Feed my sheep, Joan. 21.
said Christ to S. Peter and his successors, and all Pastors in their kind.
Ad Ephesians. 4.
Christ (says S. Paul) gave to his Church, some Apostles, some Prophets, and
other some Enangelists, and other some Pastors and Doctors. Act. 20.
And the same Apostle speaking to Pastors says: Attendite vobis etc. Attend
to your selves, and your whole flock. To which purpose also S. Peter adds
saying; 1. Pet. 5.
Pascite qui in nobis est gregem Dei. Feed the flock of God which is in you.
The consequence I prove, because to a Pastor it belongs not only to feed
by Sacraments, and the word of God, but also to rule, to govern, and correct,
and consequently the Pastors of the Church can make laws, which bynd all
Christians their subjects in conscience, and they can correct and punnish ^he
delinquents, at least by spiritual chastisements of Excommunication, and other
Censures.

10. Mat. 18.
Secondly Christ gave power by his Apostles and successors to bind and
loose, which argues Iursdiction.

11. Thirdly the Apostles, and their succes^ours, have used this Authority
over Chri^tians: Act. 15. 1. Cor. 5. Tit. 1. 1. Cor. 7. 2. Cor. 10
for they enacted laws in their first Council. Saint Paul excommunicated the
^ncestuous Corinthian; They appointed Bishops and Priests to govern particular
Churches; Saint Paul distinguishes his ^wne power of making laws from
Christ's: And he says. Arma militiae nostrae non carnalia sunt, sed potentia
Deo ad destructionem munitionum etc. The weapons of our Warfare are not
carnal, but mighty to God unto the destruction of munitions, destroying
Counsels, and all loftiness extolling it self against the Knowledge of God
etc. and having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience, etc.

12. Fiftlie, I prove it by a Theological Argument. By Baptism Christians are
made true members of the Mystical body of Christ's Church, no less then
subjects are of the Kingdom or Political body, D. Tho. 3. p q. 63. art. 6 q.
68. a. 1. and q. 69. a. 4 and 5.
yea more, because they are incorporated to the Church by a real,
supernatural, and indelible Caracter; But all members are so subject to the
head, that the head by Authority may command, correct, and punish them, if
they transgress; ergo the Pastors of the Church, and especially the chief
Pastor has Jurisdiction over all those that are baptized, be they true
Christians, or Heretics, or Apostataes. This I confirm by this congruence.
Every one is bound to the laws of the Realm, in which he was borne, by
reason that his nativity in that place, makes him a true member of that
Kingdom, as our Sovereign Liege himself well observes: In praef. monitor.
page 12.
And seeing that Baptism is a regeneration and new nativity, by which we are
borne in the Church, (for even the Children of Heretics, though they be
baptized by Heretics, if they be truly baptized, are borne in the Church)
it follows that all that are baptized, are bound to obey the Church, and
chief Pastor of the Church, to observe her laws, and may be punished by the
Church, if they transgress the same; else the Church, which is the most
eminent state and Common wealth, should be inferior unto the lowest and
meanest Political common wealth that is; for there is no lawful common
wealth, but it can make laws, and punish the transgressors.

13. Sixtlie, the Church is an absolute Common Wealth, and consequently has
Authority to make laws, to appoint spiritual Magistrates, to call Councels,
and to decide controversies, to correct and punish Heretics and Blasphemers,
and all sin, which are properly opposite to her government, and
Ecclesiastical peace: but this supposes a legislatiue an commanding, and not
only a directive, but also a coerciue power; ergo the Church and especially
her chief Pastor Christ's Vicaire, has such Authority. l. 2. ff. de Iurisd.
omnium Iud. cap. Praeterea, de officio delegati.
This Argument I confirm thus: The Civil law tells us: Cui iurifdictio
data est, ea quoque concessa esse videntur, sine quibus iurisdictio explicari
non potuit: To whom jurisdiction is granted, those things also seem to be
granted, without which the jurisdiction could not be explicated. And again:
Ex eo quod causa alicui committitur, super omnibus, quae ad causam ipsam
spectare noscuntur, plenariam recipit Potestatem: In that a cause is committed
to any, he receives full power over all things which are known to pertain to
the cause: But the Pastors of the Church, as is manifest out of the alleged
places of scripture, have Authority to govern and rule the Church, and all
the members and subjects thereof; ergo they have authority to do all those
things, which are necessarily belonging thereunto; but they should not have
all power belonging thereunto, unless they have a Power Legislatiue, and not
only directive, but also coerciue, at least by spiritual pains over
Christians* and the lay power, and temporal Jurisdictions; ergo their
spiritual power is not only above the temporal in dignity, but also in
authority and power of commanding, else they had not sufficient power to
govern the Church, which is committed unto them.

14. But because this verity will appear more by that, which I shall allege
in the next Chapter, to prove that the Pastors of the Church have spiritual
authority over Kings and Emperors; I will here make an end desiring all
wordlinges and Politikes, who so inculcare obedience to Princes and secular
power, not to forgett their duty and obedience to the Church, and her
Pastors. who have Authority as well as princes, and greater then theirs; and
to think also with them selves, that he that will not obey the Church, Mat. 18.
is to be held as an Ethnike and publican; and that, Deuteronomy. 17
if he that stubbornlie refused to obey the High priest in the old law was
to die for such disobedience, what punishment remains for them, who contemn
Church and Pope, which yet are in dignity and power as far above the
synagogue, and her priests and Bishops, as the verity surpasses the figure,
the body the shadow, the gift the promise, Christ Moses, Christ's preisthood
that of Aaron, Christ's facrifice and Sacraments, those of the Jews and
synagogue.

CHAPTER V.
Ecclesiastical and Temporal peers and princes are compared together, and
out of the Comparison is gathered, that not only private laymen, but even
temporal princes, though otherwise absolute, are subject to the pastors of
the Church, and especially to the supreme visible pastor, as is proved by
many arguments.

1. I intend not by this comparison to detract the least from Kings and
Princes; Nazia^z. orat. 17. ad ciues timore perculsos. Psalm. 81.
for I acknowledge their Authority to be of God, them selves the Images and
sons of God, according to that. Ego dixi Dij estis, and filij excelsi omnes:
I said: you are Godds, and the sons of the highest all. I will not let to
give them, in a good sense, those high titles, with which the Romans and
Grecians styled them, who called them Filios Deorum, Deos terrae, Jove's mundi,
The sons of Gods, Gods of the earth, and Jupiters of the world: for as
God is the supreme Monarch of the world, so are they of their Kingdoms, in
the government whereof, they imitate the Monarchical government of the world. I
grant that a King in respect of the laitye, is as the eye and head in the
body, as she sun amongst the planets, as the Cedar amongst Trees, as gould
amongst metalles, as fire amongst the Elements, as the sea amongst waters. I
will willingly acknowledge him the second person after God, and only lesser
then God in temporal Authority. Tertul. l. aduersus Scap. c. 2.


2. But yet it is not one of Kings least honors to acknowledge the^ selves
sons of the Church, Ambros. orat. in Auxentium.
as S. AMBROSE told Valentinian the Euiperour. And therefore as Priests are
content to give to the King and Prince that honor, which is due unto them: so
Princes must not disdain to give to Priess their due respect and right.
Princes, I grant, are called Gods by participation, and the anointed of God:
so are Priests, and in this kind greater Gods then they, because they approach
nearer unto the true God, and only God by essence, who therefore is called Deus
Deorum, Psalm. 49. and 135.
God of Gods; and their consecration and anointing being a Sacrament, is
far holier then that of Kings; for which cause CONSTANTIN called the Bishopes
of NICE his Gods, Ruf. l. 1. Cap. 2.
and would not be Judge of them, to whose judgment he was to stand: and as
Princes are Kings, so are Priests, and by so much greater Kings then they, by
how much it is more to be a King of souls, then bodies. wherefore the
scriptures alleged in the former Chapter, which give to the spiritual power a
superiority and authority over the temporal, do prove also that Bishops,
and especiallig the High and chief Pastor, are even Kings, Pastors, Joan. 21
and superiors. For when Christ bad PETER feed his sheep, he made him
Pastor over all Christians; and so the King, if he will be a sheep of Christ,
must be a sheep of PETER, and consequently of the Pope his successor, Mat.
18.
and must acknouwledge him his Pastor. And When Christ said: Dic Ecclesiae
etc. Tell the Church, and if he will not bear the Church, let him be unto thee
is an Ethnic and Publican, Did he exempt Princes from the Churches Tribunal?
And when he said: What soever you shall bind upon earth, Mat. vlt.
shall be bound in heaven, were Princes excepted? No, no. If Princes will be
members of the Church, they must be subject to the visible Head thereof: If they
will be sheep of Christ, they must acknowledge PETER, and the Pope his
successor, for their Pastor.

3. Neither can their temporal soueraintie exempt them, for that only makes
them so absolute, that they are subject to no temporal power, yet remain they
notwithstanding subject to the spiritual power of the Church, and as subject,
as the lowest Christian; and have no more command over the Church, then the
meanest of the people. True it is, that they are defendours, (or ought so to
be) and Protectours of the Church, Pastors and superiors they are not, but
sheep and inferiors; And therefore after that the Prophet Esaye had said:
Erunt Reges nutritij tui etc. Esai. 49.
Kings shall be thy nourcing Fathers; to show that this imports no
superiority over the Church, he adds: With countenance cast down toward
the ground, they shall adore thee (the Church) and they shall lick up the
dust of thy feet.

4. And this I prove first by reason grounded in faith and Divinity. For the
King by Baptism is made as truly a member of the Church, as the meanest
Christian, and is incorporated as deeply by the Caracter of Baptism, as any,
he is regenerated and borne again, as much as any, else he should not be so
good a Christian as others; And seeing that by this incorporation and nativity
(as is before declared) the Pastors, especially the chief Pastor, who is
Head of this body, has power over all Christians; it follows that he has
also power over Kings; and so as the King can punnish rebels and
Malefactors and cast them out of the Realm by banishement, so may the Chief
Pastor punnish a rebellious King, especially by spiritual censures, and may
cast him out of the Church by excommunication; else the Church were inferior
to all political bodies, yea to a natural body, which has authority for
its own preservation, to cut of a rotten member, least it infect the whole,
and to expel by purgation a malignant humor. Neither is there any reason, why
in this point we should put any difference betwixt the King, and another of his
own subjects. For although he be superior in temporal matters to all his
subjects, and is to be obeyed of the^, yet is he subject in spiritual matters
to the Churches Pastors, as much as his meanest subject.

5. And so it is not in the free choice of a Christian, though baptized amongst
Heretics, when he comes to years of discreation (as ERASMUS, and LVDOVICVS
VIVES do absurdly hold) to observe, Erasmus paraph. in Mat: Ludouic. Viues in
com. l. 1. de ciu. Dei cap. 27.
or not observe the Christian law, because he is bound to keep the promise,
which the Church, and his Godfathers made in his name, no less then Pupills
are bound to stand to that, which their Tutours have done in their name, and
for their profitt; and go he where he will, be he of what religion he will, he
carries an indelible Caracter imprinted by Baptism in hi^ souls, by which
the Church has authority over him, as over a member de iure and debito, and
can command him to observe the Christian law, as also punish him, if he
disobey, though he were an Emperor, at least by spiritual punishment.

6. Secondly, two Princes independent in one community, would make a
confusion, unless the one were subject to the other, and to be directed by the
other. Wherefore Aristotle (as above I have alleged) says that Pluralitas
Principatuum no^ est bona: Arict. l. 12. Met. cap. vlt.
Plurality of Principalities is not good: to wit, in one community, and
unless one of them be subject; for the one might hinder the other, the one
might command one thing, the other clean contrary, and so there would arise
contention and confusion; But the Church and common wealth of Christians is one
body and Community, at least materially, if not formallie; ergo these two
Princes, to wit, the spiritual and temporali, must have some subordination:
But there is no reason, that the Prince should direct, and correct the Pastor,
he being the greater Prince, and having an higher power, as it is above
proved; ergo seeing that both Pastor, and Prince are of God, and what is of
God is rightly ordained, Romans 13.
and with good order; it follows that the Chief Pastor must be superior,
and must direct, and correct the Prince, as much as is necessary to the
Churches end and good.

7, Thirdly, the chief Pastor, and sometimes also inferior Pastors, as
Bishops, have challenged to themselves as due, Authority over Princes, and
have excommunicated and laid spirituail punishements upon them; whom to
condemn as unjust usurpers (they being so many, so wise, so upright, and many
of them holy Saints) were mere madness; ergo the Prince is subject in
spiritual matters, yea and temporal matters also, when they are necessary
for the Churches good, and may be commanded, and punished, at least
spiritually, if he refuse to obey, he being in this case the Pastors subject,
and inferior.

8. Eus. l. 6. hist. c. 25 alias 27. Nicephor l. 13. c. 34. Vide Baron. an.
407. Card. Alan. Ausu. 1. polibeller. Cap. 2.
So we read that FABIAN Pope commanded PHILIP the first Christian Emperor to
take his place amongst the public Penitentes: so INNOCENTIVS the first
excommunicated Arcadius the Emperor and Eudoxia the Empress, for persecuting
S. John Chrrsostome. The excommunication begins thus: Vox sanguinis fratris
mei Iohannis clamat ad Deum contra te (o Imperator) sicuti quondam Abel Iusti
contra Cain, and is modis omnibus vindicabitur. The voice of the blood of my
brother John (Chrysostom) cries to God against thee, as Abels blood in times
past did against Cain, and it by all means shall be revenged. The sentence
follows in these words: Zonaras tom. 3. Annal.
Itaque ego minimus and peccator, cui Thronus Magni Apostoli Petri creditus
est, segrego and reijcio te, and illam, a perceptione immaculatorum mysteriorum
Christi Dei nostri: Therefore I the least, and a sinner, to whom the throne of
Great Peeter is committed, do segregate and reject thee and her (Eudoxia) from
participation of the immaculate mysteries of Christ our God. Of which Pope S.
HIEROME gives this commendation: S. Hieron. epist. 8.
Illud te pio charitatis affectu praemonendum puto, vt S. Innocentij, qui
Apostolicae Cathedrae, and supradicti viri (Anastasij) successor, and filius
est, teneas fidem, nec peregrinain, quantumuis tibi prudens callidaque
videaris, doctrinam recipias. That I thouht out of charity to admonish thee,
that thou hold the faith of S. Innocentius, who is the successor and son of
the sea Apostolic, and of Anastasius: neither do thou recedue any strange
doctrine, seem thou to thy self never so wise and witty. GREGORY the second
in a Council at Rome Anno 726. Vide Baron. an. 729.
excommunicated Leo the Emperor surnamed Isauricus and Iconomachus, and took
from him his Gabelles in Italy, and the Province it self. Greg. l. 3. ep. 5.
and 10. and l. 7. ep. 14. Vide Baron. an. 1076.
GREGORY the seventh, (commended by all, but only Schismatikes and
Heretics, for a Saint (as he who wrought miracles as well living as dead)
excommunicated HENRY the fourth Emperor of that name, for many enormities,
threatening moreover excommunication to all Princes, Kings, and Emperors,
that should usurp Inuestitures, as the same Emperor had done. Also he
interdicted the Kingdom of Polonia, and excommunicated the King BOLESLAVS for
killinge Stanisldus his Bishop at the Altar, because like a good Pastor he had
before controlled his lust, and excommunicated him. Platina in vita Innoc. 3^
ALEXANDER the third excommunicated Frederick the first; and if Henry the
second King of England had not submitted him self, he had excommunicated him
also, as he was solicited thereunto by Lewis the King of France. INNOCENTIVS
the third excommunicated Otho the fourth Emperor of that name. Cap. ad
Apostolicae dese^t. and re Iudic. in 6.
GREGORY the ninth against Frederick the second, JOHN the twenty two against
Ludouicus Bauarus, INNOCENT the third against King John of England, URBAN the
second against Philip the first of France, and other Popes against other
Princes, have sed the like severity, Albert. Pighius l. de visib. mon. cap.
17. Mat. Paris. ann. 1204. Baron. an. 1101.
even to these our days; and in all their Epistles to Kings and Emperors
they call them Sons, and speak to them as to their sheep and subjects.

9. Yea not only Popes, but even Bishops have the like Authority over Kings
and Emperors: as the Archbishop of Toledo over the King of Spain, The
Archbishop of Canterbury over the King of England, The Archbishop of Rhemes
ouet the King of France, Gregor. Naziaz. orat. 17. ad Pop. timore perculsu^,
and prino. Iras. Vide cap. suscipitisne. did. 10.
and other Bishops over other Kings. S. GREGORY Nazianzen challenged
authority over Valentinian the Emperor; for in an Oration which he made to
his Citizens stricken with Fear, and to the angry Prince and Emperor,
converting his speech to the Prefects, and even to the Emperor him self, thus
he speaks: An me libere loquentem eqno animo feretis? Nam vos quoque
potestati meae, meisque subsellijs lex Christi subijeit; Imperium enim ipsi
quoque gerimus, addo, etiam praestantius ac perfectius, nisi vero aequum est
spiritum carni fasces submittere, and caelestia terrenis cedere. Sed non
dubito, quin hanc dicendi libertatem (o Impervtor) in optimam partem
accepturussis, v^pote facrimeigregis ouis sacra, Magnique Pastoris Alumna,
recteque iam inde a primis annis a spiritu ducta and instituta, Sanctaeque and
Beatae Trinitatis lumine aeque ac nos ipsi illustrata: Will you take in good
part that which I shall speak freely? For the law of Christ does subject you
also unto my power and Tribunals: for we also bear rule, and hauc an Empire,
and that more eminent and perfect, unless a man should think it fit for the
spirit to be subject to the flesh, and that things celestial should yield to
things that be terrene. But I doubt nor (o Emperor) but that thou will take in
good part this my freedom of speech, as being a holy sheep of my holy flock,
brought up under the Great Pastor, and so from tender years well guided and
instructed by the spirit, and illuminated by the light of the Holy and blessed
Trinity, no less then we our selves. S. AMBROSE excommunicated Theodosius
for a slaughter committed, Theodoret. lib. 5. hist. cap. 18.
and a civil law enacted at Thessalonica, and would not admit him into the
Church, till he had done penance, and recalled the former law, Ita demum
(says Theodoret) Diuw Ambrosius vinclis illnm exoluit, and templum introire
sidelissimus Imperator ausus, non stans, neque genibus flexis supplicabat
Domino, sed pronus humi stratus. So at length S. Ambrose absolved him from the
bonds of his excommunication, when as the most faithful Emperor presuming to
enter into the Church, did not either standing or kneeling make his prayers
unto our Lord, but lying prostrate upon the ground. And when the Emperor,
after he had been at the Ossertorie, would have stayed in the Chancell, S.
Ambrose sent him word by a Deacon, that that was the place only for Priests
and those of the Clergy; which commandment also the Emperor obeyed so
willingly, that when afterward at Constantinople the Patriach Nectarius would
have had him stayed in the Chancell, he answered; Vix cum gemitu didici
discrimen inter Imperatorem and sacerdotem; vix inueni Doctorem veritatis: I
have scarcely learned with sorrow the difference betwixt the Emperor and the
Priest; I have scarcely found a Doctor of the truth.

9. Fourthlie I prove this, not only by the factes of Popes, but also by their
definitions, in which Popes are to be credited, though in their own cause,
because most, if not all of them, were so learned, that they knew what belonged
to their Authority, and so just, and holy also, that they would not usurp
what belonged not unto them. ADRIAN Pope makes this decree; Cap. vl^. Suorum
capitulorum etc. gencrali 25. q 1.
Generali decreto statuimus vt execrandum Anathema, and ve^uti praeuaricator
Catholicae fidei semper apud Deum reus existat, quicunque Regum vel Potentum
deinceps Romanorum Pontificium decretorum censuram in quocunque crediderit vel
permiserit violundam. We ordain by our General decree that he be before
God, as an Anatheme, and as a Preuaricatour, whosoever of the Kings or
potentates shall think or permit to be violated in any thing the censure of
the Roman Bishops, Cap. duo sunt did. 96.
and decrees. GELASIVS Pope having told Anastasius how by two powers.
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, the world is governed, and that the Priests
burden is so much the greater, in that they are to answer for Kings
comportement in the divine judgment, he adds: Nosti itaque inter haec ex
illorum te pendere iudicio, non illos ad tuam redigi posse voluntatem. Thou
know therefore that thou dependest of their Judgment, and that they are not
to be subject to thy will. And therefore (says he) many Popes have
excommunicated diverse Kings and Emperors. Pope JOHN also says. Cap. si
Imperator did. 96.
Si imperator Catholicus est, (quod salua pace illius dixerimus) filius est,
non Praesul Ecclesiae. If the Emperor be a Catholic (by his good leave be it
spoken) he is a son, not a Prelate of the Church. And afterward he adds:
Imperatores Christiani subdere debent executiones suas Ecclesiasticis
Praesulibus, non praeferre, Christian Emperors must submit their executions
unto Ecclesiastical Prelates, and not prefer. Cap. solita de ^nior. and ^bed.
INNOCENTIVS the third says, That as God in the beginning of the world
created two great lights, the Sun and Moon, and appointed that to rule the
day, this the night; so in the firmament of the Church he has placed two
great lights, to wit, Regal and Ecclesiastical power; that to rule the night
of Temporal things, this the day of spiritual things. And this (says he)
is by so much greater then that, by how much the Su^ne surpasses the Moon.
And again in the same place he says, That CHRIST excepted no Christians, when
he commanded PET^R, and in him his successors, to feed his sheep, vt alienum
a su^ demonstraret ouili, qui Petrum and successores eius, Magistros non
recognosceret, and Pastores: To show that he is an alien from his flock, who
does not acknowledge PETER and his successoures to be his Masters and Pastors.

10. Fiftlie, I prove it by the Authority of Fathers and Bishops, that were no
Popes, Ambr. orat. in Auxent. quae extat. lib 5. epist eius post epist 32.
yet great Saints. S. AMBROSE speaks in this point plainly: Soluimus quae
sunt Caesaris Caesari, and quae sunt Dei Deo; Tributum Caesaris est, non
negatur: Ecclesia Dei est, Caesari vtique non debet addici; quia ius Caesaris
esse non potest Dei templum. Quod cum honorificentia Imperatoris nemo dictum
potest negare. Quid enim honorificentius quam vt Imperator filius Ecclesiae
esse dicatur? We have paid to Caesar what things belong to Caesar, and to
God what is appertaining to God. Tribute belongs to Caesar, and is not denied
him: The Church is Gods, and therefore is not to be given to Caesar: because the
Church of God can not be Caesar's right: Which no man can deny, but that it is
spoken with the Emperors honor: for what more honorable then that the
Emperor should be called the son of the Church? And then say I, if he be a
son, he is a subject, no less then the son to the father. The same Doctor
in a book wrote of Priestlie Dignity, says yet more: Honor and sublimitas
Episcopalis (says he) nullis poterit comparationibus adaequari. Lib. de
dignit. sacerd. cap. 2.
Si Regum fulgori compares, and Principum Diademati, long erit inferius, quam
si plumbi metallum ad auri fulgorem compares: quippe cum videas Regum colla,
and Principum, submitti genibus sacerdotum, and exosculatis ecrum dexteris
orationibus eorum credant se communiri, The honor, dignity, and Highness of a
Bishop cannot be equalized by any comparisons. If thou compare it to Kingly
luster, and the diadem of Princes, thou shall say less then if thou should
compare lead to the glittering gould: for as much as thou see Kings and
Princes necks submitted to the knees of Priests, and the^ selves kissing their
right hands to be waranted by their prayers. Hom. 4. de verbis Isaiae.
S. CHYSOSTOME: Regi corpora commissa sunt, sacerdoti auima. Rex maculas
corporum remittit, sacerdos autem maculas peccatorum. Ille cogit, hic
exhortatur. Ille necessitate, hic consilio. Ille habet armasensibilia, bic arma
spiritualia. Ille bellum gerit cum Barbaris, mihi (sacerdoti) bellnm est
aduersus Daemones. Mayor hic Principatus, propterea Rex caput submittit manui
sacerdotis: and vbique in veteri scriptura sacerdotes inungebant Reges. To the
King bodies are committed, to the Priest souls. The King forgiueth the
punishments of the body, the Priest the blottes and blemishes of sins. He
compels, the Priest exhorts; he by necessity, this by counsel; he has
sensible weapons, this spiritual; he makes war against the Barbares, I (the
Priest) am to wage battle against the devils. Greater is this Principality,
and therefore the King inclines his head to the hand of the Priest: and every
where in the old Testament, Priests did anoint Kings. And again: Siquide^
sacerdotiu^ Principatus est, Hom. 5. de verbis Isaiae.
ipso etia^ regno venerabilius ac maius etc. Because Priest hoode is a
Principality, and that greater and more venerable then the Kingdom. Speak
not to me of the purple and diadem, and goulden robes; these all be but
shadows, and more vain then spring flowers. Speak not to me of these
things, but if thou will see the difference betwixt a King and a Priest, way
the power given to them both, and thou shall see the Priest fitting much higher
in dignity then the King. For a though the Throne of a King seem to us
admirable, for the precious stones, wherewith it is covered, yet he has
allosted him only the administration of earthly things. But to the Priest a
throne is placed in heaven, and he has authority to pronounce sentence in
heavenly businesses. Who says so? Mat. 18.
The King of the heavens him self: What soever you shall bind upon earth,
shall be bound also in heaven; and whatsoever you shall loose upon earth,
shall be loosed also in heaven. What can be compared with this honor? from earth
heaven takes the principal power of judging. For the judge sits on earth,
our Lord folioweth his servant; and whatsoever he shall judge here below,
that he approves above. And a little after: Eoque Deus ipsum regale caput
sacerdotis manibus subiecit, not erudiens, quod hic Princeps est illo mayor.
Siquidom id quod minus est, benedictionem accipit ab eo, quod praestantius est.
And so much God hathsubmitted the Kings head to the hands of the Priest,
teaching us that this Prince is greater then he; for he that is less,
receaueth benediction from him that is greater. Yea S. CHYSOSTOME gives not
only Bishops, but also even Deacons, Hom. 33. in Matthew. and hom. 83. in eund.
Authoririe over Kings: Si dux igitur quispiam (says he) si Consul ipse, si
qui diademate ornatur, indigne adeat, cohibe ac coerce; maiorem tu illo
potestatem habes. If therefore any Captain or Consul, if he that is adorned
with a diadem, approach unworthily, keep him back and restrain him; thou
have greater power then he. And to this purpose we read that S. Re. MIGIVS the
Apostle of France, Histoire de l'Eglise de Reins lib. 1. cap. 13.
a little before his death, commanded the Bishops to excommunicate the Kings
of France, if they should waste or invade the Churches. But above all most
forcible is the testimony of. Ignat. Epist. ad Smyrn.
S. IGNATIUS an Apostles scholar, who so extolleth Princely dignity, that
yet he gives the precedence unto the Bishops authority. Honora Deum (says he)
vt omnium authorem and Dominum etc. Honor God as the Author and Lord of all,
and the Bishop as the Prince of Priests bearing the Image of God, and houlding
his princedome of him, and his Priesthood of Christ. And after him you must
honor also the King. For none is to be prefered before God, nor equal to him;
nor none more honorable in the Church then the Bishop, exercising the
Priesthood of God for the salvation of the world. Neither is any equal to the
King, in the Host or Camp, procuring peace and benevolence to the other
Princes under him. For he that honors the Bishop, shall be honored of God,
and he that dishonors him, shall of God be dishonored. For if any man
rising against the King is worthy of damnation, how shall be escape Gods
Judgments that attempteth any thing against, or without the Bishop? For
Priesthood is the Chief and sum of all man's good; which wh^ soever
disgraceth, dishonors God, and our Lord JESUS Christ the Chief Priest of
God.

11. Sixtlie, this I prove by Emperors and Kings proper confession, who all of
them have acknowledged Bishops, and especially the Chief Bishop of Rome,
their Fathers, Pastors, and superiors, and those, that have supreme
authority ouet them. CONSTANTINE the Great in an ^ict of his shortly after
his baptism ^saieth thus: Cap. Co^stantinus 2. did. 96.
Vtile iudicauimus etc. vt sicut in terris Beatus Petrus Vicarius filij Dei
videtur esse constitutus, it a etiam and Pontifices, qui ipsius Principis
Apostolorum vices gerunt, Principatus potestatem, amplius quam terrenae
Imperialis Nostrae Serenitatis mansuetudo habere videtur, concessam a nobis,
nostroque Imperio obtineant. We have Judged it profitable, that as blessed
Peeter is appointed the vicaire of the son of God in earth, so also Bishops,
who are Vicegerents of this Prince of the Apostles, should have more amply the
power of principality granted by us and our Empire, Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 2.
then our terrene Imperial Serenitie seems to have. And Russinus relates
how that, when certain Bishops assembled at the Council of NICE offered him
Memorialles, in which were complaints and accusations of one another, he said
to them: Deus vos constituit sacerdotes, and potestatem vobis dedit de nobis
quoque iudicandi, and ideo nos a vobis recte iudicamur. Vos autem non potestis
ab hominibus iudicari; propter quod Dei solius inter vos expectate iudicium,
and vestraeiurgia, quacumque sunt, ad illud diuinum reseruentur examen. Vos
etenim nobis a Deo dati est is Dij, Psalm. 81.
and conueniens non est vt homo iudicet Deos, sed ille solus, de quo scriptum
est: Deus stetit in Synagoga Deorum, in medio autem Deos Diiudicat. God has
constituted you Priests, and has given you power to judge eue^ of us, and
therefore we are rightly Judged of you: But you can not be judged of men: for
which cause do you expect only Gods judgment betwixt you: and your differences
what soever they be, let them be reserved to the oth^e examination. For you
are given of God to us as our^^oddes, and it is not convenient that a man
should judge Gods, but he only, of whom it is written: Psalm. 81.
God stood in the Assembly of Gods, and in the midst he Judges Gods.
JUSTINIAN the Emperor in his sixth Constitution confesses the same, Authent.
Quomodo oportet Episcopum, etc.
saying: The greatest gifts of God among men is the Priesthood, and the
Empire, of which two, the former having the administration of divine things,
the other of hamane, both proceeding of one beginning, do adorn man's life etc.
CHARLES the great uses this manner of style. Cap. In memoriam, did. 19. Vide
Baron. tom. 9. an. 801.
In memoriam Beati Petri Apostoli honoremus Sanctam Romanam and Apostolicam
Sedem, vt qnae nobis Sacerdotalis est matter dignitat is, esse debeat
Ecclesiasticae Magistra rationis: Quare seruanda est cum mansuetudine
humilitas, vt licet vix ferendum ab illa sede imponatur iugum, tamen feramus,
and pia deuotione toleremus. In memory of Blessed Peter the Apostle let us
honor the holy Roman and Apostolical Seat, that she which is to us the
mother of Pristlie dignity, should be the mistress of Ecclesiastical
discipline and affairs. Wherefore humility is to be kept with Mansuetude;
that although a yoke scarcely tolerable should be imposed upon us from that
Seat, yet let us bear it, and let us suffer it with a pious devotion. And in
his Epistle to Pope ADRIAN thus he writes. Sanctissimo Patri Adriano summo and
Vniuer sali Pontifiei, Carolus Dei gratia Rex, and spiritualis silius vester.
To our most holy Father Adrian the Chiefest and Universal Bishop, Charles by
the Grace of God King, and your spiritual son. Ludou. Rex. in epist. ad Pium
2.
King Lewis in an Epistle to PIUS the second styles him in this manner:
Beatissimo Patri nostro Pio Papae secundo Obedientiam filialem. To our most
Blessed Father Pope Pius the second, filial Obedience. And afterward thus he
writes: Te Vicarium Dei viuentis ea veneratione prosequimur, vt sacra tua
monita, praesertim in Ecclesiasticis rebus, velut vocem Pastoris audire prompta
mente velimus. Te Dominici Gregis Pastorem prefitemur, and scimus, teque
iubentem sequimur. We bear thee the Vicaire of the living God such respect
and reverence, that we will hear with a prompte mind thy sacred admonitions,
especially in Ecclesiastical matters, as the voice of our Pastor. We
profess and know thee to be the Pastor of our Lords flock, Nangius de gest
is S. Lud. and Surin vitae eiusdem Aug. 25.
and we follow thy commandment. King LEWIS the Saint, and ninth of that name,
gave this commandment to his son PHILIP: Sis deuotus and obediens Matris
Romanae Ecclesiae, eiusque Pontifici, tanquam Patri spirituali, te morigerum
praebeas. Be thou devoted, and obedient to thy mother the Romain Church; and
be thou obedient to her Bishop, as to thy spiritual father.

12. The Kings of SPAIN, as being surnamed CATHOLIC, yield not in this point
to the most Christian Kings of France. Vide Cie. Later. sub Leone X. sess. 2.
FERDINAND professes him self Filium Sancta Romanae Ecclesiae Matris nostrae
deditissimum: The most devout son of the holy Roman Church our mother: and
withal pro eius honor atque statu animam ponere paratissimum: To be most
ready to expose his lise for her honor and state. Rox Alphons. in suis
Legibus, Part. 1. tit. 5. l. 1.2.3.4. and 5. Carol. 5. in Edict. wormat.
King ALPHONSE in his laws calls the Pope Patrum Patrem, Father of Fathers,
and says that therefore all Christians, when they have access unto him, do
kiss his feet. CHARLES the fifte in his Edict made at Worms, in which he
condemns Luther and his book, calls LEO the Tenth Beatissimum Patrem, Most
blessed Father, and styles him self Sedis Apostolica Sanctaeque Ro^anae
Ecclesiae primarium filium and Aduocatum. First Son and Aduocat of the Sea
Apostolic and the hodie Romain Church.

13. Neither are our Kings of England behind them in this devotion. King
LUCIUS the first Christian King of the Britains, although he might have found
some preachers, which were the remnant of those that were converted by Joseph
of Arimathia and as many think by S. Peter him self, or at least might have
found nearer help out of France yet to show his reverend conceit of the Sea
Apostolic, sent Ambassadors to Pope ELEVTHER us obsecrans vt per eius
mandatum Christianus fieret. Beda lib. 1 hist. Angl. ca. 4.
Beseeching that by his commandment he might be made a Christian. INAS King of
the West-English, in sigue of Homage to the Chief Pastor, Westmo^. an. 727.
Polid. Virg. lib. 4. hist. Angl. Alredus in vitae S. Eduardi. Polid. lib. 6.
hist. Angl.
made his Kingdom tributarie to the Pope of Rome, and set a tax upon every
house called Peeter-pence, S. EDWARD King and Confessor gives this title to
Pope NICHOLAS the second: Summo vniuersalis Eeclesiae Patri Nicholao, Edwardus
Gratia Dei Anglorum Rex debitam subiectionem and obedientiam. To the chiefest
Father of the universal Church Nicholas, Edward by the Grace of God King of
the English, offers due subjection and obedience. And in the same Epistle he
writes how he sends Peter Pence unto him, with other Royal gifts. King
OSWIN long before, Beda lib. 3. cap. 25.
when there was a controversy about the time of observation of EASTER, and
COLMAN Bishop had said, that he received his manner of celebrating EASTER from
S. John the Euangeliste, and WILFRID said that he had his manner from Rome,
and Saint Peter, to whom it was said: Mat. 16.
Tues Petrus etc. and tibidabo claues regni Caelorum; Thou art Peter etc. and
to thee will I give the keys of heaven; The King having heard both, spoke in
this manner: If it was said to Peter, I will give thee the keys of heaven: I
say unto you then, that this is the Porter, whom I will not contradict, but as
much as I know or can, I desire to obey in all things his statutes, least when
I come to heaven gates, there be none to open them to me. This said that
Religious King, and this was his respect to the Sea Apostolic. Epist. ad Joan.
III.
KENVLPHVS King of the Mercians, writing in his own, and all his Bishops, Vide
Malmes. lib 1. de gest. Reg. Angl.
and Nobilities name, begins his letter in this humble manner: To my most
holy and well-beloved Lord, LEO, the Roman Bishop of the holy and Apostolic
Sea, Kenulph by the Grace of God King of Merchland with the Bishops, Dukes, and
all degrees of honor with in our Dominions, with health of most sincere
affection in Christ; and afterward he says: The sublimitie of the Sea of
Rome is our health, and the prosperity thereof our continual joy: Because
whence you have your Apostolical dignity, thence had we the knowledge of the
true says. Wherefore I think it sit that the ear of our obedience be humbly
inclined unto your commandments. And then demanding the Popes benediction for
the better government of his people, and resistance of foreign foes, he
adds: This blessing have all the Kings, who swayed the Mercian Scepter,
deserved to obtain at your Predecessors hands. This same do I in humble
manner request, Malmes. lib. 3. de gest is Pont in VVilfrido. Malmes. lib. 1.
de gest. Po^t. Angl. Westminster. an. 854. Bale Gent. 2. cap. 20.
and desire to obtain of you (most holy Father) first by way of adoption to
receive me as a child, as I love you in the person of a Father, and shall
imbrate you with the whole force of obedience. And afterward he makes mention
of a token of an hundred and twenty Mancuzes, which he requesteth him to
accept. King ETHELDRED received the letters of Pope JOHN the seventh upon his
Knees. King ETHELWOLPH sued to the Pope for a dispensation: sent his son
Alfred to the Pope to be instructed, and sent Peter Pence, and made all England
tributarie to the Roman Sea. King ALFRED surnamed the Great, Malmes. lib. 3.
de gest. Reg. Angl. Fox. Act. and Mon. page 166. and 167. Stow. an. 1066.
of whose valor, learning, and Piety, our Chroniclers write wonders, in his
Preface before the Pastoral of S. Gregory, which he translated into the Saxon
language, calls him Christ's Vicaire. King WILLIAM the Conqueror offered to
try his Title with Harold before the Pope, and after got his Title approved
at Rome. He wrote an Epistle to GREGORY the seventh, in which he confirms
the Tribute of Peter pence, which the Kings of England, Lib. 5. hist. Ang.
Cambd. in Brita^. page 350. Malmes. lib. 3. de gest. Reg. and lib. 1. hist.
nouel. Florent. Vigor. in Chron, an. 1107 Matthew. Paris. page 96. Houed. an.
1131. Fox. page 192. Fox. page 193. Houed. pa. 502.
even from King INAS, paid to the Pope, as Polidore Virgil writes, in sign
of reverence and subjection to the Roman Sea. King HENRY the first, surnamed
Beauclerd for his knowledge in the seven liberal Sciences, built a Church at
Dunstable, and by the Authority of Pope EVGENIVS the third, (as Cambden
confesses) placed there Canon Regulars; he yielded the inuestiture of Bishops,
and intertayned most honorably Pope INNOCENT the second, and caused him to be
admitted through out all France. He wrote a letter to Pope PASCHAL, which Fox
sets down, and gives him this Title. To the venerable Father PASCHAL
chief Bishop; and at the same time (as the same Fox relates) he wrote another
letter to the said Pope demanding the Pall for Gerard Archbishop of York.
King HENRY the second, though for a time he contended with Pope ALEXANDER the
Third, yet after the death of S. THOMAS of Canterbury, Fox. page 227. Coop.
an. 1072. Bal. cent. 3. cap. 4. Houed. par 2. Annal. page 677.
he permitted Appeals to the Pope, and submitted him self and his Kingdom
unto his pleasure. King RICHARD surnamed Coeur de Lion, son to HENRY the
second, wrote a letter to Pope CLEMENT the second, with this Title: To his most
Reverend Lord and Blessed Father by the grace of God CLEMENT chief Bishop of
the holy Apostolic Sea. and a little after: The factes of Princes (says he)
have better success, Houed. page 706.
when they receive assistance and favor from the Sea Apostolic. Matthew. Paris.
and Houed. an. 1190.
And so when this King went to the holy Land, he left the care and government
of his Kingdom unto the Sea Apostolic. King HENRY the third, when the Pope
sent a Legate into England (as Matthew Paris relates) met the Legate at the
Sea coast, Matthew. Paris page 589. Fox. act. page 287.
and bowing his head to his knees, conducted him: and after writing a letter to
Pope INNOCENT, he callethe him most holy Father, and Lord, and Chief Bishop,
and offreth Kisses to his blessed feet. King EDWARD the thiad writing a letter
to the Pope, walsing. page 150.
which Walsingham serteth down, says, That it is heresy to deny the Popes
judgment praesidere omni humanae creaturae. to preside over all humane
creatures. The same King writing to Pope CLEMENT uses this submission. To his
most holy Lord Clement by the divine providence Chief Bishop of the sacred
Roman and universal Church, Edward by the Grace of God King of France, and
England, and Lord of Ireland, devout kisses of your blessed feet. And the same
King, and all his Nobles anno 1343. assembled in the Parliament at Westminster,
in a letter written to the Pope, Fox Act. pa. 383.
which Fox sets down, calls him Head of the Holy Church. King HENRY the
sift, that warlike and victorious Prince, sent his Ambassadors to the Council
of Constance called for the condemnation of VVickleph, Stowe. an. 1416
and there demanded and obtained that England might be called a Nation, and one
of the four Nations, that owe devotion to the Church of Rome. Fox Acts pa.
799. Georg. Lilius in Chron. an. 1506.
King HENRY the seventh anno 1506. sent three solemn Orators to Pope JULIUS
the second, to yield his obedience according to the manner unto the Sea of
Rome. Yea King HENRY the eight in the year 152^. dedicated his book against
Luther to Pope LEO the tenth, which book I have seen signed with the Kings
own hand in an English Caracter, for which the Pope gave him, and his
successors, the Title of Defendour of the faith. That he acknowledged the Pope
his Pastor, appears by this, that at first he made suit to him for a
separation from Queen CATHERINE, but when he perceived he could not obtain
his suit, then, and upon that occasion only, he exiled the Popes Authority,
and made him self Head, and the first Head of the Church of England, as may
appear by that, which I have said of the known respect the Kings of England
ever before bare to the Pope, and the Apostolical Sea.

14. Seuenthlis, I prove this by the ancient Ceremonies of kissing the Popes
feet, and other Homage, which no good Christian, though a King or Emperor,
has ever disdained, fulfilling therein the prophecy of Esaias: Quam speciosi
pedes Euangelizantis pacem? How beautiful are the feet of him that
Euangelizeth and preaches peace? Esaias. 52.
And following therein the example of the three Kings, Matt. 2.
who adored Christ; and of the prime Christians, who brought the price of their
Lands to the feet of the Apostles: Act. 4. and 5. Act. 10. Phocius in Nomo.
con. Cap. Constantinus. did 96. Naucler. lib. 2. gener. 18. Blond. li. 10.
Mart. Polonus and Platina in Steph. 2. S. Ansel. Luc li. 1. Collecta. Plat. in
Adria. 1. Baro. to. 12. anno 1130. Platina in Eugenio IV.
and of Cornelius, that fell at Peeters feet. CONSTANTINE the Great, Greater
for his humility, then for the greatness of his victories and Emperie, honored
the Pope as his Pastor, and superior, and bestowed great temporal honor and
Regalities upon him. JUSTINIAN the Great in the year 535. adored AGAPETVS
Pope. JUSTINIAN the second crouching to Pope CONSTANTINES the first feet,
embraced him. King PIPIN going to meet Pope STEEVEN, who was going to him into
France for help, kissed his feet, and ledd his horse by the bridle into the
Court and palace. CHARLES the Great would not be hindered by Pope ADRIAN the
first from kissing his feet, as Platina writes. LEWIS King of France, and
HENRY the second King of England kissed humbly the feet of INNOCENT the
second. SIGISMVND the Emperor in the Council of Constance worshipped Pope
MARTIN, prostrate upon the ground. ALBERT Emperor of the West, and IOANNES
PALEOLOGVS Emperor of the East, used the same submission to EVGENIVS the
fourth in the Council of Florence.

15. By this which has been said, who is of so little insight, that sees not,
how Princes are, and ought to be subject unto the chief Bishop, and highest
visible Pastor of the Church, which if Princes also could see (as their
conceit of their own Authority many times hinders them from seeing) they
would not encroach upon the Church as they do; they would not contemn her
laws, but honor them as Oracles; they would not despise the Churches
Pastors, but would as the ancient Christian Princes were wont to do, honor
them above all terrene Potentates.

16. And would to God our noble sovereign King JAMES had been trained up in
the school of Christ's Catholic Church, in which our ancient Kings his
Predecessors learned their duty toward the Pope; that rare and deep
judgment of his would never have permitted him to think a Temporal King as
great as the Pope, In praf. monitor. page 5.
to whom his Predecessors subjected their persons, Kingdoms, Crowns, and
Scepters, it would never have sunk into his learned head, that the Pope should
be Antichrist, and consequently all his Predecessors the Kings of England,
yea of Christendom, so wise, so pious, so warlike, so victorious, worshippers
and favorers of Antichrist: he would never have incited the Emperor and
Christian Princcs, In praef. monitor.
to curb him, restrain him, and to diminish that his Authority, which not
they, but Christ gave him, by which he has put the crown upon many an
Emperor and Kings head, by which all Christian Kings, and their Kingdoms
have been maintained in Religion, wealth and prosperity: against which
Authority, no temporal stares have long prevailed, but like waves against the
Rock, by persecuting it, have wasted and ruined them selves: which Authority
was not given him, ex prima intention, to take away temporal Kingdoms from
any, (unless by evil comportement they make them selves unworthy of all rule
and humane society) but rather to conserve them, and to add unto them a new
Crown and Kingdom of Heaven, for, non eripit mortalia qui regna dat
Coelestia, he that gives to man heavenly things, goes not about to take
away from him those that be earthly. Imploie then (o noble sovereign) your
rare wit, power and force to defend and protect this Authority, not to
impugn it, show your self worthy that Title of a Defendour of the faith,
which was given to your Predecessors by the Sea Apostolic, not for impugning,
but for defending her faith and Authority. Seek not to sack and raze that
City, which is built upon a Rock; Think not to prevail against that Church,
against which all the persecutions, schisms, and heresies, that have been
raised against her, no, nor the forces or gates of Hell, could hitherto, or
shall ever here after prevail. Seek not to sink the ship, which PETER
rules, and at whose stern CHRIST him self sits: It may be by Gods
permission, tossed with winds, waves, and Tempests, but it can never be
drowned; for as Pope GREGORY the ninthe once told an Emperor that thought by
humane force and policy to sincke her: Cuspinianus in Frederice.


Niteris incassum nauem submergere PETRI:
Fluctuat; at nunquam mergitur illa ratis
Thou striu'st in vain S. PEETERS ship to sink:
Floate may it well; to drown it, never think.
CHAPTER VI.
That Princes, Kings, yea Emperors have no authority to govern the Church, or
to make Ecclesiastical laws, neither to be accounted heads or Superiors, but
subjects of the Church, though protectours and defendours; and therefore are
modestly admonished of their duty and office.

1. Almighty God, as he has instituted two powers, terrene, and spiritual,
Civil and Ecclesiastical, and has distinguished them in Natures, objects,
functions, and ends, so to avoid confusion, he has placed them in diverse
subjects. The terrene power he has given to Princes and Magistrates, the
spiritual and Ecclesiastical to Priests, Prelates, and Pastors, as above we
have seen. For although there be no such natural repugnancie, but that these
powers may consort in one, Ep. 126. ad Euag.
and the self same person (for as S. HIEROME says; in the law of Nature the
first begotten of every family, were Priests and Temporal Lords,
Melchisedech also, and Moses, and the Machab^et were Priests and Princes) yet
it is most convenient that these two powers should be separated; the King and
Prince, by reason of his wars and Temporal Affairs, wherewith he is
entangled, being not so apt to menage matters of the Church and Religion, the
Prelate and Pastor being by office obliged to attend to divine matters, from
which the menaging of common wealths affairs would much distract him. And
therefore as the Church came to greater perfection, Number. 27.
so were these offices given to distinct officers. For IOSVE was made Captain
and Commander in Temporal things, 2. Paralip. 19.
ELEAZAR, was the High Priest, and chief in matters of the Church. AMARIAS the
High Priest commanded, in his, quae ad Deum pertinent, in matters pertaining to
God, and ZABADIAS was deputed to the government of those things that
appertained to military affairs. And so from the first establishing of the law
of Moses, the Temple and Synagogue was committed to the Tribe of LEVI, the
scepter and regal Authority was given to the Tribe of IVDA; in like sort in
the law of Grace, when the Church came to her greatest perfection, Christ
appointed particularly Apostles, Doctors, Ephesians. 4.
and Pastors to govern the Church; and confirmed Princes in their temporal
Authority, commanding that obedience should be given to the Pastor in
spiritual matters, and to the Prince in temporal. Mat. 22 Romans 13


2. Wherefore least in giving one of these Potentates too much, Mat. 22
I may do iniutie to the other, I must follow our Saviors Commandment, and so
give to Caesar that which belongs to him, that I take not from God and his
Church, what appertains to them. And although in giving both but their due, I
may perchance displease one, yet if I may have that indifferent audience, which
the gravity and equity of the cause requires, I hope to offend neither: and
how soeuet it happen, I had rather displease, then do wrong or injury. And
whereas in our Island, by the sway of Authority and terror of laws, it has
been made High Treason to deny the Prince Authority in matters
Ecclesiastical I protest, that what I shall say in this matter proceeds not
from any disloyal mind toward my Princes true Authority, nor from any
itching desire I have to lay open the disgrace of my Country, which I would
rather cover, if it were possible, with my own life and blood, and to
discharge my self from all just imputation of Treason, I desire to have the
leave, to plead this only for my defense that if this be Treason in me, not
only all Catholic Priests, Doctors, and Prelates of the Church, but also all
the ancient subjects, not only of England, but of all other Christian
Countries, must incur the same imputation with me, because there was never
Christians before our English Protestants, that gave Ecclesiastical power to
Princes, and there was never King of England, or of any other Country what
soever, that ever was so hardy, as to challenge such Authority, before King
HENRY the Eight; which his Challenge seemed so preposterous and monstrous,
that all the World stood, and to this day stands, amazed at it, and even our
Puritanes at home, and all the new sects abroad, do abhor and derest it.
And I in this Chapter shall bring such Arguments against it, that I hope, that
even our English protestants, who hitherto have adored it, will be ashamed hence
forth to submitt them selves to so monstrous Authority.

3. My first Arguments shall be drawn from scriptures them selves. For if the
King had any such Authority, then no doubt scripture (which ^s above we have
seen, so often inculcateth Princes Authority in matters temporal) would
never have kept silent this Ecclesiastical power, if they had had any such,
this being the greater, and more eminent: but scripture never gives Princes
this Authority, never commands Christians to obey them in Ecclesiastical
matters, but rather gives that Authority to Apostles, Bishops, and Pastors,
and Commands obedience in this kind to them, not to Princes; ergo Princes
have no Authority to command in Ecclesiastical matters. The Minor
Proposition, in which only consists the difficulty, I prove out of those
places of Scripture, which above I have alleged, and here will bring in
again, yet to another purpose. For to S. PETER, no Temporal Prince, but an
Apostle, and Pastor, was promised the headship of the Church, and consequently
the soueraintie and supreme power of the Church. Tues Petrus, and super hane
Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam. Mat. ^6.
The Hebrew hath^ Thou art a Rock, and upon this Rock will I build my Church.
And seeing that to PETER it was said, Thou art a Rock; to him also, and not to
CHRIST the Chief and independent Rock, nor to the faith of Christ, as our
Adversaries would have it, it must needs be said, and upon this Rock will I
build my Church, because the Relative, This, has relation to him, that was
spoken of imediatly before, which was only PETER, not CHRIST, nor the faith of
CHRIST; and therefore the Rock, and foundation of the Church and Head being all
one, it follows that PETER, and consequently the Pope his successor (for the
Church after PETER'S time, had as much need, or rather more, of a Head and
Pastor, as in PETER'S time, and none ever practiced Authority over all the
Church, but the Pope, as all Councels and histories do witness) is the supreme
Head of the Church, and so not every King, no, not any King in his Kingdom.
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists Pastors and Doctors only, CHRIST gave to
govern his Church, (as S. PAVLE says) not Princes: Ephesians. 4. Mat. 18
To Apostles it was said; What soever you shall bind upon earth, shall be
bound also in Heaven; and what soeeuer you shall loose upon earth, shall be
also loosed in heaven: Joan. 20
Never to Princes. To Apostles it was said: Whose sins you shall forgive,
they are forgiven them; and whose you shall retain, they are retained: Never
to Princes. Of Bishops and Priests it was said: Neb. 13.
Obey your Prelates, and be subject to them; for they watch, as being to render
account for your souls: of Princes never; rather they by these words are
commanded, also to obey. Act. 20.
To Bishops it was said. Take heed^ to your selves, and the whole flock,
wherein the Holy Ghost has placed you Bishops to rule the Church, which he
has purchased with his own blood, to Princes never. To a Bishop it was said:
Tit. 1.
For this cause I left thee in CRETE, that thou thouldst reform the things,
that are wanting, and thouldst order Priests by Cities, as I also appointed
thee; To Princes never.

4. I will not deny but that Princes are to assist the Church by sword,
scepter, and Power, and to punnish at the Churches direction, not only Theefes
and murderers, but also Heretics as CONSTANTINE and other Emperors did, I
grant that they are nourcing Fathers, Isay. 49.
but no Superiors to the Church. And therefore if we read over both the old and
new Testament, we shall never find, that any King, as King, meddled in the
government of Ecclesiastical persons and matters.

5. Bilson when he was VVardon of Winchester, wrote a book called The True
Difference betwixt Christian subjection and Unchristian Rebellion: in which he
strives, but in vain, to prove that the Prince has supreme Authority in
causes Ecclesiastical, and government of the Church. And to prove this, he
cites Nabuchodonosor, Darius, Par. 2. page 191
the King of Niniue, Moses, Iosue, David, Solomon, Asa, Iosaphat, Ezechias,
Manasses, Josias, and Nehemias, as though they had governed the Ecclesiastical
affairs of the Synagogue. In Tortura Torti pa. 363.
So does also D. ANDREWS. But if I should grant them that all these were by
God appointed Rulers of the Synagogue; yet could it not thence be inferred that
Princes are to govern the Church of Christ. For first the Synagogue was more
terrene and Less perfect then the Church; and so as their sacrifices and
Priests were terrene in respect of ours, so God might have given them terrene
Princes for their chief Ecclesiastical superiors, which manner of government
is not to be made a pattern for the government of the Church of CHRIST, this
being a more perfect common wealth, more spiritual, governed by more
spiritual Pastors, enriched with a more spiritual sacrifice and Sacraments.
Secondly, if Princes then were rulers of the Synagogue, it was by Gods
special and Indiciall law, and seeing the Judicial and Ceremonial laws are
abrogated, they can not bind Christians; or if Bilson will needs have it, that
Christian Princes must now govern the Church, because they then ruled the
Synagogue, one might infer that the Ministers of England must be circumcized,
and must offer Caldes, because then the Jewish Priests did so. Wherefore that
law as Ceremonial and Judicial, being abrogated, we must look to the new
law; in which not withstanding there is no one Text or example, that gives
Princes the rule of the Church. Thirdly I answer that none of all the Kings
alleged by D. Bilson and D. Andrews did govern the Synagogue in
Ecclesiastical matters, but did only assist the priests, that governed and
punnished Malefactors and transgressors of the law, Suarez.
according to the prescript of the law interpreted by the Priests, as Suarez in
his answer to our sovereign has learnedlie declared.

6. The second argument against Princes spiritual supremacy shall be this. If
a Prince has authority to govern the Church of his Kingdom, either he has
it preciselie because he is a King, or because he is a Christian King; but by
neither of these ways he has it; ergo by no way he has it. Not because he is
a King; for Kingly power only medleth with temporal and humane matters, and
therefore Kings are called Humanae Creaturae, 1. Petri. 2.
humane creatures, and they have their authority from the people in manner
before said, which people can give no Ecclesiastical power, that being
spiritual and supernatural; yea if Kings as Kings had this Authority, then
the Kings which reigned in the Apostles time, though Infidels, should have
been Heads of the Church, although they were no members at all, and
consequently NERO should have been Head of the Church, and all the Apostles,
and the sheep of Christ had been committed to a Ravening Wolf; which though
it be most absurd to imagine, yet TOMSOM, as BECANVS in his book entitled the
English Jar recites, is not ashamed to avouch, it saying: Omnes Principes
etiam Pagani obiectiue habent supremam potestatem in omnes omnino personas
suorum subditorum, generatim in res ipsas, sieve ciuiles sunt, sieve sacrae, All
Princes, even Paganes, obiectiuelie have supreme Authority over all the
persons of their subjects, and generally over their goods, whether they be
Civil or holy. Not because he is a Christian King, because Baptism, by which
he is made a Christian and member of the Church, gives the King no new power,
no more then it does to others that are baptized: And therefore if before
Baptism he be no Head of the Church, neither is he after Baptism, rather
Baptism, as above we have seen, makes him a subject to the Church, whereas
before he was not, and only gives him a new charge to obey, serve, and assist
the Church. VVherby it may appear how fowlie Doctor ANDREWS was deceived when
he said, That an Ethnic King, when he becomes a Christian, gains and
gets a new right and power over the Church and Spiritual matters: for these
are his words: Quin Rex quiuis, Tortura Torti page 40.
cum de Ethnico Christianus fit, non perdit terrenum ius, sed acquirit ius
nouum in bonis Ecclesiae spiritualibus. Yea every King when of an Ethnike he
becomes Christian, does not loose his terrene right, but gets a new right
in the spiritual goods of the Church. And Citing Bellarmine he says: Omnia
haec Dominus tuus totidem verbis; All those things thy Master (Bellarmin) in so
many words affirms: Bollar. lib. 5. de Pont. ca. 2. and 3.
as though Bellarmine had affirmed that a Pagan King were Head of the Church,
and had right and power in spiritual matters, whereas Bellarmine is too
learned to make so gross an error, and only affirms That Pagan Kings, are
true Princes and Lords of their Countries.

7. But perchance they will say that the Prince has this Authority by a
special Grant from God him self. This they may say, but with how little
reason, may appear by that, which already I have handled in this Chapter; for
I have proved out of scripture, that Christ gave all Authority concerning the
government of the Church to his Apostles and their successors, and not any at
all to Kings and Princes. Which because our state pleasers perceived well
enough, they are enforced to play the Jews, and to allege examples out of the
old law, as D. Bilson and D. ANDREWS do, which examples not witstanding, as I
have showed, do not firt their purpose; for they knew, and D. ANDREWS
confesses (saying, Exemplum inde nobis snmendum est, Tortura Torti pa. 363.
cum in Testaemento nouo nullum habeamus. Thence we must take an example,
since in the new Testament we have none) that there is not one text or example
in the new Testament that gives Princes any power over the Church, but rather
gives it from them unto the Pastors.

8. Thirdly if Princes were supreme Commanders in Ecclefiasticall matters, and
government of the Church, the government of the Church should not be Monarchiall
which yet is the best government, Aristo^. l. 8. Eth c. 1^ Plato in Poli.
Senec. lib. 2. de Benef. Plut. in opusc. ^a de re Homer. 2. Iliad. Iustorat. ad
gent. Athan. orat. ad Idola. Gypr. lib. de vanit. Idoloru^. Mat. 16. Joan. 21.
as Aristocle with all the best Philosophers, and ancient Fathers do affirm,
and was in deed chosen by Christ for his Church, as the writers of this time
prove out of scripture, and especially out of those words spoken to S.
Peter. Thou art Peter and on this Rock, will I build my Church; and those
also: Pafce oues meas, seed my sheep, but rather. if Kings were every one
head of the Church in their Kingdoms, the government of the Church, should be
Aristocraticall, because the Church should be governed by diverse Princes which
were most inconvenient in the Church, and subject to schisms and tumultes. For
if every King be supreme Head in his Kingdom, when a General Council should
be called (as his Majesty of England desires) I demand who should call it?
The Emperor? the Kings of England, Spain, and France, though they give him
precedence in place and honor, yet they pretend by prescription and other
Titles to be quite exempt from him, and subject to none in temporal matters;
And seeing that this supremacy in Ecclesiastical matters, either is not
distinguished from their Regal Authority, or is necessarily annexed unto it,
as they refuse to be subject in temporal matters, so might they in
Ecclesiastical. The King of England? Why he rather then the King of France?
The King of France? why he rather then any of the others? Yea if these Kings
pretend not to be subject to the Emperor, much more may they claim exemption
from one anotherr.

9. If any answer that by Common consent they may either choose one to call
the rest, or being all equal, they may meet altogether in one; neither will
this serve: For as for the first means, it is morally impossible, because
Kings, who have high aspiring minds, would never be drawn to subject them
selves to any, and so whilst every one would be Chief, none should be Chief.
The second means is as impossible for first, where shall they meet? Certes no
King will easily leave his Kingdom; and so every one would be desirous to
have the Council in his Country, yea every one would refuse to have such a
meeting in his Kingdom for fear of danger. But suppose they meet, when they
are met how shall they agree, especially they being commonly of diverse
Religions? for if a King, in that he is a King, is to judge in matters of the
Church, every King has right to be of this Council, and so the Turk, the
Persian, the Muscouite, shall have place in this Council. If you say that not
every King, but only Christian Kings are Heads of the Church in their
Kingdoms; then at least Catholic, Lutheran, and Caluinian Kings, must be of
the Council; and how shall these agree, who shall moderat, seeing there is no
more reason of one then another? If you say that Bishops must be the Men, that
must make Decrees, and Canons, and conclude all in this Council; This they
cannot do without Kings, if every King be supreme Head in their Country: and
therefore it was enacted accordingly in the Parliament holden by King HENRY the
Eight, in the twenty sixth year of his reign, That he should be reputed
supreme Head of the Church of England, and should have all the honors,
Authorities, and commodities belonging there unto; Amongst which honors the
Principal, and that which is necessarily annexed unto the Headship of the
Church is to call Councels, and to sit as Chief Judge in them. See Poulton.
^n his Abridgeme^t of the statutes. Sander. de Schis. Angl.
And Queen ELIZABETH had also granted unto her by a Parliament in the first
year of her reign, all power for the correction and reformation of the
Clergy, for the judgments and punishments of schisms and heresies, for
nominating of Bishops, and for calling of Synods, and that with such ample
Authority, that nothing should be decreed in any Synod with in the Realm,
without express license, and consent of the Queen: And if the Bishops in the
Council agree not, as I see not how they can, if there be no one amongst them,
that can command, who shall be the man, that shall take up the matter amongst
them? If you say the Kings, I demand, who shall bear the sway amongst them?
And so to make Kings Heads of the Church in their Kingdoms, is to hinder all
General Councels, which yet heretofore have been so often assembled by the
Authority of the Pope, to the great profit, peace, and unity of the Church.

10. Fourthlie, if Princes in that they are Princes, or Christian Princes, were
Heads of the Church in their Realm, then Children might be Heads of the
Church, yea and women also, for they are capable of Regal Authority, whereas
not withstanding the Wiseman pronounces a vae and curse to the land whose King
is a Child. Ecclesiastes 10.
And much more woe it were to a Church, whose head is a Child. Surely S. PAVL,
1. Cor. 14
that commands women to be silent in the Church, would never have permitted
such to govern the Church. And yet after King HENRY had arrogated this
monstrous power (in a King) to make it ridiculous to the world, God permitted
that next after him a Child came to be King, and the Head of the Church of
England, and next but one after the Child, a woman succeeded also in the like
authority.

11. Fiftlie, to make enerie King supreme Head of the Church in his Kingdom,
destroys the unity of the Church, for whereas there are three especial, and
essential Unities in the Church, to wit, Unity of Head and one government,
Unity of one faith, Unity of the same external profession and worship of God
by the same rites and Sacraments; If we receive every Prince in his Realm
for Head of the Church, these three Unities can not long be conserved. For as
for the first Unity, though our Adversaries would say, that it may well be
conserved in CHRIST, who is the principal, and only principal, and absolute
Head; yet because CHRIST is now ascended to his Father, and conuerseth no more
visibly amongst us, besides him the Church, which is a Visible Congregation and
body, stands in need of a visible Head, else should she be visibly
headless and imperfect. And therefore as scripture has declared CHRIST for our
sovereign and invisible head: Joan. 10
Vnum ouile, vnus Pastor. One fould, Ephesians. 1.
one Pastor. And again: Ipsum dedit caput supra omnem Ecclesiam. God the
Father made him head over all the Church, which is his body: So does
scripture, and CHRIST him self in scripture, point out another vnderhead, and
visible Pastor, Mat. 16.
saying: Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church; and
again. Pas^e oues meas* feed my sheep, that is all Christians; Joan. 21
and so PETER was in his time, and his successor the Pope, now is Chief Head
and visible pastor over all Christians, and consequently over all Bishops,
even in a General Council, unless they will deny them selves to be the
sheep of Christ. And this Unity was necessary to conserve the other Unities
of faith, and eternal profession and worship of God by the same Sacraments.
For diverse visible Heads would not so easily agree amongst them selves, it
being a natural thing for me^, in equal authority, to strive to draw all to
their party. Whereupon S. CIPRIAN says: Cypria. lib. 4. ep. 9. lib. 1. epist.
8. lib. de unit. Eccl.
That the Church is Plebs suo sacerdoti adunata. The people united to their
Priest. And that Non aliunde natae sunt haereses, aut orta schismata, nisi quod
vni sacerdoti Dei ab vniuersa fraternitate non obtemperetur. Not from any other
source heresies or schisms are risen, then for that obedience is not given to
one Priest of all the fraternity. For why? Exordium ab vno proficiscitur, and
Primatus Petro datur, vt vna Christi Ecclesia, and vna Cathedra monstretur. The
beginning is taken from one, and the Primacie is given to PETER, that one
Church and one chair may be showed. Cypr. ep. ad Iubaianu^. Hier. lib. 2.
contra Iouin.
And in his Epistle to Iubaianus: Ecclesia, quae vna est, super vnum, qui
Claues accepit, voce Domini fundata est. The Church which is one, is by the
voice of our Lord founded upon one, who has received the Keys. And S. HIEROME
says; Inter duodecim vnus eligitur, vt capite constituto, schismatis tollatur
occasio. Amongst twelve one is chosen, that the Head being appointed, the
occasion of schism may be taken away. But if we admit every King as Head of
the Church in his Kingdom, we shall not have one visible Head, but many, and
those also very diverse. For as Kings claim supremacy in causes
Ecclesiastical, because they are supreme Princes, for the same reason may the
senate in Venice, Genua, and Geneua challenge the same Authority: Whence
follows, that unity in faith and Sacraments under so diverse Heads, cannot
any long time be retained; but we should have as many Religions, as Kings, and
as many diverse and independent Churches and Kingdoms for one King will not
depend either for him self, or his people of an other.

12. This division we see already proceeds from these diverse Heads. Have we
not seen how Religion in England has changed with our Kings, since they
challenged supremacy of our Church? King HENRY the Eight in the six and
twentieth year of his Reign, in the Parliament holden at Westminster, the
third of November 1534. enacted that the King should be reputed the only
supreme Head in earth of the Church of England, and should have as well the Title
and style, as all honors, authorities, and commodities belonging thereunto, and
all power also to redress all Heresies, errors, and abuses in the same: and
the year before also, the fiftenth of January, the King and Parliament decreed.
That no Appeals should be made to Rome, no Annates or Impositions should be
paid to the Bishop of Rome, no suits should be made to him, for lice^re or
dispensation. And yet in the Parlam^et holden at Westminster anno Domini 1554.
the first and second year of King PHILIP and Queen MARIE, obedience was
restored to the Church of Rome, and all statutes repealed, which derogated to
the Authority and honor of the Sea Apostolic, and the Title of the Kings
supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical was rejected. After this notwithstanding
was the same Authority taken again by Queen ELIZABETH in the Parliament Anno
Domini 1558. Anno 1. regni Elizab die 13. Ian.
Likewise in the Parliament holden by King HENRY the Eight in the one and
thirtith year of his reign, and eight and twentieth of April, and in the year
of our Lord 1537. these six Articles were enacted: The Six Articles.
The Real presence of the true and natural Body and blood of Christ under
the forms of bread and wine, without the substance of bread and wine. 2. That
Communion under both kinds, is not necessary for the people. 3. That Priests
cannot marry after Priesthood. 4. That Religious after their vows cannot
marry. 5. That Private Masses are according to Gods law, and to be allowed 6.
That Auricular Confession is expedient, and necessary. And yet this statute
was qualified and repealed by EDWARD the sixth his son, and as yet a Child, in
the year of our Lord 1547. 4. Nouemb. and first year of his reign: After
that again the self same six Articles were received and confirmed in Queen
MARY'S reign in the first Parliament an. Domini 1553. 24. October. and in another
an. Domini 1554. Likewise King HENRY the Eight, in the Parliament holden the
22. of January and 34. of his reign in the year of our Lord 1542. condemned
Tindals Translation of the Bible, and all books written against the Blessed
Sacrament, and forbad the Bible to be redd in English in any Church, which
statutes were repealed by King EDWARD at Westminster an 1. Edu. 6. Domini
1547. And yet the former statute of King HENRY, was renewed by Queen MARIE in
the first year of her reign an. Domini 1553. and repealed again by Queen
ELIZABETH in the first year of her reign. So that if Kings be heads of the
Church, and have supreme Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, we shall have as many
Religions almost, as Kings. And even as King HBNRIE the Eight after his
usurpation of the supremacy, changed his wives, and made his marriages lawful
and unlawful, his children legitimat and illegitimat at his pleasure, and by
Authority also of the Parliament, which durst not gainesaie; so every King
shall have authority to change religion, and must be obeyed as the only
supreme Head in earth of the Church For as King HENRY the Eight, and his young
Son King EDWARD, and his Daughter Queen ELIZABETH challenged Authority to
redress errors, and correct heresies, to give validity to all
Ecclesiastical laws and Synodes; as King HENRY made it Heresy to deny the
Real Presence, so another King of England, or of another Kingdom, may decree
the contrary. As King HENRY forbad Priests to marry; so another King will
permit them to marry. As King HENRY commanded the Bibles to be read, and
divine service to be said, and song in Latin; so another will like better of
the vulgar tongue of his own Country: and if you say, that the King is tied
to the word of God, every one of them will say, that they follow the word of
God, having the Authority to judge of heresies, and consequently of the true
meaning of the word of God.

3. Sixtlie, if Princes were Heads of the Church, a ridiculous consequence, and
of which even the Kings and Queens of England have been ashamed, would
follow; to wit, that they may preach, minister Sacraments, excommunicate, call
Councels and sit as judges in them etc. For if the Prince be supreme head, he
is also supreme Pastor of the Church of his Kingdom; for Head and Pastor in
this kind is all one. In Tortura Torti.
And this D. ANDREWS grants and proves by the example of DAVID, to whom
the people said, That God had said unto him: Tu pafces populum meum Israel. 2.
Reg. 5
Thou shall feed my people of Israel. VVheras there only mention is of a
Temporal Pastor, government, and feeding as appears by the words following:
Tu eris Dux super Israel. Thou shall be Captain over Israel. Genesis 45.
And in this sense JOSEPH said: Ego te pascam. I will feed thee, meaning his
father JACOB. So that if the Prince be Head of the Church, he is Pastor; but
it pertains to the office of a Pastor to govern his sheep by laws, to
feed them with bread of the word of God, Matt. 4.
by which the soul lives, and the Sacraments, to sever an infected sheep
from the flock, by excommunication, least it infect the whole; and
consequently, if the King be supreme head, he may make Ecclesiastical laws,
propose the word of God by preaching, and true interpretation of it in
Councels, separate heretics from the sheepefould by excommunication, least
they pervert others. Yea, if the Prince be supreme Head of the Church, all
Authority of preaching, administration of Sacraments, calling Councels,
judging, and defining in them, collation of Benefices, giving of orders,
Jurisdictions, absoluing dispensing, excommunicating proceeds from him.
Wherefore King HENRY the Eight, as he challenged the Title of supreme Head,
so he challenged almost all this Authority, as we have seen. And to Queen
ELIZABETH in the first Parliament, and first year of her reign, the like
authority was granted. Vide Sander. de Schis. Angl. fol. 149.150.151 See also
Poultons Abbridgement of the statutes.
For in that Parliament it was decreed, that she, her heirs, and successors
should have all priueledges, preeminences, prerogatives, and spiritual
superiorities, which may be exercised, or had of any power, or man
Ecclesiastical: That she, and her successors, should have all power of
nominating and substituting whom she will to correct heresies, schisms,
abuses, and to use all authority, which an Ecclesiastical Magistrate may do.
There also it was decreed, that no Synod should be called, but by the Princes
letters and commandment, and that a Bishop should not be nominated or elected
by any other, then the Princes Authority, nor should exercise any
Jurisdiction, but at the Queens pleasure, nor otherwise then by Authority
from her Regal Majesty. And hence it is, that the Prince writes to the
Archbishop in this manner: For as much as all Jurisdiction, as well
Ecclesiastical, as secular, proceeds from Kingly power, as from the Head;
we give thee Power to promote by these presents to holy Orders etc. And the
Archbishop of Canterbury uses this style: We N. by the Divine permission
Archbishop and Primat of England authorized sufficiently by the Kings or
Queens Majesty etc. This argues that in England all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to excommunicare, absolve, to preach, and minister Sacraments, to
call Synodes, to decree in them, to make Ecclesiastical laws etc. proceeds
from the Prince, as from the Head and fountain; and consequently seeing that
what Authority the Prince gives to others, he has him self, he may
excommunicate, make Ecclesiastical laws, call Councels, sit as supreme Judge
in them, as others by his Authority do. And seeing he can give to others
Jurisdiction to give Orders, he may also minister Sacraments, preach, and
teach; for this Authority he gives to others. And therefore as in all Common
wealths, the Prince can do those things, which his inferior Officers do,
though it be not always so convenient; so, if all Ecclesiastical power
proceeds from the King as from the Head and fountain, look what the Bishops
and Ministers can do by Authority received from him, that he also him self may
do; which yet is so ridiculous, that our Princes hitherto have been ashamed of
many of those offices; and as we shall see anon, even the Protestants of
England, when they are pressed, are ashamed of this monstrous Authority.

14. Seuenthlie if Christian Kings (for few of our Adversaries dare say that
Pagan Kings have Ecclesiastical Authority) be heads of the Church; it
follows that till CONSTANTINE, or PHILIP, the first Christian Emperors, the
Church was without a head for three hundred years. If you say that S. PETER,
and his successors were heads till CONSTANTINE, then I demand, who deposed
Pope SYLVESTER, when CONSTANTINE came to be Christian, and consequently Head?
or if S. SYLVESTER was not deposed, then it follows that there were two Heads
at once, and those not subordinate.

28. Eightlie I prove this, by Kings and Emperors Confessions. And as
towching Kings, we have seen their Confessions in the former Chapter. As for
Emperors, CONSTANTINE (as we have seen) called the Bishops of the Nicen
Council, Ruffinus li. 1. cap. 2. Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita Constant. cap. 24.
his Gods and Judges; and as Eusebius reports he was wont to say to Bishops:
Vos o Episcopi, intra Ecclesiam, ego extra Ecclesiam a Deo Episcopus
constitutus sum. You, o Bishops, in affairs with in the Church, I in matters
without the Church am appointed pointed Bishop by God. Meaning that he was to
be a vigilant Prince, in the government of the Empire, but not to meddle with
Ecclesiastical affairs. And therefore when the Donatists in a matter
pertaininge to the Churches deciding, appealed from a Council of Bishops
holden by Pope MEICHIADES, unto him; Non est ausus (says S. August. epi. 162.
Augustine) Christianus Imperator sic eorum tumultuosas and fallaces quaerelas
suscipere, vt de iudicio Episcoporum, qui Romae sederant, ipse iudicaret. He
durst not so to admit their complaints, as to Judge of the Bishops who in Rome
had sit in Judgment. Yea OPTATVS says, Optat. lib. 1. cont. Parm. circa
finem.
That when he saw they appealed in such a matter unto him, he exclamed: O
rabida furoris audacia, sicut in causis Gentilium fieri solet, appellationem
interposuerunt. O VVood mad audacitie of fury, they have interposed an
Appellation as is wont to be done in the causes of Gentiles. Tortura Tort. pa.
174.
VVheras Doctor ANDREWS says that CONSTANTIN delegated the Bishops to hear
the Donatists cause, I demand whereon he groundeth that? for if he might
delegate, he might have judged of the Bishops sentence, and yet S. AVGVSTIN
says he durst not, And although at last, overcome by their importunity, he
heard them, yet not as Judge, but as an Arbiter. THEODOSIUS the younger sent
Count Candidianu^ to the Council of Ephesus With this caveat, That he should
not meddle in Ecclesiastical matters; because, illicitum est eum, qui non sit
ex ordine sanctissimoram Episcoporum, sese Eccelesiasticis immiscere
tractatibus; It is unlawful for him that is not of the order of most holy
Bishops, to entermeddle him self in Ecclesiastical treaties, and affairs.
But Doctor ANDREWS answers, Tortura Torti pa. 175.
That it is no good Argument to say; A Count can not meddle in Councels, ergo
an Emperor cannot. But he should have remembered that this Count was sent to
supply the Emperors place, and therefore if he, as the Emperors Ambassador,
could not meddle in Councels, neither could the Emperor him self. He should
also have marked the Emperors reason, which was, because it is unlawful for
him, that is not of the order of Bishops, to meddle in Ecclesiastical
affairs; which reason as well excludes the Emperor as the Count, unless
Doctor ANDREWS will make all Kings and Emperors Bishops. VALENTINIAN the
elder said, Sozom. 16 ca. 7. and 2.1.
Sibi, qui vnus e laicorum numero erat, non licere se huiusmodi rebus
interponere: It was not lawful for him, who is one of the layitie, to meddle
in such matters: And although Doctor ANDREWS would expound Zozomen (who
reports this speech of the Emperor) by Nicephorus, Hist. Tri. part. lib. 7.
c. 8.
who reports the Emperor to have said; Mihe negotiis occupato, and
Reipublicae curis distento, res huiusmodi inquirere non facile est; It is no
easy for me, who am busied with businesses, and distracted with the cares of
the Common wealth, to take notice of these matters: as though the Emperor had
authority to meddle in Councels, but was not at leisure; yet the greek word.
(...), with Doctor ANDREWS leave, Tortura Torti page 174.
signifies not facile but, fas, as he may see in BVDAEVS, and consequently
that the Emperor meant that it was not lawful for him to intermeddle in such
matters. And this meaning NICEPHORVS his next words do argue When he says: Vos
autem quibus haec procuratio mandata est: But you to whom this procuration is
committed. The same meaning also do ZOZOMENVS his own words following
insinuat: Et ideo Sacerdotes and Episcopi, quibus haec curae sunt etc. And
therefore Priests and Bishops who have care of these things. So that the
Emperor meant, that he could not only not be at leisure, but also that it was
not lawful for him to meddle in Councels. Yea he was so far from
intermedling in Ecclesiastical matters, that when the Bishops assembled at
Milan, desired him to nominate the Bishop of Milan; he wrote to the Bishops to
choose such a one as to whom (said he) we that govern the Empire may incline
our heads, because, says he, supra nos est talis electio: such an Election
passes our Authority.

16. Ninthlie, This the ancient Fathers have taught, and told even Emperors to
their faces. ATHANASIVS: Epist. ad soli. vita^ agentes.
Si istud est iudicium Episcoporum, quid commune cum eo habet Imperator? etc.
If this belong to the Judgment of Bishops, what has the Emperor to do with
it? And a little after. Quando a condito aeuo auditum est? quando Iudicium
Ecclesiae Authoritatem suam ab Imperatore accepit? aut quando vnquam hoc pro
iudicio agnitum est? Plurima ante haec Synodi fuere, multa Iudicia Ecclesiae
habita sunt. Sed neque Patres istiusmodi res principi persuadere conati sunt,
nec Princeps sein rebus Ecclesiasticis curiosum praebuit. When from the
beginning of the world was it heard, when did the Judgment of the Church take
her Authority from the Emperor? Many Synods before these times have been,
many Judgments of the Church have been given. But neither did the Fathers
persuade the Prince to meddle in those matters, neither was the Prince so
curious as to entermeddle in Ecclesiastical matters. Yea in the same Epistle
he adds: Quis enim videns eum (Constantium) in decernendo, Ibidem.
Principem se facere Episcoporum, and praesidere Ecclesiasticis iudiciis, non
merito dicat, illum eam ipsam Abominationem desolationis esse? For who seeing
him (Constantius) making him self Prince of the Bishops in decerning, and
bearing Authority over Ecclesiastical Judgments, may not worthily say that
he is the Abomination of desolation? And in that very Epistle he often times
calls CONSTANTIVS the Precursour of Antichrist, for arrogating Authority in
Councelles, and over Bishops, and for entermeddling in matters appertaining to
the Church. HOSIVS Cordubensis, Athan. Apol. pro fuga, purum ab initio.
whom Athanasius calls vere Osium, that is, a Saint, and of whom he gives
this commendation: In what Synod was not he the Captain and Ringleader?
Whom did not he by defending the truth draw to his Opinion? What Church does
not keep the monuments of his Presidence? HOSIVS, I say thus highly commended
by S. ATHANASIVS, being urged by Constantius to communicate with the Arrians,
and to subscribe against Athanasius, Athan. epist ad soli. vitam agentes.
wrote unto the Emperor in this manner. Believe me (says he) who may be thy
Grand father, I was in the COUNCIL of SARDIS, when thou and thy Blessed
brother CONSTANS called us thither etc. What Bishop there, was banished? or
when did he entermeddle him self in Ecclesiastical Judgments? And then he
gives the Emperor this wholesome Counsel, worthy to be followed of all
Princes: Desine, quaeso, and memineris te mortalem esse, etc. Leave of, I pray
thee, and remember, that thou art a mortal man. Fear the day of Judgment:
Keep thy self pure for that day. Do not entermeddle thy self in
Ecclesiastical matters, nor do thou command us in this kind, but rather
learn those things of us. God to thee has committed the Empire, to us he
has given the charge of things belonging to the Church: and as he who with
malign looks carpes at thy Empire, contradicts the divine Ordinance; so do
thou take heed, least drawing that which appertains to the Church unto thy
self, thou be made guilty of a great crime, Give, it is said, to Gaesar what
belongs to Caesar, and what appertains to God, to God. Wherefore neither is
it lawful for us to hold the Empire in earth, neither have thou, O Emperor,
power over the sacrifices and holyes. Ambros. lib. 5. op. 32. ad Valens.
These things I write for the care I have of thy Salvation etc. S. AMBROSE
has many notable sentences uttered by him with liberty and plainness worthy
such a Prelat. Writing to VALENTINIAN the younger, who by the Instigation of
his mother, urged him to a disputation or conference in matters of Religion in
the Consistory before the Emperor, he refused, because the Emperor had
nothing to do in such matters: neither (says he to Valentinian the younger)
ought any to judge me contumacious, seeing that I affirm that only, which thy
Father of August Memory, did not only answer by speech, but also by his laws
decreed, to wit, In causa fidei vel Ecclesiastici alicuius ordinis, eum
iudicare debere, qui nec munere impar sit, nec iure dissimilis. Haec enim verba
rescripti sunt. Hoc est, sacerdotes de sacerdotibus voluit iudicare. That in a
cause belonging to faith, or to Ecclesiastical order, he should give
Judgment, who is neither inseriour in office, nor in Right unlike. For these
are the words of the Rescript: That is, he would have Priests to Judge Priests.
And a little after: Quando audisti ( Clementissime Imperator) in causa fidei
Laicos de Episcopo iudicasse? etc. When did thou hear, o most Clement
Emperor, that laymen Judged a Bishop in a cause of faith? and again: Pater
tuus Deo fauente vir maturioris aeui dicebat: Non est meum iudicare inter
Episcopos, etc. Thy Father, who by Gods favor was a man of riper age, said: It
is not my office to Judge between Bishops; thy Clemency says; I must Judge,
And he being baptized in Christ, thought him self unable to bear such a
weight of Judgment; thy Clemency, of whom the Sacraments are yet to be
deserved, Orat. in Auxent. quae sequitur epist. citatam.
arrogateth judgment in a matter of faith, when as thou know not the
mystieries of faith. And yet again to the same purpose he adds: Soluimus
quae sunt Caesaris Caesari; and quae sunt Dei Deo etc. We have paid to Caesar
what was Caesar's. Tribute is Caesar's, it is not denied: the Church is Gods,
therefore it must not be given to Caesar; because the Temple can be no right of
Caesar's. No man can deny, but that this is spoken with Caesar's honor. For what
more honorable, then for the Emperor to be called the son of the Church?
Which when it is said, it is said without sin, it is said with grace.
Imperator enim bonus intra Ecclesiam, non supra Ecclesiam est: for a good
Emperor is within the Church, not above the Church. The like liberty of
speech he uses also in an Epistle to his sister Marcellina: Ambr li. 5. cit.
ep. 33. ad Marcellinam sororem.
Mandatur denique; Trade Basilicam etc. To be brief, the Emperors command
is; Deliver up the Church. I answer, it is neither lawful for me to deliver
it, nor expedient for thee. O Emperor, to take it. Thou can by no law spoil
or ransake the house of any private man; and think thou that the house of God
may by thee be destroyed and ruinated? It is alleged that to the Emperor all
things are lawful, all things are his. I answer, do not (o Emperor) charge
thy self, as to think that thou have Imperial right over divine things. Do
not extol thy self, but if thou will raygne long, be subject to God. It is
written: Mat. 22
What is Gods, to God; what is Caesar's, to Caesar. To the Emperor Palaces do
belong, to the Priests Churches. To thee is committed the care and charge of
public walls, not of those that be holy. If S. AMBROSE would not yield a
Church or Chapel to the Emperors disposition; would he, if he had lived in
King HENRY the Eight his time, and in England, have permitted him to seize
upon all Abbayes, Abbay lands, and Churches belonging unto them? Or would he,
or S. ATHANASIVS, or HOSIVS, have permitted him to sit in Parliament as supreme
Judge in matters, not only temporal, but Ecclesiastical? or if they had seen
Cromwell appointed King Henry the Eights Vicaire General in Spiritual
causes, taking place above all the Bishops and Archbishops in their
Convocation, would not ATHANASIVS have called it the Abomination of desolation?

14. Bilson in his Difference pa. 174. Andr. in Tortura Tortipa. 169. Field li.
5. de Eccles. cap. 53.
To this Argument Doctor BILSON, Doctor ANDREWS, and Doctor FIELD answer,
that Constantius and Valentinian the younger, were reprehended by these
Fathers, not for meddling in Councels and Ecclesiastical affairs, but for
tyranizing over Bishops, and for partial and unjust dealing. But if these
Fathers had mea^t no otherwise, they would not so absolutely have reprehended
meddling in Ecclesiastical matters, but would only have inueighed against the
abuses. For if a Pope, who is in deed Head of the Church, should abuse his
Authority in Councels or Ecclesiastical Judgments; though even a Catholic,
who takes him for supreme Head, might reprehend the abuse, Athan. supra.
yet he could not say to him as ATHANASIVS did to Constantius: If this be the
Judgment of Bishops, what has the Pope to do with it? Nor could he say to the
Pope, as he did to the Emperor: When was it ever heard from the beginning of
the world? when did the Judgment of the Church take Authority from the Pope?
Neither could he have said to the Pope, Hosius supra.
as HOSIVS said to the same Constantius: When was the Emperor present (to wit
as Judge, for as Protector and hearer, he knew and saw CONSTANTIN the Great
present in the Council of Nice) in Ecclesiastical Judgments? Neither could he
have said to the Pope, as the same HOSIVS says to Constantius: Do not
intermeddle in Ecclestasticall businesses; nor do thou command us in this kind,
but rather learn these things of us. Much less could those words of S.
AMBROSE, Ambros. supra.
which he so boldly spoke to Valentinian, have been suitable to the Pope, or
any supreme Head Ecclesiastical: When did thou hear, o most Clement
Emperor, (Pope) that any of the laity (Clergy) Judged Bishops in a cause of
faith? Much less could these other words of S. AMBROSE have been fitting a
Pope or any supreme head Ecclesiastical: A good Emperor (Pope) is in the
Church, not above the Church. Nor could S. AMBROSE have denied so peremptorily
to deliver a Church or Chapel to the Emperor, if he had deemed him supreme
head of the Church: much less could he have alleged that reason of his
denial: To the Emperor Palaces appertain, to the Priest Churches: for if
the King be supreme Head of the Church, then Churches pertain to him as well
as Palaces.

15. But let us hear another Father S. Chrysostom ho. 4. de verbis Isaiae. 2.
Paral. 26.
CHRYSOSTOM; pondering the audacious fact of King OZIAS (who in the pride of
his power, victories, and former virtues, arrogated to him self the Priests
office) has these words: Rex cum esset, Sacerdotij Principatum vsurpat. Volo,
inquit, adolere incensum, quia iustus sum. Sed mane intra terminos tuos; alij
sunt termini Regni; alij termini Sacerdotij. Being a King, he usurps the
power of Priesthood. I will (says he) offer incense, because I am just. But
stay within thy limits. Others are the bounds of the Kingdom, others of the
Priesthood. If then the King has his limits prefixed, and contained within the
Kingdom, it follows that he cannot intermeddle him self as a superior in
Eccles^asticall causes, but he shall pass his limits. The same Father in his
next Homely has these words, Chrysostom. hom. 5. de verbis Isaiae.
which are worthy the marking: Quanquam nobis admirandus videatur Thronus
Regius ob gemmas affixas, and aurum quo obcinctus est, tamen rerum terrenarum
administrationem sortitus est, nec vltra potestatem hanc praeterea quicquam
habet Authoritatis. Verum sacerdoti Thronus in Coelis collocatus est, and de
coelestibus negotiis pronunciandi habet potestatem. Although the Kings Throne
seems to us worthy to be admired for the precious stones, wherewith it is
besett, and the gould, wherewith it is covered, yet the King has only the
administration of terrene things, neither has he beyond this power, any
further Authority. But to the Priest a throne is placed in Heaven, and he has
power to pronounce sentence of heavenly businesses and affairs appertaining
unto heaven.

16. Tenthlie, I prove this verity by the Arguments wherewith in the former
Chapter I have proved that Kings Christian, by baptism are made subjects of
the Church, as much as is the lowest Christian; and that not only Popes, but
inferior Bishops have challenged superiority over them; which also Princes
from the beginning have ever acknowledged. For if Princes in matters
Ecclesiastical be subjects to Bishops and especially to the Chief Bishop,
they can not in that kind be heads and superiors to Bishops.

17. Lastly, I prove this by out Adversaries confession, which is an argument
ad hominem of no little force, because none is presumed to lie against him
self. Calu. in cap. 7. Amos.
CALVIN pronounces thus of HENRY the eight his supremacy: Qui initio
tantopere extulerunt HENRICVM Regem Angliae, certe fuerunt homines
inconsiderrti: dederuut enim ills summam rerum omnium potestatem, and hoc me
grauiter semper vulnerauit. Erant enim blasphemi, cum vocarent eum Summum Caput
Ecclesiae sub Christo. They who in the beginning did so much extol HENRY (the
Eight) King of England, were men inconsiderate, for they gave him supreme power
of all things, and this did always much aggreue me. For they were
Blasphemous, when they called him supreaine Head of the Church under Christ.
This was the opinion of CALVIN, which is not to be contemned of our
Protestants, who follow him as an Oracle in other, and those very many
points. And to him have subscribed our Puritans in England, and the Brethren of
Heluetia, Zurich, Berne, Geneua, Polonia, Hungary, and Scotland, who all deny
this supremacy of Kings in Ecclesiastical causes. Yea our Protestants them
selves, whilst they seek to avoid the absurdities, which above I have produced
against this supremacy, and which Catholics have objected, do in effect
despoile the King of all such Authority.

19. Becanus in Dissid. Angl.
For first, as BBCANVS has told them, they are not agreed whether his
Authority should be called Primacie, or Supremacy: nor whether he should be
styled Primate, or Sovereign, Salclebr. page 140. D. And. in Tort. page 90.
Tomson page 33.
Head, or Governor. SALCLEBRIDGE calls the King Primate of the Church of
England: Doctor ANDREWS calls his Authority Primacie; and yet TOMSON will
not have this authority called Primacie, but Supremacy, because the former
word argues a power Ecclesiastical, and of the same order with that, which
Prelates of the Church have; the last word he says, signifies not so much.
And again he will not have it called Spiritual Authority, but Authority in
respect of Spiritual things; Tomson. page 31. Idem page 95. Salcl. page 305
and he adds that the King governs Ecclesiastical things, but not
Ecclesiastically. And yet SALCLEBRIDGE says, that Kings anointed with sacred
oil (what will he then say of Kings that are not anointed?) are capable of
Spiritual Jurisdiction. And whereas at the first by the Parliament anno Domini
1543 in the year 35. of HENRY the eight, it was decre^d, That the King should
be called supreme head of the Church, Poulton in his statute Tooker. page 3.
Burhill. page 133.
and that also under pain of high Treason; yet now TOOKER, and BVRHILL will
not have the King called head of the Church. And so in deed Queen ELIZABETH in
the First Parliament, chose rather to be Gouernesse of the Church, then Head.

20. And as these men vary in the name, so do they in the Power and thing it
self. TOOKER says, The King has and can give, Tooker page 305. Salclebr. pa.
140.
and take away all Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in the outward court.
SALCLEBRIDGE says, the King can dispense in plurality of benefices, D. And.
apud Tooker pa. 305. Bur. pa. 234. Salcl. pa. 121. Took. page 36. Bur. page
137. and 242. Took. page 15. D. And. page 151.
and can license a Bastard to take holy orders. D. ANDREWS says, he has
all external Jurisdiction but Censures; yet BYRHIL denies him all
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, both in the inward and outward Court.
SALCLEBRIDGE says the King can give Benefices, create and depose Bishops: and
yet TOOKER says he can only nominate and present. BVRHIL denies the King
Authority to excommunicate, yea he says he may be excommunicated. And the
same does also D. ANDREWS and TOOKER maintain. But what a supreme Head is he,
that can not cut of by excommunication an infecting, and infected member? What
a Pastor, that ca^ not cast out an infected sheep by Excommunication? And if
he can not excommunicate, but rather may be excommunicated, it argues, that he
has a superior, who can exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over him, and
so he is not supreme Head of the Church. Wherefore Catholics, as they
acknowledge the Pope supreme Head, Salcl. page 136.
so they say he can not be excommunicated by any. SALCLEBRIGE says, that it is
clearer then the sun, that Princes have determined controversies of faith in
8. Councels: Tooker page 50. Bilson and caeteri infra citandi.
and yet TOOKER, as also D. BILSON, D. ANDREWS, and D. FIELD (as we shall see
anon) will not have the King called superior in matters of faith.

21. After this doubting and varying, they proceed to a flat denial of the
foresaied supremacy. In Tortura Torti pa. 170.
D. ANDREWS has taken a great part of the Supremacy from the King; for he
confesses, that the Emperor has no Imperial right to divine things. These
be his words: Non est in ea, quae diuina sunt; Imperiale, sed neque Pontificale
ius vllum. There is not (in the King) any Imperial, no nor Pontifical right
over divine things. He adds, that the King has no right to dispose of
Churches, which yet King HENRY the 8. challenged and practiced to the ruin of
ten thousand Churches in one year; For thus says D. ANDREWS: At illa
diuina hic quae tandem? Aedes, Templa, Basilicae, neque vero in ea, quae ita
diuina sunt, Rex noster vllum sibi ius vendicet. Ibid. pa. 171.
And a little after he says: That the King is no Judge in a cause or matter of
faith. And in the next page he seems to affirm and prove out of the
Councels of Constantinople, Pa. 172.
Antioche, and Carthage, that the King is not to be Judge in the causes of
Bishops. And the page next after that; Pa. 173.
In sacraments the King has neither supreme, nor any power at all. And
besides all this he adds, that he cannot excommunicate: Page 151
Nos Principi (says he.) Cenfurae potestatem non facimus. We do not grant
the Prince or King any power to excommunicate etc. D. BILSON says plainly,
that the King has Authority over the Persons of the Church, Bilson in his
true difference, page 171 and 172. par. 2.
but not over the things of the Church, to wit, over the persons of the
Bishops, but not over faith, Sacraments, material Churches, and such like.
Which yet I see not how it can stand together; for if the King be supreme Head,
not only over the Kingdom, but also over the Church, that is, of the persons
of the Church; then as, because he is supreme Head of the Kingdom, he can
command his lay subjects in temporal matters, as to pay Tribute, to obey
temporal laws etc. so if he be supreme Head of the Church, and has
Authority over Clergy men, as Clergy men, he can command even Churchmen in
Ecclesiastical matters, and can call Synodes, determine controversies of faith
in them, enact Ecclesiastical laws, and bestow Ecclesiastical Benefices;
and so he shall have Authority, not only over the persons, but also over the
things of the Church. And therefore as he that should say, that the King for the
necessary good of the Common Wealth, cannot dispose of the Temporalities of
the Realm, should in effect make him no King; so BILSON in saying, that the
King has no Authority over the spiritual things and graces of the Church,
makes him no Head of the Church, nor superior over Church men, as Church men.
For if the King be Head of the persons of the Church, he can command them as
his subjects; And then I demand of BILSON, in what things he can command them?
If in temporal things only, as to pay Tribute, to go to war etc. then is
he King only of the Common wealth, but no Head of the Church: If in Spiritual
things, as administration of Sacraments, decisions of matters of faith in
Councels etc. then has he the administration of spiritual things, and has
authority, not only over the persons, but also over the things of the Church.
But I need not wrest this from BILSON by force of Argument: for he no less
plainly confesses that the King is no Head of the Church. Bilson par. 2, page
240
These are his words. We confess Princes to be supreme Governors, that is,
as we have often told you, supreme bearers of the sword, which was first
ordained from above, to defend and preserve as well godliness and honesty, as
peace and tranquillity amongst men. We give Princes no power to devise or
inue^t new Religions, to alter, or change sacraments, to decide or debate
doubts of faith, to disturb, or infringe the Canons of the Church. Thus he.
VVherby we see first how he derogateth from that authority, which King HENRY
the 8, and Queen ELIZABETH challe^ged, and the former Parliament approved, for
by that authority King HENRY the 8. exiled all the Popes authority, forbad
all Appeals to Rome, contrary to the ancient Canons, disposed of Abbaies, and
Churches without the Popes authority etc. And by the same authority Q.
ELIZABETH changed the sacraments, and all the whole face and hew of religion,
and forbad Councels to be called, or any thing in them to be decided without
her consent. Secondly we may see also herby, how BILSON makes the King no
supreme Head, yea no head at all of the Church, but only a Protector and
defender thereof: which Title all Catholics grant to Kings, acknowledging
that the King is to defend the Church, to assist her by his temporal sword and
Authority, that she be not hindered in calling Councels and administration of
the Church, yea and to punish heretics condemned by her, and delivered up to
secular power. And no more does BILSON grant. And so he denying the Prince to
be head of the Church, and granting him to be only a protector and defender,
is guilty of high treason.

22. D. Field. lib. 5. de Eccles. cap. 53.
Doctor FIELD also in effect denies this authority to the King: for he
distinguishes things merely Spiritual in this manner: Either (says he) the
power in these things is of order, or of jurisdiction; the power of order
consists in preaching the word, in ministering Sacraments, and ordaining
ministers; and in these things, says he, Princes have no Authority at all,
much less supreme authority. The power of jurisdiction stands in prescribing
laws, in hearing, examining, and judging of opinion in matters of says, and
things pertaining to Ecclesiastical order, and Ministry, and due performing
of Gods service; and in these the King can only by direction of the Clergy,
make penal and tempor all laws for the Execution of Bishops laws and Canons.
Thus he. But to omit how aptly D. FIELD annexeth preaching to the power of
order, Vide Sairum lib. 4. de Censuris cap. 16. number. 21
which may be exercised with license of the Bishop, by one that has no Orders
at all; to omit also how he can possibly distinguish the powers of order and
Jurisdiction, he, and his Doctors denying all Caracters, and making ordination
nothing else but a mere deputation to such an office: I auerre that D. FIELD
in this contradicts the former authority, which was given by Parliament to
King HENRY the Eight, and King EDWARD his son, and Queen ELIZABETH his
Daughter, as may appear plainly by the acts of Parliament above alleged;
and he makes the King no Supreme Head of the Church, but only an Assistant,
Protector, and Defendour thereof, as I have showed against D. BILSON.

23. Wherefore the Catholics of England have just cause to complain of severe
dealing toward them; who many of them have been condemned to Premuniries, and
cruel deaths for denying the snpremacie of the Prince in Spiritual causes,
of which notwithstanding the leardnest of the Ministry make such doubt and
question, as we have seen, yea deny it in plain terms. For if that care had
bin had of the Kings Catholic subjects, which their number, antiquity, and
loyalty seemed to require, this question of the Supremacy should have been
better discussed, and more maturely resolved, before the Ministers should have
preached it as necessary to be believed, and before Catholics should have
been so severely handled for denying it, their own Doctors now varying so
much, as we have seen, about the very name, and thing it self, and some of the
leardnest amongst them, denying it as flatly as any Catholic can do.

24. Remember then, O Kings, Princes, and Potentates of the earth, what is
belonging to your so high an office. Psalm. 2. An exhortation to Princes.
Et nunc Reges intelligite, erudimini qui iudicatis terram; And now o Kings
understand your office, inform your selves, o you that judge the earth, what
belongs unto you. You are Judges of the earth and Common wealth, you are not
to meddle with the Church, which is called, Regnum Coelorum, Mat. 13
the Kingdom of Heaven. You are, Isa. 49.
as Esaye calls you, Nurcing Fathers, but no Governors of the Church; you
are Protectours, and Defendours, and Assistants, obliged by scepter and sword
to assist her, and to punish her Rebels at her direction. You are subjects,
no Superiors; sheep, no Pastors; Inferior members, no Heads; and your
greatest honor and safety is to serve, not to rule the Church, to defend, not
to invade her rightes. Harken, o Princes, to that wholesome counsel, which
AZARIAS the High Priest gave to King OZIAS, 2. Paral. 26. Joseph. l. 9. Ant.
cap. 11.
who would be meddling with the Priests office. For when he being puffed up with
pride of heart, took upon him to offer Incense in the Temple, and on the Altar
of Incense, AZARIAS matching his Kingly pride with a Priestlie Zeal, followed
him at his heels, accompanied with fourscore Priests, and followed him (says
S. CHRYSOSTOM) non vt Regem eiecturus, Homi. 5. de verbis Isaiae.
sed vt profugum and ingratum filium expulsurus; not as though he were to cast
out of the Temple a King, but a Runnegate and ungrateful servant, Follows him
as an eagre Mastiffe does the beast to chase him out of his Lord and Masters
house: and as one that took no care of the Kings threatening, feared neither
his Guard, nor his Regalitie, nor his golden crown, nor his Kingly scepter,
nor his stern looks and Majesty, but with an undaunted courage, with a
Constant countenance, and a free voice, that never had learned how to flatter,
2. par. 26
he tells him as plainly, as truly: Non est tui officij, OZIA, vt adoleas
Incensum Domino, sed sacerdotum, hoc est, filiorum Aaron, qui consecrati sunt
ad huiusmodi Ministerium; egredere de sanctuario, ne contempseris, quia non
reputabitur tibi ad gloriam hoc a Domino Deo: It is not thy office, OZIAS, to
burn Incense to our Lord, but of the Priests, that is, of the Children of
Aaron, which are consecrated to this kind of Ministry: Go out of the
sanctuary, contemn not: because this thing shall not be reputed to thee for
glory, of our Lord God. Vide (says S. Chrysostom.) Hom. 4. de verbis Esaiae.
libertatem; vide mentem seruire nesciam; vide linguam coelos attingentem; vide
libertatem incoercibilem; vide hominis Corpus, and angeli mentem; vide humi
ingredientem, and in Caelo versantem? Behold the freeness and plainness of a
Priest; behold a mind that never knew how to be servile; behold a tongue
that is heard to Heaven; behold an unrestrained liberty; behold the body of
a man, the mind of an Angel; behold one treading on the ground, yet
conuersing in heaven. Let me, o Christian Princes, a Priest, not of AARON, but
of Christ, use the like liberty against you, that invade the Churches right,
and arrogate Priestlie dignity. It is not thy office, o King, o Prince, to
meddle in Church matters, or government of the Church, but it is the office of
Priests and Prelates consecrated and ordained for that purpose. Dares a Prince
once offer to meddle in the Churches government? to sit as Judge in her
Synodes? to pronounce sentence in her tribunals? to prescribe service in her
Temples? Depart, o King, whosoever thou art, that art thus hardy, depart out
of the sanctuary, command no more in the Church, if thou will command long and
prosperously in thy Kingdom. Depart, I say, this is no place for thee.
Contemn not my Counsel, least thou pay for thy contempt, and be stricken
with a leprosy in thy forehead for such impudency. It is no glory for thee,
o King, to meddle in Church matters. It is a glory indeed, and as much greater
then the office of a King, at it is more to govern souls then bodies, and to
menage spiritual then temporal affairs: But it is no honor to a King,
neither will it ever turn to the prosperity of him, or his Posterity. All
the Ancient Kings, yea and Emperors also, so mighty in Arms, so rich in
Treasure, so glittering in their Crowns, Scepters, purple, and precious
stones, so fortunate in War, so glorious in Victories, never dreamed of such
ambition, but thought it their honor to be defendours, not rulers of the
Church, subjects in Spiritual matters, no Pastors, Children no Fathers,
Inferior members to the Church, no supreme Heads, and therefore submitted their
scepters to the Pastoral staff, their Crown to the Mitre, their Temporal
swords to the spiritual glaiues, their laws to the Canons, their Kingdoms to
the Church, their persons to the Priests. And shall now a King, and a Christian
King arrogate Ecclesiastical authority? If he will reign long over his
subjects, let him permit the Churches rule, and command over him. If he will
have God for his Father, let him acknowledge the Church for his Mother, him
self a son, no Father, a subject in this kind, no superior.

25. Harken, o King, whosoever thou art that arrogatest Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction or encroachest upon the Churches right and demaines, unto S.
AMBROSE his Counsel, which he gave to VALENTINIAN the younger. When did thou
hear. Supra citatus page 143
O most Clement King, that laymen were Bishops Judges in matters of faith, and
Church? do not trouble thy self, as to think that thou have any Imperial
right in divine matters: Give to God and his Church and Pastors, what is due
to them, if thou will that thy subjects give to thee, what belongs to thee o
King. Give ear o King to grave Hos^vs his speech; Leave of, Ibidem.
O King, to intermeddle in such matters; remember thou art a Mortal Man, a
King, no Priest, and reserve thy self pure and f^^e from suth audacious
attemptes; command not Priests in Ecclesiastical matters, but rather learn
such things of them, o Potentate, o Prince, o King. Nu. 16.
Harken to AZARIAS Counsel, which he gave to King OZIAS: It is not thy office,
o King, to burn Incence to our Lord; or if thou contemn AZARIAS his Counsel,
fear OZIAS his leprosy. If thou will arrogate the Office of AARON, take heed
least with Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, the earth devour thee or the fire
consume thee. 2. Man. 3.
If thou will robb the Treasure of the Temple, take heed the Angel of God
scourge thee not with Heliodorus. 2. Man. 9.
If thou will spoil the Temple and kill the people of God, with Antiochus; If
thou will destroy the Temple, with Nabuchodonosor; use prophanelie the holy
vessels with Balthazar; profane the said Temple with Pompey and others, fear
their infamous and miserable ends, knowing that there was never King nor
Emperor, that rebelled against the Church, or persecuted her, especially since
Christ's time, and since he shed his blood for her, that has not had some
miserable end or other.

26. And to omit those Pagan Persecutours, Nero, Domitian, Dioclesian,
Maximinian, Julian; and others; Zonar. and Cedr. in eius vira. Rhegino lib. 1.
Chron. an. 5.8. Martin. Polon: in Anast.
ANASTASIVS the first Emperor of that name, for resisting the Pope, for
favoring the Arrian heresy, and for disdaining to receive, or to admit to
his sight the legates, whom HORMISDA Pope sent to him, was suddenly with a
Thunderbolt, leueled at him from heaven, stricken to death. Theop. Miscel. lib.
17. Cedre^. ^n Annal. Niceph. lib 18. c. 8. and seqq. and alij omnes.
MAVRITIVS for his insolences against S. GREGORY, was driven out of his
Empire, chased into an Island, where by Phocas commandment, himself, his wise,
and children were miserably slain. Procop. lib. 3. de Bello Goth. Nicep. li.
17. c 31. Vide Baron. to 7: an 565.
JUSTINIAN after many glorious victories, fell into a most hard fortune for his
heresy and tyranie against VIGILIVS Pope; (...) was infested on all sides with
the Incursions of the Barbares, and at length by an invisible blow reached him
from God, perished most miserably. Earon. tom. 7. au. 561.
BELLISARIVS Justinians General over his Army, to whom he was so dear, that
his pourtraict was printed in the one side of Justinians Coin, with this
Title, Bilisarius Romanorum decus, Bellisarius the glory of the Romans, for
his molestation of SILVERIVS, to grarifie thereby THEODORA the Empress, had,
for suspicion of conspiracy against JUSTINIAN, his eyes pulled out, was
despoiled of all his dignities, and forced in fine to beg. Cedre^. in Anna.
Paul. Diac. li. 20. reru^ Roman. Baron. tom. 8. an. 713. Anast. in Vital. Baro.
an. 668. Paul. Diac. lib. 19 reru^ Romans
PHILIPPICVS for his contempt of CONSTANTINE Pope, and propagating of heresy,
was deprived of his Empire and his eyes also. f CONSTANS for persecuting
THEODORUS Pope, and violently carrying away Pope MARTIN from Rome, was slain in
a bathe, Fascie. Temp. in Just. 2. Martin. Pol. in Just. 2.
IVST^NIAN the second for infringing the Eight Synod, and molesting of SERGIVS
Pope who refused to consent to his heresy, was deprived of his Empire, and
besides that, of his nose and tongue. Baron. tom. 11. an. 1080.
HENRY the Fourth Emperor excommunicated and deposed by GREGORY the seventh,
as we have seen, was by his own son persecuted, holden in prison, and at
length made a miserable end out of his own Country. Neubr. li. 4. c. 13
Palmer (...) in Chro^. an. 1189
FREDERICK the first was drowned miserably in a river of Armenia, for
punishment of the schism he raised against ALEXANDER Pope, as our NEVBRIGENS^S
records. Fascic. Temp. in Frider. 2 Matt Westminster. an. 1245
FREDERICK the Second, after he was excommunicated, and deposed by INNOCENT the
Fourth Pope of that name, was strangled by his own son, and dyed without
Sacraments. Geneb. lib 4. Chron. anno 2294. in Bonifacio 8.
PHILIP le BELL King of France after he was excommunicated and deposed by
BONIFACE the Eight, never prospered as Genebrard la French man writes. And
after that BONIFACIVS was taken unawares by the deceipts, which PHILIP used, a
holy Bishop said: The King is glad he has BONIFACE Pope in hold, but no good
thereby will happen to him and his posterity; which Prophecy says Genebr.
lib 4. Chron. anno 1315.
Genebrard, was shortly after fulfilled, for the King perished by reason of a
Boar, that rushed betwixt his horses legs; three of his sons, that reigned
after him, dyed one after another in a short space; their Queens dishonored
them with their infamous adulteries; and the Issue of PHILIP failing, the
contention betwixt our EDWARD the third, son of the Daughter of PHILIP le
Bell, and PHILIP de Valois the son of CHARLES de Valois, PHILIP le Bell his
brother, arose, which contention cost France very dearly. And, to spare our
times, as God threatened by his Prophet, Isai. 60.
that the Kingdom, that shall not serve the Church, shall perish, (as we see
all Greece is lost by their heresies and schisms against the Roman Church,
and England, Germany, and Holland, and other Countries, know not what
punishment hangs over their heads) so whosoever shall observe the course of
times, and Histories, shall find that few Princes have long prospered, who
have persecuted the Roman Church and faith, or have been by her excommunicated
or deposed.

26. Wherefore Kings and Princes that contemn and despise the Church, remember
you are Men, and that your Kingdom is subject to a higher state of the Church.
Fear her glaiue, that strikes even the soul and spirit. And if you will
reign long and prosperously here, imitate those Constantines, Martians,
Theodosius, Pipins, Charles the Great, Lewis, and others, who were more
glorious for amplifying the Churches Immunities and Demaines, then for
exte^ding their Empire; more renowned for the Churches and Monasteries they
founded, the^ for the Cities and Castles they builded; who by obeying,
honoring, and enriching the Church, strengtned and enriched their Kingdoms,
and have prospered in all their wars and battles. But I will end with S.
BERNARDS Counsel, which he gave to CONRADVS King of the Romans, Bern. ep.
183. ad Conrad. Regem Romam. Romans 13.
desiring all Christian Princes to follow it: Legi quippe: Omnia anima
Potestatibus sublimioribus subdita sit etc. Quam tamen sententiam cupio vos,
and omnimodis moneo custodire in exhibenda reuerentia summae and Apostolicae
sedi: I have read indeed: Let every soul be subject to higher powers, and he
that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, which sentence not
withstanding I desire, and by all means warn you (o Princes) to keep by
exhibiting reverence to the highest, and Apostolical seat.

CHAPTER VII.
Although the Pope be not direct Temporal Lord and Superior of the world, nor
of any part thereof, by Christ's express gift and donation, but only of the
patrimony of Saint Peter given him by Constantine the Great, and other
Catholic Princes, and confirmed by the consent of the Christian world: yet by
the spiritual power, which Christ gave him in his predecessor S. Peter. (Io
21.) he may dispose of temporal things, and even of Kingdoms, for the good of
the Church, and Conservation of her, and her faith and right: and the manner
how, and in what case, he can thus dispose of temporalities, is explicated.

1. Having showed by many Arguments in the former Chapter, that the Prince
neither has any spiritual Authority, neither can by his Temporal power
entermeddle him self as a Superior in matters Spiritual and Ecclesiastical:
It remains that we discuss and examine whether contrary wise the Pope have
any temporal power, or can by his Spiritual power dispose of temporal
things. A thing, I confess, odious to some Princes, who can hardly brook it,
that you should meddle with their Crowns and Regalities, thinking their
Crowns so fast set on their Heads, that none but God can pluck them of, and
imagining they hold their scepters so fast, that none under God can wrest them
out of their hands. But yet this question is odious only to such as set little
by the Churches Authority, or at least, prefer the state before Religion,
and the Temporal advancement of the Common wealth, before the Spiritual good
of the Church: for otherwise, as guilty malefactors only cry out of the
Princes laws and Tribunals, good subjects embrace and reverence them; so those
Princes only, whose consciences accuse them of some disloyalty toward the
Church, or who desire to prefer their own wills before the Churches
commandment, or to extend their Empire with encroaching on her Demaines, and
to rule so independentlie, as they may not be controlled; such Princes (I say)
can not abide to hear of any Authority in the Pope, or Church, which may
restrain them. Other Kings, who count it their honor to be obedient Children
of the Church, and who desire not to reign over their subjects, but so as God,
and his Church may reign over them, are content, that this opinion of the
Popes authority be taught in schools, and published in printed books. And
therefore of late his Catholic Majesty with three Bishops of his Counsel, and
the Inquisition of Spain authorized the printing and setting forth of a book
of this subject, composed by a learned Divine Franciscus Suarius, and
entitled, Defensio fidei Catholicae and Apostolicae, aduersus Anglicanae
sectae errores, etc. in which the Authority of the Pope in deposing Princes,
who by their tyranny against the Church, make them selves unworthy of their
honorable room and place, is largely and learnedlie defended and proved.

2. I confess that the Popes Temporal Authority, which he has in ROME and
ITALY, proceeded not from the immediate gift of CHRIST, but rather comes to
him by the Cap. Co^stantinus d. 96. c. Ego Ludouic. d. 63. ca. futuram 12. q.
1. Naucler. genesis 13. Magd. Cent. 4. c. 7. Petr. Damian disp. cum Reg. Aduoc.
Anselm. li. 4 c. 32. Iuo Carn. p. 5. Decr. cap. 49. Genebr. lib. 3. Chron.
Abraham Leuita in ca. 11. Dan.
Donation of CONSTANTINE, PIPIN, CHARLES the Great, LEWIS the Godly, and other
Princes, as is testified partly by the Canon law, partly by the Acts of
SILVESTER, partly by other ancient writers. I grant also, that Christ made
him no temporal Prince, but only Pastor of the Christian world: For although
many Ostiens in cap. quod super his, de voto and voti Redemp. Anton. 3. p. tit.
22. cap. 5. 13. Silu. V. Papa. and V. Legitimus.
Canonists affirm, that the Pope is Temporal Lord of the whole world; yet
Henr. quod lib. 6. q. 23. Turrecr. lib. 2. Summ^. cap. 113. Caiet. tom. 1.
Opusc. tract. 2. cap. 3. and 2.2, q. 43. art. 8. and passim recentiores.
Divines stand against them in this point, and not without good reason: For
look what power the Pope has by Divine right, he has from the Apostles; And
seeing that CHRIST made his Apostles Pastors, Ephesians. 4. Joan. 21 Mat. 16.
not Princes, and gave them a Church to rule, not a Kingdom, bestowed on them
the Keys of heaven, not of Cities, Mat. 18. Act. 20. Mat. 28.
gave them power to bind and loose the soul, not the body, to teach and
baptize all Nations, not to subiugate them; and built his Church upon an
Apostle, not upon any King or Prince: It follows evidently, that the Pope by
Christ's donation, has no title to Kingdoms and Empires.

3. True it is that many Divines, and those also of note, are of opinion that
Christ as man, was Temporal King over all the world, which is the express
opinion of S. Anton. 3 p. tit. 3. cap. 2.
Antonine, Almai. tract. de potest. Ecc. c. 8.
Almainus, Turrec. lib. 2. Summae. cap. 116.
Turrecremata, Ostie^s. in cap. quod super his, de voto and voti redemp.
Ostiensis, Duran. tract. de Iurisd. Eccl qu. 43.
Durand, f Nauar. in cap. Nouit. de Iudiciis. not. 3. n. 8. and 130.
Nauar, and others: which they also prove out of diverse places of scripture,
as Apoc. ^. Princeps Regum terrae. Prince of the Kings of the earth. Apoc. 19.
Rex Regum, and Dominus Dominantium. King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Act. 10.
Hic est omnium Dominus. This is Lord of all. Psalm. 8. and Heb. 9. Omnia
subiecisti sub pedibus eius. Thou have subjected all things under his feet.
Matt. vlt. Data est mihi omnis potestas in Coelo and in terra. All power is
given to me in heaven and in earth. Yet most Interpreters expound these places,
as meant of Christ's spiritual and Priestlie Power, by which he was spiritual
King of the world. And though it be very probable, 1. Vasq. 3 p. disp. 87. ca.
3.
(as the Leardned Vasquez shows) that Christ in deed as man was Temporal
King of the world, and had that Regal dignity, not by election or descent,
but only by Hypostaticall union, which did so eleuate, and dignifie his humane
nature, that it gave him Authority even as man over all the Kings of the
earth, by which he might have commanded them even in Temporal things, and
might have deprived them of their Crowns: Yet this it not so certain, because
many Divines also hold, that Christ, as man, was no Temporal King. But
howsoever, all almost do agree, that Christ never used any Regal power, nor
did actually reign as King over any Country, much less over all the world.
And therefore he said: Joan. 18
Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo: My Kingdom is not of this world. Because
although his spiritual Kingdom, the Church, be in this world, yet it is not
of this world, in respect of the spiritual authority and graces of the
Church, which are from heanen. And although it be probable, that he had Kingly
authority, which is called. Ius regnandi, A right to reign, by which he might
have reigned, and ruled temporallie in the world; yet, as I have said, he never
actually reigned, neither did he exercise any Kingly act of his Kingly Power:
and so having said that his kingdom is not of this world, Ibidem.
be gives a reason thetof saying: Si enim ex hoc mundo esset Regnum meum,
ministri vtique decertarent, vt non traderer Iudaeis: For if my Kingdom were
of this world, my Ministers verily would strive that I should not be delivered
to the Jews, Which is a good reason. if you understand by his Kingdom the
actual exercise of his Kingly authority: for otherwise, one may be a true
King in respect of his right, (as Kings driven by force out of their Kingdoms
are) and yet have no soldiers, nor ministers, to fight for them. Joan. 2.
I know some Authors contend, that he did actually exercise the Temporal
power of a King, when with a whippe he chased buyers and sellers out of the
Temple; yet that he did by the office of a Redeemer and Prophet, whose part was
to correct sins and abuses. Others say, that he used Kingly Authority when
he cast the Devils into the Hogs, and them, into the sea. Matthew. 8. and when
he withered the Figgetree. Mat. 21. and Mar. 11. Otherwise (say they) he had
done injury to the owners. But all this an other Prophet might have done,
though no King, much more CHRIST the Prophet of Prophets; and yet should he
have done no injury to the owner, seeing that what Prophets do miraculously,
they do by authority from God, who is supreme Lord over life, goods, and all.
And because CHRIST did not actually reign, therefore Emperors and Kings were
absolute, and were not vicaires or delegates to CHRIST, and CHRIST took
neither crowns, nor scepters from them, according to that of the Hymn of the
Epiphanie. In 1. Vesp. Epiph.


Hostis Herodes impie,
Christum venire quid times?
Non eripit mortalia,
Qui regna dat coelestia.
That Christ is come why do thou dread,
O Herod thou ungodly foe?
He does, not earthly Kingdoms reaue
That heavenly Kingdoms does bestow.
4. And so although CHRIST were, even as man, a Temporal King, yet he not
actually reigning him self, it is not likely that he should give any such
authority to S. PETER, and the Pope his successor. And although he had
actually reigned him self, yet it is not necessary that he should give that
Authority to S. PETER; for he had also the power of Excellency, by which he
might command even Infidels not baptized, and by which he instituted a Church,
Sacraments, and a Priesthood, which S. PETER, and the Pope his Successor can
not do. Certes none can deny, but that CHRIST might have given S. PETER
supreme Jurisdiction spiritual over the Church without Temporal, because as
spiritual power is not necessarily annexed to the Temporal, as I have proved
in the former Chapter, so Temporal power is not necessarily joined to the
spiritual; and therefore seeing that neither the law of God, nor Nature, nor man
gives any such Temporal Jurisdiction to the Chief Pastor of the Church, why
should either he challenge it, or we give it him? especially it being a thing
very inconvenient, and odious, that either the Church, or her Chief Pastor
should have any such Temporal power. For if it were so, that the Church or her
supreme Pastor had any such soueraintie, it would deter all Pagan Kings, and
Princes from our Religion, fearing least the Church by her absolute Authority,
might deprive them of their Kingdoms, Crowns, and Scepters at her pleasure.
And hence it is, that the Popes them selves confess, that they have no
Imperial, nor Kingly Authority given them by CHRIST, but rather that these
two powers are in distinct subjects. So NICHOLAS Pope says. Cum ad verum
ventum est, etc. Ca. cum ad veru^, d. 96. Vide supra pa. 66. et page 78.
When it came to the understanding of the truth, neither did the Emperor take
unto him the rights of Bishop-like Authority, nor did the Bishop usurp the
name of the Emperor; because the same Mediator of God and men, man Christ
JESUS, has distinguished the offices of both powers by their proper and
distinct dignities, as that Christian Emperors for attaining eternal life
should need bishops, and Bishops should use the Imperial laws for the cause
only of temporal things. And S. BERNARD: Bern. li. 2. de Co^sid. ca. 6.
Nam quid tibi aliud dimisit Sanctus Apostolus? quod habeo, inquit, tibi do
etc. What other thing did the holy Apostle leave unto thee? what I have
(says he) I give thee. What is that? One thing I know, it is neither gould
nor silver, seeing that he says, gould and silver is not with me. Be it that
by some other way thou may challenge this unto thee, yet not by Apostolical
right, for he could not give thee that which he had not. What he had he gave,
solicitude (as he said) over the Churches. Did be give thee rule and
domination? not ouer-ruling the Clergy, but made example of the flock, and
do thou think this to be spoken only out of humility, not in verity? the
voice of our Lord is in the Gospel: the Princes of the Gentiles overrule them
etc. but it shall not be so amongst you.

5. But although the Pope and Chief Pastor of the Church has no direct
Temporal power, but only in his own Temporal Patrimony and Kingdom, by
which he may dispose of Kingdoms, Crowns, and scepters, yet he has a
Spiritual power, which may directly, and ordinarily dispose of spiritual
matters, and indirectlie, and in some extraordinary case, of the Temporal
also; that is, when it shall be judged necessary for the consernation of the
faith or Religion, or the Churches laws, and right, or some other great and
necessary good. I say the Pope has no direct power over Princes, for then he
might limit their power, abrogate their laws, and depose their persons, at
least for some just cause, though it did not concern either faith, or the
Churches right, or necessary good, as the King can deal with his Viceroy, and
any of his subjects; and then Princes should not be absolute and independent,
who yet, as above is declared, in Temporal matters, and so long as they
exceed not the bounds of their authority, by commanding things contrary to
Gods law, or the Churches Canons, acknowledge no Superior in earth, neither
Pope, nor Emperor, nor Common wealth. For as for the Emperor, all Princes who
are not his Vassals (as the Kings of Spain, England, and France are not) as
they acknowledge him Superior in dignity, and therefore will, and must give
him the precedence, whersoeuer they meet, yet they are not subject to him, nor
bound to obey him, unless it be when the Pope, the Chief Pastor, and he the
greatest Prince in dignity, shall think it necessary that all Christian
Princes contribute, or concur for the defense of Christendom against the
Turk, or such like Common enemy. As for the Pope I grant that CHRIST gave
him no Temporal power at all (which above I have proved) for that Temporal
power, which he has in Italy, he had not by Christ's immediate grant, but
only by Constantines, and other Emperouts and Princes donation, which donation
supposed, and confirmed also by Prescription, and his subjects, yea all the
Christian worlds consent, that part of Italy, which he possesses, is as
truly appertaining to him, as England is to the King of England, France to the
King of France, and Spain to the King of Spain; only the Pope cannot
transfer his Kingdom to his Heirs, as they may, because it comes not to him
in particular by hereditarie succession, but only by election. Yea if the Pope
were by the law of God a Temporal Sovereign Prince over all the world, other
Princes should hold of him; and CONSTANTINES donation by which he made him
Temporal Prince of Italy, had been no donation, but restitution. As for the
Common wealth, I have above declared how it has despoiled it self of all
authority, and by translating it to the King, is truly a subject, and like a
private person, and so has no power over the King, unless it be in case of
intolerable Tyranny, as above is explicated.

6. I say yet that the Pope has an Indirect power over Kings even in Temporal
mattters, which power notwithstanding is not Temporal but spiritual, nor any
distinct power from his spiritual supremacy, but even the self same: And
therefore GREGORY the Seventh in his deposition of HENRY the Fourth says,
that he deposes him by the power he has from S. PETER of binding and loosing.
And although his Pastoral and Spiritual power, directly and ordinarily has
the menaging only of spiritual matters, and so directly and ordinarily
exercises it self in excommunicating, interdicting and suspending from
Spiritual offices, calling Councels, and deciding controversies of faith in
them, in making Ecclesiastical laws, in giving Authority to preach, to
minister Sacraments, and such like; yet when it is necessary for the
conservation of this power, or of the Church, or faith (of which it has the
Charge) that it dispose of Temporal matters, it can do that also: and so the
same spiritual Authority which directly, and as it were ex prima intention
ordains and determines of Spiritual matters, deals also with Temporal
affairs, not absolutely, but as they are ordained and necessary to the
attaining of the Spiritual end, which is conservation of the Church and faith,
and the souls faluation. But because this power does not respect Temporal
things principally and for them selnes, but only secondarilie and as they are
ordained to the conservation of the Spiritual good of the Church, it is said
indirectlie only, to respect Temporal matters: and for as much as it medleth
not ordinarily but in some extraordinary case with the said Temporal
matters, we may say that the Pope ordinarily medleth with spiritual matters,
and has for his ordinary glaiue and weapons, the Spiritual censures; but
when they will not serve to defend the Churches necessary right, then he may
also use the Temporal sword and punishment, because the same Authority which
handles principally, directly, and ex prima intention the spiritual
glaiue, may also command and handle the Temporal sword, when it is necessary
to the spiritual end; for then gladius est sub gladio, as BONIFACE the Eight
said; The Temporal sword is subordinate, and subject to the Spiritual. And
this is the common opinion which our most Illustrious Cardinal Allan the
honor of our country holds and defends in his Answer to the libeller.
Chap. 5.6.

7. But this subjection of Temporal states to the Spiritual power of the Pope
and Church, may be diversely taken. First it may be taken for subjection and
inferioritie in the order of Dignity only, and so all Authors agree, that the
Spiritual power, is Superior to the Temporal. Secondly it may be understood
of a Superiority in Directing, not only by counsel, but also by
Commandment, under pain of sin, and some spiritual mulct, as
excommunication, suspension, and Interdict: And so also all good and Catholic
Authors, yea Barclaye and VViddrington confess, Widdring. in Apol. n. 197.
that the Spiritual power, may not only direct by Counsel, but may also
command the Temporal power, not to use the Temporal sword or authority to
the prejudice of the Church; and it may also correct and punish those that
refuse to obey, by Spiritual penalties. Thirdly it may be taken for a
subjection, which imports not only a subjection to the Commandment, but
also to the disposition of the Spiritual power; in which sense the Pope and
supreme Pastor may be said to have Authority not only to command under pain
of sin Christian Princes to cease from persecuting or wro^ging the Church, or
to implore their sword and Temporal Authorities and means, to the necessary
defense of the Church, but also if they refuse, and contemn his spiritual
Authority, and penalties, which he inflicteth upon them, he may dispose of
their Crowns, Kingdoms, and Authority, and bestow them on some other, that
shall do the Church better service, or at least shall not wrong her, or do her
that injury, with the which the Churches right and faith cannot consist. And
this Authority Barclaye, VViddrington, and some others, not only Heretics and
Schismatics, but also who desire still to go by the name of Catholics do
deny. Wherefore for the respect I bear and owe to God and his Church, and for
the information of some deceived Catholics, and confutation of Heretics, and
those Catholics, who in this point join with them, I will prove it by many
conuincing arguments in the ensuing chapters of this Treatise. And first out of
Scripture.

CHAPTER VIII.
By diverse places and examples of the old and new Testament, it is proved
that the Pope in some case can, not only by Spiritual Censure, but also by
Temporal punishment, and even by deprivation, chastise Princes, who are
rebellious, and do tyrannically persecute and molest the Church.

1. Having explicated how the Popes Spiritual power may dispose of Temporal
things, and even Crowns, and Diademes, when it is necessary for the Churches
co^seruation or great and necessary good; it remains, that I prove the
same. But because the proofs are long and many, I will in this Chapter
allege only those Arguments, which may be deduced out of the Text of
Scripture. And least the Adversaries of the Popes authority in this point,
play with me as they have done, with some learned writers of this time, and
brag of the victory, when they can devise any answer, though never so
slender. I will be so bold as to prevent them, and to take this evasion from
them. For if it were sufficient to shape an unshapen answer, which has only a
show of probability, then all the proofs out of scripture, which the ancient
Fathers produced against the ancient heretics shall be called in question. For
what better and more pregnant place can be alleged, then that, Ioa. 10.
which the ancient Fathers cited out of S. JOHN against the Arrians: Ego and
Pater vnum sumus? I and the Father are one; and yet the Arrians had their
answer in redines, to wit, that God the Father, and the Son, are one, not by
unity of substance, but consent of wills. And what plainer words can be
alleged for the Real presence then those of CHRIST: This is my body? Mat.
26. Clandius de Saints Repetit. 1. ca. 10.
and yet the Reformers of this time have devised no less then fowerscore
expositions and answers, all different from the Catholic sense and meaning.
But my Adversaries are to weigh and ponder the soliditie of their answers, and
the conformity also of them to the Churches definition and practice.

2. 1. Reg. 13
My first proof then shall be taken from examples of the old and new Testament,
which do not a little patronize the aforesaid authority of the Pope. SAMVEL as
he anointed King SAVL and created him King of the Jews, so he deposed him. And
although he did this as a Prophet, yet this might be a figure of that, which
the Chief Pastor may do in the new law: Zuing. art 41. 2. Paral. 26.
whereupon Zuinglius (whose authority must needs be of force against
Protestants) says plainly: Quod Reges deponi possunt, Saulis exemplum
manifest docet: That Kings may be deposed, Saules example does manifestly
teach. 2. Par. 26.
AZARIAS the High Priest deposed OZIAS for arrogating the Priests office: for
although God immediately marked him with a leprosy, yet the high Priest after
he was thus marked, had authority from God by the Leuitical law, Leu. 13.
to separate him from all society and cohabitation with his subjects. Hence I
infer first, that the high Priest had in some case authority to dispose of
Temporal things, though they belonged to Kings. For cohabitation is a
temporal thing, and yet the high Priest could deprive even a King of the same:
and if he may dispose of this Temporal thing, why not of other Temporal
things, though they be Kingdoms? Secondly, cohabitation or at least power and
right of cohabitation and society, is essentiallie included in Kingly power,
or at least necessarille annexed unto it: For a King is he that has supreme
power to govern his subjects. And seeing that government necessarily
requires, yea imports possibility, or right to cohabitate, and converse
with subjects (for how can he govern them, if he cannot converse with them, or
his officers?) if the King might by the Priest be deprived of all right to
cohabitate and converse, he might be deprived also of his Kingdom. Thirdly,
OZIAS disobeyed the high Priest, and notwithstanding his reprehension and
express commandment to the contrary, did burn Incense to our Lord, and so
AZARIAS might have caused him to have been killed for this disobedience in so
great a matter, Deuteronomy. 17
as appears by the law of God in Deuteronomie, where MOSES says: He that
shall be proved refusing to obey the commandment of the Priest, which at that
time ministers to our Lord thy God, and the decree of the Judge, that man
shall die, and thou shall take away the evil out of Israel. Hence I make this
deduction AZARIAS the High Priest might have pronounced sentence of death
against King OZIAS for disobeying in so great a matter, much more might he have
deposed him, and deprived him of his Kingdom; for death, which is deprivation
of life, is a greater penalty, then deprivation of a Kingdom, and includes
also that, because a dead man cannot be King: and if AZARIAS could deprive
OZIAS of his Kingdom, it is like that in separating him from cohabitatio^ with
the people, he did in deed deprive him. And certes this the Scripture in the
same place insinuareth saying: Fuit igitur OZIAS etc. 2. Paral. 26.
OZIAS therefore the King was a leper unto the day of his death, and he dwelt in
a house a part. Moreover IOATHAN his son governed the Kings house and judged
the people of the Lord. Which last words insinuate that his son reigned and
was King in his place, and consequently that he was deposed. Lib. 9. Antiq.
cap. 11.
And so JOSEPHUS seems to have understood the matter, when treatinge of this
fact of OZIAS and the issue thereof he says: Et cum aliqua^diu extra vrbem
vixisset, filio IOATHANO rempnblicam administrante, moerore tande^ confectus
obijt: and for some time he had lived out of the City, his son IOATHAN
administrating the common wealth, Hom. 4. de verhis Isai.
at last he was killed with sorrow. The same does also S. CHRYSOSTOM avouch
saying: Cumque sacerdotium sibi vellet sumere, and hoc quod habebat perdidit:
And when he would take upon him Priesthood. he lost that (Kingdom) which he
had. Barron. an. Christi 31. Tiberij 15.
To this may be added, that which, Baronius well observes in his Annals; to
wit, that the Jews had a Council called Synedrin, or Sanedrin, which
consisted of 72. persons, and succeeded the 72. who assisted Moises Number. 11.
which Council had authority to judge of the Law, of the Prophet, and of
Kings; and over this Council the High Priest had supreme authority. This
Council was of such credit, that it summoned Herod to appear, and to answer
to Hircanus and the Judges under him, to that which was to be objected against
him. And when he appeared in his purple, and with a strong troop: Sameas one
of the Judges reprehended this his manner of coming, and told him, that he
came in that manner; Ex Iosepho lib. 14. Antiq. 6.17.
vt si capitalem iuxta leges sententiam in eum tulerimus, nobis mactatis ipse
euadat, illata vi legibus: that if we according to the Laws should pronounce
sentence of death against him, he using force against the laws, and killing
us, might escape. By which it is plain, that this Council, and consequently
the High Priest, had authority to Judge of the Law, Prophet, and King; and
that therefore Azarias had Authority to pronounce sentence of death, and much
more of deposition, against Ozias; and seeing he might depose him it is like the
fore said circumstances considered, that he did depose him.

3. I confess that our adversaries may answer, that this example does not
convince that Ozias was deposed, but only that he not actually governing, his
son governed for him, he remaining still King till his death: But yet if this
fact be not taken barelie, but with the law also of Leuiticus, and the argument
deduced out of it, with other insinuations of scripture, Losephus, S.
Chrysostom and the Authority of the Council of Sanedt in, it is sufficient to
prove that the high Priest, did, or might have deposed him. I confess also
that our Adversaries might answer, Deuteronomy. 2.
that there was in the old law an express statute to put to death, those, that
would disobey the High Priest in matters pertaining to the law, and that
therefore the High Priest might pronounce sentence of death, and consequently
of deprivation against a King; but in the new law, there being no such express
law, and the new law also being a law of sweetness and Charity, not of fear
and rigor, the case is not the like? This they may say; But yet seeing that it
made much for the honor of the Synagogue and her security, to have had such a
power, if the Church be the verity, the Synagogue but the figure, and as
far inferior to the Church, as the law and Priesthood and sacrifice of
CHRIST is Superior to that of MOSES; no honorable, nor profitable power and
authority granted to the Synagogue, is to be denied to the Church; and
therefore seeing it is an honor to have Authority to depose Princes, and that
it is many times necessary for the conservation of the Church, her right, and
faith (for many times admonitions, yea commandments, and excommunications will
take no effect with proud and rebellious Princes) if such power were granted
to the Synagogue, it is not to be denied to the Church.

4. Another example which Divines use to allege is, 4. Reg. 11 2. Par. 22.
and 23
that of Queen ATHALIA, who (as we read in the fourth book of Kings) was by
the Commandment of the high Priest deprived first of her Kingdom, and
afterward of her life, and that also after she had reigned six years. And
although it may seem that he only set the right King Ioas, in his Throne, and
displaced an usurper, who had killed all the right Kings sons saving IOAS,
Bellarminus, Becanus and alij.
who was secretly reserved, and still living; yet many learned Authors
affirm, that she was before her deposition true and lawful Queen; because
though she entered by tyra^nicall usurpation, yet reigning so long peaceably, it
is very like that she was received by the peoples consent: and although IOAS,
who was the right heir, was yet living, yet because that was not known, it
seems that the people generally consented to ATHALIA, which consent was
sufficient to make her lawful Queen, otherwise we must call in question the
Titles of many Kings, whose Predecessors entered into the possession of their
Kingdoms by violence and invasion, and without all Title, and yet afterward
proved lawful Kings by the common reception and consent of the people,
actually reigning for some time with express or tacitt consent of the people,
giving a sufficient Title. At least this example shows that the High Priest
might be Judge of the Kings right and Title, which was to meddle in a Temporal
matter, and no less then a Kings Title.

5. ELIAS also, though a Prophet only, 3. Reg. 18 4. Reg. 1. and 2.
and no Temporal Prince, consumed by fire from Heaven OCHOSIAS Captains and
their fifties, and made a massacre of Iesabels false Prophets. Again,
ELISEVS, his scholar, by his curse set Bears upon those ungracious boys,
who called him by scorn Bald-pate; and he stroke Giezi with the leprosy,
which he had taken from NAAMAN, for his symonie. Certes ELIAS was so famous for
chrastizing rebellious Princes, and their Captains, Eccl. 48.
that Ecclesiasticus pronounces thus of him: Who did cast down Kings to
destruction, and did easily break their might, and the glorious from their
bed: And howbeit they did this by extraordinary and Prophetical power; yet
these examples show how it is not unbeseeming Spiritual power to control
sometimes Princes, and to punish them even temporally, when Gods glory, and
his Churches right and honor requires it. Number. 25
I could allege the example of MOSES, who caused the Princes to be hanged on
Gibbets against the sun, for communicating with the Moabites in sactifice;
Exodus 32
who also by the assistance of the sons of LEVI, killed above, three thousand
for adoring the Goulden Calfe. But I will come to the New law, and see what
proofs it yields.

6. The new law, though it be the law of Charity, not severity, love, not
fear, yet it is not without examples of Temporal punishment used even by the
spiritual sword. 1. Cor. 5 1. Tim. 1
S. PAVL excommunicated the In cestuous Christian, as also Hyminaeus and
Alexander, and delivered them up to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh:
for in the Primative Church, to excommunication was annexed a Temporal
punishment, D. Th. 3. p. in Addit. q. 21. a. 2. ad 3. Act. 13.
by reason that then, when any was excommunicated, the Devil by and by
possessed him and tormented him corporally. In the new law I behold S. PAVL
stricking Elymas the Magician with corporal blindness for hindering the fruict
of the Gospel, Act. 5.
and I find S. PETER pronouncing sentence of present death against Ananias and
Saphira his wife, for defrauding the Apostles in the price of the piece of
land, which they had vowed. And although this also they did by the gift of
miracles, and extraordinary prerogative of their Apostleship, yet this shows
that Te^porall punishment does not altogether surpass the actiuitie and force
of Spiritual power.

7. Secondly I prove this by another Argument drawn from the persons of
the^, on whom it seems the Church may by warrant of scripture inflict
Temporal punishment, such as are obstinat Heretics, disobedient Princes to
the Church, D. Kellyson Rep. p. 185. Deuteronomy. 13
Blasphemers, persecutours etc. which examples a writer of this time alleges,
though to another end. In the old law, which was a figure of the new, false
Prophets, who persuaded to follow false Gods, were slain, and stoned to death,
and the whole City that permitted worship of strange Gods, was commanded to
be sacked, and utterly destroyed. Deuteronomy. 17
And (as we have seen) whosoever stubbornlie disobeyed the High Priest in
matters pertaining to the law, was to be killed: And shall the Heretic
stubborn against the Church, and who persuadeth us to follow strange
Religions, go scotfree? The person, that was infected with a Corporal
leprosy, Leu. 13^
was separated from all society: and shall obstinat Heretics, prefigured by
such infected, and infecting persons, be permitted to converse with us, yea to
rule and govern amongst Christians, heresy being a spiritual leprosy, Aug
lib. 2. quaest. Euang. cap 40. Leu. 24.
which mixeth falsehood with truth, as a leprosy infecteth some parts of the
flesh, others remaining sound, and infecting, not only the body as that does,
but even the soul? The blasphemer, in the same law was by Gods own mouth
commanded to be cast out of the Camp, and to be stoned of the people: and shall
the heretic in words commonly blasphemous, in deeds sacrilegious, be
permitted in the Church, and not be cast out by Censure of excommunication,
Leis. 20^
and by death also, when that will not serve? NADAD and ABIV, though sons of
AARON for using strange fire in their Censors, were devoured with fire from
heaven: Nu. 16.
CHORE, DATHAN, ABIRON, and HON, for arrogating unto them Aarons office, were
swallowed up by the Earth: and shall the Heretic who inuenteth strange
doctrines, and who commonly without right ordination or vocation arrogateth
Priestlie Authority, be free from all Temporal punishment, he commonly
contemning all spiritual Censures? Matt. 7. and Joan. 10.
No, no, an heretic is a woolf, and consequently to be driven from the fold
with stones and clubbes: he is a thief, and so to be hanged; he is a Canker,
Ioau. 10.
ergo to be burned and seared, he is a false Coyner, that is a deprauer of Gods
word, ergo to be hang^^, drawn, 2. Tim. 2. Lib. 2. and 3. de fals^ moneta.
Mat. 13. Iudae. 1.
and quartered, he is cockle, ergo to be plucked up by the roots, least he
hinder the growth of the good corn; he is a tree of Autumn unfruitful, twice
dead, being deuoid both of the life of faith and charity, ergo to be cast into
the fire; he is an evil humor, ergo to be purged and expelled; Mat. 7.
he is a rotten, and rotting member, ergo to be cut of least he infect the
whole body.

8. Thiralie I prove this out of those very words, by which S. PETER was
constituted supreme Pastor under Christ, and vnder-Head of the Church: Pasce
oues meas: Joan. 21.
Feed my sheep: for to a Pastor it appertains to rule and govern his
sheep, to feed them, to cure them, and to defend them from the woolfe, or
ravenous beast. Wherefore S. PETER, and his successor the Pope, being the
supreme visible Pastor of the Church, is not only to rule, and govern them
by laws, nor only to feed them by the word and Sacraments, nor only to cure
and correct them by spiritual Censures; but if they beinfected, and infecting
sheep, he may not only separate them from the Church by excommunication, but
also if they contemn that punishment, by deposition, and deprivation of their
Kingly Authority: and if the woolfe come, he may not only cry out against
him by denouncing Gods law and Judgments, nor only strike him with his
spiritual staff, but he may also use even the Temporal Club to chase him
from the flock and fould, as many worthy Prelates of the Church have done,
whose examples we shall anon allege. And yet this not withstanding there
shall still be a difference betwixt the Pope and the Temporal Prince; because
the Pope is to use in the first place his spiritual glaiue, and not to meddle
with Kings Regalities, or temporal arms, but only when it is necessary for
the good of the Church, and when the Spiritual censures will no^ suffice: the
Prince is to use Temporal arms, and not to meddle with the Spiritual at all.

9. Mat. 18.
The like Argument I deduce out of these words of CHRIST: Si Ecclesiam non
audierit, sit tibi tanquam Ethnicus and Publicanus. If he will not hear the
Church, Chrysostom. in hunc locum.
let him be to thee as an Ethnike and Publican. By the Church are understood
the Prelates of the Church, and especially the Chief Prelate, the Pope, who
governs and commands in the Church: and so this place is like to the former
place of Deuteronomie. Deuteronomy. 17
For as God there says, that he that will not obey the high Priest shall be
sentenced to death; so here CHRIST says, that he who will not obey the
Pastors, and especially the high Pastor, shall be holden as an Ethnic, and
Publican, that is, by excommunication shall be cast out of all society of the
Church; for with the Ethnikes and Publicans the Jews had no commerce, nor
communication. If then he contemn this censure of the Church, the Chief
Pastor may take his arms from him, by which he molesteth her, and seeing that
his Temporal power is that, which is his Chiefest weapon, the High Pastor may
deprive him of it, else the high visible Priest of the New law, should be
inferior to the High Priest of the oulde law, and MOSES should be preferred
before CHRIST, and the Synagogue before the Church. To make this deduction of
more force, I observe that this place conuinceth, that the Pastor of the
Church may separate a disobedient Christian from the society of the rest,
which is a Temporal punishment, being a privation of Temporal conversation;
whence it follows, thar if the disobedience and default deserve it, he may
also deprive a Prince of his Crown, and Temporal Authority, that being also
a Temporal pain. Which Argument shall be confirmed more hereafter.

10. Many also, and not improbablie, allege for proof of that which has been
said, those words of our Blessed Savior to his Apostles; Mat. 18.
Whatsoever you shall bind upon earth, shall be bound also in heaven: and what
soever you shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed also in heaven. For although
this power of binding and loosing given to the Apostles and their Successors,
especially the Chief Pastor, has for her ordinary functions, loosing or
detaining sins, excommunicating or absoluing, dispensing in vows and oaths
etc. yet the words being general, What soever you shall bind upon earth, it
seems that they should not so be restrained, but that they may be extended to
loosing and absoluing even from Temporal allegiance and obedience to the
Prince, when obedience to the Prince can not stand with the conservation of the
Churches right, or faith, for which that power was given. And if the Pastor
may free the subjects in this case from all obligation of obedience or duty to
the Prince, he may make them no subjects, and consequently the Prince no King,
nor superior; for the Prince and subjects are correlatiues, which are of this
nature, that one cannot be without the other, and one destroyed, the other is
destroyed. Wherefore if the Chief Pastor of the Church can absolve the
subjects from their allegiance, be can make them no subjects; if he can make
them no subjects, he can make the Prince no Superior, and consequently
deprive him of all Temporal Authority, by which he is Superior. Whereupon
not only the learned writers of this time, Cardinal BELLARMINE, SVAREZ,
SCHVLKENIVS, and others, but also some of the ancients have understood this
place of loosing in some case even from Temporal allegiance. S. GREGORY the
Seventh, who deposed HENRY the fourth Emperor of that name, in his depositio^
which BARONIVS alleges, Baron. tom. 11. Anno 1080. number. 11.
calling upon S. PETER and S. PAVLE, says thus: Agite nunc quaeso Patres, and
Principes sanctissimi vt omnis mundus intelligat and cognoscat, quia si
potestis in Coelo ligare and obsoluere, potestis in terra Imperia^, Regna,
Principatus, Ducatus, Marchias, Comitatus, and omnium hominum possessiones pro
meritis tollere vnicuique and concedere: Go to now I pray you, o most holy
Fathers and Princes, that all the world may understand and know, that if you
can bind and loose in heaven, you can in earth take away according to their
deserts from every one, and give to others Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities,
Dukedomes, Marquisdomes, Counties, and all men's possessions. So INNOCENT the
fourth in the Council of Lions, and in the deposition of FREDERICK the second
expounds the same, and warranteth thereby his authority in deposing. And thus
much concerning proofs of the Popes authority out of scripture for deposing
Princes, and punishing Heretics and rebels to the Church by Temporal
chastisements.

CHAPTER IX.
By Theological arguments grounded in principles of faith, and the Nature of
the Church as it is an absolute Common wealth, the same power of the Supreme
Pastor is proved.

1. WHat proof holy Scripture yields for this verity, we have seen in
there former Chapter, Now let us see what proof reason grounded in faith, and
the Churches Nature, can afforde us. My first Argument I deduce from the
comparison before mentioned betwixt the Spiritual, and Temporal power, by
which I have made it manifest, that the Spiritual power exceeds the
Temporal, as in many other things, so in inflicting penalties and punishments;
for the Temporal power can only punish the body, the Spiritual can chastize
the soul; that power can only decree, and indict Temporal penalties and
mulcts, this can lay spiritual Censures and bonds upon the soul, even
excommunication. This power which the Church has to excommunicate, I have
above in part proved out of diverse places of Scripture, which here with some
others I shall allege again for my present purpose. For to omit that S.
PAVL excommunicated that Incestuous Corinthian, 1. Cor. 5. 1. Tim. 1. Tit. 3.
2. These. 3. 2. Joan. 1 2. Cor. 10
as also Hyminaeus and Alexander, he insinuates the same power where he
commands us to shun heretics, and not to say Aue unto them. As also where he
says: Arma militiae nostrae non carnalia sunt, sed potentia Deo ad
destructionem etc. The weapons of our warfare, are not carnal, but mighty to
God unto the destruction of Munitions, destroying Councels and all loftiness
extolling it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into Captivity all
understanding unto the obedience of Christ, and having in a readiness to
revenge all disobedience. And a little after: quam dedit nobis Dominus etc.
which power our Lord has given us to edification, not to your destruction.
Upon which places S. CHRYSOSTOM says: Chrysostom. hom. 22. in ep. ad Cor.
Ad hoc potentiam accepimus vt aedificemus; Quod si quis obluctetur, tum demum
altera quoque facultate vtamur, eum diruentes ac prosternentes. To this end we
have received power that we may edify. But if so be any stand out, or become
obstinate, then may we use another means, pulling him down and prostratinge
him. Which place (as some think) proves that the Chief Pastor may inflict
Temporal punishment even on Princes. And therefore S. Aug. ep. 50. ad Bonifac.
Augustine hence proves that heretics may he punished Temporally: But at
least it proves, that the Pastors, and especially the Chief Pastor of the
Church, have not only Authority to preach and minister Sacraments, but also
to chastise offenders by spiritual Censures; which power CALVIN in his
Commentaties on this place affirms to be grounded on the text of S. MATTHEW
before alleged: Mat. 18.
Whatsoever you shall bind on earth etc. to which purpose he applies that
place of HIEREMIE: Hier. 1.
Behold I hane appointed thee this day over the Gentiles, and over Kingdoms,
that thou may pluck up and destroy, and waste and dissipate, and build and
plant; which words insinuate power to dispose even of Temporal Kingdoms, and
Authority; and, at least by Caluins Confession, signifies power to
excommunicate, and to inflict Spiritual pains; which excommunication is no
less pain and punishment, then a Spiritual band and chain, wherewith the
soul is chayned, then a banishment from the Church of God, then a delivery up
to Satan, then a cutting of from all communion with the Church. For as they who
are obedient Children of the Church are partakers of three communions and
communications, Aug. li. 1 cont. aduers. legis and proph. cap. 17. Aug. ser.
68. de verbis Apost. and habetur c. Omnis Christia nus. 11. quast.
to wit, of conversation one with another, of Sactaments, and of suffrages,
prayers, satisfactions, and merits; so he that is excommunicated is deprived
of all these three goods. Wherefore S. AVGVSTIN says that it is grauius malum
excommunicaria Sacerdotibus Dei, quam si quis gladio feriretur, flammis
absorberetur, aut ferisobijceretur: It is a greater ill to be excommunicated by
the Priests of God, then if a man were killed by the sword, consumed by fire, or
cast unto wild beasts to be devoured. And again: Omnis Christianus, qui a
sacerdotibus excommunicatur, Sathanae traditur etc. Every Christian that is
excommunicated by the Priests is delivered up to Satan. How so? Because out of
the Church is the Devil, as within the Church Christ: and so hereby he is as
it were delivered up to the devil, who is separated from Ecclesiastical
communion and society. Hence I deduce this Argument: The Chief Pastor of the
Church can excommunicate a Rebellious Prince, and by excommunicating him,
deprive him of all the Spiritual Treasures of the Church, as Sacraments,
suffrages, merits, and satisfactions, yea he can cut him clean from the
Church, and deliver him up to Satan: ergo he can, when it is necessary for the
good of the Church, deprive him of Temporal goods, and even of his Kingdom. I
prove the consequence, because he that can inflict the greater punishment, can
inflict the lesser; but it is a greater punishment to be cut of from the
Church, and to be deprived of her spiritual goods and graces, then to be
deprived of Cities, countries, and Temporal Kiugdomes, ergo the Chief
Pastor, that can cast a Prince out of the Church, can cast him out of his
Kingdom.

2. I know our Adversaries will deny for all this my consequence (as
VViddrington does) because not always he that can do more, can do less, but
only then, when the more and the less are of the same kind and nature: As
for example, he that can carry fifty pound weight, can carry five and twenty
pownd weight, and yet he that can discourse and reason, which is more, can not
fly, which is less, because reasoning and flying are not of the same kind
and nature. But yet for all this, my illation and consequence is like to that
of the Apostle S. PAVL, 1. Cor. 6.
which can not be denied: For, (says he) If the world shall be judged by you,
are you unworthy to judge of the least things? know you not that we shall
judge Angels? how much more secular things? And the self same Argument uses
GREGORY the seventh to prove that he might depose HENRY the fourth: for in
the Instrument of that Emperors deposition, speaking to the Apostles S. PETER,
Vide Baron. tom. 11. an. 1080. n. 11.
and S. PAVL, he proves that they by him, and he by authority received from
them may depose the aforesaid Emperor, because, says he, you, (by Popes your
successors) have often taken Patriarchships, Primacies, Archiepiscopall and
Episcopal Dignities from the wicked and unworthy, and have bestowed them on
Religious men. Si enim spiritualia iudicatis, quid de secularibus vos posse
credendum est? and si Angelos dominantes omnibus superbis Principibus
iudicabitis, quid de illorum seruis facere potestis? For if you judge
spiritual things, what may we think you can do concerning things that be
secular and temporal? And if you shall judge Angels that have dominion over
all proud Princes, what may you do with those that be their servants and
inferiors? Where we see, that not only GREGORY the seventh, but also S. PAVL
do use the like Argument to that which I used, and prove, that they, who can
judge of spiritual matters, may much more of temporal; For although it does
not always follow in good consequence, that a man can do the lesser, because
he can do the greater, as besides the alleged example, many others do
convince, for a man can speak, which is more, and yet he can not bark like a
dog, which is less: yet when the things are of the same nature, or at least
not altogether disparate and independent, the Consequence is good. Wherefore
seeing that Temporal things are ordained to a spiritual end, (if not of their
own nature, yet by God his institution, who has ordained us unto a
supernatural end, as above I have declared) and consequently are subordinate,
and as it were means to a further end, it may be said by good consequence, as
S. PAVL and S. GREGORY the seventh say: The Chief Pastor can judge, and
dispose of Spiritual things, ergo he can judge and dispose of Temporal
things, when they are necessary to conferue the spiritual, and are necessary
means to attain to the end of the Spiritual power, which is conferuation of
the Church and faith, and the attaining of life everlasting. And so as S.
THOMAS says: D. Th. 2. 2. q. 40. a. 2. ad 3
Omnis persona, velars, vel virtus, ad quam pertinet finis, habet disponere de
his quae sunt ad finem: Every person, or art, or virtue, to which the end
belongs, may dispose of those things which are for the end. Seeing then that
God has ordained Temporal things to the salvation of our souls, and
consequently to the Churches conservation; when the Chief Pastor, whose
office is to bring us to our Spiritual end, sees that Temporal things are
necessary to that end, he can not only command, but also dispose of them.
Turrecr. lib. 2. de Eccl. ca. 114.
Hereupon TVRRECREMATA also vsinge the like Argument says: To him that can
dispose of the end, it pertains to dispose of the means, and to remove also
the Impediments, as it is manifest in the Physician and sickman, who because
they have Authority to procure health, may make choice of the means, and may
remove the Impediments of health. Wherefore seeing that the Chief Pastor is to
look to the souls health of his subjects, he may, not only command Temporal
things, but also dispose of them to that end, and may remove them, when they
are impediments to that end. And because the King and his Kingdom are
comprehended in the number of Temporal things, which are ordained to the
conservation of the Church, and the Spiritual end (for God makes a promise to
his Chureh by the Prophet Esaias: Esai. 49.
That Kings shall be her Nurcing Fathers, and that with a countenance cast down
to the ground, they shall adore her: Esai. 60.
and threatens that the Nation, and the Kingdom that shall not serve her,
shall perish) it follows also that, when the Churches right and faith can not
otherwise be conserved, the Chief Pastor may dispose of the Kings Crown and
Kingdom, he in that case being subordinate to the Church and Christian faith.
Neither will VViddringtons answer serve, to wit, that in this case they are to
be directed and commanded by the Chief Pastor for the conservation of the
Church, but cannot be by him disposed: because the argument proves more, to
wit, that if the Chief Pastor can not only command in spiritual matters,
which are greater, but also may dispose of them, he may also dispose of the
Temporal, which are lesser, they being in some case subordinate to the end of
the Spiritual power, which is conservation of the Church, and faith, and
procuration of eternal salvation.

3. A second Theological Argument may be deduced from the Authority, The
Second Theological Argum.
which the Church has over Temporal power: for as above I have showed) the
Spiritual power of the Church is not only Superior to the Temporal in
dignity, but also (if they who have this Temporal Authority be baptized) in
Authority of commanding, not only in spiritual matters, but also in
Temporal, when they hinder the Churches good, or are necessary for the
Churches conservation. And therefore if the Prince make a Civil law, which
derogateth to the Church, the Pastor can command them to alter or to abrogate
it. S. GREGORY corrected MAVRITIVS the Emperors law, Gregor. lib. 7. Indic. 1.
by which he forbad soldiers to enter into Religion. So S. AMBROSE, though no
Pope, but Archbishop of Milan, commanded Theodosius the Emperor, Theodor. li.
5 cap. 17. and 18
who had caused seven thousand at Thessalonica to be killed for a sedition made
against the Magistrates, to make a new law, by which he was so restrained, that
when he should condemn any to death or confiscation of goods, the sentenee
should not be executed till 30. days after, that he might have time to judge
better, when the fury of anger was past. And the Canon law is full of
commandementes of the Pope to Princes even for the disposition of Temporal
things; Widdr. in Apol. n. 93. and number. 97.101.141 139.377 378.
which also Widdrington grants. For in his Apology for the right of
Princes, he oftimes repeateth, that the spiritual power can direct, command,
and compel by Censures the Princes to make laws, which are necessary for the
Churches conservation, and to abrogate laws, which are injurious to her, and
so to dispose Temporal things, as they shall not prejudice the Church, but
rather serve her for her necessary conservation. Widdr. Apolog. n. 197.
Yea (says he) Potest Ecclesia propter instantem sui ipsius necessitatem
praecipere vel prohibere vsum gladij materialis: The Church, when necessity
urges, can command or forbid the use of the material and temporal sword. And
then (say I) if the Chief Pastor can command the Temporal power, scepter,
and sword, when the necessity of the Church requires he may also dispose of
the Temporal power, scepter, and sword. Widdr. in Apol. Resp. nu. 28.
This consequence Widdrington often times denies, but with how little reason
we shall see briefly. For although every one that can command, can not
dispose, yet Princes may. I grant the Ghostly Father can command his
Penitente to give Alms, and the Penitent shall be bound under sin to obey;
yet he shall not therefore loose the propriety, and dominion of those his
goods, which he should have given in alms. Yea I grant that the Prince, when
he commands his subjects to contribute for his wars, or other necessities
of the Realm, does not always by and by deprive them of their dominion and
propriety; but yet I say, that as he can command Temporal things for the
necessity of the Realm, of which he has charge; so he can by his absolute
power, called Dominium Altum, when it is necessary for the Common wealth, not
only command, but also take those goods from them and deprive them of the same,
as in many other cases he also confiscateth their goods and depriueth them of
Dominion. Wherefore seeing that the Pope is the supreme visible and spiritual
Prince of the Church, he may, not only command Christian Princes his subjects
to use their Scepter, Authority, and sword to the necessary conservation of
the Church, and especially not against the Church, but may also (if they
contemn his commandment and Spiritual Censures) for the necessary
conservation of the Church and faith, dispose of them, else he were inferior
to the Prince, and had not Authority sufficient for the conservation of the
Church, which is committed and commended to his charge.

4. The third Theological argument.
The third Argument shall be grounded in the Nature of the Church, as it is a
Common wealth; for the Church is an absolute Common wealth, not subordinate to
any other, as the Kingdom is to the Chief Pastor and Church: Now it is so,
that every absolute Common wealth, to wit, which is no part, nor is dependent
of another, has power not only to enact laws for the subjects directions,
and to inflict punishment on them that are Malefactors, or perturbers of the
Civil Peace at home, but also may make war abroad both offensive and
defensive for her necessary conservation against another Common wealth (though
otherwise not subject, nisi ratione delicti) which shall invade her rights, or
offer any notable injury. And as for defensive war, no man with the least
show can deny, but that every Common wealth, when there is just cause may wage
such war; because if every private man by the Authority, which he has from
God and Nature to conserve that being which they have given him, L. vt vim
ff^de lust. Barthol. l. 9 ff o^ poen it and l. Furum ff. de sicartis. Alex. 111
c. St vero 1. de sent. excom. Innoc. 111. cap. significasti 1. de homicid.
volunt. and casuali: and cap. dilecto de sent, excom in 6.
may vim vi repellere, and kill rather then be killed, much more may an
absolute Common wealth defend it self even by arms against another Common
wealth or Prince, that unjustly inuadeth or wrongeth it. As concerning
offensive or aggressiue wars, although every private man can not revenge
injuries past, but only defend him self when they are actuallie inferred, yet
public persons, such as are Princes, Magistrates, and Common wealths may: And
although Princes and states dependent of another can not wage war without
license of the Superior, yet Princes and Common wealths independent may not
only punish Domestical Malefactors, and perturbers of Civil Peace and
Justice at home, but also may make wars abroad against other Princes or
Common Wealths though otherwise not subject, and may not only defend them
selves, but also revenge injuries past, and may take their enemies towns and
strong houldes, burn and kill, till they have procured just renenge and future
security, and consequently may in that case depose and kill the Prince him
self, because the end of just war being peace, all things in a just war
are lawful, which are necessary to obtain peace and security: And seeing
that many times the King or Common wealth cannot sufficiently revenge nor
secure them selves, but by inuading the enemies country, by sacking his
cities, killing his subjects, and many times the Prince him self; all these
things are lawful in a just War, and have ever been practiced even amongst
the best and godliest Princes, as even scriptures auerre, Counsels approve,
and histories do witness. For in the old law IOSVE, DAVID, the MACHABEES,
yea ABRAHAM; and in the new, CONSTANTINE the Great, THEODOSIUS, CHARLES the
Great, and many others are commended for their wars against Tyrants and the
Enemies of God. And only Heretics, or favorers of Heretics, Aug. lib. 22.
co^t. Faustum ca. 74.
Manichees, Thom. Walde^s. tom 3. de Sacr. tit. 24. cap. 169.
Wicklefists, and Anabaptists Melancth de loc is. tit. de Magistratu.
condemn all war as unlawful, to whom Chil. 4. cent. 1. Adag. 1. and in ca.
3. Lucae.
Erasmus seems to subscribe. And the reason of this ARISTOTLE gives: because
(says he) every absolute Common wealth must be sufficient in it self, and
must have that Authority, which is necessary, not only to defend it self
whilst injuries are inferred, but also to revenge them by war after they are
past, and so to procure not only just revenge, but also a secure and stable
peace for after times; for if one Common Wealth or Prince should invade
another, and yet could not be repelled, no Common wealth could long conserve
it self. Wherefore when a Kingdom or Common wealth is wronged, it may, not
only defend, but also revenge it self in manner aforesaid, for in this case
one must yield, and reason teaches that the Common wealth, which is nocent,
and which offers wrong, should rather yield, then that, which is innocent,
and receaueth wrong: and so if the innocent Common Wealth cannot conserve it
self whilst the other is in prosperity, it may make war upon it and ruin
it, or subiugate it, rather then it self should be ruined. And although none
but God and lawful Superiors can revenge wrongs past (according to that Mihi
vindictam and ego retribuam: Revenge to me, Deuteronomy. 31 and Romans 12. Romans 13.
and I will reward: and again. Dei enim minister est, vindex in iram ei, qui
malum agit: For he is the Minister of God, a revenger unto wrath to him that
does evil. And S. 1. Pet. 2.
PETER bids us to be obedient, not only to Kings, as excelling, but also to
rulers as sent by him, ad vindictam malefactorum, laudem vero bonoru^, to the
revenge of malefactors but to the praise of the good:) yet a Common wealth may
revenge it self upon another Common wealth that offers injury, by reason
that it has public and supreme Authority, and that the Common wealth that
offreth wrong makes it self subject to the wronged ratione delicti.

5. Upon this ground laid, I can now build diverse arguments to prove that
which is in this Chapter intended. The First Sequel.
For first hence it follows, that the Church may use defensive war, not
only against Christian Princes, but also even against Pagans and infidels, that
do molest her; because Nature teaches that every one may vim vi repellere,
repel force by force: and although the ordinary Arms and weapons of the
Church be Spiritual, as excommunication, and such like, yet when these will
not serve, she may use temporal. For as Christ in establishing a Church gave
it a Spiritual being, so he gave it Authority to conserve and defend this
being by all lawful means: And therefore if every one may use all lawful
means to defend, not only him self, but even his Temporal goods, and may
rather kill, then be killed, yea or spoiled of his goods, because natural
reason teaches, that when God and nature give any being, they give authority
to conserve and defend it, else their liberality had been in vain: So seeing
that Christ has given his Church a being, which consists in a Spiritual
power to preach, minister Sacraments, govern by laws etc. whosoever shall be so
hardy, as to offer to deprive her of this her being, and power, she may even
with Temporal arms, which otherwise are lawful, defend and mantaine her
right. And although Infidels, who were never baptized, be not subjects of the
Church, nor she their Superior, according to that of S. PAVL. 1. Cor. 5.
Quid mihi de his, qni foris sunt. iudicare? What is it to me to judge of the^
that are without? yet there is no superiority or public Authority required
to defend; for every private man may vim vi repellere, repel force by force,
much more may the Church, or any other Common wealth: else if a private man
might defend him self, and a Common wealth could not, the private man should be
in better estate, then a Common wealth, which is absurd. Sanderus lib. 2. de
visib. mo narch. cap. 4. page 90.
What (says our learned Country man Doctor SANDERS) if the Bishop should see
a soldier running through the streets with his sword drawn, ready to kill
every one that meets him, might not the Bishop command some to take his
sword from him for the defense of the people, and especially the Clergy? if
he may give one commission to take the sword in such a case from the soldier,
why might he not take it from the Captain; yea Prince, and Emperor? 2.2. q.
10 art. 10.
Hence it is that the Angelical Doctor S. Thomas says that the Church may
free Christians from subjection to Pagan Princes and take from the Princes
their Prelacie and Dominion over them. Yea, he says that the Church may
(though she use not so to do) free also Christians subject to Pagan Princes,
though the Princes be not subject temporallie to the Church.

6. Secondly hence I gather, The second sequel.
that the Church may make, not only defensive, but also offensive war
against any other Prince or Common wealth that shall notably molest or
persecute her, or invade her Ecclesiastical right. For the Church is an
absolute Common wealth, subject, at least in Spiritual matters, to no other.
Wherefore as England, if it were notably wronged by France, might wage war,
even offensive against it, and might not only defend it self from present
wrong, but might revenge it self also of injuries past, so may the Church make
war, even offensive against both Christians and Pagans for maintenance of her
right; for although Pagans, by reason that they are not baptized, and so not
subject to the Church, can not be excommunicated, or otherwise Spiritually
punished by her, as rebellious Christians may; yet they may be temporally
punished by temporal war, in regard that they are subjects (as much as is
required to inflict temporal punishments) ratione delicti, by reason of the
wrong. For so France is not now subject to England, and yet if it should wrong
England notably, England might punish it by temporal war, because it is
subject at least in this respect ratione delicti, by reason of the offense and
wrong offered. And if the Church may wage war offensive against Pagan
Persecutors, whom she cannot punish Spiritually, much more may she against
Christian persecutours and Spiritual Tyrants, that invade her right and
persecute her faith, else she were not an absolute Common wealth, nor had not
sufficient Authority to defend, and maintain her state. The sequel.


7. Thirdly, If one absolute and independent Common wealth may wage war
defensive and offensive against another, which is injurious, though otherwise
not subject, much more may the Church against the Civil Common wealth, seeing
that this is an inferior state, and truly subject in Spiritual matters. For
if, when two absolute and indepe^dent Common wealths are opposite, that which
is nocent and offers wrong, must yield to that which is innocent and endures
wrong, though otherwise it be neither subject, nor subordinate; much more, when
the Civil Common wealth is opposite to the Church, and that offreth wrong,
this receaueth, ought the Civil Common wealth to yield to this, it being not
altogether absolute, but subordinate and subject thereunto.

8. But our Adversaries object that the Church has no Temporal, An objection.
but only a Spiritual sword, and so can only excommunicate and inflict
Censures, but can neither defend nor offend by Temporal arms; but rather,
when her Spiritual sword will not suffice, she must have patience, having no
other weapons to use. And to this purpose they cite those words of S. PAVL; 2.
Cor. 10
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal; and those also of the same
Apostle: 2. Tim. 2
No man being a soldier to God intangleth him self with secular businesses.
Yea they urge even these words of our Savior: Mat. 26.
Return thy sword into his place. And they tell us plainly, that the Church,
that is, Ca. Clerici etc, quicun. que. 20. qu. 8. and cap. cos qui 20. q. 3.
The Answer.
Clergy men, are forbidden by her own Canons to make war. To this I have an
easy answer, yea many answers. First I answer that the ordinary weapons of
the Church are spiritual, but when they will not serve for her defense, in
some cases she may use temporal arms. Secondly I answer that the Church has
none but Spiritual arms, that is, spiritual power, but by this power she
can, not only punish* Spiritually, but also Temporally, and by it she can, not
only dispose of spiritual goods, but even of the Temporal, when it is
necessary to conserve the faith and authority of the Church. Thirdly, to
answer distinctly to every parcel of the objection, I say that the first
place is understood of the spiritual power of the Church, which is not
Temporal, nor carnal, but spiritual; but as this power directly and
ordinarily medleth only with spiritual matters and pumshments, so indirectly,
and in some cases for the necessary defense of the Church, it can command the
Temporal glaiue, and handle it also, when Princes at her commandment will not
use it to her end. The other place forbids only Clergy men to be to much
sollicitous and studious about Temporal affairs. The third place only
forbids to use the sword for revenge, and by private authority: And therefore
after CHRIST had bidden S. PETER put up his sword, 1. Pet. 2.
he adds that all that take the sword, shall perish with the sword; which
must needs be understood of private men, who indeed take it, but receive it not
from authority. For the Magistrate who receaueth the sword from the Prince,
may, and must use the same for the punishment of malefactors. As for the
alleged Canons which forbid Priests, and Religious to go to war. I grant
that ordinarily they must not go to warfare, because it is not beseeming their
function, and is for that cause forbidden; but yet by dispensation of the
Chief Pastor, they may, D. Th. 2.2. qu. 40. a. 2. ad 3 Caietan, ibidem.
Bannes ibid. dub 2. cou. 2. and dub. 3 con. 1. Couar. Relect. in Clement.
Furiosus p. 2.. 3. n. 2.
and in case of great necessity (as if otherwise the Common wealth could not
be defended) they may and must even without dispensation, because to this they
are bound by the law of Nature, from which the law of the Church does not
derogate, no more then Grace does from Nature, as all Divines do avouch. If
Priests then may fight and use their temporal sword and arms for the
necessary conservation of the Common wealth, much more may they for the
defense of the Church.

9. And certes, if the Church could not do this in such case of necessity.
CHRIST had not sufficiently provided for her, nor given her that Authority,
which is requisite to every absolute Common wealth. For what if Turks and
infidels should invade the Church, ruin her Temples and Monasteries, despoile
her of her Bishoprics and benefices, force her subjects to Idolatry and
superstition hinder by violence preaching, administration of Sacraments, and
all practice of Religion, what should the Church do? excommunicate these
persecutours? she cannot, having no Spiritual power over them, they being not
incorporated to the Church by baptism. And if she could, Psalm. 63.
they would contemn all such weapons tanquam sagittas paruulorum: as the
arrows of children. What then? must the Church stand still, and let the cruel
persecutour do his worst? must she expose her self, and her subjects to their
mercy, that have no mercy? Cerres, if in that case she might not take arms,
she were the vnablest and worst provided Common wealth that ever was. And what
if the heretics, Vide Baron. an. Christi 348. and Victorem Vticen. de Persec.
Wandalica.
who commonly are more cruel than Pagans (as the cruelty of the Arrians, and
even of Protestants and Puritans in France, the low Countries, and our Island
also, bears to evident witness) would use the like, or greater cruelty and
Tyranny against the Church and the true faithful people thereof? What
defensive Armor has CHRIST given her? Excommunication (you will say) or other
spiritual censures. But what if they also (as commonly they do) would contemn
all such arms and weapons? How shall the Church conserve her self and
withstand their cruelty? should she expose her throat and breast to the
Tyrants sword, her self and her subjects to his cruelty? should she permit
Sacraments and preaching to be forbidden, all exercise of Religion to be
hindered, and in lieu thereof all abomination to be set up and promoted? You
will say that after she has threatened Gods Judgments, used her spiritual
Arms and weapons, she has no more to do, having no Temporal Arms to use,
and so must commit all to God, But then say I, that CHRIST, who was incarnate,
and lived and dyed for the Church, had not sufficiently provided for her
defense. And they that say she can only have access in that case to God, are
like to those Philosophers who deny all power to second causes to produce
substantial forms and effects, and make God the only Author. But as these
Philosophers, are hissed out of the schools, because since God created all at
the beginning, he does nothing in Nature, but by second causes: so I say, that
VViddrington and others, who deny the Church all power to defend her self, are
unnatural Children, yea merciless and cruel enemies, in remitting her to God
only, who though he always hear our prayers and petitions, yet does not
always grant them. Wherefore we must find out a sword and an ordinary
second cause which may in this case defend the Church, and this is no other
then her Spiritual power, by which, as above is declared, she can dispose of
Temporal goods, and Kingdoms for the necessary conservation of the
spiritual good: For the better declaration whereof I demand of our
Protestants in England, if his Majesty should turn Catholic, and
consequently should put the ministers out of office, persecute them with sword
and fire, what would they do? They would perchance excommunicate him; but
what if he contemned such excommunication, as justly he might, they being no
true Bishops, what would they do? Truly if a man may guess by that they
teach and have practiced in Scotland, England, France, Germany and the low
countries, they would trust more to their sword then their word, as we shall
see herafter that they have done in the like case.

10. In disp. Theol. c. 3. n. 21. sect. 1. An objection of Widdr.
But Widdrington taxing the learned Suarez says; that if because the Church is
an absolute Common wealth, and consequently has sufficient Authority to
defend her self, we may infer that she may use, not only Spiritual, but
also Temporal arms, we must infer also, that God must give the Church not
only Authority to depose Princes, but also force and means to execute the
sentence of her deposition, The Answer.
which yet we see she always has not. I answer, that it is not necessary
that God should always give execution to matters: for the King and Common
wealth cannot always actually suppress Rebels and vanquish enemies; but yet
as if the King or Common wealth had not authority to defend it self by
defensive and offensive weapons, neither he, nor the Common wealth were
sufficiently by God and Nature furnished or provided for; so if Christ had not
given his Church power and Authority to defend and conserve her self by
Temporal arms, when the spiritual glaiue will not serve, he had not provided
sufficiently for her, neither had she had the Authority which is due to an
absolute Common wealth. And although God has promised to protect his Church to
the end, (as he promised to defend the Synagogue, and to continue the Kingdom
to David's posterity) yet he uses second causes for the execution and
performance of his said promise. And therefore as not withstanding his promise,
the Jews and David used humane means, as wars, and such like, for their
conservation; so may the Church when her spiritual power is contemned.

11. But although (as this Argument proves) the Church may use Temporal
arms in case of necessity, yet it is not so convenient that she should do it
by her self immediately, but rather by the hand of the Prince, when she can
induce him to undertake her cause and defense, and for that cause, though she
uses to deliver heretics brachio seculari, to the secular arm and power, yet
she uses not to punish them her self, not for that she cannot, but because it
is not convenient she should, but only when Temporal Princes will not do that
office for her, Lib 4. de consider. cap. 3. Joan. 10. Mar. 26.
whereupon S. BERNARD, alluding to those words of Christ: Convert gladium
tuum in vaginam, as he auerreth the power of handling the Temporal sword, so
he says it is not convenient for the Pastor to use it, but only to command
it. For thus he speaks to Pope EVGENIVS the third; Quid tu denuo gladium
vsurpare tentas, etc. What do thou go about to take to thy self again
that sword, which once thou wast commanded to put up in to the sheath? Which
yet, whosoever denies to be thine, does not seem to me to have sufficiently
attended to the word of out Lord, who said; Put up thy sword into the scabbart.
It is thine therefore and perchance at thy beck, though not by thy hand to be
drawn: otherwise if it did not any wise pertain unto thee, when the Apostles
said: Behold two swords here, our Lord would not have answered, It is enough,
but, It is to much. Therefore both the spiritual and material sword is the
Churches, but that is to be used for the Church* this also of the Church: Orat.
in Auxent. quae extat lib. 5. ^p. eius. post epist. 32.
that by the hand of the Priest, this by the hand of the soul^iour, but yet at
the beck of the Priest and commandment of the Emperor. And therefore when S.
AMBROSE says: Dolere potero, poteroflere, etc. I may be sorry, I may weep, I
may groan. Against arms, soldiers, and the Goths, my tears are my
weapons. For such are the arms and defenses of the Priest. Other wise I
neither must, nor can resist, When I say S. AMBROSE says that he has no
other arms but tears and prayers, he means only that the ordinary weapons
of the Church are Spiritual, but denies not but that in an extraordinary
case, the Church and Chief Pastor may use Temporal arms, when spiritual
weapons are not sufficient.

CHAPTER X.
The same verity is confirmed by the practice of the Church in punishing
heretics temporally, with loss of goods, liberty and lives.

1. THe Church is a City on a Hill, Matt. 5
and therefore so illuminated by the Son of Justice, that no cloud of error
can obscure or endarken her: Mat. 16.
She is builded on a Rock so surely that the gates of hell, heresies, can
never prevail against her: 1. Tim. 3.
She is the pillar of truth, and therefore can not maintain any untruth: She
is the Spouse of Christ, Osee 2.
and so privy to all his secrets: She is so guided by her Head Christ Jesus,
so directed by his, and his Fathers spirit the Holy ghost, that she can not
err either in her definitions, or general practices and customs: and
therefore S. AUGUSTINE says, that to call in question quod tota per orbem
frequentat Ecclesia: Aug. ep. 118.
that which the whole Church through out the world practices, is
insolentissima insania, most insolent madness. Amongst other of her practices
one is, and that very ancient and general to punish by sword, or fire, or
else by Temporal mulctes an obstinate Heretic; And therefore to doubt whether
it be lawful or no, August. ep. 48. and 50. l. M^nichaeos, l. A riani, and l.
quicunque, C. de haeret. Cap. ad abolendam, Ca. vergentis, c. exco^municamus 1.
and 2. de haeret.
is by S. AUGUSTINES rule most insolent madness, This practice, I know, pleases
not heretics, no more then the execution of Justice is liked of Malefactors.
And therefore the August. li. 2. contra epist. Parmen. ca. 7. lib. 2. contra
lit. Petil. cap. 10. and lib. 2. co^tra ep. Gaude^t. cap. 17. and 26.
Donatists and Joan. Huss. art. 14. Constantia damnat.
Hussits in times past, and of late Luth. in Assert. a. 33.
Luther to save their own skins, stiffly stand to it, that the Church cannot
punish heretics Temporally, especially with death; and the same In Assart.
art. 33.
Luther in one of his articles condemned by LEO the Tenth, says: haereticos
comburi estcontra voluntatem spiritus: that heretics should be burned is
against the will of the spirit. To whom not withstanding Calvin in practice
subscribed not, for he caused Michael Seruetus to be burnt, reserving for him
selue his goulden Chain, as Resp. page 54.
Restius reports; and both he and Beza by and by published in print, that it
is lawful to use the Temporal sword against Heretics, which also Benedictus
Aretius allows in his history De supplicio Valentini Gentilis. And certes
that Heretics may be temporally punished by the Church, I have already
proved by many places of scripture, especially out of the old Testament, out
of which I may argue for the Churches practice with S. Ciprian: Cypr de Exhort.
Martyrij cap. 1.
Si ante aduentum Christi circa Deum colendum, and Idola speruenda, haec
praecepta seruata sunt, qua^to magis post aduentum Christi sunt seruanda,
quando ille veniens non verbis tantum nos hortatus sit, sed and factis. If
before the Coming of Christ those precepts were observed touching the
worshipping of God, and rejecting of Idols: how much more are they to be
observed after the coming of Christ, seeing that he coming has not exhorted us
only by words, but also by deeds? Aug ep. 48 et. 50.
S. AVGVSTIN speaking of the heretics of his time says: Videte qualia
faciunt, and qualia patiuntur. Occidunt animas, and affligu^tur in corpore: See
what things they do, and what they suffer; they kill souls, and are punished
in body; they kill sempiternally, Lib. 2. co^tra lit. Petil ^a. 7. and li. 1.
contra. Parm. cap. 7. Council. Calced. Act. 1. Anton. 3. p^tit. 19. c. 1.. 4.
and suffer Temporal deaths. And in diverse other places he proves that they
may be punished Temporally; though once he was of opinion, that they should not
be forced by the sword, but persuaded only by the word. Dioscor^^ Bishop of
Alexandria in the first Action of the Council of Calcedon: Si Eutyches praeter
dagma Ecclesiae sapit, no^ solum paena dignus est, sed and igne. If Eutyches
think otherwise then the Church teaches, he deserves, not only to be
punished, but also to be burned. VVhereupon S. Antonine reports that in the
time of INNOCENTIVS the Third, no less then a hundred and fourscore Heretics
of the Albigenses were burned for obstinat and pertinacious maintaining of
their damnable sect. Council. Constat. sess 15. art. 14.
And in the Council of Constance JOHN HVS, and HIEROM of Prage were condemned
to the same death, In praem. Council. Nicen. Sozom. li. 1. c 20 Socr. li. 1 cap
6 and Niceph. li. 8. cap. 18. can. Ipsapietas 23. qu. 3 l. Quicunque C de
haeret. Et ca. ad abolendam, ca. verge^tis c. excom municamus v. c. absolutos
de haret Council. Lateran. sub Inn^c. 3. can. 3. l. Cuncti l. Ariani. l.
Manichaeos. C. de heret.
and ended their miserable life by fire. Where also Hvs his fourtenth Article,
in which he affirmed contrary to this practice, that the Prelates of the Church
in delivering Heretics to secular power, were like to the Scribes and
Pharisees, who procured Christ's death, and yet said: Nobis non licet
interficere quenquam; It is not lawful for us to kill any, was condemned.
Certes in the Council of NICE, ARRIVS books were commanded to be burnt under
pain of death, as he, and his followers were banished. In THEODOSIUS the
Emperors time heretics were mulcted and punished in their purses. And after
MARTIAN and VALENTINIAN decreed punishment of death against them. The Common
law also is full of Temporal punishments prescribed for heretics. They are
delivered up to the secular power to be punnished according to the Emperors
laws; their goods are confiscated; Advocates and Notaries, that favor them,
are sufpended from their offices, and made by the law infamous for ever; They
are deprived of the right of making their last Will and Testament, or
succeeding by Testament; and are condemned to perpetual prison; Finally those
that were bound to Heretics, are freed from their bonds.

2. If VViddrington answer that this Argument proves only that Heretics may
be punished, yet not by the Church, but by the Magistrate: I must tell him,
that if the Magistrate may punish Heretics, much more may the Church, because
the Magistrate and Prince, as he is not to judge which is heresy, so it
pertaines not to him to punish Heretics, Vide Suar^z lib. 4. de legibus cap.
11.
heresy being a crime which pertains to the Ecclesiastical, not to the
Temporal Court; and therefore that Princes by their laws do decree punishments
against heretics, they do it by commission from the Church, which is the cause
why the Church first delivers them up to secular power: whence follows that
the Church, who gives Authority to Princes to punish Heretics, may do it her
self when they are wanting in their office, which also all the Arguments
alleged do convince. And Widdrington cannot deny, Ca. ad ab solendum cap.
vergentis. c. Exco^municamus. ca. fin. de haereticis. and 15. q. 6. ca. not
Sanctorum.
that the Church does deliver up Heretics to secular power, which is a
temporal punishment, as also that she casts them into prison, confifcateth
their goods, makes them infamous, incapable of new secular offices, and of the
right and lawful execution of the old, makes them unable to make their last
will, or to succeed by Testament; yea and that by her decrees they be
excommunicated, and consequently deprived of all Civil society, which are in
like sort Temporal punishments. Moreover, it cannot be denied but that the
Council of Trent, sess. 25. cap. 3. Commands Ecclesiastical judges not to
use Censures but when there is urgent cause; and in lieu thereof to condemn
malefactors to pecuniarie mulctes.

3. And if the Church can thus punish ordinary Christians temporallie, she may
inflict Temporal punishments upon Kings, because although Kings as Kings are
superiors to their subjects, yet as Christians, and Christian Kings also,
they are as subject to the Church, as others, because (as above I have
declared) the reason why other Christians are subject to the Church, and her
visible Head and Pastor, is, because they are incorporated to the Church, and
made members thereof by baptism, and consequently subject to the whole body
and head, but Kings and Emperors are as well incorporated as other
Christians, being as well baptized and signed with as good and as vndefaceable
a caracter of baptism, ergo they are as subject. And then say I, If they be as
subject, they may by the Churches authority be punished as well as others, and
not only spirituallie, but also temporallie, as others may: and if once it be
granted that heretical and rebellious Princes may be punished by the Chief
Pastor by lesser penalties, as co^fiscations of goods, infamy, exile, and
such like punishments, which are inflicted on all obstinate heretics; then I
shall easily infer, that they may by the Church be deprived also of their
Kingdoms, that deprivation being a temporal punishment, and so of the same
order with the others; And though it be greater then many others, yet, why may
it not be inflicted for an enormious rebellion or injury against the Church?
This I say to prove that Princes by the Church may be punished temporallie
though the Church always bears and ought to bear that respect to Princes,
that she will not use te^porall punishments against Princes, no nor any
punishment at all, but only when wholesome admonition will not serve, and the
Church is much interessed.

CHAPTER XI.
The same power of the Pope over Princes is proved by authority of General
Counsels, out of which are gathered, for the same authority, evident and
conuincing arguments.

1. THe Authority of a General Council, confirmed by the Pope, quoad nos, in
respect of us (to whom a Council is better known then Scripture, though in it
self not of so great credit as Scripture) is the greatest in earth, and under
the cope of Heaven. For if a Council, especially General, confirmed by the
Chief Pastor, Act. 15.
notwithstanding that it represents the whole Church, contains all the
Chief Pastors of the Church, and has in it assembled all the learning,
wisdom, Authority, and sanctity, yea the holy Ghost for directour, may err:
who cannot err? And after such Authority rejected, whom shall we find of
greater Authority for interpreting Scripture, deciding controversies, clearing
doubts and difficulties, and enacting wholesome laws? Mat. 18.
Christ's bids us hold him for no better then an Ethnike and Publican who will
not hear the Church, and where, or when does the Church more expreslie deliver
her mind, or teach with more Authority, or command with more right to be
obeyed, then in a General Council? ^^au. 14. and 16.
And if in any place or co^munitie the holy Ghost presideth (as certes Christ
promised his Holy spirit to his Church, and the Apostles, and their
Successors) no doubt in a General Council he teaches all verity. Act. 15.
Hence it is, that S. PETER and the Council holden at Jerusalem, says: Visum
est spiritui sancto and nobis: 1. Tim. 3.
It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us. And if the Church be ever the
Pillar of truth, it is in a General Council: If ever Christ fulfilleth his
promise to be there where two or three are gathered together in his name,
Athan. in epist. de Synodie Arim. and Seleue.
he fulfilleth it in a General Council. Wherefore ATHANASIVS calls the
decree of the Council of NICE Sententiam Apostolicam, An Apostolical
sentence, and in another place he marueiles how any dare make any doubt,
Epist. ad Epict. Ambros. li. 5. epist. 32. Aug. ep. 162. and 118.
or move any question concerning any matters decided in that Council. S.
AMBROSE did give such credit to it, that he said neither death nor sword should
separate him from that Authority. S. AUGUSTINE calls the sentence of a
General Council the last sentence from which is no appeal, and says that
the Authority of Councels in the Church is saluberrima, most wholesome. Ciril
in dial. 1.
S. CIRILL of Alexandria calls a General Council Basim, and immobile
fundame^tum. Gregor. epist. 28.
A ground and immovable foundation. S. GREGORY the Great honored the four
first General Councels (to which the Council of Trent is equal in
Authority, consisting of as lawful Bishops) as the four Ghospelles, to wit
for their infallibility. This I thought good to premise, because Widdrington
and others seem not to give that respect to Councels, as the Authority of
them requires. Let us now see what the Councels say of this matter in hand,
and then let me see the face, that dares face out so great Authority.

2. And first let us see what the General Counsel of Latera^, held in the
year of our Lord 1215. under INNOCENTIVS the third, determines in this
matter. Surius praefat. in hoc Conc. Platina in Innocentie 3.
No man (says Laurentius Surius in his Preface to this Council) can doubt of
the Authority and generality of this Council, because in it were handled
matters of Religion, and determined also with great consent both of the Latin
and Greek Church, and in it were present the Patriatches of Constant inopole
and Jerusalem in their proper persons, the Patriatches of Alexandria and
Antioche by their Legates; Archbishops Latin and Greek 70. Bishops 412. Abbots
and Priours above 800. the total number of all the Prelares were at least
1215. The Legates also of the Greek, and Roman Emperors, of the Kings of
Jerusalem, France, Spain, England, and other Princes, were present with the
rest. This Council then, called the Great for the number of Prelates, in the
Third Chapter, after excommunication pronounced against Heretics, admonishes
secular powers, and commands them to purge their countries from Heretics,
and to promise the same by oath: then the Council adds: Si vero Dominus
temporalis etc. Council. Later. sub Innoc. 111. cap. 3.
But if the Temporal Lord being required and admonished by the Church, shall
neglect to purge his land or Territory from heretical lewdness, let him be
excommunicated by the Metropolitan and the rest of his Comprouinciall Bishops.
And if he contemn to satisfy within a year, let this (his contempt) be
signified to the Chief Bishop (the Pope) that from that time he (the Pope) may
denounce his vasalles freed from all fidelity unto him, and may expose his
land to be possessed by Catholics, who (heretics being exterminated) may
possess it without any contradiction, and conserve it in purity of faith
without prejudice to the Principal Lords, so that he put no obstacle nor
impediment, the same law notwithstanding observed concerning those who have not
Principal Lords. This Council I suppose to be of sufficient Authority, for
it was General, and in number of Prelates and Bishops surpassed the first
Council of NICE by many; It was of as great Authority, as any Council can
be, because the Authority to make laws, and to decide controversies,
depends not of the sanctity, but only of the lawfulnes of the Pastors, and
seeing that these Pastors could say as much for their ordination and vocation,
as the Fathers of the Council of NICE could, it must needs follow that this
Council (as are also all lawful General Councels) was of as great Authority
as was that of NICE, which our Sovereign Liege King JAMES admits with the
other first three General Councels, In pr^f. monit. page 37.
and consequently cannot reject this, which is of the same Authority. To say
that the Pope speaks only of them, who are subject temporally to his
Temporal Authority which he has in Italy, were ridiculous, because the
words are General; and if they were restrained to Italy, the decree could
have had little force. To say that absolute Princes are not comprehended in
this decree, but only inferior Princes, who hold feudum Regale of them, is
absurd; for a little before this alleged decree, the Counsel ordained that
seculares potestates, secular powers, must take an oath to expel heretics out
of their countries, which words secular powers agree to absolute Kings and
Emperors, else when S. PAVL commanded that every soul be subject to higher
powers, potestatibus sublimi^ribus, Romans 13.
Kings and Emperors must be excepted, because they go not under the name of
Powers. And immediately after this admonition the Council adds the alleged
decree: Si vero Dominus Temporalis etc. But of the Temporal Lord etc. Where
she calls the same Dominos Temporales, Temporal Lords, whom before she
called Potestates saeculares, Secular powers. And are not Kings and Emperors
Domini Temporales, Temporal Lords? yea and principally, and more properly to
be called so, then those Princes that hold of others? If Widdrington would
deny this Title to our King, he would be counted a Traitor. And what can they
allege against those others so express words: eadem nihilominus lege seruata
circa eos, qui non habent dominos principales, the same law not withstanding
observed concerning those who have not principal Lords? In which words even
Kings and Emperors are comprehended, for they especially have no Temporal
Lords.

3. But let Widdrington understand by secular powers and Temporal Lords whom
he will (as certes he spends many words to show that by Temporal and
principal Lords absolute Princes are not understood) if the Pope could make
a decree of deposition against inferior Princes, why not against supreme
Princes, they in that they are Christians being as subject to the Church and
her Chief Pastor as other Christians of inferior degree? Widdr. in
discussione discussion^s Decreti Council. Lat. sec. 5. a. n. 3.
Widdrington answers that the Pope and General Council may make a decree of
deposition against inferior magistrates or Lotdes by consent and Authority
given them by Sovereign Princes, but he can not make a decree of deposition
against supreme Princes, because they never consented, never gave him
Authority against them selves. Idem sec. 5. nu. 15.
Hence Widdrington says also, that all temporal mulctes, and punishments
which the Church decrees, she decrees by authority given her from Princes,
and that therefore in such penal laws Christians may refuse to obey, till they
know that the Prince gave the Pope, and Council such Authority; yea, that in
these laws they may appeal from Pope, or General Council to the Princes.
But as in other things, Widdrington to hold up the cause whose defense he
has undertaken, is forced to help him self with the worst opinions, and to
seek authority from the obscurest Authors, and these of the least credit; So
deals he in this: for he is not ignorant, that whatsoever some one, or two
Authors may say, that all the current of Divines mislike them in this, and
count it strange, yea and absurd, to say that all the penal laws of the
Church, which prescribe Temporal mulctes related in the Canon law, and in
Councelles; should have their force not from the Councelles and Pastors, but
from Kings and Princes. For although they confess, that Princes gave to the
Pope his Temporal Demaines, and consequently Temporal and princely
Authority within the limits of the same; yet in what meeting of Princes, in
what Council, did ever Princes conspire to give the Pope Temporal Authority
through out the whole Church? And in the last General Council of Trent in
which diverse Temporal penalties are decreed, what mention is there of the
Princes donation of Authority to the Council? Princes and Emperors by them
selves or their Legates are present at the Council to protect the Fathers, to
assist them for execution of their laws, but that they ever gave authority
to the Council to enact any Temporal law, or that the Fathers of the Council
and the Chief Pastor of the Church demanded license and Authority of the
Emperor or Princes to make such laws, who ever read? who ever heard? And why
could not the Princes, why would not they them selves enact such laws in their
own name (as sometimes they have don against Heretics) that being a thing
more honorable for them and less dangerous to them, seeing that by permitting
Popes and Bishops to do it, they might derogate to their own authority and
give occasion to them to prescribe against them and to do it not in the Princes
but in their own name and Authority? And when did WIDDRINGTON hear that any
good Christians appealed from the Church and Pope in these laws unto Princes
as to their highest Superiors? when did they reject any of these laws till
they had informed them selves that they were made not by the Churches but by
the Princes authority? Certes WIDDRINGTON in this opens a wide gap for
Heretics and all contemners of the Churches authority. And what may he not
defend if he be permitted to use this liberty and audacitie? As for his
Authors we shall see hereafter in the ensewing thirteenth Chapter, how many
they are and of what Authority.

4. Wherefore my Argument shall proceed as it began in this manner: The Pope by
VViddrington can make a Decree to depose inferior Temporal Lords ergo
Supreme Princes, they as Christians being as subject te the Church by Baptism
(as above is showed in the 5. Chapter number. 4.5.6.) as much as the lowest
Christians, though in that they are absolute Princes they have no Superior but
God in Temporal Authority. To say that Pope INNOCENT made this Decree of his
own head, is but to show great ignorance, for in General Councels Popes speak
ex Cathedra, and as public, not private persons; and what they decree, is With
the common consent of all the Bishops, or the most part; else if the Pope
should do all of his own head, in vain should he assemble General Councels.
But that all the Council and Christian world consented to this decree, it is
clear enough, for that no mention is made of any variance betwixt the Pope,
and the Council in this matter. To say that the true Council of Laterane is
not extant, or that the Canons extant were compiled only by INNOCENTIVS,
because in this Council, the Council of Laterane (though not this, but
another) is cited and alleged, are so improbable euasions, that they merit
not confutation, and are very suffieientlie rejected by the book called
Discussio decreti Magni Concilij Lateranensis.

5. One thing there is bearing more show, which our Adversaries might allege,
to wit, that if this Council did in express terms define that the Pope has
power to depose Princes, they would then yield, because what a General
Council with the Pope defines directly, and expressly, is a mattet of faith,
and it is heresy to gainsay it. But seeing that all things spoken, or written
in a Council are not matters of faith, (for, as Divines commonly say, the
reasons which the Council brings for confirmation of her decree, and those
things which are spoken incidentlie, Bellarm. lib 2. de Council. cap. 11. and 12.
and the things which are determined as probable, are not of necessity to be
believed) it seems that by this decree we are not bound to believe that the
Pope can depose Princes; because though the Pope and Council make a decree of
deposition, yet they define not expressly nor sub Anathemate, under pain of
Curse, that the Pope can depose Princes.

6. But who so pleases to consider this decree well, and without all passion,
or partial affection, must needs confess, that this decree ought to be of
very great credit: for first the Pope and Council suppose at least that the
pope can depose Princes, else they would never have made such a Decree, and
consequently this decree argues that the Pope and all the Prelates, Princes,
and Legates present, were of that opinion, which no doubt, they being so many
and so learned, must needs bear a great sway amongst all good Christians; for
what they thought, all the Christian world, at least for the most part,
thought, all receiving and approouing this Council. But widdringto^ will say,
that he will not deny, but that they all thought so piouslie, and probably,
yet because they defined not in express terms that the Pope can depose
Princes, he will not believe it. A peremptory Answer certainly, and wherein
(to say no more) the Answerer shall show him self very slow and hard of
belief, and to hardy also, who blusheth not to gainsay so many learned and
godly Prelates, and whom so many grave countenances and Judgments can not
move.

7. But I will deal yet another Way, and out of the self same decree.
Although the Pope and Council in the alleged decree do not expreslie define
that Popes can upon just cause depose Princes, yet it argues that they, nor
only probably, but verily, and assuredly thought he could, else to have
grounded so odious a decree, and injurious also (if the Pope have not
Authority) upon a probable opinion, had been great rashness. For the Council
had exposed thereby (if the opinion had not been supposed most assured) the King
and Common wealth, yea and sometimes the whole Church to vprores, garboiles,
rebellious wars, and such like: And war should have been just also on both
sides: For the subjects might have refused to obey the deposed Prince, as being
freed by a General Councels authority from all obligation to him, and being
warranted by the same Council, that now he is no more their King, but an
usurper and Inuader, against whom every particular man has iustum bellum;
just war. And so as if a foreign Prince should unjustly invade France
without just title or wrong received, every Frenchman might resist him, if he
could, because he having no Title, all the Kingdom, and every particular
member has just war against him; so if a Prince deposed persist in
government, he is according to the Popes and Councels opinion (which
VViddrington confesses to be probable) an usurper and inuader, and
consequently every one of his former subjects has just war against him,
Cicero lib. 3. de offic. H^rodotus lib. 3. Xiphilin. in Augusto. Alexa^d, ab
Alex. li. 3. c. 26 D. Th in 2. d. vlt. q. 2. a. 2. ad 5 Sot. lib. 5. de Just.
q. 1. art 3. and alij infra cap. 15. citandi.
no less then (as all the best Philosophers and Divines teach) the subjects
have against an usurper of the crown. And yet this Prince deposed might
justly also persist in his possession, because no man is bound to forgo that,
to which he has probable right, being warranted by the rule of the law Reg. 65
de Regulis Iuris, in 6.
In pari delicto velcausa potior est conditio possidentis. In the like default
or cause, better is the condition of him that is in possession. And again:
Reg. 11 ibid.
Cum sunt iura partium obscura, reo fauendum est potius quam Actori. When the
rightes of the parties are obscure, the guilty or accused is to be favored
before the Actour or accuser: But the Prince in this case has, according to
VViddrington, probable right, and is in possession; and he is reus, not Actors
ergo he may stand in his own defense, and by wars defensive may maintain
his possession: And then to what injuries and gatboiles the Church should
expose Kings subjects and Kingdoms, and consequently the whole Church, who
sees not, but he that is wilfully blind, and will not open his eyes? so that
either the Council of Laterane was temerarious and rash to build so perilous a
Decree upon no assured, but only probable opinion; or she thought assuredly
that the Pope had such Authority; and then every obedient Child of the Church
should rather follow hers, then Widdringtons, and some few his companions
opinion. For certes, otherwise as it is injustice to put one out of his land or
house, who has probable right, and withal possession, because potior est
conditio possidentis, better is the condition of him that is in possession. So
were it open injustice in the Pope to deprive a King of his Crown and
Kingdom, who has probable right (because it is, as Widdrington says, but
probable, not assured, that the Pope can depose him) and who yet has
possession. He answers that the Church commands the Feast of the
Conception, and the Pope has given authority to simple Priests to confirm,
and moreover dispensed with Princes in the solemn vow of Religion, which yet
are grounded but on probable opinions: But the foresaid Author in his
discussion of this Decree, has very well showed that such inconuenienecs
follow not upon these Decrees, which are not so dangerous, nor concern not the
whole Church, as this decree does, but only particular persons, and therefore I
will not actum agere.

8. But here I can not but observe how cunningly Widdrington in his new
yeares-gifte endeavors to make his Reader believe that I made this Argument
against my self. In his new years gift page 43. and 52.
For whereas I out of the decree of the General Counsel of Lateran (which I
supposed to be just) had inferred, that the opinion which holds, that the
Pope can in some case depose a Prince (on which this decree is grounded) must
needs be more then probable, and no less then certain; else if it were but
probable that the Pope can depose a Prince it were probable also that the
Prince deposed had still probable Title, and so being in possession, should
unjustly be dispossessed; because better is the condition of the possessour,
who has probable right: VViddrington takes it for a probable opinion only
that the Pope can depose a Prince, (whieh I always denied and disprooued) and
thence infers, and (as he would seem) even by my argument, and Confession,
that the Pope cannot without open injustice depose a Prince. Where I desire the
Reader to note, how I (as all modest Catholics should do) do attribute so
much to the Councelles decree that by it, I prove it to be a certain opinion
that the Pope can depose a Prince in some case, else the decree had been
unjust: VViddrington notwitstanding this decree, holds still that it is but a
probable opinion, that the Pope can depose a Prince, and thence infers, that
the Pope can not justly depose, and so is not ashamed, nor afraid to confess
in effect that this decree of that so great, and General Council is unjust:
which with what modesty he can do. I report me to all modest Catholics, and
to the judgment of all judicious Readers.

9. Lastly I will yet try another way to persuade these kind of men, which
if they contemn, Mat. 18.
they can hardly avoid that imputation of Ethnikes and Publicanes, which
Christ him self lays on them that will not hear the Church. For not only
that, which is expreslie, and in actu signato defined by the Council, is to be
believed under pain of heresy, but also that, which in actu exercito is
defined. I will explicate my self. If the Pope, especially with a General
Council, decree or enact any General law, which he commands to be observed
of the whole Church, he does not expresselie and in actu signato define the
thing to be lawful which he commands, but yet he does in actu exercito and
tacit define it to be lawful, because if he cannot err in prescribing
general laws to the universal Church (as if he could, the whole Church,
which must obey her Chief Pastor, should err with him) it follows
necessarily that he has infallible assistance in enacting such laws, and
consequently that it must not only be probable, but also certainly true, yea
and so true, that it is not only temeritie and rashenes, but also obstinate
heresy to hold that it is unlawful, which the Pope thus commands. Bellarm.
lib 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 5. Du Valle lib. de suprema Romans Pont. in Ecclesiam
potestate part. 2. q. 7.
This is the opinion of Bellarmine, which he proves also very solidlie. The
same a learned Doctor of the Sorbonnes, and Chief Reader in Divinity called
Du Valle holds, and (as Divines know) it is the common opinion, though some
few hold the contrary. Du Valle has these words: Han^ autem
(infallibilitatem) non minus, quam in fidei definitionibus agnoscunt omnes
Catholici Doctores. But this (Infallibllitie) no less then in definitions of
faith all Catholic Doctors do acknowledge. This both Bellarmine and he, as
others also, prove by many Arguments. For First, if the Pope could command an
unlawful thing, he should command vice for virtue, and might forbid virtue as
unlawful: whence should follow that the Church (which must obey her Chief
Pastor) should err in a matter necessary to salvation; for she should
embrace vice for virtue, and imbracinge that, should be no more Holy. Yea then
the Church should err in a matter of faith, because if the Pope co^ma^d vice
for virtue, the Church, which must give ear to her Chief Pastor, should
embrace it as lawful, and consequently should embrace a thing against faith;
for, as it is against faith to say or think that Christ is not reallie in the
Blessed Sacrament, so is it to say or think that vice is virtue: which yet the
Chief Pastor should teach in commanding, and the Church should believe in
embracing and observing? Whence I infer that the former decree of the
Council is a matter of faith, and necessarily to be believed. For by this
decree, the Pope and Council of Lateran do absolve the subjects from obedience
and fidelity by a General Decree, and do depose the Prince from his Kingdom,
which if it were unjust (as it must needs be, if the Pope had no Authority)
the Pope and Council should err in a matter against faith, because the
Catholic faith teaches, that virtue is good, vice is evil and unlawful; and
yet if this decree of deposition of the Prince and absolution of his subjects
from their fidelity were against justice, the Church, which must obey her
Chief Pastor, should be bound to think injustice to be justice, and vice to
be virtue, which is against faith. And therefore if VViddrington, notwitstanding
this decree, will obstinate lie hold, that the Pope cannot depose a Prince, or
free his subjects from their fidelity and allegiance, he must grant, that
either the Pope with the Council commands against faith, or that he
disobeyeth against faith, not believing that to be just, which the Pope
decrees with a General Council. This decree of this Great Council does so
trouble and pussle VViddrington that in his book entitled discussio
discussionis, sec. 1.
he endeavors by many Arguments (though as he would seem in the name of
others) to make this Council of little credit: which was not the Spirit of the
learned Cardinal Allan, Chap. 4.
who in his Answer to the Libeller calls it the famous Council of Lateran,
and coming to allege this decree of the Fathers of that Council, he thus
pronounces: These then are the words of their most renowned decree.

10. The same Arguments I may draw out of the General Council of Lions, Cap.
1 de homicidio in 6.
which has this decree: Sacri approbatione Concilij statuimus etc. By the
approbation of the holy Council we do decree that whatsoever Prince,
Prelate, or whatsoever Ecclesiastical or secular person shall cause, or
command any Christian to be killed by the aforesaid Murderers (although death
thereby do not follow) or shall receive or defend, or hide them, shall incur,
ipso facto, the sentences of excommunication, and deposition from his dignity,
honor, office, and benefice, and that the same may be given freely to others
by them, to whom the collation appertains.

11. Likewise another Council of Lions, and General also, held in the year
of our Lord 1245. Ex Nauclero, Aemilio, Platina.
at which were present BALDVINE the Emperor and S. LEWIS of France, INNOCENT
the fourth, with with consent of the Council deposed FREDERICK the second, and
absolved his subjects from their oath made unto him, commanded under pain of
Excommunication all his adherents to leave him, and not to obey him as
Emperor, and gave permission to the Electours to choose another in his place.
Extat. cap. Ad Apostolicae, de sent. and re iud in 6. Vide etiam Westmo naest.
an. 1245. Mat. 16.
The Decree is this: Nos itaque super praemissis, etc. We therefore with our
brethren, and the Holy Council having premised a diligent deliberation about
the aforesaid, and many other his heinous excesses; seeing that we, though
unworthy, supply the place of CHRIST in earth, and that to us in the person
of Blessed Peter it was said: Whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, it
shall be bound also in heaven; do declare and denounce the aforesaid Prince, who
has made him self unworthy of Empire, kingdoms, and all honor and
dignity, and who for his iniquities is rejected of God from raygning and
ruling, to be tied in his own sins, and as an abject, deprived of all honor
and dignity: and yet not withstanding by sentence we deprive him, and
absoluing perpetually all who are bound to him by oath of fidelity from this
oath, do by Apostolical Authority firmly forbid that any hence forth do
obey him as Emperor etc.

12. GREGORY the seventh in a Council at Rome in the year of our Lord 1076.
excommunicated and deposed HENRY the fourth for many his insolences, outrages,
and enormities. Vide Baron. an 1076. n. 25.
The Excommanication begins thus: Beat Petre Apostolorum Princeps, inclina,
quaesumus, pias aures tuas nobis, and audi me seruum tuum, quem ab infantia
nutristi, and vsque ad hunc diem de manu iniquorum liberasti, qui me pro tua
fidelitate oderunt and odiunt. Tu mihi testis es, and Domina mea Matter Dei, and
Beatus Paulus frater tuus inter omnes sanctos, quod tua Sancta Roman^ Ecclesia
me inuitum ad sua gubernacula traxit etc. Blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles,
we beseech the^ to incline thy pious ears unto us, and to hear me^ thy
servant, whom from my infancy thou have nourished, and unto this day have
delivered from the hands of the wicked, who have hated and do hate me for my
fidelity toward thee. Thou art my witness, as is also my Lady the Mother of
God, and Blessed Paul thy brother amongst all the Saints, that thy holy
Roman Church drew me against my will to her government etc. Then a little
after he adds the Excommunication and deposition it self: Hac itaque fiducia
fretus, pro Ecclesia tuae honor and defensione, ex part omnipotentis Dei
Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti, per tuam potestatem and Authoritatem,
Henrico Regi Fi^io Henrici Imperatoris, qui contra tuam Ecclesiam inaudita
superbia insurrexit, totius Regni Teutonicorum and Italiae gubernacula
contradico, and omnes Christianos a vinoulo iuramenti, quod sibi fecere and
facient, absoluo; and vt nullus ei sicut Regi seruiat interdico etc. Therefore
building upon this confidence, for the honor and defense of the Church, in the
behalf of the omnipotent God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, by
thy power and Authority, I do take from King Henry the son of Henry the
Emperor, who by an unwonted pride never heard of has made insurrection
against thy Church, the government of the whole Kingdom of the Almaines and of
Italy, and do absolve all Christians from the bond of oath, which they have
made, or shall make unto him, and I do forbid any to serve him as King. But
because the Emperor, after this, submitted him self, and promised by solemn
oath satisfaction, and showed exteriourly great penance; the Pope to show that
he desired not his deposition, but as a means to the Churches true peace, and
his salvation, absolved him from excommunication in the Castle of CANVSIVM,
where then the Pope was, and admitted him to the Mass, which he celebrated:
and in the Mass called the Emperor unto the Altar, and holding the Blessed
Sacrament in his hand, said to the Emperor: Ego iam pridem ate tuisque
fautoribus literas accepi, quibus me insimulasti sedem Apostolicam per
simoniacam haeresim occupasse. I long since have received letters from thee and
from thy fautours, by which thou have accused me to have entered into
possession of the Apostolical seat by Simoniacall heresy. And though (says
he) I could bring other testimony of those that knew my life from my
Childhood, and were Authors of my promotion: ego tamen (says he) ne humano
potius quam diuino niti videar testimonio, vt satisfactionis compendio omnem
omnibus scandali scrupulum de medio auferam: Ecce Corpus Dominicum, quod
sumptur us ero, in experimentum mihi hodie fiat Innocentiae meae, vt omnipotens
Deus suo me body iudicio vel absoluat obiecti criminis suspicione, si innocens
sum, vel subitanea interimat morte, si reus sum. Yet I (says he) least I
should seem rather to lean unto humane testimony, then divine, that I may by
a compendious satisfaction take from all, all scruple of scandal; behold our
Lords Body which I shall take and receive, let it be to me this day a trial
or experiment of mine Innocence, that Almighty God may this day either absolve
me by his Judgment from suspicion of the crime objected against me, if I be
Innocent, or may kill me by sudden death, if I be guilty. Then he demanded of
the Emperor, whether he would make the like protestation, but he having a
guilty conscience durst not. After this the Emperor contemning all former
promises and oaths, returned to his vomit. Wherefore the same Pope in the
Council also at ROME anno 1080. excommunicated him again, and again declared
him still deposed, being before only absolved from excommunication, and
admitted to the Communion.

10. Widdr. Disput. Theol. c. 3. sect. 1. n. 8.
But VViddrington excepteth against this Council, for that it was not
General. But certes the Authority of this Council is sufficient to move any
true Christian heart, and child of the Church. For many things give this
Council great credit: First (as Schulckenius well observes) it was confirmed
by the Pope, Schulck. in Apol. pro Bellarm. page 260.
which (according to the common opinion) makes a matter of faith, because to
PETER, and consequently to the Pope it was said: and super hanc Petram
aedificabo Ecclesiam meam: Luc. 22.
and upon this Rock will I build my Church, and to him CHRIST said: Ego rogaui
pro te Petre vt non deficiat fides tua: and tu aliquando conuersus, confirma
fratres tuos. I have prayed for thee, PETER, that thy faith fail not; and thou
once converted confirm thy brethren. Where CHRIST, prayed for PETER as a
public person, and that he might not err in teaching others, because CHRIST
prayed for him, that he might confirm others, and so if the Chief Pastor do
speak ex Cathedra, though not in a General, but only in a Provincial
Council, it makes a matter of faith, according to the common D. Th. 2.2. q. 1.
art. 10. Walde^s. lib. 2. doctrine. Fidei cap. 47. et 48 Turrecr. l. 2. summae.
cap. 109. Driedo lib. 4. de Eccles. dogm. ca. 3. par. 3. Caiet. in opusc. de
potestate Papae and Conc. ca. 9. Canus lib. 6. de locis, c. 7. Bellarm. lib. 4.
de Pont. c. 2. Du Valle l. de supr. Po^t. Author. par. 2. q. 1. and alij.
opinion. For although many heresies were condemned by General Councels, yet
far more by Popes with their ordinary Council, or Provincial Councels
only, as the Quartadecimi by Pope VICTOR, the Nouatians by CORNELIUS, the
Pelagians by INNOCENTIVS and ZOZIMVS, and many other heretics and heresies by
other Popes without General Councels. All which to call in question were to
bring into doubt many Decretall Episties, and to give a great scope to many
Heretics to plead not guilty, as not being condemned by a General Council.
Secondly the Pope that decreed the deposition of HENRY the fourth was a great
Saint, who was brought up, as him self often confesses, from a child in the
school of S. PETER, and so knew well the practice of the Church: he wrought
miracles living and dead, and left many other testimonies of his great
sanctity, and innocence of life. All which is abundantly testified by diverse
authors, whom Bellar. lib. 4. de Romans Pont. cap. 13.
Bellarmine cites, and is recorded also by Baron. tom. 11. an. 1084. n. 10.
and an. 1085. n. 11. and 13.
Baronius. Thirdly his successors VICTOR the third, VRBANVS the second,
PASCHALIS, and others approved this sentence of Excommunication and
deposition. Fourthlie, all the Christian world, except a few Schismatikes
followers of the Emperor, and the Antipape whom he set up, favored and
approved the sentence, as is easy to be seen in Baron. to. 11. in Greg. 7.
Baronius. WILLIAM the Co^querour King of England, PHILIP King of France,
ALPHONSVS King of Castile, CANVTVS King of Denmark, ROBERT Count of Flanders,
and other Princes held with GREGORY the seventh. Yea the learned and holiest
Bishops, and Abbots were all for GREGORY the seventh, as HVGO Abbot of Clunie,
BERNARDVS Abbot of Massilia, DESIDERIVS Abbot of Cassina, and after successor
to Pope GREGORY, chosen so much against his will, that for a year he would
not undertake the charge, S. ALPHONSE Bishop of Salernum, our learned LANERANC
Archbishop of Canterbury, Saint ANSELME Bishop of Luca, Abbas Vrsperg. ad an.
1080.
to whom Vrspergensis, though a Schismatic, gives this commendation: Anselmus
Lucensis liter is apprime eruditus, ingenio acutissimus, facundia praecipaus,
and quod omnibus maius est, in Dei timore and sancta conuersatione
nominatissimus, adeo vt tam in vita, quam post mortem referatur miraculis
clarus. Anselme of Luca greatly learned, most sharp of wit, principal in
Eloquence, and (which is more then all) most famous for his fear of God and
holy conversation, in so much that he is said to have floruished with miracles
in his life time and after his death. So this Schismaticke, who followed the
Emperor, and Guibert the Antipape, says of him. This S. ANSELME wrote an
Epistle to Guibert the Antipape, Baron. anno 1080. number. 29.
in which he compared GRBGORIE the seventh to S. CORNELIUS Pope, and called
Guibert the Antipape a Preuaricatour. Lastly all the Christian world, saving
the Schismatikes, applauded it, none called this deposition in question, none
but Schismatikes doubted of his Authority. So that the Emperor was deposed,
as it were by consent of the whole Church.

14. I could allege also that this Council, in which HENRY the fourth was
deposed, did not only depose him, but also did define that the Pope can depose
Princes: for to the same Council, Baron. tom. 11. an. 1076. number. 31.
as BARONIVS affirms, appertain GREGORY the seventh his Breuiores
sententiae, shorter sentences, which are entitled Dictatus Papae, amongst which
this is one: Quod Papae liceat Reges deponere. That it is lawful for the Pope
to depose Kings. Another is: Quod a fidelitate iniquorum subiectos potest
absoluere. That he can absolve subjects from their fidelity promised to wicked
(Kings,) Neither are Widdringtons exceptions against these short sentences,
Widdr. Disput. Thcol. c. 3. sect. 1. n. 6.
and definitions of any moment. As for example; Suppose (says he) these
sentences were defined in that Council of Rome; Quomodo tibi constat eat
tanquam propositiones ad fidem pertinentes, and non vt probabiles solum
assertiones definitas esse? How know thou that those propositions are
defined as appertaining to faith, and not as probable assertions only? By which
exception he might except almost against all the Canons in all the General
Councels, and even against the General Council of Trent, in whose Canons he
shall find Anathema pronounced but seldom in the doctrine defined in the
Chapters; And so when the Council defines any thing, he might say, unless an
Anathema be added, as always it is not, that what the Council defines,
Widdr. supra, n. 7.
was defined but as probable. He excepteth also that in an other of these
definitio^s it is defined quod Romanus Pontifex. si Canonice fuerit ordinatus,
meritis B. PETRI indubitanter sanctus efficitur: That the Roman Bishop, if he
be Canonicallie ordained, is made undoubtedly a saint by the merits of S.
PETER: which is true taken in the right sense, because though every Pope be
not a saint in life and manners, yet he is a saint in office, because his
office is holy, and so even Emperors are holy, and therefore be styled Sacra
Maiestas, Sacred Majesty. Bell, li. ^ de Romans Pont. c. 8. and tract. de
potest. sum. Po^t. contra Barcl. page 28. and seqq. Schulck. page 29.
Many other Councels I could allege, as Bellarmine and Schulckennius have
done: but these shall suffice all General Councels yea and provincial also,
if they be confirmed by the Pope (according to the common opinion) being of
infallible Authority. Who lists to see the other Councels, let him read the
Authors prealleadged.

CHAPTER XII.
By the facts of the holy and learned Bishops of Rome, especially before
Gregory the seventh, the same power is confirmed.

1. MY Arguments, which I shall bring in this Chapter I ground in the factes
of Popes, Bellarm. supra, and Schulck. page 36. Azor. 10. 2. lib. 10. cap. 8.
whom Bellarmine, Schulckenius, and others commonly produce, to prove that
the Pope can depose Princes. For although Popes may err in matters of fact,
yet if it had been an unjust, and not to them an assured matter, so many, so
learned, and so holy Popes, would never have attempted such a thing. And many
of these depositions were decreed in Councels also. Schulkenius has produced
twenty eight Popes that have denounced deposition against Emperors, Kings, and
Princes. I shall content my self with the Popes, who before GREGORY the
seventh have meddled with crowns and scepters; partly because our Adversaries
affirm that GREGORY the Seventh was the first that meddled with Temporal
states of Princes; partly because they confess that GREGORY the Seventh, and
others after him, have deposed Princes; partly also because they seem to give
more credit to those former, then these later Popes, although in deed all have
the same Authority of which only, and not of sanctity of life, deposition
depends,

2. S. GREGORY the Great, in two Epistle, Greg. li. 11. epist. 10. and lib.
12. epist. 32.
threatens deposition, not only against Bishops and Priests, but also against
Kings, Judges, and whatsoever secular persons that shall be so hardy as to
infringe or violate privileges by him granted to the AVGVSTVNENSES, and to the
Monastery of S. MEDARD. For he says in the first place: Si quis Regum etc. If
any King, Priest, Judge, or secular person acknowledging the tenor of this our
constitution shall presume to do contrary thereunto, potestatis, honorisque
sui dignitate careat, let him want the dignity of his power and honor. In the
second place he says: Si quis autem Regnum etc. But if any King, Prelate,
Judge or other secular person whatsoever shall violate or contradict the
decrees of this Apostolic authority and our command, or shall disquiet and
trouble the Brothers (of the Monastery) or shall ordain otherwise then thus,
cuiuscunque dignitatis vel sublimitatis sit, honor priuetur, of what dignity
or place soever he be, let him be deprived of his honor. Which is an argument
that S. GREGORY thought he could deprive them; as those also must needs have
acknowledged, who subscribed to the later of the foresaied decrees, to wit,
thirty Bishops of several countries and Provinces, together with the King
and Queen of France.

3. Codrenus and Zonaras in vita Leonis Isauri. Sigebert. in Chron. an. 728.
and alij.
S. GREGORY the second, as above, deprived LEO Isauricus of Italy, and the
Gabelles of that province. Platina in Gregorio III. Ado in Chro^. an. 744. Ced.
in vita Leonis Isauri. Rheg. li. 2 Chronicles. Sigebert. an. 750. Paul. Aemil. li.
2. de rebus gest. Fra^c Fasc. Te^p. in Zach. Otho Frising. li. 5. hist. c. 55.
Marian. Scot. li. 3. Paulus Diac. li. 6 deff. Longob. ca. 5. Bonif. ep. ad
Zach. Pont.
Some attribute this to GREGORY the third; but the reason is, because he
confirmed the former excommunication and deposition anno 730.

4. ZACHARIAS Pope deposed CHILDERIC King of France, freed all his subjects
from their fidelity to him, and gave his Kingdom to PIPINE Father to CHARLES
the Great, and before Mayor domus. This Ado Viennensis, Cedrenus, Rhegino,
Sigibert, Paulus Aemiliue, Fasciculus Temporum, Otho Frisingensis, Marianus
Scotus, Paulus Diaconus, and S. Boniface do avouch. True it is that the Peers
and Nobles of France desired it, and sent Legates to the Pope; but the Pope was
he, by whose Authority he was deposed, what soever Barclaie and VViddrington
say to the contrary. And therefore the Old Chronicon of France, set forth by
Pitheus, says that the Pope said, it was better he should be King, who had all
the power (as PIPINE being Mayor Domus had, the King doing nothing) then he
that had the name only: dataque Authoritate sua iussit PIPINVM Francorum Regem
institui; and by power given, commanded Pipine to be instituted King. Likewise
the Author of Fasciculus Temporum says: Ipse (ZACHARIAS) reg^^ Francorum,
scilicet CHILDERICVM, deposuit: ZACHARIAS did depose the King of the French, to
wit, CHILDERIC. And after adds: Et hinc patet potestas Ecclesiae quanta
fuerit hoc tempore, qui regnum illud famosissimum transtulit de veris
haeredibus, ad genus PIPINI propter legitimam causam: And here appears how
great was the power of the Church at this time, seeing that he (ZACHARIAS) did
transfer that most famous Kingdom from the true heirs, to the family of
PIPINE, upon a just cause. Rhegino says: Per authoritatem Apostolicam, iussit
Pipinum Regem creari. By the Apostolical Authority he commanded PIPINE to be
created King: The same writes Marianus Scotus saying: Tunc ZACHARIAS Papa ex
authoritate S. Petri Apostoli mandat populo Francorum, vt PIPINVS, qui
potestate Regia vtebatur, etiam nominis dignitate frueretur: Then ZACHARIAS by
the Authority of S. Peter the Apostle commands the people of the French,
that PIPINE, who exercised the Regal power, should also enjoy the name of the
dignity. Besides this, Paulus Aemilius relates that one Burchardus a Bishop,
made an oration to him to persuade him to it; for the Pope at first feared to
undertake a matter of so great importance; yet when he considered how all the
French desired Pipine, Francos Sacramento Regi CHILDERICO dicto soluit: he
freed the French from their oath made to King CHILDERIC.

5. LEO the third Pope, a holy Prelate, to whom God miraculouslie restored both
his eyes and tongue, of which he was barbarously deprived by certain
emulatours, cteated and anointed CHARLES the Great Emperor, and made his son
King, Anastas. apud Baron. an. 799.
as Anastasius (whom Baronius alleges) declateth at large: which no sooner
was done, but the Romans cried: Vide Baron. an. 800. and Az or. to. 2. lib.
10. Instit. mor. c. 8.
Carolo pijssimo, Angusto, a Deo coronato, magno, pacifico Imperatori, vita and
victoria. And the Author of Fascicul^ Temporum says, that CHARLES took the
Diadem of the Empire from Pope LEO the third, Zonaras, Cedrenus, Paulus
Diaconus, Ado, Albertus Krantius, Otho Frisingensis, Marianus Scotus, Bell. li.
5. de Romans Pontif. cap. 8. Magdeburg ce^t. 8. ca. 10. col. 751.
and all Chroniclers, whom Cardinal Bellarmine alleges affirm the same.
Yea the Magdeburgians in blaspheming that this Translation of the Empire was
one of the Chief miracles of Antichrist, affirm it. And although Marsilius of
Padua (whom Barclay and VViddrington are enforced to follow against the
torrent of all good Autours) affirms that the people of Rome were the
Authors of this Translation; yet Cardinal Bellarmine plainly demonstrateth
the contrary, not only by all Historiographers, who attribute this to the
Pope, but also by this, that the people of Rome, if they had any Authority to
choose the Emperor, had lost it when the seat of the Empire was translated to
Constantinople, and therefore for the space of five hundred years, that is,
from CONSTANTINE the Great, to CHARLES the Great, never meddled with choosing
the Emperor. Lib. 5. de Roman. Pontif. cap. 8.. ad alios. and seqq.
Yea, as Cardinal Bellarmine shows, the people of Rome never meddled with the
election of the Emperor, for that he came to the Empire either by hereditarie
descent, or by acclamation of the soldiers.

6. GREGORY the Fifte also instituted the seven Electours and gave them
Authority to choose the Emperor, which manner is used to this day. So
Platina, Blondus, Nauclerus, and others alleged by Cardinal Bellarmine in the
place above noted. Wherefore as Cardinal Bellarmine does, so do I urge our
adversaries with this dilemna: Either the Pope did sufficiently transfer the
Empire to CHARLES the Great, and institute the seven Electours, or no: If he
did, then he has power to dispose of Temporal Kingdoms; If he did not, then
the Emperors are not legitimate, nor the Electours sufficient. GREGORY the
seventh is alleged in the former Chapter.

7. These Popes I thought good to allege, that our Adversaries may see, that
it is not true which they say, to wit, that GREGORY the seventh was the first
that challeged to him self power to dispose of kingdoms, for all the alleged
were before GREGORY the seventh. The rest of the Popes who have deposed
Princes, he that desires to know, may read Cardinal Bellarmine against
Barclay, and Schulkenius against Widdrington. Conformable to these factes of
Popes is the the Doctrine of S. 2.2. q. 12 art. 2.
Thomas of Aquin that great light of the Church, which he delivers unto us in
these words. Infidelitatem illorum qui fidem susceperunt potest (Ecclesia)
punire, and conuenienter in hoc puniuntur quod subditis fidelibus dominari non
possint. Hoc enim vergere posset in magnam fidei corruptionem, quia (vt dictum
est, hoino Apostata prauo cord machinatur malum and iurgia seminat, intendens
homines separare a fide. Et ideo quam cito aliquis per sententiam denuntiatur
excommunicatus propter Apostasiam a fide, ipso facto eius subditi sunt absoluti
a Dominio eius, and Iuramento Fidelitatis: The infidelity of those who have
received the faith, the Church may punish by sentence, and conveniently in
this are they punished, that they may not bear rule over faithful (Christian)
subjects. For this might turn to a great corruption of Faith, because (as it
is said) a man Apostata with a wicked heart does plott evil and sows
brawels, intending to separate men from Faith. And therefore so soon as any
one is by sentence denounced excommunicated for Apostasy from Faith, ipso
facto, by and by, his subjects are absolved from his Dominion, and from the
Oathe of Fidelity. Thus this learned Doctor pronounces: and thereby
justifies these factes of these holy Popes.

CHAPTER XIII.
By the number of Doctors, who have embraced the opinion, that gives this
power to the Pope, the same doctrine is proved? betwixt the number, gravity,
and authority of which Doctors, and those who stand for VViddringtons opinion,
there is no comparison to be made.

1. THis proof will not be of least force, because the voice of the Chief
Doctors of the Church is the voice of the whole Church, which never dissenterh
from that, which her Doctors commonly teach her: and seeing that the voice of
the Doctors is the voice of CHRIST (according to that: qui vos audit, me
audit; Luc. 10.
he that hears you, hears me) and that the Church is the pillar of truth;
if ever vox populi be vox Dei, 1. Tim. 3.
the voice of the people, the voice of God: this sentence which the Church
prononnceth partly by her Chief Pastors and Councels, partly by her
Doctors, Tract. de potest. Sum. Pont. aduersus Barclaiu^ in initio.
must especially be of God. But because Bellarmine has exactlie set down
their words, I will only for brevity sake set down their names, referring
the Reader to him for their sentences.

2. Our of Italy he alleges Gregory the seventh (to who^ may be added those
Prelates, who, as above we have seen, allowed of his deposing of HENRY the
fourth) S. Thomas of Aquin, S. Bonanenture, Aegidius Romanus, B. Augustinus
Triumphus, B. Ioannes de Capistrano, S. Antoninus, Isidorus Mediolanenses,
Gabriel Biel, Thomas Caietan, Alexander de S. Elpidio, Pelrus de Monte Venetus,
Petrus Ancharanus, Syluester Prieras, Astensis, Nicholaus Abbas Parnomitanus,
Ioannes de Anania, Bartholdus, Baldus, Petrus A^dreas Gambara, Restaurus
Castaldus, Dominicus Cardinalis Tuscus: to whom may be added Cardinal
Bellarmine himself, and Cardinal Baron.

3. Out of France he alleges S. Bernard, (whose words above are cited)
Petrus de Palude Patriarch of Jerusalem, Durand Bishop of Meux, Herueus
General of the Dominicans, Iacobus Almain, Henricus Cardinalis Ostiensis,
Petrus Bertrandus Cardinal and Bishop, Ioannes de Sylua; Stephanus Aufrerius,
Guilielmus Durandus called Speculator, Ioannes Faber, Aegidius Bellamera Bishop
of Auinion, Ioannes Quintinus, Remundus Ruffus, to whom may be added Genebrard,
Andreas du Vallius, and others.

4. Out of Spain S. Raimundus, Pelagius Aluarus, Ioannes de Turrecremata
Cardinal, Cyprianus Benetus Arragonensis, Franciscus Victoria, Dominicus a
Soto, Alphonsus de Castro, Iacobus Simanca, Dominicus Bannes, Martinus
Ledesmius, Gregorius de Valentia, Guilielmus de Monserat Catalanus, Alphonsus
Aluarez, Antonius Cordubensis, Ludouicus Molina, Didacus Couarruuias,
Ferdmandus Vasquius, Michael de Aninyon, Martinus Nauarrus, to whom now may be
added two other learned Divines Franciscus Suarez, and Gabriel Vasquez.

5. Out of Germany he produces Stephanus Albestanensis Bishop, Hugo de Sancto
Victore, Henricus de Gandauo, Vlricus, Dionysius Carthufianus, Ioanues Driedo,
Albertus Pighius, Iacobus Latomus, Conradus Brunus: and to these may be added
Adolphus Schulkenius, and Lessius.

6. Out of England he brings Alexander of Hales a learned Professor of
Divinity, and Master to S. Thomas of Aquin and S. Bonauenture, Holcot,
Franciscus Maironus, Ioannes Bachonus, Thomas Waldensis Provincial in his
time in England of the order of Carmelites, and one of the learned of his
age, Cardinal Pole, Doctor Sanders: To whom may be added Cardinal Allen in
his Apology, and Answer to the libeller, Doct. Stapleton, Mr. Reynolds, and
diverse others of our learned writers since King HENRY the Eight his time.

7. Dares now our adversary show his face against such an ample Senate of
Doctors, and learned men? can he think him self a good Catholic that
holds against Catholic Counsels, Chief Pastors, Doctors, yea and the
Catholic Church, which never dissented from her Doctors and Pastors? He
will say that he wants not Doctors also. O the Doctors! I grant he may
allege Heretics for his opinion; for in this he conspireth with them; for
although, as we shall see anon, they arrogate to them selves this power, yet
they deny it to the Pope. Nay, says VViddrington, I have Catholic Doctors
also to countenance my opinion, and to free it from Heresy, yea temeritie. And
who be these his Authors? He alleges Occam, Ioannes Parisiensis, Dantes the
Poet, Almainus, Ioannes Mayor, Hugo, Vulcurunus, Albericus, and others. But
either these Authors were Schismatickes, as Sigebert; or they expreslie auerte
the contrary to that, for which he alleges them as Ocham and Almaine; or
finally they neither affirm; the Popes power, nor deny it in deposing
Princes: And so only five or six, as Dantes the Poet, Sigebert the
Schismatic, Barclay, Bochell, and Lescherius expreslie hold with
VViddrington, Schulck. page 131.
as Schulckenius has showed particularly of every one of the authors he
alleges. And what are these obscure Authonrs to Scriptures, Councels, Popes,
Practice of the Church so many learned Authors of Italy, France, Spain,
Germany and England, as are produced? But that the Reader may see more
plainly how little authority Widdrington purchases to his opinion by his
Authors, I shall examine some of them in particular.

8. Apol. n. 4 Disput. Theolog. sec. 3. c. 3. n. 4. New yearesguift pa. 54.
VViddrington in his Apology and Theological Disputation and Newyeares gift
alleges out of Ioannes Azorius diverse Authors as patrones of his opinion
and seems to endeavor to bring in AZORIVS him self amongst them, though by
the head and shoulders. IOANNES AZORIVS a famous Jesuit (says he) affirms
that it has ever been a great controversy betwixt Emperors and Kings on the
one side and the Bishops of Rome on the other whether in some certain cases
the Pope has a right and power to deprive Kings of their Kingdoms etc. And
he alleges diverse Authors out of Azorius who favor his opinion. But First
although he might have some reason to allege those Authors, yet I can not see
what reason he had to allege them out of Azorius; for if he would thereby make
his Reader believe that Azorius allows his opinion for probable in that it is
countenaunced by these Authors by him alleged, he abuses his Reader, for
that AZORIVS condemns these his Authors and co^sequentlie him self very
deeply: whosoever pleases to read AZORIVS shall see that he disputing this
Question alleges for the first opinion, Tom. 2. lib. 4. instit, moral. c. 19.
which denies the Pope Authority of deposing Princes in some cases,
Lutherans, Caluinistes, and Marsilius Patauinus an heretic, and after that he
says, non long ab his fuerunt Gulielmus Ocham, etc. not far different from
these (heretics) were William Ocham, and Ioannes Parisiensis Deuines, and
Dantes the Flonentine Poet, and Almainus tract. de suprem. potest. laica
quaest. 3. Mayor in 4. did. 24. quaest. 3. concl. 3. who have followed Ocham.
And then he adds: hauc sententiam Marsilij temerariam and errorem continentem
ipse Marsilius and alij colligere se arbitrabantur, imprimis etc. This
temerarious opinion and which contains error, Marsilius and others thought
they might gather first etc. And after that he adds: reuera nisilabi and
errare velimus, negare omnino non possumus penes Romanum Pontificem esse iure
diuino vtramque potestatem: truly if we will not be deceived and err, we can
not at all deny, but that the Roman Bishop has bath authorities. Tom. 2. lib.
10. Instit. mor. c. 6.
And after he proves this out of the canon Law, by Divines also and Lawiers.
The same Azorius adds to these favorers of VViddringtons opinion Hugo,
Michael vulcurunus, and Albericus, but condemns them, and proves out of
Bartolus l. 1. ff. de requirendis reis. vlt: that Dantes was after his: death
almost condemned of heresy, and he alleges Antonius 3. p. tit. 21. cap. 5..
2. who says that Dantes in hoc errauit, erred in thu: and so is put in the
Index amongst prohibited authors, and his book of Monarohie condemned: and of
Albericus he says he is caute legendus, warily to be read, and confuteth
what he says. Whereas therefore Azorius says, that it has ever been a great
contronersie betwixt Emperors and Kings, on the one side and the Bishop of
Rome on the other etc. (whence VViddrington would in far that his opinion
were disputable and probable) Azorius means not, that it has been a
controversy betwixt Bishops of Rome and all Emperors and Kings; for seeing
that he cou^teth this opinion of VViddrington temerarious and erroneous, therein
he should condemn all Emperors and Kings of temeritie and error: but he
means schismatic or heretical Emperors and Kings, especially such as
the Bishops of Rome have deposed, who to hold their crowns, stood to it, that
the Pope could not depose them: whereupon their followers complained of GREGORY
the seventh. And therefore in GREGORY the seventh his time, when the greatest
controversy was about rhis matter, none but the Emperor deposed, and his
followers Schismatickes as he was, did contradict the Popes sentence of
deposition: yea then the King of England William the Conqueror, Alphonsus
King of Castile, Philip King of France, Kanuius King of Denmarcke, Count
Robert of Flaunders, and other Princes held league and amity with GREGORY the
seventh against the Emperor and his Antipope, Baron. tom. 11. an. 1084 Et anno
1085. n. 11. and 12 in Greg. 7. Epist. ad Greg. 7. quam referunt Magdeburge^ses
Cent. 11. cap. 8. de Schismatibus circa med.
as may be seen in Baronius in his eleventh Tome. Yea the Emperor deposed,
pleading that he could not be deposed but for heresy, confessed that he might
have been deposed for heresy: Traditio Patrum est (says he) me solius Dei
iudicio obnoxium esse, nisi (quod absit) a Catholica side deuiauerim. It is a
Tradition of the Fathers that I am subject only to Gods judgment, unless
(which Godforbid) I should suarue from the Catholic faith.

9. But let us come to his Authors in particular, of which I shall examine
only them whom Azorius, and whom he him self alleges in his Newyeares-gift
which he first dedicated in English to Englisch Catholics, and now has set
it out in Latin and commended it to the King our Sovereign. The Authors whom
Azorinial. leageth are Ocham, Ioannes Parisiensis, Dantes, Almainus, Mayor,
Hugo, Michael Vulcurunus, and Albericus. To whom Widdringto^ in his
Newyeares-guift adds Trithemius, Petrus Pithaeus, D. Barclay, the 13.
Englisch Priests and Confessors, the court of Parliament at Paris. But first
suppose all these were plainly, of Widdringtons opinion yet I could make
three general exceptions against them. The first is because many of these
Authors are no Divines and so their testimony can not make Widdringtons
opinion which is belonging to Divinity probable: because as Aristotle and
Vasquez, In his Newyeares gift c. 3. page 51. Arist. 1. Top. 8. and Vasq. apud
ea^dem. Disput. Theol. cap. 10. sec. 2. nu. 22.
alleged by Widdrington, affirm; that opinion is probable which is approved
by wise, learned, and skillful men in that art, but many of Widdringtons
Authors are not Divines: ergo they can not make Widdringtons opinion probable.
And by this Argument I can except against Trithemius an historiographer, Dantes
a poet, Albericus, Bochellus and Barclay lawers: because ne suitor extra
crepidam: Et vnicuique in sua art credendum. The second is because diverse of
these Authors have their reputation stained and their credit cracked; and if
the testimony of infamous persons is not admitted in Temporal affairs much
less in matters belonging to faith and Divinity; by which I might except
against Dantes who was as Bartholus says, suspected at least of heresy: and
who is registered in the Index of forbidden Authors: against Ocham who was
Pensioner of the Schismatic Emperor, was excommunicated of the Pope for
some errors and was the enemy of Pope JOHN the 22. as Trithemius and
Genebrard in Chron. do avouch, and his books are prohibited in the Index of
forbidden books as also are the books of Antonius de Rosellis an other of
WIDDRINGTONS Authors, and him particulerlie Navarre and Posseuine do condemn.
The third exception is that either they say nothing for him or against him, and
so I except against the rest. Nauar. relec. in cap. norunt, de iudiciu,
Posseuin. in apparatu sacro.
But although this were sufficient to reject Widdringtons Authors, yet I will
examine them in particular, and show that most of them do not only not favor
him, but do playnlie contradict him.

10. Amongst these let OCHAM speak first because he is the principal, or let
ALMAINVS speak out of his mouth and writings, that so at once we may see both
their opinions. ALMAINVS then who iumpeth in this point of doctrine with OCHAM
and speaks out of his mouth, Lib. de suprem. potest. cap. 9.
in a certain little book of supreme Ecclesiastical power which contains
an exposition of Ochams decisions has these words: non dedit Christus
potestatem (Petro) laicos suis proprietaetibus ac dominiis priuandi, nisi in
casu si contingeret Principem saecularem abutire svaiu perniciem
Christianitatis vel fidei: it a quod ille abusus esset maximo nocumento pro
consecutione foelicitatis aeternae. N^^ negat Ochan^us, quin in tali casu Papa
possit cum deponere, etsialij Doctores hoc negant, quamuis habeat potestatem
declarandi ipsum esse deponendum. Christ gave not Power to Peter to deprive
laiemen of their proprieties and dominions, except in case it should happen
that a Prince should abuse his power to the destruction of Christianity or
faith, in so much that the abuse should be a great damage to the attayning of
eternal foelicitie. Ocham denies not but that in such a case the Pope may
depose him, though other Doctors do deny this, though he have power to
declare him to be deposed. The same Almainus in the same book brings in
Ocham answering to the first Argument thus: q. 2. c. 5
Ad 1. Respondet Doctor (Ochamus) transeat Mayor; and ad Minorem notat Doctor
quod Imperator potest esse dignus depositione dupliciter: vno modo propter
crimen spirituale, vt propter haeresim quia haereticus and Schismaticus, and
vtitur potestate eius in detrimentum Christianitatis: Alio modo propter crimen
civil, vtpote negligit administrare iustitiam etc. Tumsi Imperator sit dignus
depositione propter crimen primi generis, puta propter crimen spirituale potest
deponi a Papa, cum habeat plenam potestatem in puniendis peccatis
spiritualibus. To the first (Argument) the Doctor (Ocham) answers, let the
Mayor proposition pass, and touching the Minor Propoaetion, the Doctor
(Ocham) notes that the Emperor may be worthis deposition two ways: ne way
for a spiritual crime as heresy, because an heretic and Schismaticke, and
uses his power to the detriment of Christianity: An other way, for a civil
crime, because he neglects to administer Justice etc. Then, if the Emperor
be worthy deposition for a crime of the first kind, to wit for a spiritual
crime, he may be deposed by the Pope, he having full power to punish spiritual
sins. And again in the same Chapter answering to the fourth allegation, he
brings in Ocham thus answering: dicit Doctor quod Papa potest transfer
imperium, sed hoc est solum casualiter, hoc est, quando non est Iudex
saecularis: ita si desit congregatio populi, potest Papa transfer, and hoc
casualiter. Secundo potest pro crimine pure spirituali, vt si gens illius
imperij efficeretur haeretica, vel transferret se ad aliam sectam, dimittendo
sectam Christianam, posset propter hoc Papa illam Gentem priuare dignitate
Imperiali, and transfer in aliam gentem, sed hoc non est regulariter, sed
solum causaliter. Regulariter potest pro crimine haeresis, sed non pro crimine
civilly, nisi casualiter, put a in defectu illius qui potest. The Doctor
(Ocham) says, that the Pope can transfer the Empire (from the Grecians to
the Germans) but this only casuallie, that is, when there is no saecular
Judge: so if the Congregation of the people be wanting, the Pope can transfer
(the Empire) and this casuallie. Secondly he can for a crime merely
spiritual, as if the nation of that Empire should become heretical or should
transfer it self to an other sect relinquishing the Christian sect, for
this, the Pope might deprive that nation of Imperial dignity, and so
transfer it to an other nation. But this is not regularlie (or ordinarily)
but only casuallie. Regularlie he can (depose) for the crime of heresy, but
not for a civil crime, unless casuallie, to wit in the defect of an other
that can. So that Ocham and Almainus are quite opposite to VViddrington; for
VViddrington says the Pope can depose the Prince, or dispose of temporal
Kingdoms in no case; they say he can regularlie depose and dispose in case of
Schism or Heresy, and casuallie for a Civil fault and crime, that is, when
the secular Judge, Prince or common wealth is wanting. In his Newye aresguift
page 45. Almain. q. in vesperiis. vltra medium.
VViddrington obiecteth that Almainus auerteth, that de ratione potestatis
laicae est poenam ciuilem posse infligere, vt sunt mors, exilium, bonorum
priuatio, sed nullam talem poenam ex institutione diuina infligere potest
Ecclesiastica potestas; imo nec incarcerare, vt plerisque Doctoribus placet,
sed ad solam ^^^^am spiritualem extenditur, vipote excommunicationem etc. It is
pertaining to the nature of Laicall power to inflict a civil pain, as death,
Banishment, and privation of goods; but the Ecclesiastical power can inflict
no such punishment by the divine institution: yea it can not imprison, as many
Doctors think, but it is only extended to a spiritual punishment, as
excommunication etc. But Widdrington should have expounded Almainus by
Almainus, unless he will make him flatly to contradict him self, and so to
add little credit to his opinion. And therefore when Almainus says that the
Ecclesiastical power can inflict no Temporal punishment, he means that it
can not regularlie and for a civil crime, but grants with Ocham in the
express words alleged, that it may inflict a Temporal punishment casuallie
for a Civil crime, and regularlie for the crime of heresy. But perchance
Widdrington has better luck in his other Authors.

11. Joan. Parisiens. tract. de potest. Regia and Papale. Trithem. de script.
Ecc. an. 1280.
An other Author of his is Ioannes Parisiensis who (as Trithemius testifies)
was a Divine well seen in Scriptures, who taught publickelie in Paris etc. And
what says he? If the King (says he) were an heretic, and incorrigible, and
a contemner of the Ecclesiastical censure, the Pope might do some thing in the
people, whereby that King might be deprived of his honor and deposed, by
excommunicating all them to whom it belongs to depose him etc. To this
Author I answer first that he has other positions also in that his tract
which sound not well. Secondly as he says to little for the truth so he says
to much for VViddrington and for the oath which he defends: for as he says
the Pope by him self can not depose the Prince, so he says he can depose him
by the people in that he can command them under pain of excommunication to
depose him; wherein he favors the Prince as little as if he had said the
Pope by him self can depose him: for whether the Prince be deposed
immediately, or mediatlie by the Pope, it is all one to the Prince, it being as
hard for the Prince to be deposed by the people at the Popes commandment, as
by the Popes immediate Authority.

12. After Dantes and Almainus whom we have already examined, In 4. d. 24 q.
3. ad 3. et 4
follows Ioannes Mayor, who yet says no less then Ioannes Parisiensis: for
he after he has denied the Pope to be direct Lord, or that all Princes are his
vassalles to be constituted and deposed at his will (in which I also with all
divines will not let to agree) says, si intelligatur habere dominium in
temporalibus casualiter, etc. if he be understood to have dominion in Temporal
things casuallie, and that he can do much to the deposition of Kings, by
persuading, counseling, yea and by provoking others to the sword against them
(Kings) when they are destroyers and altogether unprofitable spoylers of
Christian faith and common wealth, this is more gently to be borne, neither is
it against my sayings. HVGO cited by the Gloss, In cap. caujam quae. Qui
filij sint legitimi. Lib. de Regim. mundi par. 2. q. 2. princ. number. 82
as Schulkennius observes, says not that the Pope can not depose the Emperor
in case of heresy, but only that he has his authority from God. Michael
Vulcurunus (as Schulkennius also observes) stands in plain terms against
VViddrington and therefore was not wisely alleged by him: for he says that
in case the Emperor or King should be rebellious to the Pope, and would not
assist him in necessity, he might expel such a Prince out of the Church, and
by this he shall be said to be expelled out of his Kingdom, seeing that he who
has rule over Christians ought to be Catholic: and a little after: but yet
(says he) if the Emperor, or any other King be incorrigible in respect of
faith, and of a great and manifest sin, the Pope might depose or deprive such
a man. Trithem. de Scrip. Eccl. an. 1340.
Albericus, as appears by that which Trithemius says of him, doubts only
whether certain decretalles disposing of Temporal matters be just. Qua
decretales an sint iustae Deus nouit: nulla^ enim earum saluo meliori consilio
(and si erroneum foret reuoco) credo luri consonam: which decretalles whether
they be just or no, God knows, for I think, not gain saying better counsel
(and if it were erroneus I recall it) that none of these decretalles are
conformable to Law. I answer that this man was a Lawier, no Divine, and so
being not skillful in that science, is not of Authority in a matter of
divinity. Secondly he is doubtefull him self, ready to recall what he
says, and so can give no assurance to others.

13. Trithemius is an other Author, and him VViddrington often brings on the
stage. Trithemius (says he in his Theological Disputation, Disput. Theolog.
cap. 2. n. 5. Newyear asgift. page 45. Trithem. in Chro^. Monast. Hirsangiensis
anne 1106.
and in his Newyearesgift) Abbot of the order of S. Benedict, a man of great
learning and piety said, that the Question whether the Pope can depose a
Prince or no, was disputed amongst school Divines, and yet not determined by
the Judge. And indeed Trithemius has these words. Ipse autem Henricus 4.
primus est inter omnes Imperatores per Papam depositus. Scholasticicertant, and
adhuc sub iudice lis est, vtrum Papa Imperatorem possit deponere: quam
quaestionem cum ad nos non pertineat, indiscussam relinquamus. Henry the
fourth was the first amongst all Emperors that was deposed by the Pope. The
School Divines do contend, and as yet it is not decided by the Judge, whether
the Pope ca^ depose an Emperor: which question because it pertains not to
us, let us leave undiscussed. I answer first that Trithemius was only a
Chronographer and Historiographer, and so his words are of no more authority
then Ioannes de Sacrobosco his verdict in a case of Law, for as Vasquez says
(and VViddrington above confesses) the Authors who can make an opinion
probable must be skillful in that art or science; which Trithemius him self
knew, and therefore leaves this question undiscussed. Secondly I answer that
Trithemius speaks of HENRY the fourth Emperor, who though he had committed
many insolences against the Pope and Church, and had set up an Antipope etc.
(which his enormities Trithemius calls scelera inaudita) yet he professed him
self a Catholic, and so the School Divines, to wit, Ocham, Almainus and
such others as I have related (for others VViddrington can not allege)
disputed whether he could be deposed he being or pretending to be no heretic,
as appears by his Epistle to GREGOR^E the seventh; above alleged.
and what they resolved we have seen.

14. Widdr. In his Newyearesgift page 46. Disput. Theol. c. 3. sec. 3. number. 13.
Petrus Pithaeus God, libert. Ecc. Gallicana.
Petrus Pithaeus (says VViddrington) a man, (as Posseuin says) trnlie learned
and a diligent searcher of Antiquities, affirms that the liberty of the
Church of France is grounded in this Principle which France has ever held
for certain, that the Pope has not power to deprive the French King of his
kingdom, or in any other manner to dispose thereof: and that notwithstanding
any whatsoever monitions, or monitories, excommunications, or Interdicts which
by the Pope can be made, yet the subjects are bound to yield obedience due to
the King for Temporalles, neither therein can they be dispensed or absolved by
the Pope. And in his Disput. Theological, Cap. 3. sec. 3. number. 13.
he says that Pithaeus out of a general Maxim which France (that is, as he
puts in the margent, the greater part) ever approved, deduceth this
particular proposition, that the Pope can not deprive the French King of his
Kingdom. But first here we see VViddrington ascribes two things to Pithaeus
which seem to imply contradiction: for in his Newyearesgift he makes him say
that the liberty of the Church of France is grounded in this Principle; that
the Pope has not power to deprive the King of his Kingdom. And in his
Theological Disputation, he says that Pithaeus out of a certain general
Maxim deduced this particular proposition, that the Pope can not give the
Kingedome of Freunce into prey, nor deprive the King of it. And so he makes
this position, That the Pope can not deprive the King of France, both a
general Maxim in which the liberty of the Church of F^aunce is grounded, and
also a particular proposition deduced out of a general Maxim, which he names
not: which two things, how they cohere, let VViddrington look. And certes I
can not imagine any Maxim received in France, out of which either VViddrington
or Pithaeus can deduce that the Pope can in no case deprive the King. And if
there were any such Maxim received in France, that learned Prelat Cardinal
Perone in his eloquent oration made in the Chamber of the Third estate not
only in his own name, but also in the name of all the Nobility and Clergy
of France, would never have dared before such curious Auditors, to utter
these words following: now if those who have of set purpose labored in favor
of the oath of England (he puts in the margent VViddrington) to find out
Authors who have affirmed that in case of heresy or infidelity, the subjects
could not be absolved from the obligation, that they owe to their Princes,
could not find out any one: and if those who have since written of the same
subject in France could never find out in all France (note these words)
since the time that Schools of Divinity have been instituted and set open
till this day, one only Doctor, neither Divine, nor Lawier, nor Decree, nor
Council, nor determination, nor act of Parliament, nor Magistrate either
Ecclesiastical or Politic, who has said that in case of heresy or
infidelity the subject, can not be absolved from the oath of fidelity which
they owe to their Princes: on the contrary, if all those who have written for
the defense of the Temporal power of Kings, have ever excepted the case of
heresy and Apostasy from Christian Religion: how is it that they can without
enforcing of Consciences, make men not only to receive this doctrine that in
no case the subjects can be absolved from the oath of Allegiance they owe to
their Princes, for a perpetual and universal doctrine of the French Church,
etc. Thus he whereby it is manifest, that there is no such received Maxim in
France, out of which Pithaeus or Widdrington can deduce that the Pope in no
case can deprive the King of France. And what the opinion of the most
Christian Kingdom of France at this present is, may well appear by this,
that all the nobility and Clergy, the two most worthy Parts and members, of
that Realm in the year 1615. rejected an oath like to the oath of England, as
pernicious, cause of Schism, and the open gappe to heresy, as our most
Excellent and learned King in his Preface to his declaration for the right of
Kings set forth in French the same year, confesses, though in a co^plaining
manner, and as it is to be seen in the Oration of the said Cardinal sent to
our said Sovereign. And although the Tierce estate proposed an oath like to
that of England, yet that was but one and the lowest of the three estates, and,
as Cardinal Perone affirms, they had their lessons given them from England.

15. He alleges also out of Bochellus the Testimony of Cardinal Pelue, and
other Prelates, who in an assembly at Paris 1595. rejected the Decree of the
Council of Trent sess. 25. cap. 19. by which it is forbidden Kings to
permit Duelles under pain of loosing the city or place in which they
permit a Duelle. Concilium Tridentiuu^ (inquiunt) excommunicat, and private
Regem ciuitate illa vel loco in quo permittit fieri duellum. Hic Articulus est
contra authoritatem Regis, qui non potest priuari suo dominio temporali,
respectu cuius nullum Superiorem recognoscit. The Council of Trent (say they)
excommunicateth and depriueth a King of that City or place, in which he
permits a duelle to be made. This Article is against the Authority of the
King who can not be deprived of his temporal Dominion in respect of which he
acknowledges no Superior. I answer that it is not credible that Cardinal
Pelue and those Prelates would thus reject the Council of Trent, or affirm
that the Pope can not deprive the King: and least I may seem to do injury to
Bochellus in not crediting him, I shall give reasones for it, Cap. 3. page 111.
for first as Schulkennius shows, he thrustes into the Decrees of the Church
of France, and reckeneth amongst her liberties many scandalous things: and
to omit many of them which Schulkennius notes, I will note only two or
three of his absurdities, which I have seen in his book. In his Preface to the
Reader he shows him self no good Catholic in carping vniustelie and
saucilie at that venerable Council of Trent, Bochel. in praef, ad lectorem.
saying: quantas nouissimis temporibus, vbique terrarum excitarit turbas
Synodus Tridentina, nemo est qui nesciat: what troubles in these latter times,
the Council of Trent has stirred up, no man is ignorant. And in an other
place: he seeks to exempt the King of France and his Officers from
Excommunication, Lib. 2. tit. 16. cap. 3.
as though they could not be excommunicated by their Pastor, wherein whilst he
would exalt his King he depresseth him so low, as that he makes him of
Christian^ssimus (which title he has worthily long enjoyed) not to be
Christianus: because if he be a Christian he is a sheep of Christ, and
consequently of S. PETER to whom Christ committed his sheep, Joan. 21. Pasce
oues meas.
and consequently also of the Bishop of Rome his successor, yea and of other
Pastoures: and therefore for a just cause may be by them severed from the fold
by Excommunication, Lib. 5. c. 45. page 906. en Extraic. d'aucuns artic^tes du
Concile de Trent.
Likewise in his 5. book he sets down an extract of many of the Decrees of
the Council of Trent, which (like to no good Catholic) he rejects as
contrary to the liberty and practice of France. Yea in many places upon the
least occasion he glaunceth against that hohe and renowned Council. Wherefore
as in other things, so in this which he fathereth on Cardinal Pelue and other
Prelates, he deserves no credit. Secondly the imputation which he lays on
them is so absurd, that I can not believe that they who were well seen in the
Councelles Decrees, would ever reject that Decree of the Council: because that
Decree only depriueth a King of the city, place, or Dominion which he
holds of the Church, as is manifest by those words qu^d ab ^cclesia
obtinent: Council. Trid. ^ess. 25. c. 19.
which they hold of the Church; wherefore either the King of France holds
some city or demaine of the Pope and Church, or he does not. If he do, no
marvel that the Pope can in that case deprive him, the Pope being in this his
Temporal Lord of whom he holds that Temporal Dominion: if he be not, that
extract of BOCHELLVS is most absurd which he sets down in these french
words. L^ concile excommunie and prive le Roy de la Ville on lieu, Bochell.
lib. 5. tit. 20. c. 45. page 916 En extraict d'aueuns articles du Concile de
Trent.
ou il aura permis un duel sess. 25. cap. 19. the Council of Trent
excommunicateth and depriueth the King of the town, or place, where he shall
permit a duelle sess. 25. cap. 19. where we see that he ascribes to the
Council, as though it did absolutely deprive the King of whatsoever town or
place, whereas the Council depriueth him only of that town or place which he
holds of the Church. And therefore these words following ( Ceste Article est
contre l'authoritie du Roy, qui ne peut estre prive de son temporel ou party
d'iceluy, pour le regard duquel il ne recognoit aucun Superieur quelque il
soit. This Article is against the Authority of the King, who can not be
deprived of his temporallities or any part thereof, in respect of which he
acknowledges no Superior.) these words, I say, are most absurd and
unworthy that grave Assembly, not unbeseeming Bochellus whose spirit they
resemble. Wherefore this book of Bochellus is forbidden to be printed or sold
in Catholic countries, where the Council of Trent is received, and where a
Censor librorum is appointed. And yet such authors Widdrington is enforced to
fly unto.

16. He alleges also Mr. George Blacwell the late Archpriest, who in his
examination, and as Widdrington says, even to his death persisted in
Widdringtons opinion concerning both the oath and deposition of Kings. But it
is well known to many, that Mr. Blacwell whilst he was at liberty, was so
Zealous for the Popes Authority deposing, that he thought it a matter of
faith. And I have heard a Catholic Gentleman named, who visiting M. Blacwell
in Prison, said unto him: did not you M. Blacwell, heretofore tell me that the
oath of allegiance was in no case lawful? And Widdrington him self knows
that in a certain conference betwixt the Archpriest and other Priests at
which, VViddrington him self was present, Mr. Archpriest said he thought the
Pope had Authority to depose a Prince, but yet, matters standing as they did,
he could not lawfully exercise it. Yea in that conference also WIDDRINGTON him
self was ZEALOVS for this the Popes authority, though after his imprisonment,
and after his Chief Pastors Breues which should have confirmed him, he has
changed his opinion. Let then the Reader judge of what Authority the words
of a fearful old man then Prisoner, and straightly examined, are, he
especially having auerred the contrary when he was at liberty? what else can
hence be gathered, then that rather out of fear then Judgment, he allowed the
oath when he was in his Adversaries hands, of whom otherwise he expected all
rigor. And perchance WIDDRINGTON him self, who before his imprisonement was
so Zealous for the Popes authority, and against the oath, has not now so much
changed his mind as his tongue, nor speaks not so much out of judgment and
opinion as out of fear or faintenesse of heart. And now that he has begun, he
thinks he must go forward.

17. Lastely he alleges in all his books the 13. Reverend Priests, thinking
by their Authority and credit (for they were grave and learned men, constant
confessors, and twoe of them glorious martirs) to grace and credit his
opinion. But because they are able enough to answer for them selves, I will not
entermeddle my self in other men's matters, only in a word or two I will
answer what in effect I think they might answer, and what I have heard some of
them answer. And this I thought good to do for 2. reasones: first for the
respect and love I bear to them, they being of my coat, and principal men of
the English Clergy, which so constantly has borne the brunt of a long
persecution, that it may be an example to all other Clergies, and a mirrout to
furure ages. Secondly least I should do them injury: For if I answering to
VViddringtons other Authors, should say nothing of these by VViddrington so
often alleged, I might give occasion to the world to think, that I passed
these with silence because they were so manifest fautours of VViddringtons
opinion, as I could not tell what to say in their defense. I answer First that
this their protestation was by them made before the Popes Breues came forth,
that is Anno 1603. and therefore be it that then they were of that opinion; yet
seeing that since the Breues were published, they profess and protest the
contrary, as VViddrington well knows, and that one of them yet living,
whilst he was in prison, said he would not take the oath for the Bishopric
of London, and two others of them ( Mr. Drurie and Mr. Cadwallader) suffered
death rather then they would take the oath; VViddrington has no more reason to
allege them now for the oath, then I may have to allege now VViddrington
against the oath, because once he stood against it. If WIDDRINGTON say they
should not have changed their opinion; I must tell him, that they had more
reason to change their opinion upon their Chief Pastors commandment, then
VViddrington has to change his opinion against his Chief Pastors
commandment. This I say supposing they had once been of that opinion, as they
Protest they never were, and therefore in their Protestation alleged by
VViddrington, do give the Pope as much authority as S. Peter had, and profess
that their intentions were not in any wise to diminish his authority. Secondly
I auswer that toward the end of Queen Elizabethes reign it was signified to
certain Priests the^ being in London, that the Queens Majesty was then so
well affected to her Catholic subjects, that she proffered the^ free use of
Religion, provided that she might have security given for their fidelity, of
which by reason of Pius Quintus sentence of Excommunication and deposition
pronounced against her, she seemed to stand in fear. These 13. Reverend
Priests easily induced to believe that which they so much desired, and
fearful not to give way to so great a good pretended to English Catholics,
were content to make that Protestation which Widdrington sets down, Disput.
Theol. cap. 3. sec. 3. ^um. 11.
by which they protest that they acknowledge her to have as full Authority,
power, and Soneraigntie over us, and over all the snbiectes in the Realm, as
any her Highenesse Predecessors had. And whereas Widdrington makes this
inference; ergo to make this their fact and Protestation lawful, they must
needs deny that the Pope had authority to depose Queen Elizabeth: I deny
that his consequence, and that for many reasons. For first although I will not
be so bold as to examine whether Pius Quintus had just cause to depose Queen
Elizabeth, but rather suppose he had, nor whether the 13. Priests thought, or
might justly think that he had no just cause; yet the Pope may have
Authority to excommunicate and depose, and yet if there want just cause, his
sentence shall be inualid and of no force. And so it follows not; the 13.
Priests acknowledged the Queen lawful Queen after the sentence of
deposition, ergo they thought the Pope could not depose her, because the
sentence might be inualid, not for want of Authority in the Pope, but for want
of just cause in the Queen. Disput. Theol. cap. 10.
So WIDDRINGTON affirms that the Catholics of England may take the oath
notwithstanding the Popes commandment to the contrary: and if one should
thence infer, ergo he thinks the Pope has no Authority to command, he
would deny the Consequence, and say, that the commandment wants force to
oblige, not for want of Authority, but by reason that it proceeds from ill
information. So in the same Chapter, he confesses, that the Archpriest has
power to take from the Priests, who hold the oath to be lawful, their
faculties: and yet if he should, he would say they were not taken away, not for
want of power, but for want of just cause. So Father Persons alleged by
Widdrington, says: Disput. Theol. cap. 10. sec. 2. n. 54.
Si enim quaestio esset de facto etc. for if the question were of fact (as
this is of the 13. Ptiestes) to wit whether the Pope in this, or that case can
depose or excommunicate this, or that Prince, upon these or these causes, or
whether the former Popes have done rightin this, or otherwise, then some of
these reasons which you affirm are alleged by your frindes, might be admitted
into consideration, whether it would be to aedification or destruction, whether
it would bring with it commodity or discommoditie, whether it would be
profitable or hurtful, or whether there were causes sufficient or not (for no
man defends, that the Pope can depose without just cause) or whether due
admonition (of which in your letters there is mention) has been made. Thirdly
suppose the sentence of Pius Quintus where valid and just (as the contrary is
not easily to be thought of a man of such Authority and sanctity) and
consequently that the Queen was justly and truly deposed: yet the 13.
Priests might promise to obey her in Temporal and lawful matters, because
they might think, that the Queen would notwithstanding the sentence still
reign and govern, and would persecute with loss of goods, liberty, and
lives all those, that would not obey her; and seeing that such domages excuse
from the sentence of excommunication, and give leave to communicate with the
Prince excommunicated, and to obey him in all lawful matters; the 13. Priests
supposing otherwise the danger of incurring these domages, might promise
obedience to the Queen in all lawful matters. Wherefore Divines and Casuists
have in these two verses comprehended all the things which excuse from
excommunication, and make communication with the excommunicat persons lawful:
Haec Anathema quidem faciunt ne possit obesse:
Vtile, lex, humile, res ignorata, necesse.
Thirdly and lastly I answer, that although the sentence of excommunication and
deposition against Queen ELIZABETH were valid, and consequently she truly
deposed and deprived of all Regal Authority, yet the 13. Priests at the time
when they made that their Protestation might acknowledge Queen ELIZABETH to be
their lawful Queen, and to have as full Authority as any her predecessors
had: because that sentence of PIUS QVINTVS might at that time be abrogated, and
of no force, and so cease to bind, and consequently the Priests might
acknowledge, that then she had as full power as she had before the sentence,
and as much right and Authority as any of her Predecessors. And indeed that
PIUS QVINTVS sentence did at that time cease to bind, it may be gathered by
this, that thirty three years had passed from her deposition unto the time in
which these 13. Priests made their Protestation: all which time as well
Catholics as Protestants obeyed her as Queen, the Popes then reigning
knowing, and not reclayming, and consequently consenting: which consent of the
subjects of England and Popes of Rome, was sufficient to abrogate the former
sentence, and consequently to put Queen ELIZABETH in the same estate she
was in before the sentence. And that this tacit consent is sufficient to
abrogat either positive law or sentence, I prove by Vasq. words, Vasq. 1. 2.
Disp. 177. c. 2. n. 17.
whom VViddrington so often alleges. For Vasquez iu^ping herein with the
common opinion of Divines and Lawiers, thus pronounces. Cum Princeps sciens
vsum eum approbat, vel non improbat, nascitur consuetudo quae habet vim legis,
vel quaesufficit ad derogandum legi antealata, quia Princeps non improbans
vsum, censetur illum approbare: when the Prince knowing the use, does approve
it, or does not disprooue it, there arises a custom which has the force of a
law, or which suffices to derogate to the law before made, because the Prince
not disproouing an use, is thought to approve it. This is the doctrine of
Divines and Lawiers, Widdr. Disput. Theol. c. 6. sec. 3. n. 25.27.28.
which VViddrington him self approoueth in diverse places. Wherefore seeing
that in England the sentence of Pius Quintus pronounced against Queen
Elizabeth, was not observed for three and thirty years before the thirteen
Priests Protestation, and that all that while even the Catholics obeyed her
as Queen, the Popes knowing and not contradicting, yea some of them (as I have
heard of Pope Gregory the 13. and Clement the 8.) expresselie approouing, it
follows that at the time of the 13. Priests Protestation, the sentence of
deposition by contrary use and custom, was abrogated, and so Queen ELIZABETH
was at that time in the same state she was in before the sentence, and
conseque^tlie might be acknowledged for true Queen, and to have as full power,
and Authority, as any of her Predecessors. But because widdrington may
allege, that these 13. reverend Priests not o^lie promised that they would
acknowledge Q. Elizabeth, notwithstanding any sentence already pronounced; but
also notwitstanding any Authority, or any Excommunication whatsoever, either
denou^ced, or to be denounced, to yield unto her Majesty all obedience in
te^porall causes, I answer that the 13. Reverend Priests might acknowledge in
the Pope authority to depose the Queen, and yet promise her obedience in
Lawful things, supposing the sentence would be inualid for some of the
aforesaid causes, and not for want of authority. Again, they might think
that if the Queen would give for herafter liberty of Conscience, as was
pretended, and continue the same, as the 13. Priests might hope, the Pope
should have no cause to Excommunicate or depose her, and therefore would not, or
if he would, they might imagine that in that case he could not justly, nor
without great injury to the Catholics of England, proceed so against her,
that, being to provoke her to a new persecution; and so the 13. Reverend
Priests might think them selves not bound to obey in that case the Popes
sentence and commandment, it being unjust, and consequently, rebus sic
stantibus, they might promise, notwithstanding any sentence to be denounced, to
obey the Queen in all Temporal and lawful causes, and to defend and assist
her. If VViddrington should here object, that if the 13. Priests might promise
to acknowledge and obey Queen Elizabeth, notwithstanding any sentence to be
pronounced, supposing the sentence would be unjust: why may not the Catholic
Subject of England, take the oath of pretended allegiance, and swear that the
Pope can not depose the King, and that if he should, he would still acknowledge
and obey him, supposing the sentence would be unjust? I answer him that the
case is not like; because in the oath the question is de iure not de facto, and
therefore the Subject swears absolutely, that the Pope has not any power or
Authority to depose the King, and that notwithstanding any sentence of
Excommunication or deprivation made or granted, or to be made or granted
against the said King, or any absolution of the said subjects from their
obedience, he will bear true faith and true allegiance to his Majesty. And
seeing that the Pope has such Authority to depose a Prince, as here I suppose,
it is perjury at least to swear absolutely that he has no such Authority
over the King, and it is injury to the Pope. But the 13. Priests speak de
facto not de iure, and therefore they protest not that the Pope has no such
Authority, but promise what they would do de sacto, notwithstanding any his
Authority, that is, that not withstanding the Popes Authority and sentence,
(so liberty of Conscience were granted to all English Catholics as they
were borne in hand it should) they would still acknowledge and obey the Queen,
supposing in that case, the sentence would be unjust, and so of no force to
bynd in conscience. Wherefore seeing that these 13. Reverend Priests might make
their Protestation of acknowledging and obeying Q. ELIZABETH, not for that they
thought the Pope could not depose her, but for other reasons alleged: why
should then VViddrington take them in the worst sense? why should he bring
them so often on the stage? why should he think to grace his opinion by their
gravity, learning, and Authority, he knowing, whatsoever they thought of the
Popes Authority in deposing, before the Popes Breues came forth (as they
protest they never thought as VViddrington does) that when he began to impugn
this the Popes Authority, and against his Chief Pastors commandment to
defend the oath, they protested in private and public the contrary. And so
VViddrington may ask the^ forgiveness by public writing, whom he has
publickelie and yet wrongefullie sought to defame.

18. Here because I would not pass my limittes of brevity which I intended in
this book, I thought to have concluded this Chapter. But after I had examined
these Authors, yea after that the Printer was come to this Chapter, I came to
the sight of VViddringtons Supplication and Appendix joined to it, which before
I had nor seen: for that Catholics making a scruple either to read, or to
keep books forbidden by the Chief Pastor, and Superiors being vigilant
(and worthily) to suppress such books, it is hard in Catholic countries to
meet with any of VViddringtons books, two of them being expresselie
condemned, and all his later books being almost but repetitions of the former:
yet having hitte upon this book, I was desirous to see with what dexterity he
defended these authors against Schulckennius. And I find that he refused to
acknowledge two of them, to wit Dantes and Ocham, In Append. 6 number. 2.
saying: Imprimis falsum est, me aut Dantem aut Occamum pro meis authoribus
produxisse etc. First it is false, that I produced either Dantes or Ocham for
my Authors. But I only affirmed that by JOHN AZORIVS, they were alleged for
that opinion. And yet who could think otherwise, then that he had produced
them for his Authors, seeing that after the first opinion of Cardinal
Bellarmine and others which holds that the Chief Pastor may in some case
dispose of Temporalities and Regalities, he sets down the second opinion of
those who hold that the Chief Pastor in no case, by no Authority, either
directly or indirectlie, has power to depose a Prince; and coming to the
Authors of this second opinion, which he him self Embraces, he says: Hanc
sententiam (vt refert Ioannes Azorius, Societatis Jesus Theologus) sequuntur
Gulielmus Occamus, Ioannes Parisiensis, Dantes, Aligerius, Iacobus Almainus
etc. This sentence (as Ioannes Azorius a divine of the Society of Jesus
relates) William Occham, John of Paris, Dantes Aligerius, Ioannes Almainus,
etc. do follow. Who I say reading these words in VViddrington, could think
otherwise, then that these two Authors which VViddrington produces for the
second opinion, be produced for his Authors, though out of Azorius, as well as
the other Authors. But it seems he is loath altogether to refuse these two
Authors, and therefore he says, Azorius makes Occham a Classical Author,
and Gabriell and the Nominalles follow him as the Prince of the Nominalles, and
Suarez and Vasquez, do often allege him for their opinion; but what does all
this prove, but only that Occham in respect of his skille in Logic and
Philosophy and School Divinity, was a principal Doctor amongst the
Nominalles, and in that respect is often alleged by Catholic Doctors? yet
notwithstanding this, even Azorius, Suarez, and Vasquez, do condemn Occhams
books, which VViddrington so esteems, to wit those which he wrote against
the Pope, and his Authority. And touching Dantes, he says, Trithemius
affirmed that Dantes was most studious in Holy Scriptures. But be it that
Dantes after Poetry and Humanity studied Scriptures, yet he presuming to
study Scriptures without grounds in Divinity, as Erasmus, Laurentius Valla,
and others did, might fall into erroures as well as they. and certainly who so
pleases to read his Monarchy shall perceive in it more Poetry, Poetical
inventions, and slight and superficial Philosophy, then solid Divinity.
Whereas he rejects Bartolus censure of Dantes, as I have no leisure, so will
I not wrangle with him about that. This shall suffice me, that both of these
two Authors are censured in the Index expurgatorius set forth by Authority of
the Council of Trent and diverse Popes. And although Widdrington says, that
the compilers of the Index are not the Catholic Church, and that he knows
not for what cause diverse books in the Index are condemned, wherein he shows
little respect to Superiors; yet at least those books, which are censured in
the Index, can be no less then scandalous, and the Authors no less then
infamous, and so no fit witnesses, nor Authors to make an opinion probable. So
that let Widdrington choose what he will. Either he will have these Authors,
or he will not; if he will, they can give no credit to his opinion, they having
none them selfs; if he will not, he has two Authors fewer, and by the same
reason may reject diverse others, yea all the other Authors: and so, vae soli,
woe to him that stands post alone. But he says, that he produced not the^
alone, but with many other Catholic, Godly and learned Authors. I answer
that what the most of his Authors be, I have already showed, and whereas he
alleges Tertullian S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, and others, Schulkennius has
answered him, that they are by him misconstrued. Tertullian in his Apologeticut
says Emperors, are second to God and vndes his only power; I answer that
then Emperors were Pagans, and so not subject to the Church but to God only.
I answer secondly, that the Emperor and every absolute King Christian, has
no temporal Superior but God: yet as Widdrington dares not deny, but that
there is a spiritual power and Authority in the Chief Pastor above him
which may punish him spirituallie, so I say this power can in some case decree
temporal punishment against him, when spiritual punishment does not prevail.
Whereas S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, In Apol. n. 5. and sequentibus.
Gregorius Turonensis, alleged by TViddrington, say the King is subject to no
laws nor punishment, but of God: they mean that he is not subject to his
own, or any Te^porall Princes laws and punishment, but deny not but that he
is subject to Ecclesiastical laws and power, and may by that power be
chastised by spiritual Censures, and also temporal, when the spiritual
Censures are contemned. In Apol. number. 8.
And whereas S. Augustine, Pope Nicholas, and others alleged by widdrington,
affirm that the Pope and Church has no material or Temporal sword; I grant
it, because they by a material sword understand temporal Authority to use
it, and that the Pope has not by Christ's gift, yet he has from Christ (as I
have above proved) a spiritual power by which he may command the Temporal
sword as Widdrington him self acknowledges, In Apol. n. 196. 197.
and by this power he can decree temporal punishments when the spiritual
censures will not take place, though neither he, nor the Church does execute
these temporal punishments, especially of death and blood, it being a thing
not beseeming the Church, S. Leo ep. 93. ad Turibiu^ Asturien. Episcopum parum
ab initio.
according to that of S Leo: Ecclesiastica lenitas, cruentas refugit vltiones.
The Ecclesiastical lenity escheweth bloody reuenges. And thus much
concerning Widdringtons authors: the examination of which authors, although
it was not altogether necessary (Schulkennius having already examined them)
yet I thought it some what requisite, partly because Schulkennius examination
being in latin, it ca^ not see easily nor so generally be made known to
English men, partly because I have examined diverse Authors which
Schulkennius did not, and I have added here and there something (as facile est
inuentis addere) for more ample explication, and now also upon occasion of the
sight of Widdringtons Appendix in which he answers to Schulkennius
Examination, I have briefly refuted some of his Answers to Schulkennius
touching his Authors. Out of all this I gather, that seeing that WIDDRINGTONS
Authors either make not for him or are of no, or cracked credit, or are quite
opposite to him (which it seems he him self now sees, and therefore in his
Appendix rejects two of them, and defends not the rest, though provoked by
Schulkennius) I may say that Widdrington amidst all his Authors stands post
alone, and he but one opposes him self not only to his Chief Pastors
Censure, but also against the current of all Catholic and renowned Doctors
and Authors.

CHAPTER XIIII.
By the doctrine and practice of heretics, the same against them is
demonstrated; and thence is inferred, that the question betwixt us and them, is
not so much, whether the Pope has any such authority, as whether the Pope, or
they have it.

1. See The Protestats Apology tract. 3. sect. 2. Gretser. in comment. exeget.
c. 7. The book of dangerous pesitiont. Sleidan. lib. 18. hist. fol. 263. and
li. 22. fol. 345 Osiander in Epit. Ce^t. 16. page 526. Calvin. in Dan. cap. 6.
Lastly I prove this by the Protestants and Reformers own confession and
practice alleged by the Author of the Protestants Apology, and many other
authors. To begin with Lutherans, Sleydan and Osiander affirm that the
Magdeburgians and other Lutheran Ministers defended resistance against the
Magistrate and Prince, as lawful for defense of their Religion, and thereby
excused the Rebellion, which the Lutheran Princes made against the Emperor.
And if it be lawful to resist by war a Prince that persecureth Religion, it
is lawful to kill him, and consequently to depose him: because the end of
just war being peace, all things in it are lawful, which are necessary to
obtain peace; and if, unless the Prince be taken away, that just peace cannot
he had, that also is lawful.

2. The Caluinists are not behind them in this point: Calvin says, that
earthly Princes do bereave them selves of Authority, when they erect them
selves against God; yea that they are unworthy to be reckened in the number of
men, and therefore we must rather spit in their faces, then obey them. Beza in
ep. dedic. Noui Testam. an. 1554. and epist. 34. and 37. Can. 3. an. 1572
Beza in his Epistle Dedicatorie to his New Testament defends Rebellion
against Princes of a different Religion, if they permit not, but rather
persecure Caluinisme. The Hugonots of France in a Council of Ministers at
Berne, have decreed, that every city shall swear, that they and their
posterity will observe firm and inuiolate the things following; of which one
is can 40. that until it please God, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, to
change the heart of the French Tyrant (so they call him) in the mean time
every City shall choose a Mayor to govern them, as well in war, as in
peace. Another Canon is, that all Captains and leaders never lay down
weapons, as long as they shall see them persecute the Doctrine of Salvation
(Caluinisme) and the Disciples of the same (Caluinists.) Another is; If it
please God to raise up some Christian Prince to take revenge of their sins,
and to deliver his people, let them subject them selves to that Prince as to
another Cyrus sent to them from God. And this doctrine of the same Hugonots was
practiced in France to the ruin of many cities and Churches, and the slaughter
of many thousands, as The History of the Civil wars of France printed at
London anno 1591. and Crispinus in his book of the Estate of the Church, and
others have written, and to this day France remembers, yea feels it. The
like practice the heretics in the low Countries have used, as Osiander
confesses, and all the world witnesses. Moreover Osiander says that the
states there deposed their Prince: Osiand. in Epit. histor. Eccles. Cent. 16.
page 941.
Belgici publico scripto Domino and Regi suo Philippo obedientiam and
subiectionem renunciant: They of the low Countries renounce all obedience and
subjection to their Lord and King Philip, and consequently they depose him,
because there is no King without subjects. Yea an Edict of this deposition is
extant in their History printed at Francfort in the year 1583. in which they
declare him to have lost all right and title by his Tyranny, and forbid all
use of his name and seal.

3. Zuingl. in expla^. art. 42. fol. 84. Idem lib. 4. ep. ad Conhardum etc.
page 868. and 869.
Zuinglius and the Zuinglians iumpe with them in the same opinion. Quando
(Reges, Principes, and Magistratus) perfide and extra Regulam Christi egerint,
possunt cum Deo deponi: When Kings, Princes, and Magistrates behave them selves
perfidiouslie, and do against the rule of Christ, they may (with God) be
deposed. And again: That Kings may be deposed Saules example does teach
manifestly. And again: Permittendum est Caesari officium debitum, si modo
sidem nobis permittat illibatam. We must permit due obedience to Caesar, so
that he permit us to enjoy our faith inuiolate. Coclaeus in Actis Luth. an.
1531
And according to this doctrine the Tigurines molested the Catholic Cantones,
sowed sedition, and rebelled; but afterward in five battles, though more in
number and Artillery, they were overcome and slain, and in the first battle
Zuinglius him self was slain, and afterward burnt.

4. See Sutcliffe in his Answer to a libell supplicatorie etc. page 192. and
193. Sutcl. in his anwere to a libell. etc. page 95. Knox in Appellat. ad
nobilitatem and populum Scotiae. Buchan. li. de Iure Reg. et li 7. hist. Scot.
I could allege Goodman, who in his book (which in Queen MARY'S time was
printed at Geneua, and is commended by Whittingham in his Epistle before the
said book) affirms that it is lawful to withstand the Princes in case of
Religion, and that therefore Wiat, who rose against Queen MARIE, was no
Traitor. The like was the doctrine of Knox and Buchanan. Sutcliffe avouches
that Knox said: Noblemen, Governors, etc. Judges ought to reform religion, if
the King will not: If the Prince will not yield to his Nobles, and people, he
armeth them with power to depose him: If Princes be tyrants against God and his
truth, their subjects are freed from their oaths of obedience. And with him
accords Buchanan teachinge that the people is more excellent then the King,
and has right to bestow the Crown at their pleasure, That the People may
arraigne the King etc. That Reward should be given to them that kill Tyrants,
to wit, those who persecute Religion. And what sedition this doctrine raised in
Scotland against that worthy and virtuous Queen MARIE, his Majesty's mother,
and against his Majesty him self, all the world knows, and he best him
self. So that the question betwixt us, and our Reformers, who so storm at
this opinion of Catholics, which teaches that Popes in some case
ex^taordinarie may depose Princes, is not so much whether the Pope can do it,
as whether he, or rather a Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, Knox, or Buchanan
can do it; nor so much whether a General Council can do it, but whether such
a Council rather then a Consistory, or Heard of Ministers can.

5. And thus much I have discoursed concerning this question, whether the Pope
can in any case depose a Rebellious Prince, and who otherwise cannot be
corrected: not for that I honor not Princes, or acknowledge not obedience due
unto them, for I have above proved that they are in Temporal matters to be
honored and obeyed under pain of mortal sin; I have also confessed and
declared, that so long as they contain them selves with in their bounds, and
that their Temporal sword is not necessarily to be drawn for the Churches
defense, they have (if they be absolute Superiors) no superior on earth in
Temporal matters: but only this I have done to satisfy my conscience, to
discharge my duty to Christ his Church, and so to give to Caesar and Temporal
Princes what belongs to them, that I take not from God and his Church what is
due to them.

6. Wherein I hope I derogate no more from the Prince, then many Catholics do
from the Pope, who teach that in case of Heresy (to which as a private man,
though not as a public person, they think him to be subject) he may be a
Council of Bishops and Prelates be deposed. And therefore as Popes take this
doctrine in good part, so ought Princes not to take it so haynously that we
affirm, that in case of intolerable tyranny against the Church, the Pope may
depose them: But rather as they are content so to bear rule over their
subjects, as they will permit God to bear rule over them; so they should also
be content to subject them selves* their Kingdoms, Crowns, and scepters to
Christ and his Kingdom, that reigning under him here for a time, they may
reign with him hereafter for ever.

CHAPTER XV.
An Explication of the late Oath of pretended Allegiance, and of every clause
thereof, deduced out of the former and some other grounds, by which is proved,
that it can neither be proposed, nor ta^en, without grievous offense of
Almighty God.

1. Vide Alphonsum de Castro, V. Iurame^tum. Genesis 21. Genesis 26. Genesis 31. Psalm.
17. Romans 1.2. Cor 1. Philip. 1.1. Tim. 5
Catholics with common consent do confess and hold against the Messalians,
Euchites, Pelagians, Waldenses, Anabaptists, and Puritanes, that it is lawful
in some cases to swear, as many of the greatest Saints have done: For
ABRAHAM swore to Abimelech, ISAAC to the same, or another Abimelech, JACOB to
Laban. MOSES swore by Heaven and earth; DAVID and others oftentimes use this
oath; Viuit Deus; as God lives; which is in effect to swear by the life of
God; S. PAVL also did use diverse oaths, as Testis enim mihi est Deus: for God
is my witness; and I call God to witness; I testify before God; and such
like. Yea God him self knowing that we more easily believe when a thing is
sworn, swears himself, to win credit at our hands. Deuteronomy. 4.
And in DEVTERONOMIE he commands us to swear saying. Dominum Deum tuum
timebis, and per nomen eius iurabis: Thou shall fear thy Lord God, and shall
swear by his name. But as medicines are good, yet not always to be taken, but
only supposing a disease or sickness; so oaths are not to be used, but only
supposing a necessity, as when we cannot otherwise be believed. And therefore
when there is no necessity, CHRIST says: Mat. 5.
Ego autem dicovobis, non iurare omnino: I say to you; swear not all, to wit,
when there is no necessity. Jacob. 1.
And S. JAMES: Nolite iur are quodcunque iur amentum: Do not swear any oath.
Deuteronomy. 6.
But when there is necessity, God commands it, Psalm. 62.
as we have seen. And David commends it saying: Laudabuntur omnes qui
iurant in eo: They all shall be praised who swearein him (God.) Fot to swear
when necessity urges, is an Act of Religion, and worship of God, whom we
acknowledge to be so true, that he will not favor a lie, and of such a
majesty, that none will dare to swear by him, unless the thing be true:
which is the reason why oaths are easily credited.

2. D. Thom. 2.2. q. 89. art. 3.
But if we will have our oaths free from all sin, we must join to them
these three companions^, or conditions: Judgment Verity, and Justice;
according to that of HIEREMIE: Hierem. 4
Iur obis in veritate, and in iudicio, and in iustitia: Thou shall swear in
Verity, Judgment, and Justice. Judgment is necessary in the sweater,
Verity in the thing he swears, Justice in the cause. For want of Judgment
the oath is rash, as when we swear for every trifle; for want of Verity, the
oath is false and perjury, as when we swear a lie; for want of Justice, it is
unlawful, as if one should swear he would committ a sin. And if a man
swears with out Judgment, he takes Gods name in vain; if without Verity,
he commits perjury, and makes God to patronize a lie; if without Justice he
makes God a patron of sin. Wherefore he that would know whether the Oath,
which lately is proposed to Catholics, be lawful, must mark whether it
want not some one of these three companions or conditions, to wit, Judgment,
Verity, and Justice; for if it want but one, it is unlawful; much more if it
want all. And because there may be difficulty as well about the proposer, as
the taker of this Oath; let us see first whether in the proposer may be found
Judgment, Justice, and Verity.

3. As touching the first, it may seem not to be wanting in the Magistrate
that proposes, and that for two reasons. First because the Prince being of
another religion then the Pope, and knowing that Catholics give him power to
depose Princes, may seem justly to fear least he will exercise this
Authority upon him. Secondly the late Gunpowder-plot may seem to proceed
from such an opinion, and so the Magistrate, to secure the Prince, seems to
have reason to urge the Catholic subjects unto such an Oath.

4. But yet on the other side it seems most certain, that the Magistrate
has no just cause to propose such an Oath, and consequently that in proposing
it, he observes not the first condition. For first although the Magistrate may
have some cause to fear the Kings deposition, supposing that he persecuteth
the Catholic faith, and depriueth Catholics of livings, liberty, Romans 13.
and sometime life also; yet, as S. PAVL says: Vis non timere potestatem?
bonum fac and habebis laudem ex illa; Dei enim Minister est tibi in bonum. Si
autem malum feceris, time; non enim sine causa gladium portat etc. VVilt thou
not fear the power? do good and thou shall have praise of the same; for he is
Gods Minister unto thee for good. But if thou do evil, fear; for he bears
not the sword without cause, for he is Gods Minister, a revenger unto wrath to
him that does evil. So say I, if Princes will be free from all fear of the
Popes power, let them do good, and they shall have praise before God and men;
for the Pope is appointed Pastor unto the^ for their good. But if they will do
evil, if they will persecute the Church, her faith, and faithful children;
then let them fear, for he is Gods Minister, and has the spiritual glaiue
put into his hand to chastize, and correct all rebellious Christians. And
therefore as he that takes a man's purse from him by violence, has no just
cause to compel him to swear that he will not bewray him, because he might,
and should have abstayned from the injury, and then an oath had not been
necessary: so the Prince or Magistrate has no urgent cause to propose this
Oath to the Cath olicke subjects, because if he abstain from persecution, as
he ought to do, he needs not fear the Popes power, and so has no sufficient
cause to urge his subjects by oath to abjure the Popes Authority that he in
the mean while may persecute impune.

5. As for the Gunpowder* plot, it could not proceed from this opinion, for it
does not follow that because the Pope ca^ depose the Prince, therefore his
subjects by private Authority may endeavor to kill him; because the Pope is
superior, the subjects are inferiors; he has public, they have only
private Authority.

6. Secondly the Prince or Magistrate can not justly vex subjects, nor
trouble their consciences with it, but only for his own security: but this
Oath is so far from securing the King, that rather it exposes him to greater
danger; ergo to secure him self, the King cannot justly propose this Oath.
That this Oath cannot secure the King, it is manifest, because the most that
take this Oath, take it against their conscience, and not so much out of
opinion, as for fear; yea they think they do ill in taking it, and
consequently they think they are not bound to observe the same, for to swear
to do an evil thing, and after to fulfill the Oath, is a double sin, one in
swearing, another in fulfilling. An example is in Herod, who sinned in
promising by a solemn Oath, that he would grant his Daughter what soever she
asked, and as he was bound not to stand to such a rash oath, so he sinned
again in fulfilling it. And Widdrington requires only, that we should
swear, that we think it probable, that the Pope can not depose a Prince,
which opinion probable, and consequently fearful (for a probable opinion is
always joined cis^^ formidine de opposito, with fear of the opposite or
contrary) may easily change with every wind, and so can not secure the
Prince. And so the King after this Oath is no more secure then before, because
the Catholics, who take this Oath against their conscience, know that they are
not bound to keep their oath. And they who swear only that they think it
probable that the Pope can depose, swear with fear and without any certain
assent, and so may easily change that opinion which they hold then, in to
the contrary. Yea the Prince thereby brings him self into greater danger.
For by so unwonted and odious an Oath, so contrary to his subjects
consciences, he cannot but make him self odious, which how dangerous it is,
Cicero lib 2. de offic.
CICERO witnesses saying: Multorum odiis nullae opes, nullae vir espoteru^t
resistere; No richesse or forces are able to resist the hatreds of many.

7. I know the Politicians say: Oderint dum metuant. Let them hate, so they
fear also. Seneca lib. 2. de ira, c. 11
But yet true is that, which Seneca no inexpert Politician alleges: Necesse
est vt multos timeat, quem multi timent: He must of necessity fear many, who
causes many to fear him. Cicero lib. 2. de offie.
Because as Cicero says: quem metuunt, oderunt. Men hate whom they fear. And
what security has a Prince amongst them that hate him? When subjects hate
their Prince, they are discontended, when they are discontended, they are
desperate, when they are desperate, they care not for their own lives, when
they care not for their own lives, let then the Prince fear his; for as
Seneca says: Seneca.
Qui suam vitam contemnit, tuae Dominu^ erit: He thar contemns his own life,
will be master of thine. And from this source proceeded the late Gunpouder-plot.

8. Wherefore if Kings will reign securely, and fortify them selves
strongly, let them procure the love and good will of their subjects, Senec^
lib. 2. de Clem. cap. 19.
because as the same Moral Philosopher says; Vnum est inexpugnabile
munimentum, amor Ciuium: The only impregnable, and inexpugnable fort and strong
hold a Prince has, is the love of his Citizens and subjects. But if a Prince
seek rather to dominere odiously, then to rule sweetly, desire rather to be
feared, then loved; all the oaths, that he shall extort of his subjects,
cannot secure him, all his watch and Guarde will not save him. CLAUDIUS the
Emperor never went to a Banquet, but he environed the table with soldiers,
who only also served him at the same; and yet by his Taster he was poisened.
DOMITIAN made the walls of his Gallerie, or Ambulachre, of stones of
Phengites, which were transparent, that so he might see on all sides, and yet
he was slain by his Chamberlins. And what a strong Guarde, what armies can do
to defend a Prince that is hated, we have seen by the example of the two
HENRY'S, the Third, and Fourth of France, whereof the First was killed by a
silly Fryat, the other by a poor companion, in the midst of their Armies,
And so the first condition required to propose this Oath, which is Judgment,
that dictateth that an oath is neither to be proposed nor taken without just
cause, is wanting.

9. Verity also, which is the second companion of an oath, is here deficient,
because it is false that the Pope can not depose Princes, as I have proved by
many Arguments, and so to swear it, were to swear a falsitie, and
consequently the proposer of this Oath observes not the second condition,
which is Verity, without the which all oaths are perjury, and so neither to
be proposed, not taken.

10. The third condition is also wanting, because if it be true that the Pope
has authority to depose Princes (as I have proved) it is against Justice to
deny him this authority, and consequently to swear the denial. And so the
Magistrate wanting Judgment, Verity, and Justice, cannot lawfully propose
this Oath to Catholics, and especially to Priests, who are exempted by their
Clericall priuieledge from his Jurisdiction.

11. But because this discourse is undertaken rather for the instruction of the
Catholics, to whom the Oath is proposed, then for the Magistrate, that
proposes it; let this suffice for the proposers caveat and lesson, and let us
come to the Catholics, and examine, whether this Oath may with safe conscience
be taken of them: For if it may, it were cruelty to urge them to refuse it
with loss of livings and liberty; But if it may not, then it is as far
greater cruelty for Widdrington, and others, to persuade them that they may
take it, as it is more to loose eternal felicity, then Temporal riches, of
which Death will in fine despoile us. And because Widdrington has divided the
Oath into certain clauses, I will follow him in the same method: Protesting
first, that as His HOLINESS when he heard of this Oath, affirmed (as Father
persons alleged by WIDDRINGTON, Widdr. Disp. Th. sec. 2. cap. 10. number. 56.
related) that he had no intention, to proceed actuallie by Censures against
his Majesty (of England) but rather to use all Humanity, and only would
suffer death rather then yield any iotte of the Authority due to the Sea
Apostolic: So I have noe intention to dispute de fact, but only de Iure,
that is, not to question whether in this case, or that case, or whether for
this cause, or that cause, His Majesty, or any other absolute Prince in
particular may be deposed, or whether it would be more to destruction, or
edification: but rather (if the Oath did not mention His Majesty, and so
enforce me to speak some times of him) I would for the respect which I bear
to my Sovereign, speak no more of him then any other Prince, but, abstracting
from all Princes, factes, and cases in particular, I intend only to dispute,
as I have hitherto, of the Popes Right, and Authority over Princes in general.

The First Clause of the Oath.

I. A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge profess, and testify in my
conscience before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord King James is
lawful and true King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's Dominions
and Countries.

12. I will not stand much with WIDDRINGTON about this clause, because all
Catholics will acknowledge his Majesty that now is, for their Prince and
King, and will swear also fidelity unto him in all Temporal matters; and
this Oath has been offered by the Catholics in an Epistle they wrote to his
Majesty; which others also have offered, and for better notice and in argument
of their true meaning published their offer in print. This then is one reason
which makes Catholics to suspect, that in this Oath covertly is intended a
denial of the Popes spiritual supremacy. For if the Prince, and his
Magistrate intended only Civil and Temporal Allegiance, why did they not
propose this Oath in the ordinary tenor and terms of a Civil oath, with
which the former Kings of England, and all Catholic Kings of other Countries
even to this day content them selves? Why bring they in the Popes Authority,
which other Princes leave out? But they knew that Catholics would never have
refused such an oath, and therefore to trouble, and engage their consciences,
to have thereby some pretense to seize upon their livings and goods, and to
vex their persons, they devised this Oath. Which their manner of proceeding
may make Catholics justly suspect that some thing is intended, to which in
conscience they cannot agree, and consequently (oaths, conscience, and
Religion being so nice and dangerous matters) if there were no other reason
then this, In his Newyearesguift number. 8. page 37.
the Catholics have just cause to make, not only a scruple, but also a
conscience to take it. And therefore Widdrington him self in his
Newyeares-guist, confesses at least, that in the beginning (and why not
still?) Catholics might justly suspect this oath to be unlawful.

13. Suarez and Gretzerus.
Hence it is also, that some writers make a scruple of those words, Supremus
Dominus, Sovereign Lord: because the Oath being of it self, suspicious, and
the King of England, by his ordinary Title given him by Parliament, being
styled Supreme Head of the Church, (which dignity the Bishops and Divines of
England affirm to be annexed to the Kings Regalitie iure diuino, as we have
seen above Chap. 6.) they fear least a snake lie hid in the grass, and a pad
in the straw, and that under that Title of Supreme or Sovereign Lord, is
covertly understood Supreme Head of the Church of England, not only in
Temporal, but also in Spiritual causes. But because these words ( Sovereign
Lord) may be taken in that good sense, which ordinarily they import, and are
not put ex part praedicati, but only ex part subiecti, (for by this clause
the swearer swears not that his Majesty is Supreme or Sovereign Lord, but
only that our Sovereign Lord is true and lawful King) I will not much stand
about them.

14. For as if one should swear, that the Archbishop of Cantetburie is truly
a persecutour of Catholics, he should not swear that he is truly Archbishop,
but only that he, who is called Archbishop of Canterbury, is truly a
persecutour: so by swearing that our supreme Lord King JAMES is true, and
lawful King, we do not swear that he is Sovereign or Supreme Lord, but only
that he, who is so styled, is our Prince and King, which no English Catholic
will refuse to swear. But howsoever Catholics have good cause to suspect all
things in this unwonted Oath, it being not the ordinary Oath of Alleagea^ce,
which the Kings in other Countries propose, and wherewith the Kings of England
contented them selves, till they began to sever them selves from the true
Catholic Roman Church (for true Catholic and Roman ever went together)
and to banish out of their Realm all Papal Authority, as an enemy to their
state, which other Princes do retain, and ever have reverenced and maintained
as the Chief support of their Kingdoms. And that which augmenteth the
suspicion is, for that his Majesty him self seems to make doubt of this
Oath; and so it seems dangerous either for the Magistrate to propose it, or
the subjects to receive it. For these are his Majesty's words uttered in the
Parliament an. 1606. Some doubts have been conceived in using the Oath of
Allegiance, and that part of the Act, which ordains the taking thereof, is
thought so absurd, as no man can tell, who ought to be pressed therewith. For I
my self, when upon a time I called the Judges before me at their going to
their courts, moved the question unto them, wherein, as I thought, they could
not reasonably auswer. So that this obscurity in the Oath should first be
cleared, least swearing to that which we understand not, we expose our selves
to perjury.

The Second Clause.

And that the Pope neither by him self, nor by any authority of the Church,
or Sea of Rome, or by any other means with any other, has any power or
authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Majesty's Kingdoms
or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to anoy him, or invade his
Countries, or to discharge any of his subjects of their Allegiance and
obedience to his Majesty, or to give license, or leave to any of them, to
bear Arms, raise tumultes, or to offer any violence, or hurt to his Majesty's
Royal person, state, or government, or to any of his Majesty's subjects
within his Majesty's Dominions.

15. Widdr. in disp. Theol. in exam. huius clausulae.
This clause (says VViddrington) is Petra illa scandali and lapis offensionis:
that Rock of scandal and stone of offense, at which so many of this age, as
well learned, as unlearned have stumbled. And in deed to VViddrington him self
it has been such a Rock of scandal (but by his own fault, for many have
passed it with out either falling or stumbling) that he has not only stumbled
and fallen at it him self, but by his fall he has been the cause of the fall
and ruin of many an hundred. For if, August. sermon 14. de Sa^ctis. Act. 7. and
22.
as S. AVGVSTIN says, S. PAVL by holding the garments of those that stoned S.
STEVEN did more stone him then any of the stoners them selves. Magis saeuiens
omnes adiuuaudo quam suis manibus lapidando: Certes Widdrington persuading by
his books that the Oath is lawful, sins more damnably, then any one of
them, that take the Oath, yea takes it in every one of them, and stumbleth
and falls in them all, and consequently more then them all. But vae homini
illi, per quem scandalum hoc venit: Mat. 18.
woe to that man, by whom this scandal comes.

16. But to come to the examination of this Clause, although Widdrington makes
no bones of it, yet they that square all by conscience, and the rule of faith,
and practice of the Church, find great and many difficulties not to be
devoured by any timorous conscience. And first by all the Arguments, which
hitherto have been produced, it is as manifest that this Clause of the Oath
wants Verity (which is the second companion and condition of a lawful oath)
as it is evident, that the Pope has Authority to depose a Prince, not whom
soever, but such a one, in whom is just cause of deposition, to wit
intolerable and Rebellious Tyranny against the Church, or some such like
cause. For if the Lutherans, Caluinists, and other heretics, who hold that a
Prince, who persecuteth their religion, may be deposed and killed, can not take
this Oath, unless they first depose that conscience, and change their
opinion; much less can Catholics, who generally hold that the Pope can in
some case depose Princes, and dispose of their Kingdoms, with out doing
against their conscience.

17. Widdr. disp. Th. de Iura^. Fidel ca. 2. sect. 2. nu. 3. and ca. 3. sect.
2. n. 3.
Whereas VViddrington answers that the thing which is sworn in this Oath is
not, that King JAMES is lawful King, and cannot be deposed, but only that the
party, who swears, sincerely acknowledges that he is lawful King and
cannot be deposed; and so at least they, who are persuaded that the Pope cannot
depose Princes, may with safe conscience, and with out danger of perjury,
swear that they think he cannot be deposed: I must tell him first, that if
this were the meaning, the Oath would little avail to the Kings security;
Which yet the King says was intended by this oath, by which he would
distinguish betwixt Catholics, and be sure that they would stand for him,
though the Pope should depose him, and would not out of that opinion that the
Pope can depose a Prince, attempt any thing against him. For although the
subject swear that now at this present he is persuaded that the Pope can not
depose a Prince, yet seeing that many hold the contrary, he may after the
Oath taken, change his mind, either by conferring with the Doctors of the
contrary opinion, or by reading their books, and should not break his former
Oath, he by that protesting only and swearing what then was his opinion.
Secondly, this is but a mere evasion, because he that takes the Oath,
swears from his heart, and before God, not only that he thinks so, but also
that it is so, and that most assuredly it is so. And this, the very words of
the Oath do import, which do make the swearer say, that he does sincerlie
acknowledge and testify in his Conscience and before God that King JAMES is
lawful King, and that by no Authority he can be deposed. Which meaning the
Fourth Clause also confirms, where he swears, that the position and
doctrine, which holds, that Princes excommunicated, may be deposed and
murdered, is impious and heretical. By which manner of speech, he not only
swears what he thinks, but what absolutely is to be houlden concerning
such a doctrine and position. Yea he does not swear at all what he thinks,
as though his thinking were the immediate object of his oath, or the thing which
he swears, but by those words, I do truly and sincerely acknowiedge,
Profess, and testify in my conscience before God and the world, he does
express his act of swearing and protestation, and by the ensewing words,
that our Sovereign Lord King JAMES is lawful and true King etc. aend that the
Pope neither by him self, nor by any Authority of the Church or Sea of Rome,
or by any other means with any other, has any power, or Authority to depose
the King etc. he expresses the object of the oath, and the thing sworn, to
wit, that King JAMES is lawful King (of which no English Catholic makes
doubt) and that the Pope can not depose him. Otherwise if by this clause were
only intended, that he that takes the oath should swear what he thinks, it
should have been thus expressed. I.A.B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge,
profess, and testify in my conscience before God, and the world, that I
think, and am persuaded, that King JAMES is lawful King, and that the Pope
can not depose him. And I demand of WIDDRINGTON, if the King would make an
oath to oblige his subjects to swear not that they think, but that indeed
King JAMES is lawful King, and can not be deposed, how he could more plainly
have expressed it, then he has? And although WIDDRINGTON is not now afraid to
auerre, Widdr. in his Newyearesgift. Page 62.63.
that one may not only swear that he thinks that the Pope can not depose a
Prince, but also that absolutely he can not depose him, yet who can lawfully
swear with such asseueration, that the Pope absolutely has no such power,
knowing that there are so many Arguments, and so great authority above
produced for the contrary?

18. Let us clear the matter by an example of VViddrington his own
alleadginge? Widdr. Disp. Th. cap. 3. sect. 1. number. 11.
There are two opinions amongst Divines touching the Conception of our B.
Lady; The Thomists say, she was conceived in original sin, though by and
by after sanctified even in her mothers womb. The Scotists, and others hold
that she was sanctified in the first instant of her conception, and so never
contracted original sin at all; and this is the more common opinion, and
most conformable to the practice of the Church, celebrating the feast of her
said Conception, though the other be not condemned, but allowed. Now I demand
of VViddrington, who brings for him self this example, whether a Thomist can
swear that our Lady was conceived in original sin against the other
opinion? I grant to Widdrington, that he may swear, that he thinks so, if
in deed he be of that opinion; for in swearing that which he thinks, he
swears no falsehood: but he can not swear with the former asseueration that
absolutely she was conceived in original sin, he knowing that so many
Authors hold the conrra^ie, who are also countenanced by the Churches
practice, and consequently knowing that it is very probable that the contrary
is true, if not truest. The same, and with more reason, may I say to
Widdrington in our present case. VViddrington holds, and so do some others
whom he produces (but with how little reason and Authority we have seen)
that the Pope cannot depose Princes, nor dispose of any Temporal matters out
of his own patrimony and Kingdom, and so though he ought to depose that
conscience and opinion, yet so long as he is of that opinion, he may swear
that he thinks so, and shall swear no falsehood, if in deed he think so.
But yet he knowing that so many Scriptures, Theological reasons, Councels,
Popes, their factes and practice, so many learned Doctors and Saints, stand
for the contrary, he can not swear absolutely, and with the former
asseueration, that the Pope has no such authority, he knowing that so many
Authors and so great Arguments and Authority, do countenance the contrary
opinion: Yea much less can he swear for his opinion in this point, then can a
Thomist for his, touching our Ladies Conception: because the Thomist is
licenced by the express leave of the Church, to teach and think as he does,
and his adversaries are commanded by the Church not to condemn his opinion as
heretical, Council. Trid. sess. 5. c. 1. de Reform. Sixtus 4 ca. grave nimis de
reliq.
or erroneous, or rash, which warrant VViddrington has not for his opinion;
rather the Church has condemned it in Counsels and practice, as we have
showed. Who is then so hardy, or rather so rash, that dares swear absolutely
that the Pope has no authority to depose Princes, or dispose of their
Kingdoms, the contrary being not only probable, yea more probable, which
VViddrington can not deny, but also a matter of faith, or so nearly
concerning faith, (as the arguments and authority produced do warrant) that
Cardinal Allan in his Answer to the libeller says, Chap. 4.
it concerns the Popes Supremacy and power Apostolical, Apol. pro Card.
Bellar. cap. 6. cont. 4. page 259.
and Schulkennius very well auerreth, the contrary is either heretical, or
erroneous, and temerarious; either of which is enough to deter any timorous
conscience. But be it that the opinion, which holds that the Pope in some
cases can depose a Prince, were but probable, yet seeing that the thing which is
probable may be true, and if it be the more common and probable opinion (as
Widdrington denies not but that this opinion of deposing Princes is) it is
most like to be true: It follows consequently, that he that abiureth this
probable, yea more probable opinion, that the Pope can in some case depose
Princes, exposes him self to probable danger of swearing false, and abiuring
the truth, and so is perjured; because, qui amat periculum in illo peribit:
Eccl. 3.
he that loves danger shall perish therein: out of which words Divines do
prove, that he who wittinglie and willingly exposes him self to probable
danger of any sin, is guilty before God of that sin, as if he had
actuallie committed.

19. Certes if Verity be a necessary companion of a lawful oath, no man can
swear more, then he thinks there is verity in the thing he swears.
Wherefore that he may swear that this opinion is probable, he must in
conscience think it at least probable, which (if he ponder the Authority,
which above I have produced for the contrary) he can not possibly and with
any reason think: to swear that he thinks it not only probable, but also
absolutely and undoubtedly true, he must in conscience be so persuaded, else he
should swear against his conscience, and otherwise then in his conscience is
true. And how can he persuade him self so fully, as to swear, that from his
heart and before God, he thinks, and holds, that the Pope in no case can
depose Princes, or dispose of their Dominions, he knowing that so many, and
with so great reason hold the contrary, who are as likely, and as far more
likely not to be deceived then he, as they have more reason and Authority for
their opinion, then he.

20. Page 62. and Page 63.
WIDDRINGTON in his Newyeares-gift answers, that whatsoever opinion a man
follows in Speculation concerning the Popes Authority to deprive Princes,
yet he may as certainly acknowledge, and swear that the Pope has no
Authority to depose the King (that is to practice his deposition) as it is
clear and manifest, that he may certainly acknowledge and swear, that the
Pope has no authority to commit open injustice; and that in a doubtful,
uncertain, and disputable case the condition of the possessour is to be
preferred. But although Widdrington makes great accounte of this answer, yet
it will be found defective. For first VViddrington is not ignorant, that the
power and exercise of the power are two things, which also may be separated:
for we have the power of seeing when we sleep, but not the exercise of it; and
we have the power of walking when we repose our selves on our bed, and yet
then we walk not. And so the power of excommunicating and deposing is one
thing, and the exercise of it is an other; and therefore the Bishop may have
power to excommunicate, and yet not exercise that power; and the Pope may have
power to depose, although he do not actuallie depose any. Secondly WIDDRINGTON
knows, that a man may have the power to do a thing validlie, that is, so as
the thing done shall stand in force, and yet not lawfully, that is, with out
sin. As for example, the Prelate or Sovereign Prince, who have Authority to
dispense in positive laws subject to their Authority, if they dispense with
out just cause, the dispensation according to the probable opinion of diverse
Divines, is valid and of force, and freeth the dispensed in conscience, Soto
li. 1 de Iustitia and Iure q. 7 a. 3. Siluest. and Angelus V. Dispensatio.
but it is unlawful, and the dispenser sins. So the Pope or Bishop may
sometimes Excommunicate validlie, and yet not lawfully. For Divines affirm,
Excommunication may be three ways unjust: Ex animo, when there is just cause
to excommunicate, but the Bishop who excommunicateth does it not out of Zeal
of justice, or desire of amendment, but out of envy, hatred, or malice; Ex
ordine, when the Bishop has just cause to excommunicate, but observes not the
order of Canonical Premonition, which is to be done thrice, or once for
thrice; Ex cauia when there is no just cause. The first excommunication is
always valid, Lib. 1. Thesauri ^^suum ^^^sci entia ca. 7.
but unlawful; so is ordinarily the second as notes Sayrus our country man;
the third is not only unlawful but also inualid and of no force. So also the
Pope may depose validlie, and yet not lawfully; or without sin. For if the
Prince give sufficient cause of deposition, and the Pope notwithstanding should
(as such a superior is not easily to be thought so to do) depose the Prince
out of hatred or envy, or else when prudence would have him to tolerate the
Prince for fear of garboyles and greater hurt, the deposition should be valid
and of force, but yet unlawful, and sinful. Wherefore seeing that in this
second clause we are to swear that the Pope has no power or Authority to
depose the King, or to dispose of his majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions, etc.
Although perchance he can not now, as things stand, lawfully exercise his
power in deposing an absolute Prince, because much more hurt then good might
come of it; yet if it be probable, that the Pope has power to depose (as
Widdrington confesses it is probable) I demand of Widdrington, how he can
swear resolutelie that the Pope has no such authority, he being not ignorant
that many learned men hold it, and that more then probable that he has? And
so for all this Answer, my former Argument is in force. wherefore although it
were but probable, that the Pope has authority to depose a Prince, and that
consequently he could not actuallie without injustice depose him (the
condition of the Possessour being to be preferred) yet seeing that the power is
one thing, and the exercise an other, and that it is at least probable that
the Pope has power to depose, how can WIDDRINGTON, knowing this probability,
swear absolutely that the Pope has no authority to depose? As for example,
one is in possession of a Tenement and has probable right, an other has also
probable right to it, but without possession, and so can not justly
dispossess, because in the like defaulte or cause, De Reg^ Iuris in 6.
better is the condition of him that is in possession. Although therefore in
this case one might swear, that he, who is not in possession, can not justly
dispossess the party who has the possession: yet he could not swear, that
he has no right to the Tenement, if he know that he has probable right. And
therefore although if it were but probable, that the Pope can depose, one might
swear that he cannot exercise this power justly, because melior est conditio
Principis possidentis, yet he could not swear (as in this clause he is
commanded) that the Pope has no power nor right to depose a Prince. For as a
man may have probable right to a Tenement, and yet can not put him out of
possession who also has probable right, because possession hinders: so the
Pope might have probable authority to depose, yet could not actuallie depose a
Prince, because his possession hinders. Lastelie by as many Arguments, as I
have deduced out of Scriptures, Councelles, The ologicall principles, and
practice of holy Popes, to prove that the Pope can in some cases depose a
Prince, I have also proved WIDDRINGTONS opinion improbable. And although three
or four Authors, or as many as VVIDDRINGTON alleges may make an opinion
probable, Vasq. 1. 2. disp. 62. ca. 4.
yet as Vasquez and others do well observe, they must be skillful in that art
and science, and the rest of the torrent of Doctors must admit it as
probable, and not note it of error or temeritie. And therefore though some few
Doctors hold with VViddrington, or rather he with them; yet seeing that the
rest of the Doctors in number, learning, and sanctity far excelling, do
stand against his opinion; that his Authors either hold against him, or are
censured by the Church; that the Decrees of Councelles and facts of Popes do
condemn him, his Authors, and his opinion; and that lately his Chief
Pastors sentence has pronounced, that the oath of Allegiance contains
things contrary to faith and salvation: in which words, no doubt
WIDDRINGTONS opinion, the principal subject of the oath is deeply taxed; how
can WIDDRINGTONS opinion be probable? and if his opinion be not probable, the
contrary opinion which holds, that the Pope can depose a Prince, must be
more then probable, and no less then certain, as besides other Arguments the
Lateran Decree which otherwise should be unjust, does demonstrate: whence
follows, that the Pope has not only power to depose, but may also execute
it without injustice, the Prince deposed having no probable right or Title
remaining. And this is the opinion of all those, who hold that the Pope can
depose Princes, and this was the opinion of the Popes so learned, and so holy,
that have deposed Princes, and so must think it more then probable, else the
Prince (as I said) after deposition should retain probable right, and so being
also in Possession, could not justly be deposed.

21. Widdr. Disp. Th. cap. 3. sect. 3. n. 3. and cap. 10. sect. 2. n. 11.
This Argument will have more force, if we consider that this Oath is not only
proposed to those that hold with WIDDRINGTON, but also to those, and those
especially, who hold against him, and can not change their opinion, or depose
their conscience, because they have no probable reason to depose it, at least
so as to think absolutely and undoubtedly that the Pope cannot depose Princes,
or dispose of their Temporal states. For although, if VViddringtons opinion
were probable (as it is not) they might so depose their conscience, as to
think the contrary probable, and consequently might swear it is probable;
yet they can not swear that they think from their heart and before God, that
VViddringtons opinion is absolutely true, and consequently the contrary
absolutely false, they knowing that there is such reason and Authority for the
contrary. Yea this Oath is proposed to all sorts, as well those that are
learned as unlearned, as well those that have capacity to Judge of the Oath,
as those that have not, such as are the most part of those, to whom it is
tendered. And how shall they with any saferie of conscience swear, that before
God, and in their hearts, they think that the Pope can not depose Princes, they
being not able to judge of the matter, and knowing no more probability for the
one side, then for the other?

22. VViddrington says, that those that can not judge, may rely upon the
learned, and so though by intrinsecall principles, which are the reasons and
Arguments, which are produced for this opinion, they can not judge which
opinion is probable, or more probable, they being not of capacity to conceive
of the force of Arguments, yet by extrinsecall principles, that is, Authority
of others, who are counted good and learned men, they may frame to them selves
a conscience that the Pope can not depose Princes, because many learned and
good men hold that opinion. To which purpose he cites his Master Gabriel
Vasquez, whom notwithstanding he misconstrueth. Vasq. 1.2. disp. 62. c. 8.
For although Vasquez together with Henricus, Conradus, and Siluester, whom
he alleges, do hold that an ignorant man may follow in practice a probable
opinion, yea the Counsel of a prudent, learned, and good man, who tells him
it is a probable opinion, although the common opinion be contrary; And so if
VViddringtons opinion were probable, might also hold with him, and
consequently swear what he thinks; yet I deny VViddringtons opinion to be
probable, and have proved it not only improbable, but also repugnant to
scriptures, Theological reasons, Councels, and consequently directly or
indirectlie to faith it self. But suppose (which yet I will not grant) that
VViddringtons opinion were probable, yet neither Vasquez, nor any Divine
affirms, that it is lawful to swear absolutely that VViddringtons opinion
is true. If VViddringtons opinion were probable by reason of the Authority of
the Authors that hold it, then might any man, even he that thinks it by
intrinsecall principles of reason and argument, to be false, frame a
conscience, that it is probable for the extrinsecall principles, as the
multitude, learning, and virtue of the Authors that hold it, and consequently
might swear that he for these principles thinks it probable, yet he can not
swear (as is commanded by this Oath) from his heart, and before God, that
VViddringtons opinion is true, and that therefore absolutely the Pope can not
depose a Prince for any heresy or rebellion against the Church, because (as is
before said) he knowing, that many hold contrary to VViddrington, and that
far more are against him, then with him, who are as likely, yea more likely
to have found out the truth, then he, he can not swear absolutely that the
Pope can not in any case depose Princes; for that were to swear that a thing
false (as I have proved) or at least but probable (as VViddrington confesses)
is so certain, that the contrary is most certainly false, which is to swear
an untruth, and to commit perjury. For as it is perjury to swear, that that
is true, which we know to be false, so is it perjury to swear that to be
absolutely true, which yet is doubtful, or at least but probable.

23. Hence may easily be gathered, that this Clause of the Oath wants all
the three companions of a lawful Oath, and so cannot be taken. First it
wants Judgment, because in deed, as appears by my former arguments, there
is no just cause or reason to swear that it is probable, much less that it is
assured, which is, even by VViddringtons own acknowledgement, but probable;
and so it is rash, and wants Judgment. Secondly it wants Verity: for
besides that I have proved above, that VViddringtons opinion is false,
derogating to faith and Church, yea scriptures and reasons, and consequently
that to swear that it is true, were to swear an untruth, and to committ
perjury; VViddrington him self confesses his opinion is but probable, and
consequently to swear that it is undoubtedly true, and the contrary false,
is to swear also an untruth, because it is false, that, that which is but
probable, is assuredly true. Thirdly this Clause wants Justice, because it
is an injury to the Pope, to swear absolutely that he has no power, nor
Authority to depose Princes, he having so assured, and at least (as I have
proved) so probable claim and Title to this Authority, Widdr. supra.
even by VViddrington his own confession, who acknowledges that the Popes who
deposed Princes followed a probable opinion: although he must also fay, that
all those Popes, though holy and learned, committed great in justice in
deposing the^, they being in possession, and having also probable right, if
those Popes had but probable Authority, as above I have declared.

24. This might serve to reject this Clause as altogether unlawful to be
sworn: but yet for more full satisfaction of Catholics in this point, I will
bring another Argument to prove that it can not in conscience be sworn.
Because this Clause imports that the Pope neither by him self, nor by any
another Authority or means, can depose the King, or dispose of any of his
majesty's Dominions, or authorize any foreign Prince to anoy him, or invade
his countries, or discharge any of his subjects of their allegiance, or to
give license or leave to any of them to bear arms, raise tumults, or offer
violence or hurt to his Majesty's Royal person, state, or government, or any
his Majesty's subjects etc. Wherein also is such difficulty, that I can not
see how in a matter so doubtful, or not so certain, a man may swear so
peremptorily, and undoubtedly. Who so pleases to read Franciscus de Victoria
that learned Dominican, shall find that he sets down diverse Titles, by
which the Spaniards might justly invade and subdue the Indians; which Titles
whether any Christian Prince may have to invade England, or any other country,
I will not dispute, but only allege them, that the Reader may see that it is
not so evident that a man may take this Clause of the Oath in so general
terms as is lies, Victoria his opinion being no ways condemned, but rather
approved by many. Victoria Relect. de Indis Insulanis and Titulis quibus
Barbari potuerint venire inditionem Hispanorum.


25. The first Title pertaining to this matter, which Victoria alleges, is
the Authority which the Pope has to send Preachers even to Infidels, much
more to Christian Countries that be heretics, because over these he has
spiritual Jurisdiction. And although Paganes can not be compelled to embrace
Christian faith; yet the Christian Preachers, after they have given reason of
their Embassage, may preach by that Authority, which CHRIST gave to his
Apostles and successors, when he said: Euntes docete omnes gentes baptizantes
eos etc. Mat. 28
Going therefore teach ye all nations baptizing them, etc. And if the Paganes
would hinder their preaching, or after they have preached hinder the conversion
of Infidels, and the fruit of preaching; they may with the soldiers, whom
they carry with them, force them to permit them to preach, and to permit all
that will to hear them, and not to hinder their spiritual good and
conversion; and if otherwise they cannot pursue nor defend this their right,
they may make war upon those, that hinder them, and pursue all those things
which are lawful in a just war. And by this Title (says Victoria) the
Spaniards might make war upon the Indians, if otherwise they could not preach
the Christian faith, nor withstand the obstinate Pagans, who would hinder their
conversion, that desired to be Christians. And thus Victoria would say that the
Pope might send Preachers to England, and might desire and license some
Catholic Prince to assist and defend the Preachers in procuring heretics
conversion. And if any heretics would not permit the Catholic Doctors to
preach, or would hinder the conversion of those, that would be Catholics, the
foreign Prince licenced by the Pope, might in manner aforesaid (as Victoria
thinks, for I will say nothing of my self) make war upon the English, and
seeing that war cannot (unless by reason of ignorance) be just on both sides,
the English, especially who are Catholics, could not defend those that oppose
them selves against this Prince, who assisteth the Preachers. Thus would he
say: but as I so honor my Prince, and love my country, that I desire not that
any such Title should take place in England, so I will not dispute of it.

26.Another Title (says Victoria) by which the Spaniards might make war on
the Indians is, if after some of them be converted to the Catholic faith, the
others would force them to Idolatry, for then (says he) the Spaniards might
by arms defend them, they being become now their friends and fellows.

27.A third Title (says he) might be this: If the India^s by lawful or
unlawful means, that is by peaceble preaching, or force and violence, were
for the most part converted, the Pope to conserve Religion might give them a
Christian Prince, and send an Army to put him in possession. S. Thom. 2.2. q.
10 art. 10. Innoc. ca. super his de voto and voti redempt.
This he proves out of S. Thomas, and the common opinion of Divines, who
affirm that the Chief Pastor in favor of Religion, and for securing
Christians salvation, might free Christian slaves from servitude, and much more
other Christians, who are subject, not despotice, but only politice; yea this
he proves out of scripture, because in favor of faith a wife may be
separated from a Pagan husband, 1. Cor. 7. Cap. quanto, de diuortiis,
much more a subject from his Prince.

28. A fourth Title is if the Prince generally molest Innocents by unjust
laws, and vexations; as if a Pagan King should sacrifice Innocent Children to
his Gods, then any foreign Prince, especially by the counsel of the High
Pastor, after he has warned the said King, and sees no redress, may take
the cause of the Innocents upon him, and make war upon the King for their
defense, for as Innocents have right from God and Nature to defend them selves,
so may another with their express or presumed license, undertake their cause,
and wage war in their defense.

29. A fifth Title may be grounded in the Popes temporal authority, for he
being a temporal Prince might authorize the Duke of Vrbine for example, or
other his Feudataries, to invade England for satisfaction of injuries, if the
King of England had done him any, (for so the King of England has heretofore
invaded France for injuries received, and might again hereafter, if by the
French the like injuries should be offerred.) And yet this Clause of the Oath
makes the Catholic to swear, that the Pope neither by himself, nor by any
authority of the Church or Sea of Rome, or by any other means with any other,
has any power or authority to depose the King etc. or to anoy him or invade
his countries etc.

30. Another Title of inuading a Princes country or resisting him may be this.
If Princes contrary to the Popes commandment, and liking of all other Princes,
would call the Moors or Turks into Spain, France, or Germany, and command
their subjects to assist them; were they bound to obey, or rather were they not
bound to resist what they could? And seeing that the bringing of the Moors or
Turks into those countries might be prejudicial to all Christian countries,
and even to Christian faith; might not other Princes, especially commanded by
their Chief visible Pastor, invade their countries to hinder the entrance of
such enemies? And might nor, yea ought not the Emperor, and those Princes
subjects, to assist them against their own Princes for the common good of
Christendom? And yet by this Clause we are commanded to swear that the Pope
in no case can authorize subjects or Princes to annoy his Majesty of England,
or any his countries.

31. Wherefore although I will not auerre, that Christian Princes may have
these titles to invade England, or any part of it, or to make war, either
against the Prince (to whom I wish after long life hete eternity in heaven) or
country, which is most dear unto me; Yet by this it may easily appear, that
it is not so evident, as VViddrington would make it, that this Oath may be
taken with such an assured asseueration, and in those so general terms,
Victoria having alleged so many Titles of just wars, which make this Clause
at least doubtful, and so not to be sworn.

32. Widdr. in Disp. The ol. c. 3. sect. 4. n. 3.
VViddrington answers that in this Clause is not denied that the Common
wealth can depose a Prince, but only is auerred that the Pope cannot either by
himself, or by the Common wealth, or any other means. And (says he) if the
Pope cannot by himself, neither can he by the Common wealth. And this (as he
thinks) he conuinceth by examples. For (says he) as a stone neither with a
man, neither by a man has power to understand and disoourse, and neither by
the Common wealth, nor with the Common wealth can depose a Prince, because it
has no power of it self to discourse or depose: so if we suppose that the
Pope of him self has no power to depose a Prince, he cannot by the Common
wealth depose him, though otherwife the Common wealth could. And although
(says Widdrington) these examples be not like in all points, because the stone
is not capable at all of discoursing or deposing, the Pope is at least capable
of Authority to depose Princes, if God would give it him, yet (says he) if
we suppose that the Pope de facto has no power to depose, then a good
argument may be drawn out of these similitudes. For as the stone cannot by
man, or with a man discourse, or depose Kings, because it has no power of it
self so to do: so if the Pope have no authority to depose Princes (as
Widdrington supposes it cannot be, or is not yet sufficiently proved that he
has) he cannot de facto by the Common wealth depose.

33. But I shall make VViddrington to see by other examples and reason also,
how little these his examples avail. For suppose the Pope could not depose a
Prince by himself (as I have proved he can) yet he might do it by a
temporal Prince, or the Common wealth, and that also in VViddringtons opinion.
This I prove first by examples. For in the opinion of those Philosophers, who
say that no substance is immediately operative or active, the substance or
substantial form of fire can not produce fire immediately by it self, and
yet it can per calorem and siccitatem, by heat and siccity, which are the
fires instrument and active virtue; and so we say not only that heat
produces heat, but also that fire produces heat, though not immediately,
but by means of the foresaid qualities. So the sun engenders metalls and
mineralls in the bowels of the earth, and produces as an universal cause,
plants and herbs; and yet not by his immediate substance, but by mediation
of his light and influences. So the will of man is cause of walking, speaking,
and other external operations, yet not by her self immediately, but by
mediation of other faculties, which are dependent on her. So a Prince that had
neither hand nor foot, or if he had, should use neither, and so could not kill
his enemy, yet might he do it by his Captain, if he should command him; and
if at his commau^d the Captain should kill, the Prince also should be said to
have killed, yea and to have been the principal cause of the murder, though
immediately he either could not, or did not strike any stroke. Wherefore
VViddrington might have called to mind, that many times an agent may work an
effect by another, which it can not by it self immediately, if the other cause,
which it uses, be dependent of it, or subordinate unto it, as is to be seen
evidently in the aforesaid, and many other examples.

34. But as touching Widdringtons examples, they are not to the purpose: for no
marvel that a stone cannot discourse by, or with a man, a man being not
subordinate to a stone, nor any instrument of it; and so as little marvel it
is, that a stone cannot depose a Prince by the Pope, as that VViddrington
cannot be said to low by an ox, bleate by a sheep, or bear fruit by a tree,
here being no subordination or dependence, as there is in the other examples by
me alleged, and in the power of the Prince and Common wealth, which even by
WIDDRNIGTONS confession is dependent of the Popes authority, and may be
directed and commanded by it.

35. Secondly, this I prove by reason grounded in the opinion, which even
WIDDRINGTON himself admits. Supra cap. 3. sect. 4. n. 3.
For in the place alleged he granted as probable, that the Common wealth can
depose a Prince, though he denies that authority to the Pope. Widdr. in Resp.
Apolog. n. 12.13.14.15.16.21.23.27.28. and alibi.
And in his Apologeticall Answer he confesses that the Pope has authority to
command a Prince in Temporal matters for the necessary good of the Church,
as to use his authority, and to draw his sword for the necessary defense
thereof, and that he may inflict Spiritual censures on him, if he disobey.

36. Now if we put this together, we shall find, that the Pope, eue^ in
widdringtons opinion, may depose a Prince by the Common wealth, although he
could not do it by himself immediately: Disp. Th. cap. 3. sec. 4. n. 2. et 3.
for WIDDRINGTON grants as probable, that the Common wealth can depose a
lawful Prince in case of intolerable tyranny, for he grants that the
contrairie opinion, to wit, that the common wealth can not depose a Prince, is
but probable, and he confesses that the Pope being supreme Pastor of the
Church may command the Common wealth to use this her Temporal power, when it
is necessary for the conservation of the Church. (...)
And seeing that a commau^der is thought to do that, which another does by his
commandment, and to be a principal cause of that, of which the commanded
is but an executioner; if the Pope command the Common wealth to depose her
Prince, and she obey her Pastor (as WIDDRINGTON confesses she is bound to
do) then the Pope in that case shall be said to have deposed the Prince, because
what the Common wealth does at his commandment, he is said to do: (...)
yea he in that case is the principal agent and the Common wealth his
instrument only and executioner: But VViddrington grants that the Pope may
command the Common wealth to depose her Prince, ergo he grants that the
Pope; if not by himself immediately, yet by another, that is, by the Common
wealth, can depose a Prince. With what conscience then can VViddrington swear
to that clause of the Oath, which says that the Pope neither by himself, nor
by any Authority of the Church, or Sea of Rome, or by any other means with
any other, has any power or authority to depose the King etc.? seeing that he
grants that the Pope may command the Common wealth to do it, and that every
man is said to do that, which is done by his lawful commandment, he being
in that case the principal Agent, and the Common wealth (as is said) a
subordinate Agent and instrument only.

37. Page 75.76.77.78.79.
To this VViddrington in his Newyearesguift answers, that a commander is not
a true and proper cause, especially when he has not power to do that which he
commands, but only a cause per accidens: and so although the Pope should
command the common wealth to depose their Prince, and they at his
commandment should depose him; yet the Pope should not be said to depose him
as a true and proper cause, Widdr. in bu Newyearesgift. Page 65. n. 7.
but only as a cause per accide^s. But first VViddrington in this answer
seems at least to contradict him self; for if (as he says) a commander is
commonly said to do that thing which is done by his commandment; it
follows that a commander is commonly counted a cause of that which is done
by his commandment: and so if the Pope should command the common wealth to
depose a Prince, and the common wealth should depose him at his commandment,
he should be counted by the common conceit of men, a cause of the deposition:
and though not by him self, yet by an other should commonly be said to have
deposed him. How then can Widdrington swear against this that is commonly
said, to wit, that the Pope neither by him self, nor by any authority of the
Church or Sea of Rome, or by any other means, has any power, or authority to
depose the King etc. seeing that it is probable by WIDDRINGTONS confession, that
he may be said to have power to depose a King, in case of intolerable
Tyranny, by the common wealth? Whereas VViddrington affirms, that the Pope in
this case commanding the common wealth, should be only causa per accide^s, a
cause by accident, in that he applies only the common wealth, which is causa
per se, and the true efficient cause; I must first tell him, that even a cause
per accidens is commonly called a cause; and therefore the thief who applies
fire to the house, and is a cause by accident of burning the same, in that he
applies the fire, which is causa per se of the burning of the house, is said
commonly and absolurelie to have burned the house, and shall be bound to
restitution, yea and hanged, and that justly also, for burning the house.
Wherefore if the Pope in that case should be at least causa per accidens, he
should in common speech be counted the cause of that deposition. And therefore
if VViddrington durst not swear, that the thief neither by him self, nor by
any other cause can burn a house, if he can by applying the fire that ca^
burn it; how dares he swear, that the Pope can not either by him self, or
by any other cause depose a Prince, seeing that he, by VViddringtons Confession,
can by his commandment apply the common wealth, which is a cause per se, and
sufficient for such an effect. Secondly Widdrington abuses his terms, in
saying that a co^maunder is a cause by accident, for though he be no physical
cause of the effect, yet he is a moral cause, and in that kind a principal
cause, and a cause per se, which intends the effect, and moves the
commanded as an instrument; and the commanded though he have not always from
the co^maunder true authority (because sometimes the co^maunder has none him
self) yet he has from him moral influence, and is said to work the effect
by virtue of his commandment. And so betwixt the commander and the applyer
of fire to the straw, there is great difference: because he that applies the
fire, gives no force nor actiuitie to the fire, and so his application is but
conditio sine qua non, and he is causa per accidens: but the commander
sometimes gives authority, and always gives moral influence and motion,
(as does the principal cause to the instrument) and so he is a principal
cause and causa per se.

38. Wherefore to clear the matter more I will distinguish three kinds of
Co^maunders. The First is an unlawful commander. The Second a lawful
Commander, who has Authority to command one to do a thing, but can not do
it him self. The Third is a commander, who has authority not only to
commau^d another, but may also by him self do the thing commanded, if he
will. And these are absolutely called causes, and causes principal, and per
se, though not in the same manner. In the First kind are comprehended all
Lords or Masters, who command their servants, or ministers to kill them,
whom they them selves have no Authority to kill. So if a Captain should
command his man to kill his enemy, or one that stands in his way of
preferment, or one whose wife or purse he desires to have, he is said
commonly to be the principal cause, Antonin. lib. 4. tit. 13. part. 7. lib.
5. tit. 15. part. eade^ Mercado lib. 6. Sum. cap. 7. Vasq in Opusc. de Restit.
c. 9. dis. 1. dub. 3.
and the servant, though he be a physical cause, yet he is but a ministerial
and isntrumental cause of the murder, and though he have no true Authority
from his Master, yet he has (as I said) moral influence, and does the effect
by virtue of that moral influe^ce, which moves him. And therefore if any
restitution be to be made, he is bound principally, and in the first place to
restore, and his servant is not bound to restitution but in defect of his
Master, who is the principal cause, and gave moral influence and motion to
his servant: although the servant also, because he was bound not to obey his
Master, shall endure the punishments due to murderers by the law. Hence it is,
that D^^uines and Canonists do affirm; that if the commander do recall his
commandment before his servant has done the murder, the servant then shall
be the principal and sole cause; because after the commandment is recalled,
he does the murder of his own Authority, having now no moral influence or
motion from his Master; and so then he only is cause of the murder, not his
Master; he only is bound to restitution, if any be required, not his Master;
and he only in the inward court of Conscience deserves hanging, not his
Master; though the external court oftentimes, when it presumes that the
Master did not revoke his commandment, will pronounce sentence also against
the Master. In the Second kind is the Confessarius, who, according to the
common opinion, in the Sacrarnent of Confession can command his pe^itent to
give alms, and his penitent is borind in conscience to give the alms, be it
money, bread, corn, or such like goods, and yet the penitent does not loose
dominion of those goods, though he sin in not giving them to the poor, and
so the Confessari^us can not justly take them from him. In the Third kind are
Princes who give authority to their Judges to condemn to death, and by them
or others his officers to the hangman, to punish and hang malefactors.
Because although it be not convenient for the Kings Person to execute any
immediately him self, yet as he commands and gives authority to others,
so he might do that act of justice him self. So the Pope or Bishop, who give
authority to others to hear Confessions, might them selves hear Confessions,
though because of their other affairs they use not so to do.

39. This distinction of commanders supposed, although the Pope had not
authority of him self to depose a Prince, yet if he can command the common
wealth in some case to depose the Prince (as VViddrington grants he can) he
should be a true moral, and principal cause of the deposition, because he
should not only give moral influence to the common wealth to depose (for that
even an unlawful commander does) but he should also give authority to the
common wealth: for although the common wealth has of it self Authority to
depose a Prince in some case, and has not this Authority from the Pope, if
the Pope have Authority to command, it follows, that the common wealth
obeying his commandment and Authority, does depose by his Authority. And
this, to wit, that the Pope may depose a Prince mediatlie by the common wealth.
I prove out of VViddrington him self, who to confirm his own opinion, which
holds that the Pope can not depose a Prince, alleges Ioannes Parisiensis,
who writes thus as VViddrington alleges him: Apud Widdr, Disp. Th. ca. 3.
ser. 3. n. 7.
Si Rex est haereticus, and incorrigibilis and contemptor Ecclesi^sticae
Censurae, porest Papa aliquid facere in populo vnde priuaretur ille saeculari
honor, and deponeretur a populo, excommunicando scilicet eos omnes, ad quos
spectat regem deponere, qui ei vt Domino obedirent: If a King be an heretic,
and incorrigible, and a contemner of the Churches Censure, the Pope may do some
thing in the people, whereby he should be deprived of his secular honor, and
be deposed by the people, to wit, by excommunicating all those, to whom it
appertains to depose the King, who should obey him as Lord. Out of this
Aurhour whom WIDDRINGTON alleges as a favorer of his opinion, I can easily
deduce that which VVIDDRINGTON denies, to wit, that though the Pope could not
by him self depose a Prince, yet he might by the Common wealth. Because if the
Pope can not only command the Common wealth, but also excommunicate all
those subjects that obey such a Prince, he can compelle them to deny obedience
to him, unless they will be separated by excommunication from the Church, out
of which is no salvation. If then any one would complain of that Common wealth
for deposing their Prince, and denying obedience unto him; the people might
answer, that the Pope compelled them so to do, and to leave the King, unless
they would leave the Church: whence follows, that the Pope in that case
should be truly said to have been the principal cause of deposition, because
he compelled the Commonwealth to depose him: If VViddrington should say to his
man, kills such an one, or I will kill thee; who doubts, but that WIDDRINGTON
should be counted the principal cause of murder: wherefore seeing that this
Author (whom WIDDRINGTON produces) says, that the Pope may say to the
Commonwealth, to whom it appertains to depose the Prince; depose your
Prince, or I will separate you from the Church by Excommunication, Aug. lib.
cont. aduers. leg. and Prophet. ca. 17. sermon. 68. de verbis Apost. ca. omnis
Christianus 11. q. 3.
(which S. AUGUSTINE says is a greater evil then to be killed by a sword,
consumed by fire, or cast unto wild beasts to be devoured) who doubts but
that he should be called the principal cause of the deposition, he compelling
the subjects thereunto by so great a punishment?

40. Likewise as a foreign Prince may, and is bound sometimes to defend
Innocents, so the Pope may license and authorize, yea and command him so to
do, he having authority, as VViddrington avouches, to command a Prince in
te^porall matters: and if at the Popes commandment this Prince make war
upon the Prince that intolerably molesteth Innocents in their faith and
Religion (as Victoria in the place before alleged, says he may) that which
the Prince shall do against the other tyrannizing Prince in the pursewing of
his just war, the Pope shall be said to do, he being the commander, and
consequently the principal agent. And yet by this Clause of the Oath, the
subjects are commanded to swear that the Pope has no authority to authorize
any foreign Prince to anoy the King of England, or to invade his countries.
which is to abjure at least a probable opinion as certainly false: which how
it can be done with a good conscience, I report me even to VViddringtons large
conscience. But be this spoken to show the danger of swearing this Clause, not
to give any scope against Kings or Princes, whom I honor as God his Images,
and his Vicegerents in Earth.

The Third Clause.

Also I swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any declaration or sentence
of excommunication or deprivation made, or granted, or to be made, or granted
by the Pope, or his successors, or by any authority derived, or pretended to
be derived from him, or his Sea, against the said King, his Heirs, or
successors, or any Absolution of the said subjects from their obedience, I
will bear faith, and true allegiance to his Maiesti^, his Heirs and
successors, and him, and them will defend to the uttermost of my power against
all conspiracies, and attempts what soever, which shall be made against his, or
their persons, their crown, and dignity, by reason or color of any such
sentence, or declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to
disclose, and make known unto his Majesty, his heirs, and successors, all
Treasons, and Traiterous conspiracies, which I shall know, or hear of to be
against him, or any of them.

41. Widdr. in Disp. Theol. ca. 4. sect. 1. n. 1. and seqq.
Here VVIDDRINGTON insulteth against the learned Cardinal Bellarmine, though
the Phoenix for controversies of this our age. Cardinal Bellarmine (says he)
Gretserus, and Lessius contend, that by this Clause is denied to the Pope power
to excommunicate, which yet (says he) this Clause seems to suppose, and the
King professes he had not the intention to deny. But although this Clause
seem to suppose, and the King in words seems to confess, or at least not
to deny the Pope Authority to excommunicate, yet in effect they deny it. For
deprivation of Regal Authority being an effect of excommunicating, which
ordinarily follows excommunication of Kings and Princes, in the denial of
the effect, the cause is denied. For as if you should say, A man is not
risibilis, you should deny him to be homo; so in denying that the Pope can
deprive Princes of their Kingdoms, you deny in effect tha he can
excommunicate.

42. Here WIDDRINGTON in his Newyearesgift insulteth against me for saying, as
he makes me to say, that deprivation of Regal Authority is an effect of
Excommunication, as necessarily following Excommunication, as risibile
follows homo. But if we look into the matter narrowly, we shall find he
triumphs before the victory, and counts his chickins before they be hacht.
For first if we speak of the power of Excommunication and deprivation (of
which I speak but two lines before these words at which VViddrington carpeth)
I had showed in the seventh Chapter before, that the power to excommunicate
which the cbiefe visible Pastor has, is one and the self same power with the
power of deprivation and deposition; which one power has two acts and
effects, the one principal and first intended called actus primarius, and
this is Excommunication, or such like spiritual Censure and punishment; the
second is deprivation, deposition, and such like Temporal chastisement and
correction, which is actus secundarius, a secundarie act of the Chief
Pastors spiritual power secondarilie intended when the first will not
prevail. And these two acts are necessarily belonging to the Popes
spiritual power of Supremacy; not that this power must needs always
exercise both, or either of them, but because the Pope can not have this power,
but he must have faculty to exercise them when a just cause requires it: and
so these two acts being necessarily belonging to the Popes Supremacy, he
that denies him power to deprive or depose a Prince, denies in effect that
he has power to Excommunicate, it being one and the self same power: because
the denial of an effect necessarily belonging to a cause, is a virtuall
denial of the cause; even as to deny that fire can heat, or rarifie, is to
deny it to be fire, and to deny a man to be risibilis, is to deny him to be
man. Secondly if we speak of these two acts of this power (although
WIDDRNIGTON knows that the learned SVAREZ alleged by him, 2. p. Append
contra Suarem sec. 4.
affirms that the suspension of Kingly Authority is an effect of the act
of Excommunication) I did not say, that deprivation is always an effect of the
act of Excommunication, well knowing that although both these are so
necessarily belonging to the Popes power of Supremacy, that it can not be
without possibility of exercising them, yet it is in his free choice to
exercise either both, or either of them: and so he may excommunicate and not
deprive, and he may deprive (as he did King CHILDERIC, See Cap. Alius 15. q. 6.
alleged by me page 250. and not excommunicate. And therefore I said only;
that deprivation of Regal Authority being aneffect of excommunication which
ordinarily follows Excommunication of Kings and Princes, in the denial of
the effect, the cause is denied etc. where WIDDRINGTON leaves out those words
(which ordinarily follows) because those words would have made it plain,
that I say not that deprivation is an effect of Excommunication in all
Excommunicate persons but in Kings and Princes, nor always in excommunicated
Princes (because a King may be excommunicated and not deposed, and he may be
deposed, as CHILDERIC King of France was and not Excommunicated) but
oftentimes and ordinarily; Cap. Alius 15. q. 6.
because the Chief visible Pastor uses not by name to excommunicere a
Prince, but he also ordinarily, especially in these later Ages, deposes him,
and for two reasons also: the one because he ought not ordinatilie to proceed
to so severe a temporal punishment before he have tried whether the spiritual
punishment of excommunication will prevail: the other, because to
excommunicate him, and not to deprive him, were to irritate him and provoke him
to fury, and yet not to take his sword and power from him.

43. And therefore in the Canon Law Temporal punishment follows and
accompanies excommunication as Cap. No^ sanctorum 15. q. 6. Pope GREGORY the
seventh holding (as he says) the statutes of his Predecessoures, absolueth all
those who are obliged by faith or fidelity to excommunicated persons from
their fidelity. And in the next Chapter which begins with the word Iuratos,
Pope VRBANE absolueth soldiers from their fidelity to Count HVGO
excommunicated. And in the Decretalles Cap. Ad abolendum de Haereticis Countes,
Barons, Rectors, and Consulles of Cities, who will not aid the Church against
heretics, are excommunicated and deprived, or to be deprived of their former
te^porall honor, made unable and incapable of all future dignities, and their
Lands are Interdicted. And in the next Chapter Vergentes INNOCENTIVS the Third
confiscateth the goods of Heretics. And in the Chapter Si aduersus all
Advocates, and Notaries, who favor Heretics, are made infamous, and are
deprived of their office. Likewise in the Chapter. Excommunicamus. before cited
all Heretics are excommunicated, and after the condemnatorie sentence are to
be chastised with due punishment by the Secular Judge, and their goods are
confiscated: in which Chapter also is to be seen the Decree of the Great
Council of Lateran, which above I have alleged: And in the same Chapter
believers, receivers, defendours, and favorers of Heretics are
excommunicated, declared infamous, and unable to bear office, to make a
Testament or last will; and if he be a Judge, his sentence is disanulled etc.
And in the last Chapter of this Title de Haereticis. GREGORY the Ninth
concludes with these words: whosoever by any promise howsoever confirmed,
were obliged to those who are manifestly fallen into Heresy, let them know
that they are absolved from the duty of sidelitie, homage, and service. And
Cap. Cum secundum leges de Haereticis in 6. The Pope says, that if by the
Civil Law diverse transgressors, which he names, be justly deprived of
their goods, bona Haereticorum (qui grauius, horribilius, ac detestabilius,
quam praedicti delinquunt) ipso iure, de fratrum nostrorum consilio decernimus
confiscata: the goods of Heretics, (who more grieuouslie, more horribly, and
detestably, then the aforesaid delinquents, do offend) we decree ipso iure to
be confiscated. Wherefore although that Excommunication may be separated from
all temporal punishment, and that the Pope may excommunicate a Prince, and yet
not depose him (as INNOCENTIVS the first did excommunicate ARCADIVS whom yet
he deposed not) yet seeing, that in the Common law Temporal punishment, as
confiscation of goods, infamy, and even absolution from fidelity to Princes
are annexed to Excommunication, and proceed from the power of Excommunication,
and ordinarily follow the act of Excommunication: I might well say that
deprivation of Regal authority is an effect which ordirilie follows
Excommunication of Kings and yet say no more then the learned Suarez above
alleged, nor then S. 2.2. q. 12 art. 2.
THOMAS of AQVIN, where he says, that the Prince who has made an Apostasy
and revolt from the true Christian faith received at least in Baptism, is
conveniently deprived of rule over his subjects, and that quam cito aliquis
per sententiam denuntiatur Excommunicatus propter Apostasiam a fide, ipso facto
eius subditi sunt absoluti a dominio eius, and Iuramento fidelitatis: so soon
as any one by sentence is denounced Excommunicated for Apostasy from faith,
ipso facto, at the same instant his subjects are absolved from his Dominion or
Sovereignty, and from their oath of fidelity. Where it is manifest, that he
makes absolution of the subjects from their fidelity an effect in some sort
of the act of Excommunication.

44. Put then all this together, to wit, first, that deprivation of Regal
authority is an act though secondarie, yet necessarily appertaining to the
Chief Pastors spiritual power by which he Excommunicateth; he that denies
him power to deprive, denies necessarily his power to excommunicate, it being
one, and the self same power, as above is proved. Secondly, seeing that
deprivation, and other temporal punishments above related do ordinarily
follow the act of excommunication, though by a secondarie act of the Popes
spiritual power, as is above explicated, he that denies the Pope power to
deprive, denies him also power to excommunicate, deprivation being at least a
moral effect even of the act of excommunication. This I explicate by homo,
and risibilis, not that I auerre as necessary a conjunction betwixt the act
of excommunication and deprivation, as is betwixt homo and risibilis no example
holding in all things, but for that as because there is a necessary, and
physical connection betwixt homo and risibilis, he that denies a man to be
risibilis, does necessarily deny him to be homo: so because there is a
necessary connection betwixt the power of excommunication and deprivation, both
acts appertaining necessarily to that power, he that denies the Pope
authority to deprive a Prince, necessarily denies him power to
excommunicate, the denial of a necessary effect implying vertuallie a denial
of the cause: and because there is a moral conjunction, at least betwixt the
act of excommunication and deprivation, this as before following ordinarily
that, he that denies the Pope authority to deprive, morallie at least denies
him power to excommunicate: which is sufficient to make any timorous conscience
fear to swear that the Pope can not deprive a Prince, especially if
thereunto be added, that deprivation is a secondarie act necessarily
appertaining to the Popes supremacy and power of excommunicating, because the
denial of an act and effect though seco^darie (if it necessarily belong to
a cause) imports a denial of the cause; and therefore not only he who
denies that fire can burn or heat (which is the first act and effect of
fire) but also he that denies that fire can harden and rarefie (which are
secondarie acts of fire) denies it to be fire. And in this sense Lessius, or
his Recapitulatour cited by VViddrington said, and (whatsoever VViddrington
says) truly said, that Absolutio subditorum a vinculo fidelitatis est
effectus, qui sententiam Excommunicationis necessario consequitur, Widdr. in
Disp. Theol. c. 4. n. 4. and 7.
and Ecclesiaepraxis per mill ducentorum and amplius annorum spatium
commonstrat: Absolution of subjects from the bond of fidelity, is an effect
which necessarily follows the sentence of Excommunication, as the practice
of more then twelve hundred years does show; because this Absolution of
subjects from fidelity, is an act necessarily appertaining to the power of
Excommunicating, and morallie and ordinarily it follows even the act of
excommunication as we have said, and proved; and in the same sense the
Angelical Doctor S. THOMAS of AQVIN says, 2.2. q. 12 art. 2.
that so soon as one is denounced by sentence Excommunicated for Apostasy
from faith, ipso facto by the very fact of Excommunication denounced his
subjects are sreed from his Dominion, Rule or Sovereignty. By which words S.
THOMAS makes deprivation an effect of the sentence of Excommunication as much
as I did; and therefore either means, that excommunication is a cause of
deprivation immediately by it self, or that Deprivation follows it in manner
aforesaid. And so the act of Deprivation being at least a secondarie act of
the Popes spiritual Supremacy; to deny that he has power to deprive, is to
deny that he has power to excommunicate, it being all one power, and
consequently it is to deny covertly his spiritual Supremacy.

45. But besides this, all the Arguments, which I have alleged to prove
that the Pope can depose Princes, and all which I have said against the former
two Clauses, do manifestly prove that this Clause wants the three companions
of an Oath, and so can not lawfully be sworn. That Judgment wants, it may
appear by that, which I have said in the very beginning of my examination of
this Oath. That it wants Verity, it is as evident, as it is that the Pope
can depose Princes. And though it were but probable that the Pope could degrade
Princes, yet to swear absolutely that he can not, were to expose the swearer
to danger of perjury; yea it were to swear a falsehood, and so to committ
actual perjury. For as it is perjury to swear as true that which is false,
so is it to swear a thing to be undoubtedly and assuredly true, which is but
probable; because it is false, that that which is but probable, is absolutely,
and assuredly true. Wherefore seeing that it is false that the Pope cannot in
some case depose Princes, Widdr. disp Th. c. 6. sec 3 n. 15. and seqq.
and by VViddringtons frequent confession, is at least probable that he can
(for he says that the Popes, who deposed Princes, followed a probable opinion,
and he confesses that he contendeth not to show that it is an heretical or
false opinion, Disp. Th. in praef. n. 2. and 3.
but only that it is not de fide tenenda: to be held as a matter of faith) it
follows that this Clause can not besworne, it absolutely and with great
asseueration denying the Pope Authority to depose. And although if the Pope
should excommuntcate and depose a Prince, a subject in some case might yet obey
in lawful things, because fear of death, or loss of livings would excuse
him, when otherwise it is no scandal, nor no absolute frustration of the
Censure to obey him in particular; yet to swear this in so general terms,
can not be lawful, as not only my former Arguments, but also even that, which
out of Victoria I have alleged, does manifestly prove.

46. That this Clause wants also the third companion and condition of a
lawful oath, which is Justice, is as manifest, because it derogateth from the
Authority, which the Pope justly claymeth, and has of long time not only
possessed, but also practiced: and so to swear this Clause, is to swear and
promise by oath an act of injustice.

The Fourth Clause.

And I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure
as impious and heretical this damnable doctrine and position, that Princes,
which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by
their subjects, or any other what soever etc.

40. This Clause, as it is more plain, so can it with less show be taken,
because the common opinion, which holds that the Pope can deprive and depose
Princes, is most certain, as I above have proved, and at least it is the more
common, and being confirmed by so many Arguments and such Authority and
practice of holy and ancient Popes; and at least, even by VViddrington his
own confession, holden as probable; how can any that have any conscience
swear that it is impious? and how especially can he swear that it is
heretical and damnable, it never having been conby the Church, and defined by
General Councels, Widdr. in Disp. Th. ca. 6. sect. 2. n. 9. ^tseqq.
as above is declared?

47 Widdrington answers that to make the position here abiured as heretical,
it is sufficient that one part of it be heretical, to wit, that Princes
excommunicated by the Pope, may be murdered. And therefore although it be not
heresy to say that Princes excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be
deposed; yet seeing that at least it is heretical to say, that they may be
killed, it being flat against Scripture which forbids absolutely to kill,
Exodus 20 1. Reg. 26.
especially Kings (for who shall extend his hand against the Anointed of our
Lord, and shall be innocent?) the positio^ abiured must needs be heretical.

48. That it is sufficient, to make the position here abiured heretical, that
the last part thereof be heretical, WIDDRINGTON proves; because (says he)
the word (May) when it goes before the Conjunction (or) signifies that it is
in our free choice and election to do the one or the other, and therefore
(says he) though the propositton seem to be disjunctive, yet it is not an
absolute, but a conditional disjunctive, aequiualent to a Copulative. And so
to swear that it is heretical doctrine to say that Princes excommunicated and
deprived by the Pope, may by their subjects, or any others be deposed or
murdered; is to swear that it is heretical doctrine to say that after the
Prince is excommunicated and deprived by the Pope, it is in the free election
of his subjects or others to depose him, or kill him, as they will, which is
heretical; because at least they cannot kill him, as is prooned. And to prove
that this is the meaning of that Clause, he alleges many examples and manners
of speeches, which have the same sense: as if one should say: You may eat or
drink. You may go by horse, or on soote: The meaning is, you may do of these
which you will.

49. But this his Answer (by his leave) is not sufficient to satisfy any
timorous or rightely fearful conscience. For first, although sometimes the
Conjunction (Or) when it follows the verb (may) be taken in the meaning that
Widdrington affirms, yet not always; yea ordinarily it is taken
disiunctiuelie. And so, as to verify a disjunctive proposition, it is
sufficient that one part of it be true; so to make it false, both parts must be
false. As for example, if one should lay a wager, that to morrow it will either
rain or snow, to win the wager, it is sufficient that it do either; but to
make the proposition false, and to cause him to loose his wager, neither must
happen, that is, it must neither rain, not snow. Wherefore seeing that the
Conjunction (or) is ordinarily taken disiunctiuelie, and many times also when
(may) goes before it; it remains yet to be proved by VViddrington that (or)
is taken copulatiuelie in the Clause alleged. As for example if one should
say: It is heretical to say that a man may steal or committ aduoutrie, in
that proposition (or) is taken disiunctiuelie, and the proposition imports
that it is heretical to say that a man may either steal or committ aduoutrie:
Or (because he may say this is true by reason of the matter not of the form)
if he should say: I derest as heresy that Position which says, that a man may
be baptized of an Heretieke either lawfully or validlie, were it not a false
and heretical detestation? and yet by reason of one part of the disjunctive
proposition, to wit, or validlie. The very like (as who so marketh shall
perceive) is the proposition alleged; and therefore it imports, that it is
an heretical proposition, to say that Prince excommunicated and deprived by
the Pope, may be either deposed or killed. Whence it comes to pass, that the
party who swears that Clause, shall swear that it is heretical to say that
Princes excommunicated by the Pope may be deposed, which notwithstanding is no
where condemned as heretical, yea is decreed by General Counsels, and
practiced by many holy and learned Popes, allowed of by common consent, and
lastely confessed by VViddrington himself as probable.

50. Secondly, seeing that this manner of speech is often, yea ordinarily
taken in a disjunctive meaning, it makes this Clause at least doubtful,
whether it also be not taken disiunctiuelie, and so importe that it is
heretical to say that a Prince excommunicated may be deposed. And seeing that
no man can swear a doubtful thing, least he expose himself to perjury in
swearing false, and consequently make himself guilty indeed of perjury,
because every one is esteemed guilty of that sin or crime, Eccles. 3.
to which he exposes himself, and qui amat periculum, in illo peribit: Ht
that loves danger, shall perish in it: therefore he can not swear this
Clause, having no better assurance for the truth thereof, then as yet
Widdrington, or any other can allege (which is none at all) and so long,
remaining at the least doubtful and uncertain. Thirdly Widdrington in this
his explication does evidently eontradict the inte^tion of the Kings Majesty,
Parlame^t, and Authors of the oath; for their intention (as we have seen
above) was to secure the Prince not only from killing, but also, and
especially from depriuatio^, and deposition; partly because a King
ordinarily would choose as willingelie to be killed, as to be deprived and
deposed, he by deposition or deprivation being made of a King no King, but a
private man; partly because when he is once deprived, or deposed, he is in
danger to be killed by his subjects if he persist in government, for then
they who hold his deposition to be of force, do hold him as an inuader. So
that VViddrington by this exposition making the swearer to swear only that
the King excommunicated cannot be killed, secureth him not from deposition or
depriuatio^, no nor from killing, as I have showed, and so makes the oath
frustrate, secureth not the King, and contradicts the Kings and Parlaments
intention, which they had in framing, proposing, and commanding this oath to
be taken, thereby to secure the King.

51. Fourthlie although for the respect I owe and bear to Princes, and
especially to my own natural Liege, I will not auerre that Princes persisting
in possession and government of their Kingdom, after that the Pope has
excommunicated and deprived them, may be deposed, and killed also by their
former subjects, or any other power or potentate: yet seeing that many do
affirm and hold it, whose opinion notwithstanding is no ways censured for
heretical, or so much as temerarious, or erroneous; I do not see how that
position, though taken in VViddringtons sense and meaning, can be abiured as
heretical. I acknowledge that it is condemned as heresy in the Council of
Constance, Council. Constant. sess. 15.
to say that quilibet Tyrannus potest and debet licite and meritorie occidi per
quemlibet vasallum suum vel subditum etc. Every Tyrant may and ought lawfully
and meritoriously be killed by every one of his vasalls or subjects, even by
secret wiles or ambushements, and by crafty enticements and adulations,
notwithstanding whatsouer oath or covenant, or without expecting the sentence
or commandment of whatsoever Judge. But this is understood of him, who is true
King, but governs tyrannically (who can not be killed by any one of his
vasalls or subjects) and not of every Tyrant. For if the Tyrant be an open
inuader and usurper of the crown without all Title, then (according to the
Vide D. Tho. lib. 1. de regim. Princip. c. 6. Caiet. 2.2. q. 64. a. 3 and
Arragon. ibid. Sayr. lib. 7. Claeu. Regiae, cap. 10. uu. 4. and reliquos infra
citandos.
common opinion) every one of the Realm has iustum bellum, just war
against him, and so may kill him by way of defense: Yea although the Tyrant
have just Title, and so be true King, yet if he tyrannize in government, not
howsoever (for * Ro^. 13. 1. Pet. 2.
evil Kings must be borne withal and ought to be obeyed) but intolerably, and
so as the Common wealth can not consist under him, that then, not particular
subjects, but the Common wealth after sufficient admonition, may by common
consent, public authority, and public sentence depose him. As for example,
if the Prince should unjustly kill all his nobility, cause their wives to be
ravished, massacre their children, ransack their houses and families, and
withal give their lands and livings to others, and for no offense also, but
out of his own humor; then (say diverse Authors) the Common wealth, as she
made him King (for although some be Kings by succession, yet the first King, as
before is declared, if he were lawful, came to the crown by election of the
people) so by the same power, which in case of intolerable tyranny returns
again unto her, she may depose him, and, if after deposition he persist, she
may kill him, if otherwise she find no means to resist him. This was the
opinion of many of the Zen^phon lib. de Tyran. Arist. lib. 2. Polit. cap. 5.
and li 5. cap. 10. and 11. Cic. lib. 3. de offic.
ancient Philosophers; and this also many Christian Gigas, Paridius de Puteo,
and alij citati a Suar. lib. 6. defens. fidei Cathol. c. 4.
Lawiers, and learned D. Tho. citat. in 2 d. vlt. q. 2 ar. 2. ad 5. Gerson par.
4 tract. co^tra adulatores, consid. 7. Sotus lib. 5. de just. q. 1. ar 3.
Bannes 2.2. q 64. a 3. dub. 1. sed quaeret aliquis. Vale^tia to. 3. disp. 5 q.
8 p. 3.. si est Tyrannus, Molina to. 4. de just. tract. 3. disp. 6. n. 2. Tolet
lib. 5. Summa, cap. 6 number. 17. Sa in Aphorismis, V. Tyrannus, number. 2. Lessius
lib. 2. de just. and iure, cap. 9. dub. 4. number. 12. Suar. lib. 6. defens fidei,
cap. 4. Estius in 2. did. 44.. 2 verse. Vtrum vero.
Divines do maintain. Yea this Disput. Theol. cap. 3. sect. 4 n. 3.
VViddrington himself dares not deny* for (says he) I do not absolutely
profess, testify, and declare that the Civil Common wealth has no power to
depose a Prince etc. And if Kings, who were not excommunicated nor deprived by
the Pope, may by the Commonwealth be deposed and killed, when they are
intolerable Tyrants; why may not the Common wealth exercize the same power over
Tyrants excommunicated and deprived by the Pope, they after excommunication and
deprivation being no more Kings, but private men?

52. How then, and with what conscience can any one swear that he holds it
in conscience for an heretical position and doctrine, to say that Princes
excommunicated by the Pope, may by him, or any other authority be deposed or
killed? Yea in the examination of the second Clause, Supra nu. 14. and seqq.
I have alleged Titles out of Victoria of just war, which a foreign Prince
may make against the true Prince in favor of Religion and Innocence; which
Titles are at least probable, and at least are in no part of scripture nor
Council condemned as unlawful and impious, or heretical. I demand then how
VViddrington (who holds it probable that the Common wealth may depose a
Tyrant, and that the Pope may commau^d the Common wealth so to do) with a
timorous conscience, or with any conscience at all, can swear that the Prince
excommunicated can in no case, and by no authority, nor for no Tyranny be
deposed or killed: yea that it is an heretical and damnable position to teach
it, so many teaching it, whose doctrine was never condemned? If Widdringtons
conscience can digest this, what can it not digest? But VVIDDRINGTON (as he
that will make good that which can hardly be auerred, must needs do) has
devised yet two answers.

53. Page 43. 52. 103.
The first which he gives in his New-yeares-guifte, is in effect this: It is
but a probable opinion that the Pope can depose a Prince, and so after the
Sentence of deposition or depriuatio^, the Prince deposed has probable right
and Title, and so being in Possession, the Pope cannot justly depose him,
because better is the condition of the Possessour. Wherefore as it is lawful
to swear that it is heretical to say that a man may steal, or kill his
neightbour by private Authority and not in his own defense, or thrust him out
of his own house; so it is as lawful to swear that it is heresy: to say
that the Pope may depose a Prince, it being open Injustice to dispossess him,
who has probable right and Title. And if you object that it is not against any
definition of Church or Council to say that the Pope can depose a Prince, and
so cannot be heretical: he answers that it is against Scripture, which
forbids injustice, and that this is sufficient to make the assertion
heresy, which affirms it lawful. But to omit that it is the manner of
heretics to square all by Scripture, and not by the Churches definition: this
answer first supposes it to be an opinion only probable, that the Pope can
depose a Prince, and yet above I have proved it, no less then certain by
many Arguments, and by this in particular, that if it were but probable, the
Decree of the Council of Laterane, and the facts of many holy Popes who have
deposed Princes, should be all unjust; which with what modesty Widdr. can
grant, I report me to all modest Catholics. And if it be certain that
the Pope can depose a Prince, then it is not probable, that the Prince deposed
has probable right, but rather it is certain he has not, and so Possession
without probable Title being not sufficient (for that even thieves have such
possession) it follows that the Pope may depose a Prince without all
injustice, and so it cannot be an heresy to teach that the Pope can depose a
Prince, and consequently that position can not be abiured as heresy.
Secondly the power to depose, and the exercise of this power being two things
(as above we have seen) in so much that one may have power and yet can not
lawfully exercise it, nor some times validlie; and this clause of the oath not
co^mau^ding only to swear, that the Pope can not lawfully depose, but
absolutely that he can not depose, how can Widdrington without remorse swear
absolutely, that it is an heresy to say that the Pope ca^ depose a Prince.

54. His second answer which he has in his Theological disputation, Disp.
Th. c. 5. n. 28 Newyearesguifte page 105.
as also in his Newyeares-guifte, is this; to wit, that the aduerbe sicut, as,
may here only signify a similitude and not equallitie, or identitie: and so
the sense is, I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure as impious, and
heretical, that is not as a positio^ with is heresy, but which has such
affiniitie or similitude with heresy and error, that the Pope might declare
it heresy if he would. As, says he, if one should say I detest him as a
devil, I love him as my brother, he does not therefore affirm him to be
truly a devil, or truly his Brother. And when S. GREGORY says, Lib. 1 ep.
24.
that he received the 4. General Counsels as the 4. Gospells: and when
Christ said Marc. 15. Be you perfitt as your heavenly father is perfitt. S.
GREGORY did not receive those Counsels as truly scripture, nor did Christ
Counsel us to be truly as perfitt as our heavenly father. But first this
Silly answer shows to what Shifts VViddrington is driven. For first the
King and Parliament do hold it as a position truly heretical that the Pope
can deprive, or that the Subjects can depose and kill him whom the Pope
depriueth: and so it is most like that in this Clause they intend that the
swearer should abjure that position as truly heretical. Secondly those
protesting, execrating, and thundering words: I do further swear that I do
from my heart abhor, detest and abjure as impious and heretical this
damnable doctrine and positio^ etc. do argue that the swearer detesteth that
position as in deed heretical, impious, and damnable; otherwise, if after so
great words of abiuration he should abjure it only as approaching or
something like to heresy, we might say, parturiunt montes nascetur ridiculus
mus. neither are VViddringtons examples to the purpose, because it being
evident that he whom we detest as a devil, can not be truly a devil, and
that he whom we love as our brother, can not be our true brother; it must
needs signify only similitude not equality; but seeing that it is not
evident in terminis, as the former positions are, that that position can not
be heresy, and that the Authors of the oathe do hold it for heresy, it
follows that in this place (as) must signify equality or identitie, not
similitude: Newyearesguifte Page 106.
as VViddrington in his Newyeares-guifte confesses that sometimes it does in
regard of the matter; And so by this Clause we are to abjure that Position,
not as like to heresy, but as all one with heresy, and truly heresy.
Thirdly it is at least doubtful least this may be the sense, to wit, that
the position is truly heresy, specially seeing that the words and manner of
speech (as WIDDRINGTON confesses) are to be taken in the Common sense, and
according to the Lawemakers intention, ergo this is a clause, not to be
digested by any tymerous conscience, nor by any other, then by an all
devouring conscience.

The Fifth Clause.

And I do further believe, and in conscience am resolved, that neither the
Pope, nor any person whatsoever has power to absolve me of this Oath, Sayrus
in Claui Regia li. 6. ca. 11. n 7. Lesfius li, 2. de just. et iure cap. 40.
dub. 17. number. 114. Arragon. 2.2. q. 88. art. 10. in expl. art.. his co^stitutis
Psalm. 75.
or any part thereof.

55. In this Clause first is abiured all power to dispense in oaths and vows,
which is heretical, it being a matter of faith conformable to common consent
and to the Canons and practice of the Church, that the Pope can dispense in
oaths and vows, when there is just cause. And if in other oaths, why not in
this? VViddrington perchance will answer, that this Oath of Allegiance
binds by law of God and Nature, in which the Pope cannot dispense. But he
cannot be ignorant that all oaths and vows do bind by law of God and Nature,
according to that: Psalm. 75.
Vouete and reddite: Vow and render. And yet if he will be a Catholic, he
must confess, that the Pope can, and often times has, and does dispense in
some oaths and vows, as in a vow to make a long pilgrimage, or to give a
sum of money to a Church or Monastery, which are temporal things, though
ordained to a spiritual end: and why then can he not dispense in this for a
good end, to wit, conservation of faith, and upon just cause, as certes, if
ever there be just cause to dispense, then there is, when the Prince with
intolerable Tyranny persecuteth faith and Religion?

56. And therefore VViddrington should call to mind that distinction, which
Divines use in this matter, to wit, that there is duplex ius dininum natural,
Sanchez lib. 2. de matrim. disp. 14. n. 5. ad 4 and lib. 8. disp. 6. n. 1.
a two fold divine and natural law or right. The one is absolute, derived
only from God and Nature: the other supponit factum, vel voluntatem humanam,
that is supposes some fact, or will of man. Of this sort are oaths and
vows, which bind not absolutely, but only supposing some fact or will of
ours, by which we swear or vow what otherwise we needed not. And although in
all such things the Pope cannot dispense (for he can not dispense in matrimony
consummated, nor in matrimony betwixt brother and sister, nor in plurality of
wives, which yet suppose some fact or will of ours) yet he can dispense in
vows, especially simple, yea and in those that be solemn also, as many
Divines do probably hold: He can also dispense in oaths already made, when
there is just cause; for seeing that these vows and oaths suppose our free
will and consent, and are such also, as it is expedient that the Pope many
times should dispense in them (such as is not matrimony consummated, nor
marriage betwixt brother and sister, nor plurality of wives, because if once
dispensation in these were granted, it would occasion many fornications and
aduoutries, Sanchez lib. 2. de matrim. disp. 13. n. 11. lib. 7. disp. 52 n. 11.
and disp. 82. number. 9. Vide etia^ Bellarm li. de matrim. ca. 10.16. and 28.
as Sanchez and others observe) it was necessary that CHRIST should leave such
power to his Church, and especially to his Chief Vicaire, the Pope, by which
he might take away the obligation of these oaths and vows, which in some
circumsta^ce of times and persons can not so easily, nor so conveniently be
fulfilled and observed. So that to swear that the Pope has no Authority to
dispense with a subject in his Oath, by which he has sworn fidelity to the
King, where as notwithstanding, when the King is an intolerable Tyrant, there
is good reason, In Disp. Theolog. ca 6 sect. 1. n. 2.
and just cause of dispensation, were in effect (what soever VViddrington
affirms) to abjure all Authority of the Church in dispensations. For
although it be no good Argument to argue a particulari ad universal, and to
say, The Pope can not dispense in this Oath, ergo in none: yet when there is
the same reason of the particular, which is in the universal, then to deny the
particular, were to deny the universal. And therefore as to say, Peter (who is
a man as well as others) is not risihilis, were in effect to say that nullus
homo est risibili; so seeing there is the same reason of this Oath to Wards the
Prince, which is of other oaths, he that denies that the Pope can dispense in
this Oath, denies also in effect that he can dispense in any oath at all.

57. This power, which the Pope has in dispensing in this Oath, I confirm by
all that, which above I have alleged to prove that the Pope can depose
Princes, and absolve subjects from their allegiance, and even by the power of
binding and loosing, Mat. 18
which though ordinarily it be understood of loosing from sins and censures,
yet it is also extended to absolution from allegiance, when it is necessary
to the Churches conservation (as above I have showed) not only by Cardinal
Bellarmine, whose aythoritie VViddrington should rather reverence then
contemn, but also by ancient Popes, whose testimonies in this kind ought to
counterpoize all contrary asseuerations, they being in a matter of so great
importance undoubtedly illuminated by the spirit of truth, and delivering the
right sense of the Holy Ghost, as his Chief and infallible interpretes.

58. To this WIDDRINGTON answeareth, Disp. Th. cap. 6.
granting that although the Pope cannot dispense in iuramento assertorio, (of
which noe man doubts) yet he may in iuramento promissorio, a promissorie
oath, because the thing which we promise for the future time, may prove
hurtful or unlawful. And seeing that the things promised for the future time
in this Clause are three. 1. That I will keep fidelity and obedience to the
King and his heirs, notwithstanding excommunication or deprivation; 2. That I
will defend him and them with all my forces against all conspiracies made
against them and their Crown and dignity. 3. That I will reveal all such
treasons and traiterous co^spiracies etc. He says I may as safely and
securely swear without all danger of perjury, that I will do all these
three things, as I may swear without danger of perjury, that the Pope can
not deprive a Prince. But out of these words of WIDDRINGTON, I will frame this
argument against him self: I can noe more swear these three things, then I
can swear without all danger of perjury, that the Pope can not deprive a
Prince: but I can not without danger of perjury swear, that the Pope cannot
deprive a Prince, ergo I cannot swear these three things without danger of
perjury. The mayor proposition is WIDDRINGTONS, the minor I have often
proved, because itis at least probable, even by WIDDRINGTONS confession, that
the Pope can deprive a Prince; and if it be probable that he can, it may be
true, if it may be true, there is danger of perjury to abjure it: and so the
Conclusion follows, to wit, that I ca^ not swear these three things without
danger of perjury.

The Sixth Clause.

Which Oath I acknowledge by full and lawful Authority to be proposed unto
me, and do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the contrary.

59. In this Clause the swearer acknowledges that this Oath is proposed by
full and lawful authority, which notwithstanding is not at least so certain
a thing, as that a man may swear it. For although the Magistrate have
authority to propose an Oath of mere Civil allegiance unto lay subjects; yet
he has not anthority to propose such an Oath as this, which (as I have
proved) contains so many things not to be sworn, and so much derogateth to
the Authority of the Pope, which for so long a time he has possessed and
practiced. And especially the Magistrate can not pronose this Oath to all
sorts of people, seeing (...) can not be without moral danger of perjury;
much less can he propose it to Priests, whose Ecclesiastical immunitie freeth
them from Magistrates and Temporal Judges interrogations, and Tribunals, Ca.
qu^quam, de Censibus in 6. Ca. aduersus and cap. non minus, de Immunit. Eccl.
and who only are to be examined by their Bishops and Ordinaries, and by them
to be punnished when they offend, and not by any Temporal Judges, unless the
fault be so great, that the Bishop thinks it meet to degrade the delinquent,
and to deliver him to secular power. And so it being a thing at least very
doubtful, whether the Prince and Magistrate have authority to propose such an
oath; yea it being evident that they cannot, because (as above is proved) it
is evident that it contains many things, which are against faith, and
Authority of the Church and Counsels: the Prince and Magistrate can have no
authority at all, much less full and lawful Autho itie, to propose this
Oath. And so neither can this Clause be admitted.

60. Add to this, that, what soever VVIDDRINGTON says, the King and Parliament
by this oath, do take upon them to decide what power the Pope has from
Christ the Author and S. Peter the Popes first Predecessor: for what is it
other to determine and decide a question, then to declare, that one part of it
is to be believed and followed, towitt that the Pope cannot deprive or depose
a Prince, and that the contrary is to be abiured as impious and heretical?
And if any Doctor of the Church should define this question or any other,
how can he determine more playnlie and resolutelie. As for Example the Church
defines, that there are 7. Sacraments and pronounces Anathema against the
contrary opinion which says there are but two or not. 7. Does she not in
this define the question? Even so our Prince and Parliament by this oathe have
decreed, that the Pope can not depose or deprive a Prince, and they oblige the
Subject to swear this part, and to abjure the contrary as heresy. Is not
this then to determine?

61. Whereas Widdrington alleges, Disp. Th. c. 7. n. 11
that the faculty of divinity in Paris and Mentz, do oblige those that are
to proceed Doctors, not to teach or preach publicly, that our B. Lady was
conceived in original sin, and yet do not define the controversy; this
makes rather against him; for they also do in this define, and though not
absolutely, yet as much as by their authority they can; and therefore they
do not oblige their subjects to abjure as heresy the contrary opinion of the
Thomists, for that were absolutely to determine, and to arrogate the Popes
authority: wherefore seeing that the King and Parliament do oblige Catholics
to abjure as heresy, and under the penalty also of a Praemunire, that the Pope
cannot deprive or depose a Prince, it follows that they absolutely determine
of such a spiritual proposition and matter of divinity, and against the
Practice of many Popes, and against the decree of the Lateran Council; and so
in this they Challenge to them selves the Popes or Churches Authority, to
which it appertains to define what is heresy; and conseque^tlie to swear
that this oathe is proposed by lawful Authority, is to swear in effect that
the King and Parliament have spiritual Authority, and that the King is
supreme Head of the Church of England, and has Authority to define what
proposition is heretical. At least this Argument makes it doubtefull least
this Clause imports thus much, and so is not to be sworn.

The Seventh Clause.

And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear
according to the express words by me spoken and without any equivocation, or
mental reservation whatsoever. And I do make this recognition and
acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and truly, upon the true faith of a
Christian. So help me God.

62. Divines affirm that the guilty, D. Th. 2. 2. q. 69. a. 1. Caiet. ibid.
Henric. quodl. 1. q. 44. Petrus Nauar. li. 2. de restit.
or supposed guilty, is not lawaies bound to answer according to the Judges
meaning and intention, if the Judge do not make his interrogations
iuridicallie. The same Divines affirm that a Judge does not make his
interrogations iuridicallie, when he questioneth about any secret thing, of
which there is not some fame, cap. 4. n. 136. Lessius lib. 2. de just. and iure
cap. 31. dub. 3 and alij. Vide cap. qualiter and quando, and ca. Inquisitionis,
d^ Accusationibus.
or report against the supposed guilty; or when he examineth things, which
pertain not to his Court, but rather to the spiritual Court; or when there is
not semiplena probatio, or sufficientia indicia, or when the supposed guilty
knows him self innocent, for then he is not bound to answer according to the
Judges intention, but may equivocate. Likewise when he knows him self
innocent, and yet if he confess the circumstance, which is demanded, he
should be presumed nocent, he may deny it with an equivocation. As for
example, if one had been present when his companion, without his consent,
killed another, if the Judge ask whether he was not present, he may deny it,
meaning he was not so present, as to consent or cooperate, for if he should
confess that he had been present, he would be presumed to have consented or
cooperated, and so should be unjustly condemned. Add heereunto that the same
Divines affirm that we are not bound to answer according to the Judges
meaning, Caietan. and alij supra citati.
when the person interrogated, doubts whether the Judge has Authority, or
proceeds iuridicallie, and according to form of law and equity.

63. All which being so, this Clause of the Oath is very hard; for
notwithstanding (as we have seen) that it is certain that the Prince and
Magistrate have not Authority to propose such an Oath, which contains so
many things unlawful to be sworn, and which so derogateth from the Popes
lawful Authority, as also from Counsels, and the practice of the Church, and
which besides that, pertains not to the Temporal Court and Tribunal; yet
this Clause binds the subjects to answer, and swear without all mental
reservation, yea to swear that heartily and willingly they take this oath,
whereas most of mere fear, and altogether against their wills and conscience
take it, and cannot depose their conscience, or think that the Oath is lawful.

64. Disp. Th. ca. 8 and Newyearesguifte cap. 8.
Widdrington answers that this clause depends of the lawfullnes and justice
of the oath, and seeing that the oathe contains noe injustice nor falsehood (as
he says he has proved) it follows that in this Clause there is no
difficulty. But because the words indeed do imply, that we swear all that
goes before, he uses much art to make this Clause speak, not to the
Authors, but to his own mind. For whereas these words: And all these things
I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear according to the express
words by me spoken etc. do importe, according to the Common manner of
speaking, and use of words, that I not only sincerely acknowledge, but also
do swear (the conjunction (and) and being copulative) yet VViddrington
contrary to his rule taken out of Suarez for the interpretation of the law,
Disp. Th. c. 1. sec. 2.
which in this and other things he leaves at his pleasure; says that the
word (Swear) is not to be referred to the former words (and all these
things) but to the words plainly and sincerely. As if the sense were not
this; I do plainly and sincerely both acknowledge and swear all which I
have spoken and auerted in this oath; but this: that which I have acknowledged
I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and that which I have sworn, I do
plainly and sincerely swear. And this exposition he puts, because in
diverse parts of the oath (as he auerreth) the swearer declares and swears
not the thing, as for Example, that the Pope can not depose a Prince, but only
what his opinion is. And this interpretation, he proves by conferring this
last Clause which the first. But first VViddrington herein goes from his rule
of interpreting, which is that the words of the Law, unless some other
circumsta^ce hinder, ought to be taken according to the common use of words.
For who reading or hearing these words, And all these things I do plainly
and sincerely acknowledge and swear according to the express words by me
spoken, would not by and by understand, that he not only acknowledges but
also swears all these things by him spoken? And as VViddrington proves his
interpretation by conferring this last Clause, which the first and second, so
will I prove mine by the same conference.

65. The first and second Clause then are these: I. A. B. do truly and
sincerely acknoweledge, profess, and testify in my Conscience before God and
the world, etc. And what do I acknowledge Profess and testify? that I
acknowledge and testify? that were to confound and make all one the act of
swearing and the object of swearing, or the thing sworn. What then do I
acknowledge, profess and testify? That which follows, to wit, that our
Sovereign Lord King JAMES is lawful and true King of this realm etc. And
that which follows in the second Clause, to wit, that the Pope neither by him
self, nor by any Authority of the Church or Sea of Rome, or any other
means with any other, has any Authority to depose the King. In these two
Clauses, as even here and above I have proved, is not protested nor sworn
what the swearer thinks for that present, because according to WIDDRINGTONS
rule, that is not the plain sense of the words, and for that (as above also I
have showed) that would little secure the King (because he that swears may
afterward change his opinion and yet not contradict this his former Oath:)
but the swearer testifies in his Conscience before God and the world that the
Pope cannot depose the King. Now let us hear the last Clause: (...).
And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge, and swear,
according to the express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and
Common sense, and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation,
or mental reservation whatsoever. And seeing that amongst all these things,
this is one, to wit, that the Pope can not depose King JAMES, that also is
acknowledged and sworn. And for as much as this Position, that the Pope can
not depose a Prince, is false, as I have proved, or at most is but probable,
and therefore in controversy as VVIDDRINGTON above confesses, he that
swears this Clause exposes him self to perjury: because if it be but
probable that the Pope can not depose a Prince, the contrary, to wit that the
Pope can depose a Prince is probable, and if it be probable it may be true,
and so to abjure it by oathe, is to expose the sweater to evident danger of
perjury. I say evident danger; for there is evident danger of perjury where
there is evident probability that the thing Sworn may be false, but so it is
in our case, ergo.

66. This I thought briefly to say for examination of this Oath, and some
instruction for the subjects, especially Catholics, to whom this Oath is
proposed. And because I have at large in the former Chapters proved the
Principal object, and thing, which this Oath abiureth, to wit, that the Pope
can in some case depose Princes, I refer the Reader to those Chapters, and
withal to the whole Treatise for his fuller instruction and satisfaction in
this matter; which if he peruse, I doubt not, but partly by this examination,
partly by the former Chapters, he shall see how unlawful this Oath is, and
what just cause the Chief Vicaire of CHRIST, S. PETER'S successor, PAVL by the
grace of God, the fifth, who now reigns, and sits at the stern of S.
PETER'S ship, had to forbid by his Breues this Oath, as containing things,
which cannot be sworn without most evident and grievous wronging of Gods
Honor: and which are flat contrary to faith and salvation.

67. Little socuritie given by Widdr. to the King.
But now it shall not be amiss to observe what security Widdr. by his
Explication of the Oath, has procured to the King. His intention was by this
fouourable Explication, to make the world to see, how Loyal and faithful a
subject he is, who exempteth his Prince in Temporalities from all subjection
to the Chief Pastor, and what security he procures to his parson, he having
(if his doctrine may go for current) cut of all occasions of conspiracies and
attempts of subjects; the Prince by VViddrington being placed so high above
the reach, so far out of the Sphere of actiuitie of the Chief Pastors
Authority, that neither Pope nor Church can touch his crown, or meddle which
his Regalitie, by way of deprivation. Yet if we mark what has been said by
VViddrington in the delivery of his opinion and explication of the oath, we
shall find that he has much injured the Chief Pastor in wresting from him
(as much as in him lies) that authority which not only many his
Predecessors holy and learned, but also diverse Counsels even General have
practiced, and which the Christian world many hundred years has approved:
and yet has little, or not at all, secured the Kings person, or assured unto
him his Crown and Scepter.

68. Widdr. in Apol. n. 92. and 197. Disp. Th. ca. 3. sec. 4. n. 3.
For first he Confesses in diverse places of his books (as we have Seen)
that the Pope can command the Prince or common wealth to use or not use the
material sword; he admits also as probable, that the common wealth can
depose the Prince in case of intolerable Tyranny; and consequently when the
Pope shall Judge a King worthy deposition, he may according to VViddrington
command the Common wealth, under pain of Excommunication, to depose the
Prince, and to deprive him of Regal Authority. Wherein whoesoeth not, that he
as little secureth the Prince (which yet was intended by this oath) as they who
hold, that the Chief Pastor, can in some case deprive a Prince. Because it is
in effect all one danger to the King, whether he be deposed by the Popes
peremptory commandment, or by his own immediate Authority.

69. Widdr. Disp. Th. in praef. n. 2.3. and Respons. Apolog. praef. ad Lectore^
n. 8.9. et Disp Th. c. 6. n. 15 and seqq.
Secondly Widdring. affirms that it is but probable that the Pope can not
depose a Prince, and consequently that it is probable that he can; and that
therefore the Popes who have deposed Princes, followed therein a probable
opinion: whereby he gives as little security to the Prince, as by his former
assertion. For after that VViddrington shall have persuaded the Kings subject,
that it is probable that the Pope can not depose the Prince, has he assured
the Prince of his Subjects fidelity? nothing less, because this subject with
his probable opinion having neither evidence nor certainty, but only a
probable opinion which brings but a show of truth, and that joined with
fear and uncertainty; may upon the least coffeehouse, or probable reason
alleged by others of the contrary opinion, alter his opinion, it being not
well grounded; and so the Prince shall have no more assurance of him, then has
the mariner of the wind in march, or the fisherman of a wet eele holden by the
tail. Which also I confirm, because the nature of a probable opinion is such,
that it gives free liberty to follow it, or the contrary, that also being
probable, and therefore in speculation we may think, in practice we may
follow not only one probable opinion, but also the contrary, that also being
probable. whence follows that if the Subject hear of VViddrington, that his
opinion, which holds that the Pope can not depose a Prince, is but probable,
he will choose the contrary, if it be for his purpose, or please more his
humor; and so will easily condescend to think that the Pope can depose a
Prince. What security then gives VViddringto^ to the Prince, whose security
depends but on a probable opinion, as mutable as a rotten stick is brickle,
or a weather cock wavering and turning. And what security from perjury has
the Subject to swear absolutely that which is only probable, and which
consequently may be false?

70. Thirdly VViddr. as we have also seen, Widdr. Disp. Th. c. 2. sec. 2. n.
3. etc. 3. sect. 2. n. 3.
byndeth the Subject to swear, not that the Pope can not depose a Prince, but
only that he thinks in his conscience that he can not; and seeing that this
thinking is but a probable conceit and opinion; the subject after he has
sworn what he thinks may, easily change his opinion, and yet commit no
perjury, he swearing only what then he thought, not what he would think
hereafter.

71. Widdr. Disp. Th. c. 6 sec. 2 nu. 8 and seqq.
Fourthlie Widdrington explicating that fourth Clause of the oath: And I do
further swear that I do from any heart abhor, detest, and abjure as impious
and heretical, this damnable doctrine and position, that Princes which be
excommunicate or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by their
subjects, says, that to make that position impious and heretical: it is
sufficient if one part of it, to wit, that Princes deprived may be murdered,
is impious and heretical; And so by his explication the Subject swears only
in that Clause, that the Prince excommunicated, can not be murdered, and
therefore he secureth the Prince only from killing, not from deposition; and
consequently his explication contradicts the intention of the King and
Parliament, which was to secure the Prince not only from killing, but also, and
especially, from deposing: partly because a King had as leave be killed as
deposed, he by deposition being made a private man, and of a King, noe King;
partly because a King deposed, is in danger, if he persist in government, to
be killed by his Subjects, who, if they approve the sentence of deposition,
hold him noe more for their King. And so VViddrington makes the Oathe
frustrate, and secureth not the King either from deposition or killing.

72. Whence it follows that Widdrington has done ill offices to the Chief
visible Pastor, in endeavoring to wrest from him that authority, which he
has practiced many hundred years: and yet has done noe good office or
service to the King, having not secured him from danger of deposition, if there
were any danger. I say, if there were any; for although, as some politians will
continually busse into their Princes ears conspiracies, plots, and
treacheries, that they may be thought careful subjects and necessary about
the Kings person, so WIDDRINGTON makes show of many bugbeares and Scarrcrowes
of dangers hanging over the Kings head by reason of this Catholic Common
opinion by me and others even the most learned, defended, so to insinuate him
self for a zealous subject: yet if we look better into the matter, we shall
see, that all this is but a needles fear, and that there is morallie no such
thing to be feared. And therefore Catholic Kings notwithstanding this opinion
which they approve, do not therefore think the^ selves in less security. But
he will say that our Sovereign being of a contrary Religion, has just cause
to fear. Let him then write books to persuade his Majesty to be a
Catholic, and thereby put him out of this pretended fear. Yet suppose he
neither will nor can persuade that; I deny that there is any such danger, as
WIDDRINGTON makes show of. For be it (as in deed it is) that the Pope can in
some case depose a Prince, as when he is incompatible or intolerable for his
spiritual tyranny; yet that case happens seeldome, and when it happens,
he often times ought not depose him, as if he forsee more hurt then good will
ensewe thereon; and he must give the Prince warning and admonition, before he
pronounce sentence of Excommunication or deposition; to which if the Prince
harken, the Pope can proceed no farther. And if his admonition be contemned, he
must not with out Counsel, actuallie excommunicate, or depose him, to which
perchance, his Counselors will not aggree: and if both he, and they aggree to
have him deposed, yet the particular Subjects can not put the Prince out of
Possession; only the Common wealth, or public Authority has such power;
which yet the Common wealth can seeldem exequute, and is not bound always to
execute, but may still obey the Prince Excommunicated and deposed in lawful
things, if by disobeying him, any notable danger is like to be incurred, as I
have showed above in the thirtenth Chapter. And seeing that these Circumstances
do seeldome all meet, deposition of a King is rara auis in terris, and the
exequution of the sentence of deposition is yet rarer, and consequent lie not
so much to be feared, as VViddrington would have it. And therefore
VViddrington, if he inte^d reallie to secure the Prince, should not defend the
Oathe, as hitherto he has done, but rather persuaded the Prince to take it
quite a way, there being perchance some danger to him in urging an odious
oath apt to breed alienation in the subjects minds, and no moral danger at
all (as I have showed) in not urging it at all; the sentence of deposition of a
Prince being a rare thing, and the exequution of it far rarer. Here I might
conclude, but that I have a word or twoe to say to Widdrington upon occasion of
his Newyeares-guifte, and as much to the Catholic subjects concerning their
obedience to the King, and lastly to his Majesty concerning his confidence
which he may securely put in them.

73. WIDDRINGTON, as it is thought, A freindlie Admonition to Widdringto^.
masqued with the lettres E. I. in the beginning of the last year, presented
the Catholics of England with a new Explication of the Oath, or rather with
an old made new, and offered it unto them as a Newyeares-guift of no small price
and value, as by which (as he says) they may be more fully instructed, then
they have been by I. E. the Author of the Prelate and Prince; whose
explication of the Oathe, he avouches to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, to
be Pestiferous. But as for his Newyeares-guift, Ep. ad Regem.
it being ce^sured in other his books by his Chief Pastor, the Catholic
has just cause to say: Quicquid id est, timeo Danaos, and donae ferentes:
What ever it is. L. 2. Aeneid.
I fear the Greeks and bringers of such guiftes.
And as for my Explication, I can assure the said English Catholics, that it
is, and was allowed by the same Superiors, who have censured and condemned
Widdringtons, and it is grounded in the practice of sacred Counsels and holy
and learned Popes, our Chief visible Pastors, and it is countenaunced by all
the grauest and lernedst divines, doctors, and writers, as I have showed in
the eleventh, twelfe, and thirtenth Chapters, and as VVIDDRINGTON him self
knows, who confesses that the opinion which holds that the Pope can in
some case depose a Prince, is more Common, and consequently more probable:
whereas WIDDRINGTONS Authors, either stand against him, or are not of Credit in
a matter of Divinity, or are of cracked credit, being censured and condemned
in the Index of forbidden Authors. And therefore whereas he vaunteth a little to
much for one of his Co^ditio^ and Quil^^ie, that I shall shortly hear with
shame enough (bona verba quaeso) what goodly instruction I have give; I desire
him to take heed least he shame him self, as he has to much already, and more
then I, or other his friends desire: as for me, I will not be ashamed of my
Explication of the Oath, it being conformable to the aforesaid Authority; let
sca^dalous or censured opinions and Authors blushe and shame to appear in
public, nihil veritas erubescit (says Tertullian) nisi solummodo abscondi,
Tertull. lib cont. Valent inianos in initio.
truth blusheth at nothing, but to be hidden. As for VViddringtons tauntes,
bitter, irreuerent, and immodest speeches, which he bestows to liberally
even on the grauest and learned writers and Prelates of this age; let not
VViddrington think that they esteem them or regard them. Such speeches may
disgrace him self, but not the^: rather they will thereby gather (as
Catholics commonly do) that such lavish languages savor little of the
spirit of an humble, modest, and Catholic man, as Widdrington has been
esteemed, and still desires to be reputed. Wherefore not intending to contend
with him in that kind, nor to render evil for evil, but as true Catholics
ought to do, good for evil: out of the ancient good will I have of long time
born, and still do bear to his parson (though I like not his proceedinges) I
desire him to harken to this my ensewing good Counsel; though in so doing
perchance (and contrary also to my desire) I may force upon him an unwelcome
courtesy, and an ungrateful favor.

74. I wish him first to consider with what security of conscience he can
still persist in the defense of the Oath, The first good Counsel to Widdringt^.
not only against all the Authority by me and others alleged, but also
against the express commandment of his chief and Supreme visible Pastor?
Widd^. Disp. Th. sec. 2. ca. 10. n. 56.
he alleges Vasquez oftentimes to prove, that a man may follow in practice
any probable opinion, and he seems to be well conversant in him: why then does
he not mark and make his commodity of that Doctrine of Vasquez concerning the
Superior, when he commands according to a probable opinion? Vasquez, Vas^
1.^ disp 62. n. 32.
following therein the common opinion, affirms that a subject is bound to obey
his lawful Superior when he commands according to a probable opinion,
though he command a thing which is against the Subjects opinion, and that
also probable. Out of this I frame this Argument: A subject is bound to obey
his lawful Superior when he commands according to a probable opinion,
though he command a thing against the subjects opinion, and that also
probable: but the Pope VViddrington lawful Superior, commanding VViddrington
not to defend the Oath of pretended allegeaunce, commands at least according
to a probable opinion: ergo VViddrington is bound to obey the Pope in this
against his own opinion, though that were also probable. The Mayor Vasquez
proves; because the Subject may follow any man's probable opinion, and
consequently his Superiors, that also being probable; and if he may, he must;
because his Superior commands. The Minor VViddrington grants, and can
not deny: the Conclusion then follows, to wit, that VViddrington is bound in
conscience and under pain of mortal sin (the thing commanded being of
great importance) to desist from defending the oath, the Pope having condemned
it, and commanding him not to defend it. To say that the Pope is misinformed,
and that therefore his declaration and commandment grounded therein, does not
bynd in conscience, is but a poor stay for VViddringtons conscience; because,
Disp. Th. c. 10. sec. 1. n. 53.
as VViddrington alleges out of father Parsons letter, he informed him self,
of seven or eight of the most learned Divines in Rome, and since, he has heard
what VViddrington him self can suggest. To allege his Authors, is to little
purpose, they being (as above we have seen) few, and of little or no
Authority. To say the Pope may err, will as little seue VViddringtons turn,
because every lawful Superior is to be obeyed when he commands according
to a probable opinion; though in other things, and even in this he may err. To
answer that he is then only bound to obey his Superior when there is no
notable danger or damage in obeying; is as little to the purpose: partly
because the opinion according to which the Pope commands, is more then
probable, as above is proved; partly because though there may be Temporal
damage in refusing to take the oath, yet for VViddrington not to defend it by
public writing, there is no more danger to him, the^ to many more who never
set pen to paper for the defense of it; rather VViddrington should fear the
spiritual danger and damage which is incurred either by defending or taken
it, as his chief Pastor has assured him.

75. Secondly I wish VViddrington to reflect upon his own self, The soco^a
good Counsel to VViddringt^^.
and the state of life to which he is called; the dangerous course he runs,
and how far he is proceeded in it; how heavy an enterprise he has
undertaken, and how hardly he shall be able to go thorough with it; who
applaude him in it, who condemn him; what Authors he follows, who^ he
contradicts; whom he makes glad, whom he contristateth; what a Schism, as
it were, he has made amongst some of his Catholic brethren, with what
doubts and Scrouples he has troubled the minds of others: How many well
meaning and before very zealous Catholics, he has induced to take the Oath,
and what scope he has given to the persequutour to vex and afflict those who
out of conscience refuse to take it; how little grateful he has showed him
self to the Sea Apostolic, which bredde and brought him up, how much to
officious to her Adversaries, his chief Applauders; what little comfort at the
hour of his death, he shall reap of these his labors, how much discomfort.

76. And to you, Wholesome Counsel to the Catholics.
worthy, constant, and renowned Catholics, I give this wholesome Counsel.
Seeing that this Oath so much derogateth from the Church and her chief Pastors
honor and Authority, and gives such scope to her Enemies and Persecutours;
as you have hitherto defended (and still, saving some few, do) this Church,
her faith, and Authority, and have sustained loss of liberty, liuinges, and
lives, rather then you would consent to the least injury, which is offered her;
so do you not (by taking this Oath) falsify your faith to CHRIST, his Church,
and chief Vicaire. You have passed the raging storms and Tempests of a Sea of
Persecution, make not shipwreck of all your spiritual merchandise and merits
in the mouth of the haven: you have long since laid your hand to the plough do
not now look back: Luc. 9. Exodus 14
you have almost past the red Sea of Persecution, which hitherto has yielded
you passage, go not back to Aegipt, for then you will never come to the Land
of Promise: you have run a long time in the race, 1. Cor. 9.
faint not now before the goal; rather look up to Heaven, Gal. 5.
and you shall see the Angel houlding in his hand a crown of glory.
Currebatis been quis vos impediuit veritati non obedire? You ran well; who
hindered you not to obey the truth? Persuasio haec non est ex eo, qui vocat
vos: Ibid.
this persuasion (to take this Oath) is not of him, Ibid.
that called you. It is of the Enemy, who enuyeth that you ran so well. But
ego confido in vobis, quod nihil aliud sapietis: I have confidence in you in
our Lord, that you will be of no other mind, nor do otherwise, then becomes
good Catholics, and such Catholics also, who have been tried and purged in
the furnace, on whom the eyes of God, his Saints, and all the world are
fixed. In the mean time, qui conturbat vos por tabit iudicium suum, quicunque
est ille; he that troubles you, he that has cast stumbling blocks and
scandals in your way, he that like the serpent has buzzed in your ears, shall
bear the Judgment of almighty God, whosoever he be.

77. And as I desire you should be constant in your faith and Religion,
obedient to the Church and her chief visible Pastor in all which is belonging
to their Authority: so I exhort you to obey the Kings Majesty your Soueraige
Lord and Liege in all things which appertain to his Regal power; and so to
give to God, his Church, and chief Vicaire their due, hommage, and respect, as
you deny not to the King Tribute, Romans 13.
Custom, fear, honor, obedience, fidelity and faithful service: and not to
think that this which I have said in behalf of the authority of the Church
and her chief visible Pastor, has been to detract any the least due, right,
and respect from our Temporal Lord and Sovereign, much less to give any
way, or scope to plottes, conspiracies, or libelles, which may irritate the
Prince, purchase no good, but rather procure disgrace and prejudice to the
cause for which you suffer. For as S. PETER tells you: 1. Pet. 2.
what glory is it, if sinning and buffeted you suffer? but if doing well you
sustain patiently, that is thank before God, for unto this you are called.
For it is better (as the same Apostle assures you) to suffer as doing well (if
the will of God will have it so) then doing ill. 1. Pet. 3.
And therefore, 1. Pet. 4.
says he, let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a chief, or a rayler, or
coueter of other men's things, but if as a Christian (Catholic) let him not
be ashamed. 1. Pet. 2.
Be you therefore Subject to every humane Creatur for God, whether it be to
the King as excelling, or to rulers as sent from him, whether it be to the
Prelate or to the Prince, Church, or Common wealth: it having been my only
intention, and the only drift of this book, that Prelate and Prince should
both have their due, neither should be iniuried.

78. And therefore I exhort you to refuse the Oathe of pretended Allegeaunce,
because your Chief visible Pastor, has forbidden it, and for that, his
Authority and Right, therein is interessed: and yet I would have you also obey
the King in all Temporal and Civil causes, because such obedience Gods Law
commands; and consequently to defend his Royal parson even with hazard of
your goods, Lands, and lives, to pray for him and his Royal posterity, that
he may live and reign long in his own person, and after in a long posterity,
and that he may so gouetn his Kingdom of England here, as he may not loose,
but gain, a greater Kingdom of Heaven herafter.

79 And I most humbly also desire his most Excellent Majesty, An humble
petition to the Kings majesty.
out of his rare wisdom, deep Judgment, and long experience, not to esteem
those his only faithful Suhiectes, who are best Temporisers: because as many
of these men serve not so much the King, as the time, and in it, their own
turns: so if time and Fortune change, they also like the Fish Polypus which
takes the hew and color of the stone to which it cleaves, will change and
vary. The noble CONSTANT us Father to CONSTANTINE the Great, will be unto his
Majesty a good President in (...) Kind. He on a time, to try who were like
to prove his most faithful Subjects, commanded (as EVSEBIVS relates) that
all those of his Court, Eusebius. li. de vita Co^stan tini non long ab initi^.
who would en^oy his friendship, or participate of any his Honors and
Dignities, which he used to bestow, should sacrifice to the Gods, and that
they who would not, should be expelled the Court, and deprived of all honor
and favor. At which commandment, some of them loath to loose their honorable
places and Dignities, obeyed the King, and forsaking Christian Religion,
sacrificed to the Idolles: others fearing God more then the King, and more him
that can kill soul and body in hell, then him that can kill only the body,
Mat. 10.
but can not touch the soul; left the Court and all hopes of preferrement,
rather then they would leave their Religion, or do any thing against their
conscience, which when the King Saw, he called back those constant
Christians, and rejected from his Court and company those-false hearted
Temporizers, saying, that they who were not faithful to God, would never be
sure and trusty to the King, and that they who would not for any thing the
world could afforde, forsake God or their Religion, or do any thing against
conscience, were most like to prove most faithful friends and Subjects to
their Prince. Which President if (...) Majesty our Sovereign respect
accordingly, he will deem, and shall by experience find, that those his
Catholic Subjects, who out of Religion and Conscience, stand most
constantly for their faith, the Church, and her chief Visible Pastor, will,
out of the same Religion and conscience (which are the most strong and forcible
bonds) stand most stiffelie (when occasion shall be offered) for their King and
Sovereign, and will prove his most obedient, peaceble, and faithful
Subjects.

The Printer to the Reader.
Although the Author (gentle Reader) by publishing this his Treatise so late,
This is spoken of the first Edition.
may seem to have observed no opportunity of time; yet I can assure thee, that
it was two years since ready for the press, and much against his will has
all this while, upon some occasions, been differred. But seeing that the Oath
is still proposed by the Magistrate, and by some few also (who fear more the
loss of a Temporal, then an eternal estate) taken, and moreover defended; he
shall not be like to that Physician, who prescribes Physic after the disease
is cured, but rather to him, who expects till the disease comes to
maturitie and ripeness, that so showing it self more evidently, he may apply
the better remedy. Receive it therefore (how late soever it come) and use it
for thy good, according to the Authors desire, and sincere intention.

FINIS.
FAVLTS ESCAPED IN PRINTING.
Page 7. lin. 10. bath corrige has. selue cor. self. p. 8. l. 11. Defert cor.
Desert, p. 1^. l 22. to watdes cor. toward. p. 14. l. 10. (Ind^^h 8.) Iudi^h
8.) p. 14. l. 21 your co. your. p. 15. l. 3 Ghildbirth co. Childbirth l. 15
eins. cor. eius. p. 17. l. ^6 fornacet rieth cor. furnace tries. p. 22. l. 26.
substantiam cor. substantiam. p. 25. l. 2. tberfore corrige therefore. p. 26. l.
3 you, cor. you. p. 31. l. 18. visible cor. visible. p. 33. l. 8. follows co.
flows. p. 3^. l. 9. and cor. and. p. 43. l. 24. gnbernator cor. gu^ernator.
p. 48. l. 29. declare cor. declare. p. 50. l. 13. meantes cor. means. p. 55.
l. 3 priuarelie or. pr^uate lie. l. 5. children cor. children. p. 70. l. 1.
that is cor. that it l. 25. and cor. and page 71. l. 29. ge cor. go p. 7^. l.
11. spiritual cor. spiritual. p. 75. l. 8 Fightlie cor. Eighlie. p. 76. l.
18. government co. government. p 81. l. 24. defcendeth cor. descends. l. 28
K^uges cor. Kings. p. 82. l. 7. out cor. our. p. 85 l. 5. Enangelists cor.
Evangelists. l. 10. nobis ^o. vobis p 81 l. 22. and cor. and. l. 2^.
in^^fidictio cor-iurisdictio. p. 87. l. 12. facrifice cor. sacrifice. p. 91. l.
13. especiallig cor. especially. l. 23. is cor. as. page 93. l 10. infect cor*
infect. p. 96. l. 11. thout cor. thought. lin. 27. excommunication cor.
excommunication. p. 98. l. 29. illnm cor. illum. p. 100. l. 25. of cor. of. p.
102. l. 19. bic cor. hic. l. 20. bellnm cor. bellum. p. 105. l. 9. ouet cor.
over. l. 14. qui cor. qui. l. 24. Russinus cor. Ruffinus. p. 107. l. 9. soue
cor. son. l. 28. einsque cor. einsque. p. 108. l. 14. and cor. and. l. 19
hodie cor. holy. p. 11. l 16. first cor. first. p. 119. l. 24. howsoever cor.
howsoever. p. 110. l. 23. derest. cor. detest. p. 121. l. 3. Ecclesiastiaall
cor. Ecclesiastical. p. 123. lin. 10. is cor. if p. 127. l. 17. notwitstanding
cor. notwithstanding l. 20. snmendum cor. sumendum. l. 28. Ecclefiasticall cor.
Ecclesiastical. lin. 31. Aristocle cor. Aristotle. p. 128. l. 5. Church cor.
Church. p. 130. l. 12. os. cor. of. l. 33. General cor. General, p. 131. l.
23. enerie cor. every. p. 132. lin. 29. eternal cor. external. p. 135. l.
12. aster cor. after. p. 137. l. 33. snpreme cor. supreme p. 143. lin. 21.
gouerue cor. govern. page 1^0. l. 21. quicquam cor. quicquam. page 151. l. 19.
inconsiderrti cor. inconsiderati. p. 152. l. 10. BBCAMVS cor. BECANVS. p, 153.
l. 16. BYRHIL cor. BVRHIL. p. 154. l. 20. King cor. King, p. 155. l. 2.
Supremacy cor. supremacy. p. 172. l. 24. heanen cor. heaven. lin. 33. thetof
cor. thereof. p. 174. l. 17. although cor. although. p. 175 l. 17. Authontie
cor. Authority. p. 179. l. 21. selves cor selves. p. 186. lin. 2. rempnblicam
cor. rempublicam. l 5. The same does also cor. The same does also p. 187. li.
18. Council cor. Council pa. 190, l. 32. chrastizing cor. chastizing p. 190.
l. punish cor. punish lin. 13. sacrifice cor. sacrifice. p. 192. infecting co.
infecting. p. 195. l. 18. that. cor. that p 196 l. 22. be cor. he. p. 198. l.
9. there cor. the. page 200. l. 6 hane cor. have. p. 201. l. 25. Kingdoms cor.
Kingdoms. p. 205. l 23. for as and cor. for (as etc.) page 20^. l 19. Priuces
cor. Princes. p. 208. l. 25. offensive cor. offensive p. 214. l. 24. subject
corrige subject p. 218. l. 11. And cor. And. page 224. li. 24. selue cor.
self. p. 228. l 31. which cor. which. p. 23^. l. 7. Prelares cor. Prelates. p.
235. l. 6. Lords cor. Lords. p. 237. l. 25. te cor. to. p. 238. l. 18 hecause
cor. because. p. 240. l. 5. not cor. not. page 243. l. 18. which cor. which p.
245. l. 1^. should cor. should p. 246. l. 28. of cor of. p. 249 lin. 33. from
cor. from. p. 257. l. 5. Epistle. cor. Epistles. p. 257. l. 18. Regnnn. cor.
Regum pa. 262. l. 17. denouuced cor. denounced. p. 268. l. 22 contronersie cor.
controversy. p. 269. l. 22. Englisch cor. English p. 270. l. 2, Azorins cor.
Azorius. p. 272. l. 2. cafu cor. casu. lin. 22. edministrare cor. administrare.
lin. 28. propoaetion cor. proposition l. 30. ne cor. one. p. 276. l. 21. and
cor. and. p. 2^8. l 22 truly cor. truly, p. 279. l. 16. Freunce cor France.
p. 284. l. 3. Council co. Council. p. 29^ l. 23. murout, cor. mirror. p.
288. l. 13. subjects co. subjects. l. 18. Queen cor. Queen. l. ^2 thc. co.
the. p 290 l. 2. where cor. were. l 28. Thirdly and lastly cor. Fourthlie and
lastly. p 297. l. 32. leisnre cor. leisure. p. 298. l 31. vndes cor. under. p.
2^9. l 12. TViddrington cor. VViddrington. lin. 24. beeause cor because. p.
300. l 13. see cor. so. p. 312. l. 32. os cor. of. p. 330 l. 21. Fot. cor.
For. p. 334. l. 2^. saferie cor. safety.

Page 351. in marg dele Anton lib 4. and lib. cor. l. page 353. lin. 26 add
before if yet page 353 lin. 30. depose. cor. depose also. page 465. l last dele
of excommunication denounced. page 361 lin 10. abolendum cor. abolendam page
368. l. 25. coe. correct condemned. page 368. l. 26. and cor but practiced and.
page 400. l. 23. persuaded cor. persuade.

End

