The Exposition, and Readynges of John Keltridge: Master of the Arts: Student
of late in Trinity College in Cambridge, Minister, Preacher, and Pastor of
the Church of Dedham, that is in Essex: Upon the words of our Savior Christ,
that be written in the.xi. of Luke.

ROMANS. 10. VER. 8. The words is nie thee, even in thy Mouth, and in thy
Heart: This same is the word of Faith which we teach.

JAMES. 3.14. But if you have bitter enuiyng and strife in your Hearts rejoice
not, neither be Liers against the Truth.

Imprinted at London, by William How, for Abraham Veale. 1578.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and reverend father in God, John Elmer, Bishop of
London, and my very good Lord, health and peace, and long life in Jesus
Christ.
IF the Church and House of the Lord God, were or had been tied to any one
man, for his skill and cunning woorkemanship in the same: There might have
stepped forth, and shown themselves greatly grieved (honorable, and my very
good Lord) most singular and learned men in this common wealth: That for age
through discretion: for life through grauitee: for time, in wisdom: for praise
and speech of people, by their rare and goodly gifts: could very well and in
due season, have challenged the first place, and taken upon them the first
room, to have made dispatchall, and finished up this little building, rather
then any other. Whereunto not withstandyng, I have now put my hands, with Mortar
and Lyme and such homely provision, as I have found in the Country since my
departure from Cambridge. Very bold now, as at other times I have been with
your Fatherhood, to open my entente and meaning in this labor of mine. That
the care whereunto I am bound by private duty, may from henceforth discharge
it self: And that weresome and great burden laid on our shoulders, that be
the dispensers of the word of God, the sooner lightened. I have not given my
travail, and this the sweat of my brows, to Aristo Chius, (as in Fables) but
I have searched and made choice in the praesentyng of this my small gift, of
your Honor, then any other: For that by good right, you challenge the first
fruits of my youth: Whom it pleased in young days, and this my infancy, to
ingrafte and plant in, as one thought worthy some place, in the vineyarde of
the Lord. And I doubt not, but that rule and government, wherewith God has
blessed you in this Commonwealth of England, shall have as glorious an end, in
the suppressing and rooting out of sin, as it has had a blessed entrance,
and continued until this day, in supporting and mainteining of the truth: If
any thing in this my small volume, shall appear to belesse studied, and more
craggedly handled, then commonly the stoorehouses of young Occupiers, as I am,
ought to be. I have a good excuse unto your Lordship: in that a more toublesome
and perelous time, never happened, by the space of this one whole year, then
has done unto me: either else less fruit, and smaller commodity gleaned up by
the hands of any one labourer: or greater sorrow, or lingering hope: or sore
attemps, or the like flames, and such contentions (as your Honor very well
knows) that I have thought him much disquieted, that has not sought
quietness, in so unquiet a life. And yet in these tossings and tumblings,
wherein I am sweltered in manner, and overcome, with out any hope of recovery,
I may not be altogether dismayed: neither will I stay the course I have
begone: but fair and saftely step by step drayle forward, till that time the
Lord God shall release us: The causes hereof with my judgment of the same:
please it you to turn over but few leafes, they will show what manner a ones
they be. At the end of this book, I have offered to your Lordeship, the copy
of that Sermon, the very noates and certain words (almost) which I speak,
when you thought good, to appoint me at Fulham your Manor, this year last
past of our Lord. 1577. Upon Ascension day at the making of ministers, there
to preach before the Clergy men. This I have done at the suit and earnest
request, of certain my friends of the City of London (men of good calling,
and worship) then at that time present, though unknown unto you, when I
preached there. These I could not thrust away in so good a demand: neither
durst I withstand them in so reighteous a cause: Yet I consithered, that the
right thereof belonged not to them, for it pleased you to take it at my hands,
at that time by commandment: Therefore have I made restitution of the same.
For then they heard it, then they begged it, when as I speak it: But now I
write it, though they requirde it, and as due debt, I restore it unto your
honor. Both which: these short books (as you may know the study of young
deuines most commonly busied in) I give them, as a pawn and pledge of that
duty that I owe unto you: And I desire of the Lord God, to increase you in
all spiritual gifts in Jesus Christ, that the whole workmanship and Temple of
the Lord, may be fully finished: all rotten, and shackering sprigges that
ouershadowe the Church of God, cut off: all idle, sluggish, and hollow hearted
men, discerned: to the increase of his name, the setting forth of his glory,
the abolishing of Popery and supersticion, and the farthering of tranquillity
and peace, in these our borders.

Your Lordships faithful servant: John Keltridge.
In Dedham, this xxi. of June. 1578.
To him that reads, and understands, long life and glory, in the Lord
Christ.
I I is a speech received commonly among men, that rare things, should be dear
things: and those that be known openly, they be spewed out, and laid aside
very scornfully: The report of ye first, when I first took this in hand
compelled me to lay aside my Paper and my Ink, and betake my self to other
exercise: The trial in the other, shut up all hope that I had, if he that
rules the actions of men, as I did know and am assured, could not also
despose the heart and secret cogitations of all flesh: Therefore the prayer of
the Lord, though it be generally taught of all, and thought to be as base and
homly ware, such as every poor man lyinge tottered in his rags, and the base
husbandman in the feeld is content to use (for this their sakes also in
contempt) yet when I gave my self to the looking thereon, I found a great
deal more Majesty therein contained, then any one earthly creature can
comprise: As for the notable and famous men of late memory: displaying their
Insignes so gloriously in the sight of men, shewinge us how to war, and to
pight battle with the world and the devil: how to pray, to whom, wherefore,
and for what causes: with other artillery and goodly furniture belonginge
thereunto, as becomes those that will know the Lord: yet I can not say,
though they played their parts very conningly, and writ very subtellye, and
comprehended all that they did artificially: that therefore they swalowed up
whole multitudes of such as succeeded them: For neither Ireneus stayed, because
that the fathers which went before him, knew the Lord: neither Origin kept
back his hand, or left his pen, or despised labor, albeit, the matters he
took upon him, were described of others: And as for those succeeded them,
either faltered they in their speech, or swounded they in common talk, or did
they fall, because Cirill, or Ierom, or Crysostom, or Ambrose, plentifully, and
very faithfully with great zeal and singular travail, painted forth the
dealing and conversation of the men that lived then? I say nay: but those
flowing wits, did leave behind them a great light to their posterity, and they
that came after, sucked out the Marrow and the strength, and robbed their
Progenitors: and after that, became as mighty in their labors, and as
valiant in their wrightinges, and as pleasant in their tongue and language,
as the most renowned men of them that lived in former ages: And that I can see,
or may judge as yet, our time has bin as well blessed with flourishinge
wits, and our men that now live garnished with so great knowledge, as I do,
and dare encourage them all that love the Lord, to proceed manfully in their
callinges: in as mutch as both our Forfathers, have not stolen away all
commendation from us that follow them: neither we shut up into so narowe a
room, but that in the light and beauty of the days wherein we be, we may
among many good and excellent writers, say something: To him that looks for
the first place, it is good to content him with the second or the third
degree: For him that gapeth to contend for the rest, if he will be advertised by
me, he shall think himself well, if he can have place with the hindermost.
So that great things shall not dismaye, the weak: and simple men shall stand
by the best: But if any one pleased with his condition, can keep a mean, that
is he, that shall have the commendation from them both: As for this my
travail, and first birth (as it were) pained so mutch the more, as I desire
earnestly the Church of the Lord God should enjoy it: seeing it is my first
Babe, I willingly offer him unto you all to look upon him: and this Book I
give it the rather to young men, as I my self am but growing up, and attend
the good leisure of the Lord, that can increase and strengthen me, and bring
me up to greater stature:

For any fine and conninge feature you shall find herein, I dare not promise
so much as any jot thereof: but as be the books of Deuines, commonly talkinge
to common men, laying out the plainenes and behavior of the people, such is
this that I give unto you: If any question with me for the matter, and the
substance therein contained: let him not think he is in the Goldsmithes shop:
he will be content, when he has red so much as I have done, and seen the
behavior of the world as all may do that live now, to bestow himself in
some more homely trade a great deal: Yet I will say something unto him:
please it him to enter in to see what ware I have, and will he vouchsafe to
read over this work of mine: he shall find, though an unskillful Artificer
meddeleth with it, yet so much both of household stuff, and other furniture
(if he can place it well) and bestow it in his house: as is able to suffice
the best learned man that I know, to stop up more then one creuice or two in
his study. Neither can I see, if so be this work were taken in hand by any
other learned and skillful in judgment: but that he which looks on it,
might receive great comfort, and singular pleasure in the same: Consideringe
that he looks upon the Lord God, and talks familiarly with Christ, and
is bold to present him self before Aungelles and powers, and prays for
his Brethren, and is hard of so good and gracious a Lord, as our God is:
That gives when he asks, opens when he knocks, bestows when he
demands, that shall fear him and call on his name faithfully: Also whosoever
buieth of his Marchandrise, and uses it well to the glory of the Lord, and
profitinge himself with others: he lays not up treasure that is to be taken
from him, but caryeth it with him unto Heaven, and it lies by him for ever:
And among all the things precious and excellent that I have seen on earth,
never took I more comfort in any one then this: that the glory of the Lord,
and the sweetness of his word, and this help wherein by prayer I have all that
is necessary both heavenly and terrestrial: tittelled me from time to time,
till I had inioyed them: of truth, never ravished with any pleasure of man so
much, as of late in the meditation, and heavenly speech that I had, when I
questioned too and froe with the Lord God, what it was he would have his
people and poor famely that pineth away in this world, to look upon: From
whom I received this message: that seeing it pleased him to make choice of the
sons of men, and to take unto him those that he loved in this life, they
ought therefore to disioyne themselves, and forsake the company of unbelievers,
praying for and meditating heavenly things, castinge up their minds to
Heaven, and reposinge their hope on the God of glory, that has given unto us
his livery and his colyzen to be known as his Servants, even by prayer and
earnest invocation upon his name, the order and frame whereof, I have largely
set down in my first Book: After this, that no man be excusable, but
understand so mutch as is set down by the Lord: when any one shall come
before him, that he may not speak unknown things, or pray when he
understands not: or utter that he knows not: or power out before God and
his Aungelles, and all the honorable company and assembly of Saints,
unadvisedly that which he regards not: for this cause have I unfolded the
darkness of speech, and laid open to every Babe if so he can read the
words of our Savior Christ set down by him in the eleventh of Luke: all
which you shall find laid on a heap, and knitte up together in my second
Book. Of those that come betwixt, either precepts, either rules, either
exhortations, either demaundes, either things that be amiss, either such as
be well, either life, cyther dealinges and demeanor of men, that show
themselves in their proper places: them I exhort every man, to take privately
unto him, not to use them as common unto all: As concerning my judgment
indiuers poinctes of Religion, and called in controversy by men of our time, I
have looked at them, handled them I have not: to the decidinge of them I have
selected out an other time, and another place, meaning if so God will, to call
you or it be long, and to crave your council in the same: that if so you will
patiently bear with me in this my first request, I will be tied unto you,
and owe my service in any other: and as you may see: that wherein I have been
practiced, and whereunto, I have endeavored my self from my Cradle, according to
that have I given the name of this Book: No other thing in deed then the
exercise of my youth: and delivered up to all young ones, to look upon:
Content to leave my title therein, neither will I claim any thing from
henceforth in the same, they may challenge it, by good right to their own use:
And if the rancknes of other men, have taken away all the glory that I hoped
for: I desire and pray you al to content you with ye little that I have: If you
think good to leave unto me any time at al, to turn ye over few leaves that I
offer you: if any labor of youres come unto my hands, like favor will I show
them: and the good that I can do, they shall be assured of: As for the learned
that did manifest them unto you before, in a better and perfecter style, then
I have wrote: Them (if so they lived) I durst entreat: even Master Bucer, or
Master Martyr, or Master Calvin: or any other the honorable company, to bear
with me in that I do: both for ye their traficke and their toil they took,
was not extinguished by other men's travail: and in that they purposed not, by
the large streams wherein they were busied, to stop up the rivers and small
channels of other men's study: Beeinge my request to them shall read this
Book: that they way all things as they be set down, that they cast not
their eyes upon other men: To whom and that do fear the Lord, and wish for
peace and quietness to his Church, and reads diligently to follow it
reverently, or judge Christianly, and seek Gods glory faithfully: be health,
rest, and honor for evermore. Fare you well.

Your pore and faithful laborer in the Church of God. I. K.

Viro docto, mihique amicissimo, Iohanni Keltridgo: Thomas Numannus artium
Magister, Magistro Artium. Salut.
QVem saepe plurimumque, concinne, eleganterque perorantem: tam describentem
mores actionesque clarorum hominum: iam in Academia, nonnunquam in Rostris, and
candidatorum pompa, caelebritateque virorum optimorum: interdum priuatis
parietibus honorifice multa facientem: Colloquiis autem nostris laepidum
facaetiarumque plenum vidi. Quam potest vel amico, vel familiari, vel peregrino
cuidam iucundum esse: eunde^ te in Dei optimi maximi laud celebranda,
honoreque propagando equalem videre, quem semper in rebus gerendis,
actionibusque tuis, priuati, priuatum hominem admirati sumus. Quod eo intueor
magis, quo lingua nostra ornatius, stilo elegantius, facilitate clarius,
vulgari oratione enucleatius, complexus es sermonem tuum. Cum enim multos
intueor, singulareis in Repub. laudatosque viros, populo ignarisque loquentes:
praeter salem laeporemque, aut Maiestatem illam, quam prae fe ferunt, etiam
quandam spetiem humanitatis tuae, teiudico enarrauisse. Si de nobis audire
aliquid cupias, (cum de te non nunquam sepiusque audiuimus) Nos valere scias
velim, quod tu been valeas: eoque valere magis, quod tu literis vales. Iam enim
video non calamistratum te, non lasciuiae deditum more Cinicorum: aut pugnantem
eminus, cominus vero eiaculantem: aut Barbary vtentem ea quam admiror
Academicos, Aulae, and libidini daeditos: nunc oblitos rerum suarum,
studiorumque eorum quae diligentissime, non ita pridem amauerunt, tenuisse: sed
sobrietate grauitatem, humanitate diuinitatem, and opera magnaliaque Dei
declarauisse. Te hortor: and a hiisce illaecebrisdehortari volo, quas procul
dubio praese tulit nature impetus. Tu vero natus generosa stirpe, generosissime
progredi cupiuisti: Absens etiam matter tua, videt cuncta quae facis apud nos:
eam opportuno tempore videbis: sic enim videris mihi, terram relinquere, illam
petere: quae extincta iam diu, reddetur factis tuis gloriosa. Ego vero tua
legens, recreor vt possum maxim, cupiens fieri tui similis: Et me cum negotia
humana mea, a delectatione Theologorum a vocauerunt, fecerunt tamen in eo
studio alacriorem. Tu (mi Keltridge) vtere faelicitate tua: Si quam es nactus
labor studiorum tuorum dignitatem, eam Deus optimus maximus benignitate sua
faciet meliorem. Nosque postulauimus eum hominem videre iam diu apud nos, quem
Respub. commendauit. Quae si ingrata sit, vti audio, vbi iam es solitus
rusticari: Scias velim, fore eam inuidiam non tibi soli, sed communem etiam
grauibus viris: Nec haec vniuersorum vox est: Iam enim versaris in Tusculano:
sed partem Respub. sibi optimam, deteriorem rudiores* ipsis seruauerunt.
Equidem scio dixisse aliquo spatio recreare velle te, idque rure: Non ego tibi
facilis esse poteram, qui ipsi tibi iniuriam feceras: Quae enim te improuisa
negotia a Matre tua auocauerunt? Si Remp. cupis, stat ea ipsa sine te: si quid
aliud petis: petere potueris, difficile est videre quod velis: Tu fato vtare
tuo licebit: si quod sit fatum fateri perpeti te quod patiarts. Sin vero pudeat
te tui, nec absentibus nobis, audeas in re planadicere, quod scias, te ipsa
fatie videamus: quanquam (hoc namque scio) dolores omnes, tuaque onera,
confectio huius libri, laepos, iucunditas, lectioque rerum optimarum, vnaa
labores tuos obsorbuerunt: Aut auium cantus, pratorum viriditas, camporumque
amaenitas, ipsaque deambulatio subcessiuis temporibus habita (sic enim es
solitus iocari) plane scio, hilarem fortemque efficerunt. Sin minus, cum te
viderimus, hilarem laetumque, si quo modo possumus, fatiemus: Tu vt
consueuisti, velim literis and scientia progrediare: vt quam spem Acadaemicis
nobis, dignitatem familijs tuis, honorem tibi ipsi peperisti: Eum omnem
exercitio, studio, eloquentiaque tua* and laijdabilimorum virtutum que
comitatu, vna cum peritia, and mirifico laepore tuo, exercitatione, scripto,
tum etiam elegantia, vrbanitate, linguarum varietate, ipso cantu, and orationis
suauitate, seruare tibi posse videare. Vale.

Tuus. Thomas Numannus.
Cantabrigia. Iunij. 2. 1578.
I.R. Cantabrigiensis, Artium Magister, Authori.
SI tibi religio cordi est, si vota precesque,
En, quas, caelesti detulitarce Deus.
Si cupis ex animo, pietatem discere veram,
Ecce, tibi christus Ludimagister adest.
Commoda si quaeras, animae tibi commoda monstrat
Hic liber, hic sanctae pabula mentis erunt.
Anne voluptatem iucundaque munera poscis
Munera, quae longos sunt habitura dies.
Ex hoc font fluent auidae solamina menti
Sola fuos famulos quae sine fine beant.
Scriptores alij lucri fallacis amore,
Diuulgant animi damna pudenda sui.
Applausum plebis, multorum scripta, requirunt,
Mobile iudicium mobile vulgus, habet.
Multorum Italicis turgescit pagina fumis
Nomen habet libri, non habet artis opus.
Hos Venus eneruat, Venerisque obscaena libido
Plena est deliris impia Musa iocis.
Aspice quam multas vendit vernacula nugas
Lingua, quibus species nulla pudoris inest.
Incumbit lassis infoelix sarcina praelis,
Equibus exitij dira venena fluunt.
At tu Keltrigi diuerso tramite curris,
Scribis: at in scriptis stat Deus ipse tuis.
Et legis, ast, ea quae Christi dictata, legebas
Ante, fidem, mores, dogmata sana, preces.
Enarras? at quae te iussit spiritus, ergo
Macte age, virtutem quaelibet ansamouet.
Gloria sit Christi, populi sit fructus, at ista
Laudis, and ingenij sint monumenta tui.
FINIS.
The exposition and Readynges: of John Keltridge: upon these words of our
Savior Christ, that be written in the.xj. of Luke.
The text.
1. And it fortuned, Luke. 11
as he was praying in a certain place, when he had ceased: one of his
Disciples said unto him. Lord teach us to pray as John also taught his
disciples. And he said unto them, when you pray, say:

2. O our Father which art in Heaven:

3. Hallowed be thy name.

4. Thy Kingdom come.

5. Thy will be fulfilled, even in Earth also, as it is in Heaven.

6. Our daily bread give us this day.

7. And forgive us our sins, for even we forgive every man that offends us:

8. And lead us not into temptation.

9. But deliver us from evil.


THe Church and society of the faithful, it has bin from the beginning, and
as from the first moulde whereon we were fashioned, so till the last hour when
the Lord will call us unto a reckning, he will daily foster and maintain such
as fear his name. For which cause the family of the Lord, and of those that
believe and call on him faithfully, have in espetiall received two manner of
ordinances, given directly from God since the first creation. The first is the
knowledge of him and of his word. The second, the manner of prayer and of
calling on the Lord: wherein I do exempte and seuar from the Church, all fond
and counterfeit illusions, crept in by the vanity and superstition of men. For
as he that made and created all, was partner with no man in that singular
work of his. So is it not to be permitted, that any one should have that
glory, which is due only to his Majesty. Therefore he has sealed up as proper
to his several use, all manner of adoration, all invocation and ernest
affection of the spirit, neither has he given liberty to the Sons of men,
to use it any otherwise, then in his name: the certaynty whereof is known in
this, for that our Savior Christ, has given by his coming unto man, (...)
things as keys to open and shut the Gates of Heaven. His Gospel wherein the
everlasting God is known, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent: together
with our duty and feruency, and the use thereof, as the uniting of us all in
both the sacraments. So that of these as of a sweet savor, do the odours cum
up out of that golden Censar, which offer and present them selves before his
Throne, the prayers of his Saints. Wherefore I have above all other, as one
albeit in the greenenes of my days (peradventure also rawnes of time) far
unmeet to discern so great a matter. Yet made choice especially of this, that
a plain and perfect way may be known wherein to walk. For that every one is
ready to come unto the Alter, and many in these days think them selves
discharged, come they to the Temple to hear Elyas. And this veil it is taken
away more easily, as we be readier to serve God sinsearly. But if any man
think I have done him injury, in decidinge this I appeal to the Book of God
to try it. In whose name, I require all such as fear his Majesty, and love
the truth, to give me liberty to use my speech oue hour or two: Then shall
he seem very Christianly bente, when he examineth all things by the word of
the Lord, or lives so all the days of his life, that prayinge devoutly, he
pray unfeignedly: or crauinge needely, he do it neighbourly: or askinge
earnestly it be done brotherly in all his dealings.

The occasion of these words of our Savior Christ, was taken of a question
moved of his Disciples, namely how and after what manner it was expedient to
pray? And this, it was drawn from the custom and ordinance of the disciples
of John: so that these few lines have two things in general therein contained.
First, a demand or request of his disciples. Next an answer or replye, to
the peticion of his said scholars. Both which give me occasion to divide or
make distribution of the same words: for in the demand or request of his
disciples, is contained an entrance or pathway unto prayer, which you shall
find to be only handled in this first piece of this work, and as for the
answer of Christ, that, it is now too long to stand upon: for a brief
exposition with the meaning thereof, it is to be looked for, in the second
part of this Book. The knowledge how to pray, with the demand or question,
has these four pieces, severally divided by themselves.

1. Whether we have need of prayer or not? 2. What prayer is? 3. What kinds
or manner of prayer there be? 4. How to prepare our selves to prayer?
Causes that we have need of Prayer are these.

FIrst, the expres word of God that commands us to pray. The question is
when? and it must be always, as Mat. 7.7. Luke 18.1. Romans 12.12. Ephesians. 6.18.
Colos. 4.2. 1. Tim. 2.8. Pro. 18.23. 1. These. 5.17. Psalm. 50.

The second cause that we have need of prayer is showen in the examples of
our forfathers in the Law, and before the Law, according to the will of God
that ought to move us: of Abell. Genesis 4.4. of Seth. Genesis 4.26. of Noe. Genesis
6.6. and Genesis 8.22.

In this age men are not said to have so full knowledge of God, only to have
sacrifised, and called on God, and not by the word praying. Albeit it was not
without intercession. But in the days of Abram, afterward called Abraham, the
way and manner of calling on the name of God, is most lively expressed, as Genesis
22.8. Genesis 13.4. Therefore also had Abraham, the commendation of the Lord, in
the training and bringing up of his youth and household, as Genesis 18.19. So
Abraham his servant prayed, when he went to get his Masters Son a Wife,
from Caran of Mesopotamia, of the house of Nicor. Genesis 24.12. So Isaac went
out to pray in the eueninge, verse. 63. After this began the word of God to be
more fully known unto our fathers. He was not only more openly worshipped,
but more reverently and duly honored. For Moses prayed forty days and forty
nights. Deuteronomy. 9.25. Also for his Sister Mary, stricken with a leoprosie, for
that she rebelled against her Brother. Numb 12 13. Therefore also God
commanded Iosuah, to meditate in the book of his Law: day and night. Iosuah.
1.8. After which time they of Israel gave them selves to more earnest
obedyence, and more pure and sinceare reverence of his Majesty: Great men,
aunciant Matrons, Kings, and Princes loved him faithfully, called on his name
constantly, signified their homage and obedyence openly. Hanna wife unto
Helcana, in the sight of the Priest. 2. Sam. 1 Debora and Barack. Iud. 5.1.
Judith in the misery and calamytie of her Citezens. 13.2. And David sanctified
the name of him that was Almighty, and asked council of the Lord God 2. Sam.
5. by Abiathar the high Preeste. After that he daunced before the Ark of God. 2. Sam. 6. Then at the blessinge received of Nathan with the certeinty of
his kingedome, with an aunsweare of the house he would have builte: he went
in, and sat before the Lord, and worshipped. 2. Sam. 7.18: so did Solomon,
even in the royaltye and statelynesse of his Princes. Offering up burnt
offerings, and trespass offerings and consecrating the Temple newly dedicated. 2.
Kings. 8.22. stood before the Alter in the sight of the congregation, and
stretched out his hands toward Heaven. In the same manner Christ prayed for
us. Ioh. 16.26. and 17.9. and 20. He prays also for Peter. Luke 22.32. Paull
prays without ceasinge. 1. These. 1.2. He prays in the Temple. Act. 22.17.
He fasteth and prays. Act. 14.23. So that Ideines banished, slothe
abolished, our minds strengthened: In desiring readynes, in praying steadines,
in believing perfectnes, can not, but they must thoroughly cupple us and chain
us to the Lord, make us ready by the examples of our Predecessors, and of God
himself, to obaye and praise him.

The third cause, is, The necessity of man that needs all things, for what
have we, that we have not from the Lord. Meat to nourish us: apparel to
clothe us: the Sun to comfort us: the Moon to pleasure us: ye Stars in their
brightness: the Summer in his gallantnes: the Springtyde in his pleasantness,
all comes from the Lord.

The fourth cause is, The danger and perrill wherein we be, so often times
fallinge, so often slyppinge, so continually transgressing the will of the
highest. At our birthe very unwilling to enter into these miseries, yet
tasting of the vanities and delights of the flesh, we choke up the good gifts
of God, and are daily wayed down, with greater encomberaunces. If we look up
to Heaven, the glory and furniture thereof condempneth us, for they run out
their race, and keep their appointed circuit, as men of war, prepared unto
battle, they never retire back uncrowned. Man only among them that have
reason, very unreasonable, always rebelleth and reasons with God. If we
turn our eyes to see the earth, the creatures therein, they curse the state of
man, and groan to be at liberty, acknowledginge our fall, and seeinge the
dishonor whereunto we be come, that standinge so surely, waver now so
brickelly, and living happily, are now feign to misery: decayinge not stayinge,
till he that sit above in the Heavens renew again our former state, and bring
us holme to life. Therefore pray without intercession, that the god of glory may
recompense those that be his, at his appearing.

The fifth cause is, The deliverance by the Lord, that other wise wear
helpless. For as they whose bones were wearied in Aegipt, Exo. 5.16.
whose sinews and ioyncts were benommed with making brick, that could get no
stubble and straw to burn their Clay, that had little rest and small quiet,
until God appointed his messenger, sent his servants in signs and wonders to
reskew them. So we, if blessedness come not from the strength of Israel, and
quietness from him that loved Jacob, and a pleasant look from him that erecteth
the Hill of Sion, and deliverance from Christ, and strength from God: neither
can we, neither may we, neither ought we, to hope for any safety whatsoever.
The Lord our God, he is a man of war, his name is Jehovah: he scatters
the Charyots in his wrath, he sends out lightning in his fury, he chastneth
his enemies as a valiant champion, and battereth in pieces the bulworkes of
the wicked: so excelent is he, and so kind a Lord, unto such as fear him,
that trouble, persecution, death it self is conquered, where he helps us:
anguish of mind, and penury be common messengers, where he assaulteth us.

The sixth cause is, and the last. The Diuil and Sathanas, that assayeth
continually, and works craftily, to bereave us of the honor we look for,
from the Lord. That subtly prenenteth us, watchfuly intangleth us: so
deceiptfully snareth us, to drive us from our God. He has a number at his
beck, as Pages to wait on us. Servant he has great store at his
commandment to withdraw us: espyes he appoynteth to ransacke our dooinges,
the more easily to betray us. For he is the prince of this world, he rules
cheeflye. Ephesians. 2.2. Ioh. 12.31. Many ways he may ouerreatch us, for diverse
he his pretenses, pleasant he his fetches to entrap us, when reason is
exiled, and she has lost her seat: when Wisdom is banished, and content to
seek out an other corners to harbor in: when the pleasauntnes of the brain,
and finenes of thy wit is fled away. When thy young days are gone, and the
greenenesse of thy youth wythered up. When wantonness has rushed out, and thou
thy self warest dim: when strength fails thee, and thy stout and
courragious men are feign to bough, and the Elements can feed thee no longer,
and thou laid in thy Pauilion, and thy Tente pitched in the ground, thy body
laid unto the earth, and thy spirit in his power that gave it thee: shall he
not give a shrewde assault and lay unto thy charge, and vpbrayde thee with thy
misdeeds, that has so long a time accused our brethren day and night before
the Lord? Reu. 12.10. If he spared not Iehosuah the heighe Preeste, Zach. 3.2.
standinge before the Angel of the Lord. But suffered rebuke at the hands of
the Mediator, and as yet cease not to vere his saints. The only way that
we have to avoid him, is by our intercession and prayer to the Lord, offered
up in golden vessels before our God, to make an Attonment for our sins: and
hear is sumwhat to be consithered also.

For there is two kinds of prayer one of good men, of evil me^ another

Full dear in the sight of the Lord, is the prayers of his saints, and his
ears are open unto their cryinge, who is there that has failed that put his
trust in the Lord? or has he despised the sighinge of a contrite heart. Then
to put a difference in this world of those that be Gods, and of such as be
not. Certain there be, whose moan and gronings the Lord God regards, other
there be whom he contemns. Abraham when Lot his brother, was taken by the
five Kings, Genesis 14.16
persued the Chase, armed his young men, went down to battle, was hard of
God, and won the feelde. But Ahab, though Iehosaphat were with him, and
helped him, 2. Kings. 22.35.
though his peticion was for victory, yet he had the overthrow. His Prophets
begiled, and Micheah his prayer hard, and he saved: a difference there was,
betwixt Abell his offeringes, and the offeringe of Cayen. And God appeared
unto Laban in Astonishment to warn him, when he hasted after Jacob, his wife
and his servant. But to Jacob in Bethell, when he lay a sleep and leaned on
the Stone, in great excellency and majesty, appeared he to comfort him.
David his prayer for the people, when he numbered them: was contrary to Saul
his peticion of the Lord, when he went to the inchauntresse to aid him. And
as Husay his council the Arachite, was more precious to his Lord, then was
that of Ahitophell: so be the prayers of Saints, then of Hipocrits: and of
the good, then of wicked, and of the poor in heart, then of dissemblers. Al
give not ear to Moses, some die with Scorpions. The Manhu it nourished not
alike, for to some it is destruction in the eatinge: there is one Iesabell
among the Princes: one Nabal among the Israelits: one Ismael in Abraham's
house: one Absolon in David's Court: so is there many Hipocrits among me^. Some
evil clusters among Grapes: some Briers among trees: some Nettels among
herbs: some Darnell among corn: some Cockle among wheat: and some wicked
among good. The Sea it has the Saphirre, and the Diamonde, and the Emeroide,
and it has the Pupil Stones, and it has the stately Fish, and the thin
and tender Barcks, as well as great and mighty ships. The earth it self has
many children, and from her breasts come diverse Twins, yet be they not alike.
The woods they have their Pine, their Peatche, their Elm, their Apple, their
Ciprus, and their Cedrus, the Violet, and the Cristolet, it has the Brom, it
has the Nut, it has the Crab: and so has God, he has the good, he has
the bad. The Heavens they make but one compass, they draw their train alike,
and very gloriously they enclose with like countenance all such as dwell on
earth: Yet tell me which of them treads like steps as other do? or
runs not swiftly, or flies speedely, or bends crookedly, or windeth
narrowly, or praunseth not forth more valiauntly, or else retireth wearely, or
mou^teth not forth more greedely? Again to we not wonder at the Son, that
leads the forefronte of the battle, with his glittering armor? whom the
moon follows with contrary attire, the Ringeleader and Mistress of the
night: upon whom there wayteth such a number of fair damsels, every one
having so several a countenance, that each man may know their dispositions,
their way unto their houses is so contrary. Then let man alone, for he has
diverse children: and let him that is above work in man, for sundry be his
benefittes, and let us submit our selves unto the hands of God that guides us.
For as out of the Eden goes a Kiuer that waters the Garden, and is divided
into four heads. And as Phishon compasses the land of Hauilah where there is
good Gold, where the Bdelium and the Onix Stone is: the other springes do run
to other Cuntryes, wherein we can not find so precious Iewele: even so is man
divided by the Lord: some bordering as it were at the mouth of Eden, sauer of
more fine, and better metal, then they of Aethiopia do. Others be content
with base and homly Gold: the third kind it sauoreth of that which is more
gross and brickle then the rest. The fourth is so far from heat, that very
little which is good is found there. And so fares it with man, sometimes the
word is choked up, it is scattered among thorns: often times it takes root,
but it is blasted suddenly, the Sun scorcheth it, it seldom brings forth
fruit, so hard and stony is the heart of man that receives it. Therefore the
Pharesay he prayed, Luke 1^.
and set up his bristles against the Lord, despising the publican that looked
up to Heaven, and set abroad his works to be seen of men, I like not those
Philatharies, upon the skirtes of thy garments, and thy giuinge of alms they
be not pleasant to the Lord: for Trompets are blown before thee, and thou
sit in the sinogogues, Math. 6.
and in the corners of streets, to be seen of men, thy prayers are long,
thy talk is much, and thy tongue it spends many hours in vanities,
repeatinge diverse prayers as the heathen do, but thou have thy reward, for the
Lord loves the purity of the soul, and the integryte of the heart is burnt
sacrifise, so that at length we may shut up this piece and return to some
other for seeing that good and bad are among men, and for that all think they
pray aright when they go wrong, I have sought out an other way: even for him
that will be godly, to be godly still, and have appointed out a more perfect and
orderly manner then this is wherein every one that is good, will be busied. Now
then having sumthing roughly handled this my first piece of this work, I crane
of you to hear the rest. For that which follows is grosser a great deal, and
not so fine as that even now came out of Eden, and this our cuntry it has not
so well bin tilled of late, neither have men so regarded their wealth, as there
they do: but such as it is I give it you, and a better care, may happily
aforde some better fruit, and now we proceed to the second part: namely to
search out what prayer is. What prayer is thought to be among the learned.


As of a Letter by wrighting to a friend, such is the force of prayer in
speaking to God, whereof I may determine mutch, but now content to say little:
prayer is thought to be a talking with the Lord, and a communinge of him that
is faithful in spirit, with God above, requiring at his pleasure that which
is good and profitable for him: and praying for aid to help him, In. Lucam.
or grace to relieve him, if ought may or do happen that is not commodious. M.
Gualter calls it a talk or speech with God. Quia orationis loco minime
habentur nuda verba, quae ore aut labijs proferuntur, nisi ex animo fide
praedito, et certa spe in dei auxilium erecto procedant. In comment. in psalm.
135.
Arnobius, the Rhetoritian in Africa when he lived, after Christ three hundred
and thirty, brought from Panisme unto Christianity, used very often to pray,
and left a testimon^e thereof in his book as follows. His intercession it
cannot perish and be of no force, that has promised in earth to hear us. And
if we cease not in praying, how can he be flow in hearing? Lactan. lib. 6.
cap. 13.
His scholar Lactantius as Ierom records, trained up at Rome, was not of so
sound a judgment in this, as was his master. That supposes us if we ask
any thing of God, to be tempted of God: to know thereby if we be thereof
worthy.

Chromatius Bishop of Aquileia, In concion. de octo beau citud.
may well abide the toutchstone herein, that binds Prayer to have his only
success by faith. As for Epiphanius of Eleutherapolis in Palaestine, his
doings they be very pleasant, and his writings exquisite: he has also bin
a witness how we should walk in prayer before the Lord, Lib. 1. Tom. 1.
haeres. 66.
his judgment is to call on God, only one true and perfect Lord, and on
Christ the Son of God with the spirit proceeding from them both. And that
rare man of God, then whom Stridon in the borders of Dalmatia and Pannonia, In
comment. in Esaias. cap. 62.
saw never as yet a perfecter. Ierom I mean so much allowed, determines of
this, very wisely: whose admonition I would it were ingrafted in us to the
full, or else I would that grave father lived now, whose look and countenance
might withdraw us from our vanities: his mild and sugared speech, is not
unlike to this. Cease not to pray continually, and give not place unto the
Lord: in season and out of season, and be importunate upon him even as that
widow is, to that same unjust steward, that hard the stony judge, who
oftentimes withdrew him self. This Ierom is he that so often, if chance
afordeth, and I have to deal with him, rauisheth me so suddenly, that I hardly
leave him. For this cause, his neat and pleasant style, requires me to
taste of one or two more of his sayings. It follows in the same place not
far of: If he gives to him that asks, if he finds that seeks, if he
opens when one knocks, it appears he will not be slow to him
requires. And therefore he promises a reward already for such as demand, and
says Ierom: This Gate wherein the just man does enter is such a one, wherein
are hidden a number of pleasant and delicate things, to him that seeks them.
Diverse there be that of late, and now also have writ hereof, how to ^^me unto
Christ: but in this place I take the fathers, for they are sound, and very
strong in this, and very good, whose cumly age I must reverence, in that the
younger forte, and we also even in these last years, are beighly bounden to
them: so that small cause there is for any to repent him of readinge them,
whose diligence has brought to pass, that we with less pain, may teach
ours.

Julius Firmicus Maternus, In fragmen. de errore prophanar. relig.
under the Emperor Constantine and his Sons, an Astrologian at the first,
and so it seems still: for he clymeth up very hie and mounteth to the
Heavens: neither looks he for any man's help in his prayers, he is raised
upward to God, he suffers no man to be called on, but the name only of
Christ. The manner also and condition of prayer is seen plentifully, in that
same borne at Africa a very worthy man of God, Caius Marius Victorinus,
reckoned of Ierom, among them of his number and Catalouge, worthy and famous
wrighters. For beside that ever he did on the Articles of faith, or else in the
pain he took against Heretics, no where does he seem to have delte
precisely and more warely, then in his opinion of prayer, acknowledging Christ
to be sufficient and the only true bread from Heaven to feed us. De oratione,
Lib. 2.
There comes now unto my hand, a man (of truth scase worthy the naming among
the Fathers) for his so vile and evil dealinge, and as you may know him, a
Cinnick, fitter for the staff and the shacky hear, then to judge of Religion,
borne at Alexandria, at what time Gregory Nazianzen taught at Constantinople,
he was brought to Cristianitee by preachinge. This Maximus Aegiptius by his
wilye sleights having gotten many from Byantius, corrupted one Peter Bishop of
Alexandria, and created this Aegiptius Bishop. Yet this man, otherwise a
faithful steward in the house of God, whrot many good books. I therefore take
his well meaning mind of prayer even especially against the wicked, De
oratione Lib. 4. ca. 86
ye they may know that a wicked man has taught them to pray often, his
readynes was seen in this, for that he instructed all flesh to pray
continually: he adioyneth his reason in an other place. The sedulyte and
forwardnes of a man calling on the Lord, Lib. 4. ca. 35.
(if it he done rightly) is that which commends the soul of man: spoken as
I think, to stir up the sloth in us, to pighte us a place in Heaven, where the
soul of man rests. The lively exposition thereof is well noted, in that he
debarreth us from all manner contemplations in the earth, he leaves no room
for the thoughts of man in time of prayer, no not so mutch as to think of him
that hurt thee, or of thy enemy, but freely to lay aside all grudginges,
debates, strifes, enimyties, Lib. 3. ca 49
to repose one only hope in God. And I like his reason well, and it is allowed in
the Book of God, for that our praying it is a quieting of our minds: so that
it appears by all those that went before, that terror should strike us, for
we speak to God, that the world must forsake us, for we seek heaven: the
body leave us for we speak in spirit: our wealth must not trouble us, our
treasure is above, nor our enemies grieve us, for we are friends with Christ.

On this our prayer, there is depending two things: Two things that be wayters
upon him that prays.
the first is calling upon him. The second is geuinge of thanks unto him. If
thou ask to wholme, it is? it is to God. If through wholme? it is through
Christ? if ye mean to him, it is faith: if wherein? in is his bloodsheading and
death. Therefore Paull, Colos. 4.2.
continue in pr^ier, and watch in the saine with thanks giving, prayinge for
us, that God may open unto us the Door of utterance, to speak the mystery of
Christ. For even now do we see our full redemption, if calling on the Lord,
we repose our trust in the only mediator Jesus Christ, the Son of God,
being nothing careful but that in all things we let our requests be showed
unto God, in prayer and supplication with giving thanks. For he is the God of
peace which does keep our minds and hearts in Christ Jesus. Philip. 4.6.
That we must pray you have hard: what prayer is, I have set down, suffer
me (though breefely) but to know how we must use it, and so we shall
discharge our d^tye more fully. Ephraem, a Sirian, for so is he called by
Theoderet, in an homely of prayer, reckoned among the^ of Caesarius, has
given a very good light to this our question. Let says he thy calling on the
Lord be as that which was of Hanna, Mother unto Samuel, that sat weeping in
spirit, and groneing, and that was meek and mild in heart not seen of men,
not gased upon of others. That same Ephraem has yet gonne farther in this, he
searches out more narrowly, the dealinges of the world and preuenteth that
same glorious pomp in our professors, that lay open their thoughts, and ripp
up their cogitacions to be seen of men. with which kind of people I profess
my self mutch to have dealt withal, and glad I am it pleased God to let me
have sight of such in these my young days, for that I may beeware the better
in ryper years. But his council it is not to pray for our selves but for
all, even such as be Christians and of the Lord: and not for our friends but
even for those that hate us. I think he has sufficiently glaunced at our
Anabaptists, that beside their error in mislyking our manner of prayer
(holdinge with none but such as is framed and ordered by them) intertayne but
little order in the Church, but careless in life, and suspected in their dealing,
make the Gospel a covering, and the word a cloak to dissemble with: regard
such as favor them: presume to appoincte the elect of the Lord at their
several judgments: pray for such as be of their Church: keep secret the
dealinges of ungodly men: (least their profession and calling be dishonested)
as though David could not offend, or Abraham transgress the will of God, (be
it reverently spoken and with fear) but the Church of God should suffer
Shipwreck for it. I speak as one moved, and sorry I am that I am at holme.
And this sore, it is so festred and writhed already into the hearts of men, that
an Iron to sear it is better the^ a plaster to mollefy it with. And if God
do not give an other spirit, or dalyaunce be deferred as yet it is: I have at
this time but looked at them, if God permit, and leisure serve, and these
outrageous enemyties still continue, I am not purposed to leave them so rawly.
But ouerslipping my self I have plunged unadvisedly to come so near us: truly
so it may be. For better a great deal is it to keep him that is abroad, and
strike the enemy, then to rushe upon our friends that be at holme. And yet
not so, nor so wisely neither if we consider all. For it is wisdom to cut of
him in thy own Camp first, if so thy liberty permits thee: and then to
wrestle with the forraner: but content I am, and I strive not now: I will arm
my self against some other time. Only let them take heed they come not
nearer, for if they do, though now they be without reatch: yet Pen, Ink, and
Paper, shall never spare them: well to leave this of our disordered and crooked
dealing, let us approtche to that which is more pleasant, and fruitful, then
is this: and if thou will pray, and pray aright, pray thus.

First in spirit Ephe. 6.8. Jude. 20. Our order and manner in praying.
and in many other places: the reason hereof is. For that the man always
occupied in his traficke, is not able to use the body, the ioynctes, the
lymmes, the outward gesture, as other does, whose leisure suffers them to
pray at all times: but even this is required in him, as in all other, to lift
up himself, to erecte and rear him up, in soul, in spirit in heart unto the
Lord: that the affairs and dealings in this world overcome thee not.

Secondly, in faith. Math. 2.12, Mark. 11.23. Ioh. 15.7. Iam. 1.6. and the
5.15. Ephe. 3.12. Ephe. 2.8. and else wheare. For as God has left unto us, all
manner of instruments to work by, as he has given us a mean and way on
earth, to labor by, as man has his several manner to inritch him with: So
for the spiritual affairs, for thy work, for thy way, for thy labor, for
thy custom to attain thy honor with all, is theare of us all, as common unto
all, one only instrument which is says.

Thirdly it must be done, in the name of Christ alone, where in is secluded
all manner worship and invocation either of Saints, either of men, either of
creature on the earth. That prayer used of them in Aegipt to Isis, so named of
the glory which they saw in the Moon. Also they of Athens that worshipped the
unknown God. Acts. 20. As they which were at Rome, that served Minerua,
Pallas, Juno, Hereules with the rest, diversely invented by the Ethnickes: All
else whatsoever, they be condemned by this, for it ought to be in ye name of
Christ, the reason is: that we take it not as a charactar, or fondly for the
repeating thereof, as that there should be any forse and virtue in it. But
these be the causes for which we are charged and enjoined to think that we
have salvation in the name of Christ.

The first cause for which we pray, in the name of Christ.

For that he only forgiueth sins. Math. 9.2. Acts. 10.43. Romans 8.4. 1.
Cor. 5.18. Ephe. 1.7. and the fourth, the thirteenth verse: otherwise we might
pray to the Block and to the stone, and to the thing that creeps, and
profits us not. For what advantage had we in sorrowing all the days of our
life, and in the end when the wrinckels in our sace appears, and the
messenger does his duty and cites us before the Lord, then we be still in
death, and life is kept from us? then this is the end bereof. Namely that our
transgressio^s may be hid, and our sins covered, and that we may have
remission of the same, and life eternal; which is the first cause we pray in
the name of Jesus Christ.

The second, for that he is the way, the truth, and the life: Ioh. 14.5. and
26. Ioh. 11.2. Ioh. 14 6. Acts. 3.15.1. Ioh. 1.2.1. Ioh. 5.11. Colos. 3.4. By
this we are secluded from all licentious liberty of the Gentilles: from all
invention of man: from all fond, and phanatical illutions. For if we seek
for lyse? we have it in Christ, that dyed for us to bring us, out of death.
If for a guide? we have the spirit that will conducte us in the right way, and
lead us to his Father: if the truth? there was no blemish found on his lips,
nor deceypt in his tongue, and he brought in the truth the Gospel of his
Father, and the word of life, kept secret from the beginning of the world, and
revealed in these latter days unto the sons of men wherefore we need to
seek no farther, we have all things wrought in Christ.

The third, for that he is the accomplishment and end of the law. This may
seem little to apperfayn to us: but when we consider ye by the law came in
death, and by the fulfillinge of the law came deliverance from death: it may
appear what a glorious God, he was, and most victorious, that has overcome
the sharpenes thereof, and vanquished the power of the Devil: that kept this
as a handwrighting against man, that of himself was never able to fulfill it,
wherefore we pray in the name of Christ, for that he has abolished the
strength and force of sin, and finished the manifold rites and ordinances
required therein: who was the only end and fulfiller of them all, Mat. 5.17.
Romans 10.4.

The fourth, for that he is our Master, or Lord whom we ought to hear.
Math. 17.5. and 23.8. Mark 9.7. Ioh. 13.13. Acts. 3.22.

The fifth, for that he is King and prince of kings. Math. 12.9. and 27.11.
Luke. 1.33. Ioh. 1.40. and 12.15. Revel. 1.5. and 11.19.

The firte, for that he can call, he can heal, and he can comfort sinners.
Math. 2.21. and.9.13. and 11.28. and 18.10. Luke. 4.19 and 19.10.1 Timo. 1.15.

The seventh, for that he is the searcher of the heart Math. 9.22. Luke. 6.8.
and 11.17. and 9.47. Ioh. 2.24. Hebrew. 4.13. Revel. 2 23.

The eight, for that he only is Lord. Math. 22.43. Luke. 2 11. Ioh. 12.13.
Pro. 28. Acts. 9.5. and 10.48 1 Cor. 2.8. and 8.6. and 12.3. and Ephesians. 4.1.
Philem. 2.11. Revel. 17.14.

The ninth, for that he only is savior. Math. 1.21. Luke. 1.32. Ioh. 3.16.
and 4.24. Acts, 40.12. 1. Tim. 1.15.1. Ioh. 4.9.

The tenth and the last, for that he is only mediator and advocate for man.
Math. 11.27. Ioh 10.9. and 14 6. Acts. 4 22. Romans 5.1. and 8.34. Ephesians. 2.18.
and 3.12.1. Tim 2.5. Heb. 7.27. and 6.6. and 9.15. and 12 24. and. 13.15.1.
Ioh. 2.1.

THus mutch to debar man from the authority that he looked for, that having
our true faith fired on the Lord, reposing our hope in Christ, calling upon his
name, all invocation upon Saints, all homage and reverence, they claim as
due unto Peter, the dignity and superiority to the Virgin Mary, all
prerogative falsely attributed by the Papists unto Images with other the
ofskourings, and imaginations whatsoever of man usurped against the Majesty
of our God, is altogether clipped of. So that we may come before his
judgment seat, and claim a right and title, for that we be heirs in his
Christ: we be cleansed, and purged and renewed in him, our sins are wiped and
washed in his blood. He it is that directs us in the iourny and wearisome
Pilgrimage, we have to go in: he guardeth us by the spirit in truth, whom
the Pr^phets prefigured before, and the Book of God did forsignifie to come on
earth: that is Lord and King over all, and has conquered Hell, death, the
Devil, and the world, that has led captiuety captive, and given gifts unto
men: that calls us at his pleasure, and heals us if at any time we surfett
in ye vanities of the flesh, and he does fatherly comfort us if by diseases
we be pestered, or swollen with infirmities, which often times do so bubble
up in the hearts of men, that never it is, or rather rare and very seldom
feene, that ye co^tagiousnes within us may or can be healed. This is the same
christ that searches the hearts and reins that be thou in the height above,
or in the depth below, be thou in thy closet, or in thy secret chaumber, yet
knows he thy doings, he examineth thy deeds, he tries the heart and
immagination of man, and wayeth out thy life by thy faith. For he rydeth upon
the Cherubins, and his wings are spread on the whole face of the earth, he
comes out as a Gyaunt to run his course, and valiauntly does he run out in
his displeasure, and the Hills, the mountains, the lambs and the little
sheep, they leap and hopp at the sight of the Majesty of our God: which only
saves us, only protecteth us guides us alone, and is intercessor for us,
bought us with a dear price, the price of blood, and debased for our
infirmities under Pontius Pilate (even of his love to man) gave up his life
into his Fathers hands, and was seen again above men, and took up our flesh
with him into Heaven at his glorious ascendinge, and sits at the right hand
of his Father, a mediator and intercessor for man that only pacefieth the wrath
of God, in wholm both Jew and Gentil, both Gretian and Barbarian has
remission of sins, on whose name we must call, in whom we must trust, upon
whose shoulders is laid the weakness of our flesh, in whom we must believe,
even in Jesus Christ the Son of God, equal with his Father in power, in
dignity, in majesty, in deiete, to whom belongs glory for ever and for ever.
Ioh. 17.
This is the true Christian faith, to believe thee only true Lord, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. Having at length drawn out the full proportion
almost, the heigh, stature, and cumlynes of such a man as fears God, we may
now return again to the second part of this work. For ouerslipping our
selves a little in so deep a mystery of the Lord and his Christ, I have
prolonged my speech of that I took in hand at the first: Too finish up then
this Treatise as our prayer it is in the name of Christ, so discreatly, must it
and very orderly be done, debasing our selves and laying down that hawtines
of courage, the man of this world, boasting and bragginge of good woorks, and
attire our selves with more spiritual and perfect apparel then that is: and
this garment it must never be put of, but we ought to wear it as comely and
decente clothing even unto the Grave. For intermission will not be suffered in
those that be the Lords, but our prayinge it must be continually by
perseueringe therein. Luke 1^.8. and 16.1. and 21.36. Acts. 2.14. Romans 2.12.
Ephesians. 6.16. Colos. 4.2. Pet. 4.7. neither have I opened such a door I hope to
panisme, that any man mistakinge me, shall use the house, the field, the
Temple, the streat, the open air, and the day and the night alike. No, I leave
a time to work, a time to play, a time to labor, a time to rest, a time to
pray, a time to cease from praying. For the lifting up of thy hands, thy
reverence downward to the ground, thy howlinge and shreaking in the Temple, thy
knockinge and belowinge at the Alter, thy bent knees, they be some times
tokens of Ipocresy as christianitee. But I say, if place and time (though never
out of time to pray) can be done without gazing on of men, and truly and
duly. with no affected praise of worldlings. I do appoint thee all times. For
I will, that thou pray always, lifting up pure hands without wrath, without
doubtinge. 1. Tim. 2.
This place I do express it more willingly, for that of late, I know some
that have, though presisely, Precise men often^imes ^nvvise men.
yet not so wisely intercepted no time, no occation, no season, no hour, but
in sighing and groneing by open tokens of their inward thoughts, have
ouerslipped no opertunitye, to show their affectioned minds vuto religion. To
avoid all inconveniences, this of Paul and of Christ, to pray every wheare with
out ceasing, I take thus. The first I understand as that. 1. Cor. 2. That there
is now no difference betwixt the Jew and the Gentill, the Barbarian and the
Graetian, because God is father to them all. And now in Christ is that of
Malachy brought to pass, that not in Judea only, but in all the world
sacrifise and burnt offerings shall be offered up unto the Lord. And that of
Christ to the Woman of Samaria accords with this. Ioh. 4.
Art thou greater then our Father Jacob that gave us this Well, and he
himself drank thereof and his Cattle? and again: our Fathers worshipped in
this Mountain but they say Jerusalem is the place where men do worship.
But she was answered by Christ. Believe me Woman the hour comes and now
is, when you shall neither in this Mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship the
Father: a reason is also surrendered. That the hour shall be and now is, when
the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: and albeit
in the Psalms we find the affection of the Prophet to have bin powered out in
greater zeal for the Lord of Hosts sake, as Psalm. 67. Praise you the Lord
all you nations, and that in the.117. I will spread abroad and knowledge thy
name among the Gentiles. Yet is there time and place and occasion too, to utter
forth our cogitacions, that we be not judged of men. I acknowledge and not
unwillingly, that David was in the Cave sometimes praying, and in the feelde,
and in the Dens, and in the night, and in his bed: Jonas could pray in the
belly of the Whale. Daniell in the Lions Den, and his companions lifted up
their voices in the flaming Furnace, and Noe coming out of the Arc in the
open air. And Elyas on the topp of the Hill, groneling with head betwixt his
legs, and Christ himself at the shore side among the Ships. And Paull
with the Elders in the sight of the people. Yet this is my watchworde, let no
man go beyond his skill, nor draw private examples to general observations.
But if death and persecution incroche upon thee, pray every where, for thou it
is that shall glorify the Lord. But if quietness and rest be given unto thee,
use discretion and modesty, in ordering thy form of prayer.

For the second thing in this point, which I noted in Paull, without ceasing.
This is my judgment: that thou be like minded in all things: and remember it
is the Lord, that searches the heart, and the reins, that he will be
worshipped in Spirit and truth.

But now, we have harder matters, that befall unto us, and if so it pleased
God, I would like lots might happen to us al. For I know there is none whom God
has touched by his spirit inwardly, but wishes him self, accursed to bring
salvation unto all. I speak it, for that it is so hard a thing for the sons
of Adam to be agreeable to this in all poynctes: namely one to pray for an
other, Ieam. 5.16. and for thy enemies and persecutors. Math. 5.44. Lu.
6.35.23.34. Acts. 7.6. And for all men 1. Tim. 2.8. I enter now on such a
stage, as that sufficient reason might be showed, to draw the full length and
whole discourse of this tragedy. But it is not my mind, to vnlase and ripp up
the wounds of any man. For even the view and sight of this story, may be
pitiful enough to any Christian. To bring in place the speakers hereof, It
were that of Atreus in Seneca, and of Astiages in Justin to bid the Father to
the cating of his own Son. But I take an other way, and not so lothesome as
is that: for such as be of this Seane shall not speak, and I only content to
use a do^me show: for it is strange: that minds of men are so distracted, as
the life of any, should only consist in life of thears: and their judgment
upon others to stand as sound judgment: to pray for none: to condemn all: to
like of few, to upbraid the best: such iugling there is in worldlinges. I know
some that have stumbled so vnluckely on such, that their hurt has been more
in one hour, then heaps of Gold can recover in many years. These I do
admonish, and I charge them too in the Lord: Vpstart and fond heresies budding
up in our churches.
for to stay at home and pray less, is better for such, then to range abroad,
and live worse: and this is my exhortation, to pray for them that curse thee:
to hate none: to judge the best: to love all: for it sauoreth of Anabaptisme,
to beat down, to suppress, to throw down to the ground any man, whom thou
never knew worthy the smyting: to exempte any as extrauegaunts to the Lord,
that could never judge what the elect are. Did David never pray for Saull?
2. Sam. ^.4.
or was he never in his hands that he might have slain him if he would? Eut
he not of the lap of his Coat? or touched he the life of his Master? I
know that if the soul of some, were as fast clasped in the hands of them, as
the lay of Saulles Coat was in the hand of David, it had been mangled and
hewed in pieces before this. This is it, I give in charge: let them of this
world think well of all, and hope even of those that be without. For though
Samuel would not see Saull, 2. Sam. 15.
until the day of his death, yet mourned he for him: Moses will not stick to
pray for such as have cursed him. The injuries that he sustained in Sur, and
the outcryes in that Wilderness, of that unthankful people, Exodus 33.
turned not away their remembrance, in his prayers to the Lord. Nor Jeremy so
often laid in Prison and clogged with Chains, could yet forget the anguishe of
Sion, and the tribulation that befell to Jerusalem: Ier. 8.
but he prayed for them. Now pittyfull is then the state of us? who rayseth up
him that is afflicted? who windeth up his sores and powers in Oil ^ and
remooueth the st^ip^ from the heart? The state of our dissernbling profes^ sors
at this day:
of a truth the sin of Judah is written with a pen of Iron: the point of a
Diamond, has ingraue^ in this people so sore a hatred, that life to death, and
flesh to earth, and Gold to dross, is changed as soon as their lips from
leasing, or their minds from strife. Acts. 7.
If you had bin at the death of Steauen when the stones rushed so about him,
and the states of Jerusalem clapped their hands to dry up his blood. I am
affrayd the question might have been asked to what end he suffered so many
blows, and these fellows can not abide so few words? I answer little
herein. That which follows shall sufficiently approve it. For beside the
breach of brotherhoode in the world which is common, there is many things to
be consithered in prayer. Only understand, that I wright not as a teacher to
reform that I see amiss, that pertayneth to the aged and the hoary heads: I
speak now to younglinges and to Babes: such as be of greater grothe, whose
manners I have glaunsed at, whose life and wealth I never touched, to them I
leave the whip and the heavier judgment: my lesson, it is to young Scholars,
whom I teach after this manner.

Thy peticion made to God, having cleansed thy vessels from dregs, and thy
heart from corruption, thy request made for the safety of all, and thou
reconciled unto thy Brother, thy mind fixed above, thy speech and talk
seasoned with salt, let thy prayers, be for the Saints, even the elect and
chosen of God. Ephesians. 6.18.1. These. 5.26. Heb. 13.24. For as they of Babylon
hanged up their Harpes, and laid aside their melody when they sat by the
Ryuers and wept: so may the Children of God, lay apart their joy, and their
greeting and their mirth, when they think upon the Saints that be abroad.
The cause hereof I take to be the v^itie and brotherhoode of such as be
roupled in the Lord, that being members of one body and severed from the world
in their head Christ, always remember their partners of the said afflictions,
and comfort themselves in the bonds that they sustain in this life: Basil.
of this is mention made in Basil, in his Epistle. 63. That one should pray
for another, and for the saints, Eusebius.
And Eusebius in his eight Epistle, makes mention of a charge that was given
them and how they ought to be remembered, that were of the Church, at their
general meetinge, and at their Sinods, and to pray one for another, These
conditions are seldom kept though much talked of, among our vain glorious
men:
and the prayers of the people to be joined with them. That the rest of their
inhabitaunts day and night might be remembered unto the Lord. Whereupon, I could
by just occasion set open so vile a Door, for the enemy to look into, as the
rawnes of our time and carelesnes of our days, might very hardly bear it: and
of those men even such as dare judge the Children of God, and his Saints: as
of opinion that all be secluded and expelled his temple, that have not bin
found to deal with thears. This vncharytable rashness I leave to him that
sits above that will in due time redres it, and but that I love breuety, and
mind not to be tedious in stuffinge up so short a volume as this is, with
novelties, very hardly I could have past it. But I bear with their memories
for whose cause I wright this, and the deformytyes of aged men I leave to
others. Such striving small obayinge has bin seldom seen in Ingland.
As I can therefore shortly, albeit peradventure hardly. I conclude all prayer
with these two. That we remember Kings and Magistrates. 1. Tim. 2.2. and
that it be against temptacions. Math. 16.41. Luke. 22.40. The first of these
was very duly kept in the primative Church, reported by Eusebius in his
fourth Book of the life of Constantine: Eusebius. Pamph.
That it was their custom to pray unto one Lord that guided them, that
defended them only from their enemies, from wholm they had all things: and in
the end, for their Emperor Constantine and his Chi^dren, Freedom is made
serui^nde, and obedience disobedience to them that use it not.
that they might long prosper with them. I would that affection were in us, so
great and subtle snapping, it would not be against the state as now it is.
God that brought us out of Aegipt, bring us no more to those flesh pottes,
and give us the liberty of his Gospel, and free passage of his word, and stop
the mouths of his enemies that snuff and bark at us abroad, and could as yet
never enjoy the liberty hereof at home: and let us conclude this part, that
being in a readiness to offer up our selves a lively and quick sacrifice unto
the Lord, we may be armed against the assaults of Satan, and quietly abide
whatsoever his gracious hand shall lay upon us. For very brickle is the mind
of man, and unsteady be all his dooinges, and our enemy the Devil and
Sathanas that raumpinge and roaring Lion, he is even now let lose, and in his
time that he has, beeinge very short, he is always so busy with the elect
of the Lord, that very few there be, be not entangled: Then to end this the
cause, one of them, and the last, for which we pray. It is against
temptacions: That we may avoid his Snares, The last ^^use to pray
and eschew his ginnes he lays for us. I might run a long race in this
feeld, and breath I could here a little, but tired never. And it would amaze
any man in the midst of his conrse to see so great a Millstone as there is, to
be cast into the earth, and no man almost of sufficient force to bruise it: it
has well bin assayed of late, but yet the dust thereof is so scattered, Sects
and di^itio^s about orders in the church.
that a number be almost choked with it. For even in this is the diuelishnes
of the Leuiathan seen, that makes so good a reckoninge with the world, as
beeinge holy and unspotted in their dealinges, despise such as intermeddle not
in their affairs, and think of common men as they do of Ethnicks: But is
their house so surely builte, that the waves beating thereon can never move it?
I know not well herein what it is I might speak: but if Isaac did fall, or if
Joseph offended, or Moses slid, or Elias, or Peter, or Paull, or the Apostles?
they might as well as other Christians, pray unto the Lord against
temptations. But let these alone, and let them be hardened still, it will be to
late when Er and Onon are stricken by the hand of God: when Agar is gone and
thruste out of thy house: He that falls willingly as these did and tempts
God, and prays not: shall have that portion they had.
when Esau has sold his brightright to call it back: when Joseph is cast of
and sold unto the Ismaelits: when Iudath has defiled Thamar, and then calls
on righteousness: when Semei shall curse David to his face: when Absolon shall
hang on the Trees and Spears through him: when Saull has held up his hands
against his own soul: when Achitophell has set his house in order and
strangled himself: when Satan shall preuente us, and we know it not: and the
Devil hook us in, and we perceive it not: and tempte us and assault us, and
we pray not: The Lord keep those be his, from this, and give us of his light
and the brightness of his countenance among us, prepare our minds to run from
iniquity, and keep our souls in rest and quietness, that we may avoid
te^ptacions. This much for this part, and more then at the first I purposed,
for the knowledge hereof: what prayer is?

The third thing, The third thing to be considered in prayer and the parts
thereof.
I noted in the question of his disciples is? what kinds or manner of prayer
there is, that be now in use? Of this, I find two. The first is public and
in the assembly of many, Acts 2.34. and. 4.24. and. 12.5. and. 20.36. and.
21.5. And this manner of prayer, is of the whole Church and Congregation,
assembled together as one man, to power out their prayers to the Lord. The
second manner or order of prayer, is private, we have the example in Christ.
Math 14.23. and 26.36. Luke. 5.16. and 6.12. and. 22.32. This prayinge, it is
of every one that is of the sheepfolde of Christ, being the first and
cheifest poyncte in a Christian, to accustom himself unto prayer, of which I
have sufficiently spoken before, in the first cause, that ought to move us to
pray: whereas the examples of the Saints of God, of the Prophets, of the
Patriarchs of Christ, of his Apostles that used always to pray, may the more
inslame us. There shall be therefore no iteration of that now, The antiqui tie of
common prayer.
let us only cousider what it is that is public, and what therein to be
required. The custom of meeting at common prayer, it is no new thing, it has
bin from all beginning wherein the Church of God has flourished. Genesis 4.
For I doubt not but the poor offeringe of Caien and of Abell, was a thing
generallye used of the Church in that time, and done of them as taken from the
use of the Congregation or meetinge, then used: People used not so open and
plain administration of the Sacraments, in this age: as in the law, and after
the Law, and a fevv hundred years before the Law.
and albeit the Church was small, and they destitute of the Sacrament of the
Tree of life: Yet they had so much as did signely unto them a cextainty of
their salvation. And there is in that place opened to us, that in the time of
Seth men began to call on the name of the Lord. Not that God had no worship,
or that there were none that served and called on his name: but then the Church
which was before darkened I take it to have bin again newly restored. So that
it seems to me they knew the Lord, and that openly, such as wear his. I
might speak of Abraham and of his time, how he also repaired the house of
God: Genesis 19. Genesis 20.
And in Sodom also was God known: Again Abraham prayed for Abimelech and his
householde. For as Nemrod had his solempe places for his Idolles, as is
mentioned by Berosus the Chaldean; and Manetho the Aegiptian Preeste after the
flood. So doubt I not, but God had his abidynge place, though not so plainly
described by the Prophets. Now, in Moses his time, Exodus 19.
it was without all controversy fully ratefied and established, when after the
delinery of the Law unto his servant Moses: in glory and great Majesty, he
severed Aaron from the rest, Exodus 28.
and put upon him most glorious apparel, and gave him the Preesthoode for
ever, and the government of the Tabernacle to him and his, in a perpetual
generation. Very notably approved by Iosuah, Josh. 5.
when they eat the passover in Ierico, after their journey in the Wilderness:
Also more lively set out in their solemn meeting and coming up thither to
worship God: where the Lottes were cast be fore the Lord, Josh. 18.
to divide the inheritance of Israel. After this you shall sinde every wheare
great meetinges of all Israel, and of the whole Congregation. I refer it
therefore to them that will search the Book of God: and though vnwiltinge, Much
seuer^ inge, little inclining to the word, brought in by Scrsmatickes.
yet as interrupted hear to see the state of our days, in that a more bright
and comely platform, has very seldom bin drawn out in any Church then in
ours. But so sluggish and careless lives, I (speak of some, I know it) so
mutch breatch and contempt in others, (I have seen it.) So small regard to
the Temple and love and zeal to the house of God (for I have hard it,) as in
few common wealths has been red the like, that is it which is most pitiful.

I only wish that men in our days, where the Harrow is not used, nor inginnes
of Iron framed, or the torturs and exiles put in practice (as is else ever ye
wheare,) would more willingly agree together, then as yet they do. The state
under Diocletian.
In the histories of the persecutions under Dioclesian, and Maximine the
Emperor, there is mention made very often of the places that Christians met in.
But as it appears, before Constantine, their places whytherto they commonly
resorted, Temple^ called D^minica, and Orato^ia and Basil^.
wear but homly and not so trimmed as ours, termed by the name of Dominica,
and as Eusebius records Oratoria, and in Nazianzen, the Church is called
Basilica, and so I find it in Ambrose: But for this I think no man will
strive, vnleast Ethnicke like, we take that which men use so much at this day,
to pray abroad, for that in persecution, it was not lawful for them, to come
to Churches. Or there is a reason found out (and so it may be) to pray in the
Churchyeardes, Error in the mistaking of examples.
and at Graves and Sepulchers of the dead, because in the persecution and
tyranny of Gorgias of Alexandria, they were content (or compelled rather) to ly
at the Graves and Sepulchers of their Fathers. Unhappely I think was that
storye taken in hand, and in an evil time (if it be grounded theare) to
prostrate themselves in feelds, Common customs do bring great matters to
pass: and the use of that is evil does make it good: though evil before: as
with us.
to lie at the foot of Hills, to pray without the walls, and Towns, and
gates of the Cities, for that Christians had so small a liberty under Valence
of Antioch? But where so ever it be fetched, for that it is untrue, look
about, search other Historyes: gather as well that which is good and see mely,
as that which is erroneous, and you shall find many examples of Christianity:
For these arguments taken from the custom of the nations, and from the
Gentilles, for that contrary to the rule of the Book of God, they appointed at
their several pleasures, this or that, it is not to be liked of. But as every
Cuntrye has his custom, in coming to praise the name of God: if it were in
holes and Caves of the earth, as the Indians some of them do it in: Custom of
the^ in India, to pray in Aegipt, in Barbary:
or in houses of Reeds as they in very hot Countries do, or in other (though
unseemly places to us) as diverse of the nations, and as our Irishe men not so
far a iourny from us, very beastly people do: yet if that Cuntry whatsoever,
has any one in him that calls on the name of Christ: he and they be as well
excepted in their homely Cottages, as other people be in stately*Pallaces. And
though I allow not the Jewish tradition renewed by Constantine, in carrying
about a tent, squared like the Temples they buylt then, for to praise the name
of God with his soldiers: yet because the meaning of that good Emperor, can
in no wise be condemned, I cannot altogether disallowe the thing. But now in
so great a light, where the word of God never shined more brightly then it
does here: I needs must cry out with Jeremy, that readier were they in the
world, to offer up cakes to the Queen of heaven, then they be now to give
thanks and pay their vows to the God of Jacob. O that I could but ransake out
the cause hereof. I am persuaded, that not only they whose writings have been
mistaken of a number to this hour, would knit them selves as fellow
laborers herein, but diverse also whom God has blessed with great wisdom,
would employ their faithful hearts to redress it. Give me leave here though
not so fully, yet of truth, not altogether rashly, to enquire and seek after
this. For a little experiensed herein, I have a shrewd guess at their reasons.
It may be that the church needs some holy water again, as in the time of
popery to purge it a fresh. Errors of diverse that like not our temples.
Otherwise, I know not but that our temples might please them. For if they have
been used ever since Christ our Savior (the manner I mean of our churches)
may or ought the order of the building restrain or keep any from prayer? I
speak not of the three first hundred years, it is open unto him that
reads: that though fire and sword kept them under: Yet had they both places
and temples, and Synagogues to pray in: and I doubt not, but the head or
chauncell thereof stood Eastwarde, as ours does. If it were Iewishe and
ceremonial and not allowed, Argument taken from traditions.
why did not Christ abolish it? For he taught in their Synagogues and in their
temples, and disputed with the Scribes, and used that well, which they abused:
But if this were never thought on of so great a number of learned fathers, is
it matter enough for men to make conscience in so small trifles? Zenon bishop
of Gaza (called of many the eye or glory of those days) built a temple called
of Sozomenus Oratorium: Zenon of Gaza.
and the pattern thereof was taken from those churches that were in use then,
and it was allowed. Many years if so it had pleased God, it might have stood,
yea, even till this day, for ought that I can see against it. But they will not
come to the temples in some places, (or not willingly) for that they were
dedicated to saints. A temple built at Edessa to saint Thomas.
Was that in Basil, buylt at Edessa unto saint Thomas, ever the worse for
that it bore his name? Is the water the worse that an evil man holds? the
gold impure that the sinner touches? or the vessel and cupp of more
corruption, that the Papist buyeth? I dare not say it. For, if the believing
man shall cleanse even those things that are filthy: then Christians may allow
of these things, wherein there is no shame to use them: I ask a question, and
judge thereof thy self. Is it lawful if a man were in Constantinople, or now
in Rome, Question ^oued.
to worship in the temple or not? to this, when it is answered, I will say
something. I have often said, that this is not a volume to approve and
confirm every particular thing by large discoursing thereon: but as content to
run them oner, and at more leisure, if things be not reformed, to entreat
thereof more copiously. There is yet another thing that presses sore and
deateth down to the ground (a great cause that men come not to the temple.)
The Surplesse which keeps men f^^^ church.
I can not tell what nature it has, or how loathsome it is in the look, but
men run from it very speedily: and it is pity, and the Lord knows how
grievous it is in his sight: that such as have been very zealous furtherers of
the Gospel, shall withdraw them selves from church, from service, from
obeying, from duty, and that for a surplesse? When I purposed to write of
prayer, I determined not (God knows) to sit me down to check any man:
Great abuse, littlevse, when men so willingly abuse the Lord.
but as one that has had trial of these abuses, I am by private duty
enforced to look upon them. For of late, neither as yet so long since is it
that these lettes were known among men. But who waying the condition and state
of people in those days, and casting his eyes to see them now: will not
lament to see how their consciences and minds be alienated from that they
were: and privately use private prayer, and publicly do come to none: and
against their own consciences offend often, rather then to incur the breach
of law once. I speak it as aghast, by the small conference of time, and
perusing of the stories: which I easily acknowledge in my self. Yet as one to
whom God has given a little taste, I do not think convenient that what cold
affection soever I have unto Religion, or what zeal it be that I bear unto
the Gospel, ought in me or any other to be quenched for so small a trifle.
Disorders i^ our church.
The Sabbath is broken, the church is not frequented, obedience is not given,
Magistracy is not known, the word of God is not heard, the Sacraments be
not received, unity of the church broken, peace, concord, and amity is not
thought on, all order and custom is spurned under foot, and all is for a
Surplesse. I ask a question again, and when that is set down, I dare say
more. Can the liberty which we have in Christ, and the bondage from whence we
are delivered by the Gospel, bear it or no? This may suffice, and for this
time I stay here. For it seems not to me sufficient, that the benefit which
is given unto every country for their custom, should be restrained and kept
back, because of the minds of diverse men that be therein. Otherwise, I may
reason, that Papists and Athistes, (whereof I am in doubt, some be in the
church) may be an occasion, that whereas they be not pleased in their
consciences, the right course may not be taken to the Gospel.

And though there be weak, and there be strong, and there is the Papists
that delights in the use of the Surplesse and hope for a day: yet of what
force is this Argument? The Church must yield to their affections, and they
shall be as Elders to dipese their rittes pertaining to the Church: Reason to
keep the Church, though the Surplesse be worn.
But diverse be offended, I know it, and I lamente it. Yet what then? This
reason of the people it abides not the fire: for as well is the consideration
of my duty, and the cause of their offense to be searched and the proof of
Antichristianite to be wayed, and the detestation whyther it be just or no
considered, and their hearts whyther they ought too be touched, and their
consciences offended, and this our communicating with Idolatry (falsely so
termed) duly examined, before we relente to the infirmities of other. And as
they be but words, and presumptions grounded upon other men's weakness, so
when the argument is made strong, it wilbee leauyed. This is that I stand on,
can any man offended herewith, by that veil is laid before his eyes have a
sufficient warrant to refuse the word, the Sacraments, the Temple, and for
such a trifle. Then this is that I see which came hereof, that many before
persuaded well of these rites, No excuse for ceremonies that be indifferent.
have new by a sinister opinion of late driven into their heads, altogether
abandoned the truth. So that to try this whyther it be lawful or not, some
other way must be taken to disprooue it. For this wythereth at the Sun, and
the minds of men be as the Smoke, that thoroughly persuaded thereof, relent
again at so homly an argument. I leave it therefore, and I take in hand an
other matter, sumwhat more weighty then that of the people: and that is,
whyther or no we ought to repair unto public prayer, and what occations may
withdraw us: But for ye our meetings is commonly referred unto one day, which
is the Sabbath, (albee it extraordinarely we may have several comminges
together on other days to serve God) Yet in the holy day I include all. Our
puplike prayer, is to be referred in espetiall to the Sabbath.
And this it is which is said to be the seventh day, that God blessed when
he finished his work, and the Tabernacle of the Heavens where he sits: The
keeping whereof will be better considered when the causes of the institution
thereof be opened. The first cause, for which the Sabbath was ordained, was
Economicall or politic, and it is expedient for the preservation and safety
of man, that he may rest his weary bones and eat the labor of his hands, and
the sweat of his brows with ioyfulnes. Three causes, of the celebration of
the Sabbath by Gods appointment.
To this alludeth the spirit of God in Exodus: thou and thy Servant and thy
Maid, and Cattle and thy Stranger that is within thy Gates: The cause is:
that in care, and ouerlabouring, and tediousnes of thy soul, thou should
not repine against the Lord. Of the rest, much is written. Exodus 13. Deuteronomy. 5.
The second cause of Sabbothe, is ecclesiastical, or for the Church: because as
there was assembling together of the Jews, wherein the Lord was reverenced,
and his Sabbath hallowed, so especially for this, that agreeinge in one, we
might be members and professors of one Christ, which was the only end of the
Law. For as they had the Tabernacle to come unto, so they had three several
time^ appointed to meet in: their Passover, for their delivery out of Aegipt:
their Penticost for the rememberaunce of the law given by Moses: their feast
of Tabernacles, for that God kept and delivered their Fathers in the Wilderness
the space of forty years. So that as they did meet and had several places for
their offeringes, so ought we to be gathered together at Prayer. The third
cause of the institution of the Sabbath, is the rest and quietness therein
prefigured, when the Saints of God shall be associated all of them and dwell
with the Lord: of the Sabbath and the use thereof: I refer you to the
Prophets. In wholme I find no one so great complaynt of them in Israel, as I
do for the contempt and breach of the holy day: The blessinge in keeping it,
the dreadful cursing in breaking it is set down. Esaias. 58.13. and 56.2. The
curse to him that dispiseth his ordinance is showed in Deuteronomy. but his
displeasure and wrath is opened to us, The straight nes that God used, for
such as brook the Sabbath.
in that the fellow that gathered sticks on the Sabbath, was stoned: and in
them sufficiently declared, whom God checked for that they gathered Manhu on
the Saboth: and when they went out, found none: if it be a cause of force
enough to keep a man from Church, to break the Sabbath, to journey many miles,
to hear a Sermond when thy aboade wear more acceptable to thy God, and thy
diligence more commendable:

Then truly these men (named before) may plead with the Lord as unjustly
punished. For the one had no ster to warm him with, the other lackte meat to
feed him with: and thou want a Prophet, and go a gadding, and seek a
stranger, and huntest after the word, to delight thee with. Surely this was
looked too in Israel, and it was never permitted among the Gentilles, and the
contempt of the word and of the Sabbath was never suffered among Infidelles,
it was grievously punished in the primative Church, and if Constantine,
Athamasius and Ierom lived, they would have rowsed them out, and have fetchte
them wholme long ere this.

I trust I need not question hear with any man, Controversy that is about the
day of the Sabbath.
as touching the day that is appointed for the Sabbath For days of them selves
are indifferent. Math. 22.5. Luke. 13.15. Ioh. 5.10. Romans 14.5. Gala. 4.10. And
God could have appointed every day to worship him, if so his Majesty had
thought good thereof: but he appointed only one, that giuinge our selves to
labor, we might be readyer at appointed day to learn our duty. For as in
other Ceremonies, there is sumthing that can not be changed, and there is
that may be forborne and left out, so also is it hear. For in Circumsitio^,
and in Baptism, it is necessarely required, that those which pertayne unto the
covenant and be lately joined to the Church, The true use of the Sacraments
and how to be esteemed.
should have some external sign to show it: but the manner thereof is for a
time: as first the cutting of the foreskinne, and the alteration thereof renewed
again in the sprinkling of water. Therefore to show there was no necessity
thereof, there was a time wherein none was circumcised, and afterward given to
Abraham and established, Though we never reccaue the Sacraments: we may be
saved yet for all th^g custom appointed by God is to be^ kept.
it was left undone in the Wilderness the space of forty years: so then we be
not tied thereunto and the external rites: In like manner, the case is all one
in us ye Ministers of the word, namely ye we have provided for us to live by.
But whither we take it as tithe, or out of ye Kings tresury, it is indifferent.
And so is it in ye Saboth, even ye we keep a day holy unto the Lord: but
whyther it be the first day, or the second, or the fourth, that for ought that
I can yet see, I find not. Then this is taken in of the Church as being her
right and at her appointment, and she has instituted the Sunday for the
Saboth to magnefie the name of the Lord withal, as for other Festival days,
(then when I have occasion to speak) the breach of these, beeinge as great as
the abuse of the other, at more convenient place must be examined: for now I
am already admonished to make haste: only let this be sufficient for the
understanding of that which I considered in Prayer, that ons part thereof was
public, and the other private.

The manner of prayer how it is to be used, whether kneeling, sitting,
standing, or going, there is small cause to reason of it. For if it be private
to thy self, The manner of private prayer.
the Lord accepts as well the goer as the runner, and the stander as the
kneeler, if he come in spirit and truth. Albeit I do wish a reverend fear,
in every one that comes before the Lord. For if there be duty and
reverence, and care to be had among men, and those that dwell in teats, whose
building is but for a season. What manner of humility ought we to use unto the
Lord our God, In public prayer agreement is to be made of necessity.
that governs us and the whole earth? But in public prayer, it is my
desire, that all would be of one mind, not reading, when one is preaching: or
another talking, while he is ministering: or thou kneeling when he is sitting,
but that we be alike affectioned unto the Lord. For as the Levites, when the
Trumpe did sound at once, did agree alike, so would I at one time we might
accord in voice, in gesture, in prayer, in supplication, in soul, in heart
unto our God. For lift thou up thy hands, or beat thou on thy breast: or speak
thou openly, or sigh inwardly: or else what ever thy custom be, be it not
Iewishe or Ethnicke like, it is all one unto the Lord. Only in the
Congregation where God will be known among us, and where we may be judged to be
as servants unto one Lord, let there be no discord or disagreement in any
thing. For as is of the servant to the master, so is there of us by duty in
us, to our God: and if in the house they be at variance among them selves,
Their eu^ome and manner in the time of Ba^ll.
will their Lord bear it? No more if we agree not, will he like it. Basil in
his sixty and three Epistle witnesses, that in joining together in common
prayer, the Bishop or Elder that taught them, when he went up into his
appointed place, he read unto them out of the Scriptures: and the first thing
that he spoke was to join together in prayer unto Christ, for to direct and
lighten their minds in his peace. The same Basil is author, that they turned
their bodies to the East, and prayed. I note not their manner then, as their
custom, nor their custom as their agreement, nor their agreement as their end,
in that all were joined and knit as by a thread in one. Athan^s^u^ record.


Athanasius is witness hereof in his fourteenth question. Out of whom I find
a commendation left unto the churches of Africa, that so easily consented
together, making no religion, or putting no superstition in this so indifferent
a thing. Praecise manners, they be un manerly now.
Also in his book de Spiritu sancto, Basil has left this as worthy memory,
that on the Sunday, they were accustomed to pray standing, because as that day
Christ rose from death. And they noted this in them selves, to be such as
should be erected in soul unto the Lord. And as they did stand on the earth,
so they were admonished to look upward to heaven for grace. The twentieth
Canon of the counsel of Nece, Concilium Nicenum.
as it is reckoned by Gratian, reports this same thing to be done of them
all on the Sabbath. And at Pentecost, where (as I take it) partly from Basil
and Athanasius, and from the custom of the Primative Church. All our churches
at this day, our chapels, and temples stand Eastwarde. But let it pass: Our
time it need not to take so heavily these the rytes and ordinances which we
have: for as they be not many, so if we were pestered as the Primative church
was (which God forbid) yet how untowardly would it be taken? And now to cut
of this third part also, Much striving, small Christianity in a number of
these.
for our manner of prayer: thus I think, that the best and the farthest from
superstition, and the nearest to Christ, and the most excellent, to set out
our reverence and duty, is at our coming together, to pray kneeling.

Thus at the length we are arrived at our last hold, and compelled for want
of wind and weather in so perilous sailing, to cast Anchor. But how soever it
be, we hoysted out, because it is with some danger, contented we are to bear
the burden, and to require others to take some pity of us to: for I know
that this is not taken in hand without the looking on of many Sea men, that
would right gladly set sail to their greater vessels, that harder passage
might be permitted to our small bark. For this cause also I take the Sun and
the Sky as I find it, and content to enjoy the small liberty that is left.
And greater speed is made to bring us home, for that if so we chance to
perish by the way and suffer shipwreck, other men may take heed by the
onerthrowe of this our Boat, more warely in their journey to look to theirs.
For outleaping all the inconveniences hitherto, that be common in the world, we
are like to be grounded on two as perilous rocks, as the heart and imagination
of man can wish us to. Before, we had to do with them, that for their
unskillfulness in the use of prayer, How to prepare our selves to pray, the
last part of this book.
were happily to be pardoned. And now comes in how it is we should prepare
our selves to prayer. The fourth and last thing that I noted in the question
that was asked: This it may seem to be very common, and appertaining only to
men of great discretion: gets any thing of the Lord. Also, for that every
man comes at appointed season, The (...) thing in our preparacion to prayer,
it to be humble and lowly in heart.
I was loath to break it, therefore in the question, who it is that prays? it
is answered, the holy and humble spirited man, that comes drenched all in
tears, and that would touch the hemme of Christ's garment, rather than be
will depart unhealed. This humblenes of mind it is of two sorts: for there is
one that is among men. Math 18.4. and 23.12. Luke. 14.11. Romans 12.16. Ephe.
4.2. Phil. 2.3. collos. 3.12. 2. Pet. 5.5. And this fellow, he may dally with
the world, and deal disguisedly on both sides, but yet God that is above does
judge him. Nimrod that great hunter before the Lord, fought not so valiantly,
and lived not so wickedly, but he had as ignominious an end, and died
miserably. And these men that can creep on the earth for advantage, and kiss
thy feet to ingrosse commodities, and can hoorde up substance in their cofers,
that look so stily, The manner of vvorling^ and of hypocrites.
and minse it so cunningly as though the full measure of righteousness were in
them, that will have the upper hand in Religion, and be inferior unto none in
profession: yet can scrape up as greedely, and oppress unchristianly, and
deal vnneighbourly, and live uncharitably, and give reproach for reproach, as
slanderously, and hate as deadly, and injury as spitefully, and backbite as
maliciously, as he that seeks to get the greatest game, and striuest most:
such a one is not meet to come before the Lord and his anointed, nor to ask
at the hands of God. If he do, I say unto him, he has his reward. There is
another kind of humility, and it is only in debasing our selves, whereby we
become as little children without pride and haughtiness of mind, fit to be
received unto the Lord. Of this humility we read Math. 18 10. Luke. 18.14.
James. 4.10. For all show of righteousness, all manner of uprightness in thy
self must be secluded, and the grace of the Lord is that which is sufficient
for us. If any should presume by way of suit to arrogate any thing unto himself
that is due unto the Prince: the state of that man is very dangerous. But if
thou lay not thy infirmities abroad, and uncover not thy nakedness before the
Lord God, when thou enterest into his seat and iudgest presumptuously in thine
own eyes, Humility in all at coming to prayer.
then look about and beware. For of a truth, he has the law, and the
Scepter, and he has the sword to destroy thee. Remember David his
supplication unto the Lord. Psalm. 25.
O think upon thy tender mercy, and loving kindness, for they have been for
ever. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my rebellions, but according to
thy kindness remember thou me for thy goodness sake O Lord. I think David
indifferently smyteth us unto the quick: and he that shall turn him self to
see the manners of our time, will think there is scarce a God upon the earth,
to see what glory he suffers in the ungodly men, and to see how the head of
the just is covered with reproaches. But as the beauty of the Sun, till the
cloud ouershadowe it, and as is the Palm tree, till the frost nippeth it, and
as the blossom of the Peache, till the wind alter it: so is the beauty of
the wicked til ye Lord co^sumeth him. For if God enter into judgment, what
flesh shall be iustefied in his sight? Dan. 9.
For even this confessed Daniel in that he and other of the Church presented
not their supplications before God, for their own righteousness: but for his
own mercy sake, foreseeing that we of Adam, are by nature the Children of
death, to what end shall we strive with God, whose spirit has not always
striued with us? For he knew that we were but flesh, Genesis 8.
and that vain were the cogitacions and thoughts of man from his youth. Then
let this be our first way to prepare our selves to go to prayer: that we
take unto us humilite, and debase our selves before the Lord. The state of
such as dissemble.


The second kind of service or duty we owe, and rightly to come unto prayer
is this: that we be not gilty of that in Esaias. This people confesses me
with their lips but their hearts are far from me: He that is offender
herein, is not fit to come unto the Lord, namely to have thy body at the
Temple, and thy presence at the Alter, and thy heart at holme. Can the
Ethiopian be made white? or the so^mer change his course? Can you gather
Grapes of Thistles, and Figs of Thorns? will thou fetch Honye out of the
Rock? and the Sun beams from the duskishnes of the night? or the Cristolet?
or the Saphir, out of all quarters of the earth? No more will he his glory
from the wicked, nor his love and favor from the ungodly, nor joy and Heaven
from the dissembler, nor his Christ and his own presence will he show for
ever unto the Hypocrite. I remember I spoke hereof before, yet it is necessary
to touch it now: that the just measure of the man of God may appear.

The third thing, or the preparation and pathway that we may have more
assured entrance into prayer, The perfection of the man of God.
is to be of a faithful and upright conversation, and to be steady in faith.
If we come unto a Senate or before grave and ancient counselors, we repose
some assurance of that we come for, in their hands, and I know if it be the
price of Monye, there is no man but speaks very co^sta^tly: Then, if we have
any thing to crave for of the Lord, it behooves us to tread our steps aright,
to lay the form of our words duelye, and the manner of our speech that we
lispe not, and thy thoughts and cogitacions, that thou waver not before his
Majesty: For if thy mind be not settled, and thy dealings despised, and thou
thy self strengthened, that thou shiuer not: it is in hazard, but that thy
whole request perishes: Romans 10.
And to say the truth, how can we call on him on whom we believe not? Go we
unto the Mariner and the Seafaring man, and to no end? or think we then to
be drowned? Do we run unto the Physician or wait we for poison? will the
Lawier take his fee for nothing, or can we bow our selves before our God, as
if we were at Beersheba or at Dan, or at the Idolles of Samaria, to return
again without answer? then unhappy truly were our case, but even for this
do we come before ye Lord, to wipe away the tears from our eyes, and the
burden from our shoulders, and that he would accept our faith. For he that
believes in him he shall not perish but have life: And unto this end are we
called, that we might be heirs of eternal salvation according to hope.
Titus. 3. Therefore Ieames: he that prays let him pray in faith, not
doubtinge, for he that wauereth is like unto the leapinges of the Sea, that is
turned and walowed in the wind, and let not that man think that he shall have
any thing from the Lord, Luke 7.
that asks not steadfastly. It was well said of the Apostle: Lord increase
our says, and again help or unbelief for it is very hard for flesh and
blood to ask so faithfully: Mark. 9.
but that he will be still in a mammoringe: To the end then that we may appear
before him clothed with righteousness, and our garments be spanged with
sinseritie and truth: that we may know to pray faithfully, to obey steadely, to
trust in him obediently, I will draw out the Image of a perfect and upright
Christian, and lay open the tokens and signs of an Infidel. There is, for so
I sinde in the writers, five kinds or manner of faith, which I do profess
that I have red also in the book of God.

1. An Historical, or Ethnicke like, For that the Infidest and the Panim, and
the ungodly, do think they have faith: I have therefore put in this division or
disterence which is in faith*
2. A dead faith: that is good for naught: 3. A faith of miracles: common to
the wicked, 4. A temporal faith: which is but for a time: 5. A iustifiyng
faith: which remains ever.
AN Historical faith, such a one as is of the Ethnic, when there shall be no
difference made of the Heavenly and the Eternal God, than is of the Infidel,
to an Idol, of a Panime to his counterfeit and hallowed Saint, or the Gentil
to his Saturn, or the Turk to his Mahomet. And this manner of Religion, it is
in all those that be on the face of ye earth, for the Heavens declare the glory
of God, and the Firmament his handy work: and very nature showed to the
Heathen that there was one that satte above, that spread abroad the face of the
Heavens as a coueringe, and called the Sun at his pleasure, and renewed the
course of the years: Cleanthe^ in Seneca cried out: The Heru^^, and the work^
of his hands, do declare there is a God.
Duc me sum pater altique dominator poli: and that excellent verse in Peter
Martirre borrowed of the Poet Homer, can testefie ye same: (...). Aristotle had
Ens entium in his lips: as for any thing else he knew not. It is a common thing
among the nations to confess a God, as for ought else they know not. Otherwise,
as I find it in Arnobius the Persians would never join themselves with their
Mothers. Nor they of Aegipt and of Athens, Brutishnes in the ^^nt^^ies and such
as know not God.
with their Sisters. Neither would their Tragedies be stufte so full with
incestious marriages: They had small cause to boaste so much of Hercules either
he that furious and frantic: or else of Aetheus, by an inchauntresse I know
not how, or by some one of their woonted lies, immagined of them to have bin
taken up to Heaven. This is the ignorance wherewith God often times blinds the
Infidels, for his dispight and contempt of Relygion: even to give them eyes
that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear, and hearts that
they should not understand and seek after the Lord, as it is come to pass
this day. I know that Eusebius misliked the Aegiptians, Esaias. 6.
and thought them unskillful iudgers of the Eternal God, that made the Son
which is at the beck and co^maundment of the Heighest, to be the Creator and
Workemaister of other Creatures. Diocletiam worshipped as a God:
Had that Diocletianus any fear of God that would be worshipped as a God? and
reverenced among men, that was him self a very man? Epiphanes in Samos, was
accustomly honored, for so says Epiphanius: Thermatis the daughter of Amenoph
the Son of Pharooe (I am assured against the will of Moses) was made a
Goddess for that she brought up Moses, wittely it is said of Prudentius, in
his book against Simmachius.

Quicquid humus, pelagus, caelum mirabile gignunt. Id duxere Deos.

For the Phaenitians, they knew not the Aegiptians: nor the Aegiptians the
Scithians: The blindenes and hardness of heart for their incredulite upon the
Gentilles.
nor the Scithians the Persians: nor the Persians the Syrians. Pelasgos I Will
knew not them of Throitia: nor they the Thebes: nor they the Indians: nor the
Indians the Arabians: neither yet knew they the Aepionians: There were diverse
in Siria, and diverse in Sylicia, and diverse in Cappadotia: and the Cappadotians
knew not the Gods of the Bethinians, nor they the Romans, neither the Romans
the Armenians, nor the Armenians us, nor we them in France, nor the French
men the Bohemians, nor the Bohemian, the Irishe nation, nor that brutishe
people God: So that the whole earth was divided. This same historical, this
Ethnicke belief, this heathenish knowledge had so overflowed the face of the
earth, The end of the election in man, at his calling to be godly, etc.
that very few there were that knew the Lord. I make therefore this
division only, and this separation of us from them: that God only in his
eternal decree, has segregated us from the nations, that we should be a
holy nation, and a royal Priesthood: Not giving our selves over to the lusts
of the flesh, and vanities of our minds, and pleasures of this life (wherein
I know not what commodity it is we get) but to keep our selves from
filthiness and uncleanness, and to the serving of the eternal God, which is
attained of us, by a more open declaration of his works, then to confess a
bare Lord or a bare God. For we consider where he is, and it is above, which
is the father of light: The Gospel brings in all truth: vvipeth away all
idolatry, and all supe^stition: all blindness and error, and teaches us to
know God.
we know that he made all even by his word: the eternal word the son of
God: and that now he guides and governs all, for he is the Lord of glory
and of power: all which Panisme and Gentilisme, could never teach us. And of
a certeintie, it is and shall be to the end of the world, that he whom men do
think to call upon rightly, then, when they consider the Lord in his works,
and what he is, they are very far from him. And this superstition, this
ignorance, I would it were not so common as it is among men: the bare Christian
profession will not serve us unto eternal life: and belche out the name of God
so often as thou will: and power out the hidd treasuries of thy heart in
knowing the Lord: yet if thy life and demeanor be not according, it is but
historical, it is but Ethnic like. Remember Lamech, I would slaye a man in my
might, Genesis 4
and a young man in my strength. If Cain shall be avenged seven fold, then Lamech
seventy times seven fold. This mockery of the judgments of God, because he
stroke him not presently, and for that he deferred his wrath in Cain, how is it
shown in a bare knowledge of justice in God? It is ye common custom of wicked
men, to confess a kind of anger and displeasure in God: but they are not
terrified or dismaide by his judgments. So did Abimelech and Picoll his
captain, that could not deny but that God was with Abraham, and prospered
him in his doings: and therefore made a covenant with the Patriarch, Genesis 21.
that should continue unto him and his children for ever. This Philistine,
knew there was a true and a just God that Abraham worshipped: but he and his
people would not follow him. The like is in Laban the Aramite, Jacobs kinsman,
that regarded that poor Jacob for fear only, Genesis 37.
and reported that the God of Jacob and his fathers had appeared to them by
night. And given him a warning for the life of Jacob and for his souls that
were with him, that he should not touch him, but this Sirian he lived never the
better, Wicked men and infidels stricken with feeling of Gods judgments,
though else they know him not, and therein show, that they deserve death and
condemnation.
or else served the Lord the more. But in a bare and only knowledge that
there was the God of Jacob, he is a condemnation to him self, that was a most
vile idolater and served him not. The like is in Saul, at that time he went
unto the Pythonist, and made protestation there, that the Lord had forsaken
him, neither would he answer him by Vrim and Thumim, nor by Prophets: yet
never did he turn him aright, either else forgot he his filthy ways, but
proceeded to vex the Lord, and to bring his displeasure upon him. This may be
a note to know a right Israelite, if he profess uprightly, live warily, and
acknowledge God sincerely, otherwise, if thou unfold thy hid cogitatio^s, and
denounce a bare speech of the Lord: and that he is ready to punish and to
strike, and that thou ought to call upon him, yet know not how and
which way: this intelligence of thine, it is but heathenish, thy faith it is
but historical: for the devils they know there is a God. The second kind of
faith it is that which I call a dead faith, for it brings forth no fruit,
much like unto a dead man, yet we say he is man, not that he is, but for that
he was a man. A dead faith.
The image or picture of any man, it is called by ye name of him that it was
made for, although it has neither life, neither breath, as has the man. And
so was the clubbe in the hands of Hercules in the temple of Rome, so called
from ye name of him that used it, yet never stroke he therewith. For if he could
have done it, even Anthony and Sylla, in all their strength durst not have
looked on him, who if he had lived, would always have hated them. And so be ye
braze^ bulls that Solomon made, called by an improper name, for they never
roared: and the golden calfe ye was set up at Dan by Jeroboam, and at Bethel
another they are said to be that which they never were: 1 King. 12.
In like manner say I, these to be faithful me^, because they seem to have
faith, and yet to be dead, in that for a truth they never knew as yet to live.
Theoderet bishop of cyrus, brings in, in his long discourse of heresies,
Theodoret of Cyrus.
one Stromatius Clemens as a witness against Prodycus, whose profession and
life was in those days much talked of, and did only in name and bare words
show it to ye church, who permitted that which (...) of Chremes in Terence, ye
doting father Adolesce^^ulum Scortari: and he thought it a thing indifferent to
use other men's wives as his own: Blindness i^ the heretike^
which ^or ^ble and gross heresy I rehearse, for that when men are dead in
sin, and stand in their own conceits to be reputed as faithful, it often
times falls out ye they be erroneous. For what is it for a man to say he does
believe, and to profess Christianity, to be a furtherer of religion (as he
supposes) and yet he walks in darkness, and lives very wickedly. Believe
me, it is a common belief in ye world and I can testify the same in too
great a number, that can tithe minte and Common, The order in double dealers.
and let other great and waightier matters alone, and will strain full hardly at
a gnat, yet will they swallow up the huge and monstrous Camyll at their
pleasure. Of truth, such dealing is not seemly for the professors of truth:
and better it were they never knew the Gospel, then to abuse ye Gospel thus.
Well, til thy manners be altered, and thy ways cleansed, thy life purged, and
evil dealings mended, thy faith where in thou hold will not save thee, it is
not alive it is dead. This faith it showed it self in Achan the son of
Caran, that in so pure and perfect state of the common wealth, wherein he was,
dyed to the flesh, that he might live unto the Lord, and he was an example to
his posterity for ever. Hophni and Phynees that dyed both in one day, Io^h. 7.
surrendered but a small account of their true faith, that justified them selves
before Israel, and yet abused the women that came up to Jerusalem to ye
purifying: 1. Sam. 2.
what zeal was that unto religion that was in Ahab, or in Iezabell his wife
that strumpet, that made so glorious a show unto Jerusalem of their works,
did they escape the hands of god? From whence came that when Jeroboam stretched
out his hands against the Prophet, 1. King. 16.
to have smitten him, and his hand withered up? 1. King. 13.
yet that faith he professed may be red of openly. The like zeal is seen this
day in many, This evil life makes all the pomp and boasting of our common
striuers to vanish away.
content to strive and debate for trifle^, but stick not to oppress and
hinder their brother: not reformable to any order, the weight whereof, if they
way it: it is but a shadow unto the rest of their wickedness. The Lord will
look down, I am in doubt upon the sons of men. And if he do, were it not
for Abraham his servant, and for Lot, whom yet we have abiding with us, The
very wicked are preserved and kept, for the good man's lake.
for whose sake he spares us, should not water be powered down again on the
face of the earth, or should not fire come down from Heaven? The Lord be
merciful unto us, I say no more: But to fold up this leaf: with the rest,
let us be assured, ye though the Pharisey go by, and the Leuite, and suffer
the poor man that fell into the hands of thieves to ly wounded: The poor
Samaritan whose faith thou doubtest of, shall be more faithful and more
accepted for the penny and the Oil that he gave him, then thou ye have great
riches and stuffed tresuries: for I say ye faith without works is dead. Iam.
2.7. and thy works declare thy faith. Gal. 5.6.1. Tim. 1.22. Ph. 2.5.

Hear comes in an other fellow, This kind takes away the hope that is in
Anabap. in papists: in the inchauntresse and in the ungodly.
that will claim some prerogative and title to faith, as well as he that went
before: and this is one that has a miraculous faith. You may marueyle that
seeing there is none now, and the use also of miracles cease, what end there
is I should make of this doctrine: Not to be scrupulous and inquisitiue hear,
neither to search farther then becomes me, two causes I set down that I
handle this. The first is, that the holds and fortresses whereon the Papist
groundeth his superstition may more easily be battered. The second, against the
Anabaptists that run to outward and exterior signs, to wonders and
reuelatio^s, and leave the right way which is by faith. For the wicked and
ungodly men do miracles as well as those that be just and upright men: of this
faith, there is mention made in the first to the Corinth. To one is given the
spirit of wisdom, to an other knowledge by the same spirit. To an other the
gifts of healing, to an other power to do great things, to an other Prophesy
by the same spirit. Crisostom, (...) Theophilact upon thi^.
Of this does Crisostom and Theophilact make mention in the 13. of the first to
the Cor. Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, and have not
love, I am as sounding Brass, or as a tinkling Cimball, and though I had the
gift of Prophesy and knew all secrets, and all knowledge, yea if I had all
faith so that I could remove Mountains, and yet had no love, I were nothing.
Of this same there is sumthing spoken by Christ in Math. 7.22. Many will say to
me in that day, Lord have we not by thy name Prophesied, and by thy name cast
out Deuilles, and by thy name done many great works, then will I protest I
never knew them, depart from me you that work iniquity. In the Law it was
said, that God would send false Prophettes to try them. And I doubt not but
it was an argument of the truth unto Israel, if signs and wonders wear
wrought by them. The which thing I take in hand, for that a number have
faitered in this of late.

And it is an argument of the Anabaptists, to allow their devilish pretenses by
signs and reuellations: This presumption of truth, wear it to be grounded
hear, it would iustesie that Traitor Judas: for I doubt not, but ye he also
was among the twelve that Christ sent out to preach abroad. Also Cayephas
might claim some Privilege of Prophesing, Prophesing, and miracles, and
signs, a trial oftentimes of his people.
if it would save him, for he knew that it was expedient: one Man should dye
for the people. And Balaam was sent for unto Balack, whose evil pretense is
noted after that, because he laid stumbling Blocks before Israel, and
caused them to sin, and he both did Prophecy and wrought many miracles, but
this is nothing, for God has promised death unto the false Prophet. Deuteronomy.
18.20. and 13.1. which argues that such shall both cum to try us: next though
they do wonders, yet they shall not escape his fearse wrath, but perish for
it. No doubt these be the latter days, wherein shall arise false Christ's, and
false Prophets, and shall show great signs and woonders: so that if it wear
possible, it should deceive the very elect: wherefore there is no ground of our
faith upon these exterior shows, nor salvation to be promised for thy
miracles sake: For as they at the Possouer received to the outward show, no
more then a bare sign of him that should be crucified: so in like manner
those that wrought by miracles and woonders, wear never the nearer Heaven by
them: for they wear tokens only of their functions. Who can reason that in as
much as I am baptized, Miracles, the^ be^ (...) signs, they be no cert^ya
tokens of ly^e.
I am immediately elected? or receiving the Sacraments I am therefore to be
assured of my salvation? For as the first is a token of regeneration, which is
not tied to the outward Ceremonies: so the second it is not necessary, it
should have his effect, for I may receive it unworthily: Then this which I
call a faith of miracles, it is effectual for a time: and as well is the Lord
gloryfied in the reprobate, as he is in his chosen: and all things are
created by the Lord, and the wicked for the day of wrath: Is there any that
dare tie the spirit of the Lord God to any man? are we not in his hands?
and has he not made us? If God will set out his power in the Vessels of
dishonor, and make them to be ready at his commandment? What shall he do
unto those whom he has chosen unto glory? do you not find that Saull was
also reckoned among the Prophets? Simon magus, esteemed as God, with the
Samaritans.
and so was Simon Magus among the Apostels (I speak of the Samaritans which
knew him not) then we may be satisfied in in this: for it is no proof of
our election and of our faith, because we can do miracles. The Papists that
have erred in that gros Idolatry of transubstantiation, to ratefie their
devises of the real presence of Christ, have snatched certain proofs out of
Ciprian in the treatise of the life of Gregory: A bufiue ^^gument (...) from
Ciprian.
their first reason is: That in the hand of Gregorius as he prayed at the
Alter, the Sacrament, that is the bread, was turned into a finger: and appeared
as flesh: But how strong an argument is this? The villainy of the pope
Hildebrand.
For Hildebrand that wrought by inchauntment and got the Bishopric, and
succeeded him many years after, might give his predicessor leave to play one
knacke of legerdemayne as well as he. The same Ciprian (though I know he
had his error) is witness that sometime as the Sacrament was ministered, there
stood in the presence of the Preeste a little Boy: whereon their reason is
still grounded. Ergo, Christ is really in the Sacrament: It was pritely said
in one place by Malanghton, upon a frumpe that he gave a cauilling Sophistar,
The peevish nes of their reason appears.
Baculus stat in angulo, ergo non licet sacerdotibus ducere vxores: and of
truth so say I to this argument. A Reed grows in the Riuar, I must not
therefore play to morrow: For as is of little Children at the Skales, so is the
childishnes of this reason open to us all? And yet there is a third reason
mixed to that which went before: that when as ye bread was thrust through with
Penkniues, there issued out of the host perfect blood: therefore they conclude
Christ is really in the Sacrament. Error is shevved by example.
The Ensusiastistes that wear often times frantic and mad, they used to
dance, and kept company with Deuilles, and as they reported, were the^ selves
turned into Spirits, yet thought they notwithstanding they had the holy Ghost.
Ergo ought we to credit them? These patched coats, I would they wear given
to some other, we stand in no such need as yet to wear them: I might heap
up a donghill of such robbish if I would, but we have too much of that
already, Dregs of Popery in ^apistes.
I wish rather, ye they would unburden us of that we have: for you left of
late such bundels there of in out corners, that if provision be not had and
foresight taken it will before it be long infecte us all: we are content to
leave this for such as desire it: and very willinge to learn if that you can
afforde us better ware: Trifling books of sluggish idle priests.
as for this faith of miracles, it is now vanished and fled for fear: the
sight of the Gospel did so astonishe them, that they were never known in
England since. Peradventure some idle Monk, or Launcelet friar, newely crept
out of his Portesse, has compiled a great and huge volume of their saint
George on horseback: or some such petie Canon, thrust out a sheet or two of
paper of their Diriges and Trentalles: otherwise they have occupied and busied
them selves in little.

Then let this suffice now, for a testimonial before the Lord: that in no one
thing, neither wonder: Salvation only in a lively faith.
nor sign, neither miracle, neither toke^, or in ought else, is the salvation
and life of man put: save in a lively, true, and perfect hope by faith,
confirmed in our redemption upon the cross in the blood of Christ: So that at
length, though very weary, we have arrived at a very pleasant port: for one
or two turns more over passed, we will lanche no more into the depth, but
quietly take our aboade in this haven by faith: that can quietly protect us,
against all the haylestones and tempests of the devil. Yet enter we not in
presently: something there is we must suffer before, least that rashly and in
haste, we mistake the hold whereunto we should bend our sails, and be
thrown out a loofe unto another. And as is of two rocks, the one whereof will
smite us in sunder if we light thereon: the other, if we do draw to it
warily, will save us: even so is it of these that I talk of. The countenance
of them both is alike for a season, but happy is he that can make choice of
them: the difference is seen very easily in that the last two members which
I left untouched before, ar still behind.

The first of them, is faith for a time: Faith, vv^ is for a ti^
the second is a justifying faith, and a great piece of cunninge there is in
discerning them: of that faith which is for a season and for a while, it is
written in Matthew 13. When any man hears the word of the kingdom, and
understands it not: For the evil man comes and snatcheth away that which
is sown in his heart: and it is he which has received ye seed by the ways
side. The un tovvard, and vnfearned reason of a popish prelat.


Smith, sometimes a Bishop in England, an impudent Sophister, in his book he
wrote against Peter Martyr that good man of God, the very same that he set out
against Melancton and against Luther: he in those of his chippes, which he
swept up together, very inconstantly affirms: fidem, faith, not to be
fideutiam, faithfulness: and inueying sore against such as make that man which
would be faithful, to continue in his faithfulness. He racketh that same
place of Paul. Ephesians. 3. (...): That is we have boldness and entrance, with
confidence by faith in him. What is it can be uttered in plainer forte? The
true fight of the faithful man
In Christ we be encouraged to look up to heaven, that durst not before cast
our eyes upon the Lord. We have a passage to his kingdom, the gates whereof
are now more largely opened then before: we have a confidence, otherwise we
might be swalowed up of death and hell, and we should be tossed, as the wanes
of the water. Lastly, it is a faith in Christ: wherein is excluded the
ability of man, then we must atteine by grace in faith, which is the only
gift of God: To be faithful for a time and to revolt, is a sign of
reprobation, how ever xvc cloak it.
so that it is an Iron taken out of the fire, and from the smythes forge, to
separarate faith from faithfulness: it never came out of the furnace of the
Lord.

Then this, whereof I speak, the faith of man, which is for a time, it is a
sign of reprobation: For he that puts his hand to the plough, and knew the
word, and runs back: happy had he been, had he never known it. Who
runs his race, and gets the game? what Champion retireth before he has
got the field? Who iourneyeth, and then repents, before his appointed day?
Does the world mislike effeminate and sluggish men? Time tries, and
persecution judges of the good gold: and then shall the dross be known.
And will the Lord be pleased with unconstant and wavering hearts? I never
liked him, whose amity was fervent for a day, and altered again with a blast.
Neither has my soul loved the man, that could so valiantly rattle out the
threatenings of God, and when anguishe and persecution assaulteth him, kept
silence. The earth has spewed out the unsavory cockle, that has upon it a
Summer garment, and dares not show his head in Winter. And God has left of
the Ethnikes, and of the nations, as pricks and thorns in our sides to try
us: and we be not of his building, if we stand not as stiff in tribulation and
sorrow, as if we would in time of peace. popery, th^^ was once i^ England.
Our late days are a witness hereof, when it pleased God to try his good
Gold, and suffered the Copper and baser metal against the day of wrath. And
he never commended the Israelites, in that they forsook his law and his word,
but he scourged them grievously to reclaim them. In that peace and security,
the like whereof was never seen on earth, as was given by God in the days of
Solomon, What advantage was it, though they built so glorious a temple, and
went afterward a whooring to their idols? Iehosophat was in great peril of
his life, 1. King. 2 (...).
for waaging battle with an unjust man, and had not the Lord heard him he
had dyed: It is my note upon this, that thou be all alike, and that thou waver
not: for if he would have stricken a just man for that he stumbled: what shall
be come of that man, that lies groueling in sin?

Ichu began a good course, and happy were his days, and blessed were his
years, for doing the message of God so ducly: but if then, when he had put
down the house of Ahab: and suffered Baal to be woorshipped no more in Israel,
2. King. 10.
and had molten the golden Calves, he had then also left ye sins of Jeroboam
which caused Israel to transgress the will of God: his seat, it had been
established: and his throne set up among the tribes for ever. Josiah his zeal
at the first, his repairing of the temple, his altering of religion, the good
ways wherein he went, were no cause to keep the hand of God from him, 2.
King. 23.
when he went up against Pharoath Necoth to Megiddo to fight, and consulted not
with the Lord? I like not that of Ieptath, to come fair and softly, and to
stay so cowardly: for I wish that he had known as well, what God would have
required when he came home with victory: as he did search out before when he
went against the Ammonites: Judge. 11.
then let him that will be the true worshipper of God, seek as well what is
profitable to morrow for him, as that which is expedient to day. I confess,
(and forrie I am, that I must so often show my self an enemy unto him: but
thus it is, I hate him to the death) that I have nothing to do with the
hollow hearted Gospeller, or with his looseness of life. I seek that man
that continues, and endures to the end. And as for their envy, it is not
that I care for: such fainte hearted fellows may easily be blown away: a
stroke or two, though it be of small force, it will dismay them.

To them I say whom God has blessed in his spirit to bear his livery, There
is falshed and wickedness, even in those that profess the Gospel. Ephesians. 6.
and to carry his marks in their for heads: that are able to suffer
persecution, and will not for a time: but come there life, or come there death
stand corragiously to the battle: To those I give a more warli^e attire, and
I tharge them that in such extremity they be apparrell^^ thus. Let their
loins be gyrt with truth. Let their Brestplate be of righteousness: These
weapons, shevve not thy man lines, but go^lynes:
let their feet be shod with the Gospel of peace: let them take to help them
the Sheeld of faith: let them put on their heads the Helmet of salvation: let
them take to fight withal, the Sword of the Spirit: and the God of Peace and
glory, he shall keep them from all the stery darts of Satan.

Thus albeit in a wearisome manner, we have escaped and come to land: I doubt
not but well defended for a long space, and so well furnished, as the Devil,
the world, and the flesh shall never move us: My council is, seeing our
enemies be overthrown, and we at rest: that we do as they at Thebes did:
Readiness in praying, steadines in perseuering, and vvatchfulnes, in thy
dealings: be true tokens of iustefiyng faith.
that come wind or come weather, come danger come perrill, we be found in
the top of the Tower watchinge. Otherwise there is that be ready enough to
reskewe the pray: and our enemy the Devil he has a band of men in a
readiness, always to assault us. And he lays as great seege, as any Captayn
of them all that fights on the earth for his tra^sitory affairs: the
espetiall mark which he aymeth at, is it that now I have in hand, the faith
of man: and it is the fifth and the last thing in my division that I noted: I
put it in the last garrison of my men, because if all fail, if life, if
Glory, if this world, yet have we one behind that is able to reskew us: and
this faith whereby we are justified, it does not stay on it self, neither can
we have hope of recovery if we fail at any time, but from that sure and
vnmoouable fortres where it is shrouded: and this hold it is the Lord. For
man is weak and feeble, and our fathers that went before, they staggared even
in their faith, and fell from the Lord, and so had continued unto the end, if
the Lord had not helped them, for this cause God has allotted unto us to our
use, very strong Inginnes, that will rowse out our enemies and shingr them to
morselles, if they come near us. These be in number three. Th^e things to be
required in a iulcesting faith.
The first is hope: the second is stedfastnes: the third is the spirit: These
be they that fight for us, and maintain our right, and shall keep us and our
faith that it waver not. This sure and steadfast hope I put it in the forefront
of this battle, because it leads us by hand (as it were) unto the Lord, and
makes us certain, that he can and will fight for us. A man hops, that
beleeu^th not: but he that has faith, has assured hope.
And this hope it was in the blind man that cried out, Jesus thou Sun of
David have mercy on me. I cut not in pieces these too, faith and hope, if they
be in the godly: yet I seauer the one from the other, after a forte, for I
know that he which hops, is in a good entrance unto faith: For the certenty
of the second: it is the establishinge of the first: and though they be
called as beeinge one faith. Luke 18.24. yet it is in a diverse respect: For
the hope that is in man, it is the Page, and Seruetar and the very wayter upon
faith: giuinge attendaunce thereon. Faith, it is Lady and gouernesse to the
other: it spinneth up the Third, and so much as it wants, it adds unto it.
It becomes all of us to say, Lord we believe, help our unbelief. For I can
determine no otherwise of that in Naman the Syrian, when he went away angry
from the Prophet. Is there no waters in Damascus, Abanar and Parpar, as good as
those that be about Samaria? A sight and vevv efhope, before we come to faith
Yet with what manner of hope, he washed him in Iordayne, I leave to others.
To discourse at large hereof, it is fitter for him, that will guide a great
Navy in the wide Ocean Sea, then for a man that is content to rule a small
Galley in the Riuar: such therefore as look for larger discourses, I refer them
to such as take in hand greater volumes. I give but short lessons, and have
consideration of the memoryes of them I spoke unto: but it follows.

To the faith which iustefieth, there goes hope: to this hope I have annexed
assurance, and the spirit of God knitteth them together: A true and
infallable sign of says.
what is it if a man cry Lord, Lord, and then he does hear him: when he
has that he looked for, and enjoys that he wished for, he shall then
reuolte and repent him of the truth he stood in? These Weathercocks, they
are good for nothing but to stand in the air: for if a tempest do come, and a
shower fall, it tottereth again and houereth as at the first: whose picture I
remember I once saw in the description of Bifrons Ianus, which stood in the
Temple of Rome, and had two faces for both ears, and these men they have two
tongues for both times. Starters from the truth.
God weed out such unprofitable Nettels, if so it please him: for they can
tingle now and then, and peradventure blistar the hands of a few refreshe as
yet the simple soul they will not. Well, these have the reward: and because
they are luke warm neither whot nor cold, God has promised to spue them
forth. This man that I seek for, that has learned to know the Lord Christ,
and seasoned his speech with salt, and waited for the Bridegroms coming: He
is of another manner of heart, and of an an other Spirit: and vexations and
troubles, and anguishe of mind, and care and the world, and the assaults of
Satan, they can never remove him. David stays not: Ionathas sleeps not:
Daniell trifeleth not: Esdras is not dismayde: Judith discomforted: Mardochaeus
altered: but they stand in the Lord corragiously. Examples o^ the true
iustesiyng faith by this from Christ.
The Martyrdom of Antonius moved him not: the death of Sabinas turned him
not: ye slaughter of Germanus withdrewe him not: We must be whipped and
drowned with Theodotia: content to suffer and dig in mind pittes with
Siluanus: to be burned with Domininus: to have our sides launched with sharp
Rasars as Pamphylus: For our life, it is as the life of Latimar: our faith as
the faith of Ridley: our end, as the end of Cranmar: our ways as the ways of
Death for the Lords sake, for blessed is that man continues to the end, and
he it is that shall be saved.

The third and last help whereto we trust: The Spirit, that is guide and
leader of all such as fear the Lord.
that holds us, that raises us, that renueth us, ye strength neth us, it is
the spirit. This is he that finisheth and ends all: have you wisdom? have
thou knowledge? have you gifts of Prophecy, of tongues, of discerning, of
beeleeuing, of faith? It is not thine, the spirit of God is he that gave it.
This is a hard thing for man to digest: who when he inioyeth and possesses
all, when he is the ruler and Master upon earth, when he bids, he
commands, he builds, he alters, he gathers, he inritcheth, yet all
that he has, it is laid in the dust, and carried with him to the Grave: he
himself also at the will of the Lord. This I speak, to suppress the
insolency of man, that beeinge hear in life, does live in death, and can not
come to dwell with Christ, vnleast the spirit of God direct him. Then in
that faith, whereby we be fully iustefied, our hope it is made perfect, our
perfection remains to the end: our end is directed by the spirit: so that
this is the some of all that I have spoken that we stay and be reared up, and
dye and live, and in the Lord. The way and the mean I have set down, the
order to come unto it, the rules and ordinances we should keep in it. It
remains lastly, to pray unto our Lord Jesus Christ the Sun of God, The
spirit is only retained by prayer.
to inflame and guide us by his spirit, that we fall not. For I acknowledge
my self a professed enemy against that of the Papists, and the exclamation
they make, of good works: Other wise Moses could have come to the Lord, and
have known the God of Jacob by him self, God needed not to have called: but
as one mightily preserved by the daughter of Pharoath, that found him wrapped
in swaddling cloures in a basket of flagges, shows unto me, that God had
some great message for him to do, that kept him so mightily in the time of
death. It is said I think, that God had respect unto Abell, and that he cared
not for the offering of Cain: good works are left out here, we must rifle
somewhat farther from them.

Abraham believed, Genesis 4. A reason tha^, we are not justified by good vvork^.
and it was counted unto him for righteousness: to whom appertains the gift
of belief but unto God? to whom are we comptable? who is it that lays not
sin unto our charge, who accepts of our life and conversation but God? who
only is righteous? who only just? who only pure? who only faithful? but
only one Lord? Then, who gives the same grace? the same life? the same
gifts? but the same Christ? Now find out the merits and works in man. I
might be long in this discourse, of the Patriarchs, of the prophets, of all the
elect of the Lord, in due time called and brought home to serve him. But there
is no wrestling and strife now, then when we join hand to hand, and cupple
our selves to the bar to try it: then shall be seen who it is that has this
privilege. Only remains, that whereas I have set down, that we have need
of prayer, and that we must pray: to hang you no longer in suspense thereof:
seeing I have defined what it is, and how to use your selves, mannerly in ye
presence of so high and great a Lord: and that you ought not to doubt of the
form and manner thereof.

There is yet left you behind to learn, The profit and common ditie that we
have by faith.
that this prayer being done and finished by faith, many great and singular
commodities do come by it: and as out of ye water brook, diverse vessels be
filled with one water, and the same very good: so of one faith be many
perfectly and spiritually fed, and yet the same do bring but one life.

For the spirit of God which works to the best, in those that be his, has
given an assurance to the childryn of obedience: of the life, and of the
hidden treasuries that be laid up for the righteous, until the day of
revealing: and for that cause to encourage us in the voyage that we have to
go, God has confirmed our weakness with certain promises, that we may in
all our dealings stand the better. Yet till he bring the same to pass, he
has laid before us that which is requisite to be done of our parts. Without
grace, without the operation and vvorking of the Lord, we fall to the
ground.
This, when by his grace it is finished, he will make a consummation and
perfection of his blessedness, and we shall obtain that which we prayed for
by faith in Christ. Our duty is first of all to consider, that the faith
which we have (for I know that there is none, but they will be accounted as
faithful) consists chiefly of these three things. First, that there is but
one faith. Secondly, that it is the gift of God. Thirdly, that it comes by
hearing. For that man that will be justified, must be justified through these.
Our faith has adjoined to the knowledge thereof, three things.
That there is but one faith, Paull very notably has described to us in the
fourth to the Ephesians. There is one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God
and father of all, which is above all, and through all, and in you al. And as
on earth there is one only air that fostereth us: so is there only one faith
in Christ that saves us.

The second thing is: that this faith is the gift of God. Math. 11.27. Luke.
17.22. John. 6 44. Act. 15.8. The reason hereof is this: We are by nature the
children of death, wherein then can we be saved but in Christ? and Christ, he
has given us a mean, and it is faith: and faith brings life, so that if we
had faith by nature, we were the children of God and of life by nature. But
this is otherwise: for as by one man came in death: so by one man came in life.
And as the first Adam was made a living soul: so is the second Adam made a
quickening Spirit: that where as before, we were made children of wrath and
death. Now we are in Christ created a new, and fashioned another lump, and
made comlyer and better, then before we were. Also the wall is broken down
betwixt him and us, and we have free passage to him by faith: and this faith
it is given us, for it is the gift of God.

The third property required in this our faith: A good token of a true
Israelite, to be a hearer of the word: and is also very often a covering for
the wicked, to cloak him vvithall.
was that it should come by hearing, Romans 10.17. The occasion hereof I take to
be, that a difference might appear of the rightuous, and of the unrighteous
man. For, as every one is readiest in hearing, so should he be perfectest in
his living. Yet, this is not as the light in the Sun, that can not be
altered: for our worldlings in these days are at Sermons with the first, but
in life the filthiest. The proof thereof, it will show it self, if it were
lawful to touch the behavior of private men, which offense as I think it
not expedient to be given in the church: so if it were ever lawful, I
suppose it to be now: Papists, runners abroad: and great seekers after
Bulls, and pardons: no followers and seekers of the word of God,
wherein a number be redier to fly to Layis with them of the tribe of Dan, to
be a father and Priest to Images: then quietly to stay at home, or do any
good in Siloe. Their earerings and their jewels, they are too base to serve
their Mahomet in their chambers, and to garnish up their altars: but zeal that
they have to the house of God and his word: The grain of mustarde seed
spoken of in Matthew, and less (if less there may be) will press it down
with heaped up measure.

The Lord grant, that if time served, there be not spies among us, to way
out the riches of Jerusalem by wayght: nor servants in our own palaces,
ready bent to say Ahimelech and the Priests of God: For that they of mount
Ephraim, and the inhabitaunts of Gilgall, be so graceless in their dealings.
These Asarites, how begin they even now to kick against us? Have they net
served Baall, before our faces of late? of a truth it will fall out, that as
they have been sufficient thorns and pricks in our sides until this day:
Papi^es that look for a day.
so to pay us that they owe us, and to fill our measures to the brimme, if
ever Abimelech do get up, we shall find it too late to fly unto sichem to
save us. These days of sorrow the Lord keep from us, and give them of his
spirit, to acknowledge the true light: that the faith whereon they vaunt so
mutch, may appear as the day: and that old Cankar, so grown in their sides,
and now rotten for lack of launching, may grow to whole and perfect flesh:
or that he would fend a sharp razour to ransack it.

But as for these men, An exhortation to those young scholars, to vvho^ this
same was written.
I leave them to the Lord, and I return thither from whence I came: to take
my last farewell of my young Scholars, to whom I have directed all this
speech: And I wish them in time to know the Lord. And that the rottenness
and putrefaction that is together drawn into their hearts, that they swallowed
up from their cradels, might be laid aside in their youth, and they grow up of
them selves into a more lively body. For I know, though you be accustomed to
pray: yet, that your tender years be not able to carry with them that
discretion and natural attendaunce, most commonly in such as be of greater
stature, and more days. Learn in thy youth then, and seek to bring that
desire thou haste to prayer, unto his full perfection: as for this short lesson
I do give thee, it is an other manner of one, the^ as yet thou have learned:
and thy readiness of wit, thy tender age, thy prime and flower wherein thou art,
it will be an aid and help unto thy memorys. Neither will I exact so straight
and narrow kind of life, as others do: for I leave a liberty to the freshnes
of thy youth, as meet and convenient times to sport thee with. Thy pastime
alone let it be honest mirth, as becomes a servant and Scholar of Christ:
I permit thee not to seek out any holes and corners to pray in: and let not
the evil example of these that be aged, alter and break the right course,
thou should take in thy youth.

I give thee a charge for the Sabbath day: As God has made us: so will he
be honored for us:
and that thou sever not thy self from the congregation, neither cut his
Church into pieces: whereof thou art also one. For I would that thou knew,
that the end wherefore you are called into the Church of God, is to understand
that your redemption is laid up in Christ: and your life perfited in his
blood, a token and sign whereof you received, when as you promised unto the
Lord, to be holy and perfect and unspotted unto him: so that there is no time
given you to contend for trifles: neither may you contend about Baptism, or
doubt of the favor of God, or distrust the Lord, seeing he is a God of
righteousness: And if our manner of order trouble thee, or our custom hinder
thee, that we use at Baptism, I show thee that it is indifferente: Comlynes
(...) commended by Paull: el^ eucry man will have his custom, the^ shall
there be no order.
what matter is it if thou come unto the Funt, and there receauest tokens of
grace? It is better and more laudable then if thou did take it at a Basin,
or out of a Pot, or powered out through any there vessels: for they all be
profaned worse by wicked and profane men, that wash and handle them, then is
this: used of Papists in time of Popery. For these are abused now: the Funt
has bin cleansed many a time since, and is put unto a good use: Think not
mutch to forsake the Devil for he is a wicked Spirit, and enemy to mankind:
or to denounse his works, for they be evil and ungodly: nor the Pomps and
vanities of this world, for they fade and vanishe together: This dealing and
dalying, precisenes yet wickedness in greater matters: is abhorninable
and if thou conceive an evil opinion of the Minister, yet do not thou the
duty of a Minister, and let not the examples of other men move thee, for it
is ungodly and against the word of the Lord: But see that thou walk uprightly,
in sinscritee and integrytee of heart. When thou come to greater grothe, and
art able first to pray: then aright: next to God: when thou art instructed in
the manner and form of prayer, and then understand that it is to be done,
in pure and perfect faith without swaruinge, and art able to judge a true
Christian by the Badge, and Colisen he wears: Which is a good and upright
conversation grounded upon assured hope: take no thought my Child, neither
think that thou art far from Christ: and be thou persuaded that he
knows thee: For then I will bring thee to his Table, and thou shall eat and
drink with him: and I will give thee assurance of that faith thou have,
neither shalt thou be any more a stranger or foraner, but a partaker of his
body and of his blood: whereby thou art washed and cleansed from sin: on whom
thou feedest spiritually, in that lively faith which I have taught. But take
you heed my little ones, that you do not trouble your selves with vanities,
for that you have not learned of me: neither vere your minds with untimely
questions which be not for your years, leave them to others: I charge thee
that thou make no difference of standinge, if thou come thither: neither yet
necessity in kneeling to know God: nor Religion insitting to serve the Lord.
Presume not to be a Iudger of thy Brother at his Table: These and such like,
be common with us.
rake not up old offenses, and remember not the iniquities done in his youth:
think that God has forgotten them, and know they are wiped away, by assured
repentance, in the blood of Christ: The wicked man shall bear his own sin,
and the ungodly his own transgressions, therefore fly not from the Table of
the Lord for the iniquity of thy Brother: My little one, learn in time, More
amendment, and les judgment of others: is good,
and suffer not age to incrotch with stealinge steps before thou know the
Lord: For if I give thee Bread, and Wine, as given unto every one privately,
to put him in mind of the receipte thereof: If I bid thee take the Bread in a
remembrance of his body, that was given for thee, and the Wine in a
remembrance of his blood was shed for thee: it is all one unto us, as if
Brother should drink unto Brother, and the effect thereof alike: If I shall
use a certain and definite order in my prayer, All order contempned with us.
to the end, there may be no confusion in the Church: it is better my Sun,
then if every man pray severally, and then there shall be small agreement or
consent among us? But I see that every one of you has his appointed manner:
and it is not good in the Church of God, for there must (be as it wear) one
body, joined together by one voice, uttering all of us (as of one speech, one
prayer unto our God: As for the Garments that we wear, they detract nothing
from the goodness of the Lord: and make a conscience in thy life, that God may
prosper thy days and bless thy youth, and give thee a perfect knowledge in
thy age, and direct thee in a holy and pure conversation in the sight of men.
Put not religion in trifles: and if at the Table of the Lord, I stand North or
South: it is alike, as if I turned Cast or West unto the Lord: For he is in
all quarters of the earth: As for the state wherein thou art, doubt thou not
thereof: and let no man delude thee in any thing: For thy Baptism, Obedience is
superstition, where vvisdo^ is vvantinge.
at what time soever it was: whether in ignorance, or in the brightness of
the Gospel: whether by a man, or by a woman: or by the good, or by the evil:
or by the Christian, or by the Panime (though none of them all be allowed of
me) yet if it happen so: God, he is not tied to the good or to the bad, to
the water or to the sign, Signs are to kens, no necessary assuraunces of our
salvation.
but those whom he accepts will he call into his Church: Put not the
ground of thy faith in any thing that is unseemly: and think not those which
be thy suertyes shall answer for thee or for thy deeds: For when they have
brought thee out of fire and water, and set thee upon thy feet, and trained
thee up in good nurture: and tought thee the ways of the Lord, and thou of thy
self come unto full grothe, my Child think not thou art tied unto them, or
yet that their life is fastened unto thine: For thy sin it is upon thy own
head, and God will root out the heary scalpe of such a one as transgresses
his Laws: doubt not of this, whither thou ought to forsake the Devil and
all his works or no? but understand at the beginning: and know that God
loves righteousness and hates iniquity: and thy conversation let it not be in
the works of the flesh: He that forsakes not the works is the Servant of
the Devil: and he has no portion in Christ.
Murder, adultery, incest, fornication, theft, bribary, extorcion, usury,
robbing thy neighbor, nor in porloyning, nor in deceyt, nor in racking of the
poor, nor in grudging, nor in envy, nor debate, nor striving, nor in
concupiscence, nor in the ways and sweetness of this life. For these, and
such like be the works of the Devil, and thou must vow, and promise to
forsake him and all his works and come to God: For God loves the willinge
soul, and the mind, that is ready to obey him is acceptable in his sight. It
is a gross error my Children to say that you only are the Church of God: and
forget this, We are of the Church every man is not the Church.
and learn of me. There is on earth but one true Church, and one head we
have, and one espoused thereunto in one Christ: and every man is or ought to
be a member of the same, not every man one Church. For as on earth we
confess that there is above us but one Lord, and one King: so in Heaven there
is but one Lord, one God, one Christ, of who^ we be members, knit, united,
and coopeled together, to have our dwellinge in the heavens. Let this then
pass, and understand that our mantion and abiding place is above: and though
we be in sundry countries here on earth: yet we profess one faith, one
truth, one hope, all which be the true tokens ye we agree together in one
church. So then, we be members one of another, and not every one, one
another head: and we be parteners and fellows in one and the same church,
not every one the several head of the true church: Wherefore instructed fully
in this, know that it is expedient, as you are all of one body, and joints,
and members of one head: so to frame and fashion you here in this world, that
you love and agree in one: as also, that you make profession and promise in
open dealinges that you be at agreement, and condescende together in one
congregation: In speaking, dissembling: in brotherhood, falsehood: in thy
actions, naught else but factions: they be tokens of impiety, no Christiamtie
for it is abominable and learn it before crookedness and weariness
incrotche: that any one for private gain, shall cloak and cover the inward
affections: or show him self by outward gesture and deed, to be another
manner of man then he is in mind and heart: for it is good that there be no
doubleness, no hypocrisy, no open show and profession in any thing, which
notwithstanding thou shall mislike in private assemblies, or show thy self an
adversary before men, that liking and good report may be taken: yet in thy
soul, and in thy heart shall be another man.

Thus, if thou be affectioned, God shall bless thee in thy dealing, and
prosper thee in that thou go about: and he will give thee honor in thine
age, and glory will fellow thee to the grane. Then, if the Lord do visit
thee and think on thee in his mercy: and in his favor give unto thee a
comforter, which is flesh of thy flesh, and bone of thy bone: and thou
acknowledging his benefit, and confessing his reward, will show the
obeisance and duty to him. Then coople thy self to the order of the church:
and disdain not to be ordered by government. The con^e^pt of Magistracy: is
the only token of one that is carclesse.
Thy marriage, it is as lawful and acceptable unto God, as well in the body
and midst of the church, as if it were celebrated, or solemnized at the table
of the Lord. Stand not so mutche upon the use of the ring, which is a sigue
only of the joining, and a pawn of your trothe plighted each to other: and
has neither force to salvation, or any religion that is the more beautified by
it: but is a bare order and custom in the church. Let no man persuade thee
that any evil or accursed dealing, F^llinge so grosely: and cauilling, so
dispightfully is a small token of Christiany tie.
any wicked or ungodly man's life is to be kept close, and secreate, or bidden
from the world, if thou know it, for fear the Gospel should be slaundered:
It is abomination to ye Lord, he will disclose it. See unto thy self, and
look narrowly to thy steps, and examine thy ways: take not an oath falsely,
neither bring thou destruction to thine own soul: for the credit and the
honor thou may purchase to the wicked man. For the portion of him that uses
perjury is death: and the lying soul heapeth up wrath, and a perverse man is
destruction: and happy is that man whose vprightnes is not entangled nor
snared with the wicked. Last of all, If errors be not taken in time: they
will never be Seared or weeded out will death.
my litrie babes, for a number are even now to be taken: and it is good to
use the benefit of the year, and opportunity of the seasonable weather we
have: otherwise, a great fort of you, be so far grown, that if moderation be
not had, we shall never bend you. For this cause learn in time: and presume
to judge no man in his dealing. Think Christianly of all: condemn none.
Seclude not the infidel from Christ, but leave a hope till the last gasp. As
for Christians (and us all that ought to be of one church) let charity rule
thee, Al judgment is to be deferred to the Lord: but no authority is given to
m^^.
and brotherhood move thee, and the same profession (of which we be all)
continually guide thee: enter rashly into judgment with none. As for the
wicked, let him be wicked still: and for the ungodly, let him wallawe in
ungodliness. The Lord will recompense him at his appearing: he has given
thee no authority to revenge it.

And now that I have brought you (as I take it) out of ignorannce, and laid
before you the way to go in, receive at my hands a few words: lap them up
in thy breast, and hide them in the secret closet of thine heart: for they be
as the Balm, and as precious as the ointment, and they will bring joy and
pleasure in the end if thou keep them. Mark therefore, and understand what
it is that I teach.

First, I open unto thee my faith: and I give unto thee, the assured colisen of
a Christian: and it is this. Learn to pray: for it is necessary and
convenient to all flesh. Know what prayer is, and use it rightly. Understand
the manner and order how to pray: use not the fond custom of the nations:
settle thy self, and prepare thee as unto the battle: so to be strongly
armed against temptations. First, A general repeticion of things contained in
this Book.
know our fathers did it: then the express word of God commands it: that
our necessity wills it: that our danger and peril wherein we be requires
it: that our deliverance from the Lord, otherwise helpless compels it:
that our enemy the devil and Satanas, daily assaying us, does drive us to it.
In thy prayer, fly Hypocrisy: come humbly and lowly to the Lord: put away
hollownesse and looseness of heart from thee. Be thou in assurance, and fixed
in hope. Ask not at his hands what pleases thee: and let not thy prayers be
unseemly for his majesty. Fail not herein: neither stay thou, but persevere
and continue in thy prayer. And now take an assurance of thy faith: lay hold
in time, and leave not the hope that thou have in the Lord. Renounce all
Gentilisme: Give no credit to sighs and wenders: be not dead in thy life:
show thy faith by thy deeds. Let it not be for a time: neither continue in
faith for a season, but be steadfast: confessing and acknowledging, that the
faith which justifies thee, is brought from hope unto assurance, and guided by
the spirit that directs thee. Understand that there is but one faith, as
there is one God: that it is the gift of the Lord: and that it comes by
hearing the word, and by preaching. Thus when thou art armed, know that thy
redemption is wrought: thy full satisfaction is ended, All our tra^aile in this
life, all our pain, it is made joy and pleasure unto us, in Christ.
thou thy self art made a new creature, and taken into the sheepfolde of the
Lord: and encourage thee the more in thy hard and wearisome journey: take
with thee the commeditie, and fruit which thou reapest: and gather it up as
the clusters of grapes in the harvest: or as the Olive and the Sinamand in the
Summer: for the sweat of thy brows, and the labor of thy hands, and the
end of thy tranaile, and of thy pain, shall be this. First, thy sins are
forgiven thee: for he that believes, shall not perish, but have everlasting
life. Matthew 9.2. Luke. 7.50. Acts. 10.43. I suppose it to be spoken of
Christ to this end. That man borne of a woman, and having but a short time to
live: being full of misery, might know him self to be worse then the
creatures that perish, if he had not a mean and way to save him: so that by
faith, we are no more dead so the flesh, but quiekened to the Lord Christ,
and thy sins be washed, My ^^rruption purified, thy uncleanness cleansed,
thy darkness lightened, thou thy self by faith saved.

The second benefit that comes to you my Children by this doctrine, I have
taught you, is, that we are the Children of God. John 1.12. Galat. 3.26. The
greatest glory in this life, that the proud and stately man does think upon,
is honor hear on earth and superiority with the highest, and heir to him that
is greatest, and familiarity with stately Lords and Lorolike states: but the
Children of obedyence they leave the transitorye world, they mount up into the
Sky, they pearce the Heaven, and dwell with the Lord of Lords: and be
heirs and Suns unto him.

The third commodity you shall find hereby, is this, that Christ dwells in
us. Ephesians. 3.12. and that you be made Temples of God, and habitations of the holy
Ghost: whom we have received from the Lord. John. 14.17. Romans 5.5. and 8.9.2.
Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. and 6.16. Gal^ 3.2. Ephe. 2.22. This also takes away the
righteousness of such, as walk not after the the spirit but after the flesh,
that quench the graces given unto them, and blinded with the spirit of error
remain still in darkness: and it iustefieth those that be Gods: and it is
our singular comfort, that he dwells and remains among us, so that all
filthynes must be laid aparte, dressinge and trimminge our bodies, as fit
places to receive the holy Choste, walking not in wantonness and banqueting,
neither in riot and gluttony, after the manner of this world, but frame and
fashion our earthly members, ye the man of God may appear, and the love of the
father which is spread abroad in our hearts, by the holy Ghost which is given
unto us.

The fourth and excellent dignity, that you my little ones, and all other that
profes unfeignedly shall receine is this. You be iustefied, purefied,
regenerated, and sanctefied, and by faith. Acts. 13.39. and 15.9. and 26.18.
Romans 3.24. and 4.5. and 5.1. and 9.30. and 10 10. Philip. 39. Colos. 1 23. From
him it comes that you have life: who when you wear culpaple before the
Lord: wrought a mean to strike out the hand wrighting, written in the Table
of stone, and has opened us a Door to enter in at, that wear deprived of the
Glory of God, and has engraven his commandments in our hearts, that more
freely by his grace, we might see our redemption wrought in Christ Jesus, by
whom in faith we are adopted, and Circumcised, not in a Circumcision made with
hands, but in cuttinge away our carnal affections, by the force of the
spirit: and as being enemies we were reconciled to God, by the death of his
Sun: so now beeinge reconciled, we shall be saved by his life: For to such as
walk in the steps of our Father Abraham, has he given eternal salvation
according to promise, that was not called by the will of man, and the will of
flesh: but by the will of God: So that blessed be our Lord Jesus Christ,
that sets out his love toward us, and has given us the ernest of his
Spirit, and in a more heanenly washinge purified us: and that not by water but
by the holy Ghost is it that he has renewed us: And with a better blessinge
then ye which was of Moses (that lasted for a season and is abolished) newly
sanctefied us: and by a faith that makes not ashamed, strengthened us: that we
might come and dwell with Christ, whose praise is not of men but of God.

The fifth and the last pre^eminence that you my Children for the long frauaile
and tediousnes wherein you have wearied your selves shall purchase and get unto
you: is that you shall obtain life everlasting. Ioh. 3.15. and 5.24. and 6.40.
and 11.25. and 20.29. Acts. 16.3. Romans 1.12. John. 5.13. This is the greatest
and the worthyest crown of glory that can be given unto man: for that trouble
which I know lies upon you for the Gospel, it is not to be compared unto the
life to come: and the persecution which befalls to the godly, and that sin
which now has dominion over you, that rules them which are not fully called
in Christ, will be an occasion that hereafter your obedyence shall burst out
into righteousness: your righteousness, to perfectnes: your perfectnes to
holiness: your holiness to redynes: your redynes to steadynes: your steadynes
unto eternal life: And the God of glory will direct you by his spirit, and
the spirit shall lead you unto Christ, and he will make a consummation of
your sorrows, and crown you with his Glory, and bring you to his Habitacio^,
where he has dweit ever. Whose riches are unsearchable: whose wisdom is
without depth: whose joys are not to be opened, of such as fear his name:
which he has provided, and laid up, and hidden in his secret treasuries
till his day of appearing: which he will bestow upon the just, and upon the
Saints that call upon him by true faith. For of him, and through him, and for
him ar all things, to whom be Glory for ever and aver. Amen.

FINIS.
The second part, of the Readings of John Keltridge.
NOw therefore having instructed you, how to enter unto the Lord: and the
Hedge being broken, to come more readely unto his dwellinge: you may freely
and with a good courage draw near to his Temple, and there in his sight, with
reverence and fear, power out your prayers before him: For this cause, as a
pawn and pledge of the care that I have, and as one in due time ordained of
the Lord, to set forth his word. I have this day discharged my conscience
before the Lord and his anointed, and before you all. To you of the younger
sort I send greetinge: I wish knowledge and wisdom to the rest: To the aged
and gray headed Fathers, health and peace in Christ. Take this among you, to
whom I owe it: and my presence I thrust upon you, whose look and countenance,
I never saw as yet: to read this, not rende this: that knowinge and
followinge: understanding not wandering, as hearetofore: your duty and
obedyence: our prayers and our request should be rightly offered up before
God: When as therefore we present our selves before his Majesty, let our
supplycations be framed thus.

O our Father which art in Heaven.
IN the whole course of the Scriptures, The difference in the prayi^ng of our
forfathers and the contrary aic in ours.
the men of God when they prayed to the Lord, used to call upon him, in the
name of their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that he would remember his
promise made unto them, and his covenant unto their posterity: but now the
scepter being given from Judah, and the Lawgiuer having lost his title: and
Siloe now come to comfort his people: They prayed as for one they looked for:
we pray as thankful unto him in that we have received him.
we leave that old and ancient speech of Abraham and of Jacob. We take a
more familier and common language, and call upon God, as we would or could
speak unto one that loves us: or as to him that dwells with us: or to such
a one as teaches us: or to such a one as nurtureth us: or as to a loving and
kind man: who for his tender and natural affection bears with us. The
threats of the law, take no hold upon those that call upon him. Not the
fire at Sinai, is able to discourage those be his: for he has abolished the
old scourge, and the hatred and wrath he conceived against man: and he is
reconciled and made a father unto us in his son Christ.

First then here appears the love of God, God is our father, in that he is
the father to his son Christ: and God to us in that we are his brethren.
that when we were dead in sin, and chayned to the weakness and beggary
traditions of the Jews: he has now appointed a more excellent and undefiled
law, that will not permit the sprinkling of blood: nor the death of creatures
that were innocent: No more now to shake the earth: nor to appear in fiery
clouds: nor to have his seat like pillars of brass to discourage us: but to
make an atonement, he has sent his only begotten son, that took our shape
upon him, and became weakness to make us strong and to make an agreement
betwixt him and us, that he might be kind and fatherly unto us.

Secondly, he has assured us for ever of his love, and in his Christ, made an
eternal testament, God spoke unto our fathers but roughly: to us familiarly by
the man Christ.
that cannot be broken, to the end we should acknowledge him and call upon
his name all the days of our life. Can the mother forget her young one? or the
Eagle those that she fostered? Will the Storke return no more to her eggs
she hid: or the Partridge discover her nest, to give up her young ones to the
enemy? The heavens may pass away: but the love of God will never fail his
children.
if all this could happen, yet will not the Lord forget us. For as is bond
betwixt father and the son: and as is the covenant betwixt the mother and
her babe: and as is the love of the Turtle to his mate: so is the Lord fixed to
us. He is a rightuous God, he will not break his promise: and we may claim
our privilege freely: for he has given it us freely in his son, purchased
in a great prise, and bought without any substance that we gave, even with the
life of his only son: so that he will not forsake us to the end, that be
his: neither give us over, for he is our father. The assurance hereof,
appears by the will that he left us at his departure, and that in that he
bequeathed us his Indentures to show for it. For, as power and authority was
given to Christ both in heaven and earth: The death of Christ, sealed our
redemption fully: and made acco^plishment for our sinus.
and those which were in the worloe, those his father gave unto him. So, having
title and interest thereunto, he made us his heirs and fellow brethren, that
we might have one father with him, and have our mantion and m^elling, there
where he has: and to show this unto us more perfectly: he left us, when he
took his leave on earth, these his letters, and his seal to show for it.

First, The letters patents we can shevve or our ^nheitance.
he that willed and dyed, and gave us this testament, is christ.

His heirs he made all such as be of his church.

His executours and administratours, be the pastors of his flock.

Witnesses at his death, and that bare record hereof, be his Apostles.

The riches he gave us, the substance he bequethed us, is the kingdom of his
father.

The title we have to it, the writings we can show for it, be his last
words, at his last supper: which he strengthened and sealed in his blood.

It is not unknown how shrewde a fall man had at the first, that bruzed and
mangled his joints in such sort, The love of God is seen in the use of all
his creatures: the heavens, the earth, etc.
as that we which are his children are lame almost ever since. Now to comfort
us in our weakness, and to teach us to go better then before we did: God
has left an ordinary mean to crave for help at his hand. For, as the
father helps his tender and beloved child, when he needs: and the mother
cannot refrain from tears when the infant weepeth: No more can our God and
our father but pity us, and the state of man, when he asks.

Two things I have in this place offered me, that I would gladly open. The
first, what we should eschew and avoid in our supplications and prayers we
make to the Lord. The second, is the use hereof, which the son of God has
given us. And albeit I have set down before in my former treatise to my young
scholar, a large and plentiful discourse to trouble his young head withal:
Yet it is such, as the grauest father that I know may look upon. I profess,
neither will I strive herein, No excus^ can be admitted for thy negligence, in
the service of the Lord.
the weightinesse of the cause, and my small skill, and few years that yet I
know: But for all that, give me leave to speak to them of the country, and to
the husbandman. I meddle not with you of the city. And if I have forgot my
self to pleasure them: pardon me but this once. If not, the rudeness I have
learned, since I gave over my study, is civility enough to speak Northerenly
to the laboring man.

It comes to my remembrance, that I assayed before, to beat some knowledge
of the abuse of prayer into the minds of my auditors: But looking at it then,
never touching it I am admonished, that there is something to be do, e in it
now. Therefore, to feed here, upon the grosenesse of our stomachs, before
we come to taste of sweeter meats, I have to clip away the perverseness of our
time, usually now accustomed among men. And it is the praise we look to
reap at the hands of God: Short prayers if they be earnest, are better then
much babbling vvherin is no stedfastnes.
for that we either stay long at the temple, or use tedious and wearisome
prayers at our meetings. But if thou pray until the night, and then go
late to bed: or if thou continue till the twilight, when the cock warns thee
to come home: yet it is nothing to ye Lord, if thy praying forgets
following him, when thou returnest. For ye they of Christ be not babblers as
the Ethnickes be: excludes the long and tedious reading at the Church, and
men busied at their books, when the Congregation is otherwise to be edified,
it leaves thee a small room to put thy reward in. Abuse of me^, if they
mislike the man that precheth or if he use common prayer.
The first it perishes by this, for that God knows what we have need of
before we ask: wherein the error of the Gentiles is shut out, that kneeled
so devoutly before their Idols, when happily they were abroad, and busied in
some other place, and could not so presently hear them, unless they tarryed
till they returned. But it is with the Lord, as is with a cunning and expert
Physician, that can judge by the sight of him he sees, what disease it is
whereof he sickeneth. And our Lord, he knows whereof we stand in need,
Precise men have noplace that pray at those times they like: otherwise forget
them selves, the whole month and the whole year (...).
and searches the sorrow of our souls: and we need not to tire our selves,
hours, and days, and nights, and weeks, as the Papists do. Again, that
superstitious custom of old time, to pray at certain hours, and at no other
I condemn it: for Christ all night, and in the morning, and at noone tide
prayde: I am ashamed to stand draining to search out their beastly customs: I
therefore leave them to such as wilbee blinded in their foolishness.

The Epicure and the Athist, have reasoned very subtly against prayer: If
he knew before what we should need why pray we? he could give it us: if
he did not know what it was we needed, why? he is not God, wherefore then
pray we? If he gives not, it is because he loves not: if he loves not,
it is because hee-careth not: if he cares not, it is because he will not,
then wherefore is it, that we pray? But let them dye in their carlesnesse, and
consume in the filthiness of their thoughts, for we are assured of his love
and favor, in that he commands us to pray, and in the name of Christ. It
were enoughe for us, in that God does bid us: yet other causes there be, al
which I have set down in my former Treatise: Notwithstanding, do the
Chickens beg at the hands of her that hatched them? Nature condempneth in
the wicked, that do as their kind and manner is: only they forget God.
and do the Lions Whelps crave for their pray? does the Bear and the Sauedge
beast, feed her younglings when they cry? and will the Tigar return unto her
cowtch to help them she left behind her? and will not God look upon us whom
he has created? But wherefore has Christ willed us to ask, and taught us to
pray? truly, for that we need many things, and be as naked, so ashamed of
our selves if he help not: For of our selves we have nothing, and in him we
have abundance and plentye of all things: Christ alone unspotted and
blameles: man of him self, wicked and shameless*
If we look for the gifts of the spirit, we find them all in Christ, for
he was anointed: If for strength? it is in his power and in his government:
If for puritee: and for corruption that it may be wiped away: we have it in
his conception: If for love? we have it in that he was made like unto us: and
he came into the world to save us: If for redemption? we have it in his
passion: If for absolution? we have it in his submission:

If to take away the curse from us? Why? he hunge upon the Cross for us: If
for satisfaction? he was our Sacrifise: If for clensing of our sins? we
have it in his blood: if for reconciliatio^? we have it in his descending to
Hell: If for mortification of the flesh? All our corruption is hidden, and
laid up in Christ.
it is showen in his Burial: who was as touching the body laid in Grave, that
we as touching the body might be buried to sin: if for newnes of life? we
have it in his resurrection: if for immortallity? he rose, and ascended, and
dwells with his Father to make us perfect, and immortal, and Kings and
Priests for ever: If we pray to be heirs of Heaven? his ascending and
magnefiynge above the Angels has given it: If for securitee, for treasure,
for riches? they be laid up for us in his kingdom: If to have him merciful,
and to spare us in his judgment? No man has hated his own flesh at any
time: then Christ can not cast of us.
why? he is judge him self, he will not cast away and condemn his own
flesh. So that out of season came this question, wherefore pray we? for we
must, and we ought to pray, that the greater encomberaunces, overtake us not.
And for a truth, if our vessels did not taste of this lycour, and we our
selves overthrown in our unadvised behavior, the prayers of those which so
often times come unto the Temple, would have bin heard of the Lord God ere
this: But the comers, they come in such disguised and maskinge manner: either
having their mind at whom in their Cofars: or thinkinge on the pride and
bravery they be in: or coming sluggishly: This misshapen visage in a Christian
is filt^y.
or returning wawardly: or requiring revenge greedely: or askinge coldly: or
wishinge that which is unseemly: or despisinge thy neighbor unchristianly:
That it is no marueyle, if the Lord God thrust thee away and hear thee not,
the souls of such a number of men cry out against thee. But to return, and to
leave the Epicure, and the Ethnicke, and the other rabble whatsoever: Let us
understand that God has debased him self for us, and tempered his talk, and
applied his speech unto our capacities, and he has taught us very breefely to
call upon him: The reason hereof is, for that we are weak and very feeble in
our doings, in our life, God thinks upon our imbecilleties in all he does
in our conversation: and at death, in extremity, in peril, in ieoperdy, in
calamity, at the fire, or when we be at the Block, and the Sword ready to be
laid to our neck, we oftentimes forget our selves. Therefore to mollesy their
stony minds, and to inamour them as it were, to make men have a lykinge of the
Lord: Papists convicted: old vviues fables, have no place: presise, and
nise, and long prayers be cause that we slip so often.
to show that he beholds three words advisedly and wisely spoken: rather
then a number of Aue Marias, and a bedroale of Credoes in deum, heaped up
without discretion: he has included in few words such good and pleasant
lessons, as if they be duly consithered, contain in them a pure and perfect
platform of prayer: first we pray: to whom? to our Father: Wherefore? he is
our God: but where? not on earth: He is above, he is not hear, he is in
Heaven.

That late and worthy man of God M. Gualter (as it seems to me) in his
Treatise of the prayer of the Lord, has iusteled with some one or other,
about the force, and virtue, and strength, which is thought to be in this
prayer, I find also that the Rabbines of the Jews boasted much of ye words
that were written in the forhead of Aaron: and the Magicians of their
exorcismes, and the Papists of this prayer: all which they think to be of
great force, Superstition crept in by ignorauce.
if they hanged about the neck of any man. His talk is against them (and so
is mine at this present) that think there is salvation, or life, or health,
in that they repeat the words of Christ: And therefore the enchauntresse, to
dissemble her wickedness, and cullor her guile, adioyneth unto her inchauntment
the Lords Prayer: And the Diuinar: or he that tells, and calls up by
Spirits, As murderers and Thieves use Knives and Swords together with good
men: so do the wicked their prayers, together with the faithful: yet to one
they are life, to the other death.
he snatcheth something from Christ, and he will have a leg, or an arm of
him: and so inflamously abuses the godhead of the Lord.

But to take away this old wives Tale, I think it expedient to say somewhat:
and at the first, rather then to interrupte my speech hereafter: As therefore
Nadab and Abihu the Sons of Aaron, that offered up incense in the same Censor
that their Father did: Yet because they did it not aright they dyed for it. So
hear: though we pray all with one prayer, and power out our supplications at
one time, because we pray not all alike, with mind in spirit unto the
Lord, they be to none effect, neither avail they: And as there was in the
Wilderness one Manhu, whereon Israel fed, yet some wicked and disobedient, had
not the like nourishment and effect thereof as had others: So the prayer of the
Lord, though he gave it to all, God permits: the Devil works: and man
sins: and vvilfully they proucke God
that all might use it, yet it is not profitable to him abuses it: And as
Saull used Samuel after his death, and the Pythonest called the Devil by the
name of him he was not, and the Devil deceived Samuel and did not profit
him. So it is with us. The prayer of the Lord unto the wicked, being wrested
to their death: as Samuel was by the Devil to blind Saull: shall never help
them: But abandon these wicked men we must, The Sinner does all he does to
death he wants grace and light: the godly they work to life and use the
same thing well by the Spirit.
and permit them not so much as to have, speech with us: God has heaped up
judgment, against the day of judgment to consume them: For the prayer of it
self, (I say not well) the bare words, not rightly understood, they be no
better then any other: The Oil, and the Wax, and the Honey, and the Tar, be
common things, but to join them, to mixte them, to compound them together, to
give them to the pacient at convenient time: there is the cunninge. The Nettle
byteth, yet it heals: the Flax it cures, yet it burns: the Spider
poysoneth, yet she profits: Then all things are good, even the ungodly man
to him can use him: So is the prayer of the Lord. Otherwise as God has his
elect in the Courts of the Ethnicke: and as he saves some in the Turks
Palaces, and among the Jews keeps those he will have kept: God has notied
us to pray after one manner^ but this and others be good: for his will sake,
and the perfectnes thereof: we use this.
so what salvation can they or others look for, if faith and life of man were
tide to this prayer: seeing there be a number that never as yet did know the
same? Also, where is Abraham, Isaak and Jacob, which never prayed thus? There
is then many things to be wayed before we presume to ground any Religion and
health upon man, for repeating this prayer. Then this order and manner of
praying, we must have it of some other, not of our selves: therefore he which
has taught it us, and instructed us in his Spirit, grant unto us the true
use hereof in his blood.

Truth it is in Crisostome his Homily, that Maximus speaks. Every one when
he prays: let him pray unto the Lord: Wherefore my proceeding into this so
great a matter, makes me in doubt, but that the Lord is, where he always
was, to take in hand so great a mystery. But I am content as hitherto I have
to use my country speech: God looks not on man, but on the mind.
and I know that all alike unto the Lord is that man accepted, that goes
cottered and torn in his rags, as he that is stuffed and pampered up in
veluets: and it is a common fashion in the world in those our days, for every
one to use his liberty of speech and lasciniousnesse of tongue in this point.
All states can reason, why they need no prayer: but all must submit them
selves, and pray to God.
He that is poor, why should I pray (says he) for I have nothing. The
ritche man, he stands in little need, he has enough. The strong man, he
knows his portion, he seeks for no more, so valiant and puissant is he in
this life.

The proud man, he is in his ruff, he noddeth with his head, and beckeneth
with the hand: he sets sail to all things. The incestious person, what
can he ask? he lives in pleasure. The merchaunt, what has he to do with God?
the wind and weather serves him. And in comes the student, and he makes
his reckoning, he casts and he tumbleth over his books, he looks and
hops for nothing: for his wit helps him: So that the whole world it is
divided: every one thinks he has little to do with God. Then my first note
is, that this prayer in general appertains to all. For, from the tabernacle
to the tente: from him that sits in the gate, As is the sapp and the earth:
so is prayer and Invocation to man:
to the poor man in the field: from Tirus, even from those that go to
Tharsis, to the thresher, and the corn flower: from him that gives wages, to
him that receives hire: from him that puts on silk and soft clothing,
even unto Lazarus that lies at the doors: severally from the top of Sion to
the poor cottage: From the Cedar trees of Libanon, unto the man remaining
among the fennes and flagges: it is his duty, he is bound, he ought to
remember that he should pray: For he that sends his Cammels for spieerie:
and aduentureth to Corinthum for Jewels: that provides into Arabia to get the
purest gold: and so greedely searches for the riches of Damascus, As water
confumeth all: so God distroyeth all degrees, if they call not upon him.
nay, though he tarry at home, and abides the Sun all the days of his
life, and suffers the bitter frostes in Winter, though he be created to
tend cattle, and to keep the wild Coalte, and the Ass in the Wilderness:
though his hands be wearied with the plough, and his arm withered up with
holding of the rake: though he sit at the threshholde, and have not
wherewithal to feed him: yet has he his soul to look unto: that in my
judgment it is time to seek narrowly abroad, to reckon with our selves, to
give attendaunce, to wait on God: for every one that lives, has need of
prayer.

But to ransake every thing more narrowly: let us know what it is, is
contained herein: As our life it above with the God of glory: so must we be
spiritually bent at prayer.
for we dispute not for riches, or for wealth, or for honor, that vanishes
away: but for the Lord, and for Christ: the first thing that is mentioned is
this: that we call on God, and we say: O our father: In the scriptures God is
called the Lord of Hosts, the judge of the whole earth, the King of Kings, a
consuminge fire, the founteine of life, that sits upon the Cherubynnes,
that rules the world: And here we call him by the name of father: I am not
purposed to run paraphrastically on this: if it please you to stay on my
simple judgment, this I think: God named him our Father: for that as a
Father, he giueeth all things that we his Children, need.
If in our prayers we make unto God, we should call him Lord, we spoke unto
one that we think should have dominion over us: If as to a Judge, we ought
to stand at the bar, and hold up our hands, and plead for our selves:
then should he sit with his twenty four elders, and give sentence upon us.
If as to a King, his Scepter and royal seat, it would dismay us: if happily we
forgate our homage and went awrye, the messenger of death is ready for us: If
as to consuming fire? what eye could abide him: for if the beast that touched
the burning mountain was shot thorough, what hope has man to skape, The
Lord is terrible: yet in Christ is his love and favor opened: in vvho^ only
there is satisfaction.
when a flaming fire must go before him, and thousands, thousands minister
unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stand before him: when the
seats shall be set, the books oponed, and judgment given, what mercy then can
we look for at Gods hand? But if we called on God, as on him that is the
fountain of life, how could we call upon him when we be in death? And if you
prayed unto him as the ruler of the world? then is man beaten down, that
could never as yet, among all the beasts thereof be tamed. But see how
loving a Lord God we have, that in our transgressions, wounds us not: in our
sins strikes us not: in our disobedience reme^breth us not: God a Father in
the cration and a Father in his blesing, and a father to us, in giving to us:
but all alone is he our father in the attonemente.
in our evil ways punishes us not: that never thinks on our iniquities, but
calls us as children to ask at his hands, ye more willingly to train us up
in his fear: and has for all our manifold transgressions, made himself a
father to us. But from whence comes this? our father is Adam, and he is dead:
and we be his children, and how can we live? To him he gave a charge to sweat
it out, and to labor on earth, what then can happen to us but misery? Then
which way so ever we look on our selves, we are in death: and whence have
we this therefore, that we call on God as on our father? Pardone me, if
being a man as you be, I am inquisitiue to search out what man is. And say
what you will, yet will not I be satisfied til I knows more. For as Crisostome
is plentiful in the description of man: So I think, that as the ship is in
the Sea that tottereth: or as the fether in the air that houereth: All things
turn to our destruction, if God help not.
or as the tree on earth that shakes: even like portion indge I to be
allotted to man when he offends. For wish any thing that is good: that can
not man do, without God will: neither wills he that God wishes without God
please: And that I will, and that I may, I do not, if he permits not: So
wish I, If as we be from the eathe earthly: so we were not also governed
by the spirit: then were we in death.
yet miss I, if he directs not. True it is that Isychius said: in man
there is two natures, or rather properties: one is, that we carry about with
us, and it is dust: the other, it is given unto us, and it is ye spirit: and
both these making but one man: yet do we not know on Christ. Salonius writing
upon Ecclesiastes, gives wisdom and understanding unto man, above al others
that have life: and in the same, he gives us free passage to know God, but it
is in Christ.

And Agustine in his Apognosticon, against the Palagian: guieth us liberty to
Ploughe, to Till, to labor, to Sow, to Spinne, to Card, to drink, to eat,
to feed our cattle and our Beasts (if so you will) to use the Arrowe, and
the Bow, and the Herbs: but to come unto God, and to have any portion from
him without Christ, that he permits not. Being in death and in s^n it is
requisite that we should have a Mediator.
Sedulius, upon the Corrinthians, gives no liberty unto us, but only to sin:
and Primatius, in his Treatise on the Romans is of the same judgment: so that
in the end when our deeds be ransackt, and our thoughts sought out, what is
it that we can claim of the Lord? Then hereon we stand, Christ which
always has bin with his Father (the lively and express Image of his godhead)
came into the world and was debased for us: and we being of his flesh, and the
same mould that he was of: beeinge perfect man in all poynctes (sin only
accepted) he has made us one with him and taken us into the same fellowship of
his kingdom and of his Saints, Unmeasurable, and unsearchable is the love of
God: that beeinge life, gave himself to death for us.
and we are made Sons with him unto one Father. Unto this it was alluded by
David, As the Father has pity on his Children, so has the Lord on all such
as call upon him faithfully. Esaias touched this in his comparison that he
makes with the Woman and her Infant? whom though she could forget sucking at
her Breasts, yet would not the Lord forsake us: If I were not drawn into a
narrow straight, by the importunitee allotted to me at this present: I would
see what that were which man so mutch braggeth of: and if it were possible,
that from top to toe: he had no one blemish to be found within him: Yet if a
man might enter into his heart and search his Sinews and his cogitations
within, how corrupt and vnfauorye should we find him? well: this is our
comfort: and it is the noate of Master Gualter, that he is not only a
Father in governing the world, and the whole train that waits thereon, but
he is our Father: And as in Job, he is called the Father of the Aungelles and
of the Saints, and holy men which loved him: so that, it is little unto us,
and small prositte have we thereby, beeinge neither Angels or so holy as they:
Our Father. Seeing our benefits are common to all: it is reason that we pray
for al^^and for that God is the author o life: we pray if it be his will,
that all may live.
if of his bounty, and mercy, it were not said unto us here, that he is our
Father toe: but I consider yet an other thing: and why say we not, O my
Father, as well as O our Father? Ciprian on the prayer of the Lord, gives this
reason. This prayer it is common to us all says he: for when we pray, we
pray not for one but for all, because all they and we are one: And he is said
to be our Father: even of us, as many as be sanctified, as be renewed, as be
strengthened in his Spirit: as for other, they stand aloof, and wish they may
to come unto us, come at any time they shall not.

Thus you know, he is a Father, and he is our Father: it is adjoined, he is
our God: he is above, and it is in Heaven: These three I join together,
neither will I sever them: The elect and chosen of God, none other come unto
him:
For as he is far above the reatch and capacity of man: so has he no
terrestrial Throne to sit in: but a more bright and glorious Seat, is that of
the Lord our God. And as was the Arc and mercy Seat within, whereunto no man
durst presume to come and look into it, but such as God had chosen from the
rest: so to his kingdom and his Empire shall no man approtche, but such as
he has elected in his Christ. It may seem a vain thing to ask this
question, why we pray to God? Yet such is the vanity and ignorance of man,
that he knows not: and such is his dulnes, ye he answers not: but the
weakness it is alike in us all that searches not. Why we pray to God.
To say the truth, this question, is above that I can well attain unto, and
the reasons that may be given, they be so innumerable, I bare not enter now
into them.

If God do spare me so much leisure, All things are not fit for all times.
as that successiucly, I may but steal one or two hours to labor in, I will
answer this fully: I have now set my pen unto an other treatise: wherein
before I end, I shall I trust stop the mouths of some, as touching God. Let
this my small time and stolen hours, crave pardon for this present, and suffer
me not to draw out the length of this threede, For as mutch as God is
unsearchable, and incomprehe^sible, it is good reason to submit our selves, and
pray to him.
that we shall never wind it up: And if this will not suffice, look toward the
heavens, judge the number of the stars, call them by their names, and give
every one his several charge. Command the Sun, the Moon, to stayde their
course, let there not be light any more upon the earth: and if these things be
to high for thee: judge of ye common creatures that do dwell with thee, and
tell me the drops of ye rain: ride upon the wings of the wind: measure me
the weighte of the fire. Call back again the day that is past: and renew the
course of that which is to come: draw out the deapth of the Sea by his
bucketts: and let the earth cast forth the hid treasuries that be within her:
and if silence has caught thee, All Gods creatures are ready to fulfill his
commandments, against his enemies.
and thy wisdom fades, then give homage unto him, at whose commandment they
be: entreat him to spare thy life in time of need, that has judgment in
stoore, and a consuming fire to run before him: if they or thou rebel.
Lactantius in his second book, seems to me to have delte with these men: who
dwelling in ignorance, had small delight to seek the Lord. And doubted, as
touching their prayer unto him: his judgment is this. Nothing must be honored,
nothing worshipped, but the only one Lord God, proceeding and coming, from the
only, own, eterall, and everliving father: and therefore has created man to
want many things, that in his necessity and want, he may know where and of
whom to ask for all things: We pray in the name of one: for that the th^ee
persons make but one God.
and Ambrose, in his Spiritu fancto: The father is to be glorified with the
son: the son with the father: the holy ghost with them both: for these
three are but one God. Basil against Iulina (after that also Martured)
councelleth him to give all honor and pre-eminence in prayer unto God: That in
his heavenly and eternal wisdom created all. Epiphanius in his third Toome:
Beside many excellent and good sayings, pleases me in this: for having to do
with them, that give unseemly reverence to saints, teaches thus: Let Marie
be had in estimation, and Peter: but let the father, and the son, and the
spirit, be worshipped: for neither to woman nor to man pertains this honor
and invocation, The saints with god we confess they were good men: but
the honor due to the Lord, is not to be given unto them.
neither to Angles, or to any other perteneth this glory. But it is a mystery,
proper only to the Lord: The time would fail me, to vnfoldethe heavenly
sayings of the fathers: I leave the^ to the diligent searcher: The hour
passing away so spedely, makes me to hasten to the rest.

And here I admonish you that in praying to our father, you pray to him that is
in heaven. For we may ask many things on earth, yet can we not atteine them:
but if we ask and faithfully of our father in heaven: he will give us them:
where that infidel is condemned, that is found in David to have cried out and
to have said in his heart there is no God, and that he which is in the
heavens, regardoth not them on earth. seeing all things be vvonderfull and
straung, how is he most glorious that made them.
Teach this man I dare not, counsel him I will: For let him cast out his eyes,
and lift up his head, and think but on the creatures that be made: How the
Sun gives light a far of: and the Axell tree of the heaven does compass
the earth: how the clouds power out their reign, and the dew his silver
dropps: and the night his grimme and fierce countenance to man: and shall we
then give nothing to the Lord, that made them? But I cease to follow this
path, I take an other. For if he thought on Israel, In that peril which is
greatest: God is readiest.
when their shoulders were worn in pieces with carrying brick: or if he
brought them from Babylon: or fed Elias with the Ravens: and made the dumb
creatures to be Nurses to his servants: and sent Daniell pottage into the
Lions den: and stayed the force of the flaming Furnace: he can, and he will,
and he stays not, and I doubt it not, but that he still will help us.

Last of all, it is a good consequent, our father is in heaven: We therefore
ought not to repose our trust and confidence below as we do: either tarry
here, If the heavens pass, and the creatures perish: man also shall have an
end.
so much as to abide and lay our affiaunce and steadiness on things that be
above. For it is an infallible truth, that I find in Paul, that we have no
abydinge here on earth, but that our life it is above, where as is the father
of light. I might take good occasion to withdraw a number, from the
transitory affairs of this world, which have their change, and their end,
when the heavens shall roll as a scroole, and the elements burn with fire: but
these I leave them till more longer days, when the Sun and the light shall
give us more liberty, who runninge forth so speedily, has put me in mind
to cut of this speech. It follows:

Hallowed be thy name.
THe great care that the Lord God has had of his church, is very worthily
set out in the general discourse, and pitiful callamitie wherein they that
knew him, and called all only on his name, continually were assaulted: Out of
which troubles he always both mightily and fatherly delivered them: yet in no
one thing has he shown his tender affection unto man, No man has feared God,
and remained helples.
more then in this, in that he has set him free, from the bondage of the
devil, the flesh, and the works thereof: in that he has created us, redeemed
us, sanctified, and regenerated us: And yet lest we should falter any more,
and forget him, he has left us a comforter, which is his spirit: and taught
a way and set us in the path, and directed us by his own mouth, to be in our
prayers, holy and unspotted unto him. Then in this wherewithal we be
instructed of Christ, though it be a short lesson, is contained for all that
the whole and plentiful discourse of the life of man: even what is meefe and
requisite to be done: meat, as well for the foul to feed withal, as for the
body to live withal: the sum whereof is set down by Christ in six
principal heads: whereof the first is this. Man comme^deth man: much more man
God.
Hallowed be thy name. For as al things upon the earth were created by him:
so ought all that be on the face of the earth, continually praise him. And as
we be children and heirs unto him: so cheefely ought all our force, our
strength, our might, and ought else that is in us, be directed unto this: that
we might magnify his name and praise him. First seek the glory of God: then
thine own glory.
The example and patron whereof, is seen in the good Judges that lived, who
before they established their own thrones, their dominions their Empires, or
sought their own glory: made an entrance and ready gate to set up and
establish the sincerity and purity of religion. Therefore Christ of him self
testifies, God honors those that honor him: and in all things that are is
he honored: if man should hold his peace.
I seek not mine one name, but my fathers that sent me* and I have glorified
thee among men, and I will glorify thee again. For, if he be our father,
where is our honor: Will the child acknowledge his parents: and the wild and
savage beast give place to them that nourish her? succeadeth the fire the
heavens in his place? and the fire the air? and she air the water? and the
water the earth? and the earth us? and shall not we acknowledge and reverence
the Lord of Hosts, who dwells betwixt the Cherubynnes, and ought to be
worshipped of all nations under heaven? Cyprian has given, as touching this
first point, hallowed be thy name: in mine opinion a very good reason. For
says he, God needs not man: but man needet^ God.
we crave not that God should be sanctified in our prayers, who is always
holy: but that his name sanctified in us, we might be made perfect and holy
in him: Thus I also find it in the book of God, in that place: Be thou holy,
because I am holy: Then our prayer is, that being sanctified and cleansed, and
made perfect in the Lord: we may be holy and good and persevere therein. For
this cause Paulinus in the fifth age of the Church when he lived, called our
Baptisteries, places of restoring again of man: meaning thereby, as I do
guess, that we ought to rise from sin and live to life, mortifying and
beating down the lusts of the flesh: and as we should sanctify the name
of the Lord, so we ought in our conversation, and in our walking before him,
to be again sanctified: that is, walk as holy before him. For, as the water,
in the fifth of John, did never cleanse and make perfect, but when the Angel
moved it: No more is man renewed and altered, but when the Spirit sanctifies
him. And as Sara was not by nature, but by promise made a mother and bare a
child: So are we holy, not of our selves, but of the Lord. Therefore we need
daily sanctifiyng: and seeing that we sin, All goodness, all perfection, and
all holiness, comes of the spirit.
and fall so often, we must rise, and be reared up in Christ, in renouation
and sanctification of the spirit. For this is our sanctification in Paul, that
we be no fornicatours, no worshipers of Idols, no adulterers, no light persons,
no folowers of women, not thieves, not deceivers, not haters, not drunkardes:
and these sometime we were, but we are washed, but we are justified, but we
are sanctified in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Master Gualter upon this place, has an especial note, as touching this
hallowed, or sanctified be thy name: neither will I blame him here, in
consideration the superstition of ye world is so great: who begyled in ye
vanity of their thoughts, are not able, Not every one that says Lord, Lord,
shall be saved: but he only that calls on him, and beleceu^th.
or else will not judge aright of the will of the Lord. He finds great
fault, for that men take an occasion from the name of God: as though the bare
rehersall thereof had virtue in it to do wounders, signs and miracles in the
earth. And of truth that wherewith M. Gualter found fault is so common in the
world: that as every one is holiest and will be counted godlyest, so is he in
this life peruersist: I wish that of Cyris were settled in the minds of men:
that before they judge of any thing in the Book of God, they would consider
three things: the time, the person, and the matter that is handled: which if
they were duly wayed, it would be a cause good enough that men should not
stray as they do in the judging of the Scriptures. For as out of this place is
grounded this error, Plain men begyled in time of popery, keep the old
superstition still in much bab ling.
that if we reckon up the bare name of the Lord, it is sufficient for us: if
we say sanctified be his name, it is enough unto salvation: therefore ye common
sort of people, repeat and utter these words of Christ, but they consider
no more: and so think, that by saying of the same, they have discharged their
duty: but this it is gross and pernicious: it sauoureth of the flesh alone,
that is sluggishe and heavy, and tired if it take any pains in searching out
the will of God: For not every one ye says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but be that knows the will of my father and does it.
This is the only cause that the heretics have erred so grossly heretofore, ^
have taken the bare words, not the meaning of the spirit: Therefore, to take
away all occasion of falsho^ which is gathered from the name of God, I save
this: God knovve^ in all his works, has names given him to show the same.
The name of God in Scriptures does signify every thing which is proper unto
him, whereby his heavenly and divine nature, or his works and glory appears:
As in David, thy name O Lord and thy praise endures for ever, it extends and
reaches to the ends and coasts of the world: and again, praise him al you
people, bless you the name of the Lord: Iunilius, Iunilius, co^tra,
haereticos.
writting against heretics, reckeneth according to the Hebrews computation,
eight especial names, given unto God, which be these: first God: then Lord:
also Lord and God together: or else almighty, or sufficient or omnipotent, or
our pillar and stay, or God of hosts, or a judge and searcher: The He rue I
have left out, for I think it not convenient the rehersall now: these only
significations be they that are presented unto us: Genesis 17.
and by these names is he called in the scriptures, especially by Abraham when
he apeared unto him: and then when he spoke to Moses. Exodus 3.6 Exodus 15.
Psalm 86. And the Grecians call him a secret sercher, or pearser of all
things, and a sister of our thoughts. Where unto Peter Martyr, and Musculus
have in diverse places alluded: and master Gualter seems to touch the very
same upon the exposition of ye name of god: Here unto I adioyn and put those
same glorious titles given unto him by Moses, when he desired he might see and
look upon the Lord God. Exodus 34. For then when he passed by in the cloud,
when Moses was put into a clifte of the rock, and God had put ^^s hand before
him, and Moses saw his back parts alone, he cried out. Lord. God, merciful,
and liberal, ^^ntle and pitiful, of infinite goodness and truth: keeping thy
goodness for thousan^s, forgiving iniquity and transgressio^s, and sins,
leaving not ungodliness unpunished, but visiting the sins of their fathers, in
(...) sons, and sons sons, upon such as fear not him and keep not his
commandments: This and other such like places of scripture, No flesh shall
die for others: all flesh dies or lives to him self:
do open and show unto us the incomprehencible Godhead of the Lord which only
is seen in his works, his creation and his creatures, and by the same
commanded in this place to exalte magnify and bless his name: The wicked
take occasion (as I showed you before) to call on his name very often, and
think they do sanctify it, when they name it: but it is not so: For Moses
did not speed the better for his calling on God, or for his stretching out of
his arms, or for thy squeaking out on the name of the Lord, when he
commanded in his name that life should depart, and the Grasshoppers run away
out of Egypt: but in acknowledging his might and his power, and his greatness
that was able to do it, and bring it to pass, and by faith, he did accomplish
it: So we think in this sole speech uttered, hallowed be thy name: there is no
commodity comes to us. But in remembering what we be and desiring by all
means, with our might, with strength, with our power to bless it, and set it
forth, in that is our obedience and prayer know. Elyas called on the name of
God, All flesh ought to seek the glory of god and then is the name of God
hallowed.
and fire came down from heaven, and consumed the water, the sticks, and the
sacrifice: And Jeremy in the name of the Lord, foretold their captivity into
Babylon: And Micheas in the name of God, prophesied of the overthrow of Ahad:
And yet by rehearsing the name of the Lord, did they not this, but by faith
through the spirit. In like manner we, by asking or demanding, or ^rauing,
though it be in his name, if it be not by faith, it is nothing. The reason
hereof is, use his name, and in ^^are, and in skill, a^^ as he bids, it
helps thee: Abuse his Godhead, and turn it to thy pleasure, and rack his
liberty to the commodity, and he consumes thee.

Then in this place sanctified be thy name, is nothing else mente, then his
glory, ye knowledge of him, God gi^eth his glory unto none: and those that
serve him, those he helps.
the true understanding of his majesty, the debasing of our selves, and the
glorifying of the Lord our God. This was the only cause that Moses and Aaron
did not see the land of promise, neitheir entered into Canaan. For they did
not sanctify the Lord at the waters of striefe: That is magnify and extol
their God, and that ought to have glorified him, who in that distress wherein
they were, was able to have helped the^ if they had called on his name.

Hallowing, that is making holy, Such were the holy things belonging to the
temple such also were the pri^sts in the law: such be the preachers now:
that be kept as holy unto god and severed from the world, that they might
^^lisse and sanctify him.
or holying and sanctifiying, does signify any thing that is consecrated, or
given, or severed from man unto God, and is only proper to the Lord, to his
service, to the worship of his name: I take this word to proceed from the
Hebrews, that in their speech, called it a gift (as it were) presented to
God. It came of the ceremony which was used in Israel, who as any thing was
holy, and consecrated to the Lord, used to lay their hands thereon
singnifying that, that thing they gave, they willingly gave it to ye Lord. So
Jacob blessing Ephraim and Manasses, laid his hands upon them, and blessed
them: or put them a part from other, unto God. In the same signification they
laid their hands on their sacrifices, as being holy to the Lord: and pastors
and Deacons kept this order in the church: and so did Paul and laid his hands
upon them, delivering them up, or putting them in mind of their duty, that
ought to be holy and upright before the Lord. In that sert we do make holy or
sanctify the name of the Lords our God, in that it is only he, to whom we
give holiness and sanctification, and reverence, and hemage a boue the rest,
and do confess none to be like him: Here it comes to pass, that we call
those which be the Lords, Saints: that is holy: as coming from one that is
holy, which is the Lord God. For an those that are begrymed and sweltered in
claye, or said to be claylike: and of black, black men: so from him that is
holiest are we holy. Gualter, out of Cratilas in Plato (as I take it) has
properly derived this word, Holy, as like to God. for that he is holy.
and calls it (...) (not earthly) of the privative a, and (...), That is
without the earth: As then being worthy of the names of saints, when we have
forsaken the enormities of the flesh, and of the earth, which is of those that
being hear are earthly: But paraduenture over far in this, and easily
known from whence I came, even from the earth, that sauoureth so much of these
gross and crooked speeches: yet as content we my portion, I cannot be ashamed
to power forth my hard and crabby talk, seeing so great strife in others
to be nice: and in their finesse and purity of tongue, could to this day (in
my judgment) use none: I ask at your hands this a lone: to suffer me
patiently, to speak unto rudelinges, even them of the country where now I
am: If not, but you will snoffle at it, and envy my small skill: truly, I
give you warning to change your minds: for even you with all your eloquence
shall never persuade me to give over: And as one unacquainted with so dainty
ears, I return again to the earth from whence I went: more exquisite, more
delicate, and the gorgeous stuff, God most glorious and worthy all honor
has created all the treatures, to se^ue for the use of man: man only did he
make to honor him.
I leave to you.

In this place by this word sanctifying, or hallowed I understand to esteem
or think as holy: to honor and celebrate, and to call on the name of one
eternal God which is holy: and in this sense God does use these words in
Ezechiel, I will be magnified, and I will be satisfied, and I will be known in the
eyes of the nations: and they shall know that I am the Lord. Ezech. 38.23.
and Esaie showed the same very effectual: The Lord has opened (or made his
arm naked) in the sight of the Gentiles, and all the ends of the earth shall
see the salvation of our God. Esaias. 52.10. For in that the name of God is holy
and reverent, and very holiness and sanctity it self: therefore are we
commanded to hallowe it: But because he is not known of all, and the minds
of men are cloyed and worn with superstition, Idolatry, Blasphemy,
incantation, execration, perjury: therefore is it that in prayer we pray,
that glory may be given unto him, homage, ductie, fear, and reverence, that
all may honor him, praise him, and laud him.

For this cause I have set you down a perfect rule, These three are set down
for that his mercy and his love appears most in them. Theodoree.
and square to direct our life and conversation withal: and to understand
how God is known: which is, partly in our creation: partly in our
redemption: partly in our justification: that the Lord God may be known
upon the earth: his son Christ among men: and the spirit that governs and
directs the hearts of all flesh. Theodoret, in that place where he shows
what God is: makes this sanctification or holiness, a name that does appertain
to the Trinity: for ye none else by nature are Gods, but they: his opinion is,
that Lord and God appertain to the three several persons: but our Lord and
God is to be honored or sanctified: so that in one God: the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, ar to be sanctified: Eucherius upon the Kings: Eucherius
in Reg.
shows the wisdom of the Lord God, which does wonders and signs, and
miracles, without any slothe or staying, but even speedely at his word: not
says he with many trifling circumstances, but in his wisdom at his
pleasure. How glorious a God then is he, and worthy to be magnified:
Therefore Crisostom to Philemon: When God did not stand in need of our help,
he created and made us of nothing. For when he had made every thing, then made
he man: what reverence then can we give to our God, more then sanctify him,
and show his power among men? Primatius on the Romans, atributeth mercy,
justice, goodness, Here is it known that we love God when we set out his
name fear God. and increase the number of his Church.
peace, with all other good gifts unto the Lord: and to this end he does it,
even to pluck down and debase man, and to exalt and sanctify the name of god.
Augustine is very excellent in his meditations: he gives unto God these
titles: Great, mighty, omnipotent, eternal, pitiful, long suffering,
righteous: that hydeth many things, knows all things: Only strong, only
present, only of force and of strength, incomprehensible, seeinge all things,
iudginge all things, vuchanngable, yet changing and altering all other:
immortal, infinite, whom no man can attain unto, Immoouable yet moouinge and
turninge all: unsearchable yet searching all: fearful, and fearing all, yet
never feared: that is aunciaunt and old and gray headed for he was ever: not
altered, for he is the same: that brings all to age, and continues always:
workinge, and fashioninge, and framinge, and making, and creating all, yet
always quiet: always strong, always giving, never needing: defending, These
are un searchable: not to be attained of us: yet do they not, and they cannot
set out the full power of God.
distributing, nourishing, profiting, louinge, ayding, mainteining: displeased,
yet pleased: repenting, not striking: and consuming, yet protecting and
fostering: that is only one, and eternal, and everlasting, and unchangeable
in his counsel. I suppose that Augustine has showed us how to judge of the
Lord, how to sanctify him, how to glorify him? even when we lay aside all
that is in man, and give due honor, reverence, fear and majesty unto him: I
will stay no longer in this place, I proceed to that which follows: for I
dare not stand in curious intermedling with the Lord: but I show yon
briefly in what the Lord is sanctified, even in all things that are upon the
earth, whose excellency (if it have any) and glory and goodness, comes only
from God: But in especial, God is sanctified by these two works and just
judgments of his, that happen in the world.

The first is his righteousnesss and his justice, God helps the good:
beatethdovvn the wicked punishes the sinner: and succoureth his faithful: in
which chiefly he is glorified.
in the revealing whereof, even by punishing the wicked, and comforting them
that be his, the Lord God is chiefly glorified: as in Pharao his overthrow
in the read Sea, with the destruction and ouerwhelming of his captains,
horses, and chariots, that was a fear and astonishment to all nations. The
like in Sennacharib, the Tirant of Assiria, that ouerthrewe the Gods of the
nations, and blasphemed the true and living God, and perished he and his
people, by ye hand of the Angel. In no one thing is the Lord so glorified as
in this: Though Israel was as it were eaten up of the vvie ked for a time:
and the tribe of Judah extinguished and the root of David forgotten: and the
temple forsaken: yet soudeinly was all this renewed, and God glorified in his
Christ.
in showing his rigor and sharpness to the infidels and nations, and by
saving and protecting his people: what glorious and beautiful steps had the
daughter of Syon, when Judah was brought out of captivity, and Jerusalem from
thraldom, and bondage: and the lame man went in the streets: and the blind
could see the Lord: and the Leapers were cleansed: and the bloody Cite, was
made a running spring: and the standing poole, a river of sweet water: and
when joy and health was spread abroad, upon the children of that woeful and
desolate widow Sion: when the Messiah was come: the Church delivered: the
Apostles called: the Gentiles elected: and Herod eaten and devoured with Lice,
the enemy of the Lord: and the Church had quietness: and the enemies were
swallowed up: and glad tidings of the Gospel, was preached on the face of the
whole earth. When the Lord permitted persecution under Nero, Domitian, Traian,
Dioclesian, until Arcadius, how rose it again triumphantly? and the Lord
God magnified in Asia, in Aphrica, in Europe, and the heretics beaten and
suppressed down, by the word of God. This persecucion was great. yet was
God honored in the sight of men, by the courage and death of his saints
After that from Arcadius unto Honorius: unto Theodotius the younger: unto
Martian: until Leo: until Zeno. How worthy a passage had the power of the
Gospel: even from Arrius and those heretics that went before him, until
Pelagius and those heretics which succeeded him? I might cunne over the sixth
age since Christ, where albeit the countenance of the Lord, shined not so
pleasantly, as it did (...) others: yet the stories of Anastatius, of Iustus,
of lus^mian, and of Justin, of T^berius, of Mauritius, do testify, that the
Lord God gave his Church an honorable conquest, over the enemies of Christ.
But I let this ^ip, and I return thither from whence I went: For all men we
pray: for the good, that God vvoulde strengthen them: for the faithlull he
would deliver them: for the vveake, he would encourage them: for them
without, that he would call them: and for the rebel and obstinat, that he
vvuld consume the^: in all which God is magnified.
namely, that this ought to be our petition, our earnest suit and desire unto
the lord, that he would not permit his name to be blasphemed and profaned
among the nations: but in his mercy he would give us of his grace, and in his
justice strike and punish those that be his adversaries, that all men may
know him, and adore his name: and that he may be feared and honored among
all. After this manner be the godly brought, speaking as it were in their own
persons. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give thy praise,
for thy goodness and for the truethes sake. And again in pitiful sort do
the Saints complain by David: when the heathen cried out, where is their
God? And again: Power forth thy wrath and indignation upon the heathen
which know thee not, and upon the kingdoms which call not on thy name. And
again in Ioell: Help us O Lord of our strength, eue^ for thy glor^e and for
thy names sake. Let the revenge of the blood of thy Saints powered forth, be
openly showed among the nations. Yet herein is heed to be taken: namely that
private gr^dge, and prinate malice, make us not to burst out into these
exclamations: but that it be done in the zeal of the Lord.

The second kind or manner of his power, God is a consuming fire to the
wicked: to them that fea^e him, ^ee is a merciful God.
wherein he is sanctified, his name glorified, and he praised among the
children of men: is his infinite mer^ic and goodness, that is extended from
generation to generation, even unto thousand shousandes, of such as fear him,
and keep his commandments: and were it not for the Lord of hosts and for
his great mercy: that in Esaias should ^e fulfilled, that we were as Sodoma,
and become as outcastes in Gomorra: the calamities that happened to Judah, in so
oft^ times changing their judges that were fallen so strangely, and yet
recovered themselves again so mightily in a short space, are a witness unto
us, to testifite this.

Their transgressions under Samuel, yet he delivered God tries his people and
suffers the^ to fall: that they may have a better risinge.
them: their falling in the time of David yet he ^aued them: their misery and
desperate case wherein they faltered under Solomon, yet he protected them:
under Ahab yet he defended them: under ye residewe of his successors, yet did
he not deface them: so that his justice to punish them: his judgments to tame
them: his wraith and his fury to consume them: And his mercy to encourage
them, his righteousness to help them, his clemency to hold them: and his
goodness for to ransom them: be the greatest and the mightiest works of the
Lord, wherein he is glorified: Yet in none so much as in this: that they
which went before us, and we which follow now that be alive, are in his
mercy and goodness saved, Sin reigning in our ^^ortall bodies: we were
c^oked up in the san^e: but tha^ only we are faued and li^ted up in Christ.
and in one Jesus Christ: that being dead are made alive: being fal^en from
grace are raised up in a gratiou^ Lord, and swalowed up with iniquity, are
made new treatures, and a perfect workemanshippe unto God our father:
Thelassius hereon, in his Hecatondate the second, properly touches this: Thou
art free says he, and called unto liberty in Christ, by grace: give not thy
self then unto the pleasure of the flest: for even in this benefit, is
wrought the work of our salvation: which is, that we be true and vprighte, and
perfect: that by us and in our works the name of God may be glorified. For even
in this is the word evil spoken of, in that we be followers of the flesh: and
for this the name of God is dishonored among the Gentiles. Losenes of life in
Christians, is the cause of the dishonoring of God: and makes the infidelles
the worse.
Then to the end this part, for I see that I am over reached by the hour:
nothing on earth both set out his glory that made it, so much as this: That he
confounds his enemies, whereby the Godly are comforted, and his word has
free passage, and in his mercy forbeareth his saints, and at once consumes
not, or in his wrath destroys not: but patient, long sufferinge of great
goodness, uses all kind of clemency, to bring those his unto him.

To conclude: it is the only end and use of this petition. Hallowed be thy
name: That if we shall see the whole world to be divided, and cut in sunder:
For the word of God: then in our peticion, ye sects may be abolished, falfe
opinions defaced, the truth established, the Gospel confirmed: to pray to our
Lord God. Hallowed be thy name: if we be snared with the intiseme^ts of the
flesh: if glory puff us: if bravery and gallantnesse in the world do move
us: Scismes in our common wealth: be for our sins: but the evil life in
precise people, certefieth us, that they have an other end in their dealing
then all the world knovveth.
If concupisence stir us, or impiety and ungodliness wrestle with us. No
easier way can befounde to overcome them then this. Hallowed be thy name: The
rich man he forgets the Lord, and is choked with the cares of this life:
he scrapeth greadely, he oppresses unbrotherly: begileth uncharitably:
deals with all men unjustly: and lives unchristianly: The aduouterer
unchastly: the thaefe untruly: the extortioner by robbery: the vserrer by
pilferie: or else if all the world should ioyn together in tyrranie, it can no
better way remedied, be more easily redressed, or the word of God obeyed or
thy life and wicked demeanor purged: then by this prayer: Hallowed be thy name:
but let us leave this, and come to the next: and it folweth.

Let thy Kingdom come.
OUR Lord and savior Christ, If God used an order in praying: then we in our
supplications and in our common wealth, must be also erdered.
as tendering the health and safety of man, has set down a definitie, and
certain order of prayer, to be vled: Not to take away all other: or ye no man
may or can pray, but only praying thus: but to show us in espetiall, that the
glory of God is first to be looked for: his name promoted: his authority
established: his Godhead magnified: his kingdom enlarged: that in all our
petitions this above other things ought to be regarded: to desire earnestly,
that the retrennesse of the flesh, and beastlines thereof might be launched,
first seek the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof then all things
shall ^ given you.
and the glory of God: his gospel, his word, his kingdom ratified: This is
the second peticion or request that we make unto God in our prayers: For we
desired at the first to be helped of him as of our father, and it is expedient
that we should not seek our own commodity but the Lords, and it is known
in that we ask new: Let thy kingdom come: This kingdom, it is net given to
one only, but to all flesh: it is not of man, or the power of man, but of the
Lord: for that we be weak it is given to strengthen us: because we be
sorrowful, it is given to comfort us: and knowing we be ignorant, he has
given it to instruct us: The ^ai^ctes and holy men they, pine away and take
thought if any superstition do hear sway rather the^ the truth,
and for our better consolation, this is that he teaches us: Let thy kingdom
come.

M. Gualter is of this opinion, that for so much as sin and iniquity
reigns in us, therefore we pray that ungodliness may be expelled, and
wickedness banished, and the only kingdom of God known among us: Cyprian
upon the Lords prayer. We pray says he, that the kingdom of glory may come,
promised by Christ, and bought by the blood and death of Christ: that we which
reigned in the world, may now again be changed, and reign with Christ: For
so it is prepared of the Lord, that such as be his, should be seauered from
the Gods of this world, and made a new people to him and his father, As the
light is more excellent and better vvelcome where there has bin darkness and
joy, where sorrovv and truth, vvhete was ignorance so out of the kindome of
Satan, is the kingdom of Heaven, made more glorious, and better accepted
among, men.
and so receive (as it is in Matthew) the kingdom that was prepared for them
from the beginning: There is in this life two manner of regiments: two
kingdoms that be among us: one it is of God and of the Lord, and of his son
Christ: The other is of ye prince of this world, the ruler of the air, that
governs the hearts of the wicked (as in Peter.) And this conquest, this
victory that he claymeth and the rule which he has, it came in by that
untimely fight which he had with our first father Adam, who in the cumbat and
battle which he had, was seduced by the wiliness of a poor woman: you may
easily know what force we be of, that are overcome by so weak creatures. And
from that time Satan has so prevailed with the sons of men, that they have
haene slaves and Galeboyes, to do his work, and toil in his carte ever
since: yet not so: that he has clean swallowed us, and taken the whole
government into his hands: but in this respect said to reign: in that
commonly he infecteth the kings of the earth, The wicked he blinds, the
godly he stirs up: and by his temtations, he does make those that be the
Lords, more vvarye:
and the most of the nations, with the cup of his fornication: That in just
judgment, and in full desert for their manifould sins, are permitted to be
scourged, and for their malice and ingratitude duly punished: In whom the
kingdom of Satan is said to have pour for that he governs their deeds and
their whole life, neither suffered he them to see the light and purity of the
Gospel: And this government it has stolen away and so bewitched the minds
of men: that for the space of one thousand sire hundred fifty six years, the
Lord God, save only in a poor family, or now and then in some Seth, or one
Enoch, was scarce known upon the face of the earth: for which cause, the
windows of the heaven opened, and they powered down rain, and consumed those
of the earth. And to so many thousands as were there, what was the Arc that
it might be rompared thereunto, which had in it but eight persons, God ne^^^
forsakes hist but in desperate cases, uses mightily to restore hi^ children.
as a several people kept to God? And in this place I have drawn you out a
short catalouge of the perverse and crooked kingdom, the dominion of the
devil: by which you may know, what we are of our selves when God forsakes
us: and you shall understand again, that the Lord, even in the midst of
death, can keep us that be of his Church unto life. I know ye I have to deal
with a great number, that if God would not cut off ye presumptuous speech,
would complain with Esdras, ye he had forgotten Sion, and that his people had
hanged up their harpes by the river of Babell, God vvilha^e his to mourn a
season: that they may be glad and re^oyce with great honor.
and wept there, yet could not be heard of God. And if ever it appeared in
black and mourning weed, then was the Church of God cheefely destitute and
void of help: when as Nemrod that mighty hunter, grew up to so great
strength, and consumed the flock and heritage of the Lord. This kingdom of
Satan, it is enlarged especially by these three means: the first, is in
belying and defacing the truth, the word of God: the second is in open
wickedness: the third is by sects, scismes and heresies, to beat down the
Gospel. An example of the first, I cannot show better, then in him of whom we
brag so much our first father: No truth is in his lips: but falshod and
lies: be the weapons of the devil.
what a lie was that he made unto him, to begyle him withal? If you eat of
this fruit, you shall be Gods knowing good and evil? then take this in the mean
time: as God his glory, his kingdom and his empire is enlarged, by setting
out ye truth: so is ye kingdom of the devil by disceit.

After this sort, he bewitched the Philosophers of old: he begyled the
Gentiles, and nations on the earth, with fond and fantastical illusions:
taken from the Sun, the Moon, and the other creatures who^ they worshipped.
The beginning of the King of Babylon and of Assiria, Of evil Parents, often
times good children: and of an evil stock good branches: yet only the will
of God: that is tied unto no person.
after the floode. 131. year, testify the same: even from Nemrod (before
named) and called of M. Bullinger and of the Poets, Saturnus: how great
blindness and filthy superstition incroched on the earth? even that blessed
nation, (whom God has now mightily prospered) the Germans: from whence I
know not whether any more heavenly, or more wise, or better learned, or
greater number to set out the glory of the Lord and his Christ, has risen out
of any place or nation, or country under ye Sun, then has from them: Yet
these came out of the loins of that beastly Monarcha: and lived a long time in
Idolatry. For take a view of their predccessours from whence they came, and
judge whether God has blessed them or no, that when they were wild grapes,
and good for nothing, has graffed them again upon a new stock, and they
bring forth very plentiful fruit. For consider all and the power of God
which wrought it. How sprang up Idolatry when Ninus son to Nemrod
(otherwise of the Poets Jupiter Belus) began to reign. He erected a temple to
his father: and to his mother Juno: and to Rhea his mothers mother: and be was
the chief author of idolatry, God is not tied to the greatest number: but he
takes, where he pleases: and chooses where he lists.
even the most gross and beastliest, that I find among men. Him did
Semiramis ( a Paragon, and his mother, and an Amazon, as filthy and wicked as
her son, succeed in the Empire. Only in an out corner about Mesopotamia, and
in other petty viliages was God known: I touch this age. For that it pleased
God to suffer Satan to build him a throne and a kingdom among men in those
days especially: which was the foundation and Pillar of all untruth until
this day: For now began the Egyptians to bud up, that untoward generation
(whose name deserves to be hated) for that all our toys and inventions, in
hidden and unknown arts, began with them. And the devil to establishe and
ratisie his dourine, began in Egypt the fifteenth year of Nemrod: God sees
(...) and in due time executes his fierce wrath.
which was of Noe the 745. and of the world 1801. years. Then began Mizraim (so
called in their language) his tyranny: this is he called of ye Histeriographers
Oceanus, that made great broils in the Church, and confirmed his wickedness
with blood. But it is true that is in Solomon. The Lord that sits in his
seat does wipe away all evil. And again: the wise King does scatter the
wicked, and bring a mischief upon them: And therefore this buylding of Satan
it lasted not long, but was broken down, even the chief walls thereof: when
he suffered Abraham to soiourne among them. For his posterity sufferes many
troubles, and diverse calamities, and were oppressed many years: yet in the
end, the Lord God was magnified, his name was praised, and his Majesty
seen, and his people had a glorious day of them, when Pharooth and his
horsemen and his Chariots, were overwhelmed and drowned in the deapth of the
Seas. Prayer refiss teth all troubles: and if we were at the door of death:
yet are we delivered by it.
Therefore in my judgment this is a worthy and most excellent prayer, that
the old relics of the ancient building may be defaced: and to desire the
Lord that his kingdom may be increased, and superstition and falshod sowed
and settled in ye hearts of men, rooted out: and the purity of the Gospel may
take hold: and verity and religion shine among us: For it is the old custom
of Satan to begyle us: and as ancient as the Egyptians be, and the Caldees,
and the Hebrews, so is his policy and his wiliness of many years, and long
time, and greater continuance, then our late and miserable days be able to
resist: This serpent, with many heads: God will bring down: and you shall
see him treden under foot.
if we were assaulted with the like. For which cause seeing superstition has
heretofore ouerflowed the face of the whole earth, and from the beginning might
have continued until our latter times, had not the Lord God in his son
Chrisie looked on us. For that Mahomet, and the Turk have their dominion and
glorious titles to be made Gods above all that be in earth: and his neighbor
his next rempanion, The Pope vvil fall ere long: and his time as it is but
short: so it is the easier to be borne: as he is now rent and torn in
pieces: and his legs also and feet, almost cut off.
has now a long season set him self in his chair of state, and Imperial
throne, and has made all the princes of the earth drunken with his venomous
eup: for that we our selves be a gazing stock almost to the whole world,
and the eyes of every kingdom and nation, cast upon us: for that peace and
quietness and the true light of the Gospel, was never set out in his perfect
color, as it is at this day with us: and for that if unthankfulness continue,
and lothsomnesse take us: we are at a venture, that God will deprive us of his
benefits: Considering the brickle state, and distress wherein we be, no
greater consolation (in my judgment) may or can happen to us, nor worthier
blessing light on us, or more earnest supplication moved by us: then that he
would promete his glory, sanctify his name, The enemies backbite the word,
and God, and the Gospel, if any fall: neither know they how out of their
fall there comes up strength: and abey the better armed.
defend his church, establishe his kingdom, root out the posterity of Satan,
and suffer his peace to be among us.

The second shift, and policy that he has to erect his own glory, and set
up his kingdom: is by open sin and manifest breach of the word of God,
whether it be in Idola^rie, or murder, or whoordom, or incest, or sorcerie, or
theft, or in any other kind of ungodliness whatsoever. For what a victory and
glory has he gotten, when the children of Abraham, and the heirs of his
covenant, do stide so far from the truth, as that they be a gazing stock and
eyesore to all other.

This impure and wicked spirit, the author of sedition, and father of all
untruth, by cogitations, by cuill thoughts, by devises, by evil pretenses, by
lusts: by concupiscence first moves them: then by breath of the word, by
malice, by begiling, by deceit, by intisement, by encouraging to all cuill, in
the end consumes them.

And here creeps in his last and most deceiuable ^^ite: Our strife is for
trifles: and albeit great shevve be made of conscience: all men may see how
small ^^nscience these have: which leave their vocation their calling, the
church and the faithful: contemning brotherly fellowship: absent them from
preaching, and hearing the word: and distike al but such as they would have:
this is purity with securatie.
that incenseth, and inflameth even the brightest and the glorious stars,
with his rancor and pride: And so puffs them up with vain conceit: by his
weapons which he gives them: sects, scismes, heresies, fond illusions, they
commonly drayle with them most good and exquisite pillars of the Church: For my
own part if ever satan displayed his pagiaunt, and set abroad his insignes
among men, I am persuaded he has don it very cunningly in these days: For the
word of God is trodden under foot, unrighteousness (has almost) the upper
hand: the alters of God are broken down: the temple is pestered with money
chaungers: every one has his religion: every one his God: botherhoode is
forsaken: love is forgotten: truth and equity are banished into far
countries and feign to beg their bread: contention is grown up: diuitions
and enmity are creapte into our hearts: some delight in one man: others in
another man, Paul and Apollos, and Clephas are so much talkte of, that Christ
and religion is never a whit thought of: this building up of the Sinagouge of
satan, and despising the word, does make our prayer of small effect: no
though we cry out day and night before the Lord, Let thy kingdom come. Yet
till these and such like be amended, things that be amiss, it prevails
not:

Can the Rushe grow without mire? or the grass grow without water: will the
tree bear fruit with out moisture, Very subtle is Satan, and seeks by all
means to suppress religion: even by color of Religion.
or can the spider make her house or weaue her web without labor? No more
can the devil without beguiling us, nor his workmen without intising us: nor
his builders without molesting us, bring any good success or passage to his
kingdom: and this devise of Satan has been put in practice of late, and I
can testify it: for that great zeal which I have seen, and the small
knowledge which men have: their religion in matters of no value: their
ignorance in things of great weight: can ought derogate so much from the
kingdom of God and of Christ as this? It is an old bar and a crooked piece of
iron he has laid in our way: and the best Smith that I know this day, This
division came in but of late years and Satan mightily prevailed.
is not able to bring it to any fashion: And labor as much as you can therein,
yet will it never be brought to good pass, that any one should sever the
congregation, pluck the Lord Christ in peeses, divide his church, bring in
brawls, contentions, strife debat grudging, without great peril and ioperdie
to the nocke and houshoulde of God? And even now we begin as they in Asia
did, to strive for the passover, and the holy day: yet in this enimitie and
debate, if every man would examine his private conscience, and his dealings
wherein he is blinded, the great show and fair face for the Surplesse and the
Cope to countenance them: will never make recompense for the oppression and
guile, the use whereof so much shameth them: I know not what this precise life
means: and this dealinge wills: but I know it is against the will of God.
But if that complaint so common now among us were true: yet there is little
consideration of the kingdom of God, when the apparel and attire that is
worn in the church shall drive thee from it: And it is not a sufficient cause
for any of you all, to cry out reformation and reformation, Church men and
Church men, the Pope, and the Pope: yet I say not truly, there is good cause
to do so, for if manners in men could be reformable: and they that be about the
offeringes of the Lord, were sound agreeable: no man in tongue threatening out
vengeance against the Pope, Flyinge from the Church: and ronninge from
preaching so small frequentinge of the Temple, on the saboth vvil cause the
Lord to take his Gospel from us.
were found in heart to dissemble popishly: the ark of God it needed not be
carried into so private corners as it is, neither would a great number run
rather unto private houses to serve there, then refuse to come up to Bethell to
offer with the congregation: But I say unto all in the Lord, and as from the
Lord: If God when we have plenty of the word, and eat in full abundance
of the fatness of the Olive: does for this our sin take bread and the word
from us too, we have in our transgressions worthily deserved it: the days are
now so miserable, that every man makes conscience of nothing: every base
citchinboy must now play the Leuite, and yet unworthy to enter into the porche
of the Lord: It is filthy when private men become Preachers.
The people is as the priest, the priest must give place to the people, and
that man that comes not to please them, is thought unworthy to speak among
them: The Lord end the troubles of his saints, and unfold these, devises of
the diuill: that all flesh may see his dealings, and speak well of the name of
the Lord: for till these things be amended, and our holowe hearts better
settled, and our braules and debats ended, the kingdom of God, cannot be
builded.

But to vndersrande this more fully, Let thy kingdom come. We have to
consider, God takes to him: no man can take from him:
that as god has permitted in his eternal counsel and limited unto us whom
he has chosen, a very ordinary way to come unto him: as he has kept a
certain portion to himself, as he has given them strength and might to
resist the devil: so he has from all beginning in his secret determination
given a part and company unto Sathanas: unto us that be his, he has squared
out a pathway and entrance to walk in: even thorough his son Christ: in
whom we are reconciled: in whose blood we are washed: Gods love was seen
before the world, in electing us: at the creation in giving to us: in the
world in calling us: then in Christ in redeeming us and it vvilbee fully
shevven in be^uen when he crovvneth us.
in whom our glory appears: our sanctification comes: his kingdom and
dominion increases.

And this is our kingdom, that God in his son Christ wrought and brought to
pass before the foundation of the world, that the head of the serpent should
be trodden down: and our deliverance bought: that we might live in obedience
and knowledge all our life: of this kingdom, ought these places to be
understood: opened before and prophesied of the kingdom of Christ and his
regiment. Psalm 2. Psalm. 47. Psalm. 72. Esa. 9. Iere. 23. But most excellently
and generally in the discourse of Daniel and his prophecy: and it is alluded
unto by Paul. Colos. 1. that charge us to give thanks to God the father
which has delivered us from the power of darkness, and translated us into
the kingdom of his well-beloved son: and this is it for which we pray, Let thy
kingdom come. Therefore Eucherius upon the kings, does figuratively draw the
kingdom of Saul unto Christ, All things do appertaing to the Lord: for he
was made all in all, for us.
in that they of Israel lost the kingdom and government by his reprobation,
and it should be recovered again under the Messtas by free gift: Lactantius
gives a spiritual and heavenly kingdom unto Christ: for that he was obedient
and fatthfull to his father and fulfilled all things, even to the death of the
cross: therefore he has given him a kingdom, and honor, and rule. Also
Epiphanius makes a comparison betwixt the house of Israel, and Jerusalem, from
whom the scepter and kingdom was some times taken away: but says he, for
ever shall our glory last, which we shall have in the throne of the Lord: And
his kingdom it is not on earth, for so he testified under that testimony he
gave unto Pontius Pilate: Therefore Cyprian: Christ may be called the kingdom
of God, whom we look for daily, and in our prayers desire he would come
speedily: for in so much as he is our resurrection, our glory, our crown,
therefore shall we rise and be made like unto him, and reign with him most
gloriously: We have no glory but in Christ: nor kingdom, but in Christ: no^
honor but in Christ: therefore are we joyful, and glad and only in Christ.
It is true and certain, as there is a dominion and sceptar on earth, so there
is and shall be a kingdom in heaven: so that at such time as we pray, and
desire to be with Christ, we desire to be with him in his kingdom, which in
the end he will give unto us in heaven. Then as the power of Satan is great,
and as he has his policy and ingins ready prepared to snare us: so has the
Lord God his ordinary means to bring us to his kingdom, and he lays up in
store for those that be his against the day of his coming.

First of all the kingdom of God was known and opened, and enlarged very
abundantly, by his word which he gave us: so that they which were snared and
entangled by Satan, had to run unto that eternal decree and heavenly Oracle,
that was delivered by the Lord: The seed of the woman shall tread down the
head of the Serpent: with this as with spiritual food were our fathers fedd,
and lived in the hope which they had in one Christ: for they hoped for an
heritage, and for a kingdom, and for their redemption which they knew should
be fulfilled in their season.

Secondly, Faith finisheth, and disposes all things.
the amplification and increase of the kingdom of God was showed to man: in
that when the appointed hour was come, he sent his only begotten son into
the world: that being made man of the virgin Marie, he might take our
weakness upon him, and bear our infirmities: that our nakedness might be
no more open before God his father: but we might be clothed and covered in his
peace. First he washed away our sins, and nailed them unto the Cross, and
adopted us into the liberty of the children of God: That we might falter no
more, and slide from him: he left a defense and shield for us, which is our
faith: that albeit we have sin and iniquity ranging in our mortal bodies:
yet by a lively hope in his blood, we might stand steadfast against the enemy,
An instume^t to work with all sharper then any svvord, to divide the word
of life.
and have our sins no more imputed to us: but be counted able to stand
before his tribunal, in the merit and death of his son: and such an
assurance is given unto us of life in that kingdom: that Paul bursteth out
into a very vehement speech, and wondereth at the Lord, that has brought to
pass so much for us: For who can lay ought to our charge that be the children
of God? It is God that justifies who shall condemn? It is Christ that is
dead: nay rather which is risen again: that sits at the right hand of his
father, and is an intercessor and mediator for us. Wherefore, seeing the son
of God has made a satisfaction for our sins: Though god defer long: yet he
will pay us in the end.
and has by his resurrection, vanquished hell, death, the devil, and
condemnation: it does follow, that he has made us a free passage to his
kingdom, and has set in good order the perfection that was wanting: to make
us obedient children in this life, and to give us his reward at the length,
even a crown of immortality and glory.

And here comes in the third thing, that establishes and gives us full
certeintie of our kingdom in Christ: whereby he squareth us as fit stones,
hewn out in good time, Man, vveake of him self, and ungodly: he is perfited,
and changed by the Spirit of God.
for so excellent a building: and it is the earnest of the spirit proceeding
from his father, to direct, sanctify, and govern us, against all the
assaults and temptations of Satan. And here it comes to pass, that where
as by nature and offense of the first man, we are unready and unmeet to do
that which is acceptable and pleasant in his sight: now by his spirit
woorkinge in our minds and consciences, and daily striving with the flesh:
we find aptnes in our selves, and a more readiness to obey the Lord. This
comforter as he was most plentifully in great terror and astonishement
manifested to his Apostles, at the first enlarging of the kingdom of God: so
has he not forsaken us, though visibly he appear not unto us: but does purge
and wipe away our infirmities, and lighteneth us by a perfect calling, and
secreate operation, through the obedience of his name? that we may know what
ye holy and perfect, and ready will of God is. And as Saul, a very wicked and
ungodly man was found prophesying among the Prophets: and Amos from the
Mulberie trees, and from the plough, The time it is appointed when we shall
come to God: before that, we are as men in this world drowned in sin and
vvies kednesse.
was taken into the temple and Sinagog of Jerusalem: and as some of the
Apostles from the net, and the fishers hook, were altered and changed unto
other manner of men: so is it with us: made and fashioned again that were
before filthy and wicked, we are purged, renewed, cleansed and renouated by a
more liuelye quickening: we stand boldly before his throne of grace: and
hear, and know the glad tidings of peace: for the spirit makes
intercession, with groninges for those that be the Lords, and works mightily
in our hearts unto salvation.

Fourthly and lastly, this kingdom of God is increased and enlarged by the
preaching of the Gospel. a very ordinary way that God has left unto us, to
bring us to heaven: even to believe the word, and obey the Lord God, If the
contempt of this be death, what shall become of them that do contempt it.
and to attain to the full measure and depth thereof, which is the eternal
decree, purpose and determination of his death, the end whereof is our life:
the cause thereof his only love, good will, and favor, that he bare to man,
openly known and apparent by the Gospel. It is therefore called the Gospel
of Jesus Christ the son of God. Mar. 1. It is called the word of Christ.
Collos. 3. It is called the word of the Lord. Act. 6. It is called the
doctrine of Christ, or the teaching of the Lord. Act. 13. And it is called the
teaching of him that saves. Tit. 2. It is called the preaching of the Lord.
Romans 16. all which titles and epithites given unto the Gospel that is preached
have this end: To know that First it came from God: then it is delivered
unto man: next we must believe it, (and herchy it is we are saved) for this
cause it is called in Math. 13. the good seed. By this Gospel health and life
is showed to him that believes: for which cause Paul said: I am not ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God to all them that believe. The
ordinary mean to come to God is by hering: by this life: by life God: in him
our heaven and our salvation and our life.
It is also called the word of life, Verbum est vi^^^, that contains or
lays up a crown of glory for him that is steadfast in faith. It is called
the word of reconciliation, for it declares the agreement betwixt God and
man, in our Lord Jesus Christ: and so find we it. 2. Cor. 5. All things are
of the Lord, unto whom we are reconciled in Christ, and has given unto us the
ministry of reconciliatio^. And this Gospel, it is called the Gospel of the
glory of Christ. 2. Cor. 4. The God of this world has blinded ye eyes of the
unbelievers, that the brightness of the glorious Gospel of God cannot shine
among them, which is the express image of his father: therefore in Tim. be
calls it the Gospel of the eternal and blessed Lord, The love of the father,
is the love of his Christ, that came for man, and dyed: that out of death,
there might spring forth life, to all believers.
for this is he that God has given unto us, a very pawn and pledge, and full
satisfaction for man. This is the cause that it is called by the name of good
tidings, and to be the Gospel of the kingdom of God and the word of the
kingdom, Mark. 1. Math. 13. For it brings us from the dominion of the
devil, and places us again in the kingdom of the Lord: which kingdom as Mat.
records, has been prooided for the godly, from the very beginning of the
world: but as concerning this kingdom, we have it not in this life present with
us: neither attain we the perfection thereof: for there is a kingdom of
favor and of grace, and a kingdom of glory: this grace then it is in us,
because this glory may be with us: therefore is it, No man is crowned, if he
have not run for it: no man has it, if also he win it not: no man does win
it bntby strength: no man is strong but in God: so that we must stay til God
give us power, that we may have the victory.
that the king of this world is taken from us, that the spirit of God may
rest by us. Then in brief: this is the sum of our prayers, that for as much
as Satan has his ministers to help and assist him to suppress the word and
beat down the kingdom of Christ, and of the gospel, and to set up fashod and
untruth: We humbly crave of the Lord, that ye enemy of mankind may be
snafled, and tied up, his empire rased out, and his force abated, and that the
kingdom of God may only be among us. Thus much for the second peticion that
we make unto the Lord, wherein is set down, that we ought to pray, and unto
God: unto none that is enemy unto us, but to him that loves us: and is our
father: Not to any among the sons of men, but to one that rules them all
that sits above: that we look for ^ kingdom and from the Lord: that it is
given not to us only but to all that are his elect: not for such as be
earthly, but for them that thirst very gredely and seek after God: that it is
not for a time, but it is for ever: Althings are given to know God: but these
are given to know God, our neighbor, our selves, and his Christ, in whom we
finishe and end all.
That this kingdom is with us and we have a good assurance thereof by the
word of God: given unto man partly to instruct him: partly to strenghen him:
partly to comfort him: that the king and ruler of the air may be driven from
him: and the kingdom of God and of Christ known unto him: which kingdom he
grant unto us all, that has redeemed all, Jesus Christ the righteous: to whom
with the father and the holy ghost, three persons, one everlasting, true,
only and eternal God, be all honor, and glory, and power, and dominion now
and for ever. Amen.

Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.
CHrist our savior instructing his disciples to pray, The end of our prayer is
that the king dome of God and his Christ may shine: and darkness, and popery
and dregs of superstition may be abolished.
gave them first in charge to sanctify the name of the Lord, and direct
their actiones and vooinges to him that is above, the father of light. For it
is the foundation and very pillar of our faith, that all things be done to
the aduansement and setting out of the glory of our God and his name: before
we presume to search and seek for our own commodity. And for that this
cannot be done until the head of the serpent and his force be beaten down:
We pray that he and his kingdom may be abolished, and that the Lord and his
son Christ, and the kingdom of salvation and his gospel may be set up, yet
because God cannot reign so in us, and dwell among us, as either we look for,
or we wish for. We make our continual prayer, The kingdom of God.
that his will may be done in earth among us as it is in heaven: Whereby we
give our selves as well in body as in soul to obey him.

Where our only demand and peticion is unto the Lord, Nothing so accepted
to the Lord: as a vvillinge and ready mind to serve him.
that his kingdom may come among us: his name known of us, he would take us
into his protection and guidance: to obey his will, to remember his laws, to
fulfill his heasts, to vow our bodies and souls as^^uch as in us lies
continully to serve him.

M. M. Gualter.
Gualter in his question wherefere we pray not for our selves: and that our
will may be done as for the Lord and for his? Seeing that is against reason we
should make request for an other, and leave the commodity which is our own.
He answers thus: for that Christ has given an example of praying, and set
down that which is is porfitable for us: he could not say that our will
should be fulfilled which is ungodly, evil, malicious, and daily requiring
that does hurt us: But he leaves it to God, as knowing what it is that is
more needful for us.

Cyprian discoursing hereof, gives a good reason: Ciprian.
that because the devil desires and strives with us: therefore pray we for
resistance, that God would comfort us: For the devil wills and we will: But
the will of God breaks both: So that neither will I, neither nill I, but that
God would.

This place it wipeth away all that the Pelagianes can or may say herein:
Pelagius con dempned hear.
for if the will of man be ruled by the will of the Lord, and our works and our
wits, and our saying and our doing be all framed by the will of god: What is
there left behind for us to reason of? Thy hands if they labor: thy wisdom
in foretelling: thy body in thy endeavor: thy mind and soul what ever it be
that it reckeneth: yet it is guided by the Lord.

And to the man that has reason, The obedience of creatures to the Lord, does
continu ally check us that d^scbay him, and break his commau^dements.
what can be more unreasonable, then when the Angles do there messags at his
will? the heavens obey him at his beck? The air flickereth and fleeteth away
when he bideth it? The waters roll and plounce forth and consumes the
inheritannce that dwell under the sun? And at his pleasure returns to his
place: when the earth remoueth at his wrath, and the mountains leave there
dwelling and run a wrie in his displeasure? Yet that man should as a Lord
and king over these, be without a king and guide to rule him? It pleases God
I should see the manner of the world and of foolish people in my youth: and
glad I am thereof. For if a man live many years, and in them all rejoice, yet
shall he remember the day of darkness, and in the end all whatsoever comes
is but vanity. But he that knows the will of God and is led by it, The life
of man is for a time: but he that fears God, lives for ever.
his end is gladness and his years is glory, and honor shall be his portion
for ever. For as the clouds drop in there season on the earth, and as the tree
does fall toward the South, or as the North wind blustreth and consumes, or
as in the place the tree falls there it lies: So is it ordained to man, that
according to his life, he should find it when he comes to account.

Who can measure the waves of the Sea by his Bucketts? or who is he can show
me the way of the spirit? The incomprehencible wisdom of God, and the
weakness of man.
How do the boanes grow? And how increase our Synewes? Or what is the just
order of the body, when thou live? What is the secreate working in the womb,
when the infant strives with his mother, and she bursteth and consumes with
Sorrow? All these be hard and the wisdom of al flesh cannot judge hereof.
But the will of the Lord who knows it? Then happy is that man that has
understanding and he is blessed of the Lord that has wisdom: and his days
are prolonged on earth ye measures his doings by the will of God. For the
husbandman sows his seed: but he knows not the gain that will come up
thereof. Gods providence, in guiding, and providing for all.
And the wayfaring man he takes his journey in the morning: but he is not
aware what will be fall or night. The crafts master, he works and wearieth
himself, yet little does he know who shall eat the labor of his hands. And
he that planteth and builds, cannot tell to whom his substance is provided
for. Then if in these things that be on earth, the Lord God is known as
guider and directour of them all. What salvation can we look for? What health
can we wish for? What preservation can we hope for? But from the Lord? Is it
then any marvel if we pray, Let thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven?

Two fortes of men I condemn here. The first they that be among them selves a
several house and church from all other, Two kinds of Heretics. be
condemned here: the household of faith.
that be louelike and of the household of faith, with whom against the will of
God, there is thoughts, cogitations, evil pretenses to mischief, that think,
though they be vile and lascivious, yet to be accounted as holy and
righteous: and do think that they are led by the Spirit of God and cannot
err. And though they will and wish nothing else then is wicked, yet that all
is done by the will of God.

The second, is against the Pelagians and against free will men that give
salvation to their deeds, Free will men, banished by this place.
and life unto their works, and heaven unto their own will: to have free
power to choose or refuse: to take it or forsake it being offered them: to have
a mind to obey God, and a will to serve the Lord: and readiness to fulfill the
commandments, of them selves and from no other. Man striuinge with God, is
as a beast, but when he fights with him, he vanishes as does the dust
Among whom this prayer is changed: Thy will be fulfilled, and their own
imaginations strengthened, for their will is sufficient. Let no man wounder at
this: For the place is not so inconvenient, but that I may touch it. And I
wish we might not have to do with them, they be so dangerous.

But as the wind that is in the East, comes near unto the Western part,
and is scattered abroad through all coasts of the earth: So am I afraid,
that our neighbors infected about us with these heresies, driven to seek
their harbor and dwelling in other places, should wander now too near us.
And undoubtedly, if this watcheworde be not sufficient to stay the course that
is begone. My little treatise hereof at this time shall rise hereafter to a
greater volume.

The first Heresy took his original from Simon Magus, the inchaunter: he
that would have bought the Holy ghost for money, Simon Magus the beginner of
the household of faith: some call it the family of love.
when he was baptized of Philip: That did think it was no sin to use the
company of all women indifferently. This herctike thought also that he could
not sin. And if any fault was committed, that it was forgiven him. And
lawful to use any company, any vice, any evil deed, sin and beastliness
without exception. And this herisie, The beastliness of man drowned in sin.
as I hear, is blown abroad, and even now renewed not many miles from us:
that it seems high time to confound them, least they should spread abroad
and infect others.

I seek not curiously to know whom especially they followed. Carpocrates
heresy.
For they savor partly of Carpocrates, that filthy and beastly liver. They
take part of Prodicus, Prodicus error.
that did prostitute him self to all manner of lasciuiousnes: that was a
defender of those that were called Adamites. They have a portion among the
Donatistes that severe them selves from the supper of the Lord, Donatistes
their fall.
least they should be insected with others.

And Pelagius has schooled them, In time of peace men do occupy them selves
with idle questions: and among those that think them selves purest, are
greatest ^eresies.
to think well of them selves: and to have salvation in their own will. So that
if they knew not before: I show them now (I hope in time) what father they
had, and from whence they had their beginning. All which comes from the
enemy of all flesh, the father of lies, and Prince of this world, that is
ruler of the air, the devil and Sathanas.

This household of faith, commonly called The family of love: it was spread
abroad in Germany, and in the low country, The house hold of faith, brought
in among the ^ermans.
very nigh about three hundred years past: and renewed of late within this
forty years: and has continued until now: If so that it had not pleased
God the more to lighten them with his spirit, that in time they should revolt.

First, they do think that he which is regenerated can sin no more: and that
the Spirit will never leave them, for what gross sin soever: and that they
are deified. The next, that their bodies may as common ware be sold to every
one to use them alike. Which gross and pernicious errors, I am forie I must
close them up in so short a room: But yet content at this present to keep a
low sail, I will touch them briefly. A reason that we all do sin, and
this man does err.


All flesh does sin, for man sins daily. Some men I doubt not have the
spitite of God: Then men having the Spirit of God, sin daily.
I sometime woundered at the first entrance and step I took unto divinity,
The sinneof the elect, are not to death: but falling they rise again by grace.
to see what end was allotted unto the sons of Adam. I marueiled at the grace
we have from God. That though Lot was called good, yet fell in drunkenness,
and rose again so sp^edily by the Lord. And Abraham so well beloved and
commended from heaven: how it came to pass, that he should prostitute his
wife. And why Moses, that spoke unto the Lord face to face, had not the power
nor wisdom at that instant to sanctify the Lord at the waters of Merebath.
The imbecilitie and fall of the faithful.
I could not a long time digest that same of Saul, that though he had grace
most plentiful, yet fell be from it. Nor of Achitophell, that was so often
times in the tabernacle of the Lord, and in the end strangled him self so
villenously with a halter. The godly are never cast off: the wicked when they
stand, fall down to hell.
Or why Judas that was among the twelve (and I doubt not but he did miracles
and preached to) yet fell so strangely in the end. And hardly was I satisu^ed
when I found a doubt of a number in the book of God, whose dealinges were
sometimes commended, whose lives at length so altered, whose ends were feared
and despised of many.

The first sort were good, and are said to have pleased the Lord God: and I
know, and I am assured that they had the spirit of the Lord abundantly, yet
did they fall very grossly.

The second forte that I reckoned up, The spirit of God is not tied to man:
but man is ^ied to the spirit.
had the Spirit of the Lord for a season, and it was taken away from them:
for it was abused by them, and they had their portion, which was condemnation.

The third sort that I find, are such as fell and did rise: and yet in the
end, how they ended and dyed: for that they are not condemned, we have left
it to the Lord.

Three sorts of men I synde: Three kinds of operation and vvorking by the
spirit.
and three sorts of workinge: and three manners of operations, by the Spirit.

The first from death unto life, and saved daily by renouation.

The second, from life unto death, that fell continually by reprobation.

The third, betwixt them both, that lined and sinned, and offended, and were
strengthened: and I doubt not but saved: but by imputation, by grace through
Christ.

The Creature cannot be as is the Creator: neither Adam, as was God that made
him. But he that has the fullness of the Spirit of the holy Ghost in ample
and full measure dwelling in him, Reason that man rules not the spirit of God.
remaining in deity, in godhead, in divinity, has that which is proper to
God and Christo.

Then neither man, neither creature, neither any thing on earth can have this
property to wind the Spirit as he lists: for it is proper only to the
Lord.

Elias prayed for rain and God heard him: When he fled from Iezabell he was
nourished by the Angel of God. Elias deuideth the waters, and is taken up into
heaven in a flerie Chariot, If he prayed he had it not of himself, he
acknowleged the gift there of from God.

If the Angel was sent from God, he did not command it, nor trust in his
own might, he confessed one that sent him. He divided the waters for the
spirit of God did move him: yet stayed he his time, for the spirit of God did
lead him. And he was taken up not of himself, but at the commandment and
will of God that called him.

Are they better then Elyas? I never saw it yet. A comparion with the
Fathers and our men: that in all manner dealings, cry out that it is the
spirit of God.
Are they stronger then Moses that made Egypt to quake? Then show me thy
miracles and command the waters, the Sea, the air, the heavens to obey thee.
Yet shall thou be but a man and be ruled by the Lord. Are they more perfect
and upright then Samuel? Hardly is it to be credited. And yet work what thou
can work, it is not of thy self. The spirit it is not thine. Thy deeds
and dealings be not thine own. Thy cogitations and thoughts if they be good, I
say with Paul and with the prophets. They be the gifts of God.

Will the Sun and the Moon rule the heavens or be they not ruled of the
Lord? The dumb creatures are a witness against us, that obey the Lord: yet
man does not.
Can the clouds scatter their drops abroad? Or the horie frostes lie on the
grass? Or the caterpiller eat up the herbs? Or drought consume them on the
earth? Or the pestilence ransake the kings Palaces? Or death do his mesage in
aresting thee. If the Lore send them not? No more can thou do any good if he
guide thee not.

The gould is dug in the earth, the cloddes be broken, the dross is purged,
the fine mettaile is laid up for store: And so is man by the Lord altered,
renewed, strengthened, and cleansed, and kept against the day of righteousness.
Can the pot plead with his master: Be it of brass or clay, of Copper or
Silver or of Gould? Man on earth is a stranger but kept of the Lord till the
day of judgment.
Or the plant that is set in the earth, be it pear or aple or what fruit
else soever, may it reason with him that graffed it, for that it might have been
made one of a better taste? Why then should we murmur at the Lord that rules
us, and gives a boundaunce of his spirit, and uprightness of life according
to his will and secret purpose: Not as man thinks at his own pleasure, to
use or abuse as him lists. It is very true that the holy ghost appeared
visiblie by signs on the apostles like cloven tongues, and is said to come in
fire. But it is no argument.

God shows his power visiblie by his spirit, Ergo, Error and fault of a
false argument.
God is in us really? in spirit.
For I know that the Apostles were not deisted in that place, and made so
perfect that they could not sin. For Paul resisted Peter to his face, in the
Gallathians, For that when he was in Antiochia, before certain came from
James, he eat with the Gentiles. But when they were come, he withdrewe him and
separated himself, The fall of man, is for two ends: to know his own
weakness: to pray the more earnesty.
fearing them which were of the Circumcision. In like manner Barnabas. So that
it is no argument. They received the holy ghost. Ergo, they sinned not. But
even God in his elect will be glorified in that they falling down, rise again
so gloriously.

In deed the Persians do reason here, that therefore the fire is God: because
the holy ghost appeered as fire. And these heritickes that they be as God:
because God is said to dwell in them. Heresy of the Persians.
Truth it is, that the spirit of God is the earnest of our inheritance, and
that we are the temples of the holy ghost, yet but by a way of comparison. For
we find it in the law: get you out from among them O my people. Their false
conclusion taken away:
And separate your selves from them says the Lord. And touch, not him that is
unclean, the one expresses the other: As the Temple is kept and consecrated
to god so ought our bodies and souls to be hallowed and sanctified and kept
clean unto the Lord.

As touching the beasty and lascivious life whereunto they be given, no heart
can suffer it, Arguments to prove that we be full of sin: and that he which
continues therein shall die the death
and my pen it shakes to report it. But if that be true that is in Paul. Let
not sin reign in your mortal bodies to obey the lusts thereof. If that be
so in the Galathians, Fornicatours, idolaters, adulterers, wantones, buggerers,
thieves, dronkerds, extortioners, raylers, shall not inherit the kingdom of
God: If it be true to the Corinthians, The Famely of Love condemned.
to avoid Fornication let every man have his wife, and let every woman have
her own husband. If unto the Ephesians: beware of fornication, uncleanness,
coueteousnesse, let it not be once named among you as becomes saints. If in
the revelation. The Lord had some thing to say unto the church of Pargamos
although that in the heat and percecution and slaughter of the Martyrs of God
they continued steadily. Yet had some among them, where as satan dwelt, that
maintained the doctrine of Balaam, The doctrine of Balaam.
that taught Balaac to put a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to
sacrifice unto Idols and commit fornication. If he had something to say unto
them for that they maintained the doctrine of the Nicolitans which thing he
hates. Nicolitans, that make other men's vviues common: condemned.
It is most certain and true that the family of love has erred.

If God taught us a right, commit not adultery. If Moses said that very truly
join not your selves to the manner or custom of the nations. Manlynes, is
beastlynes: and humanity is villainy, when grace wants.
If Samuel checked them for that they went a whoring after strange wives. If
Esaias, for that Israel rose up early and went astray. And as the untamed and
unbridled Colt went a neighing after other men's wives: if Jeremy, that
confusion shall come on them, and baldness on their pates for defiling their
own coutche. It is undoubted, it is most true that the famelie of love has
erred.

If the fathe^^ have judged rightly, if Nazianzen in his funeral and last
talk unto his sister: Nazianzon.
To join us together in one flesh, cannot separate us from the spirit.
Ambrose.
If Ambrose in his speech he has of virgens, was wont to commend Sara and
Rebecca and Rachell, as Matrons of chastity. Their husbands as Lords to
direct them in integrity, Epiphanus, that does alovve marriages. Ierom. Basil.
If Epiphanius in his second book, agrees with ye church as unspotted and
clean having honest and comely marriages therein. If Jerome upon Timothy the 4.
condempneth such as think not reuerenly of Matrimony. If Basil in his
Examero calls it the chain and bond of nature. If Athanasius accuses
Miluius of this heresy, Athanasius.
and in judging not honorably of marriage sets forth Adam and Eve joined
together in Paradise. If all the fathers have agreed and set themselves against
the adulterer. If Christ committed them to death. And Paul, that incestuous man
to Sathanas. If they in the prematiue Church have consented all in one, and our
laws agree in the same at this day: What need we to strive any more for this.
The case is open, the thing is known. It is undoubted, it is most true, that
the famelie of love has erred. To confute them perticulerly as it were by
treatise, that I leave to them whose private charge requires it.

To you I speak this, The reward of sin is death.
to give a warning that all such detestable unto the Lord, are reserved
against the great day, the day of wrath, and he will judge them: Partly to
awake you out of that slumber wherein you be, that this beginning and
enteraunce which I now perceive to be grounded a little in smaller trifles,
burst not out into greater heresies.

But I return to the next, and that is of free will men. And yet a little I am
inforsed to search out this which is very common and it smells of the Donatist
that think the Church is no where, but where such as they be are. Your
prayer, The abuse of our men, that usurp the glory of god and edifying and
suffer all things: and he accounted as wicked that misti keth them.
that the will of God may be done in earth, wills not thee to judge so
rashly of thy brother. And that byworde so common in the woride: Do all things
to the glory of God: tastes of those runninge heads in the Primative church
in Africa. The Circumcelions: that thought all things which were not done and
liked by them, they could never be done to Gods glory.

Again, for I will never spare the wicked. It is not the will of God, that any
as a man frantic and without wit, should scourge and whip them selves as the
Jews and Italian fashion was: and renewed among them in Italy of late, that
remain as the Jews do in the old ceremonies. I touch them upon good
occasion: for I have known of these Jewish rites, renewed of late.

And it is a wicked and most heinous ^fence, This error is common: but as God
loves the good and the godly: so he hates the wicked and the sinners, they
be not the Lords.
and against the rule and prescript commandment of God. To keep truth in
thy heart, and to lie unto thy neighbor for advantage: or for the Gospel, to
swear to an untruth, to honest him that professes religion. And it took the
beginning from the Maniches, and from the Gnostiches: and renewed in
Priscillian, which thing I think it is but of a blind affection and
ignorant zeal, and not known unto some. Let warninge therefore be taken in
time.

I find that under Gratian and Valentinian, In this age increased this grosle
ignorance: after Christ the fourth age.
the assembly of the Priscilianistes were very great, such as were defiled
with filthiness, with whoredom, with evil dealing, with any vice whatsoever. If
they came unto their sect, they kept it close. If they joined with them, they
concealed it. All others, they esteemed as castawayes. There was a verse among
them: Iura, periura, secretum prodere noli.

Swear and forswear, Judges take heed, how you admit oaths: for this
herisie is commonly sprung up: and it is abyvvord that those that be not as
they are: they be without: therefore they may, swear though falsely: if it be
for the safety of their companion: others are thought to be but Egyptians:
that are not as they be. Arbitrarii.
keep secret, thy secret deeds bewray them not. I accuse no man: I wish
amendment: for I see that which is amiss. God which knows the heart and the
secrets, and searches the raines, will search out and examine and judge it
to. Let this be a remembrance in prayer: His will be done in earth: and it
will take away thy will from this wilfulness. And now I come to the free will
men: I am longer then hitherto I was wont: but the matter, and the weightinesse
of the cause compels me.

Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. This order in prayer, takes
away the will of man: it takes away works: it takes away all power ye is in
us: it refers us only to the will of god. Flesh and blood, has in this
place a great combat with the Spirit: that seeing he is lord in earth, and
master of the fishes in the Sea, and guide and ruler over the creatures in the
earth: yet should be so debarred of his liberty, and so tied unto thraldom,
that he has not so much as power over his own soul: nor discretion to
judge of that should bring him life. The fish that swimmeth in the river: The
bird that flickereth in the air: the worm that creeps on the earth, A
subtle and crafty reason taken from the impotencie that is in man: the more
by his ^railtie and vveikenesse to stir up man.
may seem to be happier then man is: For every one has an end and appointed
time given him to judge of that which brings life, and avoid that which is
evil. As for man, he is so tied: that the sword, the Ieobet, the Axe, the
water, the fire cannot be avoided, if it be determined by the Lord. But
unhappy is man, that cannot see the goodness of our God. For seeing all things
happen by the Lord: what is it shall trouble me? God has appointed the
heavens, the earth, the clouds, and all shall be obedient to them that fears
him. For it is our comfortes: we are weak, and we be not able to help our
selves: But one there is that sits above, and it is he that shall provide
for us.

Jerome unto Tesiphon, Ieromagainst Bryto.

Mark the state of wickedness: for as every thing is most fantastical, so
commonly i^ is believed.


complayneth of Pelagius by surname Bryto, according as Prosperus writeteth in
the year of Christ 415. Or as Marianus reckons 414. In the time of Honorius
and Theodotius, that spread abroad his heresies throughout all the East. And
he with a great number more, infected the whole country. And it is
complained by Augustus that it blazed and bruted forth throughout all
Palestine. And the same is author, that it was known in Africa, and then
carried to Constantinople: Sooner is the truth abolished, then filshod rooted
out: and for this, read the state of the kings of israel.

Osorius. I think as odiosus, to the church of God.


into Italy: into Scilitia: into France: into England, as Prosper records:
So that I wounder not at all, if the relics thereof remain still. For
Melanchton, though otherwise a good man, and a very notable member in the
Church of God, of late years in Germany was overthrown in this. And Erasmus
that Semipelagian (very vnsteadie I must needs say, and one that durst not
stand long unto the truth) stumbled in this. As for Osorius his sweet
words has so ravished our young wits, that it is to be feared, they taste
a little of his rankenesse of speech. Therefore, to confound him with others
that Hyerarkye, Martyn Luther.
I refer you to that man of late memory, the light and glory of Germany,
Martine Luther, that I know both can and will take my part against them all.
For I stand not here by way of confutation, to set my self an adversary
against all: but to give unto you a notice of some, for both I and others may
well touch it, seeing it has had so great defenders of late and so near us.
Many things to be vvayed in the handeling of free will.


Now then, I speak not of the state of Adam, and his s^yding from the Lord:
what he was in Paradise. It is another question, I talk of such as we be
now: I touch not what we are in civil matters: or what our will is in common
affairs, eating and drinking, in cloth, in apparel, in such of that sort.
These pertain to the earth: We dispute of that that leads us to heaven. We
take not in hand what there is in that man, that is regenerated by the
spirit: where there is a mind and a will to the Lord, In God are we made
ready to do good: in our selves, we Iose all: even our own selves.
by the Lord. But we speak of him that is in sin, how he comes to God.
And I meddle not with destenie, with providence, with necessity: they are not
depending hereon: For there should then be no end of our contreuersie. Neither
with the ministry of the word, and of the Sacraments, as means to bring
us: We should then be too long. Nor yet, whether we have any light or not,
any force and might or no, any will, any moving, any care any desire: For it is
easily known, without God we have nothing.

This is it which I touch briefly at this time, and it is my question: The
calling of the finner, and the alteration in this life of the ungodly man, is
the only work of God.
That in the conversion of the wicked and ungodly man unto the Lord: Whereby
he is thoroughly grieved for his sin: whereby he sees in a lively faith,
the free mercy of God, and the benefit of his Mediator: whereby he is
instified before the Lord: whereby he is renewed: whereby he is lightened:
whether or not, there be a mind and readiness in him: whether his will, his
soul and his understanding is raised or stirred up of him self, of his own
liberty, at his pleasure, for to know, Seek the Lord, and his Christ? Or
whether his whole conversion: his alteration: his regeneration, is to be
referred to the Spirit of the Lord, and the woorking of God? and his mind
moved and settled by the Holy Ghost? or whether it comes and proreede of him
self? This therefore to be short, it comes and proceeds all from God.

For first I show, With our conception comes in sin: wiped away in the
blood of Christ.
that from the top of the head to the soul of the foot, we are full of
botches and blaines, there is no whole part within us: as the leprocie the
body: so does Sathanas infecte the soul: as the botches and byles, the skin
and flesh: So the devil, the mind and heart of man. For we are under
bondage, and servitude, and in the slavery of this world.

Secondly, the spirit of God only does draw us and does renew us, and does
make us new creatures. The mind and heart of man is ruled and obayeth: of our
selves we can do nothing, The manner and order of our salvation.
no not think a good thought: this is more plainly seen by the form of this
prayer that I have in hand. For the caller is the Lord, it is done by his
will to save them that be on earth, to fulfill the petition that it may be
with us as it is in heaven. The next cause hereof is Christ. If man had life
of him self: then no man vvoulde die: but this is salse: then no doubt,
eternal life comes from God.
First for that he became man. Next, to save men, his blood was shed, and
he died to get us life. Thirdly, he rose from death, and went up to heaven,
that we might have our dwelling and mansion with him who is above.

To have an assurance hereof, we have the spirit that continually works in
the minds of those that be his, whom he has severed from the beginning of
the world to dwell with him. That he has predistinated unto life, and made the
heirs of his glory. Sorites: or rather gradatio.
For whom he has elected those he calls: whom he calls those he
justifies: whom he justifies, those he glorifieth. And where is now the
will of man?

But to understand more plainly the way and order of his elect whom he has
appointed in this life, to dwell with him.

First I give them this note, that it is by regeneration of ye spirit, which
they shall feel working in the^, in that being overwhelmed in sin, and laden
with iniquity, they shall have taste of their own transgressions, and a hatred
of themselus as touching the flesh. And they do rise out of darkness and the
lusts of this life, So long as there is life, so long reigns sin, in our
mortal bodies: yet by our imputation in Christ, it is wiped away.
and reform them as new creatures unto God and his Christ, making shipwrecke
of their bodies for the testimony of his truth. And therefore conuertion or
repentance is in the regenerate man in whom there is an alteration and
change from this wicked and ungodly life. His soul it sorroweth for the sin
past. Contrition and repentance is so settled within him, that the fear of the
judgments and wrath of GOD hangs over him. But he knows that he is saved
and kept from it in Christ.

For this cause we have a lather to climb weal into heaven, and by steps and
degrees as it were to come to God.

The first is our conuertion from sin, Four several things required in the
regenerate man
unto holiness and good conversation.

The second is our quickening or our renewing according to the image of God,
that is in man. The third is our government or direction in the whole course
of our whole life. The fourth is ye perfection of righteousness, according to
the gift of perseverance and continuing to thend of our race. This mean is
much contempned: preachinge despised if the man be misliked: therefore is there
open to kens of infidelity.


Truth it is that God has left us a mean in earth and a way to atteine to
this, and it is by hearing his word, wherein the law and the gospel is very
plentifully set out unto us. And therefore the counsels of Christ may be
sufficient, that upon the excellency of his message shows our duty. For
he witnesses that he spoke not of him self, but from the father, that sent
him ye had given him a commandment what to say, and what to speak. And
saint Paul says, I make open unto you the Gospel which I preached,
Enthusiastike, very heretics.
which you have received, wherein you stand, and wherein you are saved.
Therefore we look not here upon the madness of Enthusiastists, that be
frantic, and think they have the spirit. Nor of the Anabaptists that look
for revelations and dreams. Hear the word, refuse it not: rebel not
against the spirit.
But we take a mean given unto us by the spirit which is the word. For as man
has power to hear, to understand, to give ear, and to read: so unless
there come a schoulemaister to instruct us, and a gouerner to guide us we do
as Agrippa did. We come but fair and softely.

I acknowledge an hethnish and as it were an outlandish kind of reverence that
we give unto the lord, which is in a bare sight of the heavens and vewe of the
Elements, that judges there is a Lord. But this it makes not unto
salvation. And for that cause the Prophets and the Apostles calls man but by
the name of him that is in darkness and in death. And therefore saint John
says, the light appeared in darkness, and the darkness comprehendid it not.
And Saint Paul says, the worldly or fleshly man perceives not those things
which are of the spirit, for they be foolishnes unto him. God is said to do
it: the son to bring it, the holy ghost to finish it, if it be good that is
man: and this work is but one.
And Christ himself affirms ye no man knows the father, but the son and
he unto whom he reuealeth him. And again when he asked Peter, who say thou
that I am? He answered, thou art Christ the son of ye living God. Happy art
thou Simon said the Lord for flesh and blood has not revealed this, but my
father which is in heaven. And therefore very lovingly it is said unto us that
for this end, Christ came into the world even unto judgment, that those which
are blind might see. Then this is the full force and authority of the
spirit, that rules and alters the actions in man, and makes the doings of
those in the world to be acceptable, by quickening and reviving, Proof, that
all our good actions come of God.
by altering and by renewing the man of God which before was imperfect.

That it is the work of the spirte, take that in the Prophet, they shall be all
taught of God. Any that of Christ, when the comforter shall come, the spirit
of truth, he shall teach you all things. For so I find it every where: Lydia
did hear, whose heart the Lord opened that she might give ear unto ye words
of Paul. god electeth: Christ saves: the spirit works and all this, is
but one work in one God.
And therefore one of the Prophets. I will give them an heart they shall know
me. So that the true understanding, hearing, following and observing the laws
of the Lord, from whence come they? But from above from the Lord of truth,
from him that wills the salvation of all, even of all those that he will
save. For where Saint Paul says, that the fullness of gentiles shall come in.
And again it is said in the Prophets all flesh shall see the salvation of our
God.

I understand it thus: Even as Augustine does upon that place in Math. That God
wills all men shall be saved, of those says he whom he has determined for to
save. For as Gregory Nazianzen confuteth the heretics that denied the holy
ghost to be God, out of the first of John that reasoned with him in the same
text. Even so do I here. For upon that place in John by him were all things
made and without him were nothing made that was made, they cauell thus.

The holy ghost is some thing and existeth. Ergo, the holy ghost is a creature
and made by him.
That father Nazianzen answers thus. Nazianzne.
Al things were made by him, or created, of those things says he which he did
make or create. Ierom.
And so say I, he wills the life of all, and gives salvation unto all, even
to whom in his secret power, The very chosen and elect vessels of God have
their faults: some more and some less.
and determinate purpose he will give unto: To those he gives. Therefore
Jeremy had a sore fall here at, and stumbled grievously in my judgment in one
place, where I find thus. It is our part to begin that is good, but the
part of God to end it: our part to offer that we can, his part to finish that
we will: But how can we most miserably living here on earth, will that which is
good, without the will of God? or give assault thereunto which are of strength
to accomplish nothing?

Augustine fasted hereof, Augustine. The labor of man is in vain if God help
not: then much less is our salvation in our power, being sinful
and almost poisoned him self therewith, if he had not lifted his head from
the cup as he did: For he imagines, that faith whereby we believe in God, is
not to be said the gift of God, but to be within us, as from us. And thereby
we begin to wish and to ask the gifts of God. But he gave over this in the
end, and attributes all unto the Lord, that helps and prepares, and
prospers, and makes ready all our hearts.

The diversity in those that are baptized shows this: For all alike
receiving the Sacraments: are not like in conversation, in life, in manners:
Iudgemente^ and works in God, are secret:
and children some are taken away at the time of regenerating: some before
they are brought into the Church. Others before they come to full grows:
diverse in the middle age: of which, none of them I know, but would go to
heaven, if it lay in their power to get it. But because it is the choice of the
Lord, and he clecteth us: we may cry with Saint Paul: Oh, Cyprian. The
Pathers are very dangerous to vvade in, without great aduisement, and ernest
prayer for every one has his fall and the young wits are casely choked with
them.
the height, depth, and breadth of the riches of the Lord, how unsearchable
are his works, and his ways past finding out. Therefore I like that which
is in Cyprian: That we must brag in nothing, because nothing is ours.

Only among the fathers, Clemens and Cyprian are those, whose books I wish
alone to be read of such as God has given wisdom unto, and good judgment
in the discerning of Scriptures: For they be dangerous to wade in: and though
they were near the Apostles time: yet all the chafe and the rubbigges that
our late writers have stuff up their volumes withal, seems to be fetched
from thence.

This disputation might be prolonged: But the searching out of the fathers is
a greater labor then can be arraigned unto soudenly. And the loathsome sent,
wherewithal our late writers dooinges are taynted, do discourage me to meddle
with them. I briefly end thus. If there be yet a reason to be showed in
natural causes? Or if we waver and falter in things that be common with us? If
the moving of the beauens cannot be opened? If no man can show a reason of the
brightness in the Sun? The consideration of the creatures conversant with
us, does amaz and dim our sight: then much more God.
nor of the cleerenesse of the air? or of the operation of the wind? or of
the order and knitting togeether of the body? If we cannot measure out the
sinews? or draw out the joints? or unfold the secreat creuisses in the
head? What are we to reason and dispute with God? How feeds he the young
Raven? How is the Phoenix hatched? How keeps he the Storke? What daiyaunce
has he given to the Conney? Or what years does he permit to the wild Colte?
How gardeth he the Lion? What harbor has he given to the savage beasts? If
we could but immagine the state of the blessed we should be ravished, O
Lord how straungly?
And to say a truth: what end has he allotted unto man? I say: all the
works of the Lord are wonderful. But his secreat wisdom, wherein he has
provided and laid up in his mercy for the sons of Adam great and most
singular benefits. They are not to be attained unto: For his doings are
incomprehensible, his judgments are secreat. His ways unknown: his counsel
hidden: his love and his favor far outreaching us: that we may well make
our prayer unto the Lord, to have his will fulfilled, and his commandments
obeyed in earth: Contentious Scismatickes become (if God stay not, gross
Heretics.
because no man is able, either by wishing, either by desiring, either yet by
willing it to come to heaven. Thus much for these two kinds of men ye are in
our days, whereof I am sure there is a great number. For partly by their
deeds, for they be outrageous: partly by their courage, they be so
quarellous, the common sort of men must needs know them. But to that which
follows.

Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. Cyprian geeueth a very good
reason hereof: Cypri^^.
Voluntate Dei id est Dei protectione egeamus. The will of God, that is the
aid and help of God is that we need. For without his will we have naught.
And no man is of any force, if he in his favor and his mercy help them not:
for who has resisted him and has not dyed for it? Then we have to search
what it is, that is the will of the Lord to be done. And this is said by the
fathers, The will of God is of two sorts.
and the same I find in ye Scriptures to be of two sorts. First his will it is
holy, pure, perfect, eternal, everlasting, from all beginning, without power
of man, according to the which he rules all: he governs all: he guides and
protecteth all, God as he is, can not be comprehended: but as he shows
him self unto us, and has revealed him self in the vvork^ of his hands, so,
not else can we know him.
wherein all things be as they are. And he has created and fashioned all
whatsoever that is on the earth from ye foundation and original of the same.
And this is always fulfilled. No man hinders it, no man stops it: For the
Lord has his decree above all the inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea,
and they be obedient.

Of this is written in Esaias: I am God the Lord which speak it: my counsel is
firm, or indureth ever. Whatsoever I will, that I do. David also prophesied
hereof. For our God he is in heaven, he has done all things whatsoever
pleases him. For ye counsel of the Lord remains for ever. Again in Esaias:
If the Lord of hoasts decree any thing: who is ye shall resist him? But of this
the eternal purpose of ye Lord I speak not of: for it contains the secret
and hidden mystery of our election, of our predestination, of his providence,
of his government, of his regiment in the earth. And here we do as Job did:
We lay our hands upon our mouth: we stay the course of our lips: we
falter in our speech before the Lord. And therefore, for that he rules all,
let us commit our selves into his hand that guydeth us: and not curiously
search, that has in his secret determination ruled the ways and the steps,
and the hearts and minds of all flesh. We therefore handle this point
reuerendly, and stay on him, that assuredly works for all those that be his.
The mind of God, is said to be known, for that he gave us his Word and his
Gospel: vvherin we savve the vvil of his father.
Only let man, and the son of man give him self into his hands, and leave
to search out by any curious mean, what it is he has purposed. The next and
the most perfect will of God is revealed by the Gospel, without which
knowledge we are in death. This he has most fully opened in Jesus Christ his
son, the redeemer only and savior of the world, whom he has appointed
the only, true, and right instructour of those that dwell in earth: according
to the Oracle received from heaven. This is my beloved son, In Christ are we
partakers of the heavenly nature
hear him: very nighe to the saying that is in John: No man has seen God at
any time. The son which is in the bosom of his father he has revealed him:
For he is the true interpreter of his father. And therefore Christ of him
self says: The prophets and the fathers received the same spirit, which we
do now: yet it is more apparent, and speaks more familiarly unto us, then in
old time.
All that I have had of my father I have shown unto you. Not that Christ was
not known before: for he is openly desiphered out in ye Prophet. But in
especial at his incarnation: when he took our flesh upon him, and was made
man: it was fulfilled that every one shall tell his neighbor, and from ye
greatest to the least: even babes and little ones should prophecy of the
works of ye Lord and tell abroad his name. Therefore Peter, the Prophets and men
of God, spoke by the Spirit, suffered persecution and death, and were serchers
out of the mysteries of our redemption. And this is the will of God spoken of
in this prayer, that we seek not after any other knowledge: but only bent and
given unto his word, we meditate to serve him day and night: whereof this is
the end: that God would direct us in his paths, and lead us a right to follow
his laws: That we may delight and be practiced therein all our life.

Now to know this will of God the better, Three things considered in the will
of God.
this is the sweetness and perfect comfort that we get, to understand and
learn. 3. things given unto us by his will. First it is ye will of God, that we
should be saved by his son Jesus Christ, for in him we are chosen from all
beginning, to be heirs of eternal life. Of this our savior speaks in John.
This is the will of him that sent me, that all which sees the son and
knows him, and believes in him should have eternal life. Then this is our
peticion that above all, it would please the Lord to illuminate and lighten
every man with the truth, All good things, comes from above the father of
light: then papists have no place manthinke^h gift of God.
that his will by our incredulity and others their continancie be not
hindered.

Here appears that, whereof I made mention before, namely, that faith is the
gift of God, given unto us in his mercy, by his grace, not gotten of our
selves of our might by our strength. To fulfill that of Christ so often spoken
in John. No man knows the son but the father, and he to whom the father
will show him. And verefied yet again, The earthly manthinketh upon those
things that are earthly: he that is heavenly, lays his cogitations upon those
things that are a^
no man comes unto me unless that my father draw him to me. For all this
hidden Secret of the death of Christ, of his blood that was shed and given
for man it is foolishnes unto ye fleshly man if he be not drawn and brought
thereunto by God. Then from above it is, we are lightened, that his will may
be done in us, that are wilful.

Secondly it is the will of God, that those which are redeemed in I.sus
Christ, and do atteine him willingly by faith, show them selves obedient and
deutifull unto the Lord and walk in his commandments he has taught them.
Our redemption wrought, and bought in Christ Jesus freely.
Nature teaches those be his to owe obeyzance and homage unto them that
hazard and adventure their lives for their sake. And the sauedge and untamed
Colte turns back with his salutation and greeteth them we her neighing, that
suckereth her. Then it is good reason and agreat point in us to be considered
of, to know what honor, what reverence, what deutie, what obeyzance we owe
unto him, that has given his life for us, and purchas^d a ransom, (when we
were captives and cheaned under Satan) and that by so great a price, the
price of blood. The Church of God is known, in that they Jove one another.
And it is first required that as their is one God, so we agree and love as
one. That we love him withal our heart: with our soul, with our might: it is
his will, that those purified, washed, and cleansed in his blood: do not
defile their bodies that be temples of the holy ghost: but keep them as
undefiled members of his Church. Therefore Saint Paul says, All be not
alike: but as is the measure of grace, so do we live in this world
this is the will of God, your sanctification, your holiness, that every one
keep his vessel in purity, and in honor: not in lust and filthiness, as
the nations did that knew not God. And to the Ephesians. God has elected us from
all beginning, ye according to the measure given us in this life, we might be
blameless and without spot. Whereunto I may refer that of Christ done of him
at his last supper, that very humbly he washed his desciples feet. To keep us
from fin, it is the token of the man of God.
In token of the corruption and putrefaction that must be seared and cut away
in those that be his. Therefore it is Gods will that we follow not ye lusts of
the flesh, but, mortify our earthly members, dying unto sin that we may rise
again to newness of life.

Then in these three, the love of God, the holiness of life, the mutual
society and brotherly love one with another, is the will of God reposed. This
it is that we must understand herein the will of the Lord, Love binds up
all sores and heals all wounds.
Even that we be unspotted and blameless in our conversation. That the fear
of God and dread of his majesty may touch us: that we be freendly and loving
one unto another through love.

Thirdly it is the will of the Lord, that we be conformed and made like in the
image of his son Christ: And as by his cross and death he entered the
glorious heavens, Mortefiynge of our fleshly members: is rising up unto God.
and sits in majesty and power with his father, so we may also be tamed and
crucified as touching the flesh, ye we may rest and dwell with him above. For as
the father sometime does lashe his son, and by a few scorges draws him
home unto him. So our Father in troubles and a little trying as it were by
stripes, brings us back that were lost, and causes us retire that went
astray, and prepares a salve to heal us again. Even meditation and prayer in
his Christ.

This is the cause he exhorts man unto the bearing of his cross, Persecution
common trials, of the faithful.
and charge his disciples to arm themselves against persecution, and has
made his saints to taste of the whippe, and of the rod, to reclame them when
they waltered in their sin. For it is true that through many tribulations we
must enter into the kingdom of heaven. So that it is the doctrine we learn
here: that when we suffer persecution, and all the day long are scorned for his
sake, As sheep are we slain for the Lord sake.
we remember it is the will of God, that has promised salvation and victory
to his saints, and overthrow and destruction to such as hate him. Therefore
we say it is his will to permit the ungodly and lose liver, to flourish for a
season and in the end as the Sun does the berbe, and as winter does the
trees, All creatures obedient to the will of God.
he consumes them.

Furthermore we say, Let thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, and not
without good cause, for the sun very gloriously runs forth and does know
his cabbon to abide in, Every hour are we put in mind of our service to the
Lord: by his creatures.
and when so ever it pleases the Lord to command them any service that be a
boue, they are spedie in their message. The Angels obey him, the furniture of
the heavens and artillery that is there, serves him. The fire at his beck
consumes. The air at his commandment infecteth: the water rises above the
banckes and deuoureth: The earth is opened at his pleasure and swaloweth. But
if he speak unto man and charge him to stand and to obey, he rebelleth. Then
that which by nature we have not: By grace and favor we atteine unto.

And we pray that his will may be done in earth as it is in heaven. That heaven
and earth may obey him together. For as the Angels minister before him, and as
the spirits and souls of righteous men rejoice and sing unto him: So take it
here, that there might be a consent and agreement of us all, This blessedness
shall be seen in the nevve Jerusalem: when the Saints, and the Angels, and
the heavens, and earth: will make one consent and one voice in serving God:
no, not the Diuelles, shall rebel any more against him: but stand to his
^udgemente:
in the bond of peace, in the unity of the gospel, that heaven and earth
might rejoice at it. Wherein we consent and confess that he is Lord as well of
the heaven as of the earth. And we condemn those that think in their hearts
there is no God. For the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof.

Also we are put in mind of the miserable condition and state of man himself,
that daily transgresses and continually forgets the goodness of his GOD.
Therefore our custom is, as was ye of Lot reckned by Peter. 2.2. That living
with the filthy and swinish Sodomittes lamented daily and bewailed the
filthiness that he saw there. And as is of the good subject that is daily
conversant with such as be rebellious: So is the state of Godly men, that sigh
and groan in spirit, at the peruersitie of those that resist the word. And
wish (if so the Lord will) that his will may be fulfilled in them.

Thus much for this third part of this prayer, wherein we acknowledge, the
will and word of God how it is he that rules us: As God by his will, did
that he could so by that ought we be vvilling to that he wills us: least
we strive against the will of God.
that of our selves we have nothing to help us, that flesh and blood cannot
obey him, if we want his grace to bring us to him: that he which elected us
is God, and not of our selves but in his Christ. And brought us out of bondage
by his death: and made a propitiation for us in his blood: and left us an
earnest of his inheriritaunce, and a token of his favor, which is the Spirit
that guydeth and rules us, and incourageth and comfort us, illuminatinge
our minds in his might. To whom with the father and his son Christ, be all
dominion and glory now and ever. Amen.

Geeue us this day our daily bread.
THE happy and blessed state wherein man lived, before he fell from God: The
unhappy and pitiful fall of man is seen in that all things stand and serve
and obey God: we only left that first state, and fell from that happiness
vvherin we were.
is apparent and opened unto us: in that the Image of the Lord appeared in
him, more plentifully then now it does. When as neither tyllinge, neither
sowing, neither reaping, neither gathering, was found upon the earth. But he
sucked from her breasts, and gleaned up the riches of the field, without
labor and sweat of the Brows.

But after that Satan had subtelly prevented us: Our glory was our ignominy:
and our fall was our shame: and the Fig leaves were a token to our
nakedness. Our abundance was turned into scarcetic, and we cast out as
Plowmen to harrowe and till the ground. The earth be comes Iron, and the
beauens be as brass, and the trees deny their service unto man, if God be
angry with him,
We tasted no more of the liberality of our first Nurse: but for our offense
she became hard and flintie unto us: and every one eats of the labor of
his hands: and in care and sorrow does he live all his days: so that the
necessity wherein we be, the anguishe of the spirit, and trouble of mind
that we live in, is of sufficient force to compel us to cry unto our God,
and to howl in our misery: that he would help, that he would relieve us:
that he would prosper us: that he would geeue unto us our daily bread. The
prayers that we powered forth before the Lord: that kept the first entrance
and stepped up in the former array, to conduct us unto Christ. Perteined unto
the person of God, and gave us an admonition, First seek the kingdom of God,
and then all things shall be ministered un to thee.
to seek the glory of the Lord, and the enlarging of his kingdom, before
we presume to seek our own commodities. And now that obeysaunce is given
unto him: he geeueth us license in our own behalf, to ask of him such
things, as be necessary.

And therefore that saying of Master Calvin, the very Saint of God and elect
of Christ, is in many places of his book repeated: whose sweet speech and
fyled style, has opened such a door to Christianity: as that the Spirit of
the Lord for exquisite judgment, and true exposition of the word, has not
to this day blessed one of his Saints more plentifully then he has done him.
In his harmony page the 90. He makes as it were a couple of Tables, and
cutteth this prayer by section into two parts: whereof the one respects the
true worship of God: The other appertains to the works of Charity. And
truth it is Prius nos instituit ad querendam Deigloriam in altera part
ostendit, quid pro nobis petere conueniat. The good gifts of the Lord are
common to all? for the Sun shines and the rain droppeth upon the
unrighteous, as on the righteous man.
He has added (for so it pleases me at this time) a very good reason. Non
enim propriae v^ tilitatis studio, sic nos occuparifas est, quin primatum
semper teneat dei gloria. Then this is the end that I search out, that all
things, that are necessary for the use of man. All our good gifts given unto
us from the Lord, be the woorkemanship of his hands, and the blessing
wherewith he prospers us. That out of this may spring this interpretation,
by bread, to understand, as Master Gualter thinks. Vniuersum hominis
victum, and quaecumque ad eius conseruationem requiruntur. All that is
expedient for life, and that which does nourishe and keep us.

This bread is called heavenly Lightening, or coming from above unto us, that
our duty may appear, and our reddinesse may be seen. He that needs,
prays to have it, he that has it, prays to keep it: but happy is that
man, which does his duitie, and prays, as commanded of God, that he
falls not.
That seeing all things comes from above, our Lord God, would not be slack
in giving unto us that we need. Master Calvin moves out of this place an
objection That when as Christ has given this unto all men that are of the
faithful, and pray truly: Give us this day our daily bread. And of this
number, there be a great number that be very ritche, and have plenty, and
their Garners stored also, and heaped with abundance of victual. To what end
(says he) is this: they should ask of God, when they have yearly coming in,
to enritch them? Master Calvin answers: It is an admonition to us, that if
God daily prosper us not: thy heaps of Corn: thy vessels of Oil, of Wine,
perishes. And so it is, The singular operation, vvorking, and government of
the Lord, against nature.
and so I find it. For he is the only staff of bread, and stay of meat:
and he can feed Daniell, and make him as well liking with the Pulse he
eats: as the children be, that fed daily from the kings table. And his
power is seen as well in him that dwells under the Oak, and in the depth of
the earth: and in the poor cottage, as it is in the Palaces of the ritche,
and with those that have their houses of Cedar.

The great, The singular operation, vvorking, and government of the Lord,
against nature.
mighty, and wounderfull works of God are many: yet in no one is his power
seen more, then it is in this: That every creature has his sundry kinds of
meat. And every country his sundry kind of bread: And every degree, his
contrary manner in fare. Yet every one in his stature, and each person in
comeliness, has his countenannce, and his beauty from the Lord.

I sometimes talked with one not so well instructed, as I wished in this. And
many an hour I spent in talk, and a few days I consumed to open unto him
the works of God. I reasoned from the excellency that he gave, unto the
workmanship of his hands.

For the Birds, Our English Athists, never have enough, till their mouths be
stopped with clay: and their bodies covered with the earth.
they have their glittering attire, and are clothed as with gold and purple.
Very pleasantly they spread abroad their wings, and they vaunt it soorth in
the air, as in their houses, and bid battle to their enemies: yet are they
fed with very homely dishes.

The Beasts of the earth, have their several pasture, and make their boast of
the flowers, and of the green grass, and feed very delicately on the
Salowes: All things are given for man, man only is created to glorify the
Lord.
and are valiant Champions in their kind, and afoorde us their coats for
apparel, and their lives for our food: So kind they be, that when they have
labored all the day, and toyled in the mire, and be very weary even unto
death: yet will he brag as much of his hay, and of his stubble that he
eats, as the prowdest Paramour of them all, of her nyce iouncating.

I reckoned up the whole host of heaven, the creeping woorme: The floting
fish, the serpent that groueleth on earth: The mansions of the depth with the
cabones thereof: No one thing I pretermitted that I remembered, to set out the
works of God, and his regiment.

I called to mind that GOD gives to man all things on earth to foster man:
Yet unnaturally against nature, we abuse the natural gifts of God.
Anthropophag^.
And men very unkindly against their kindly course, eats man.

Yet is he puissant and coragious in his kind: and feeds as hungerly, and
fares as deintily: and looks as merely: and runs as speedely: and lives
as prondly: and goes as stately: as we in England with all our concepts
invented for us. Yet could I not persuade this man, nature and ignorance had
wrought so in him. And a Stoycke I found him, an Epicure I left him, counting
him and his belly to be but beastly, till God shall turn him.

This I say, Of so homly a mould as we came of how bevvtifull a Tabernacle
did God erect.
that expedient yea very meet is it we should know the operation and inward
working of the creator: that raises out of the dust, so singular an Image and
pattern of his deity: and has made the son of that man which goes to the
Plough, and to the cart: and that follows the cattle and keeps the swine in
the field: That tombleth at home in the straw, and hides his head in the
couche, ye is parched with ye heat of the sun, and smothered up with his
beams, and runs to the heaps of snow, and abides in chillie frost, and
is benommed with the blastes of the wind, and houereth over a few chippes at
the end of his labor: And feeds chearely on brown bread. Yet even this
fame poor creature dandeleth his little one in his arms: and having so gross
a father and so homely a Nurse, this fame little babe it looks as pertely,
and in face as comely, Al cret^rs do know their bringing up, and the very
^outch is more vvelco^ ^chim that is acquainted therewith, the^ sumptuous
furniture.
and shows it self I waraunt you in gesture so neatly, as if it had never
known so base a parentage. Yet that which is more: strippe it of the poor
rags he wears, and apparel him with purple and fine silk: set him at thy
table, and pamper him up with thine own delicacies: he will leave al thy meat,
thy table and thy bed, he will bluther til the death and pine away in sorrow: he
will acknowledge his father, he will call and run to the poor herdwoman, he
will not exchange that same thatcht house, for the gorgiousnesse and bravery
of the court. This is a blessing of God ye prospereth-him that tilleth in the
field, and increases the labor of his hands, as well as that man that is of
the city, or in the pauilion, or in the houses of great men. Give us our daily
bread this day.


And it is even the same thing that I understand here, when as we pray give us
this day our daily bread. Even that God would bless us, and protect us, and
give us of his benifites, and enlarge our stoore, and permit us to enjoy the
wealth he lends us: And sanctify himself in our actions, and feed us in his
mercy, help us in extreemitie, nourishe us by his creatures, guide us in our
laboring: in our going in, in our going out, in the field, in the house, in
our sitting down, In the Scriptures bread is taken for the food of the soul
often times: and there fore Christ is called the true bread came down s^om
Heaven to feed us.
in our rising up, at meat, at table, at board, at bed even at all times his
grace would be with us to defend us.

It is well known, that man consists of soul and body: we should do
injury to our selves, and detract from the power of God: If in our prayer we
understood those things only that be transitory, and apperteine to this
life: and left the care and foresight of things to come, that may last and
remain with us forever in heaven. Then let the same be in us ye is in the
skillful Mariner, and let us repose no less trust in our selves then the
Chirurga does, that in danger, or in peril, or in rest, or in quietness,
omitteth no one thing that is appertinent.

It is my wish also in those that are the Lords, Carelesnes i^ impiety, but
greedmes with covetousness, is irreligiousnes.
to regard this life as though they lived not, and to enjoy these terrestical
benifits as though they had the^ not: and for their dealings in this life, to
deal as though they knew them not. For the life to come, to be launchers and
fearers of such corrupt and putrified members, as shall hinder them. And to be
physicians in there diet, and sparing in their life, that the cares of this
world chooke them not. But as well to seek for the bread that came down from
heaven, and the spiritual Manna. As they be ready to enquire and search out for
there pelf in this life. For as the body is fed to increase it, so has also
the spirit of man his preservatives to keep it. And the nourishement hereof
is the word of God, even Jesus Christ, We fell by man, we are all redeemed
again in the man Christ.
the express image and liuelines of his father: that came down from heaven
and dyed for us, that suffered on the cross, and by his merits and blood
sheading redeemed us, our souls and bodies, and has made us inheritors with
him in the kingdom of his father. Whereunto Paul alludeth. 1. Cor. 10.
Where he calls him the spiritual food, that our fathers fed on and
that self same rock that they stand on, One God in the law: and the same
Christ in the law: with one oblation saned us both before and after the
lavve^ for he was slain from al beginning
and makes them to be baptized with the same baptism that we are. All which
I could lively set forth to have been accomplished under the ceremonies in the
law. But that the hour warns me to make have. And to this interpretation
master Gualter has alluded in Luke. Whose saying I cannot but reverence, that
wrote so learnedly. Cum homo duabus partibus conslet, anima and corpore,
duplici cibo opus est quo totus ali atque conseruari possit.

Therefore it is our petion, that we may have the knowledge of his son Christ
revealed, the only salnation of our souls, ye we may enjoy the merits of his
death, and be led and confirmed by the working of his spirit, very well and
truly understood in this. Give us this day our daily bread.

And here for the acknowledging and full understanding of this verse, A
temporal comparison with heaven ly things.
I have at this present alluded unto our temporal benifits, and that the force
and e^^casie may appear: collected a certain simile or congruence, which I
find mistically to be comprised in that it is said our daily bread.

He that feeds us, is Christ. Our bread, is his body. Our drink, is his
blood. Our vessel from whence we draw it, is the Lord. Our feeding, is in
spirit. The corn or grain, it is glad tidings of the Gospel. The mill or he
that grindeth and fashioneth it is god the father and the spirit. The bag or
vessel it is put into, is our bodies. The workmen it is delivered unto, be
his ministers. They that eat and feed hereof, be his faithful and olect in
Christ. This bread is delivered, by preaching. It is received by hearing. We
enjoy it, or feed thereon by following.
The manner or condition of this bread is such:

It is pure and perfect wheat, the savor whereof is to life. It is unleavened,
for it is wrought like sweet cakes, with holiness and purity. It is not raw
like dough, but seasoned in the fire, the furnace of the spirit. It is not
Mislin. It is without blemishe, unspotted, kned with sincerity. It is
pleasant in taste, and operation, for it saves us. It is of many grains,
made one body, to knit us together in one Christ. It is not for a season to
our bodies, it is for ever to our souls in heaven. Last of all, we chawe it,
and consume it by faith.
This bread, he that tastes of, Better is he that knevv not the word and
heard not of it: the^ he that has it, and follows it not: the first is of
ignorance to reprobation: this is of folly to greater co^demp^ation: that, by
Diuelishnes this, of pee^ishnes: have one reward, eternal death.
and vomiteth it up no more, is sure to receive the right use thereof. And he
may speak boldly with Paul: That he has a crown of glory laid up for him.
He need not repent him of his labor, or be forrowfull for his pain taken
on the earth. For his commendation shall be with the Prophets that are gone
before: and with the good men of God, that are translated from this earthly
mantion, and sit above with GOD in glory.

The Spiritual food I have touched, and made search for our heavenly meat:
Let us now proceed to ransacke out that which is the bread of our body. For
in this word Bread, taken alone for corporal and bodyly sustenaunce: I
comprehend all kind of food: of the great and sumptuous Table: as well as
the base and homely banquet. Thy clothe, thy garment, thy vesture, thy house,
thy covering, thy health, thy Woll and fleece abroad, all thy harbor, and
tillage at home. What is understood by bread.
For if the Sparrowe have meat proui^ed him, and not one of them lights on
the ground without our Father? In vain is the thoughts of man: and the
immaginations of his heart be prevented, if the Lord bless him not.

In this is comprehended the troublesome mishaps in this life, in body, in
mind, or any other misaduenture, so named of us: and no other way prevented
then by this: Geeue us this day our daily bread. For in greatest distress,
God often times tries his Saints: and when all hope is past, as appears
to man: then comes his saving health soudenly.
and most ieoperdy, the Ravens can be his Messengers to nourish us. And if we
have but one cruse of Oil, though it be in great famine, so that we remain
helpless. He is as near us as that poor widdowe unto Elyas: and can
command that neither our oil shall be spent, or our Meal wasted, till
salvation appear unto Israel.

And as one Colaquintida, was not alike to all, though it saved some of the
Prophets. No more is he tied either to times or seasons. And in the same he
gives us, in the same he helps us, if we ask earnestly.

I am compelled here, as otherwise I confess in other places, to use
oftentimes interpretation and notes of the Scholemen: neither am I ashamed to
profess that openly, the use whereof I find to be so great by private
conference. For even unto the worst of them all we owe much. And God has
looked upon us in these days that has left unto his church as many volumes
of such as be pure and perfect style: that speak their very mother foung in
Latin, and judge discreetely of the Greek, as ever they had. Or that Orator
saw, that bragged so much of his Bibliotheca in Rome. From them I acknowledge
I have sucked out, The doctors and the fathers are as good instruments, whet
and prepared for the use of Gods church.
(if that any thing it be that I have) and their comely grave and singular
majesty in the book of God. O Lord whereunto had it come, if the modesty
and reverence they bare to the word, had not cut of that natural and
luxurious heat, that bubbled out so fiercely in their talk? Whom I can never
be ashamed of, for the pleasure I took, and the profit I received when at
first I red them. And therefore paying that I owe them, and restoring that I
stole away: Our bread is asked: for that it is not common unto one but to us
all: and because God would have us remember our brethren as well as our own
selves, and the whole church as our private family.
I have here and there painted out this treatise with such flowers, as not
altogether robbing them, I could or might conveniently gather in my writings.
Whereof this is one: He says Ours: not as having right or title of our selves
to claim him as our own, or ought else. But for that of his grace he geeueth
it us and that freely. It is said to be ours. For so is Christ called our
Lord, and our redeemer, not as brought in by us. But ours, in that we have
need of him, and in our life call on him. For that God the father elected and
predestined from all beginning, that he should be our wisdom, our
righteousness, our sanctification. Therefore Cyprian, pater noster quia
intelligentium and credentium pater est. Et panem nostrum vocamus. Quia
Christus noster, qui corpuseius contigimus, Panis est. He is our father, for
that he is father of such of us as understand and believe aright. And he is
our bread says Cyprian: For that Christ, of whose body we be, is our meat.

In that he says our bread, we are admonished every one of his private
calling. That we eat the labor of our hands, and gather together that which
we possess by the sweat of our own brows. Not buylding by the houses of our
forefathers in blood? nor garnishing our Iuery beds with other men's
labors: but every one quietly to enjoy his own. In Israel god permited none
to beg: but with us the number of them is so great, and their misery such,
and our hearts so stony, and our dealings so hard, that scarce a piece of
bread can be aforded them.
I leave not so much to Ahab as to enter on the ground of Naboth. Neither
shall Abymeleche press upon the goods and treasuries of Abraham. The Landmarke
shall not be removed: and accursed shall be that man that ingrosseth the
substance and commodities of others, and eats up the fat of the Land: For
God has geeuen a place to all, and the poor man has he given to try thee
with all against the day of wrath.

Our daily bread: or as the Greek: this day our bread: Such is the condition
of man, that the same thing which he has this day the very same he misseth
on the morrow
Signifies our poverty, or the necessity and penury wherein we be: that
having nothing of our selves, are feign to crave all things of another. For if
we have all things that be needful for the mind and for the body, yet
avails it not: for the mind is diversely, diverse ways troubled with
temptations. The body disgesteth that it received before: So that it hungreth
and pants for more. And therefore we say: This day, or from day to day. Or
as in Matthew This day.

The meaning whereof I take this: that God giving his benefits and the use of
his creatures to all: not now, but continually at all seasons: It is our
prayer he would vouchsafe to remember us at this present, as he has of his
goodness bestowed upon us heretofore. It is very pretty, as you may easily judge
(an eloquent man) cunningly and wisely noted of M. Gualter in Luke. Videre est
quam egregios facerit Satan. etc. You may easily know says he, what manner of
Gods we were, If we had no thing, but of our own: we might well enough be
stripped naked, and seek corners again, to hide our shame from the Lord.
after Satan had diluded the Woman: That made report unto Eve, in what day
she should eat of the Tree of Life, she should be like unto God, knowing
good and evil. For as soon as she with her Husband fasted of the forbidden
fruit, see what Gods we be? They with their posterity sell into misery?
They did hunger: they thirsted: they were troubled in the Frostes: they
suffered the heat in Summer: and lost the glory they had before: and as
Beggars from gate to gate: so were they compelled to ask at Gods hand.

This meditation of so discrete a Father as he was: I would it were imprinted
more deeply then it is in themyndes of men. That hawtines and stately gesture
would more easily be delayed among us then it is.

And the beggarly attire that we have put on by our own folly, would cause us
to ask more for gods sake then we do.

Here be condemned two sorts of men. The first of those ye are not content
with such as god has blessed them, dally and play in their riot, hurding up
all manner of unseemly and unchristian dealings: seruers of the time: and
swallowed up in ambition, give wages and large stipende to some one or others
unthrifts to hunt out novelties and to invent outlandishe feats. The abuse of
England in feastings and banqueting, is a byvvorde to all the nations on the
earth.
The mild and comely fare that this realm above all other nations is blessed
with, cannot delight our Dionitius scholars: that Roman Epicure is risen
again from death. We must have Cranes necks, that ye long swallowing of our
meat may title us more pleasantly. And now a days, he is no gentleman, that
has not his set feeldes to sport and trauerse in: his new outlandish feate to
delight him in: and his shameless banqueting house open to all minstrelsie, to
spend his young days in: Whese lips could never utter this. Give us this
day our daily bread.

And as the Manna which they gethered (if they took above a Gomer, every man
for his eating according to his household, scralled full of worms and stanke
the day after. So let them be assured, that this their tempting of the Lord,
though it savor in their throat and be pleasant for a season: will in the end
be rottenness, and putrefaction unto them when he calls to account.

The second hind of men that I note here, I would I might but look upon
them, Come near them I dare not, they be so glorious: Their Marble and Iuorie
bedds, their Jewels and out ragious bravery, astonish me when I see them. That
so much the more makes me to wonder, as I see their end to approach and their
glory to be transitory. For when he has sailed in many a perilous storm,
and put his life into the hands of Pirates, and is now become gray headed and
withered up by long labor. Yet the value of his substance is not very many
thousands. All that the days of man is labor and tediousnes: and in the
end, his substance is not great, and he carries nothing with him to the
grave.
And then commits be his goods paraduenture to the fire. It may be he
leaves them in the depth of the Sea: but if he live and enjoy them for a time,
in the third generation, he is forgotten: and so many thousands as he had, so
many thousand men enjoys them. This is a strange thing and yet it is common
among you of the City. For either the sea and the waves thereof consumes
them, or the easdroppers, and the lurkers in corners scatter them: or secretly
the Lord himself by one or other means bestows them. For as lightning
passes and vanishes out of sight: so withers away the riches of the wicked
man. And as the snow melts at the fire, or as the frost at the heat of the
sun: so does the substance of the ungodly, at the beck of the Lord. The wages
of the evil are crooked, and they are lewd in their paths. Glory remains
with him in his youth, and beggerie dwells with him in his age. For the soul
of the poor man pants for sorrow, and he ruffeleth in the streets, and
passes by the miserable: he stops his ear, and regards not the cry. The
portion of the sinner is death, his vvayes is perdition, his glory is shame,
his children be beggars, and his name is buried in dishonor.
Wherefore the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the trangressours
shall be rooted out of it. For the way to his house is death, and the path of the
sinner carries to the grave, and hell fire consumes him quick: because he
trusts in his riches and makes the world his God, and says to his substance
we shall dwell for ever, he never remembers to pray unto the Lord: Give us
this day our daily bread.

And for that I am entered into the true description of such a Citizen as
fears God. I will draw out the picture and proportion of so comely a man, as
for stature and height, for true and perfect workmanship, can not be matched
in any one city here in England, that by chance not now so long since, I had
a vewe and sight of, and described by the prophet David in one of his Psalms.

For the whole body of a man I find to consist of these ten parts.
Of the Head: That as the heue^s guides the earth, so is thought to turn and
weaue about the body of man. Of the Heart: that as a Costerne contains the
little Channels. Of the Breath: Otherwise as blocks and stones we stand empty.
Of the Liver: so which as their captain, the Lungs and the Lights do their
obeisance, the drawer of blood and judge of life. Of the Eyes: as windows to
peep out at, the Mistresses of the bodies, and Ladies of pleasure. Of the
Sinnewes and Joints: To couple the body and chain him in, that he be
dissolute and wretchlesse in body. Of the Arms: Of the Hands a couple of
instruments huen out of nature, to tune the residue of the parts of man that
be out of square: Of the Legs: Of the Feet. That we seem not mangled
ormaimed in joints like idel and sluggish scarrecrowes, good for nothing but to
stand in the air to fear Bussards.
The philosopher as I remember thought him an unable person and unmeet for any
thing that consisted not wholly of theses parts. And Moses debarred him the
tabernacle of the Lord: neither could he serve in the house of God, if he
missed any one of these. And I think as in the life of man to live hear. So
in the heavens the eternal life to dwell there, be these several parts of man
to be required. Even the head, the Heart, the Breath, the Liver, the Eyes, the
Synewes, the Arms, the Hands: the Legs, the Feet, without the which, no man
can come to heaven and unto God, and painted forth by the Prophet David. In
the. 15. Psalm. Rara auis in teris, nigrosiue simillima signo.


An upright life, the head of man. Righteousness, the Heart of man. Truth, the
Breath of man. Goodness, the Liver of man. Modesty and comeliness, the
Synewes and joints of man. Humility and lowliness, the Arms of man.
Swearing and not disapointing thy neighbor, the Hands of man. No reward and
bribe to slay the innocent, the Legs of man. No giving of money upon usury,
nor purloyning from the poor, the Feet of man.
As for him whom the Poet has deciphered out Qui mihi possit quod honestum ac
iustum videatur. The description of a vvorldely man.


Whom wantonness and unbridled lust, has puffed up to all sin: whose
amendment of late I wished: whose end I feared: whose life is laid with his
wealth: whose joy remains on the earth: whose pleasure perishes, whose riches
fails: that never thinks on God: remembers not the Lord: prays not to
him that sits above: thinks he has all things from himself. Look I
pray you upon him, vewe and mark him well: and see whether he be dect, as a
prophet, or apparilled as Aaron, or in fashion as Leuite, or in manners as an
Israelite, or like such a man as should dwell with God. That hereafter if you
chance to see him, you may by my marks fully know him.

Whose head is sin: whose brainpan is wretchedness: whose end misery.
Whose Liver is unrighteousness. Whose heart is darted with untruth. That
dissembleth in his tongue, lies to the simple, beguileth all. Whose breath is
blasphemy. That belcheth, London is witness hereof the proporti^ on and
stature height of whom, was drawn out this last year, 1577. given of God
an example for ever, to show how men should bestow their riches: and a
hosiar, dwelling in Burch yard lane.
and ratteleth out oaths against the highest, regards not the Lord that
sits above. Whose eyes be compact of loftiness and of pride. Whose joints
and sinnewes, are encombrance and hurt, disappointing and disceit. Whose arms
are swearing, and beguiling his neighbor. By treachery gaining: by dissembling
enritching, by undoing, murdering, arms, Iwisse, able, and of force to
wrestle, with the mightiest. Whose hands are redines and speedines to gain by
false sleightes. Two hands, able to ingros whole common wealths, into private
commodities. Whose legs be usury and extortion. Able in time by this
villainy, to outronne him that is swiftiest in his race, and overtake him that
dwells in most stately Palaces. Whose feet are briberie and reward, to
spoil the innocent. Able by the blood of righteous men, and by inglutting him
self in their innocence, to stand on feet, and praunce it, to look alofte,
and countenance it, to go stately, to stand stoutly, as though he were
most pure in heart.
This kind of man I would he were not with us, If the rich man have no thing
he curses: if he have a littell he desires: if he have much he svvelleth:
but if he have honor, then he forgets God: thus the ungodly have neither
beginning or ending of their wicked nesse.
or if he be gone let him be a warning to us: for it is not with our
humanity, when God has given us Bread plenty, and blessed us with abundance,
to ask still with Mydas, till we be choked with Gold. So Naball like, that
we can not spare David so mutch as three Loves of Bread to feed his
Servants. That rich glutto^ in Luke as I am persuaded, when he lay in Hell
in torments, and saw Abraham, he would willingly have drawn out his Gold,
until the bottom of his Coffars, and have morgaged all his land and
substance too, for one drop of water to cool his tongue.

But go too thou rich man, laugh, sport, play, and be merry: Thou know
thy Heaven, and that is Hell. The next thing I have noted is this: First he
gives: then to us: Thirdly to day: Fourthly, Bread. Wherein we are admonished
of the duty of all Christians: not to gaze so mutch on the commodity of
private gain: as to pray and to remember the state of the Church. For in that
we pray for us, we pray for all, even such as be of the Household of GOD.

It accords to the doctrine of Paull. 1. Corinthians. 12. That makes our body
under one head Christ. And that mutual (...), that compassion and remorse we
have one of an other, is properly set forth to the Ephesians. 2.

And as the Children in Luke are said to dance, when their fellows daunced:
As the smoke from the fire, so should our prayers asce^d up altogether to the
Lord.
and are said to weep when as they wept: and to be merry when their
companions were glad: So in like manner are the Servants of our God, that
remember the afflictions of our fellow Brethren, and think on the calamities
of such as suffer with us. For as in heaven there shall be not diverse, but one
Song: one Alleluiah to praise the Lord: And as there is not many Ierusalems
but one Jerusalem. And as there is but one Golden Read to measure the Temple.
So there can not be, neither should there be, any more then one voice in one
Church to pray to God.

He that gives, is God: To whom it is given, is all flesh: It is to day, for
we always need it: And Bread it is, even all manner sustenance to nourishe
us.
The use hereof is this: that we show our selves duetiful and obedient,
rendering due homage and reverence to the Lord, from whom we have all things.
For if the Ox knows his keeper, and the Ass his Masters Cribbe. Shall
Israel and they of the house of God, forget the Lord? Fights not the Dog
for his Master? The vvilling mind, and the ready heart, and he that is
thankful unto God, is he that is accepted of the Lord.
strives not the Bear for the safety of her young? does not the Husbandman
lay his corn to usury? And hydeth he not his grain in earth? And is not the
ground thankful again for his tendinge and care he had of it? Then let man
cast his eyes to Heaven, and think on the Lord that gives all, that he be
not forgotten of his Father above, when Christ shall come and deliver up the
Kingdom to his Father, and give reward to them that serve him. Thus I have
though very wearysome paraduenture to your hearing, breefelye passed ever,
this first lesson of our first Table concerning man.

Two more there is left behind: which if God permit and my leisure do afforde
it, shall be more narrowly and straightly handled hereafter.

Forgive us our Tresspasses, as we forgive them that Tresspas against us.
I Have very often made mention in this my Treatise of the necessity of prayer,
We ought not to sease at any time from prayer, but the remembrance thereof
ought to be as the dew of the morning, or as the frosts in Win ter, that
faleth not.
and now the force thereof appears so lively, and the greatness thereof is set
down so fully, that in so good a thing, in so perfect a rule appointed by the
Lord: I once more am enforced to call you altogether, to assemble your selves
as they in Esdras did, to understand and hear the Book of God.

For as in the Tables of Stone wherein the commandments were engraven: The
first commandment auayled not, if they made a seclusion of the second: No
more can that which went before (profitt us) of the Lord and of God, and of
our bare protestation unto Christ: As bare words edify not so a rehersall
of Gods commaundeme^ts profit not without belief steadily fixed in him.
unless in his mercy he forgive us. Wherefore we are to be called together
every one, and to all persons I give notice of thefame, that every one may
judge his dealinge: Then shall we be forward and attentive to hear the
Lord: when we are found to agree and meet as one. Or when such A. Zacheus is
caught among us, as will not judge but forgive and pay his debts: and that can
as expedient, speak truth in all. As for me I may do that which Statius
does in Synephebis: and with good cause desire and crave the help of all which
are as I, all wrapped in sins. And justly I think I can cry cut.

Pro deum, popularium omnium adolescentum. Clamo, postulo, Oro, ploro, atque
imploro fidem. Not for a light and trifling thing, offense is committed: he
must die the death.

Ab amico amante argentum accipere meretrix non vult.

The money that was offered of the lover, If Poets have put religion in
vamties: and vvoundred at follies: we may be amazed in handeling matter^ of
faith.
is refused of his Peragon. But even to join and help, and come in one, and
mark my speech, that have to do and to meddle with that, will accuse you all:
even of faith, of hope, of religion, of truth of allegiaunce: Non dijs
immortalibus. As the Orator reported. But to God, to the Lord, unto Christ that
can consume us.

For iniquity is the way of all flesh, and the treadings of those in earth is
ignorance. Wherefore lot us consider the vanity of man and by deep
consideration open the rawnesse of our nature: let us perseuaer in discerning
our own corruption, and offer up our souls and bodies to the Lord, for he it
is we have offended.

Therefore in this next percell, The humble spirited man is better then
Sacrifice: and lovvlinesse of heart, and contrition is the burnt of fering.
though it be but a small bundel, is trussed up the salvation and full drift of
us all, that can never glorify the Lord better, nor show our selves more
obedient unto him, then at such time as we debase and humble us before the
Lord, when that arrogancy and the man of pride is laid down, and our bodis
mortified before our god. For if we do confess the Lord to be our father, if
not on earth, but in heaven: if we seek to sanctify him and to magnify his
name. If to reign in us by his spirit. If that his kingdom should be
enlarged, his name glorified, his praise exalted among the sons of men. If
that his will may be fulfilled and what please him may come to pass. If that
he gives to us continually and feeds us daily and nourishes us howrely, and
gives us bread and meat in due season: yet is it nothing, it is but a bare
knowledge, and an hypocritical confession, if thou ask it not in humbleness,
and meekness of spirit, As poison to the body, so is ungodliness to the
soul, and as corruption to the fore and the wound: so is sin and,
iniquirie to the mind of man.
but art swelled and puffed up with Pride, as though thy own righteousness,
and the strength of thine own arms bad brought it to pass. For which cause
we pray that our debts may be forgiven us, and our transgressions pardoned us,
and we acknowledge that we owe much unto the Lord God. For seeing that our
sins are as the stained clothe of a woman: for ye we hatch Cocatrice eggs,
and weaue the spiders web. Is not his hand upon us, and his consuming wrath,
has it not already snared us, and are we not entangled unto death? And is it
not time to begin, and to pray wc humility, and confess our sins? for here
glittereth forth the first hope we have in Christ, in that he was a
propitiacion for us to his father, If God pardoned not, no flesh could be
sauid: the pardones of the pope vanish away here: for we have remission and
our debtes is paid in one Christ
that cannot any otherwise be satisfied, then in acknowledging our sins.

Chiefly here and before all else, we have to understand, what is meant by this,
for give us our debtes.

For as touching our duty, we owe much unto the Lord, fear, obedience,
love, reverence, with such like. Being so mutche bound the more unto our
God: as his mercy is great, and his love surpassing our love, or his
kindness without end, which is set forth to be seen of man, in these two
things.

The first is in the eternal covenant which he has made with man whereby his
free mercy is seen, After the fall of man, we had an eternal covenant given
us, otnervvise, we had been past hope of recovery.
by not imputing unto us our sin.

The other is, the weakness and imbecillitie of all flesh: so that being
debtors we are alienated from the Lord, having no hope of peace left unto us,
but by his only grace, to fulfill that. Romans 3. That all have sinned and are
destitute of the glory of God, and that every mouth might be stopped, and the
whole world culpable in his sight. For though there appear a certain notice
and glimmering ^f perfection (as it were) in the saints of God. Yet till they
be moved by the spirit, they run at randals, and then when they are best,
they fall often.

Wherefore here is condemned those vpstart and newfangled vanities,
Praescitians.
now of late fleeringe to and fro in the minds of men: that by counterfeit
and glosing speech, insinuate I know not, what kind of holiness in
themselves. And there is a byworde of late crept into our Church, taken as I
suppose from the contrariety of their manners. And we must be puritans in the
name of God, and sever our selves from other congregations: Nisenesse io^ned to
open wickedness: causes blind nesse.
and truly paraduenture more aptely then they are a ware of. For Puri tanquam
spuri, agrees right: God he merciful unto us: I know some that go a tippe
Tooes, and mince it as neately in talk, as any courtier of them all can do at
meat. and yet by your leaves (be not angry we them neither) they be as vily
spleafooted, and tread their shoes as much a wry, as ye homelest carter of
them all that keeps the Plough, thorough out the year. And when I have
consithered all, they be but men. But blessed be our Lord the man Jesus
Christ, that has ginen us an other mean, and opened unto us a better way, If
God help not, vain is the hope of man: and in our fall, if he raise us not,
we lie still.
and permits us to have falts and some blemish, and suffers us to fall
oftentimes: and then gives us leave to lay the burden of our sins upon his
shoulders. For even thus it is prepared, ye unless Moses have one to hold up
his arm, ye victory will be lost: and yet if it be so that he has help for a
season, such is our nature, our fragilitie such, ye he is wearied fo: and if ye
have not a stone to underprop him, to stay his elbow on. It is in hazard ye he
falls not they and al. And if David could not promise him any assurance in
his life but that he fell so sodeinly, at the sight of a silye woman that
washed her: brag they as much as they will, and live they as well as they
can, yet at length by trusting so much to this tower, they may paradue^ture
some one or other time be ouertake^: but this two headed serpent I let it
alone, God will one day as be has of late mangled the one of them: so I doubt
not, but he will sharpe^ an other sword, shall cut off both.

This piece of this prayer calls us to the tribunal seat of God: By our
debts we are put in mind of gods judgments, which in our selves we can
never pay, or aunsvvere for them sufficiently.
and our names written in his book, our plea can be no other then for mercy:
so that what we have not of our selves, that have we from the lord and
condemned by sin in the flesh, we are raised by him in the spirit: For all
flesh sins: the just man lives by faith. David I doubt not did see this:
When be acknowleged his imbicilitie, and gave way unto weakness, and saw his
conception how it was in sin: and knew his thoughts how they were evil from
his youth. I labor more in this, for that I have had of late to deal with
some, that prestime to sever them from those be wicked, This purity in this
your security: is plainly shevven to be in fidelity.
and account althings as righteousness that proceeds from them. These I
desire in the Lord, to read over the Prophets: And if from Adam till the
floude, all had their infirmities. If Adam fell? if our first mother gave us so
unlucky a drink that we al have been blistered therewith from our cradelles.
Weakness is ours, as for strength it is the Lords,
If Abell offered up ye first fruits of his sheep, as a sacrifice to the
Lord, yet commended to be a just man. If Noah him self commended of the
Lord, fell so grossly in incest and overcome in drink: we be no better then
our fathers, we may fall. I speak not here to uphold sin: no the lord God is my
witness whom I serve in his Christ, that since ye first fast ye I supped of
the Cupe of ye Lord, and from ye time I set my foot upon ye door of his
threshold, to see what was don there, I have abhorred to ye death, ye ways of
death. And let this be my witness at the day of the Lord, and let me look at
that day for the Crown of glory, as I have sought with all endeavor to build
up his Church, and detested iniquitye.

Let no man suspecte me here, for I know I have to deal with curious heads,
that take every light ocrasion for their purpose. The protestation of his
faith, that will be saved.
I shiner them in pieces (for this cause only if I can) and I cut them of. For
this is my Faith, and this I know: That by the first man came in death: and by
ye second man Christ came in life.

The first is of the flesh to condempnation.

The second of the Spirit to Salvation. And that which comes of it self,
ryseth up in man, to cast down man: being only sinue scrawling in our mortal
bodies, and is made righteousness in the man Christ: in whom we have an earnest
by the spirit. Our spirit witnessing with the spirit of God: that we be
inheritours of life: so that I leave to us no good thing as of our selves: but
I refer my self to the hands of God, in his son Christ: in whom only,
I rise a perfect man to life eternal. As for others, if they think to get any
thing by their labor, let them brag thereof when they have gotten it. For as
the Carpinters of Noe, when he made the Arc: so are these: that made a house
to save some, yet saved not them selves. And they may glorify the Lord in one
or other their doings: Glory in the beauens, till they be changed, shall they
never have.

Lactantius as I think of his mild and pleasant words, he spoke in his
book de Ira, Lactantius: a lactaeo fiu^mine.
has wiped away all the sleights of man, as touching this question. For
Subiecta est peccato fragilitas carnis, qua induti sumus. The fragilitie of our
flesh says he, is subject and prone to sin, wherwithal we are clad. In his
book Contra Gentes, in his. 13. Cap he has confessed ye very like: that no
man can be without sin, during his above in the flesh. Gregorius Nazianzen, in
his Oration so termed, where with all be comfort. Gregorius Nazianzen.
De patre tacente: gives it proper only to the Lord God, to be without
sin. In his Oration Infamatrice. Against Julian the second, (as else where in
many places) sets down that God has so ordained, ye no man on earth should
be without sin.

And Ambrose bet down the same in his time, Ambrose. Bound we are, and thrall
every one of us, and chayned to the infirmities and feeblenes of the flesh, in
this terrestrial tabernacle.
that I stand on now. And in his first Book Chap 2 Quis est, says be, qui
mundum Cor a peccato habeat, Aut non delinquat in Lingua sua? Is there any man
says Ambros that has a clean heart, that is unspotted and free from sin? Or
that has not offended in his tongue? Herunto it is alluded in the Scriptures,
where it is so often attributed unto our satisfaction, our clensing, our
washing, our purginge or makingecleane, our freedom in Christ.

This suppressinge and beatinge down of the insolency flaming a fresh in our
age, might in one Psalm 32. be sufficiently raked out. Wherein David speaks
no one word of justification in us. But he counts that man happy whose
iniquities be forgiven, and whose sins be covered: he accompteth him
blessed to whom the Lord imputes no sin. Esaias. 4 4.
In Esaias the Lord him self speaks, where he comfort as it were his
people Israel, showing it was only he that did blot out their transgressions,
and of him self he did it, and he would no more remember their iniquities.
Red ye never as yet that Parable in Math. Where the kingdom of Heaven is
compared to one that is rich and wealthy, Math. 18.
having many debtors: among the rest he had one that ought him ten thousand
Talents, when he had not wherewith all to pay: he, his wife and all that he
had should have bin sold: But think you if Christ had not taken compassion
of him, and for given him all his debt: If he had ^yeu by the heels and
fettered all the days of his life, yet that he could ever have paid the
vttermoste Farthing?

Verily, as the woman with the bloody Flixe spent her substance, and mended
not, so if we touch not the hem of his garment and debase our selves: little it
is we can look for at the hands of God.

But now this is our comfort in all extremity: The payment of man for that he
owes, is a lively confession of his sins: that are vvyped away in the
blood of Christ.
that God has commanded us to pray in the name of his Son Christ. And this
is the Irrefragable testimony of his goodwill, that he makes us sure of the
remission of our sins: For he has promised, and he fails us not, but so
far as the East is from the West, so far has he set our sins from us.

Thus mutch for the first note, we are all debtors, that is sinners and
offenders against the Lord. Not to discourage any man (for God forbid) but as
willinge to lift them up, as they be to mount into the Heavens, if they
could: so that it be discretly done.

I have adjoined a short Lesson borrowed of M. Gualter in his Treatise on Luke,
Page. 284. M. Gualter.
Hicergo obseruemus, quoad nos peccata exmera and gratuita mi fericordia
remitti, nullo nostrorum operum aut meritorum respectu, quae in nobis prorsus
nulla sunt: In meaning this. It is only one Lord that has remitted unto us
and pardoned our sins without our desarte, yet is he rightuous, neither is
there any thing deminished in his justice: For that which was ours sin is wiped
away and cleansed in his blood. And in due time according to his first purpose,
came he and took our flesh upon him, and wiped away the curse and malediction
was due to us, by his cure upon the Cross: so that we attain our
righteousness only in the Lord. And (as otherwise you may know him. Very
sweet and comfortable is Lactantius in his 77. Book cap. 1. The Aucthor of
life, and our righteousness which we have of God, is only God him self.

Arnobius in lib. Arnobius.
2. Contra gentes, says, that it was all alone, one Bishop Jesus Christ
that gave Salvation to our souls, and that could give the spirit of Eternitye.

And Epiphanius in lib. Epiphanius.
3. Tomo. 20. has thus: Christ without his passion, wrought not our
redemption: but in that be dyed for us, and gave him self unto his father a
full Sacrifice for our souls, in his blood he has perfectly washed away our
sins, and has rased out the handwrighting against us, and nailed it to the
Cross.

Hilarye In his Trinitate second Book, Hylary.
says, properly for this. The Virgin (that is) Mary, his birth and his body,
after that, the cross, death, and hell, were a means to work our salvation:
which tends to this: That albeit our sins be manifold and many in number,
yet are they al forgotten in Christ: And to encourage us the more, he has left
us a mean to attain the same, which is faith.

Of the death of Christ, The Ladder to reach to heaven with all, and to
attain to God: is faith.
how did Esaias Euangelize long before, of that which appeared notwithstanding
long after. Surely he has borne our infirmities and car ryed our forrowes: yet
we did judge him as plagued, and smitten of GOD, and humbled: But he was
wounded for our transgressions. He was broken for our iniquities. Esaias. 53.
The chasticement of our peace was upon him: And with his stripes we are
healed.

All we like sheep have gone astraye, we have turned every one to his own
way: and the Lord has laid upon him the iniquity of us all. ^. Pet. 1.
And Peter, he him self has set out, as one that saw and knew the Lord:
The excellent and great mercy of God, that are not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and Goolde by a vain conversation from our fathers, but with
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lainbe undefiled and without spot.
Therefore in Titus, Tytus. 2.
he is said to have given himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purge us to be a peculier people unto himself, zealous of good
works. And in one verse doubtless, even in Tymoth. 1. Timo. 3.
Is the full salvation of man set down, where according to the hope that Paul
had received by faith in one Christ. Or teaches his young scholar to be
settled and grounded in the lord, For without controversy, it is the mystery of
Godliness, which is: God is manifested in the flesh, justified in spirit,
seen of Angels, preached unto the gentiles, Believed on in the world, and
received up in glory. Al which, of the remission of our sins, of our
redemption wrought of our justification finished: of our glory to be revealed:
what assurance can we have in this life: where withal can we be made
certain: bow can we comprehend, the height, the depth and breadth here of,
but only by faith in the same Christ?

For as Chrisostom in his sermon, Of Faith, Crisostome.
Hope and Charity: So determeine I in this place of the same.

Faith is the beginning of reighteousnes, the head of our sanctification: the
entrance or path way to our devotion: the foundation also of our religion.
Haec excludit dubia, tenet certa, promissa consignat: hanc qui tenet, foelix
est, Augustine de vera innocentia, Augustine.
Cap. 352. Has laid a perfect platform of our faith in my judgment. It is
faith in Christ (for so he says) to believe in him that justifies the wicked,
to believe in ye Mediator, without whom no man is reconciled to God.

To beeleeue in the Savior which came to seek and to save that was lost. To
believe in him which said without me ye can do nothing.

Theodoret, Theodoret.
names this faith in his first book De fide an assured agreement, a consent,
or certenty, or affiaunce, that we have of invisible things, which are yet to
come. Thalassius.
The meaning whereof is expressed by Thalassius, that calls Christ, our
savior, names him God, Isychius. Christ was oftered up once for all:
neither needs man daily sacrifice: but in this word, the fathers shevve
how much we are bound to the Lord: in that Christ was laid on thealter, to
be slain fovs. Paul^nus.
in whom we are justified, that he might quicken us, and make us alive in
him: therefore also he has given unto us faith to attain life. In his
Hecatondate. 4. Isychius though paraduenture it savor a little of the law and
the Prophets, calls Christ a sacrifice: For no man says he can atteyn ye
sacrifice of our Lord (that is his death) but by the spirit of God. * In the.
5. upon Liuiticus. And I take this to be more necessary to be known, as I do
find it most expedient for man. For as without water there is no pla^ting, or
as without ye son there is no prospering, or as without wisdom, there is no
cunning: No more is there life without doctrine, or salvation without teaching,
or hope without trust, or Christ without the word, or the word without God,
or they al with out faith.

Paulinus upon the death of Celsus, has a proper verse. Nam veluti rupto
patuere sacraria velo: sic reserat nobis legis operta fides.

But ouerlonge I suppose in this and some what tedious: and truly I confess
it, for the liberty that I have in Christ, and the freedom I have gotten by
his death, has swallowed me up. That even now had I not been admonished, ye
you be already weary, I should have forgotten my self in this my tarying. It
may be the late speech hereof sounds in your ears: that tossing it to and
fro in my former reading, requires at this time I would not handle it so
roughly. And I am content to stay this course: only take of me this watchword:
he ye believes not, he is a sinner and he that has not remission in the death
of Christ, shat man cannot be saved.

The next is, This for give nes of our sins, as was for give others: is an
assured pledge and certain token that we be the Lords.
as we forgive them that offend against us: Guen all those that trespass, or
commit offense or endamage, or hurt us, or seek our life or goods, or such
like: the reason whereof I take to be this. God has promised to be kindly and
good to Israel, to be a father and a Lord unto them, to comfort them and help
them as it is every where: then, even for our own sake to live thereafter and
to fear him: We have example in Christ to for give others, as he forgiueth us:
for be you merciful, That vvhicht is of duty can not have any revvard, that
we are bound unto can not be of our selves: that which is not freely
without compulsion, can not purchase redemption: then our life vvherin we are
led, your works which are bettred by the spirit take and wipe away al hope
and salvation that comes of them: for we have all by the spirit of God.
Ciptian.
because I am merciful. And if that the Lord has pardoned us that deserved
eternal death and condempnation: is it much for us to forgive our poor
Brother, that has but offended in transitory things hereon earth?

The example of Christ may move us, that when he was smitten, did not smite
again, and when he was reviled, reviled not: And when he hanged on the
Cross, and they rayled on him, desired his father that he would not lay
their sin unto their charge.

Our praying here, that he would forgive us as we forgive others, is not
therefore put in, that we by forgeuing shall receive reward, and that because
we remit other their offenses, Therefore we also shall have pardone at the
hands of God: that were beastly in us to think so. For then it were by
desert, then were it of merit, that we should have eternal life. But even
here is our protestation and the badge seen of our Christianity, in that we
conform, and make our selves like unto Christ that forgave all.

Therefore Cyprian, adiunxit legem certa nos lege and sponsione co^stringe^s,
and sic nobis dimitti debita postulamus, secundum quod and ipsi. Debitoribus
nostris dimittimus.

For true it is that is in Math. With what measure we meat, I marvel how
they can excuse them selves, that put so great religion in a surples, and a
cap, or in orders. motes in respect of that wickedness lies within them:
but can go to law for every trifle, and take many pounds for a word
speking: and be at continual strife and debate with their neighbor: that
death may sooner part them, then Christianity rule them. Magistracy, is the
ordinance and gift of God. They be also called Gods on earth: sitting as
Judges in the person of god to judge righteously.
with the same shall we be measured again. And if we play as that same
unfaithful servant did, that when all was forgiven him, yet went and took
the law of his fellow servant: It is in a hazard, that he bind us and cast
us not in the gayle and fetter us, till we have paid our whole debt. If thou
be at the altar and then remember thou have any thing against thy brother, lay
down thy gift (says one of the Euaungelists by Christ) and after
recencilation made, come and offer at the altar.

It is an assured and most certain sign of our faith, if we be such as our
master was. It beats and treads down the pride and hautinesse of man,
that as he is most stately, is often times bent to cruelty: and as he is
puffed up, reuengeth most: and as he is most guilty and greatest offender, so
he spares none. For as we be ravished till we see the blood of him we love
not: so here we are clipped of from this liberty. That natural heat most
commonly bubling within us by our first birth, is extinguished, by the meekenes
and humbleness of spirit, that we have from the Lord. As I am not here of
the opinion of that Stoycke, to set fire on ye house of him I hate: and to
wear my drawn swoorde to wound him I meet next, that I hate most: so
permit I also a liberty to ye christian, and a revenge to the godly man, that
he appeal from private injuries, to open maiestracie: And this daggar is able
to wound the proudest Anabaptist of them all, ye I know this day: whose
private affection, could never abide ye any should sit in Moses seat. But these
hissing serpens, that creep so slyly, and search so narrowely the hearts of
poor brethren, will one day I trust take more hold of the true light of the
Lord: whose private conscience, if it were as well known abroad, as it is
practiced in corners, they would have been cut off long ere this. And it is no
meruail they busze so much in the cares of men: The manner of our private
magistracy, by private excommunicating* without the consent of them in
authority the usual custom in discerning the state of offenders, and taking
private matters to their hands, is here cut of, it is not to be allowed.
for the liberty ye God has given David, can snaffle such an accursed Semei,
if he disse^ble not. As for the Anabaptist reason, if he give thee a blow on
the right ear, turn unto him the other. It abides not the heat, the Sun does
wyther it: for if it may be to win thy brother, and to get a soul to God:
Take two on each ear, rather then revenge it. If god be not dishonored
thereby, give him thy Cloak to, if he will, and leave all. But if the word be
defamed and the Gospel sclaundered, I say again, turn unto him, smite again,
and spare him not. I give no private man to judge the case, let the seniors in
Israel hear the matter and judge thereof. But if thou be set upon and be
betrayed all alone, or with others, turn thy face again, take up stones to
hurt at him, revenge thy cause, it is ye Lords. I ask but a question here,
why did Christ's disciples wear swords? This is of a truth: if it had not been
lawful, he would never have permitted them, and as Moses when he saw one
fighting with his Brother, slew the Aegiptian: Such is our case, no other.
Their what may be said unto ye prayer of Sampson: for it is his request unto
God, Iud. 16.
ye he may be reue^ged upon his enemies the Philistines, for ye they put out
both his eyes. Peter Martyr, is of this opinion, Peter Martyr.
ye if he did it, with an evil and malicious stomach and in anger that then
it cannot be vpholden and borne withal, Augustine.
for says he. Non potuisset magis deo probari, quam si express dixisset,
quaeso Domine, been fortunes vel furcum vel adulteriu^ meum. Augustine is of
this opinion, with diverse other writes to. That he did it by the singular
instinction or moving of the holy ghost, and the pricking forward of the
spirit. And so it is not a miss to take it: For that which to man, as it is
in man, from man is naught. So by ye styring up of the spirit, if we have an
assured and certain token thereof) many things may be permitted which is not
lawful for us, otherwise to do.

Comes now into my mind in what a desperate state they be, Inanslayers
condemned hear^.
that for every trifle, and upon so slight occasion as now is common in our
English rufflers, spill Innocent blood.

Oh that it pleased the Lord to lighten the hearts of men. To see with what
price we are bought in Christ? The hand of Caine would not be so ready at
the throat of Abell, as it is. But now Romulus is drawinge the Sword, and it
be with Remus for the Kingdom. Esau and Jacob agree not. Ismaell and Isaak,
will not dwell together. Joseph is ready to be sold for money. Saull seeks
after David. The Samaritan lies wounded, no man helps him: What shall I say
more: The great man curses the poor man: Private excuses for private revenge
can not excuse us.
the poor man complayneth of the rich. The godly man, he says he hates
him, for he is evil: The evil he flies him that is pure in heart, he is
not for his purpose. Thus every one has his several manner, each person has
his reasons, no man loves one another.

I ask once again another question, how canste thou pray. Forgive us our
debts, when of a certeinty thou thy self forgiuest none?

The makebate, he pleads for himself, his gentlemanlike qualities, his stock
and parentage from whence he came. Our English ^uflars in stead of Courtiars
vaunt it abroad.
His Hercules heart he has, can not be plucked down: for it is not Courtier
like. Surely more courteous, and less Courtiars were good for England.

Shall I speak my mind? I would of truth, but I fear you of the Court. Yet
must I correct my self, I go awrye: for a noble heart is always seen by a
valiant courage. And Theseus never presed to brawle But the field and the Forte
to go to the Baryars, not private corners to seek to wrestle in, is
Gentlemanlike. And such as seek this, to them I speak. To this unhappy
world, now all thwackt and pestered with graceles men, to you all I say the
truth. I will leave of my Gown, and set apart my profession for a time, and I
will reason with you: and prepare as well as you can, take your Armor unto you,
for of truth, if you be not well fenced I will not spare you. This only I
crave, that your weapons and mine may be alike. For you be merciles men I
know it well enough, you would ouerreache me.

And my quarrel that I strive for, The gentleness of the father marteth the
good nature of the son, and cruelty is good often times, in stead of
lenitee.
is to you that be Fathers. That suffer your Children to spend so long a time
in Idleness and riot: that permit them to be Courtyars for a year or two, and
when their substance is spent, suffer them to be beggars al there life: In Rome
learning was so much esteemed, and in Aegipt so much reverenced, that Kings
were called priests. And Senators were Philosophers, and Consules were
Prophetides, and their honorable men were learned men. But now adays the Innes
of the Court and London, has consumed so many, that few are left, to write
or to read, or to know almost what God means.

Is there not a gray headed man to bear me witness, that whereas they had
never a Beggar among them of Israel, we have now many thousands with us in
England? But will no man speak for me? How is England altered of late, the
russet coat is turned in to silks and faithfulness, in covvardlines: the stout
man, is the murdering man*
Shall I fight all alone with these Maisterlesse men? or dare no man utter that
which he has seen? That within 60 years, sithence these Gentlemanlike
qualities budded up, two Runnagates for one true man: two quarelers for such as
accustomeably were wont to be at quiet are now of late spronge up with us of
England? If no man dare adventure with me the brunte hereof, such blows as my
youth can afforde, such do I offer you: and ward it as well as ye can, and
speak the truth. Is not every Plowman become a Gentleman? does not many a
Mariner send his son forth to be a Courtiar? All things are turned and
altered into pride.
do not men of occupations train up their Children to know fashions? Is not
the kytchin Boy waxed proud? is he not now beecome a waytinge Boy? is not
all things so changed with your disorder, that if a Ruffian peecpe out of the
thresholde, he must have a Page with him? Then truly look unto it, for there
is utterly a fault among you. And it is that for which I strive now, and it
is common with you in the City. Where men do swim so deep in blood as they
do. No forgiving, no forgetting: All revenging, no revealing: their debts come
rolling home in their bosom, Quietness is the great blessing of God, but the
quarreller is accursed of the Lord.
that owe any. The day has been, that quietness was so much set by in Israel
there was scarce any weapons to fight withal: Now our Swords can not help
us, our manlynes keep us, we are affrayde of our shadows as we go in the
streets. Your huffinge and carrowfing is turned to bloodsheading: our
freendlynes and familiaritye is turned to enimity. Our love and our neighboring
is turned to brawling.

Nay, our Cups, and our banqueting, is turned to murdering.

I am persuaded before the Lord, that a number of Swashbucklers: nay even of
us Gospellers, be fitter to sport it out with Dalila, Roffeanlike Ministers.
and dance it out with Herodias, then to come to the Temple to hear Moses.

God mende the state hereof, and give us more of his peace, and bless us with
his rest (if it be his will) And send a strong Eastern wind, to rid away
these Catterpillers, that we dye not all.

But let them alone, the common wealth will be so weary, that what with men
for their Sons, and Mothers for their Children, Blood is paid again by blood.
and men Women and Children for their heaps of Carcases that lie scrawling in
the streets: they will be glad ear it be long to spewe them out.

There is yet another kind of fellow that I mark and meant in these words of
Christ, for give our debts: The private enemy, and the dissembler, is much
vvorste then he that professes enimitie.
and as the Adder is more sharp, and her force dangerous when she comes
unlooked for, then when we may a void her, so be these I talk of: that lie
hidden in the thicket, till they spy their opertunitie, and then wreake their
malice on their brother.

This envious man little remembers what our Savior Christ did, that when he
could have slain him, yet saved him. When death and destruction was limited
for his portion with hipocrites, wrought a good work and brought to pass a
full satisfaction for his sins.

And for a certeintie, if the wicked man knew from whence he fetches this
same, The devil, the author of difcention and hatred.
and if once he saw that ugly shape and monstrous visage, of that deformed
creature that brought this to the world, I suppose that for the hatred they
owe unto the Devil and Sathanas, he would from hence forth never use it.

And of these there is two sorts. One is for his neighbors loss, for the
evil success that happens to his brother, this (...) joy and pleasure that
is taken in other men's mishaps, unfolds the inwards cogitations of ye heart.
Shows that we be not perfect and upright before him, and it is that the Lord
will require at our hands.

This (...) is next follow brother with him that is (...). Desire of evil
success to his brother.


The second kind of malyee secreatly wrapped within man.

For he that is sorry for the good success of any one though he be a wicked
man, has little consideration, that the sun shines as well on the good as the
had: And how gorgeous a show and what covering soever they have to shadow it
with, be they well assured, the Lord will not suffer it.

Here it comes, that a fond affection leads a number, and he has this
man, and he hates that man: his reason is not to seek: he is an enemy to the
gospel. Every man has a cloak and a corner for his malice.
This is but the shift of one that halteth, and such idle excuces shall not
excuse thee, at the day of wrath. I can give testimony of this, and my
conscience beam witness that I find it true. Whether I may accuse the days
or no wherein I am, I cannot tell. Refuse the dealinge of some I may for good
occasion: whose consiences are sore troubled, and they dismayed for a piece of
bread, and a cake, and for an holy day. That is happiest and counted wisest,
that makes religion his warrant, and his profession his Canape to dissemble
gloriously. Praecisenes of life and ungodliness in works be common things in
the world:
That heapeth up riches greedely, robs his brother uncharitably, that
gloseth shamefully, and walks unbrotherly, yet will he be a gospeller, and
deal precisely.

I say no more, it goes very hard with us, when men of conscience in great
and weighty matters shall strain their conscience as they do: and life and
death, God can not be dishonored more the^ in the shamlesse man that professes
him: yet in heart hates him, for he never follows him.
shall be too little for others, if they shall give place but to trifles. That
swallowe up Cammelles, and be strangled, with a small and tender knatte. That
lay great and heavy burdens upon other men's shoulders, and bear not so much
as the weight there of them selves. Surely they shall not escape the vengeance
that is to come: nor eschew the firce wrath of the highest. They shall pearishe
in the vanity of their thoughts, and consume away at the look of the Lord of
hosts. For they have not known the Lord their maker, nor believed him in
faith, nor professed his power, nor looked for judgment, neither make they an
account of his coming in the Clouds, neither take they any heed to forgive
other men their debtes.

There is other kind of men that I note here, Brethren of onchoushold very
conscionable, and of great presise nesse that know no^ this.
and I put them in the same Catalogue? for as I understand they be fellow
brethren: and pity it is to divide them, they be so friendly. And these be
such as forgive all, but for advantage will be lie their neighbors, and for
their profit dissemble with many, and for that they will not shame the gospel,
take an oath now and then to rid their brethren out of thraldom, and accuse
them they favor not. And slander them, they fancy not, and raise up
reproaches, though they have suffered, the heat of many summers: Outrageous
dealing in dissemblers.
and ratle forth their gun shot against the godly. Yet forgive they their
debts, as they would be forgiven of God. But I wish them to remember not that
in Virgilius.

Talia voce refert curis ingentibus aeger. Spem vultu simulat premit altum
cord dolorem: Nor that which Plautus has in Trinummo, Sapiens quidem polipse
fingit fortunam sibi: A politic man, the world now does smile upon him: as
to know from whence he came: that he is the Temple and glorious building, of
such a one as will not suffer strange merchaundise to be set at sale within
his liberty.

For if the midwiues in that they saved the lives of young children, whose
blood Pharao gaped for, were known by their infirmities to be but women, in
that they lied in so good a cause: out of doubt a little corner is left to
these men, ye are nothing so good as the midwiues were. Neither save they any
ones life, much less in their beastly and malicious quarrels, allowed of God.

If Abraham found his reward, No lying permitted for any cause.
and Sara his wife aghast at Abimelech, returned and had the shame, for that she
said, she was his sister: know first that neither Sara, neither Abraham be
here, neither is your case a like. Thirdly that his weakness, shall not save
your rashenesse.

Though Rahab the harlot did save the three men that came as spies to
Hierocuntia, and had her reward Notwithstanding you have erred and that
grossly. For both the commodity of them in Israel, and the whole land, is to
be preferred before your private gain, and when you approve it by the word of
God and allow her words, Perjury, and forsvvearing, though it be for such as
do profess the Gospel: it is detestable: thou art accursed that use it.
I will commend it. But where find we in the word of God to swear for any,
and that falsely? and that as you think for his glory? I will give you no
weapons to fight withal: And those wherewith you seem to strike, are blount
already: And it may be that he which fyled them and delivered them unto you as
good metal, wanted cunning. When ye have considered better, and cast your
penyworthes, paraduenture also you will repent you, for so shrewde a bargain as
you have had in giving so largely for such counterfeites, and it may be a
warning unto you to search more narrowely. As for my self I can be but brief
herein, the son calls me back, ye ronning so hastily puts me in mind what
to do, Gregor us.
and this judgment shall not be my own: take it from Gregorius that allows in
some case to be lie thy self to save others: Augustine.
But I oppose Augustine against him, ye in the sermon de verbis Apostili. Cap.
29. Determines more soundly and discreefely a great deal of this matter.

Fingendo si prius non eras peccator, factus eris peccator, Nempe dicendo te
commisisse quod non admiseris. To lie says Augustine for any thing though
before thou offendest not, It makes thee as he that finned: namely thou
saidste, thou did that was never done: And I am utterly against all
whatsoever, This pureness is blindness: your precisenes filthiness before God:
Thou and thy brethren, you have your revvard: for no wickedness is to be
concealed.
that give larger scope to these double hearted fellows, then can be allowed by
the word of God: Or that any man should conceal and keep close his
wickedness, and the filthiness of life in others, for fear that the Gospel
should be discredited, and God dishonored.

But I say if it be in Absalon: if in thy Son: if in thy only son,
conceal it not. Hear, for I will answer that doubt, to cut you shorter. It
is not lawful to tell an untruth, no not to save the life of thy neighbor.

Augustine in his book De mendatio to Consentius, questioneth thus: If a man
be sick extremely, even to death, Augustine;
and the same man also knew his son to be in great ieopardie and peril of
his life. The father has such love unto his child, that the death of his
son will be the death of him his father, if he know it. One stands by,
that knows his son is dead. Examples, that it is not lavvfull to lie in any
case.
The father asks the same person as touching his son: What shall be done in
this case? If he says that he is not dead, he lies: if that he say he
knows not, he dissembleth: if he says he is dead, he does against nature, he
burieth the father with the son, Homo vt sum permoueor res dura est: As I am
a man says Augustine, I am sore affrighted and it is a hard case. But he
concludes: Non esse mentiendum: Lie not at all.

Take yet an other Question: if you meet with a strumpet, with an unchaste
woman, that as Putiphars wife to Joseph would have thee to defile thy soul in
her dischastitie by Foruication: and thou denyest, it is come so far that
she will stea her self, unless she satisfy her lust with thee. What shall be
done now? shall thou agree and condescend unto her? I say no. And says
Augustine: The reason is alike in both, you shall not lie and commit evil for
thy neighbors commodity.

Otherwise, there is a Latice and an open pathway^ to all mischief: For one
lies for his substance: an other for his neighbors wealth: another for his
fathers commodity. One for his brother, and for his honor, and for his
dignity: and so in all states, there is is no end of lying. But yet again I
say with Augustine. Non est committendum vt proalterius corporali vita,
quicquis suam occidat animam. For thy corporal gain, let no man cast away his
soul. And I say again lie not at all.

But yet to exclude all shifts, and lcaue no one creuise to peep into, what
shall be said to this Lawyare shift^ murderers and Thieves set upon a man:
one hydeth him: These men would know where he is hidden. Reuelabit an non? I
say, commit the matter unto God: if thou can conueigh him, send him away, if
not but they demand where he is, to have his life: Thou need not to tell
it, they be but private men: If thou art not inforsed conceal it. But if they
compel thee by thy life: Thy soul is in the hands of God, thy life is in
theirs. Obaye thou God before men. If the Magistrate do ask thee of a wicked
man that has committed treason against his person? The experyence in all
this, has bin ^^ene of late: and it is to be taken that it spread not farther.
If of an Extorcioner? if of an unjust dealer? if of a wicked person? I say,
though he be thy Brother though thy friend, though thy Master, though thy
father, though she out of whose bowels thou commeste: Her blood is on her own
head, disclose it, lie not: otherwise soul for soue, life for life, man for
man, blood for blood, you dye both. To conclude: in thy Merchandise truth, in
thy dealings truth, in barganing truth, in selling truth, in inritching
truth: Truth in all things. For men that deal untruly, often times do live
unruly. And these be they that commonly do end their lives most desperately.

I am now at length arrived to a very dangerous and troublesome port. Whereas:
(but that now God be thanked, the wind and weather is delayed:) There might
seem some danger of sanding: for three already I escaped, very perellous kind
of men: And I have now to encounter with the fourth: That be such as fright
me the more, A perilous kind of Heretic.
as I see there pretensed zeal more cunningly cloaked then the rest. And yet,
these forgive their debtes and pardon their enemies.

Yet moved by the Spirit and for zeal of the Gospel, or by revelation from
Heaven, or by certain perverseness that they be the enemies of Christ: Will use
the Sword and aucthority: and put their hands to the knife, to wound and
launche their Brothers throat. Some have dyed in England not long since for the
same: And the Martyrdom of one Burchet a Gentleman, with one or two more his
companyons. (Par semper paria petit) though unknown as yet, hanged at the
Strand in London a few years now past, did much mischief hear in England.
What happened to the writer hereof. 1576. October. 13.


I was in the Country, and now past but two years where in a long Voyage that
I took, I did by chance stumble upon some of them, and about Sowthhampton,
with the Coast there adjoining, and Westward toward Portchmowth, I had some
talk with poor Laymen as I rode, that inclined much hereunto: Whom after I
had admonished, with a little bitter speech as a terror to them for proceedinge
any farther* They reclaimed for a time: how since that they have been moved
by the Spirit of God I know not. In this Cuntry where now I am, I can accuse
none, but how near in diverse poynctes they come unto them, I refer me to the
discretion, of such as know them: without affection, beeinge pertiall unto
none, I set down the truth. That wise men may know them, and the simple fly
them. That only God may be glorified in the ordinary means he has appointed.

The beginning whereof I can fetch it from none other, Enthusiastists.
then from that villainous sect of Enthusiastistes that was the beginning and
Orriginall of beastly and filthy deuinacions, and lived by inspiration, as I
find in* Theodoret of Cyrus, whose beginner thereof and Kingleader was
sometimes Salbas, ruler among very wicked and graceles men. And Adelphius, and
Daodes, The beginning of this heresy.
and Simeones and Hermes with others. And as Judas for betraying Christ, so
were these for abusinge the Church, very infamous, and noted among the
Fathers. These fellow servant and Copemates as it were with Nouatus: that
infected them of Phrigia, Nouatus of Phrigia.
and Paphlagonia with his precisenes and exactnes of life, and permitted none
that had sacrifised to Idols to come near the church: refused ye manner of
Baptism ye was used, permitted none to come to the holy mysteries: Practice of
prescitians.
Neither yet referred him to ye mercy of God. Which how much it differs from
them in our English Church (whereof the Lord be merciful unto us, there is a
great number) every where sprung up of late: denying our order and manner in
baptism, thrusting such from the Supper of ye Lord as they like not: take them
selves only for the pure and perfect church, refusing others, with such like
opinions a number, as ye like has been seldom seen in any age, in any church
since Christ's coming in so short a space, as is now.

I can compare them to no one state of any common wealth, so near and so
narrowly, as I can unto that, whereof there is some mention made in Sleidons
Commentaries, in his tenth book. For unto ye same great and famous City of
Mounster, the Metropolis of Westphalia: there resorted certain Anabaptists,
whose beginning and Orriginal was taken from one Tho. Muncer, that raised a
tumult of the co^munalty.

And these pretended certain holiness and purity of life: in so much that
counted as Godly and zealous christians, they were never espied, A comparison
of our time: with them that are found in Sleydon.
they dealt so closely and holilye in life, until they began to spread through
out Germany, and Luther and almost al other learned men, inueighed against
them.

But after when this their childhoode began to reatch unto it fresher blood,
and gathered strength to creep withal, not far from Mounster at a Church of
S. Morris, the year of our Lord. 1332. One Barnearde Rotman a preacher of the
Gospel, gathered together a great audience in that City, and suppressed at
the first by the Catholics, being sent away empty without hope of that he
came for, Barnard Kotman, a secreat Anabaptist.
he went aside to another country for a space. Yet after that returned back,
and being very popular, he ravished the minds of the people, he preached very
sincerely, he lived uprightly and faught zealously: John L^iden a Coblar: and
heretic: for commonly heresy follovveth the ignorant.
But know all and judge with me: dissembling a long time what he was. Comes
at length a certain Cobbler to Mounster out of Holland to name Ihon Leidan, A
rank Anabaptist, and having got acquaintance with the preachers, assotiated
and kept company with them: after familiarity among the^ being well known to
the commons: Herman Stapred.
he inueighed openly against the state. At which time one Herman Stapred, as
preuie to the drift of his fellow Rotman, linked him self at length with the
rest (and it was that Stapred, ye was scholar to Henrick Rolly, which a little
before was executed at Vtreight, for the opinion of Anabaptisme) but it grew to
so great inconuenie^ce here with them of ye city, that ye senate banished al ye
pack of the^: yet the subtlety of these men prevented ye intent of ye wise
Senate, neither departed they but kept secretly in holes and corners, and went
privily to the followers of their sect: lurked there for a space, taught in ye
night, preached in private places, used conue^ticles, and gathered companies, ye
ye number of the^ in ye end increased abou^da^tly.

And then having gotten the upper hand, came in ye diuilish device of running
up and down in ye streets, as though they had been inspired with a kind of
prophecy.

Then began one Kniperdoling, with other lay me^ to use expoundings,
interpretations, and diuinations. Women were prophets and spoke openly in
congregations. Knipperdoling alaye man, and preacher.
Good preachers were exiled, and in their steed came up the ofscowring of the
City, and then began civil war, and murder, and discention, and confusion
of the state.

For my own part I judge Christianly, and the Lord God look upon me in the
same: yet this I think, that the Lord being angry, has somewhat care long to
say unto us. And for the thing it self, he that has but one eye may seewhat
mark it is they shoot at: for ye state, ye laws, the common wealth: if their
request be granted cannot stand.

And as in the reign of Emperor Charles the first began most bloody
broils by avarice and herisie that sprange up: So in espetiall it was seen in
that unlucky Westphalia, when heaps of dead men lay scattered in the
streets, The miserable state that comes by confusion.
and the bodies of their Emperors were unburied: when the Senate was expelled
and every one that ought private grudge ware a dagger in his sleeue to cut his
neighbors throat: And all things were in common: and when this heresy was
spread in many places through out Germany: that if was lawful for every one to
kill his enemy. That is flat against that I have in hand: Forgive us our
trespaces as we forgive them that trespass against us.

For that same Iellowzie in Elyas. That called to heaven and was heard of the
Lord, and fire came down and consumed those he cursed: Is no sufficient
argument to confirm that error. For when thou art a Prophet and can tell
what is to come: when thou have such commandment from the Lord: Priua^e
examples are not to be gathered unto a general doctrine.
and art assuredly moved by the Spirit: when thy life is sought, and God
wilbee revenged on them that mock thee: when the prophets be despised and any
seek there death: and thou also have an assured warraunt from the LORD I will
agree with thee:

But if Christ when he was despised of them in Samaria, and could have cast of
ye dust of his feet against the^, revenged not again. If he checked James and
John that asked if fire should come down from heaven to distroy them, when he
went from Galilee to Jerusalem? you may know e well it was an extraordinary
thing God would have done, he used not the natural ways on earth to fulfill
his mind.

What if Peter destroyed Ananias and Saphira his wife, and cursed them to
death? Their arguments are ansvvered.
Are you Apostles as they were? Did you ever see Christ? have you
commandment to do signs and wounders, and to heal and foretell? or if you
drink poison will it not hurt you? if this commandment was never given you
your reason quayleth. But if God will have his indignation and fury to be
shown upon the vessels of wrath. If he will not spare the hipocrite, but
unlace his nakedness to the world? If the reprobate shall have judgment in
this life, and in the world to come to astonish thee? if that Ananias and
Saphira were guilty of theft and Sacraledge? then when thy commission is good,
and thy warraunt sufficient, and thou have to deal also with such men, I will
allow it. The success of that which happened to the writer hereof, about:
Southampto^.


Notwithstanding, among other reasons that I now remember, laid unto me by
poor lay men (though I perceive they had good instructers that taught them so
counningly) yet one among them all, in a red Cappe and a black coat did vere
me perlously. For my own part I was amazed, and it was strange to see a poor
fellow, brought up at plough and cart withered and weather beaten, and be
shacked in his array, yet to reason so profoundely: do not know (says ye
same poor man) that Thelias thwackt ye prists of Ball and sklewe them, at a
Ponde: and they were the foes of God, and why shall not we kill those that be
hiks enemies. Mary mass I trow ye one Skamuel sklewe Ahag (he would have
said Agag) and with that was very angrye: and Spineas (he meant Pineas, or
plainly Phinees) did skill a whore and as knave, and he iks praised by God. I
was afraid then, and rid away as well as I could. I thought it time, yet by
his leave, Aunsvvering to the reasons of the lay men.
for I am out of his paws, and I have leisure enough, I will answer it now.
For it tends heather: that Elias did kill the pristes of Baal, at the brook
of Kison, at such time as they had cried out Baal, Baal here us etc. The
ignorance of men may appear therein: and true it is: an evil scholemaster, may
easily mar a fine scholar: for though these men spoke roughly, and had grimme
talk, yet by their traveling it appeared to me, they had a willing mind to
atteine sumething. And as I have heard, for that in those quarters there be
many Papists, I did in very deed suspect much: But I let them alone, and God
almighty turn them, and if these my few lines may ever happen to come to
their fingers, I know I shall smarte for it.

How ever it be, and wheresoever now they be, I will speak this to them
briefly. God was then dishonored the space of many years by Ahab his
parmission in suffering these Chemerimes, those bloody sacrificers in his
commonwealth. And Iesabel that infamous strompette, had nourished the Priests
of Baal in her house. Now God being sore displeased, would have the Idolaters
punished according to his law.

If there be found in any Cities man or woman Deuteronomy. 17.2.3
which the Lord thy God gives thee, God gives in charge in the law: and
often inspireth men secretly to execute his judgments: in the Gospel he
has not as of late years used it: for all things are referred to the word
and to Magistrates. Number 25.1^ Psalm. 106. Eccle. 45.
that has wrought wickedness in his sight, and has gone and served other
Gods and worshipped them. The Sun the Moon, etc. Carrye him to the gates of
the City, and stone him with stones till he dye. Then that which Elyas did,
he was commanded by the Lord.

As touching Phineas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, that
slew Zambry and Cosby: it is said: that he turned away the anger of God from
the children of Israel, in ye he was zealous for the Lord of Hoastes sake, ye
is, he did it not but by ye singular spirit of God that stirred him. And for
his obeisance rewarded him. For his commendation remains in David.

Then if he would not be pettish, I would say some thing to this poor Cuntry
man ye would learn: when Idolatry is come to the full brimme, and Magistracy,
and authority is contempted, as Moses was: and when thou art commanded to hang
their heads up in the Sun, that offend the Lord. when God says unto thee
do this, and he raises thee up: The purpose of God and of the wicked is
contrary.
once again I say it is an offense if thou obey not. But al these extraordinary
examples, the wicked men do peruerte to their condempnation: For they take it
as done of themselves in the flesh, that was commanded them in spirit from the
Lord. And where they accomplished the commandment of their God to abolish and
root out sin, They do it in reuengement to their own condempnation.

As for Samuel that slew Hagag, that Heathnish and Idolatrous Prince, that
Amalechite, 1. Sam. 15.
whom God hated and abhorred, and now commanded to be slain. For that he
laid wait for them, as in the way up from Egypt: It was lawfully done. For
Samuel was a Magistrate and ruler in Israel, and he judged Israel, fortye
years. And ruled them in vprightnes and integritee all his life, against whom
at his death, Israel was not able to say ought or to charge him with any thing.
Then being the Magistrate he had Aucthority to use the sword and execute
judgment. Which if I thought you would deny, as the Anabaptists do, I then
would take it an other way in hand.

But wearied my self, and having even now tried you, I let them alone for this
time: when occasion serves, and leisure permits, and God grants unto me
fit opportunity, I will more largely handle it. For this time I cease.

And this it is my doctrine that I teach: if thou or any man else, shall take
upon thee the seat of the Lord: enter into judgment: All judgment given to
God, no reuengement unto man.
condemn thy brother: lay in wait for him: take up the swoorde: presume to
smite, or else any other way indammage him: Thou art guilty of his blood, and
the Lord will require it at thy hands.

The last thing which I note herein: Forgive us our debtes, as we forgive our
debtors: Is the agreement and unity that the Lord requires in us all: that
offers us, as it were our salvation in his Christ, and inrolleth us again
to be duetifull and obedient to others. Godless is louelesse, and the end of
them both is death.
This I would it were (if so it seemed good unto his Majesty) more common
then it is, less debate and more love would grow among us. For this cause,
as being one that means well unto the famili^ of the Lord, and would right
gladly hazard that little which I have, to join you all in one Christ. Take
this from me, as a poor testimony of the love I bear you. Even a golden
chain and precious Emerode that I willingly do give, to link you and couple
you togeether in one Lord. And I give it in the name of Christ, and of his
church, that even now in England suffers shipwreck, and goes to decay,
and more and more yet like to perish if we stay not on this Anchor, and take
not hold in his Christ.

The Perle or Emerolde, it is Love. The Chain or Jewel, is Truth.
For, if you do remember, The badge of a true Christian that is sowed to the
coat he vveareth which is, his profession.
I protractured out a man not so long since, that to my thinking, though he was
comely enough in height, stature and proportion, and able to serve in the house
of God: yet I left him very naked: and to cover his shame I have given him
apparel in this place. And upon his raiment he may hang ye two former
Jewels, Love and Truth only: Let his Robes, and his ornaments, be Discretion.
His Pomp and his bravery, Hospitality. His glorying and beautifying, let it
be Teaching. His vesture and cloth, Sagacitie and prudente. His gown, Long
suffering. His coat, Faithfulness. How the man of God must and ought to be
apparelled.
His doublet, Assurance. His shyrte, Bountifulness. His hose, Patience. His
feet, shod with Peace. His hose garters, Temperance. On his head for his
Helmet, Fortitude. In his hands for his armor, Hope.


And he that is apparelled thus, The readiness that ought to be in us, at the
calling of our God.
I dare set him against all the temptations of Satan, and the world, the
flesh, and the devil shall never move him. It is my humble suit unto you all,
in the name of Christ: that we seek to agree in one, and every man as much as
in him lies, endeavor him self to find out this clothing. Believe me it is
a garment without seame and wrinckle. And it will do you great honesty at the
day of the Lord. It will be your commendation, when he comes in the Clouds,
and calls you to his heavenly banquet, that then you shall be found so well
appointed to enter with him into the Bridegromes chamber, and sit at his table.
Do ye not know, that he which has not on his wedding Coat shall be cast out
with Hippocrits from that heavenly Supper, and have his portion in the Lake
that burns with fire? Verily it is his reward.

But the Children of the kingdom, shall abide for ever with the Lord. And to
this he bring us, that has in his most precious blood redeemed us, Jesus
Christ the righteous: To whom with the father and the holy Ghost, be all
honor and glory, both now and ever. Amen.

And lead us not into temptation, But deliver us from evil.
I Have showed you before, Seeingin this life we are still in darkness,
weakness, blindness and ignorance, wal king in the shadow of death: as
these be great stays and hindrances of our glory: so of truth, if God
deliver us not from these and the like assaults of Satan: we pegish all.
that this prayer had in it six peticions, whereof there is now five gone.
There remains only this last. For God gave us in charge, to give our first
duty unto him: and for that it was very hard to accomplish it without
prayer: He has given as it were his consent to hear us. And now he has
geeuen unto us a kind of Brestplate to put on. Namely: To call upon his name:
To require and pray of his son Christ, that seeing we be weak of our
selves, and frail by nature: he would lay no more upon us, then we be able
to bear. For the devil is ready at our elbowe to assault us: and he fendeth
forth his Harbingers right duly to entangle us (if so they may) the better
to seduce us from the Lord: And this the Lord God has given: to put us in
mind in what continual dannger we stand, that if he aid us not, and
protecte us not, and stretch not forth his arm to stay us, we fall down
headlong into sin.

This manner of speech uttered here by our Savior Christ, seemed to be unto
some a very heavy thing, and not unto the justice of the Lord: and apperteining
to his majesty. To suffer any one to be led into temptation. Traheron, his
iudgeme^^
Which kind of exposition Traheron a German seems to mislike, in a little
treatise he writes thereon. And the like is in a number of Curious and vain
men, that dare not and will not say. Lead us not into temptation. But do a
forde us thus much. Permit us not to be led into temptation. Both which
interpretations I mislike utterly: and I say as the Gretians, carry us not, or
conduct us not, or try us not, or lead us not into temptations.

For the better exposition and plain understanding of the weak. I will show ye
signification of ye word temptation. Tempting is often times taken for trying,
or approving, or experiensing by one way or other, Temptation, and what the
meaning thereof is.
for ye bringing to pass of any thing: to put in practice and to know of what
nature, quality, and substance the thing is of: And this word is used
diversely: for God is said to be tempted of man: and he also is stirred up or
provoked, or moved of the Lord: and that is, when his word is not believed, or
the gospel has not his success, which only shows the Lord to be holy,
God is tempted when he is provoked.
to be good, to be just, to be perfect, to be omnipotent etc. but desire some
other way, by outward and erteriour show, as by works or miracles, to tempt
the Lord God. And so did Israel when they had tasted of Manna from heaven. Can
he give us also flesh to eat? after this sort is Christ said to have been
tempted of Satan. He sat him upon the top of the pinnacle, and said throw
thy self down for it is written. And again, make these stones bread, for it
is written. But God tempts and tries many and sundry ways. To begin with
his own, whom he has chosen in Christ from all beeginning, and prepared them
as fit Temples of the holy ghost, from the foundation of the world: Them he
tempts, The godly are tempted, when they are tried.
and tries sundry ways: Namely to make his virtues, which he has wrought and
ordained them unto, to show them selves, that were hidden before: or to open
their noughtie and corrupt nature, that after they may be more careful in
their steps, and wary in their dooinge, and more easily atteine, to the
deep consideration and knowledge of his secret purpose, which works
allway, and seeks diverse means to draw them from their wicked life.

And the example of the first Adam: This trial, is a token of election: if it
walk there after: else of reprobation.
was a lively image of the Godly. And he was a zealous man: in whom God was
much glorified among the Gentiles: The like in Jacob, whom he blessed above
many kinreds, and made him a Lord over his chosen. Also Daniel, that magnified
the Lord, in the kings court, and found so great favor in the sight of
Darius, among the Caldees, and was tried by the Lions, by the Image of Bell and
so glorified the Lord. In Susanna, in Babylon, as in Ageographa.

The second manner of temptation wherewith the Lord, The second kind of
temptation.
tries those ye be his. Was seen in Peter, that at the call of the cock, was
put in mind of the offense he had committed: and there upon wept bitterly. And
Paul, though he was guilty of the blood of Stephen, and laid his raiment at
his feet, yet at the voice from heaven, Saul, Sual, why persecutest thou me?
he was again called home. He felt the benifite of his redemption in Christ,
and after that was diversely tried in many temptations by the Lord: by Sea: by
land: in danger of Perots: in danger of death: he was whipped: he was
stoned: he suffered buffering: the Vyper had aucthorite over him for a space:
and that Orator Tertullus had some thing to say unto him at the bar before
Festus: I think Barnabas found^ good trial in this, in ye werisome viage which
be had, through, Selentia and Cyprus, and from Salamis, and from Perga of
Pamphilia, and Antiochia and the rest.

Sithen there is diverse kinds of temptations: one is, that which is commonly
called adversity: against this we must not pray. For it is true that is in
Paul. The order for us that p^ay against temptation.
Those which will live Godly in Christ: must suffer persecution. Yet if we
begin to faint, we may stir up our slouthfulnes and imbicility by prayer to
Christ. And so Paul prayed that the Te^pter which was given him, that he
should not wax proud, after such time be was wrapte up into the third
heavens) might be taken from him.

And Christ gave us an example hereof in Math. Father take away this Cup from
me, if it be thy will. In another place. Therefore came I into the world, that
by my death, I might save some. God tries those that be his by adu^^sitie.
Or that I might drink of this Cup. And this he did for our example for of
him self he was stroung enough: and he knew what should happen: but being man
he took upon him our in firmities, and bare our grief: and as for our
adversity, ye first kind of temptation, it can not be but profitable, seeing
that God will not suffer those that be his, to be tempted above that they be
able to bear.

And James. 11. Think it a great joy my brethren so often as you fall into
temptation: seeing you know that the trial of your faith brings patience:
and patience makes a full end or consummation of all.

And David. Happy is he that suffers temptation, for because, when he is
tried, Psalm. 26.
he shall receive a crown of life which God has promised to them that love
him.

There is also a temptation which is of Satan. Master Gualter in Luke. Page
286. Calls the devil a tempter, and he fetches it from out of the
scriptures, which in deed you shall find in many places. His reason is good.
The devil tempts to seduce us, the Lord to vvin us: and the one is unto
life, the other is unto death.
Assidue varieque molitur, vt nos a Deo abducat, and per incredulitatem, aut
peccandi licentiam male perdat (1) Continually does the devil go about to
seduce us from the Lord, that by incredulity and by licentious life, he may
destroy us. Therefore in this place it is well noted, where he is said (...)
a tempter. And here it is that we call him Satan, which is the Hebrew, and
signifies an enemy. And so he is called in Zachary 3. He showed me Iehosua
the high priest standing before the Angel of the Lord, to resist me. And the
Lord said to Satan, the Lord reproved thee thou Satan, that is, thou enemy
to man. And in Job, the children of God came, and stood before God: and Satan
was among them: that is their enemy. And so when the sonns of Seruia came unto
David and would have had execution done: David answered, what have I to do
with you, Great joy is there among the wicked spirits, if they get the
righteous from the Lord: and the Angels they rejoice at the conversion of a
finner. M. Caluin^.
you children of Seruia? you are this day unto me as Satan an enemy. For they
thought to slay Semei, and to make it a bloody day to David.

And so is he called Diavolous, a devil, that is an accusar and so it is in the
Reuela. 12. The old Serpent which is called the Devil and Sathanas (that is
your accuser and enemy) is cast forth. Then we pray here against temptations.
That is, he would not let us be snared, or swallowed up by the subtlety, and
wiliness of the devil This is the end hereof. That as Calvin. Propiae
infirmitatis, nobis conscii, dei presidio defendi nos sciamus.

That being guilty of our own weakness, we might be fostered or stayed, by
the help of the Lord, that we may stand assured, against all engynes of of
Satan. For therefore it is spoken, that we may know all things happen by the
providence of God, and that we were in extreme misery and overcame by the
wiliness and subtlety of this enemy of ours, if he reared us not, and
lifted us not up in his Christ. Aug. in his book De Natura and gratia. Ca.
58. thinks thus: Vt resistamus diabolo, Augustine.
precamur vt aufugiat Diabolus, cum dicimus, Ne nos inducas in temptacionem.

The Aucthor against the two Epistles of Pelagius. Lib. 4. Cap. 9. does bring
out of Cyprian, this Exposition when it is said, Lead us not into temptation:
If God touched not his chosen by the pricks and tediousnes of evil life: they
would be ^^ untamed Coalts in their dealing Cyprian.
We are admonished of our imbecility and weakness. For it is said, watch and
pray that you enter not into temptation. A reason is adjoined: the Spirit is
willing, the flesh is weak, and this is, least we should be puffed up
insolently. Cyprian upon the Lords Prayer, gathers a verygood lesson. The
author of untruth and our adversary the devil, can do nothing without Gods
permission. And therefore all our fear, and our trembling is to be laid upon
the Lord: for that in all temptations the wicked man can do naught unless he
have power from God. Where I desire you to co^sither with me two things.

First the disposition of the wicked: for their reason is, he leads us into
Temptation, he is therefore the Aucthor of sin.

The godly man he says, he leads us into temptation. See first what a
loving Father we have, how good a God, he tries us and proves us, he
suffers us not to be tempted above our strength. For in his goodness, by his
Scourges, he reclaymeth us: That which I give to understand is this.

The godly take all things to the best, A difference betwixt the godly and
ungodly man
for their Salvation: The wicked wrest and wreath all manner of Gods works, all
his dealings to their reprobation. For this Heresye grounded out of this place,
God tempts us, he is therefore the Aucthor of sin. I will confute it
breefely.

Three kinds of men I find here, that peruerte and turn the meaning of the
Spirit of God.

The first, is detestable and derogating from the Majesty of the Lord.
Liberties condemned.
And it is of the Libertines, touched also before. That hurl and thrust upon
the Lord all their offenses, al their wicked and malicious deeds, and make
him, the Author of sin.

The second opinion is of learned and wise Fathers whom I reverence for their
skill, and honor for their guiftes. Yet hold I not with them in that they are
faulty, and they think that God hardneth and stifneth the hearts of men? All
things are not to be uttered at all reasons.
And that he is the cause of sin: yet so, that the same which is malice in
man, raised up by God is perfectnes in him. That he punishes sin by sin,
yet are they affrayd to grant that he works in all,

The third kind is of them, that interpret through the whole Volume and Book
of God thus: He suffers him to fall: he permits him to offend: He
lets them go astray: and going so nicely to work think they shall escape
all hinderaunces thereby, to detracte any thing from the Majesty of the Lord.
Of these some one of them must, they cannot all be true: It is an excellent
Argument that I find in Augustine in his questions. Augustine his reason.
Deus non est aucthor vllius rei qua homo fit deterior. etc. God is not ye
Aucthor of any one thing in man for which he is worse. But by sin, men are the
worse, then God is not the aucthor of sin.

He that is the punisher of offenders, and a distroyer of those he
malefactors, and consumer of such as run in sin: he cannot be sinful, or
the Aucthor of sin.

God punishes offenders and destroys malefactors and is a flame of fire to
the wicked: The second reason.
then God is not the Aucthor of sin.

He that sends his Prophettes to reclayme them: The third reason.
And his Preachers to win them: And his word to bring them: And his Christ to
serve them: is not the Aucthor of sin.

God it is, that sent his Prophets to feed them: And his Minysters to
instruct them: And his Gospel to renew them: And the life of his Son for
the ly^^ of us all: to bring us to eternal life: Then God is not the Aucthor
of sin. A confider^tion of the vvorking and power of God.


The Sun might turn him self and take his seat in Cancer. And the Moon
could pause and stay her swifte Voyage which she keeps before I should
fail in this. I will not then beat so mutch on this Iron. The Scripture
teaches us: reason leads us: Experience guides us: Nature it self
directs man to this: That he which sits upon the Cherubins and takes
the Heavens in his arm, and stretches forth his legs toward all the
corners of the earth: and looks so fiersly up on the Sons of men: and
judges according unto equity: and has his Loins girte with a Silver Gyrdle,
and his legs of Brass. That commands the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars, and theydare not resist him: That says do this, and they do it:
And so gloriouslye reygneth on the earth: and sends his Ministers of flaminge
fire to consume the wicked: and has his Habergions and instruments of Iron,
for the ungodly against the day of wrath. It seems to me very unreasonable,
that any one man being never so mutch blinded, should not see his Majesty, his
brightness, his perfection, his guidance, his government, his Authority, his
rule, to be perfect, to be pure, to be unspotted, to be glorious, and
exceeding comely, even in the creeping worms.

Then let this suffice to stay upon, for the libertine and outlaw, and denyer
of the godhead of our Lord. That he erreth, he is deceived, he finds it
amiss. That God either is, or can be the Aucthour of sin.

The Maniches, with the Martianistes, that are dependant hereon: Maniches, and
Marcionistes, have vvouuderfully erred.
have small inheritance with the Lord, that have divided his kinge^ome, and
given a Regimente to a good God: and an other to an evil God: and cut him in
pieces as it were, and deprive him of his right that is due unto him. Against
whom it were a long disputation, for his providence and his rule are depending
hereon, and it is more requesite for him to handle, that has ye Oars and the
Sea at liberty, then for me that run in so narrow a stream.

This I say, as all things were made and created by only one true and eternal
God, Genesis 1.
to fulfill that in Genesis. In the beginning God created Heaven and earth.
And in John: In the beginning was the word, the word was with God, ^ohn. 1.
and God was the word: all things were made by him, and without him was
nothing made that was made. And by him were all things both in heaven and in
earth, Collos. 1.
visible, or invisible: Whether they be Majesty's, or Lordships: either rules,
A confutatiof the second heresi, which touches god to be the author of ungod
linesse.
or powers: All things were created by him, and for him: he was before all
things, and in him all things consists. It is therefore Sacrilege, and
breach of the power of the Lord, to give any thing unto any other, or make his
power equal with the works of his hands, that framed and fashioned all at the
beginning. But now to the second opinion? As for these, we leave them to the
Lord, ye at his coming in the Heavens will look upon them, whom they shall
well know to be maker and Creator of all, when the Element shall melte with
fire, and the Heavens fold like a Scroll. And all that is in heaven and in
earth obey him.

For the brief instruction hereof, I will answer two Arguments, in this
second cause. One is this Adams sin was iniquity. God wills none
iniquity. Therefore God willed not Adam should sin.
If he willed not sin then: he does not will it now, for he is now as he was
then. And to this tends the next.

He that does the will of God, pleases God. Pigghius, ta^ quam fict^^ us. A
false sorites, a causa ad non causam.
Adam in breaking the commandment pleased not God. Therefore God willed not
he should sin.
And Pigghius a bastard divine.

The Jews in crucefying Christ did that God would: That God would deserves
not death. That which deserves not death is not sin. That is not sin, is
not to be punished Then the Jews in doing that God would, be not to be
punished.
And now I require ye to give me leave a little, and mark my speech, I doubt
not, but you will see and confess with me the power of the Lords, that out of
that is evil can bring that is good, to fulfill his will. Wherein I can not
marvel that Jerome stuck so stifely in the denial of his providence, Ierom
went avvry in that his iudgeme^^ of God.
and did not think that he was busied in small trifles, or had to do with
matters of little valewe. And I note the blindness of our Papists, with
whom Phillip Melancton bare, and was very free and ernest in this, and a man
fearful by nature gave place unto ye papists in more things then this.

But for my own part I teach thus, and this doctrine, not in my own name, but
in ye Lords: as having glened it by corn and corn, from ye most excellent and
best learned men under the Sun: and of late days (for God has given us more
light then to them in former age) in flourishing state among men. Zvvinglius.
Oecolam^dius.
Out of whose life I confess my self to have borrowed much (if ought ye it be I
possess.) And Zwinglius, and Oecolampadius, the two lights and very stars of
their time are witness here. Martinus Luther, Martine Luther. Martine Bucet.
M. Calvin.
Martinus Bucer, men of singular learning and wisdom shall testify the same:
and I call to witness in this behalf. Petrus Martyr, and Johannes Clauine, of
which two, for sundry sciences, for readiness and liveliness in wit, for
eloquence and handsome handling of the scriptures, no one can be compared of
late days to them, the LORD God did manifest him self so plainly to them: I
offer you there fore, taken from these men my judgment and opinion to the
three former arguments.

To the first.

The second.

The third. The evil racking of the purpose and drifte of God, is the cause of
our blindness and ignorance: for flesh and blood is not able to attain the
depth of his wisdoms
the God of hoastes, he works by an other way, and his judgment is above the
capacity of man: For God wrought not naughtines in Adames heart first: But
ordained that satan moved by his own cankered and corrupt nature, should
work in him, and corrupt Adam by his own falte. For in that the sin and
infirmity which lurketh in an other, is bewrayed and brought to light, mark
the providence and government of the Lord: which brings that to pass
whereby his own wisdom, righteousness and mercy may appear. If he did
work and cause an adulterous mind in a man, whose mind was pure and innocent
before, and then moved him to utter the same in act and deed: somewhat what it
were that we had to say unto the Lord: But if he work not that adulterous
mind: but finds it corrupt and defiled by Satan, and by the person him
self and then ordeineth that shall be fall: causes the same wickedness in that
same man, to tend to his glory. Let us try out the unsearchable riches and
wisdom of the Lord, that causes the same thing which of it self is evil:
to turn and be changed unto that which shall be good.

Then if these men understand by his will that God delighted not in Adames
sin: there is no strife: Accursed is he that vvresteth the doings of the
Lord, to his own muentions.
I say so, and so we fight with the air. But if there by is meant: It was not
Gods decree and ordinance that Adam should finne, but all only for his fall
and in respect of sin: they my be Anathamatized and that justly. For they
pluck God out of his throne, they have no consideration, but measure the Lord
as man. To this tends both the rest: for now I must be short, and I doubt
not but GOD will permit, that I may one day make longer discourse hereof.

Christ is said to die, and for our redemption, for his resurrection is our
justification. To the second and third arguments.
Now it was Gods will this should be, why then shall not the Jews be excused?
O wretched man that I am, that should thus reason against the goodness of
God, and abuse his long sufferaunce that brings us to eternal life?

I answer that same filthy Papist, Consider the secret decte^ and eternal
purpose of God.
that scholar of so vile a master (and that sought his death and mine, and
sees it not) Pyggyus. Often times God and wicked men (I speak according to
our weakness and in reverence) are said to think one thing. For Adam would
sin, and Gods will was he should sin, but Adam would be like and equal to
God: he would be perfect knowing good and evil. Gods will was that Adam
through his own fault should sin, I might reason of Joseph and his
brethren: of David and of Saul that persecuted him: the which both came not
without his appointment: but the malice in the brethren, and hatred in Saul
that sought David's blood, proceeded of the devil.

This argument quayleth: for there is recourse had unto man there is no
consideration of the Lord.


to turns Adames sin to good, and to bring good out of evil: so that out of
his perdition he brought salvation, out of his fall strength and life. Out of
his thoughts and cogitation, blessedness and perfection unto man.

The Jews will was to put Christ to death. And Gods will was his son should
die. But to the Jews it was in malice and cruelty. But of God in goodness and
cleme^cie. For he raunsomed us that were prisoners and captives, in the
slavery of the devil. Hes gave us life, that were before in death, and
offered us salvation that were before in condempnation: wherefore this argument
is naught.

God wills it, and we will it, Ergo our wills is one. It is a causa non
sufficient. He ye taught this may go to school again, and set him down for
ought that I can see: for if he turn not over a new leaf it is not this, can
ever honest him. Take the reason. God has a Consideration in his will and
purpose more then man has: for an unthrifty child wills the death of his
father. God also will have him die. But it is in another manner. The unthrifty
son does it, to enjoy his fathers goods: God does it to make an exchange to
conueigh him out of misery to life, if he be his: for he ordained it before
all beginning. Or to translate him from us unto death, if he has not chosen
him in Christ, for it is his lot, and he decreede it before the world. And
here I stay. For if Paul can not Satisfte thee in his discourse to the
Romans: neither do I look to persuade thee herein. That if thou like not me
and my words, as the Orator did of Plato, and Isocrates when he spoke of
Theusidides: so say I, of Calvin and of Zwinglius: let me go astray with the m.
Now to conclude all. Lead us not into temptation. The very meaning and true
exposition is this. Let O Lord thy spirit be with us, direct us in our
dooinges: The true interpretation of this last peticion: lead us not into
temptation.
govern us in that we go about: suffer us not to be tempted beyond that
we are able to bear: For the Devil and Sathanas seeks to molest and
inueigle away the Children of God. And it is our duty to pray unto the Lord
that we be not overcome in our temptation. For they of God, they study not to
do well, and to win Heaven by their merrits, but they pray to stand
steadfastly, that they may be saved, and have redemption in his death. They
study not by good works to obtain Salvation, but because they are already
saved (for they be assured thereof) they will be thankful and obediente to
the Lord, because in his free election he has saved them.

The like may be said of the last words. Deliver us from Evil. For to this
end is our life, our dealings, our conversation, our vprightnes before the
Lord: That we have an assured testimony of his good will, that he will keep
us from death.

The rest of this Prayer: For thine is the kingdom, This I have handled in an
other treatise which when God sends opportunity, shall be finished.
thy power and thy glory, for ever and ever. Because our Luke has pretermitted
it, therefore will not I, at this time touch it.

In this my short Treatise, if I have done any good, I am glad thereof: The
poor substance that I have, and that little God has given me: that I have
offered to you all: when God shall enritch me with greater store, and my
Barnes better filled then now they be. So good corn as our Barren soil
brings forth, of that I willingly will give you choice: Only at this time,
take my present farewell, as a grain or two left behind, to fill up your
measure: for I would have no man to suspecte me for my weight. And let not my
doctrine be an offense to any: this was only the the true meaning that I had,
to teach one Lord and Jesus Christ whom be sent, the redeemer of the world,
that I worship in the Spirit.

And this I commit unto the whole Church of God, whose building and
workmanship, The vvorkemanship of the true Church of god, buylt and reared up
in Christ.
if it be any other then this let it be accursed.

1. The foundation or corner Stone, Christ. 2. The builders, his Ministers. 3.
The Mortar to temper it, is Verity. 4. The Lyme to season it, is Skilfulnesse.
5. The Sand to strengthen it, is Wisdom: and scattered thorough every part
and parcel of this buildinge. 6. The Instruments to work withal: be the
guiftes of the holy Ghost. 7. The Pillars, Confidence and Trust. 8. The
Walls, the two Sacraments. 9. The ground or Pauement, our Profession. 10. The
Roof or covering: Perseverance. 11. The Windows and light, the working and
lightning we have from the Spirit. 12. The Doors to enter at, the word and
the Gospel. 13. The Bars to stay this, he that gave this, God the Father.
14. The knitting of all this together, is Love. 15. The keeping it from
shaking: brotherly agreement. 16. The force and strength thereof: one mind and
one Judgment. 17. The glory and beauty thereof, Immortality. 18. The end of
this building, the glory of God. 19. The price and reward, Life,
Not that which is terrestrial, and endures a small time: but an other, even
that which is above when we shall dwell with God. The only price of such as
love and fear his name unfeignedly: To whom, that be of his true Church, the
Lord God send his blessing and peace for ever, that quietness may be to them
of Israel, and life for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
A Sermon, made before the reverend father in God, John, Bishop of London, (by
I. Keltridge, Preacher) at his Manor at Fulham, before them of the Clergy, at
the making of Ministers: in the year of our Lord God. 1577. and now set out
in Printe.
It is thus written in the first Epistle of Paull unto Timoth. Chap. 3. verse.
1.

1. It is a true saying: if a man desire the office of a Bishop he desires a
good work.

2. A Bishop therefore must be unreprovable: the husband of one wife:
watching: sober: modest: harberous: apt to teach:

3. Not given to Wine: no striker: not given to filthy lucre but gentill: no
fighter: not covetous: etc.

These words contain thus mutch: the rule and gouernemente and state of the
Church: The office: the duty: the function of a Bishop. The state is preserved,
the government established: the authority reverenced: the Church settled,
where Bishops be chosen that are blameless: The commonwealth is racked, the
state impo^erished: wise and gray headed fathers despised, the word of God
banished, where Bishops are chosen that are shamcles. If the rulers be wise
and discreet ^^en: if the order and frame conningly and truly set up: if the
guidance be sincerely and purely drawn (...), as also squared by the rule set
down in the Book of God: Then Bishops live happily: The common wealth
quietly: the state flourishes most gloriously. At this present, as one of the
poorest and meanest Levites among Israel: yet ordained I hope in good time to
serve in the Tabernacle of the Lord, elected and chosen to se the Curtains of
our God, and the hangings of the habitation of the Lord of Hoastes, dewely to
be spread before his seat. As one desirous to see that no Aliaunt shall
touch the Ark of God, nor any one vnclensed to approach his sanctuary. I am
bold to enter in, to see the surneture thereof, the glory, the apparel, the
sumpteousnesse of his Throne: and to see, and for to know, whether we be
apparelled as Aaron: or decked as Leuits: or in manners Israelites, or among the
Prophets: the sons of Prophets: that the voice of the Lord may sound among
us.

Four especially: weight, and great encombraunces, able to beat and way
him to the ground: lie on the neck of a Bishop. His Vocation, by Calling: His
Deutie, by Function. His Dignity, by office. His Authority, by Rule.


All which, have severally four most excellent and goodly gifts, kept up as
in their treasurehouse, to furnish and store good men withal.

His calling has four pillars to stay on: for he must be Vnrebucable,
subject to no reproach, blameless. Not wanton, not lascivious, husband of one
wife. Painful, yet gainful to bring to God: even watchful: By temperancie,
not by glottonie ruling them: but modest:


His function requires 4. garments to cloth him with. His Robes and his
Jewels, Discretion and Gravity: His statelynes, and his Bravery:
Hospitaliti^. His honoring, and apparelling, Instructing. His cloth and
garment, lyned with abstinencie, that he be no dronkarde, or gluttonous person.


His office has adjoined four Sergeants to wait on him. He must be no
incrocher upon any: no fighter. No scraper in of his gold, by filthy lucre.
Lowly, courteous, gentle unto all men. No brawler, no striuer, no quareler with
any man


His authority and his rule comes in, that makes an end of all strife,
the mistress and Gouernesse, to keep the rest in awe. By instructing, by
ordering, being able to teach his household. Living discretely, warily,
uprightly, abhorring covetousness. That can keep in subjection his own family,
in fear and in reverence. That he be not a young scholar, puffed up with
pride: but that he have a good report of all.


All which: as they be in number xxii. So for the greatness of the matter, the
stateliness of that I take in hand, the skill and furniture, that is required
in him I seek for. I am in great doubt the time will not suffer me to
ransacke so much as the third gift, that ought to be in us Prophets: that I
may go so far as the word of God leads me, let us join in hearty and
faithful prayers, together unto the Lord: For the whole Church of God: As a
member and portion thereof: this Church of England and Irelande etc.

THis place, where as he speaks of a Bishop, is is not to be understood so,
as that only he speaks to him in authority, called by Luke a Senior: or as
in Tytus. 1. For this cause have I left thee in Creata, to set in order the
residue that were left. Or as Acts. 20. (...). But as Calvin thinks. In the
bishop so called of Paul, is meant every one severally and jointly in his
function, to whom ye charge of souls is committed. Therefore Pomeranus, offitia
sunt non dignitates: and Musculus Instruere no^ regere: Teaching them, not
fleesing them: and Bullenger Vocati, non intrusi: and Chrysostom, Ordinandos
ad bonu^, non deuorandos ad commodum: elected to serve them, not chosen to eat
them: and Ambrose, non ambitione and pecuniae desiderio. For men that come
hastily, to serve god in the ministry, take it for wealth sake to live
securely: then, that al may be comptable unto ye Lord, and surrender a reason
of religion, I take it generally of all: that Bishops, that is those to whom
cure and charge of souls is committed, ought to have those good gifts set
down by Paul, in his youngling Timotheus. Not to make any strife, or to debate
the matter as some have done: or therefore ye I may seem to take away
authority from the Senior, or government from the Elder, or pre-eminence
from superior, or rule from him that sits in seat to guide others. But as
Paul in this of Timoth. to the saints of Christ which be at Philippos,
together with Bishops and Deacons, even so say I: to all those which be here
Bishops, Deacons, Elders, Seniors, Ministers, Preshiters, is this same given
in charge, for none shall be excused: but as touching that common cry hussing so
much in the ears of many, about them that bear^ the sway in the Church, this I
say briefly.

I can not find any difference in the primatius Church from ours, but in the
name alone: for they bad Bishops, and they also whom they called Elders: and
we have Ministers, which they called Docters: we have Instructours, which
they called Teachers: we have Rulers, whom they called Seniors: we have
Presbiters, that were Pastors: we have other Dignities, which they called
Offices: so ye we have, as they had: only they suffer us not to be as they
were. For that argument of Archaepoumenos: It is not so pithy nor so strongly
wrested, as once I thought: neither yet that, of one head of one body: for
many Kings, yet one King, as have been: and many Bishops, yet one Bishop: as
is: Not many Kings as many heads to divide one body: but one head to keep
the kingdom of that same body. Not many Bishops as subuerting them: But one
Bishop over Bishops to protect them: Not diverse heads of one body to divide
them: but one head of diverse members to uphold them: so then, our Bishops,
and their Bishops, and in Jesus Christ, one Bishop: let us now approach unto
his calling.

Two kind of ways are we called.

By the Lord, and by men: ordinarely and mediately: and strangely, by the Lord
God and inwardly: As Moses, by the hand of the Lord, by the flaming bush: Leuy
and his Famely by the forecounsell of God: Aaron severed from the congregation:
Elyas, from among the residue of the Prophets: Samuel, from among the children
of Ely: Gad, and Nathan, from the children of their Tribes with others.

A mong the nations also called he very straungely a great number: Melchisedeck
out of Egypt, from Mesopotamia: Balaam from out of the mountains, and from
the East. Job, in the land of Hus. Scibillae mutch spoken of among writers:
Joseph in Egypt, Jonas in Niniui: Daniel in Babylon: Nehemias and Esdras,
among the Pertians, all which were straungly, and some of them extraordinarelie
called by the Lord: and this kind of calling cease: and we take an other
into our Church.

The second order of calling Ministers: it is ordinary.

1 It is therefore put to the secreat workinge of the Spirit of the Lord, in
the minds of men.

2 And to that which Paull says here: he that desires a Bishoppricke,
desires a good work.

3 And to the wisdom and discretion of him that chooses them.

As when that ye twelve called the brethren together, and charged them to
choose out seven men of honest report: Act. 6. Like as Paul when he came to
Derbe, and had herd of Timotheus, that had a good report of the brethren, that
were at Listra and Iconium Act. 16. That it may be verested of us, spoken of
the Lord by Paul and Barnabas: that he had put them a part, and chosen them
unto a good work. Act. 13. where I find no popular consent, nor any
acclamatio^s of ye people, as in Rome when they choosed Censors, Dictators,
Tribunals, Pretors, and such like: neither cast they as it were lotts, or else
gave it unto election of the multitude: or else tied to the congregation a lone:
but the likaunce was given to one Elder: the choice to him that was wise in the
Church: and he that was chosen, continued as their Ruler, for ever.

That al things may be fully don: their is adjoined the putting on of hands. I
take it that this custom came from the Hebrews, who as any thing was holy and
consecrated to the Lord: so they used to lay their hands thereon: signifying
that, that thing they gave, they willingly gave it unto the Lord. So Jacob.
blessing Ephraim, and Manasses, laid his hands upon their beads: so did
Christ lay his hands on the little babes, that were brought unto him. In the
same signification, laid they hands on their sacrifices.

Therefore when they made choice of Docters, Pastors, Teachers, Deacons, they
laid hands upon them: to shew^ that we are not ours but the Lords, given
and dedicated to the use of his Church: thus now have we brought David from
the sheepefolde and Ewes: Amos has no more to do among his cattle: Moses is
called from Madian: The Apostles have not to deal with the Angle and the
hook: and we have given Tymothe the first step into the ministry: his
authority he has to execute indgement: power he has to tell righteousness
to the house of Jacob, and to bring Syon, the hill of our God to know his
ordinance: He may now bouldly enter into the Sainctuarie: called he is: hands
are laid upon him: and he has wished a good work: and let us now know, how
he may perform it.

The 4. first as proppes and stays to hold him up, that hanged upon his
calling, are these. (...). Blameless. (...), Husband of one wife. (...),
watchiug. (...). Sober.


(...). Among the wonders of the world this is one: that in so long time, so
many years, so great space: I have neither read of, neither hard of, neither
found out, that Son of man, that was blameless: For there is none that do
good, no not one: None can say that of Christ, which you can accuse me of
sin? Very few can say that, our Savior reported of Zacheus, a perfect
Israelite, in whom there is no guile: Not many can say as Paull said, when he
sent from Miletum, for the Sages, and Elders of Ephesus, that he was
giltlesse of the blood of all: Nor report with Samuel, whose Ox, or whose
Ass, have I pluckte from you? Not now so great heaps of those that wish to
be wiped out of the Book of life to save Israel: Nor with Paul to be
accursed as touching the flesh, that he might save some, at the day of the
Lord: few there be that offer up as Job did, for their Sons or their
daughters, or redeem (if peradventure they might) the transgressions of their
children: who has the commendation that Abraham had of God, that he can say,
he is an upright man, and will teach his children the ways of the Lord? what
man goes now into the fields to pray with Isaak? or remembers with Israel
the benefits he has received? or cares not for the ways of Balaam? or
seeks not the promotion of Egypt, and the substance of the Isles about him?
Who has been found of late, worthy to be taken from of the earth to dwell
with God? Or thought meet to have the Angels wait upon them with their fiery
Chariots? Have we been fed with Angels food? Has the rock been broken in
pieces, to yield us water? Have we tried the drought in the wilderness? the
frostes in the fields? the strength of the mighty? the peril and ieopardy of
red Seas? who is there in time of need aduentureth his life with Judith? That
if Nathan speak, repent him of his fault? that hardoneth not his heart with
Ahab? That strives not with the Priests of God? Then as yet, I know not, or
find not, that man that is blameless.

Who plays not that part of Naboth, that fat Chuffe? Who hides them that
are in perrill, from the face of Iesabell? Who is not ready to sacrifise to
Peor? Who renueth the decayed Sanctuary? Who ronneth not with Vzias to the
Arc? Who has not forsaken the Lord, and forgotten his holy Hill? Who reareth
not up Alters unto Jupiter, and gives not rich burnt offeringes to the
Planets: as yet then, I ^^ow not, or find not, that man that is blamele^^.

(...) there any filled with wisdom as is the flood of Phison with his
Buckettes? or like Tigris, when the new fruictes are growinge? that brings in
plenteous understanding as Euphrates, and fills it up, as Iordayne in the
Harvest? that casts out wisdom as floods, or as the Waterbrooke of the
River, or as Dorix, when it is at the full, or as the water Conduicte out of
the Garden of pleasure? That deceyueth not in his tongue, that beguileth not
his Neighbor, that speaks truth to all? thensure, I have not, or find not,
that man which is blameless.

Has not wisdom cried out? does not understanding put forth her voice?
stands she not in the heigh places, in the streets and ways? does she not
cry in the whole City in the Gates, and no man hears her? Who regards
the yellinge of the poor afflicted soul? Who causes the Hedge, and Vineyard
of the Lordo to be repaired? who has brought Gold, Incence, Frankensence,
and Mirrhe, to him deserved it? who lays not his hands with the Soldiers, to
keep Christ still in the Grave, ye he rise not? what cause have I then to
question any more with Paull? I may not, I ought not, I dare not, I should not:
for it is undoubted, and without question, I know not, I find not, that man
which is blameless.

Then let us seek a little farther, happelye we may find some man by the way,
or some one thing that may be done by man, and that he may clime unto:
therefore we come to the second part of this second diuition: of truth not
so hard as the other: yet not so easelye as it is taken for: and it is this:

(...): Husband of one Wife: This, it was put in, because of the unbelieving
Brethren, that had diverse wives: in the law it was permitted and before the
law. Sobolis procreandae causa: that the world might be increased to have
many wives: Abraham had diverse wives: Jacob diverse: David married Abigail, yet
had he two beside, nay and more too: Elcana was indifferent well wiued, but
he had brawles enough with them: and it went hard with Jacob when he was
bought and sold in the feelds with his Sons Mandragoras: So vnlouingly,
these louelesse toys, causes broils in braineles love: I find not in the
conrse of all the Prophets, that any one of them broake the rule of the Lord
in this: and if Monuments were searched, which have you of all Dianaes
Priests, of Apollos shauelinges, of those Romish Flamines, that have not run
upon the sword, upon death, upon fire, then they would once violate and break
their chastety? Of those that be this day at ye Altar of the Lord, that poor
out his Incence and offer at his Table, how many is there, whom the Gospel
cries out upon, and these days has spewed forth from of the face of the
earth, as unworthy to abide in the tents of Jacob for this villainy? A forte
there be even in the house of God, fitter to sport it with the Timbrell and
the Pipe, then to take in their hands the Book of the Lord: Helyas looked up
to the Heavens, and saw a black Cloud, whereby he judged that rain was
coming to help Israel with all: Is there none here of all the Prophets that
will look up to the Heavens to bring tidings to this people? Surely it may be
done, and safely. For if ever vengaunce approached nere us: and tempests, and
storms fell on us: these are the days, wherein the air is black and glowmy,
and full of thick clouds, ready to power forth rain, and throw down
Hailestones, to consume us, for the aduowtery and incestiousnes of us the
Clergy: what a number have been deprived of late? what a number are
suspected now? I, it was a a sore lesson: I, it was a good lesson: I, but it
was a hard lesson: (...), Gratianus, that vile and filthy wretch, with others
that rabble, forbad Marriage: The Gretian Church and the Latin suffered it a
long time: Silitius settled and established it in Spain: Gregory in Silitia:
and it was assayed in Germany: But Augustanus, Maguntius, and Hildebrand,
disanulde it: These days are so miserable, that Concubines be but common
ware, and men of conscience yet in these Marchaundrise, will strain their
conscience: Polygamos, Digamos, Trigamos, Centigamos (if so you will) they
spare them not at all, so it be done in the Closet. I am persuaded before the
Lord, and that among us who be of the household of faith: that Solomon, his so
great a number of Concubines, the royalty and stateliness of his princes:
are scarce able to serve the greediness, of some our English wan tons that be
among us: the Lord cut them off, and give Micheas a bold spirit to tell them
of it: Let us come to the third part, and see what it is that follows.

(...), Watching: A great charge it is, that is given to the minister of the
word of God: who as one to tender the care of his launched patient, ought to
be ready at all assayes, to wind and fold up the rawenesse thereof: And this
was it Christ said to the twelve, get you and preach you: And the fifty he
sent forth healing and teaching in his name: also Christ in John, you shall
bear witness of me. In that last prayer, the charge he gave unto them, he
lifted up his voice and said: sanctefie them O father in the truth, thy word
is the truth: as thou did send me into the world, so do I send them into
the world: and again to Peter, feed my sheep: and again, a good sheepeherd
gives his life for the sheep and they here his voice, and they are led by
him: Esaias the Prophet, threatens out vengeance against them, that live
securely and carelessly in their charge: Woe be unto Syon, Woe be unto Jerusalem,
Woe be unto Ephraim, and Woe unto Manasses. Her Priests be blind and
ignorant every one of them, the are domme dogs that cannot bark: looking
after vain and wanton things: And this vice, it is two common the Lord
knows, among us, that are become continual sleepers, and lie down in our
lassiuiousnesse, and belshe out in our talk most infamous blasphemy against
the Lord: I here the voices of good and wise men, tinkling in my ears of the
dissolute ministers in the country, and that be abroad. But let good men
blushe, let them that should see, be blinded: the Lord will one day take away
this Veil, and uncover their faces to see better: I see it, and I know it,
and I speak it from the Lord, that if thy wisdom were as great as Solomon's
was, if thy counsel as Joseph, if as well learned as Paul as active as Joshua,
as heighly commended as ever was Peter: yet if thy dissolute life, out go thy
sugared speech, thou art but as sounding brass, and as a tinkling Cymball, good
for nothing. Know you not that Saul persecuting the Church of God, comes not
near it? That the Priests of Baal must not serve in it? That the Leuite
defiled upon a dead Carkace must not approach it? That Nadab and Abihu offering
up wrong Cence before the Lord, die for it? That the Mohabits child in the
tenth generation, no, not forever, minister in it? Fiery toungs be they that
shall help thee: the zeal of Elyas that shall move thee: The Spirit that
was in Amos to provoke thee: For he is no prophet, that Prophesying, shall go
coldely to work in his prophesy, for it is a great work, it is a mighty
work and he desires a good work, that desires to be a Bishop: So that at
length, we have found out, the heigh, stature, and comlynesse, of him we
sought for: to these if we adioyne but a few more joints, with some travail,
we shall I doubt not, draw out the full protracture of the whole man: for now
follows the last of my first part.

(...). Sober. Among all the euilles that be under the sun, these my soul
hates: as for ye Path way of them, it leads unto hell: A man, in
aucthoritis, that dare not speak: The Candle of the Godly man, that is
quenched with unrighteousness: the plentiousnesse of food in the fields of the
poor, the greediness of the mighty, that deuoureth it: the Prophet that
sees all abominations under the sun, and chasteneth them not: The
unreasonable bibbing of those that be at the Alter. The drunkerds and
guidibeades that be in the house of God: And the shameless man, which falls
down with wine: Al which they be in the very heigh way that leads unto
hell. Two things I require in the man that fears God: Two things I wish were
in all that live upon the earth: And two things I wish unto the watchman:
But I require al things to be in the sons of Prophets: My desire shalbs
fulfilled in these: If he that does fear the Lord take heed of falling: For
a discreet servant shall do well and his ways prosper. If all they that be
under heaven, leave righteousness for inheritance, and virtue to their
children: For the riches of the sinner are laid up for the just. If there be a
ready eye in the watchman: If any heart that is trusty unto his flock: If
the sons of Prophets have undefiled lips: If toungues that speak not
guyle: If a steadie head without wavering: If a comely behavior without
beguyling: If an unspotted mind without riot: If an untroubled Spirit, not
puffed with drink: If a sober and temperate life, that he be not checked of
those with out, or fall into the hands of the Tempter: For thus it behooves a
man, that will serve the Lord, always to be most pure, most chaste, most
upright in conversation: For that of you Poet. (...) and ye of Musculus, (...)
health, and safety, and vprightues of the mind can not be wanting in that
teacher, that teaches others Thus have we drawn out, the one quarter of him,
that ought to be a serueter at the Table of the Lord: Give me leave to come
but to the second part of him: if his co^lynes be such, his color so
exquesite, his fashion and workmanship so nice and dainty in the drawing, ye I
can not at this present, paint him out fully, the days are long, and our time
is great, hereafter peradventure it may be fully finished: let us see what
that is that follows.

Upon the vocation, and calling of a Minister, hangs the duty and function
thereof. That be may seem more glorious, I have given unto him most gorgeous
array, not of Aaron only that lasted for a time, and afterward was stripped
thereof, but of our heigh Priest and King, even the Son of God Jesus Christ:
That had no seame in that Garment which he put on, either any wrincle, who has
carried us with him into the Heavens, in token we must be apparrelled, and wear
the same garments that he did.

The second order in his duty and function, is that every Preacher be
attired thus. That he put on discretion, the very Oil that must drenche, the
skirtes of his clothing: That he use hospitality: the royalty we put on, the
Belles that make us to be known by: That he exercise him self in teachinge:
the yealow silk, the purple, the Scarlet that we Were, to adorn and
beautify the house of God with all. That he be clad with abstinency, the
Ephod and the brestlap that he puts on: fastened with two hooks of pure
gold: Sagacitie, and Modesty.


First says Paul, discreet, comely apparelled: As touching the apparel that
is enjoined us, because I am none of those, that seek for reformotion in a
thing of so small weight, lest the whole countenance and face of the Church
should be altered: Therefore do I leave it to their consciences, that are
minded to continewe in the house of God. If any use broad and great
Philatharies as the Pharisees did, or that think the Gould, and the best Gould
too, even that of Arabia to be only theirs: that in their finesse, are not
content with costlynesse, and in their bravery, think it not so great a
matter to wallow in their ioylitie: To them I give this lesson: That the day
will come, when God will pluck their broydered works, their spanges, their
Jewels, and their garments they fetched from Damascus, he will send the^ to
gether sticks in the desert, and to make brick in Egypt to tame the^ with.
It is a general complaint every where: the mouth of each person is open
against us, to see the vurulynesse of him that enters the Porch of the Lord:
And as were the sons of Aaron more marked and merueiled at for their glorious
attire they put on, then all Israel: so in our days, are the ministers known
and discerned as greatest roysters: and the one sort of preathers, as chiefest
swashbuclers: and diverse of our teachers, as common Gamesters: and such as
should be ordered as masters of disorder: yet has the Lord no pleasure in
these: his Garden, is his Temple. His savor is thy favor. Thy labowring, his
embalming. Thy teaching: his inritching. Thy preaching, his deleighting. What
ask you? What seek you? What require you of the Lord? Feed my flock: keep
my sheep: love my Lambs, all things shall be ministered unto you. This is the
charge Paul gave, to choose wise men for their Elders, over the congregations.
And Solomon, a discreate man builds the house: a foolish person does root it
out. For Woe be unto Syon, and Woe be unto Damascus, and Woe unto Sydon, and Woe
be unto all the Isles, that lack wise men for their rulers, and discreet
persons to teach them wisdom. Well, let this be my first poinct in this his
second attire, to cloth the minister of the Lord withal, we will proceed,
happily at length, we shall find that, which may delight us. The next is.

(...) Such a one, as shall maintain and keep strangers, and not unfitly:
For among Israel strangers were harbored, because they themselves were
strangers in Egypt And we must remember to keep strangers, in token that
we do wander on earth, and have no abiding place, and in remembrance we be
strangers unto all the world, for the word of the Lord. That heathnish
writer, yet ye eloquent writer Marcus Tullius: Says properly in his Officijs.
Non dominus domo, sed domus domino cohonestanda. The house ought not to set out
the master, but the goodness of the master adorneth and beutifieth the
statelynesse of the house. Ulysses, traueling very far, gave his
commendation to Greece and all the countries there about, that for courtesy
and hospitality, it might well be compared unto all Latium. I know not what
Ulysses would say, if he were with us, but I am in doubt he might beg and
sterue to, before he gate ought. I must of duty counsel you with Paul to be
good unto the poor, for by receiving strangers, men have received Angels
into their houses. If David may be believed: the good man's child, has seldom
begged bread, and the heart of the reighteous man is always lyberal. I must
speak the truth before the Lord, and before you all, for we are driven into a
very narowe strait: the belly, and the back flaunteth it out in all
sumpteousnesse: your houses, they have nothing in them but bare walls: they be
so pinched with penury: those which are in ye commonwealth, in whose hands
are many heaps of Gould, are loath to distribute three peckes of meal to the
poor and fatherless: Nay I have hard some speak it: That if the insatiable
gathering together of money: if your racking of poor people: if the
greediness of scraping in of wealth, were left among you, the spirituality: we
which are of the commonwealth that have nothing but by travail, and sweat of
our brows, raked up in many years, would bestow more on the poor people then
we do.

This is a pitiful cry, and it is ascended up already unto ye ears of the
Lord: the people they are ready to starve: they houle in their misery: and
cry out in the very pain and smart of their souls, upon us the ministers
of the Lord, that harden other men's hearts by our coueteousnesse. Naball must
needs be hard and greedy: and no marvel, if Dives think much to give unto
Lazarus: that ritche men seek for new barnes to put in their stoore, when
they of Judah, and such as be in the house of God, continually thirste to
inritch them. Well, the Church of God perishes in her misery, and pants so
sore, that she is burst with crying, because that this is not looked unto. In a
clear testimony of my conscience, I utter the truth unto you, for I have
seen it in some, I know it in many, it is common in all. Hospitality here so
much accounted of, of Paul, is termed husbandry: For if you save much
greedely, that your children may spend it lasciuiously: it is said to be but
good husbandry. I once was at Paul's Cross, when as a learned and grave father
preaching there, among many other things spoke much then of this vice: He
called to memory at that time, for the space of many years before, that there
had been no one Alderman in all London, whose senne was remembered to have used
ye honestly which the father in many years, had seraped up so couetously: It
was a sore and heavy saying for those wise and gray headed men that were then
present: And the saying of that wise Prophet moved the hearts of many that
heard it.

There is at this day, now in London, in most florishinge state, two sons
of two Aldermen, gouerninge by the wealth their fathers left them, the happy
and good state of that City. But if that old and grayheaded father were now
alive, and speaking of the ministers of the word of God, should turn his
eyes to see the iolitie, wherein their children be: that same discreet father,
for the two famous and most worthy Shrifes, that have governed that honorable
City of London, could not (since that England was inhabited and known of
men) pick out so much as two sons, of two Bishops, to have sat in the
seat of their fathers: I speak it as in such a time, wherein the Lord has
sent a rot among us: that wise men and most good and godly men should have so
lewd and wicked children. This is it I say, The Lord will have their sons to
spend it wantonly, for that their fathers have rackte it up so unkindly: And
if that money were bestowed on the poor, which pine away for want of food, or
some other way to the good and profit of the Church, which lies smothered in
their coffers, and motheaten with rust: the Lord would not only prosper them,
as good Phinees, to have the honor of the Priesthood to remain in their
houses for ever: But they should be suer to have one in the favor and sight
of God, in a perpetual generation.

The world is now so proud, and the people therein so stately, that if the
son of a minister be not a gentleman, the son of ye minister shall be but
in account a beggar. There is some in England, that have good and large
stipends for serving the Lord, and they spend it as liberally on their Sons
to make them Courtiers: Well, Aaron did not so, either Eleazar so, either else
the Apostles and brethren of the Lord, either else did Cephas or the residew
so: Pittye it is, the Church of God, to see how it serves: how the people die
for food: the hedge of the Lord, how it is broken down: and they of the
house do not so much as send their children out of their house to repair it.
The Lord move his Prophets, to see unto it: And give the^ yt earnest of his
spirit, the zeal of his glory, the fear of his name, the reverence of his
Majesty, they ought to have: that his Gospel may be farthered, his
Jerusalem builded, his City finished, his Church fetled, that (if it be his
will) it may from henceforth, be never more removed: we have now run through,
the two first pieces, of our last work, even a little liberty more, and I doubt
not but I shall dispatch the rest. It follows.

(...), Apt to teach: there was required (...), and now we have (...), the
lord God has always had a care over his church, he therefore has continually
sent laborers into his harueste, to help them forward therein: and in that he
says apt to teach. None must be fit to lay his hands unto this plough, yt is
not of sufficient force to rule it:

I would to God our ministers knew the way, to put of their shoes, when they
come into the Temple: or that they would singe an other song, then that they
chaunted and flong forth to those of Babylon: Or dawbed not up the walls of
his Temple, with untempered Mortar, as now they do.

Here, how it is, I know not, it may happily be better, then where as I have
been: but in other plares, the Huntesman is readier then the Minister, and he
fitter to trauerse the feelds, then he is to feed the flock: I am ashamed to
see in the congregation (the heritage of the Lord) that there should be any,
as to serve in his Tabernacle, which came not of the flock of Phinees, and are
not found registered among them of the right Preesthood: If Israel were now
gathered together, they would have chosen Eleazar, and his children, and have
let the other gone as Bastards. I see very well, that as to one Tribe, so only
to one Church and society, is this that I speak. But I would all the Lords in
Israel heard me, that there might not so much as a Porter be left in the
house of God, if he were not able to open and lock the doors, by good title:
This is the poor council that I am able to give you at this time, O you of
the kindred of Leuy: that every man make clean his vessels, and keep holy
his own soul, that he may be blameless at the day of the Lord. How can
this be, when a number are so tongue tied, that in every third living, not
the third man, is able to speak to the People? There was in Gilgal, Schools
of learning, whereof Samuel was head, not far of Iordayne, when the twelve stones
were set up, at what time the people came as on dry land through Jordan.

There was also in Ierico an other school, whereas Elyzeus ruled, called
Nazaristes: Thither they went unto the Prophets, from thence were they called,
if they needed any. God, to whom all praise belongs, has given unto
England, two as worthy and famous Schools, as I have red of in any common
wealth. But how many have bin sent for from thence into the common wealth: or
who is there, if he have not one to speak for him, that at this day eats
among the Prophets?

The Sickle has now been twice six times put into the Reapers hands, since
I gave my first full entry into Cambridge: and many a time has the Sun
turned back again his course, since I began my study: yet I did never hear
of twice six persons, which were called by the Patronistes into any one
benifice throughout England: either known any, if he sued not for it, to have
got ought: and then if Master Simon and he iugled not together, or went aside
into some corner, he went without it too: If not then the guifte thereof was
given unto his man: and ten pounds, or a twenty, or three times ten,
sometimes, returns back again into his Cofers: Thus are the poor servants
of the Lord robbed. How can it be, that Universities should be so pestered as
they are with students, vnleast you took out of the Country to serve your
turn? when you might have good and faithful Ministers, from the schools?
complayn you of dronkards? take sober men from the Universities: let them of
the feeldes, keep their Plough still. Complain you of evil livers? how can it
be, otherwise, seeinge they never knew as yet to live well? Complayn you of
dissolute and idle men? Then choose out them, that are benommed in ioynctes,
and wythered in face, and broken with long travail at their books: use
discipline for those fat Chuffes, that lie snorting in private corners:
Complain you of Spendthriftes, and Banckerowtes, redier to rifle and swear it
out: fitter for the Buckler and buffetinge, then for the Bible and profitinge?
Then strip them bare and disherite them of this title, ye deface the Church with
their dishonest and unchaste life: Apparel sober and graye headed fathers,
that want, and stand in need: Complayn you of the small skill, and little
instructing of those that be in the Church? then I am enforced, I perceive, to
tell you all: fetch out the brass, and copper, and Tin, whereof there is now
so great store in Jerusalem: Let your knives, and your Basins, your pottes and
your vessels about the Tabernacle of the Lord, be of silver only and of
gold: for purity and cleanenes, is verity and holiness unto God: breefely I
say thus mutch: (...), Art thou a Minister? It is expedient thou be a
teacher: For I say from Ezechiell and from the Lord. If God send a sword
into the land, and that people have a Watchman, that is set over them: That
same man when he sees the sword, shall blow the Trompet and warn the
people: If a man hear, and is not warned, but the sword come and take him
away, his blood shall be on his own head: for he heard the sound of the
Trompet, and cared not. If the watchman see the sword coming and tells it
not, if any of the people be hurt, he shall die in his sin, his blood will I
require at the watchmans hand: Again, if I say unto the wicked, thou wicked
thou shalt surely dye, and he may beware, and will not, he dies in his
sins, his blood will I ask at his own hands.

But if he be wicked, and thou tellest not the wicked of his wickedness, he
shall surely dye in his sin, but his blood will I require at thy hands: for as
truly as the Lord lives, if he stretch forth his hand over a City and
destroy provision of bread, and send dearth among them to distroy man and
beast in the feelde, though Noe, Daniell and Job, those three men were among
them: yet shall they save but their own souls. If I bring noisome beasts into
the land to waste it up, and leave it desolate, that no man may go therein,
for Scorpions and wild beasts. If these three men were there, they should
save but their own souls. And if he send out a Pestilence into the land,
and poor out his sore indignation on it in blood, so that he rooteth out both
man and beast, If Noe, Daniell, and Job, were therein, they should deliver
neither sons, neither daughters, but save their own souls, in their own
righteousness: well, I exhort you all in the Lord, and in the name of the
Church of God, which waltering in many corners of England, holds up her
hands unto you, that being wearied with long and great tediousness, is not
able to lift up her head any longer. That now shiuering thorows all the
joints of her body, cries out pititifully, for instruction at your hands.
That being defaced heretofore with base and homely doctrine, craves to be fed
with good Discipline, and receive good and strong meat from you: and I crave
it in the name of Jesus Christ which has bought you, and for his bloudshedding
which has ransomed you, and for the mediation on his behalf, which daily
prospers you: That you would be good and faithful stewards in the house of
God: That henceforth you suffer no dissolute and gyddiheads to trouble her, no
dombe and doltish ministers to mussle her, no Priests of Baall, no bringers of
newfangles, to come near her: You shall increase to the Lord GOD the number
of his chosen people, you shall strengthen the weak, help the feeble,
incurrage the poor in spirit, make strong the feeble knees, open the eyes of
the blind, help the ignorant, and build up the walls of his spiritual
Jerusalem. I have described heatherto, the half face of such a Prophet, as I
have seldom heard of in any commmon wealth: please it you to give me leave, to
touch but the very hem of this his next garment: If then I give him not
sufficient clothing, I am content to let him go for this time: hereafter when I
am welthier, more fully to attire him.

To his body as to the whole man, I have given him this yt he be blameles. To
keep him in awe, as otherwise one wild enoughe, that he praunce not forth in
his fury, he has a snaffle to draw him back, even a very good virtue,
mutual society: For that he has a house and a charge to, he has a tower
to look out on, where he must be watching: For that he is in a very brickle
place, I have set one to wait upon him, to keep him in sobriety: he is
covered with discreetion: and being a man of wisdom he regards not him
self so much as others, he bestows therefore on his neighbors, and keeps
hospitality: And knowing that men live not by bread only, he diggeth for
the pittes of the water of life, and teaches them to seek the Manhu came
down from heaven: Lastly, as one able to discharge so great an office, he
has Abstinency as keeper of him self, and others, that they abstain from
such things as be hurtefull, and seek them, may profit all. In the book of
God, there is prescript commandment given, as touching them, that abstayned:
Loquere ad filios Israel, vir, sieve mulier, si vouerint votum Nadir separe^t se
a domino, a vino and sisera abstineant: etc. Of abstainers I find two sorts.
The one at the commandment of the Lord: The other of free will: Commanded
of God was Samuel, even from the breasts of his mother: when as Hanna, wife of
Helcana being barre^, she desired of the Lord a child. 1. Sam. 2.33. The like
was of Sampson, when the Angel appeared to Manoath, of the tribe of Dan, whose
wife also had never child til that time: Judge. 13. Like as was that of John
Baptist when as the Angel appeared to Zachary at the Alter: showing him, that
his wife should conceive and bear a son, and that he should drink neither
wine, neither strong drink (for he was a Nazarist) as Luke 1. An other kind of
abstainer there was, ye lasted al only for a time: common to the Leuite, to
the Priest, to man, to woman unto all (for a certain season) which custom (in
manner) was kept by Paul, when he vowed a vow, and shaued his head in
Cenchraea, Priscilla and Aquila accompaning him. This was that whereon the
Papists took so much hold, for their vowings: But as the Gopell is free, and
tied neither to times and seasons, neither to years and days: so, the
liberty that we have in Christ does abrogate these. Paul speaking here, of
the abstayning, means not, that we should renew this custom again, but
warns us here of drounkennesse, and of intemperauncie: A vice very common,
and in deed not cared for, and I marvel so much the more thereat, as I see
them to be traunceformed into beasts, and that manliness and live blood that
follows the greenesse of youth, to be turned into blackness and ugliness in
the Face: of whom you may have a good note to discern them, by that
sweltering and rottenness you shall see in them that be common quaffers:
Wherefore, as there be now every where in the house of God, redier at
Ticktacke, then at the Bible: that dishonest their calling of Dyceing, and
bring contempt to the word of God, shame to them selves, and a reproach for ever
to their vocation, by ouerdrinking, so, if any thing deserves banishment from
the sight of God, from the ministry: from Bishoppricke: this in my judgment
especially deserves it: And how can it be that the true food, the spiritual
and perfect drink can ever be tasted of, if such misshapen, deformed and
disguised Ale house Knights, be suffered to have any thing to do, in the
service of the Lord? For this cause, thinking my self most happy at this
time, though unworthy to speak in so learned and Honorable an assembly, as
here I see. Yet either as Phormio to Hannibal, or as one emboldened to speak
at this present, I presume in the name of the Lord God, in the behalf of his
Church, and of the flock he has committed to us, to speak thus much. Not
therein to rip up old sores, which I know, cannot be healed: or to vnlase ye
wounds of any man, which cannot be done without peril and ioperdy of the body,
neither yet as having cause to cry out for reformation, in diverse cases, in
that many things, be reformed most exactly: But humbly to crave of your
honor, whom God has placed in his eternal counsel over us Levites: to rub
and race out, all the stock of Iesabell: to pluck out and deface them, which
have no title to the true Priesthood: To rende the kingdom of those headless
fellows, who having of a long time served Peor and offered up the first
fruits of their youth to Accaron, are now compelled, to lie groueling in the
Church of God: and in the darkness wherein they have loytered, shoake up the
people with unleavened bread: nay with chafe and superstition, wherein they
have serurely lurked these many years. The country is so full, either of
tongue tied ministers which speak nothing* or of Vessels without water good
for nothing, or of idle and sluggish Levites which profit nothing, yt the
people of ye Lord are starued, they lack meat; every corner so full of
newefangled and disguised toys: bringing in of news, and strange novelties,
to delight the people: in preching divided, in doctrine contrary, in life and
behavior filthy, in instructions erroneous, in admonitions Fantastical, in
their dealings, innonating and changing the old for the new: that the
sheepefolde of the Lord, is cut in sunder, and feign to abide in many angles,
and to lurk in private corners, that they may better be satisfied in that they
ask. I am persuadid, that a great number, they are fitter for Mycah, to serve
and worship a Theraphin to the dishonor of the Lord, then once to offer up
true and good Cence in ye house of ye God of Jacob. I may well say that the
Regions are ripe already unto Harvest, but the workmen, they are unskillful
in their doings, for they cut down, and they spoil the branches of the good
Vine, they are not able to prune them in their season: They have so by the
space of many years ouershadowed the little graftes, and kept under the simple
souls by cloak of superstition: That for lack of the Sun, the sinsceare and
true meaning of the word, that has bin kept from them, by these rotten and
shackering boughs, they are even now fallen to the ground and wythered: O
Lord? how many poor and sillye Creatures of God have pyned away, which never
knew what Jesus Christ mente? how many is there that if they had tasted of
this Bread of life, whereon we feed, would most willingly have nourished them
selves therewith, and for the want thereof, have died in honger? Wherefore and for
which cause (even in the Lord Christ and in his blood, I speak thus mutch)
The Lord has so blessed the sons of his Prophets, and Gilgall is become so
glorious in the sight of God, and Bethell, and Ierico where our Nazaristes be,
is now come unto so full a groath: as that since the Lord has given his word
to man, a more happy and flourishing estate, was never seen among the sons
of Prophettes. It is our humble suits, that as GOD has blessed them, so Ely
and Elyas, would now bring these young Levites, into the Tabernacle of the
Lord, to serve there. The Lord God send down upon you the full measure and
abundance of his spirit, that those may be chosen out as fitteste for
Israel, that are meetest to bear the Ark of the Lord: The Lord send us
his Prophettes of his grace and goodness, that as he has given mercyfully
unto us, a long, calm, and quiet Summer: therein to make ripe, and fully to
strengthen our studyes, such a time, as heretofore we never had: so in the
pleasure and greenenes of this same time, we suffer not the fruicte which is
looked for at our hands, to wyther away, but that we may bring it into the
common Wealth among others, and profit them which have either little or small
skill in the word of God, and that hope to be only relieved, by our doings:
And that God that heatherto has blessed them, in that his favor prosper us,
and them, in Jesus Christ. And now even last of all, having said what I do
think, and uttered that I mean, in a true testimony of my conscience: I crave
pardon at your hands, my fellow Brethren and laborers in the Lord: Take this
my farewell and last speech among you. Even to you of Cambridge, I also
sometime of Cambridge, do speak: To others, men of learning and wisdom, I a
little experienced in readinge, and as one snatchinge hear and there that which
he could get at study, make my humble suit and ernest request with hartye
good will unto you all: That the house of the Lord, wonderfullye decayed, and
broken down in many places in England: the wales thereof so shaken, that any
ravening and ramping beast may enter therein to devour up the poor flock of
the Lord: scarce in sixteen years one man found out to speak unto the^
sixteen times: nay in twenty years not two Sermondes: in ten years not one
Preacher: and since the blessed and happy day (then which never came one more
joyful in this Realm, when our most gracious Sovereign took first of all the
Scepter and the Diadem upon her head, and now has kept the same from the
hands of foreign men) I say from that day of joy and mirth, until this hour:
many Churches, sundry congregations, diverse Parishes in this Realm, either are
destitute altogether, or seldom in seven years, or never in many Months,
or not at all since the preachinge of the Gospel, have had any one good
Preacher to teach them: Our Prophets, they tarry at holme, and very loathe they
be to go abroad, so many troubles, and sundry miseries are insident unto them
in the common wealth: And verily I can scarce blame them: for if they do, they
are feign to go into the feeldes to gather their own meat (if so they will,)
as though there were now a dearth among them: and then there daintiest feed it
is but Pottage: If (which is worse) they happen to gather some Coliquintida or
of ye wild Vine, they may sterue or else be poisoned, there is never an Elyza
to help the^: or any one (so rare it is) like unto that Sunamite commended of
the Lord: that if a Prophet or man of God come by him, will call him, or
appoinct him a place, or make him a chaumber, or wall it about, or set him a
bed there, or a Table, or a stool or a Candelsticke, to entertayne him and
his servant, if he turn thither or come that way: That I might have good
occasion to charge them to stay at holme and be content with their small
provision, for they shall be fed as hongerly when they come abroad, as ever they
were, when they kept their study: And yet this is not my meaning: for without
doubt, if we were as ready to serve the Lord, as God would be if we walked
uprightly, to bless us: though they would not or they could not, or that the
people were hard and stony unto us: yet the Lord would provide us meat, yea
though it were from the mouth of the Kauens, and we should be as well lyking
with the pulse and the pottage whereon we feed, as any other though they were in
the Kings Court, with all their dainties: Wherefore let no man be discourged,
we are but as our fathers were: furthermore it is our portion in this life, to
be in bondage in this world: And if we were not, as now we are, very secure,
the Lord would deliver us: It is a pitiful thing, and I can not but utter
it, take it as you will: we disagree among our selves, and be at discord
with in our own house: and there is heart burning even among those that
minister in the Ephod and serve at the Table of the Lord: The thing is to
open, the grudge is over well known: as for the contention I would it were so
great as that of the Prophets was, that any just quarrel might be pretended:
but in as much, as neither the work is falsified that appertains to the holy
buildings, nor the garments or ye silk, or the fine purple and wreathed work,
contrary to the commandment of God: but your disputation is about Snuffers,
and Besoms, and such base and homly stuff, which you thruste into the
Tabernacle of our God, and lay upon us being things of no value: therefore I am
not purposed to defend the^ at this time, but to pray unto the Lord to prepare
our hearts aright, that we may use them equal and as becomes us, both of
them: Having for all that, great and wayghty matters, to charge them with, that
throng in upon us with their superstitious glosing: very desirous to know what
conscience there is, and how reverently it may be done, that having so
goodly, so great, so famous and excellent guiftes, they shall for all that,
leave the people of God unfed, see the poor flock of the Lord sterue before
their faces, the lame man and simple soul dye for food: they hide themselves
and lurk in private corners, gadding a broad like men of occupations attired
like prentesies rather then Preachers teaching in schools, then speaking in
Pulpets, and all for ye vanyty and immagination of our hearts, or for the
unruliness, or for the blindness, or for the unskillfulness of ignorant men.
Furthermore there is no cause, that they whose doctrine and life, manners and
knowledge, is comparable almost with those the best that bear the cheefeste
places in the commonwealth, should disguisedly transform them selves to all
fashions, that they be readier to run a hoyting and raunginge abroad through
every petty and bye holes in England, preaching and teaching in private houses:
ministering and serving in private places: dissuading not persuading once to
good orders: disfiguring their calling, and laying aside their function where
unto they are chosen: and seeking to be plausable among the ruder sort:
serving their affections, and yelding to their desires, as common Chapemen, to
buy and sell: and to lay abroad whatsoever disorders shall be brought into the
commonwealth: so that after this my last peticion and request, unto you all in
the Church of the Lord: specially to you at this present gathered together to
show your duty and readiness, and your good affection that you bear to the
Lord God: rejoicing so much the more as I see so goodly a company assembled
and met in one to join and knit hands to the finishing and reising up of the
spiritual Jerusalem: I say, unto you all I power forth with a wandering
mind, and very unwilling heart, these my hindermost and last words: And they
be: that none of you do come as the sons of Ely did to them of Judah,
bringing with you a three forked fleshooke, to pluck out the meat that is in
the pottes, if any one deny it you: Or that you presume to take this charge
for the love of money and greediness unto gain, as some have done: or that
you be a dishoner unto the famely o^ (...) Lord, traunsported and borne about
from place (...) place like masterlesse men: Having no aboode, no not a hole to
lay your heads in, too unseemly in these our days, where a number do sit in
the heigh ways, and in the gates of other men waiting for a piece of bread
and for alms at their hands, when it were fitter that they were kepers of
hospitality, them selves: Again I require and pray you earnestly a servant
of the LORD and fellow labourer with you: To scatter your selves through
every angle and quarter of this Realm in several congregations, that all
countries may hear your voice, and every part thereof may glorify the
Lord. Follow not the custom of our Presice men, very dainty and coye, so
nice as may be, if they see a Surplesse, or a Coope: Yet they will thrust them
of their accord into others men's charge, and take upon them government in the
jurisdiction of others, and spread abrod the infirmities of weak brethren,
and dispense a year some times, months (if they think good) and often many
weeks, to satisfy the insatiable demaundes of their confederates: yet cannot
find in their heart to bestow them in any other foraine and strange place,
where the word of God has not been heard, to do good there: And to
conclude, let there be one agreement, one brotherhoode, one voice, and one
sound in all your preaching, speak not contrary things: a very common
thing in these days, men have learned to dissemble so gloriously: Also I
desire you, nay I charge you in the Lord Christ, that you be not of diverse
minds, but that you teach one GOD, and one Christ, whom he has sent: sowing
abroad no new and fantastical opinions: or scattering devilish and old
heresies: or inuenting strange and fond novelties: thrusting upon the simple
souls inuocations, and fables, which apperteine not to edification: All
which are brought in at this day by the Scismatickes of our time, and now
trouble the common wealth: that the same sword which appertained at the first
all alone to the Magistrate, to the rooting out of vice, and hewing off of the
Papists: is now also feign to be drawn forth, to cut off them: Well, the
Lord grant (if so it be his will) peace to Jerusalem, and long life to the
daughter of Syon, and joy and tranquillity to us of his Church: that she may
be brought to know the will of the LORD, and we ruled by him, in all our
exercises: that the word may have free passage, his name only glorified, his
will known, his commandments kept, and the gospel truly and sincearely
taught, to the maintenance and furthering of Religion, and the beating and
suppressing down of sin, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

