A Chronycle with a Genealogy declaryng that the Brittons and Welshemen are
lineallye dyscended from Brute. Newly and very wittely compyled in Meter.

The preface. To the high and most excellent Prince Edward the six^, King
of England, France and Irelande, and in yearthe the supreme head of the
Church of England and Irelande: Arthur ^elton wyssheth continual peace,
health of body, and prosperous success.
AS the worthy, prudent Secretary
In those days, named Danucius
Wrote volumes large, of, famous memory
Only to prefer, and make glorious
The name of his Lord, called Aurelius
Thinkyng it sin, rebuke and shame
Out of his book, to seclude his name.
Eucolpius, even in like case
Preferred, Alexander Seuerus
Which in his time, so worthy was
The Romain Tato, with Citus Liuius
Advanced the name, of ^easar Julius
Thus one after other, their time Did apply
To that intent, good fame should not die.
Even so most mighty, and gracius prince
Under support of your benign grace,
I mindyng sleuth, utterly to convince
As most unworthy, following their trace
Your redoubted father, in every like case
For to advance, my wits will frame
With the most worthiest, to set out his name
After shall entreat, of his magnificence
His laws, statutes, his Civil ordinance
His mighty power, his wonderful prudence
His just judgments, his rightful gouerna^ce
Namely to speak of very true substance
His graces laws, most godly devised
Lately into Wales, to us there commised
With a certain true comparison
Which was most worthiest, of Antiquity
The Romans, with their foundation
Either the Brutes, with their posterity
And of their Cities, the sovereignty
Which of them twain, should other surmou^t
London or Rome, as after shall recount.
With an extract, or a Genealogy
Conueiyng his, and your most noble descent
As ancient Aucthors, puts in memory
From the first age, to this time present
According to their minds, and true judgment
Who wrote the same, in time long paste
To that intent, it should endure and last.
Considering the high magnificence
Of your father, most clearly did shine
Passing al other, in princely excellence
None to be compared before his time
Al men perceive, your nature does inclyne
To amplify the same, more out at large
Surmou^ting the steps of your fathers stage
In whom consists, our confidence
Our hope, our trust, our consolacion
Wherein nature, shows an evidence
According to our expectacion
To follow the same, by inclinacion
With your mother, most gracious Queen
Whose virtue plain, in your face is seen.
Thus God of his divine might
Has endued, your most noble majesty
As appears to every man's sight
Whose incomperable dexterstie
In learning, having a sovereignty
Passing all other, by report of name
Considering your age, this is the fame.
The procedynges, of yournoble age
Does us encourage, your subjects true
Well perceauyng, your verteous courage
Most godly stories, for to insewe
Which does insence: my heart does renew
To dedicate, this unworthy litell book
Unto your highness, thereupon to lake.
Which was begone, in your fathers time
Unto whose highness, I minded the same
But death alas, his life did vptwyne
Before I could my purpose well frame
Preventing al things, but his worldly fame
Which may not pass, wither, nor yet decaie
His famous report, endure shall always.
O ye infernal systers of the darcke night
With Cerberus in Hell, as Poets does fain
Of all nobility, the quenchers of light
Whose cruelty, no wight can restrain
Ye cut the thread, ye part in twain
The life of man, without respect
The poor ye spare, the noble reiecte.
Cursed be ye, ye daughters of Hell
Which are in number, counted but three
Cloto, Lachesis, and Atropos the fell
Ye might have spared, your cruelty
A littel time, of our felicite
Until our king, most noble of courage
Had proceeded into moo years of age.
What I have written in sentence plain
In laud or praise, of your father dear
Unto your highness, let it remain
As though it did, to your grace appear
Written of your self, as matter clear
With no less zeal, obedience and love
Then duty may observe, increase and move
I do confess, and this is true
If Cato the sage, or prudent Tully
With their fyled tongues, and sentence new^
Were here again his grace to magnify
As they did the Romans glorify
Yet should they not, as in this case
Worthily give praise, unto his grace
All things remembered as of my part
Most humbly desires, your noble grace
With constant will, and faithful heart
To pardon my boldenes, folly and trespace
Considering always, as in this case
That every true heart, enforced is
To render his love, duty and service.
The end of the preface.
The Chronicle of the Brutes.
IN the Golden time when al things flourished
As it were, by deuyne providence
And that nature in manne was stablished.
Having reason, wisdom and science
By gift of the high magnifycence
To understand, determine and know
The Heavens above, and the earth allow.
Then the wise, sage and ancient
By great industry and diligent labor
By sobre respect and great aduisement
Made laws, statutes, with other good order
Man to stablyshe, only by favor
Them to conducte, sauely to bring
Unto knowledge, wisdom and learning.
Thus by politic moderacion
Without rigor, or cruel ordinance
Princes notable, of intencion
Having pour and mighty governance
Established laws, by discrete purueyaunce
Only their subjects, to keep in awe
Dreadyng God, and fearyng his law.
Such Princes, kings and famous Emperors
Of duty ought to be magnified
Not only as worthy Lonqueroures
But as men with grace nutrified
Whose acts are worthy to be specified
Enrolled up with gold pearl and stone
Registered in a book, them selfs alone.
Like as the Romans wise and circumspect
In time long past, their fame to advance
All notable things, as in effect
Made by statutes, or Liuill ordynance
Registered was, for a remembrance
Their Senate only to magnify
By fam' report, as they thought the^ worthy.
The Romans most commended Leasar
The Trojans Hector the famous knight
The Percians, great Alexander
The Greeks Achilles, for manhood and myght^
The Larthagiens, to maintain their right
Affirmyng Hanniball, their lodesterre
Thus every one, his time did prefer.
And we Arthur most worthyest of all
Ought to remember, in our fantasy
Passing all other, in deeds marciall
Like Mars him self, shinyng in glory
In his triumphs, conquest and victory
As the story of him do the recounte
All other kings in his time did surmount.
AS that time is past, and worn out
This time present, we must put in ure
That in time to come, there be no doubt
But that this time, that time may assure
For time once past, is without recure
Wherefore this time, let us intend
The time to come, may this time commend.
Let the Romans, aduannce their Leasar
The Trojan Hector, their famous knight
The Percian their great Alexander
The Greek Achilles, for strength and might
The Larthagiens, to maintain their right
Only preferryng, their Hannybail
Yet have we one, passing them all.
Which we ought of duty and reverence
Most humbly, his grace to magnify
Salute in heart, word and sentence
Somewhat of him to exemplify
I mean our king, most famous Henry
Our natural Lord, our supreme head
Most renoumed, and most to be dred.
Like as Lato, the prudent counceler
Wrote volumes large, of famous report
Princes notable, only to prefer
Among the Romans, virtue to supporte
Whose example, is to our comfort
Following the same, vice to confound
Thus of our duty, surely are we bound.
Wherefore I will my pen advance
Mekely thereto my self incline
With most dilygent attendaunce
Directyng my style, this present time
In word and sense, straight as a line
With Rome, Carthage, Thebes and other m^
As far as the best, his fame to goo.
Like as Phebes, in the midday spear
His radiant beams, most pure and bryghte
Illustreth out, both fresh and clear
Persyng the dewes, by force of might
I illuminyng all manner of sight
Comforting fruits, flowers earbes and grass
So does our king, al other kings pass.
I would to Christ that my edicion
According to my judgment
Might take effect, like my intencion
In things condyng worthy or equiuolent
Unto his grace, this time present
Then would I, the truth declare
Which am enforced with terms rude and bare
Yet nevertheless, my inward desire
Without any more loquacitee
Greatly I seek, as reason does require
For to approve, his noble majesty
Of all other kings, to have the soueraintee
As son and air, to lusty dame nature
Resemblyng her person shape and figure.
I dare allege, as in this case
That nature sought, time oportune
When she first formed, his noble grace
Only by respect, of gentell Fortune
All other causes, for to contune
Assured to gether, by promise bound
That in his parson, no fault were found.
Thus has nature, by great aduisemente
With circumspecte deliberacion
Full like a Goddess, pure and excellent
showed her power, and mighty operacion
Nothing reseruyng, at his creacion
Which might his nobilitee advance
Unto his birth she gave such attendaunce.
With strength, beawtie, and semelynesse
She has amplyfyed his courage
Most renoumed, for gentleness
Therein he has so great advantage
Passing all other, his parentage
Thus by report, preferred is his name
Entitled in the book, of worthy fame.
Gentelst of Gentyles, grace to recure
Like Alcibyades, that famous knight
Of Athenes prince, their party to assure Alcibiades of Athenes.

So is his grace, most gentelest in syghte
Whose inward respect, iudgyng a right
A prince of nature, that gentle is
Of faithful subjects, can never mysse.
For like as gentleness, does plain appear
Only by natural inclinacion
In countenance, in speech and cheer
So does the love, and hearty affection
Exclude all manner of contencion
Causes subjects, them selfs to endeuer
Where gentleness is, in love to perceu^.
By his gentleness, our wro^ges ar redressed
By his gentleness, our love made pardurable
By his gentleness, the truth out expressed
Our hearts are made sure, and veritable
His gentleness is so resemblable
That al things to him, he does accumulate
Which to gentleness is appropriate.
So that his grace, passes all other
An evident thing for to declare
There reigned, never such another
His subjects to keep, preserve and spare
Wherefore we may in this compare
All most one thing, as in degree
His gentleness, to merciful pity.
For that land dominion or regiment
That has a prince, of gentell nature
God has promised, long stablishment
In love together, they shall endure
Wherefore in this, let us assure
Since gentleness comes of gift divine
Let us to gentleness, our hearts incline.
Thus are we bound, plainly to express
His gentleness, only to discure
conseruyng our wealth, and whole redress
By his grace, lately put in ure
Of his laws, now are we made sure
Among the mountains hills and vales
Now is it England, sometime called Wales.
And further in this to report
According to his merciful yousage
Our abusions only to transporte
Has devised with his counsayl sage
Wales to conducte from all bondage
Brefely to conclude, this to understand
Priuileged we are, with the laws of England
Like as Minos, that famous king
Sometime reigning, in the land of Crete Minos king of Crete

Full renoumed for science and connyng
Found out the laws, most wholesome and sweet
Grounded on reason, with virtue replete
Ministryng them, as a judge royal
Among his subjects, by deeds equal.
Prouidyng before, in his aduertence
None should declyne, as in this case
For lack of knowledge, and experience
So ready he was, their welthe to purchase
Thus of his living, and bountiful grace
Preparyng in time, them to advance
Only by law, and Civil ordinance.
Though he were a king, with scepter and
To execute right, nothig disdained (croune
For all his fame, his princely renoume
In judgment sat, his domes vnfarned
Love nor hate, his person constrained
But like the deserte, as then did appear
His sentence gave, with right princely there.
Methamorphosios, there may ye se
Of Mines the princely governance
Also of Scille void of all pity
Her father slew with cruel veugeaunce
Only of Minos, to have acquaintance
And he again like a ryghtfull king
Gave sentence plain, her deed condempning.
For to affirm and brefely conclude
Our party in this, fully to sustain
Unto Minos with like similitude
Let us advance, our king and sovereign
In all things that does appertain
Unto Justice, or good governance
By law, reason or Civil ordinance.
Was there ever yet, any prince living
In Chronicle, story, or sentence plain
His noble grace, in this resemblyng
Or common welthe, for to sustain
Or for our sake, undertook such pain
As does his grace, this present time
Us to preserve from damnable crime.
How far were we, out of our way
For lack of Justice and good governance
Was there ever any, before this day
King or prince, of such remembrance
Us to instruct, by law or ordinance
Whereby we might, our folly redress
Till now his grace, the truth to confess.
Which by study, and diligent labor
Most circumspectly, herein advised
For to reform, our old behavior
His gracious laws, to us has commised
To the intent we should not be supprised
By bondage enforced with crueltee
From old customs, set us at lybertee.
We must of force, the truth confess
We cannot well, our selves excuse
Our deeds plainly bears witness
Of our folly and great abuse
Old customs had, loathe to refuse
Surely at the first, how they began
Not pleasyng to God, nether yet to man.
For among al, some customs we had
Which before God were intolerable
As I suppose, all men being sad
Will grant it, true and veritable
A thing unjust falce and flexable
Though some affirmed their customs sure
By Charter Riall, ever to endure.
Some Lords no doubt had great rialtie
Conserved by kings, in times long past
In Forest and Chase, having liberty
But not their subjects, to spoil and waste
By color or craft, suthe means to cast
Them to keep in thraldom and bondage
Where they ought, no dewtie nor seruage.
Yet some there were, by way of exaction
Under pretense, of such rialte^
By craft, and subtle collusion
Only to deceive, the porealtee
Affirmyng under such libertee
All men to take, that there should pass
Out of their way, to fine for their trespass.
A lack that such ingratitude
In man's mind should be comprehended
A poor man, being destitude
Out of his way, nothing offended
The oppression, before intended
Compound they must, be it right or wrong
Or else enforced to some prison strong.
Such was the custom, without defense
Plainly to yield, or money to pay
Folly it was, to speak of indigence
For ready money, would then a away
(And further) some does report and say,
They must agree, and be at a point
As the Foster would, or else lose a ioynte.
Worthy Edippus the famous yo^g knight
Which was so lusty, and fresh of courage ppus of b^

So strong, so hardy, so full of might
Had never so dredefull, a passage
Nor in the length of all his voyage
Found none so monsterus a beast
In mountain, wodde chase or forest.
Spynx the serpent which was so odible
So monsterus, so fearful to see
So fyerse, so cruel, and so terrible
Deuouryng all thing without pity
Was never so full of cruelty
Men for to spoil, for silver or gold
in story found, that ever was told.
This Edippus with full pure intent
Going toward Thebes, that famous city
Of adventure met this cruel Serpent
Upon the mountain, called Phocie
Of his manfull, Magnamitee
There he slew this monsterous beast
S^ttyng the country, and Thebes at rest
But our Edippus, refuge and Champion
Our comfort our joy and hear^es solace
Our noble, most famous of renoune
Our king most worthiest that ever was
Only by prudence, has brought to pas
A thousand has slain, as in effect
Which of such crime, by force were detecte.
Our mountains, our wodes, ourchases great
From such exactions, are made full plain
No raucnous prays, now can they geate
They must of force, their fury restrain
They may no longer, such purpose attain
There is no help for their refute
But leave their custom, and old pursuit.
There shall no craft, nor yet colusion
No feigned tales, no falce pretense
No color, deceipte, or adulacion
Be taken now for their defense
Like as they are, such like recompense
So that the truth shall be defended
When the unjust shall be condemned.
Has not his grace, of his mere goodness
Most pryncely, our causes to renew
Brought us from all wrongful dures
Such abusions, only to subdew
And further all offenders to pursewe
Has stablyshed us by prudent purueiaunce
Them to Chastise, for their misgouernau^ce.
Hercules the strong, and pereles knight ^uses of (...) or E^.

Of who^ the Poets, so much does feign
Had never more virtue force or might
Then has our king, Lord and soueraygne
Yet did he wonderful things attain
In his conquest triumphs and victory
As the stories of him do the specify.
Busiris Antheus and Gereon
Of Egipte, Libie, also of Spain
All three kings by succession
Can witness this story plain
Diomed in Trace, as king did raygne
Cacus Nessus and Cerberus the great
Also the Lion, and the Bulle of Crete.
Abcor the Serpent, odious and black
Most outrageous wild and savage
The monsterus mess, of Archades lake
deuouryng all things in their rage
Hercules with most knyghtly visage
Slew them all, such was his grace
None might wtsta^d, his knighthod to deface.
These tirantes great, by odius crime
Accused were, of theft and robbery
Bryngyng the country, unto ruin
Spoilyng the people, of malice and envy
Delityng in murder, and tyranny
Which caused Hercules, maugre their will
Them to betray, and after to kill.
Here must ye note, mark this right well
As Diodorus, affirms it plain
Also Saint Jerome, likewise does tell
How that there were, Hercules twain
Which were right noble, stories be plain
But Hercules, named Egipcius
Was he that did, these deeds meruaylous.
Not Hercules, called Alcides
Which the Greeks, so highly do commend
Son of Jupiter, this is douteles
To whose power he might not extend
Who ever will the cause defend
Look in the fifth book, of Antiquities
Of Birosus, the Ethimologies.
As in a treatise, lately compyled
After my simple, and rude device
As ancient Aucthors, has comprysed
In time long past, right famous and wise
Which to set forth, I did enterprise
Where ye may see, of these nobles twayn
For the common wealth which took most pain.
Of this Hercules, Called Egipcius
Came the notable, and famous lignage
Down to Troy, and so to Brutus
Unto this day, with all the surplusage
To our most noble, ryall of courage
Henry the eight, elect by grace divine
Of the same descent, stock blud and line.
Which only now, for our redress
With like vygoure, and manfull might
As a king, of wisdom perelesse
Considering all things of right
Such tyranny has appealed out of syghte
By his royal power, and heart most constant
As at this time, to us is apparaunt.
Where are become, these tirauntes great
So insaciate, of their desire
Whose ^auin some time, no man could set
So ^raged was, their mortal ire
Who durst denay, what they did require
To burn or spoil, all was one thing
Such was their use, custom and living.
The true man abroad, he might not pas
But must of force, with them compounde
Like as they would, give more or las
Or else they would, his wealth confound
With some distres, to beat or wound
His cattle steal, or goods to spoil
Thus would the Thief, the true man defo^e.
if they were taken, as seldom was seen
They would allege, for their defense
The Lord of the soyie might them redeem
And of this roialtee, with them dispense
Such was their use, and vile pretense
Paiyng therefore, their fine accustomed
From all daungier, to be franchysed
The party nothing herein suffysed
Must nedss of force, his wrong sustain
Gods people utterly despised
The true man the loss, the thief the gain
Restitucion none should they attain
Five pound and a penny, paid for the fine
The Thief goes quite, for fault and crime.
And yet alas, one custom we had
Which as I think, all grace did expel
I suppose never none half so bad
Engendered in the pit of Hell
The price of a man, was known to well
If he ware ^layne, the payment should be
Like as he was, in birth or degree.
O custom unkind, causer of distress
Whose terrible plage, infecteth the Air
Man's life with murdre, to repress
Considering Christ, man's solle to repair
Became man, of a Uirgyn fair
Only for love. man to redeem
Alas that man, with murdre should be seen.
Murdre of truth, is intolerable
Murdre before God, calls for vengeance
Murdre to man, is abominable
Murdre to nature, is a defiaunce
Murdre to life, is a discontinuance
Murdre to grace, is plain a rebel
Murdre at the first, began sure in Hell.
This was our country brought in defame
Sclaundred and noysed, for our outrage
All true men of this reaported shame
God knows who had the pylage
The poor man, but small advantage
The Thief his pleasure, on mountayn and hill
If he had money, might walk at his will.
Thus the slander ran far abroad
All most to our great desolacion
As though we all had been of one accord
No diuersitee in their opinion
Such was the rumoure and communicacio^
No thing reseruyng in their judgment
Between a Thief and the Innocent.
And thus full often, we bare the blame
causeles, of truethe nothing offended
Nor by consent, worthy of infame
Yet by report we were suspended
As though we had, thereto intended
Idelnesse was cause, as in effect
Why we were had in such respect.
Oh thou vicious Sardanipall ^ius Sarda^all.

The beginning of slouthe and Idleness
Whose example all wealth does appall
Delightyng in sin and wretchedness
With surfeites great, the body to oppress
Which brought in theft and robery
Murder, riote, also aduoutry.
Who list the story, to account
Shall well perceive, in sloth and idleness
(...) other before the, thou did surmount^
Thy vicious life, be^th full witness
She was thy lady and chief mastresse
To whom thou did, thy self abound
Which was the cause thy person to co^fou^d
For Arbachus, of virtues respect ^cou Arbachu

As a prince of excellent wisdom
Did thee manace, chastise and correct
For thy froward, abhominacion
Idleness was cause, and occacion
Why thou vicious Sardanapall
From thine estate, had so great a fall
For like as verteous business
Inuenteth things right laudable
So does riote and idleness
Increase mischenes intollorable
One thing mark, which is veritable
Put idleness, clean out of v^e
For custom all most, turns to nature.
Note where idleness, does often remain
Fare well all verteous business
For idleness, inflameth the brain
And brings in new fanglenesse
Sequestrith the heart, from all goodness
And aldre last, note this for ever
God from man, it does clean deceiuer.
Idleness, caused our abusion
By idleness, increased our infame
Till now of late, by politic reason
Of our king, most gracious of name
Which has brought us into a new frame
So that we feel, by worldly business
There comm^th gain, and moderat richesse
Thus has our wise worthy Arbachus
Suppressed our folly and customs rude
Lausyng our hertes, to be desirus
To follow the sage, multitude
Idleness utterly to (...)
Laboryng abrod, our fode to get
Leuyng by our hands, and bodily sweat.
To dig and delu^, to ear and sows
To graffe or piant, in rough or plain
On mountayns hie, or vales low
Little we force, for labor and pain
So that we may, our w^lth attain
Tenderyng so much our business
That we forget, the vice of idleness.
For where of truth, with us late past
Both corn and frui^e, was scant and bare
Our country void, lay half in wast
I dare allege, and surely declare
Now at this time we may well spare
If there should chance, a time of need
With corn and cattaile, our neighbors fe^
And thus daily, we do prevail
In our increase, both cataile and corn
Thanks be to God, all is quoche quail
The chafe the wedes, a way are shorn
Never so well, sens we were borne
Our country made plain, and habitable
Which seemed before, irrecurable.
And further, of his benyng grace
Through his most merciful assent
Our commune wealth, for to purchase
Has remitted, of pure intent
Two thousand marks, of yearly rent
Before paid, in silver and gold
Taxed among us, of customs old.
Yet has our Trojan, most mighty emye
Planted us, with prudent Latons (roure
^o be our president and governor
Associate with noble Sipious
With diverse mo, of high discressions
For to augment, our common weal
Granted by commission, under his scale.
In sundery parts, for our redress
As did some time, the noble senate
Consules prefectes, of great sadness
Dictatours full famous, of estate
Decemusres, wisdom to approbate
^rauersyng the countries round about
Where suspecte persons, were had most in-
(doubt.
To that intent, our ciuility
Were not suppressed, for lack of governance
Nether is enforced, by tyrrany
But redused, to a Civil substance
According to the use, and continuance
Of English laws, in time long past
Whereof we be now, made sure and fast.
Thus charge upon charge, daily does in-
Unto his grace, in manner importable (sewe
Inuentyng laws, and statutes new
Gentill and soft, by mean tretable
To thentent, it should be pardurable
Among us for ever, this is the mean
Uncorrupted to keep us pure and clean.
Thus a king of vigilant respect
Shows unto us, this constant love
As a father, in this effect
Tenderyng his child, vice to remove
Without rigor, our folly does reprove
Caryng not for treasure or expense
But to withdraw, the cause of our offense.
For to compare, and brefe the time
Account all stories, that ever was
Enforce your self, thereto to inclyne
Read where ye list, your time to pas
And ye shall not find, that ever there was
A king of better remembrance
His subjects to keep, preserve and advance.
Reken Lesar, with his triumphs all
Alexander, Hecto^, or Achilles
Edippus, or worthy Haniball
Minos the Judges, or great Harcules
Or yet Arbachus, of knighthod pereles
Let them come all, their virtue to declare
Yet shall they not, with his grace compare.
For these princes, these conquerors great
Set their mind, and full attendance
Countrees to subdewe, and kyngdoms to geate
Only by strength and mighty puysance
And some again, to take their chance
Ieopard their persons, to get them a name
As beasts wild, to make them tame.
And thus they wrought all by fantasy
As fortune list, the party assure
To win or lose, put in ieopardy
Hap as it would, all inaduenture
Goods, lands, life, body and treasure
But those kings, are most to be commended
From vicious life, their subjects has defended.
As our noble, and most famous king
Appoyncted by grace, of the deite
Most circumspecte, in over lokyng
His subjects to keep, in a conformite
One law, one king, one deuinite
One faith, one hope, one erudicion
One mind, one will, and one intencion.
Never none like, account the time
Sens Brute, our first progenitoure
Borne by dissent, of right noble line
Being prince, king, and goueronure
Unto our parents, chief protectoure
Through whose manfull magnanimite
They were delivered, from old captivity.
As famous auctours, most seriously
With a sincere opposicion
In time long past right willyngly
By a loving emulacion
Only for our, eriducion
Has related, as after shall insewe
More exactly, matter constaunt and true.
Some what herin, doubtless am I moved
For to express, my fantasy
Not of impacience, much grieved
But that some, has judged wrongfully
As in reproach, of our country
Deniyng plain, most noble Brute
Our antecessor our stock and our fruit.
A book of late, there was compiled
By Polidorus, in Italy borne ^idorus.

Nothing to us reconsiled
But rather written, in hatred or scorn
Yet shall we say, if he had sworn
We Welshmen, with him shall compare
For old antiquities, the truth to declare.
His slanderous style, to exterminate
Reject, avoid, and clean put a way
Which is so subtle, and intricate
Thynkyng thereby, our fame to decaie
None will so report, I dare well say
Having wit, reason or intelligence
Other to justice, myndyng aduertence.
Not contented this to deny
But would of force, our name appall
Cleave to extincte, out of memory
As though we were, reiectes of all
Knowing not, our descent natural
From whence we came, nor of what line
Us to infame, this is his crime.
Me think of truth, to much ye err
In your reproach, spoke of disdain
Affirmyng plain, in time of war
We Welshemen, no honor to attain
Nether yet in peace, true to remain
Your barberous words, back does rebou^de
To your infame, all things does sound.
It is unmeet, a man of your age
Accounted sad, wise and discrete
So violently, abroad to rage
Matters to pen, which is unmeet
With words untrue, with terms onswete
Or things deny which auctours old
In time long past, both wrote and told.
Who shall but think, your sentence light
As things in vain, to none effect
Words of reproach, spoke again right
Men should abhor, and clean reiecte
To breue my time, this is theffecte
Your slanderous words, affirms plain
To rise of ire, hatred or disdain.
If ye of force, will us persewe
Only through your ingratitude
Blame us nothing, your words exchewe
Beware hurt not, a multitude
Lest some perchance, with sentence rude
Justly again, like your offense
Even with the same, will you recompense.
We speak to you, Master Polidorus
Whose ingratitude, we greatly complain
Ye go about, to raze out the flowers
Of our parents, as things in vain
And yet of truth, ye cannot refrain
But generally, us to accuse
No indifferency, herin ye use.
We Welshemen say for our defense
That ye Romans, surmountyng in pride
With your Imperial magnificence
Supposyng thereby, the heuens to divide
Came long after, our noble tribe
So that we may, write of your estate
Not ye of us, ye came all to late.
How should ye know, our antecessours
Our stock, our line, our progeny
Our most mighty conquerours
Sith ye be of much less memory
Writing nothing, almost plainly
But what does rebounde, to your estate
Magnifiyng the pomp, of your Senate.
By cause your auctoure, Titus Liuius
Of noble Brute makes no mention
Being perchance, somewhat obliuius
Or knew not, of that succession
Therefore ye make no description
But only of your kings of Italy
Which reigned there, successively.
As appears, by story evident
Called Fasciculus Temporum
Where little is, to us pertinent
But to the first, of your succession
Having the regal possession
Breuely does pass, all other things
Only does write, but of a few kings.
Though he forgate, this noble prince
Or listed not, his fame to conuaie
Yet shall he not his name convince
Nor this his honor, to pulle away
Fasciculus Temporum, plainly does say
That Brute began, first to excel
When Heli was priest, and Judge of Israel
Holy Eusebius, does testify
Also saint Bid, makes mention
That noble Brute of the age, five and thirty
Entered first into this region
Which was before Christ's incarnacion
A thousand. i. C. twenty and twain
And after Troy. xliii. years plain
Galfridus affirms assuredly
That noble Brute, in his years grene
Like Marce for strength, fearce and hardy
In Greece most princely was seen
Wan there croune, ceptre and diadem
From Panderus, of Achilles blud
His daughter, his treasure, with all his good.
And further the Greeks to deface
That day he did, the field recure
Most princely, met them in the face
Whose knightly strokes, they might not in-
A shilde he bare, the field of asure (dure
^hree crounes of gold, sumteously wrought
A Lion set, on his helmet a lofte.
Also G^ydo, do Collumpnia
Does verify, this to be true
That he did honor the gods Diana
Passing the seas, fortune to insewe
Where he had answer, his joys to renew
Being right young, should supply the place
with scepter and croune, his enemies to inchase
Ranulphus, a man of perfeccion
Writes right plain, as in this case
How noble Brute, within this region
Landed first, by a special grace
Predestinate before, was that place
As Diana the mighty Gods
Had promised, namyng it Totnesse.
Also the Flower, of histories
Named Peter Pactauiences
With many noble writers
Allows the very same senses
To much of truth, are their offenses
Which will alone, such things deny
That auctours old, do write and verify.
Martinus super Cronicas
Vtropius, and Sabellicus
Affirms plain, how all thing was
In the time of Brenne and Belenus
Of the descent, of noble Brutus
How they entered, first into Italy
Having at Rome gates, a noble victory.
This story to amplify and augment
The sixth year of Artaxarses the king
As Iacobus Phillippus does assent
Over the Persians, that time reignyng
These princes. ii. with standerdes displaiyng
As brother with brother, of one mind and asse^t
Again you Romans, with heart most verue^t
Had a battaill strong, as is expressed
Where your Senate, Tribunes and Dictators
By knightly force, were clean oppressed
Your Pretours, Consules and governors
Your lusty manfull, young soldiors
Your valiant knights, in steel armed bright
All were taken, slain or put to flight.
Ye cannot well, these auctours deny
For all your vain, stentacion
Your city spoiled, all went a wry
Make thereof a true declaracion
Ye were right feign, by composicion
A peace to take, ths is no naie
Else to yield up, or sone fly away.
Noble Arthur the famous Brute
Of the same line, and true succession
Which by his conquest, and princely pursuit
Uanquished full many a region
Son of Uter, called Pendragon
Chronicles, plainly does it specify
Yet ye Romans, this prince will deny
Look in Fasciculus Temporum
The time of Bisshoppe, Hilarious
In lina Christi, accomptyng the sum
Four hundred sixty and four, truly to discus
Then flourished Arthur, that was victorious
With his own hand, in one day he slew
Four hundred and sixty, if that story be true.
Also behold Poli cronicon
The* xxiii. Chapter, the seventh book
There may ye se, by plain description
The year of our Lord, who list to look
A^ xi hundred four score, his body up took
Translated into Glastinbury
By the famous king, the second Henry.
In the thirty year, or there about
Of our sovereign, king Henry theight
Ye blinded Romans, to put out of doubt
The cause made plain, perfect and straight
A cross was found, of full great weight
In Glastenbury, with letters of gold
Graven full deep, with this sentence old.
Here lies Arthur, the worthy king
Deep in the ground, his body to hide
Sometime in Britain, famously reignyng
God of his mercy, for him provide
His solle unto rest, to be his guide
For a more concordaunce of yearthly fame
For evermore, florishe might his name.
But ye Romans so full of pride
Will in no wise, to this assent
In couerture, all things to hide
Of ambicion, and froward intent
In all your stories, this is full meant
Nothing to touch, or matter to frame
Which should rebounde, to your rebuke or
(shame
Your old enmite, rancor and debate
Will not permit, the Brutes to advance
By cause your noble Imperial estate
By them was brought, unto vtteraunce
At your hard walls, such was your chance
The honor ye lost, your knights ma^ly slain
By princes notable, kings of Britain.
For shame a wake, begin of new
Recante your feigned fantasy To Master ^olidorus.

Confess your fault, all is untrue
Make some excuse, with honesty
Affirm the sleep, was in your iye
Feeble with watch, heavy was your head
Ye wist not well, what ye wrote or said.
And thus may ye, your self excuse
Referryng it, unto ignorance
Your old errors, clean to refuse
Resityng plain, as matter insubstance
All that ye did, was of inconstance
Affeccion moved so much your intent
For to write true, ye could not assent.
Sith ye so largely, in your pretense
Here tofore; have us frequented
Ia amplifiyng, your cruel insence
Again us most fraudently invented
Though herin my spirits be incensed
You to requite, in writing so large
Take it a worth, mine is the charge.
For he that will, causeles procure
Or it invent, things of defame
He may well judge, being right sure
Men will requite him, even with the same
Likewise again, in board or in game
As the cause is, seek out the ground
Slandered report, clean to confound
Ye are vnueritabl, in your report
Unshamefast, auctours to deny
And we very loathe, for to supporte
Fables untrue, to invent a lie
Let Boccas by judge, if ye will apply
Which of us twain, most have offended
Or in this case, worthiest to be commended.
Where ye allege, and us accuse
That we in battaill, are feeble and faint
No fetes of arms, that we can use
But must of force, of very constraint
Entreat of peace, as toward attaint
Your slandered report, to your infame
Shall ever increase, in hinderyng your name
I will appeal, as in this case
Record to take, of Titus Liuius
Let him verify, how all things was
In the time of noble Camillus
Dictatour of Rome with famous Lucius
Consuls elect, as for that year
With Emilius, the story is full clear.
Eutropius an auctoure full true
Likewise plainly, does defyne
As in the story, before does insewe
The famous Brutes, as in their time
Being of discente, blood birthe and line
Of noble Brute, their fury to withstand.
Rome enclosed, with most mighty England
If ye list by clear, computacion
Plainly to know, the years and the time
How long it was, after Romes foundation
Three hundred three score, puttyng thereto nine
The first fall, the woeful ruin
Of Rome that ever, I did of read
Never before, standing in such fear and dread
Oh ye Romans, full of presumpcion
Remember your birthe, stock, and your line
And of your city, the first foundation
Accomptyng A milius your parentyne
With Rea his sister, the feminyne
And Aldre last, truly to discus
The two brethren, Remus and Romulus:
Ye began with robery and pilage
And we by marciall dissipline
Ye froward of birthe, blood and lineage
And we right noble, famous of line
Account both male, and feminyne
Ye in feigned, fables to inewe
And we in forced, to stories true.
Things grounded on wrong may not
Scripture thereof, makes mention (endure
An evil beginning, who may assure
Thereof to make, a good foundation
For where nothing is, but fraud and treason
Murdre riote, with foul aduoutry
The end must needs, be full of misery.
Though fortune favor, a time to advance
In her assence, climyng a lofte
With a pretense, of fair countenance
As has been proved, in times full often
In her return, falling un^fte
She has again, with ^wnyng there
Dusked the weather, before pure and clear:
Where ar no we, your famous Emperors
Your triumphant knights, stately ridyng
Your notable wise Senatoures
Your Cons^ers, your City guidyng
Your pr^ctes Dictatours, clearly shining
Are they not ^onsumed, frus^rate and gone
And ye from favor, almost left alone*
Your noble Ma^che called Aurelius
Which was of Rome, the famous Emperor Marcus Aurelius

Criyng out, with voice most piteous
Cursyng the time, the day and hour
When Rome began, fir^ for to flower
Triumphyng in pomp, also in pride
Which caused virtue, from Rome to divide.
Did not he also, piteously complain
Saying of truth, Rome shall be confounded
Of very Justice, the Gods cannot refrain
But of equity, must be condemned
For like he said, as Rome was commended
Above all other, most worthiest of name
The time shall come, of reproach and shame.
It must proceed, by iustfull sentence
Considering al things of right
Where opp^ssion is done by violence
It may not endure, by force of might
Example good, to every wight
Behold ye Romans, this present time
Are ye not almost, brought unto ruin.
Considre well, your first beginning
Of Remus and Romulus, brother and brother Remus and Romulus

An accident, of very evil living
If ye note well, Rea their mother
Sacred to Uesta, it was no other
Professed there, only to Chastitee
Her life during, to live in virginity.
The Temple by her, defiled was
The story plain, bears full witness
And she again, for her trespass
By her brother, cruel and merciles
Uoyde of all succoure, being remediles
Died in prison, recure was there none
Her children sole, left alone.
Their father not known, for birth or lineage
Fostered they were, without al reverence
Of a she Wolf, full wild and savage
The children froward, cruel of courage
Of very hatred, ire and disdain
The elder brother, the younger has slain.
Like as their uncle, named Emilius
His brother slew, with fraud and treason
So in like case, most cruel Romulus
Against all kind, and natural reason
His brother slew, for his possession
Thus of Rome, was the Antiquity
Murdre upon murdre, void of all pity.
Remember Rome, thy old abusion
Thy infamed, and cursed governance
Thy tyranny, and falce extorcion
Thy great adultrie, and foul daliaunce
Way these together, al in one balaunce
And thou shall not find, any rightful sentence
Against the Brutes, to give evidence.
Who began first, the Civil wars
Discord, discencion, troble and stryffe
The proud Romans, surmou^ting the sterres
Which was the loss, of many man's life
Marius and Silla, began the myschefe Marius and Silla.

Four thousand lay dead and slain
Six hundred knights, the story is plain
Likewise most dredefull and piteous
For to rehearse, the woeful destruction
Between Pompey, and Ceasar Julius
Three hundred M. brought to confusion
Murdered and slain, through falce abusion Ceasar Julius Pompeius.

Thus of the Romans, was ye governance
Let Boccas be judge, of al their mischaunce.
Who were the cruel, persecutours
Who subplanted, Christ's religion
Who were the falce, conspiratours
Who were the traitors, to every region
Who, wrought fraud, who wrought treason
Who slew the Appostles, Peter and Paul^
Who martered, all most the saints all.
Who invented, falce conspiracy
Who oppressed, the pore Innocent
Who slew the worthy, Scipions three
Oh cursed people, without al reverence
Who conspired against the magnificence
Of Ceasar, most mightiest of estate (...) Scipions (...)

By treason slain, among your Senate.
Oh cruel Rome, confess thy outrage
Thy shameful murdre, thy foul abusion
Cry out and complain, with all thy surplusage
Alack alack, through falce contradiction
In the was slain, by cruel treason
The lantern the light, the prince of eloquence
Among you Romans, most of excellence.
Of Rethorique, the famous orator
In his days, called sage Tullye ^ully

Chosen to be a gouernoure
Your common weal, only to guide
By mean of knighthode, also of Clergy
Defended you, from proud Cataline
Which would have brought your city to ruin
With all his falce conspiratours
which to his treason, were fully consented
Punished those rebels, and traitors
By prison strong, their bodies turmented
By force whereof, the commons assented
The prison to call, after his own name
Tullian, the more to encreace his fame
What should I say, of your treasons all
To amplify them, and set them at large
In murdre and riote, like fendes infernal
So monsterous ye are, of mind and courage
Of customs old, as beasts full savage
Innocents to kill, virtue to confound
Of all sorrows, the rote and the ground
Fourtene Emperors, in stories I find
One after other, there did insewe
To Christ's faith, cruel and unkind
Innocent blood, causeless to pursewe
Only twain, no mo was found true
All the rest, as tirantes inflamed
Woldin no wise, Christ to be named.
Record I take, of that cursed man
To God always, found contrarius Ualarian

Called in his day, cruel Ualerian
Uoide of all favor, most impiteous
Of Emperoures all, none more ungracious
Against Christ's faith, of mind and will
By persecucion, his saints to kill.
But god of his grace, his power to wtdrawe Sapor

Caused Sapor that time king of Perce
For all his froward, and cursed law
His imperial power, sone to suscesse
Took him prisoner, in mids of the Prece
Made a footstool, of his cursed Corse
When ever he list, to mount on his Horse.
Likewise the tiraunt, named Domician
Proudest of all, reckon any one Domician

Persecuted many a Christian man
Into Pathmos, exiled Saint Ihon
Thought him self, most worthiest alone
In his estate, proudly up stalled
A God abroad, for to be called.
Made a decree, of very presumpcion
In pain of death, no man to deny
But God above, knowing his intencion
To punish his pride, in his own army
Caused his knights, to wound his body
With unware death, the story to express
Denied of burial, was his Carcass.
Most cruel infamed Maxence Maxence

Likewise our Faith, he did pursewe
Causeles with most cruel violence
Having no respect, to Christ Jesus
Slain as a traitor, to God untrue
Of very disdain, his life once past
His cursed troncke, into Cybre was cast.
Galerius falseste of assent
Against Christ's Faith, sought occasion Galerius

Them to destroy, by furious judgment
Which was at length, to his confusion
With sickness take, thus in conclusion
The Air corrupted, began to putrify
Only by stincke, of his carren body
Also valence, the prowes Emperou^
Which in his rage, was so mercylesse Ualence.

Against Hermites, them to devour
Living in desert, and wilderness
Slew them all of very wilfulness
Consumed he was, by brennyng of Fire
By the Gootes, which his death did conspire
Most cursed of all, that I rehearse can
Among all your falce conspiratours Julian Apostita.

Was your Emperor, named Julian
Which wrought by crafty inuencions
Called sprytes, by his Coniuracions
Did them worship, by way of sacrifice
Unto God most hateful, in such manner wise
With them he had, such conversation
That they to him, were favorable
For his Ceremonies, and falce oblacion
Promisyng him, to be veritable
That he should pass, in deeds honorable
Great Alexander, in triumphant victory
As in excellyng, his state and glory.
Thus fell he into feigned fantasy
Trus^yng to Pluto, the God infernal
But then the Lord most mighty
Disdayned his pride, Imperial
Send unto him a knight Immortal
Most Angelicke, in steel armed bright
Roue him to the heart in his most might.
Among all other, that I can read
Most vicious, and odiu^ to hear
Was cursed Nero, without fear or dread Uicius Nero.

Whose shamful story, plainly does appear
Consydre it well: ye Romans draw nere
Such do ye foster, nurrishe up and bring
Hateful to God, most fro ward in living
Who was more vicious of nature
By constraint of his disposicion
Who was more unsure, grace to recover
Then was Nero, by inclinacion
More prouder of port, with fraud and treason
His wife his brother, causeless he slew
No matter of right, them to pursewe.
This story right sore, does him accuse
With his mother called Agripine
Like a ribauld her body should mysuse
In carnal knowlage, filthy as a swine
And further plainly to defyne
His mothers womb, he corue upon a day
To se the place, nine months where he la^e.
This proud tirant, unfortunate man
Moral Sene^, causeles he slew (...).

Which was his master when he began
Uirgins professed, he did pursewe
Being right chaste, steadfast and true
His Lecherus lust, only to fulfill
Ravished them of force, against their will
Yet moreover, this Fend infernal
Against Christ's faith, most dispiteous ^eter and ^aule

Slew the Apostles, Peter and Paul
For which vengeance, and deeds most lecherus
God gave him over, as man ungracious
With a dagger, roue him self unto the heart
Died for pain, anguishe and deadly smarte.
Thus God of his right, tira^tes can chastyce
Which will rebel, against pore innocence
Them to murdre, and will not advertise
In Christ to have, true confidence
They must of force, without assistence
Remain with Cerberus, the Hell hound
Linked with Ta^talus in chains fast bound.
Of our Emperors, a full great number
I could resite froward of courage
Christ's faith, causeles to incumber
I will let pas, all the surplusage
No more to speak, of fraud and pyllage
Neither murdre, treason, with their infame
Set them together, with rebuke and shame.
Can ye deny, but this is true
Why do ye then, us Brutes accuse
We are right loathe, our faults to renew
But sith ye causeles, do us misuse
As in report, ye cannot refuse
Gross is his wit, worthy of infa^e
That will not defend, his country and name.
If ye look well, and judge a right
Ye ought not us, Welshmen disdain
Since we with all our force and might
Your holy men did entertayne
From your exile, and cruel pain
When that they durst, no where abide
For their refuge, we did provide.
For in the time, of your great outrage
When no man might, your malice entreat
So wilful were ye, of mind and courage
Christ and his laws, sone to forget
His elect to kill, malice and threate
Of very constraint, enforced to flee
So cruel and merciles, that time were ye.
Help or redress, none could they find
Their careful life, for to assure
Their inspyred hearts, their constant mind
Enforced were, lack of recure
To seek abroad, their hard adventure
Where that they might, with pure intent
Christ's religion for to augment.
Then into Wales, they did approach
Through Gods providence, his might to
Under many a strong mighty roche (show
Builded their Chapels, in deserts low
In sundry places, as men does know
As at this day, plainly does appear
The places old, evident and clear.
This is no feigned inuencion
Neither yet no curious fable
Who list to look, without suspection
Shall find it true, and veritable
Written by fathers, honorable
For a more concordant of Godly fame
Our Churches at this day, ^reth their name
Look up your stories, and sentence old
Accompiyng the time, years and season
I dare affirm, Being so bold
To make herein, a comparison
With any Christen religion
For length of time, bearyng good name
Concerning out faith, for any infame
A thousand. 300. four score and twain
Sithen it floryshed, first with us
In the time of many a proud Romayne
Martered was holy Euleutcrius
In whose time reigned Lucius
In Britaigne, the famous region
Then entered forth Christ's religion
This was in the year of our Lord
An hundred six and fiftye plain
After his birth, stories does accord
Sithin the faith, came first into Britaygne
Among us Brutes there to remain
As at this day, ye may well see
Never accused, of Infidelite
What place so constant, sure and stable
As at that time, might there be found
Like unto Wales, none so veritable
No tyranny with us, there did abound
The Faith remained, full hole and sound
According to Christ's religion
Without spot or gall, of infection.
To what place should they have resorted
To have had redress, in this misery
Or where should they have been supported
Nether in Rome, neither in Italy
Nether in Spain, France, or Germany
Brefely to conclude, this is manifest
From the son risyng, down to the Weste.
Such tirantes that time had the governance
That no man durst Christ to confess
Dispysed his laws, and in that instaunce
In. xxx. days, as Scripture does witness
Twenty thousand slain this is doutlesse ^clecian ^ximian

By Dioclesian, reigning in the East
And Maximinian, do wne in the west.
Who ever hard, of such a sort
So ungracious, and so untrue
As were the Romans, in their report
To blaspheme our Lord, Christ Jesus
Affirmyng plain, this to be true
That Rome never ioyousely prospered
Sithin the faith, among them entered
Look in the time, of Arcadius
There may ye se, their false opinion
Being Emperor, with Honorius ^aidus ^h hono^s.

Unto their Idolles having affection
As saint Austine, makes relacion
In his book called Ciuitate Dei
Where he confounds, their false Heresy.
My hand quaketh, for fere and dread
My heart of truth, begins to shrink
When I behold, this story to read
The tears weate, distilleth my incke
Oh Lord, to remember and think
The cruelty, mischefe, and endless pain
Among the Romans, that time did reign
Who should but morn, lament and weep
Considering all things of right
The virtuous with grace then replete
Put in exile, clean out of sight
The tirauntes great, by force of might
Persecuted the innocent bloudde
Thus with the Romans, that time it stood.
To brefe my sentence, the truth to tell
With us in Wales, none were oppressed
No tirauntes great, with us did dwell
There was the place, of peace and rest
Christ and his laws, for to degest
None durst approach, that to deny
Again our faith, once to reply.
How may ye then, with us compare
Or why do ye, Welshmen defame
Let your own stor^es, the truth declare
Ye are defective, even in the same
As in reproach, worthy of blame
Innocents, gyltlesse to accuse
In that your self, most does abuse.
Of your nobles, and Emperors all
With Constantine, make no comparison
For his magnificence Imperial
Borne in Britaygn, that famous region
He was the first, of hearty affection
That did decree, al men to dye
Christ and his laws that would deny.
Unto the Church, for Christ's sake
Excelled all other, before his time
The Romayne Temples, newely did make
Dedicated them by sentence divine
To the honor of God, and the orders nyn^
With most mere and pure devotion
Gave to the Church, the first possession
To that intent, from all indigence
The ministers, should stand at rest
God for to serve, with due reverence
All worldly thoughts to be represt
Virtue to increace, this is manifest
All solitary, there for to abide
For the love of Christ, this did he provide.
Gave goods and treasure with ornaments large
Amplifyde all things, with great expense
Made a decree, and gave in charge
That all men should, with due reverence
To Christ's cross, keep his obedience
And was the first, in Banner and Shylde
Crosses to peynt, that bare in field.
Oh most famous Coustantine
To whom no Romayne might attain
Whose goodness the world did inl^ine
Borne in England, then called Brytaygne
Son of S. Helin, the story is plain
From Troy linially, down descended
In Christ's Church, most to be commeded.
But now a lack, all is reuersed
Only through feigned perfection
For doubtless, virtue was repressed
When Constantine, first of affection
To Peter's Church, gave such possession
Then obedience, began to rebel
Which caused pride, Humilitee to expel
O Rome Rome, change thy soil, remove thy
Barre^ and bare, fruteles is thy ground (place The bish of Rome

Yet unto this day, for lack of grace
Littell virtue, in the there does abound
I dare allege, this world so round
May not suffyce, this present hour
So satisfye thy head and gouernoure
The cruel Emperors, by force of war
Might never such riches attain
Kingdoms to spoil, countries to mar
As at this time the cause is playn^
With so small trauayl, and so great gain
Such Policy there is invented
By seal and wax, and parchment indented
Solles for to save, ded gone and past
But God alone no wight can tell
Whether they be free, or in pain cast
In Paradise, Heaven, or in Hell
Yet for money, those solles will they sell
By auctoritee of Peter and Paul
Pardon forgive, and release them all
Thus Lord thy might, they would ^draw
To whom mercy, only does appertaigne
As though they might, in heaven make a law
At their pleasure, solles to detayne
Some to release, and some to remain
Like as they would, for mede or hyre
Some to acquit, some leave in the fire.
Oh Lord above, a damnable offense
Among thy people, such erroures to bring
Against all trewthe, and godly reverence (...). (...).

To have a trust, in any other thing
There is no help, no other meaning
Let this in our hearts, fast be graued
Only by Christ's blud, our solles ar saved.
And yet (O Lord) how far do they err
Thy majesty is all full of mercy
No sinner doutles, will thou debar
Being penitent, contrite and sorry
These covetous heads, clean contrary
The poor solle, wrapped in woo and pain
Without money, shall lie still and complain.
What Charitee herein is extended
When two solles in pain, lies together
Perchance both in one case have offended
The one for money, his joy shall recover
The other for lack, shall lie still for ever
Such is their Charitee, in time of need
Their wordly pomp, to set forth and feed.
If cruel Nero, had now afrende
That would disbource, and pay at large
So to compounde, and make an end
For all his sins, and fell outrage
I think his solle, might walk at large
Considering perdons, are so plenty
By mean whereof, hell is empty.
Oh Lord God, what wondrefull pride
Is it on earth, gods to be called
Equal with thy grace, solles to divide
As though they were, in heaven stalled
Thy enemies Lord, they may be called
Which will thy people, such errors bring
For their profit, our solles deceiuyng
Is there any other, manner of mean^
Then in the blood, of Christ Jesus
The immuculate la^be, most pure and clean
The son of God, which does forgive us
If we knowledge, our deeds vicius
Christ it is, that gives remission
By the mercy, of his blessed passion.
The Apostle blessed saint Peter
Nether yet inspired holy saint Paull
The very true, and sincere preacher
Ever pardoned any solle at all
The spirit once past, the body mortal
That only to God, reserved is
His divine power, consists in this.
O glorius God, how much are we (...)
Unto thy divine majesty
These errors great for to confound
Auoydyng the danger, of this infirmity
In the time of our necessite
Like as sometime, surely it befell
Unto thy elect, of Israel.
Which so tenderly, have cared for us
That nothing might be, for our salvation
But by thy pity, most glorious
Thou have of thy godly affeccion
Prepared the same, for our redemption
As in the old law, apereth full well
By Iosi^, then king of Israel.
For when thy laws, were clean suppressed
By the space of many hundred years
By Iosia again were redressed
Dedicated to thy heavenly speres
Abholished their frounyng cheres
In worshippyng their false Idolatry
Thy glorious name, newly to magnify.
By reason whereof, this prince deserved
A name of renown, to him most excellent
By thy grace Lord, only reserved
Which to his name, shall be permanent
Never none to him, equiuolent
Reignyng as king over Israel
Lord unto thee, this is known right well
So in likewise, most merciful Lord
This present hour, of thy tender love
Thy old mercy, newly to record
Our princes heart, inwardly does mou^
Such abusions, to reiecte and reprove
Thy laws, Lord, long out of remembra^c^
Are now reduced, to thy godly ordinance.
By our most noble, Henry theight
Through thy incomperable goodness
All things Lord, is made pure and straight
A^holished is all wickedness
In especial Lord, this is doubtless
The power of Rome, so long misused
Our king has now utterly confused.
Now to return, where I began
So to conclude, and brief my style
Between the Brute, and the Roman
No terms to seek, my tongue to fyle
No matter more, now to compile
The time to tracte, do I intend
But close up my book, and make an end.
But first to you, master Polido^
Your conscience, only to discharge
Which of long time, has been obliui^
Against us Brutes, in writing so large
Your spirits incensed, all in a rage
By your yeporte, us to infame
Your pen to rash, your terms out of frame
Where is become, your bounden deutie
Our antecessours, this to deface
Sith it pleases, the high Majesty
Of our most noble, the kings good grace.
Not to disdain, as in this case
To be compted, of the same stock and line
Down by dissent, to this present time.
Who were more worthy, then were these three
Hercules, Hector, and Arthur the king
For their princely Magnanimitee
Was never none, to them resemblyng
In bodily strength, all other surmountyng
Lions, Dragons, monsterous and wild
By manly co^straint, made them tame and mild
These princely men, these worthies three
Whose knightly force, for to prefer
Poets do feign, a singularitee
For their manhood, and strength in war
Should be transformed, into a star
As it were, by a divine grace
In the Cristall sky, to take their place.
To bring you, from all ambiguitie
Unto the truth, of this succession
By a dissente, and a genelogie
Without any vain, ostentacion
I purpose with an honest emulacion
Here to conclude, who so list to look
Set together, at the end of my book.
But yet because, I have expressed
As here to fore, somewhat al large
Our old abuses, newly redressed
Perchance ye will ley, them to my charge
Saying therein, ye have advantage
So that we cannot, the thing deny
But with the Prophet, to say peccaui.
We do confess, our simplicite
Like as it was, in time of Israel
To live with milk, yerbes and honey
For great excess, we take no travel
Nether for pomp, or rich apparel
We Welshemen plain, that do deny
Which is often, much used in Italy.
But as David, with grace replete
In time of Saull, the famous king
Disdained not, his sheep to keep
About the feldes, them pastoryng
Likewise do we, our selfs conferryng
Disdain not, herdmen to be
Which is aparte, of our ciuilite.
We use no figs, in pees ^tage or meat
Which in Italy, is often frequented
Without suspecte, together we eat
No poisons with us, is there invented
And ye again, contrary incensed
With poison strong, this is insubstance
The greater estate, the less of assurance.
Withdraw your pen, Master Polidorus
Your vain report, and fliyng fantasy
Your terms gross, and matter slanderus
No more in this, to amplify
But what may stand, with honesty
Words of defame, ye may well think
Men will requite, even to the pittes brink^
Herin to make, a degression
After the mind, of Josephus
In the years, and computacion
Between noble Brute, and Romulus
And of their citees, stately and sumpteous
Which of the^ twain, should other surmou^t
Of antiquitee, their years to account.
Also their stock, birthe, and their line
As ^usebius, and also saint Bid
Plainly does define and determyne
Brute to be, most ancient in deed
Four hundred and twenty years as I read
So that London, was a city of fame
When Rome, nor Romulus bear no name.
Look up your stories, and mark the^ well
When Brute began, his foundation
Ely was Judge, and priest in Israel
Next insuyng, after Samson
As holy scripture, makes mention
Which was before Christ, M. C. xxii. year
As in the stories, more plainly does apere
And thus Eusebius, also saint Bid
Affirms plain, in every thing
How Rome was made, the iiii. year in deed
Of Acham that time, of Italy king
Which does agree, the years accomptyng
That London before Rome, was raised first
Four hundred and twenty years just.
Also Galfridus, reherseth plain
How many kings, successively
One after other, here did remain
Of one dissent, line and progeny
Fully an hundred, as he does specify
Recon from Brute, down to Cadwaladre
And thus of the kings, was the hole nu^bre.
From Cadwalader, the year accomptyng
As diverse auctours, does specify
Until this time, down dissendyng
Till our most noble, theight king Henry
Of the same stock, line and progeny
As by dissent, the years does appear
Fully eight hundred fifty and eight year.
Then to account, the years and the number
Sithen Brute, took his first possession
Equally divide, them asunder
Recordyng to the computacion
And ye shall find, by plain description
Two thousand six hundred. lxvi. years plain
Sithin Brute began, the year of his reign
Thus for years, time and continuance
For blood, birthe, and high parentage
For nobilitee, and mighty puissaunce
For vigoure, strength, and manfull courage
Let us compare, with Rome and Cartage
With all other, notable citees
For our renoumed, old antiquitees.
What should I more, of this report
Sith stories old, does it renew
Whose list thereto, himself resort
As I have said, shall find it true
Set out at large, as it is dew
Honor reverence, with all other things
As does appertain, to worthy kings.
Wherefore let us, Integratly intend
Our most famous king, for to advance
Like his deserts, his grace to commend
In his high and mighty governance
Blessed are we, happy his ou^ chance
To be borne under, so noble a king
To se his grace, over us reignyng.
Which has provided, for our redress
Never none like, before this day
Let us in Wales, the truth confess
And for his grace, most hertely pray
Long to continewe, God grant he may
With rest and peace, amongst us here
Save our Queen, our prince, and his daughter
(dear.
The Autour.
Considering, fortunes mutabilitee
Now up now down, as ye whele goth a C

To day a prince, of much nobilite (bout
To morrow in danger, sta^dyng in great doubt
This has happened, the world throughout
Well most none, of the first blood and line
In any region, reigns at this time.
Among all princes, of excellence
Fo^ength of time, blood and progeny
Let us prefer, the high magnificence
Of our most royal, theight king Henry
Which at this hour, by grace of the deity
Possesses the same, kingdom and power
Like as did Brute, his first progenitoure.
Though doble fortune, in time long past
His noble blood, for to incumbre
Her traitorous traynes, a broad did cast
With foren kings, to keep them under
In diverse places, sent in an number
Yet God would not, of his divine grace
The Troyans blood, should lose their place.
As shall appear, by this dissente
Brifely set out, this present time
By auctours good, famous and excellent
As stories old, does determine
Though for a time, they were in ruin
Not possessyng their in heritaunce
God of his might, has now made assurau^ce
But sith it were, all to tedious
Their ancient names, for to prescribe
I will be brief, and comp^ndious
By number, to account this tribe
All foren kings, for to divide
Only a few of the Brutes to name
As they were worthy, of laud and fame.
FINIS.
A Genelogie of the Brutes.
Osiris Diodorus Secul^s, Birosus the Laldy in the. v. book of his anti
quities, Busebius Tibule, and Boc cas affirmith Osiris, was called Si^pis the
God in Egipte.
the first king of Egypt, in Genesis called Misraem Also king of Italy.
Hercules son of Osiris
Labus or Samct Iherom in the^r of Gen^ ^is, Diodorus Biro^us, affirmentl this
Hercules to do the. rii. nota ble labores. And not Hercules Al cides which the
Greeks affirms to be their Lhampion.
Libus called gr^a Hercules King of Egipte, Italy, Almayne, Phenice, P^rigie,
Libie, Argis, Greece, Affricke, Gall Seltike and Tuscan. Tus^us the son of
Hercules King of Italy. Atheus the son of Tuscus King of Italy. Blascon the
son of Altheus king of Italye. Lomblablasco^ Birosus in his. v book of
antiquities. I ho^ de Utter by comme^tator of Birosus, says he had. 3 sons,
Iaseus, Dardanus and Ar monia.
the son of Blascon King of Italye. Iaseus King of Italy. Armonia the third
brother.
Dardanus Eusebius says that Dardanus began too reign, the year of the
world. iii. thousand seven hun dred. xxiii. the age of Moses. i. hundred and.
xiiii.
the second son of Lo^bloblascon king of Dardine in Phrigie. Erictonius Look
in Diodorus seculus the fifte book for Erictonius.
the son of Dar dayne the second King of Dardayne. Troos ye son Diodorus
writes ex pressely yt Troy, exiled Tan talus out of high Phrigee, being kig
there. Ilius Assaracus and Ganim^ des, sons of Trois.
of Eryctonyus, changed the name of Dardaine and called it Troy. The young son
Ganimides which Tantalus betrayed. Ilion son of Trois king of Troy.
Laomedon son of Ilion king of Troy. Priamus Hector the valiant the son of
priamus
the son of Laomedon the last King.
Assaracus the second soonne of Troys.
Lapis the soonne of Assararus a Prince of Troy. Anchisis the son of Lapis a
prince of Troy. Eness the Look in saint Au ^en the twentye Chapter of the
seuentene book of the Litee of God.
son of Anchisis king of Italy. Ascanius the Look in Eusebius and Sabellicus.
son of Eneas and of Lheusa dou ghter of Priamus King of Italy.
King of ^roy. Siluius brother of Ascanius son of King of Italy.
Eneas, and of Lauina. Brute the Brute of the noble blood of ^roye look i
Fasciculus Temporu^ ^ li^a Chri st^ when Hel^ was priest in Israel and also
look Galfride,
first King of Britayne son of Siluius Posthumus. Lambre Prince of Wales.
^banactus of Scotland.
Lotrynus the son of Brute the second King of Britayne. Between Lotrsnus and
Bellinu^ w^ ^viii king^.
Belinus Belinus with help of his brother Br^ overcame ye Bom^ Look (...) A^ ye
xx. bo^*
the soonne of Donwallo the twenty and one King of Britayne. Between Belinus
and Lassibelan were (...)* (...)* ge^.
Lassibelan In Lassibela^s time Julius Le far came into this land with his
Romans.
soonne of Hely the three score and seven King of Br^ayne. Next Lassibelan was
Tinencius king.
^mbelyne the In (...) time JESUS CHRIST was borne of the glorious virgyn Mari
soonne of Timen cius the. (...). and nine King of Britayne. Between ^imbelyn
and Lucius was four Kings.
Lucius the Lucius was the first Christen King in the year of our lord an
hundred fiftye and five year. Look in Gyldas.
soonne of ^oelles the seventy and four King of Britayne. Constantine the
great son of S. Emperor of Rome Monarche and presydente of every region of
Christendom.
Helin, the iii^. score king of Britaygne. Between Constantine the Emperor and
Constantyne the third, was four kings in Britayne.
Constantine th This Con stantine d^aue out of Britany the Scotts Danes.
Norweges Pictes, and hunes with the Romans, whi the sore oppressed Bry taygne.
third of that name the. lxx^iiii. king of Britaygne. Between Constantine the
third and Arthure, was but four kings in Britaigne.
Arthur the great Of Arthur the great look in Fasciculus Te^porum in Li nea
Christi iiii. hu^drede lxiiii. in Polic^onicon xxiii. Chapter, and in Galfride.
in the year of our lord. 400. lxxx was yt lxxxxii. kig of Britayne. Between
der was. ix. Arthur and kings in Cadwala-Britaygne.
Tadwallader the Look in Fabian which affirms he slew Lotha rius, his brother
Edry^us, and Ithelwolde, three of the Saxons kiges: Look also of Gal fridus.
hunderde king of Britaygne, and the last king of Brytayne. The mortal plages
infectio^ of pestilence and scarsnes of victaylles drove Tadwallader to Rome.
Idwall son of Idwall came into Wales by commandment of Tad walader to
defend the Brytons against the Saxons. Of this Idwal Walshmen had their name.
Tadwallader, prince of North Wales. Between Idwal and Twdwr Mawr was there
eight princes successively
Tewdwr Mawre This price chased the Saxons, Danes and Pictes, from the borders
of Wales with all other foreyn enemies.
the great Prince of Wales, was the ten the Prince. Between Tewdwr Maure and
Edmonde Earl of Richmond were of lineall discente fully, xi. between Tadwaller
and Edmond. xxi
Edmond Earl This famus Edmond of the veraye true line of Tadwalader dyrectly
half brother to kig Henri. vi. whose mother was daughter to the French King and
wife to the famous King Henry the fifth.
of Richemonde son of Owen and Queen Katherine. Henri the seventh This noble
King was called the second Solomon.
son of Edmond Earl of Richmond. Henry the eyghte Henry the eight most
christe^king, King of En gla^d, France and Ireland, and of the Church of
England and Ireland, the first supreme Head,
son of Henry the seventh Edward the sixth son of Hen ry the eight whom Eod
preserve.
THese Auctours old, with one accord
This famous line, co^ueigheth straight
To ou^ most drad, sovereign Lord
By the grace of God, Henry the eight*
To Edward our price, our tresure of weight
Whom God above, their enemies repress
Send them long life, with plenteous success.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London in the parish of Christ's Church within new gate by
Richard Grafton, Prynter to our sovereign lord King Edward the. VI. 1547. Cum
priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.




