A DVTIFVL INVECTIVE, Against the most heinous Treasons of BALLARD and
BABINGton: with other their Adherents, lately executed. Together, with the
horrible attempts and actions of the Q. of Scotts: and the Sentence pronounced
against her at Fodderingay. Newly compiled and set forth, in English verse:
For a Newyeares gift to all loyal English subjects. by W. Kempe.

Imprinted at London by Richard Jones, dwelling at the sign of the Rose and
crown, near Holborne bridge. 1587.

To the right honorable my very good Lord, George Barn, L. Mayor of the City
of London: W. Kempe wishes in this world al earthly felicity, and in the
world to come the inestimable joys of Heaven.
BLame me not (right honorable, and my especial good Lord) though my boldenes
exceed the compass of discretion, and my rashness herein, surmount the
limittes of reason: For though there be (undoubtedly) many causes of great
importance and efficacy, which may utterly extinguish all hope of your
Lordships favorable acceptance hereof, and chiefly for that it wants such
ornaments, as a work (worthy your reading) ought to be furnished withal: yet
my good Lord, having a certain and most assured knowledge, both of your
Lordships most sincere, zealous, and loyal affection, you have always carried
toward her most excellent Majesty, (whose happy days I beseech the
almighty may be innumerable) and also of the studious care you have ever
fostered, for the prosperity of this flourishing, common wealth, has so
animated my fearful mind, that (casting away all doubts which I might
iustlye stumble at) I have (most bayardlike) burst out into this boldenes, and
presumed to present unto your Lordshippe, this unlearned pamphlet or small
treatise, wherein I have simply and plainly discovered the horrible and
detestable tresons, lately practiced by those graceles traitors and
unprofitable members, which (thanks be to God) lately suffered condign
punishment for their traitorous enterprises: and also made manifest the
treacherous dealing of that ungodly disposed woman, the Scottish Queen: with
the sentence pronounced against her at Fodderingay, and confirmed by her
Majesty, And further, have therein showed, what rewards they always reap
which attempt the like: and lastly conclude with an exhortation to all her
Majesty's liege people, to shun such ungodly and unnatural enterprises,
together, with a prayer for the preservation of her Highness most royal person,
her honorable Counsel, and the Commons of this Realm: humbly beseeching
your Lordship (of your accustomed goodness, and loving encouraging, you have
always used toward every one, whom you see forward in weldoing) to
vouchsafe to protect the first fruits of my labor, and whereas it
(altogether) wants learning, to furnish it with your favor, so shall your
Lordship yield more then I dare desire or can deserve, and bind me forever, to
rest at your honors command to the uttermost I may: not omitting my prayer
unto the almighty, to send your Lordship a happy new year and many: to his
(only) glory, and the earnest desires of all your welwillers.

Your Lordships most ready, as it shall please you to use me. W. Kempe.

A Joyful Nevv-yeares Gift to all loyal English subjects.
Woe, woe. yea treble woe, be unto them appointed:
That go about to overthrow, the living Lords anointed.

WHat madness has so mazd men's minds, that they cannot forsee,
The wretched ends of catiues vile, which work by treachery?
To overthrow the blessed state, of happy common wealth,
or to deprive their sovereign prince, of her long wished health.
If fear of God and of his laws, were clearelie out of mind,
If fear of death (by Princes laws) might not their duties bind?
If utter ruin of the Realm, and spoil of guiltless blood?
Might not suffice to stay the rage, of traitors cruel mood?
Yet, might they well consider, how treasons come to naught,
And always work their overthrow, by whom they first were wrought
And what they have pretended, that should on others light,
Has happened on their cursed corpse, and them confounded quight.
Examples many have been shown, which plainly do express,
How never traitor could prevail, in that his wickedness.
But still they have by God himself most straungely been prevented,
And their devices still disclos'de, though secretly invented:
Yet these ambitious wicked graftes, aspiring to grow hier,
And cherisht (as it seems) by that most lewd Italian Friar,
I mean the Pope and cursed crew of Papists most unkind,
Who walking darckly in deceit, would feign have all men blind,
Not fearing God nor yet his laws, nor having any care,
For to preserve the common wealth, or how the commons fare.
Have sought by all the subtle means, the Devil could invent,
To slay our Queen, confound the Realm, and kill the innocent.
But God, the searcher of all thoughts, who knew their wicked mind:
And saw the platform of their work, whereto they were inclinde:
And likewise having special care how he might safe defend:
His servant true (our sovereign Queen) from such most cruel end:
And with his mercy lovingly, beholding the estate,
Of us his people here on earth, before his face prostrate:
Has brought their treasons unto light, and them has over thrown
In their own stones, whereby it is most plainly seen and known,
Our sovereign Queen to him is dear, and in her he is pleased.
That for her sake these dangers great and troubles are appeasde.
O Ballard Ballard.
thou that wast the first, and chief man in this act,
What moved thee (so void of grace) for to attempt this fact?
Did thou not know, that fluttering Birds will treason still bewray:
And heaven and earth do still provide, for traitors sharp decay?
ANd Babington, Babington.
thou cursed wretch, what did bewitch thy mind?
That to thy Prince and country dear, thou should be so unkind,
Thou hopedst (belike) for better hap, then ever traitor had,
But now thou have thy due desert, which maks our hearts full glad.
SAuadge Sauadge.
also, thy name of right, unto thee is assignde,
For what could be more sauadge-like, then bear a bloody mind,
against so gracious Queen as this, who always does invent,
How she her subjects wealth and peace by all means may augment.
BUt Barnewell, Barnewell.
thou of all the rest, most cursed may thou be:
How could thy hardened Tigers heart, so wickedly agree,
For to behold so good a Prince, and of her take a view:
How she might be deprived of life, by this most traitorous crew?
ANd Tichburn, Tichburne.
thou which liu'dst so well, and had great wealth at will*
what was the cause thou wentst about, the Queen and realm to spil?
Was Pope and popish pack, so vile, now planted in thy mind:
That thou did hope for this thy crime, pardon by them to find?
ANd Tilney Tilney.
thou, amongst the rest, most worthy art of blame,
That would conspire th'vntimelie death, of such a peerless dame,
To whom (besides thy allegiance) thou specially did swear,
That during life, thou would to her, a loyal duty bear.
ANd Abington, Abington.
what Circes charm, thy wicked mind bewicht,
Her for ^o hate, who thee and thine, so largely had enricht:
Thy fathers wealth which thou possessed, in court it was all gain^
But now, thy name (with loss of it,) for ever thou have stainde.
ANd Salsburie, Salsburie.
I marvel much, what graceless Feend thee led,
Or devilish bag of hateful hell, this mischief in thee bred:
Did thou not know our gracious Queen, is placed here by God:
By justice for to punish vice, with sharp correcting rod:
ANd Jones, Jones.
how fell thy, wits away, that thou could not remember*
That he which treasons does conceal, or traitors acts does tender,
Of like and equal scorge shall taste, and have such punishment,
As he that author is thereof, and does the same invent.
CHarnocke Cha(...)
also, what fury fell, thy senseless head did fraught,
With such ungodly enterprise, which thee to shame has brought,
Now may thou see what fruitles gain, from Antechrist does spring
And how to shameful wretched end, the Pope his people bring.
DIstressed Dun, Du(...)
thy dismal day, thou justly have deserved:
That would consent her to destroy, who thee and us preserved
In quiet peace from time to time, and always does devise,
Gods truth to raise within her Realm, and popery does despise.
ANd trusties Trauis, Tra(...)
what meanst thou, this treason to conspire?
Thou thoughts by this to mend thy state, and thereby clime up hier:
But now thy fall deservedly, thy name has more disgraced:
Then all the acts thou ever did, in favor had thee placed.
ANd graceless Gage, Gag(...)
was fear of God and duty so exilde:
That thou thy name with treason foul, so lewdly have defilde?
Well may thou cu^ss^ thy careless course thou tookst in this attempt
And wish thou had even at thy birth, been from the world exempt.
ANd Bellamie Bell(...)
though last, not least, in this devilish device:
What was the game thou hopst to have, for this bad enterprise?
The Pope of like did promise thee, that thou should saincted be.
But in mean time thou quartered art, a thing more fit for thee.
ONe other Bellamie there was, amongst this cursed crew.
What was the recompense, I pray, he should receive in lue:
Of this his traitorous enterprise, An(...) Bell(...)
perhaps he should be martred:
But if he had not hanged himself he (surely) had been quartered.
Now may you see you faithles wights, what fruit from tresons spring
Now may you see what wretched end, your haples hope does bring:
Now may you all with open cry, the hour and time both curse
That ever you lent your listening ears, to her, whose words have worse
Bewitched your wretched senceles minds, that you could not forsee
The guerdon always incident, to works of treachery:
Then ever Circes wicked charms, did any wight enchaunt:
For God forbid, that traitor should, of good successes vaunt.
THe Scottish Queen, The (...)tish Que(...)
with mischief scaught, for to perform the will
Of him (whose Pupil she has been) has used all her skill:
By words most fair, and loving terms, and gifts of value great:
For to persuade your hollow hearts, your duties to forgette;
And for to be assistant still her treacheries to further,
Wherein she reckens it no sin, though you commit great murder,
Such is he heinous hateful mind, who long has lived in hope,
By such her subtle lawles means (and help of cursed Pope)
Both to deprive our sovereign Queen, of her imperial crown,
And true religion to expel, Gods gospel to put down,
And though to color this her fact, she only did pretend:
A title and her liberty, yet God will us defend.
As plainly does and may appear, by this his special care
He has of this our sovereign Queen, and of our happy fare.
Yet you be witched wretched wights, her Siren songs did hear,
And gave such credit thereunto, as nothing you did fear,
But traitorously forgetting cleans, the duty you did owe,
To this your gracious sovereign, (as all the world did know)
Did give consent, you would forthwith, by all the force you might,
Sake to deprive this peereles Prince, of Realm and regal right*
Wherein you fully did conclude, that it could never be,
Except you first conspirde her death, by secret treachery.
And thereupon consulted often, and sundry ways did seek
For to perform this devilish act, which you so well did like.
Next unto this your promise was, to lend your help and aid
With all the force and power you could, to foes that should invade.
And thereby for to set at large, that Queen whom. I did name:
Who alwaie in her treacherous mind, does naught but mischief frame.
These were the faithless parts you played, at instance of that Dame,
Who sought your ends and utter spoil, with everlasting shame:
For plainly has it fallen out, by sundry proofs most true,
She was the only maintainer, of all this Traitorous crew:
For trial whereof we may see, how that our gracious Queen
Both having care the very truth, most plainly might be seen,
And she with honor might be tried in that she was a Prince
Did cause the chiefest peers, her faults (by justice) to convince:
Who did assemble at her place (by name) called Fodderingay,
There to examine out the truth, and hear what she could say:
And to that end did then direct, to them a large commission
For to examine every one, in whom they found suspicion.
Who meeting at that place, it plainly did appear,
Howthat she was the chiefest cause, of al our troubles hear,
And that she by persuasions did seek for to withdraw,
The subjects hearts, from this our Queen, who ^arst had lived in awe.
And that the treasons named before, were al by her consent:
And that she author was thereof, and did the same invent,
Whereto her answer was so light, and to so small effect,
As that the weakness of the same, her treasons did detect.
And thereupon, these Peers of state, having a due regard,
To what she could object thereto, and likewise nothing sparde.
(by circumstance) to search out truth, did forthwith then pronounce,
That she was guilty of these crimes, and could them not renounce.
Which sentence so by them declarde, was by our Queens consent,
Plainly revealed to all estates in court of Parliament:
And was by them considered off, who there did all agree
To join in suit unto her grace, the same to ratify.
Where to our Queen with wonted grace and mercy being moved
Was loathe to yealde consent thereto, for that she well her loved
And if it could have been devised, how she might safe remain
From such like treacherous attemptes, then is it most certain,
She would not have agreed thereto, but sought some milder way,
To deal with her, although she sought, her Graces sharp decay.
But seeing there could no way be known, how any trust might be
Reposde in one that had so often, practiced most traitorously
The overthrow of this estate, and sought her Graces death.
She was resolved at the length though with a fainting breath
For to confirm that sentence just, was by her Peers decreede,
And that the same should stand in force as her own act and deed.
Commanding since in public sort, for open declaration,
That it should notified be. by public proclamation.
This is the end the Lord appoints, for those that seem to frown:
Against his anointed, whom he has endued with regal crown.
Fie on such fond and faithles wightes in whom no truth does dwell,
Who both allegiance, duet^e, love, and conscience does expel.
Could any Christian fearing God or bearing any zeal,
To good religion, christian faith, or state of public weal:
Find in his heart for to devise how he might dark a light:
That like the Ortent Sun does shine thorowout the world most bright.
^ath not her Graces government this eight and twenty years:
^ene had in admiration of all that thereof hears.
The fruit whereof does plainly prove, she is the Lords anointed:
Plast here by God for to perform, what is by him appointed.
Such senseless sottes, and dreaming doltes, which at her state do spurn,
Do seem with Cieues (by labor strong) the rivers swift to turn.
Or else do shoot against the sky, and when their arrows fall:
They light upon their cursed corpse, and kill themselves withal.
Liege people to so good a Queen, example take hereby,
Fear God, in ^hiefe, obey your Prince, and love her zealously.
Good englishmen and loyal hearts, lift up your minds with me:
Stretch out your hands, bow down your knees, unto our, God most hie:
And with incessant voice, thus cry, O Lord of might and power,
Preserve our Queen from traitors force, who seek her to devour.
Cut off such graceless wicked graftes, grub up and root their stock.
Drive out such ravening wolves (O Lord) from out thy seely flock,
Prolong her days we pray thee Lord, and if it be thy will:
Let us not ouerliue her reign, but let us have her still.
Unto her Counsel (likewise) grant, thy wisdom from above:
That with all loyal faithful hearts, they firmly may her love.
Let al their counsels ever tend, her person to protect:
From rage of foe, and popish crew, that are with mischief dect.
Upon the commons Lord also, pour down thy heavenly grace:
That in all states a perfect love and duty may take place,
Toward this peereles Prince of price, who always does delight,
To have thy praises beautified, and glory brought to light.
Amen: thereto, let all men say, with joy of inward heart,
And they that will not say, Amen: the Lord them soon convert:
Or speedely confound at least, and bring to shameful end:
That (by their fall) al others may, their traitorous lives amend.
W. Kempe.

Finis.

