A RETVRNE FROM ARGIER.

A Sermon Preached at Minhead in the County of Somerset the 16. of March, 1627.
at the readmission of a relapsed Christian into our CHVRCH.

By Edward Kellet Doctor of Divinity.

IEREM. 3.22. Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your
backe-slidings: behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for I. P. and are to be sold by Richard Thrale,
dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crosse-Keyes, 1628.

A Countryman of ours goinge from the Port of Mynhead in Sommersetshire, bound
for the streights, was taken by Turkish Pirates, and made a slave at Argier, and
living there in slavery, by frailty and weakness, for sooke the Christian
Religion, and turned Turk, and lived so some years; and in that time serving
in a Turkish Ship, which was taken by an Englishman of war, was brought back
again to Mynhead, where being made to understand the grieuousnesse of his
Apostasy, was very penitent for the same, and desired to be reconciled to the
Church, unto which he was admitted by the authority of the Lord Bishop of that
Dioces, with advise of some great and learned Prelates of this Kingdom, and
was enjoined penance for his Apostasy: and at his admission, and performance
thereof, these two Sermons were Preached, the third Sunday in Lent. Anno 1627.
one in the Forenoone, the other in the afternoon.

GALATIANS 5.2. Jf ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.


IN these giddie times, when it is esteemed a piece of Religion, for the People
to censure their Priests; if I be blamed, and it be judged unfit, Front est
ocipitio prior, and sedulus pastor, suis magis oculis, quam alienit greges suos
quam alienos lustrare debet. Dictum Xauerij.
that I spend my pains this Sabbath, in another man's Cure, and not in my own;
let me assume this just defense, That I was never absent Non licentiosa
liberate, sed necessaria seruitute; which was S. Augustine his excuse to the
Clergy, and people of Hippo, Epist. 138.
wilfully; and though I might allege, that every true Pastor, is a Pastor in
any part of the world; and we are commanded, when we have opportunity, to do
good, Gal. 6.10. and there is no such opportunity of doing good, as when
expectation is raised, by new or strange occurrences: yea, we are bound, not
only to do good, but to do the most good we can; Luke 17.10.
and if we could do all that is commanded, we have done but what was our
duty to do. Yet more fully to free, both my most worthy fellow laborer, and
my self, from the aspersion of intrusion, and of being Polypragmons (which
has been whispered among you) be pleased to know, that no part of this
business, is undertaken of our own heads, but all by the direction of our
lawful Superiors. And if it were but a thing in different, we might not
disobey them; In adiaphoris. licet per se iniuncti operis qualitas innoxia sit,
adiun^lae tamen authoritatis pondus, obnoxium mandato; mandatumque, peccato
facit obnoxium, Bernard.
but being so good in it self, and upon so unusual an accident, when a great
door, and effectual, is opened unto us, 1 Cor. 16.9. Ostium pro Occasion,
Act. 14.27, and alibi.
if we deserve no thanks, yet we fear no reproof, unless this be imputed
for one; That I am so long from my Text.

If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

THat the Apostle spoke to the Galatians, every one knows; but, neither what
the Galatians were, is so manifest unto all, nor why he wrote thus unto the
Galatians. First, of the first. The Galatians were not people of one City, as
the Romans and Corinthians, and the like were; nor was any City of the world
called Galatia, but it is the name of a whole country, situated in Lesser-Asia,
called first Gallo-Graecia, because of the French Colonies thither
transplanted, and there fixed, and then Galatia: which contained a great tract
of ground, (as may appear by its Qu^ ad Orien^^m spectat, Capadociae and
Haly-fluui^ finiti^^a, ab Occidente, sythinia, a Me^idie, Pamphilia; a
Septentri^n^, Ponto Eux^o slauditur.
boundaries) in which were three famous Cities, (says Pliny) and innumerable
Churches; In qua Ecclesias erant innu^^erabiles, says S. Augustine, in his
Book d^ vnitate Eccles^s, cap. 12.
all which were planted, and watered by the Apostle S. Paul, who reduced them
from idolatry and Paganism, unto Christianity; For he went over all the
Country of Galatia, in order, strengthening all the Disciples, Acts 18.23.
(...), sigillatim, one Church after another; every Church he visited. Musculus
in Praesat. in Epist. (...) Galat.
Now as this is the only Epistle of his thirteen, which was written to a
whole Province, to all the Brethren of Galatia; and a large letter written with
his own hand, which he did not do often, and therefore intimates, that they
should consider of it, as a singular testimony of his love; You see (says he)
how large a letter I have written to you with mine own hand, Gal. 6.11. so the
cause why he wrote it, was remarkable, and is now to be unfolded.

After that the good seed of the Gospel was sowed amongst them, whilst S.
Paul (whose jurisdiction was not limited) did labor other-where, in the
conversion of others, there were certain halfe-fac'd Christians, who received
Christ, as a Preacher of the Truth, as a pattern of Holiness in his own
person, as a guide unto perfection, for all them that believed in him. But the
forgiveness of sins, and Reconciliation with God, and the justification of
Man, they ascribed to the works of the Law, and not to Christ. Briefly, to our
purpose, thus, Acts 15.1. Certain men came down from Judea, and taught the
Brethren, saying, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye
cannot be saved: what sort of men, these Seducers were, is mentioned, Acts
15.5. They were of the sect of the Pharisees, which believed. These
Christian-Iewes, or Iewish-Christians, would join Moses and Christ, the Law
and the Gospel, forgetting the substance of the Precepts given unto them,
Leuit. 19.19. Thou shall not let thy Cattle gender with a diverse kind; Thou
shall not sow thy field with a mingled seed, neither shall a garment of linen
and woollen come upon thee. And Deuteronomy. 22.9. Thou shall not sow thy vineyard
with diverse seeds, nor plough with an Ox and an Ass together. Nor would they
remember what was written in the Gospel, Mat. 9.16. No man puts a piece of
new cloth upon an old garment; neither do men put new wine into old bottles.
All which places, do in their moral, forbid mingling of Religions, as the
Fathers expound them: Nefas est (...) veteribus commiscere, says Ambrose; and
he proves it from the place of S. Math. Tertullian understands by them, the
Old and New Testament, In lib. de Oratione, cap. 1. Christus nouis Discipulis,
nouam orationis formam determinauit. Oportebat enim, in hac quoque specie,
nouum vinum, nouis vtribus recondi; and nou^^ plagulam, nous assui vestimento.
See him to the same effect, contra Marcionem, 3.15. and contra eundem, 4.11.
And concerning the former place of Leuiticus, though I will not say with
Caietan it is not to be understood literally; because they had many Mules at
one time, even 245. Ezra 2.66. and others ordinarily, at other times, before
that, 2 Samuel 13.29. yet I will say with Isychius, The mingling of the Jewish
and Christian Religion, might be aimed at; that the water of Baptism, was to
wash away the blood of Circumcision, that the Oblation on the Altar of the
Cross, being at the time of the Evening Sacrifice, was to consummate all
Sacrifices. Procopius Gazaeus, on the place. Non absurd, praedictis sub
inuolucris, prohibet, ne diuersam sectemur Religionem. And for the place of the
Ox and the Ass in Deuter. Procopius says well; Bos, Victimae, Ciboque sacer
est: cum Asinus neutrius vsum praebeat: and since he applies the Ass to
Heretics or Grecians, I think I may much more to the Jewish Ceremonies, which
were as the Ass that Christ rid upon; and did carry Christ, as the Ass did
Isis, when as he said truly, Non tibi, sed Religioni: so the respect was borne
to the Ceremonies, not for their own sake, but for Christ's.
so, whilst they would be both Jews and Christians, they were neither true
Jews, nor perfect Christians.

Of this kind, were the Millenaries long after, who would have the Law and
Circumcision in force with the Gospel, whom Epiphanius Haeres. 77, From my
Text confuteth: yet through the enticing of those false Brethren, the simple
Galatians were bewitched; and began to place confidence in the virtue of
Circumcision. Our holy Apostle in two Epistles does many ways confute this
error. It is an idle distinction, which Cornelius Cornelij a Lapide the Jesuit
makes, between the Epistle to the Romans and this Epistle; That this was
written against the Gentiles only, but the Epistle to the Romans was writ
against both Jews and Gentiles: for, the Apostle here wrote, against the
Gentiles for Iudaizing; and against the Jews for seducing them. Tertullian
aduersus Marcionem lib. 5, says, This is the principal Epistle, aduersus
Iudaismum. But an exacter difference is this: In this Epistle he fights
chiefly against the Ceremonials, to which the Gentiles were now incaptiuated;
In the Epistle to the Romans, his maine force is bent, against the moral works
of the Law, of which the Jews boasted, above the Gentiles; that even they, do
not justify a sinner, much less the Ceremonials, but only Faith in Christ.
Fetch all the Arguments, who pleases, at the fountains head; this being an
easy Epitome of it: that conuincing by deeper demonstration, and eloquence
maiesticall; this Epistle to the Galatians, rather reproouing, then teaching,
in phrases not so lofty, as homely, and fitting to new conuerts. Hierom thus
Altuiri sens^, and profundioribus vsus est argumentis ad Romanos. Ad Galatas,
moderasio^s stilo, increpat potius quam docet, and communes sententias communi
orati^n^ vestit.


But let us come, first to the words in a lump; then to the points in
several,

The Syriac has it, If you Be circumcised, Christ does profit you nothing. May
I add, if it had been read, If you shall be circumcised Christ shall profit
you nothing: that there in no difference, in sense from these words, If you Be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For, all the three Propositions,
run to this head, to show the praesent dangerous estate of them, who trust in
Circumcision.

The points do follow.

1. From the Persons spoken unto, viz the Galatians. If ye be circumcised, is
afforded liberty to examine, whither the Jews, and Gentiles, where under the
same tie and yoke, concering Circumcision, when S. Paul wrote thus? 2. From the
Commination, Christ shall profit you nothing, is occasion administered to show,
what the loss of Christ is, and how heinous is that sin of being
circumcised, which is attended with so dread-full a punishment, as the
receiving of no benefit by the death of Christ.

But set the Emphasis on (...) and weigh, that he says not, If ye have bin
circumcised, but, si circumcidamini, If ye be Circumcised; then thirdly and
lastly, from the praesent tense of the verb, as the former point is punctually
established, viz the danger of damnation, that they are in for the praesent,
who trust in Circumcision, and are Jews in heart; so is it not auerred nor
intended, that a Gentile Circumcised, and after repenting, is in that woeful
case: but rather from the present danger of obstinate Iudaizing-Gentils, the
future freedom of the Circumcised Gentile, whenever he becomes a
Repentant Christian, may be justly gathered, or inferred. Thus did the present
occasion set me on this Text, and the points are drawn and sorted to the
present occasion. Proceed we now orderly.

Whereas the first Quaere is, Whither Jews and Gentiles, were equally bound,
to abandon Circumcision; I distinguish, that the Jews were of two sorts, the
first, Obstinate vnbeleeures, who had no part in Christ, and of those, the
quaestion is not understood: the second sort, were Jews, yet Disciples,
party-colored Christians, and those men's case, varied from the Gentiles. For,
though it had been their safest way, to have renounced Circumcision, after they
were initiated into Christ, yet these men might have kept up Circumcision,
which was wholly forbid unto the Gentiles. Indeed at any time, after Christ's
death, if the Jews had used Circumcision, as thinking it absolutely necessary
to salvation, they had sinned Credeban^ adhuc Signum durare, and tunc signatum
nondum venisse, and sic excidebant a Christo. Aquin. in his Lection on my Text.
For it was a type of Christ, and in effect, they had denied Christ to be the
Messiah, who so trusted in Circumcision: yet in other respects, it was, it
might be in long use after S. Hierom did well maintain, that the Ceremonials
were neither mortna, nor mortifera, till Christ's Passion, but he erred in
saying, that they might not be used, without sin, after Christ's Death. See
Aquin. 1.2. Quaest. 103. Artic 4.
S. Augustine more conveniently tripartites the time: first, Whilst Christ
lived (says he) the Ceremonialls were in force: secondly, Between Christ's
Death, and the Publication of the Gospel the Ceremonialls were dead, as having
no virtue in them, and none were bound to keep them: yet were they not wholly
unlawful: thirdly, after the Preaching of the Gospel, they were both dead,
and deadly, unprofitable in themselves, and sinful to others, in their use.
Yet even this last Position, is not sound, unless we stretch it, to a large
latepatencie Scotus dislikes it; and though Conrade Koellin, on Aquin. 1^, 2
ae. Quaest. 103, taxes Scotus, that he took nor aright, what Augustine and
Thomas understand, by the Diuulgation of the Gospel; and thereupon
distinguishes, There is a double Publication of the Gospel, Vna imperfecta,
quando per Apostolos and alios praedicati erant Articuli fidei, and the
Necessity of the Sacraments of the New-Law, and of the Praecepts of Christ.
The other is the perfect Promulgation of the Gospel, where the aforesaid
things were preached, and the sufficiency of the New-Law without the Legals,
and the inutilitie, yea hurt of the Legals. After this Publication, Aquin
means, it was not lawful to observe the Legals as Sacraments; and Scotus
opposes not this, says Koellin: yet he himself is too blame, first, in
making an imperfect Preaching of the Apostles, which was most perfect, though
indeed not so large, or full. Secondly, in mistaking Aquinas, who says not any
where, it was lawful to observe the Legalls as Sacraments, at any time,
between Christ's Death, and the full promulgation of the Gospel. For it was
at no time lawful, after the Death of Christ, to use them, as Sacraments, and
so the heart of his distinction is broken, which makes is unlawful, to use
Legals, as Sacraments, after the enlarged Promulgation, which was merely
unlawful, at the first, or breifer Publication:
For the faith of the Romans, was spoken-of, throughout the whole world, Romans
1.8. And, the Gospel was in all the world, Coloss. 1.6. And the Apostles had
in their perfectest Counsel at Jerusalem, determined against the
Ceremonials, Act. 15.10. -- Yet after this, S. Paul did Circumcisie Timothy,
Act. 16.3. and shaued his head at Cenchrea, Act. 18.18. And the Ceremonials
might lawfully be practiced even after this, upon two especial reasons: first,
because they were not buried, though they were dead. For, if not only Princes,
but Noblemen, yea very mean persons sometimes, after they have expired, be
kept above ground, that they may be more honorably, and solemnly interred,
then why not Moses? Why not his Law, which being so full of Ceremonies, was not
to want that ordinary, great and last Ceremony of a prolonged, stately,
Princely, burial? If any one be so curious, as to search, What day, what hour
the Funerals were ended, and exactly, when it was first a sin, for the
Iewish-Christians, to be Circumcisied? I will answer, that as the Lord buried
Moses, and no man knows of his Sepulcher, unto this day, Deuter. 34.6. so
perhaps it was a prognostic, that no man should know that Article of time,
when the Ceremonies were so accomplishedly interred, that the use of them,
should begin to be sinful. Quando ista publicatio facta sit, non Legitur in
Scriptura, says Koellin ibid. and he speaks of the extended, and (as he
calls it) the perfest promulgation of the Gospel.
yet this shall not hinder me from showing my guess, and private opinion, That
the Mosaicall Ceremonies were buried in the ruins of the Temple, or rather in
the dispersion, under Adrian, as will probably arise from the next reason. The
second reason, why after Christ's death, yea, after the manifestation of the
Gospel, the Ceremonialls were not quite abolished, but permitted, is drawn
from the scandal of the weak Brethren, in whose behalf, and for whose
salvation, these things were lawfully put in ure, which otherwise had been
unlawful. For, though we need not yield any thing, when there is an obdurate
passive Tertullian in his Book de Velandis wirginibus, Bonae res neminem
scandalizant nisi malam mentem. Si bonum est modestia, verecundia, fastidium
gloriae, agnoscant malum suum, qui de tali bono scandalizantur. Quid enim si
incontinentes dicant se a continentibus scandalizari continentia reuocandane
est? S. Hierom ad Heliodorum is more lofty and resolute. Licet in limine
eaieat pater, per calcatum patrem perge, and fixis oculis ad vexillum Crucis
euola.
scandal; called Scandalum Iudaeorum, or Pharisaeorum, because, they were
offended with Christ's wholesome Doctrine, Matt. 15.12. and with the miraculous
raising of Lazarus, John 11.47. and at his wisdom and mighty works, Matt.
13.57. but we are to follow Christ, who did not many mighty works there, Matt.
13.58. and went thence, Ioh. 11.54. and only of them, Sinite illos, caeci duces
sunt caecorum. Matt. 15.14. and yet continued doing of good otherwhere, Mark.
6.6. Consider these places; 1 Cor. 10.32. Gal. 6.2. Matt. 18.6. Heb. 12 -- 1
Cor. 9.19. -- 1 Cor. 8.9 --
The Prophet Isaiah 57.14. says, Not only, lay no stumbling block; but if
others lay it, Take up the stumbling-blocke; not to let it fall again; but
take it out of the way of my people. And 1. Thessal. 5.22. Abstain from all
appearance of sin: that is, though thou sinnest not, yet avoid scandal,
since there needed no abstaining, from the appearance of evil, if none would
take offense at it. In this case S. Paul says, I would eat no flesh, while the
world stands, least I make my brother to offend. Yea, if the feeble
Disciples, be offended, with our omission of things indifferent, we are, no
longer, to omit them. Many thousand Jews, were turned Christians, who were
zealous for Moses his Law, Act. 21.20. who were scandalized by S. Paul, as if
he had taught all the Jews, among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying, that
they ought not to circumcise their children. S. James the Bishop of Jerusalem,
and his Presbiters, persuaded S. Paul, to remove this scandal, and to purify
himself, with others, after the manner of the Jews: yet were the Ceremonials,
now, dead, and S. Paul had truly preached against them. For all this because
this doctrine, was scandalous at Jerusalem, where were more Jews, then in any
City of the world, S. Paul did purify himself: And for the same respect,
because of the Jews, which were in those quarters, did Circumcise Timothy,
Act. 16.3. For, Timothy his father being a Greek, and his mother a Iewesse,
Circumcision, or Uncircumcision, was Indifferent: but to establish the weak,
and remove scandal, did the great Impugner of the Mosaical rites, not omit
that indifferent Circumcision. Yea, to take away this stone of offense,
Circumcision was retained, a long time, in the City of Jerusalem, and
fifteen Christian Bishops of Jerusalem were all successively of the
Circumcision. And the first Christian Bishop of Jerusalem, that was a Gentile,
was one Marcus, in the Reign of Adrian, after the overthrow, both of the
Temple, and of the City whose name Jerusalem was changed into Aelia. So says
Nicephorus 3.25. and Sulpitius Seuerus lib. 2. Histor. though Baronius does
nibble at it, ad Annum Christi 138. In these two cases only, Circumcision
might without offense, be kept on foot, by the believing Jews, even after the
promulgation of the Gospel: though they may praetend a third reason, for the
continuation of it, from the words of God, Genesis 17.13. My Covenant shall bein
your flesh for an everlasting conenant; yet they are to know, that (...) Olano,
imports not, an absolute, but a respective euerlastingnesse: as a Ward, is
for ever a Ward, until the time appointed of the father, Gal. 4.2. which
euerlastingnesse is not unlimited, but bounded; not simple, but referentiall:
so circumcision being but a Type, was to last only, to a Typical,
paedagogicall, periodicall, euerlastingnesse, that is till the substance should
come. Deuter. 15.17. He shall be thy servant for ever; yet in the Chambers of
Death, the servant is free from his master, Job. 3.19. and nor master, nor
servant, can live for ever. Aeternum sumitur pro saeculo, quod habet finem, sed
non determinatu^ nobis, says aquinas. Thus much be spoken, concerning the
Jewish Christians, and the reasons, why Circumcision was allowed unto them. Now
concerning the Christian-Gentile, he was not permitted in any case to be
Circumcised, no, though he were at Jerusalem, among the favorers of
Circumcision, as appears by the example of Titus, Gal. 2.3. The Apostles in
their Council, reckon among other things, Circumcision, as a trouble to the
Gentiles, Act. 15.19. and in their missiues, Act. 15.28. they account it a
burden. S. Paul calls it an entanglement, a yoke, a bondage, in the verse
immediately before my Text; And I testify again, unto every man, that is
circumcised, that he is debtor, to do the whole Law; immediately after my
Text: a poor debtor, wrapped in Bands, worse then the Bonds of Usurers; in
Bonds forfeited, and impossible to be satisfied; for no mere man ever kept the
whole Law. Now, least that presumptious credulity might cosen it self, in
hoping that Christ, would be their Mediator, that he had satisfied the whole
Law for them, and would pay their debt and blot out the Handwriting of
Ordinances, which was against them, and contrary unto them, and take it out of
the way, and nail it unto his Cross. S. Paul, with more then common
earnestness, and holy feruencie, protests, Behold, I Paul say unto you, that
if you, you Galatians, be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

And yet on the other side, if a circumcised Gentile, had after, turned
Christian, it is the Apostolical rule to his Corinthians. 1. Cor. 7.18. Is any
man called being circumcised? let him not become uncircumcised; as it is
modestly rendered, in our late Translation Non adducat praeputium, says the
Vulgar: but its in the Original, (...), non attrahatur praeputium. Where the
Apostle secretly reprehendeth, the wicked custom of the Jews, who by
Instruments and Medicines made Circumcision to become uncircumcision: as
appears plainly, by the opposition of the two Verbes, (...) and (...); for,
they re-skinned the secret part. Hence Martial made mention, Recutitornm
Iudaeorum; and their very Sabbaoths, escaped not the venom of tongues, but were
called, recutita Sabbata. Though Origin (...) denies such a reduction or
dilatation can be, yet Celsus that learned Physician 7o.25. says, it may be.
Theodoret agrees with us. Epiphanius de Mensura and Ponderibus. about the
midst of the Book shows the means, and terms the attractorie
Instrument (...) Spastherem, and says, the Jews do father the invention of
it, on the Renegado Esau, (who sold away his Birthright, and thought to
frustrat the sign of the true Religion, perhaps then, when to the grief of
his Parents, he took two wives, of the Hittites, Genes. 26.34) -- Certain it
is that they who turned from the Jewish Religion, to the Samaritan, or from the
Samaritan to the Jewish, were twice Circumcised; and Symachus, who translated
the Hebrew, into Graeke, was twice Circumcised; says Epiphanius. Or if the
Jews embraced the Gentile Religion, as Menelaus and Tobias his sons did
(says Josephus Antiquit. Judaic. 10o.6o.) Adduxerunt sibi praeputia, vt nudi
quoque non essent Graecis dissimiles; which Josephus horrowed from 1. Maccab.
1.17. They made themselves uncircumcised; or as the Vulgar has it, fecerunt
sibi praeputia. The Apostell, wholly disliketh the course, and would not have
bodily Circumcision, to be made Uncircumcision, when once it is done, yet most
severely interdicteth Circumcision to the Gentile Galatians. Jf ye be
Circumcised, Christ profits you nothing.
Thus am I fallen off from the first general part of my Text, which was
extracted from the quality and condition of those, to whom our holy Apostle
wrote; namely, the Galatians, Gentile-Christians, to the second maine point
from the Commination it self; What it is to loose Christ, and the greatness
of that sin, which is accompanied with the loss of so great a benefit.

The loss which one may have, by the loss of Christ, can never be
sufficiently conceived, unless we value the great good and benefit, which we
gain by him.

And this good or profit, must needs be undervalued, unless the miserable
estate in which we were, before he helped us, be considered.

View therefore:

First, our lamentable condition in the state of Nature. Secondly, the infinite
blessings of our Redemption by the merits of Christ.

Thirdly, the loss of so precious a Jewel, of so great riches, as the not
being profitable by Christ.

But, first, let me have a venue with the words (...), nisi circumcidamini; Ye
cannot be saned say the false Brethren, Acts 15.1.

(...) si circumcidamini, says the Apostle in my Text, If ye be circumcised,
Christ shall profit you nothing. Where S. Paul opposes Christ's not profiting
us, unto Salvation denied by the Pseudapostols; intimating that Christ's help,
affords us salvation: Christ's not profiting us, leaves us in the state of
Damnation.

(...), though the word does more properly, and natiuely, betoken gain,
benefit, emolument, or increase, as (...) its primitive, signifies to heap
up, to amasse, or gather together: yet by a metaphor, it is derived, to any
manner of help, aid, comfort, benevolence, profit, or assistance: all which
in every kind, as the sound Christian reapeth by his Savior, so he who
circumciseth himself, in confidence of its virtue, shall gather no fruit by
Christ, no blessing any way. Christ (...) shall profit him nothing. The
circumcised Christian, aufert dominicae Passionis effectum, says Aquinas on
the place; that is, he is in no better condition, than if Christ had not dyed
for him; and that estate is most commiserable, which is the first point to be
explained.

That we were once happy in Adam, and might so have continued; costeth sighs
to remember, and tears to recount: for he represented our persons, and stood
for Us Idealiter, from which happiness he fell, and We with Him, and in Him.
One sin, one sin only, the first sin of Adam, brought Us to the Vallie
of death, and into this woeful plight, (as may be seen in my Miscellanies, as
yet vnpublished.)

Rich We were, He has made Us Poor; yea, by clothing Us, has made Us naked.
We were Lords of the Creatures; now We are servants to sin. We were in Him
the Sons of God, Luke 3.38. now we are by Him, the children of wrath, Ephesians.
2.3. The object of our understanding was truth; the perfection was knowledge:
but now we are ignorant, Ephesians. 4.18. The object of our will was goodness, the
perfection Love but now we are naturally vain, Ephesians. 4.17. The object of our
irascible part, was Difficulty, if any thing then might be said to be
difficult, which might have been perfected in victory; but now this faculty
is grown infirm: the flesh lusts, and as natural men, we are sure to be
vanquished. The object of our part concupisci^le, was moderate delight, the
perfection was contentment; but now we are fallen pointblanke to the contrary,
Ephesians. 4.19. Omnes morimur in Adamo, 1 Cor. 15.22. and through Him, the whole
nature of every one of mankind, (Christ only excepted, who is the immaculate
Lamb of God) is corrupted, secundum se totum, and totum sui: insomuch, that all
the faculties of our souls and bodies are depraved: and every one is naturally
subject to every sin, which has been, or hereafter may be committed. He who
desires to see our corrupt nature more lively painted forth, let him have
recourse to Romans 3. from the ninth, to the nineteenth verse: and Ephesians. 2.1.2.
and 3. verses, and especially Genesis 6.5. that every imagination of the thoughts
of man's heart, was only evil continually. In this deplorable condition, the
first Adam left us; then comes the second Adam, our only Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, (which is the second point, and now to be insisted upon,) He
takes our nature upon him, Heb. 2.16. He vanquisheth Satan, and his
temptations, because Adam was vanquished. He fasted, because Adam sinned by
eating: He watched, He prayed, He fulfilled all the Law: He was wounded for our
transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our
peace, was upon Him, and with his stripes we are healed, Esa. 53.5. God has
made Him to be sin for Us, who kne no sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. Christ has redeemed
Us from the curso of the Law, being made accursed for us, Gal. 3.13. For Us did
he sweat drops of blood in the Garden; for us, was He nailed to the Cross,
and put to a most shameful death: for us, did He tread out the Wine Press of
Gods wrath alone; and for us, appreciatiue, satisfied the rigor of Gods
justice: He dyed for our sins, and rose again for our justification, Rom
425. And now He sits at the right hand of God, speaking better things for
us, than the blood of Abel. And whereas the Accuser of the Brethren, night and
day, soliciteth God for vengeance against our sins; Christ the great Mediator
stands between Gods wrath and us, and interposeth his Merits, giving us time
to repent. There is not a sentence executed now, against any of mankind, but
it proceeds our of the mouth of Christ. Indeed Basil against Eunomius says.
that the Father appeared, Esa. 6.1. but it is attributed to Christ, Ioh 12.40.
and 41. and S Paul ascribes it to the Holy Ghost, Acts 28.25. So that each
person is Judge equally, in Diuinis: yet Christ has now this power of
Judicature, deputed unto him. Ioh 5.22. Math. 11 27. Math. 28 18. He has the
keys of hell, and of death, Revel. 1.18 The Trinity judges authoritatiue,
Christ, executiue: God, by a primarie independent right; Christ, by a delegated
power: Est in Patre authoritas in Filio sub-authoritas: Christ is not Judge
exclusiuely, or by way of opposition to the Father or the Spirit; but by
appropriation. And this authority he has as he is Man, Ioh. 5.27. Acts 17.31.
And it was given him at his Incarnation, Heb. 1.6. But the full actual
administration of this power, was not till his Ascension and sitting at the
right hand of. God, 1 Pet. 3.22 Heb. 10.12. Augustine de fide and symbolo cap.
7. makes sedere, to signify a Iudiciarie power. All this also is proved at
full, in my Miscellanies of the particular judgment of souls immediately upon
death; which point has never bin handled, as it ought or may be.
Thus, are we delivered from the power of darkness, Colos. 1.13. yea, he has
now reconciled us, who were alienated and enemies, verse 21. We were wounded,
and the good Samaritane has healed us; We were dead in our sins, and He has
quickened us, and has forgiven us all our trespasses, Col. 2.13. He is our
peace, Ephesians. 2.14. In him we are complete; In him we are circumcised, with
the Circumcision made without hands; buried with him, risen with him, Colos.
2.10. And God has made us sit together in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 2.6. Christ Jesus of God, is made unto us, Wisdom, and Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. And, we are made the Righteousness
of God, in Christ. We are justified by his blood, and we shall be saved from
wrath by him, Romans 5.9. Briefly thus, he has now done us more good, than ever
Adam did harm, Romans 5.15.

For, first, Adam conveyed unto us original sin only, which cannot be
intended, but is alike in all. Christ gives many different graces, and
increases them; yea, many, which Adam and his posterity should never have had,
if he had not fallen: as Patience, Virginity, Repentance, Bowels of Pity, and
tender commiseration, fraternall Correction, and the perfection of
Christianity, glorious Martyrdom.

Secondly, Adams sin, was the sin only of a mere man; Christ's obedience
was the obedience of the Son of God, the Mediator between God and Man, the
Man Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 2.5. Adams sin was but the producer of that effect,
which must needs have been in God: for God is necessarily just, and could not
be otherwise. But Christ has brought forth mercy in God, and God might have
been both God, and a good God, and yet not merciful. For Mercy presupposes
Misery; Miserecordiae propria seeds est, Miseria, says Bernard; and Misery
might not have been.

Thirdly, by Adams offense, Man is compared to the Beasts that perish, Psalm.
49.12. By the grace of Christ, we shall be (...) equal to Angels, Mark. 12.25.
Man being at the best, in the first Adam, our nature was inferior to the
Angels, Heb. 2.7. yea, Christ himself on earth, by his suffering of death,
Heb. 2.9. though now we see him crowned with glory and honor; yet in other
regards, Christ is preferred before the Angels, Heb. 2.2.3.5. and Heb. 1. the
whole Chapter is but an Eulogie, Magnificat, and Landatory of our Savior, both
as God and Man, exalting him above the Angels, in his Person, and in his
Office, and giving him, among other, these prerogatives; That he is set down
on the right hand of the Majesty on high, verse 3. That he is made so much
better than the Angels, as he has by inheritance, obtained a more excellent
name, verse 4. That God never spoke to the Angels, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee, and I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a
Son, verse 5. But God said concerning Christ, Let all the Angels of God
worship him, verse 6. They are his ministers and instruments, verse 7. He is a
Judge, an eternal Judge; Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, verse 8. yea,
not only the natural humane soul of our Savior Jesus Christ, blessed for
ever; and the soul of the blessed Virgin Mary full of grace, but even our
bodily nature in Christ, is lifted up, above Angels, and Archangels,
Cherubims, or Seraphims, or any Creature of that Spiritual and Celestial
Hierarchy.

Fourthly, Adams (...), could not reach to Christ, and infect him. Christ's
(...) came home to Adam, and not only saved his soul, but Christ's Blood on
the Cross, besprinkled the very grave of Adam; and whereas the first offense,
had not power enough to destroy any one in this world, if they trusted in
Christ; the Obedience of the second Adam is not only in the rigor of Gods
justice, sufficient for the sins of one world; but if GOD should create more
worlds of men, and all they be sinners, and after sin, repentant and
believing in Christ, the superabundant riches and treasure of his merit, could
not be spent: the fountain of his Blood would not be dried up; they should all
be saved, and GOD must rest indebted to the Cross: it has paid for more than
can sin, to the greatest number of sins and sinners that can be named by
one; another man may make addition, (for all Numeration is finite) but the
Infinite merit of Christ can never be exhausted.

Fifthly, if by the first Adam, Goodness was destroyed, not only the same
Goodness, is by the second Adam revived; but even the evils of punishment, yea
of faultiness, mala poenae, and mala culpae, mala vltoria, and mala
peccatoria, as they are phrased by Tertullian, all, and every one of these,
turn to the behoof and good of Gods children. For, we are Conquerours, we
are more than Conquerours, through him that loved us, Romans 8.37. For, many
Conquerours, through envy, have been denied Triumph; but we do always
triumph in Christ, 2 Cor. 2.14. And we know, that all things work together
for good, to them that love God, Romans 8.38. Persecution, Sickness, Death,
Temptation, Sin and Satan, shall by Christ profit us. Let no man blame my
prolixitie, nor censure me, for much commending of Christ, whom none
discommendeth; for summing up the gain which we have by Him, which none would
lose. For lo, there stands before us, in a habit penitential, and of a
mind (I hope) most penitent, an heinous sinner; who renounced Christ, fled
from the glorious Ensign of the Cross, which he received in Baptism;
disclayming his portion in the second Person of the individual Trinity, and in
fact, if not in word, professing himself an enemy to the son of the Blessed
Virgin full of grace; Jesus Christ our only Lord and Savior. O why did thou
fly when thou were captive, from him, who was thy Redeemer? and being free in
Christ, though in bodily durance, would thou be taken captive by Satan? and
to avoid the slavery of the little Devil, the Turk, deuote thy self to the
great Devil the enemy of mankind? By not adhering to Christ, by wauing thy
belief, by disclayming thy vow in Baptism, by professing Turcisme, thou have
sold heaven, art initiated into hell, and have purchased only a conscience,
frighted with horror, where the Worm still gnaweth, and still is hungry. Yea,
whereas you thought to gain by forsaking Christ, you have forfeited all right,
to all the creatures in heaven, and in earth. For, the true Christian, by
having Christ, has an Interest in all things: All things are ours, and we are
Christ's, and Christ is God's, 1 Corinthians. 3.33. And he that is without Christ
though he may have, a right, in Fore terrene, and humano; (for Dominium, non
fundatur, in Gratia; sed in Natura) and we allow Propriety, so that the Meum
of one Heathen, differs from the Tuum of an other: Yet in Foro coelesti, and
Diuino, Revel. 5.11. -- Many Angels, round about the Throne, or that Throne,
(...) with a loud voice, said, Worthy is the Lamb, that was slain, (namely
our Savior Jesus Christ) to receive, Power, Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength,
and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing; and every Creature, which is in Heaven,
and on the Earth, and under the Earth, and such as are in the Sea, and all that
are in them, not in eo as is the vulgat, but (...), all the offspring of all
Creatures, said, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, be unto Him that sits
upon that Throne, (to distinguish him from others who sat on other Thrones)
and to the Lamb for ever and ever. They are all for Christ, and are Christ's;
and by Him, for us; We being called unto the fellowship of Jesus Christ our
Lord. 1 Cor. 1.9. Co-heires with him, Romans 8.17. And a reason hereof is given,
verse 32. If God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all;
how shall he not, with him also, freely give us all things? But all these things
have you lost, (poor miserable soul) by losing Christ; and this great loss,
does argue the heinousness of thy sin, which is the next point in my
propounded Method, to be handled.

For, though perchance you thought it, to be a small offense, and it is
muttered among some unbelievers, or Misbeleeuers, as if this Penance were
greater than the Fault, yet you will confess, the merciful indulgence of our
Church, and the ugliness of this offense, if you consider these five points.

First, that God has loaded little sins with heavy punishments.

Secondly, that thy sin, put into the balance, weighs more, than the sin
of Caine, or of Achitophel, or of the Jews, which murdered Christ.

Thirdly, that thy sin is made exceeding sinful, by believing in so
notorious a monster as Mahomet was: And in his law, which is so full of beastly
and senseless lies.

Fourthly, the exceeding sinfulness of thy transgression, is yet aggrauated,
both from the excellency of Christ's person, whom thou did forsake, (He being
the second Person in Trinity, the Son of God, the holy Redeemer of man, the
great (...), the Angelus Foederis,) and likewise from the rational verities of
our Christian profession.

Fifthly and lastly, whereas by thy kindred, friends, or acquaintance, (in a
foolish pity, hurtful to thy soul) false colors are set on bad cloth;
fair painting on a rotten board; and some have risen up in your defense, with
semblances, to make thy sin show less; I intend (by Gods grace) in a holy
servitude, for the good of thy soul, and for the terror of others, to pluck
the figgelcaues, to take away the excuses, to remove the loose veiles and
couers, that so you may see and bewa^le the monstrousness of your offense; and
that others may avoid the like.

First, therefore you will easily confess the fouleness^ of your
transgression, if you remember that God does all things (...); and being, (...)
never punished beyond measure, any sin; but always citra condignum; and yet
shall behold the severity of Gods judgments against small trespasses. The
breach of the Sabbath was attended with death, Exodus 31.14. The gatherer of
sticke^ in the Sabbath was put in Ward and then stoned, Numb. 15.34. Moses,
capitali paenae subiecit ros, qui Sabbaium violarent, ^d potissimum de causa,
quod Mundi creationem, Sabbathi violatione, in dubium reuocare viderentur, vt
Kabbi Moses Aegyptius scribit, says Bodin, in Methodo sua, page 312.
Saul rejected for not destroying of Amalech, 1 Samuel 15 23. Vzza smote for his
rashness, 2 Samuel 6.7. though he intended well. Aplague sent to sweep a whole
country, for David's numbering of the people, 2 Samuel 24.15. In the new Testament,
Ananias and Saphira strooken with sudden death for a lie, Acts 5.3. The buyers
and sellers in the Temple cast out and scourged with small cords, Ioh. 2.14.
though their actions were conducible, to the readier administration of
sacrifices in the Temple, S. Peter was called Satan, for giving ill advise,
Math. 16.23. though, non odiendo Christum, sedse nimis amando peccauit, says
Bernard. And not Hilarious alone (though Maldonat says so) but Chrysologus
Sermon 27. (and perchance some others, whom nor Maldonate, nor I ever read)
more wittily, than soundly expound the words, thus; Dominus, seruum post se
mittit. Scandalum remittit authori: dicendo ad Petrum, Vade post me: and
Diabolo, Scandalum mihies.
And that which in application may strike horror to our souls, the Fig Tree
was cursed for bearing nothing but leaves, when the time of Figs was not yet
come, Mar. 11.23. These were just rewards for small offenses, for peccadillos
in the eyes of men; but every sin deserves death, even the least anomy, in
the exactness of Gods justice. One mortal sin is not expiable with seven
years lying in the torments of hell. But this thy sin, was not only mortal,
not only a breach of thy vow in Baptism; but a flat Rebellious understanding
of it: A treacherous opposition, a seandalous contradiction; stayning and
ingrayning of the Crystal clere-sauing water of Baptism, with the blood of
Circumcision. Thy abiuring of thy Savior, was an offense, almost beyond
Pardon, and above Indulgence; as may appear, by a comparatiue Reference of
some particulars, of thy Sin, with others. In contemplation whereof, though
some do clippe thy sin, yet I dare say, That in diverse regards, thy sin
was greater, then that of Caines; He slew, but his Younger-Brother; but You
have slain, as far as you then could, the first borne of every Creature, the
Lord of Life; and have crucified to your self again, the Son of God afresh,
and put him to an open shame, Heb. 6.6. The blood of Abel did cry against
Caine: Vox sanguinum clamantium fratris tui, Genesis 4.10. Vox seminum clamantium,
says the Chaldee; the voices of the little-ones, which might have descended
from Abel, in him, did cry against that ungracious Fatricide; yea, though Caine
was branded all his life time, with unusual bodily torment; and punished in his
soul ever since, and all his posterity swept from the face of the earth in
the flood; yet still the blood of Abel cries for vengeance, Heb. 11.4. as
Aquin expounds it; and shall cry till the hand that struck the blow, do burn
in fire and brimstone; so Estius and Ribera. What punishment then did you
deserve, in betraying your Elder-brother that offered up a better sacrifice
than Abel, and would more profit you, than ever Abel would, or could have
profited Caine?

Thy transgression was greater then the sin of Achitophel, for he, only with
a Politic eye, looking rather on the Sunne-rising, then on the Sunne-setting,
rebel^d against his Lord, and Master, David; but you have deserted, yea armed
your self, against David's Lord, and Master.

Thy Offense was greater, then diverse of the Jews, who put our Redeemer unto
death; for, they did it through ignorance, as did also their rulers, Act. 3.17.
But you wittingly against your own Conscience, forsook your Savior; and
though they praeferred Barabbas (who was a Robber John 18.40. a Murderer, Act,
3.14. a Mutiner, Luke 23.19.) yet you have adhaered to one, every way, worse
then Barrabas; before the most holy, just, and innocent Christ, you have
aesteemed Mahomet, that Rake-shame of the World, which was the third point
propounded, and is now to be handled. Mahomet (I say) the Rauisher of his
Mastresse, See Baronius ad Annum Christi, 630.
the known Adulterer with one Zeid, which he him-self confesses in his Law,
and says, God made it sinne-lesse, and exemplarie for ever: a Murderer of the
Emperors Brother: a Rebel against Heraclius, who was his Benefactor: a
Gentile, in some points, a Jew in others, a Christian in others, a Maniche,
Nestorian; and Arrian; a very Compound of Heresies; a Compounder of Vanities; a
grand Imposter, out of whom Eusebius in his Panoply, has gathered, 130.
Fables; and in whose Alcoran, there is such an hotchpotch of errors, that the
sight or smell, would surfeit one. Errors palpable, as the Egyptian darkness:
nasty, as bred in the lap of lust; so brutish, so blockish, that, knowing all
his vanities would he easily confuted, he cutteth off all disputations, with
the sword; and in steed of Persuasion, the Child of Truth displayed, he has
set Death before them, to keep them fast in blindness; yet in spite of
worldly Policy, there have broke-forth, seauentie two principal Mahumetan
Sects, See ^ulius Scaliger, against Exercitat, 258. Cardan, Sect. 2. which he
borrowed from Ioannes ^eo, and Master Sandy^ from Scafiger.
says Johannes Leo, in his third Book, of his African History, And Leo was
sometime himself a learned Mahumtan; but seeing, with the eyes of his mind,
their abominable Errors; and with the eyes of his Body, such villainy, as never
was heard of, to be vpheld, by their superstitious Beleese, contrary to sight,
and sense, at one open Market in Alcair (as is in the same third book) he
bathed himself, in the Lauer of Regeneration, and detesting their Irreligion,
became a Christian. Likewise of late, d^uerse Turks, have sealed their
Profession of Christianity, with their Blood, even in Constantinople. Yea a
very Priest of their own, a famous eminent Priest; Ibraim Sheck, was there
stoned to death; his head after cut off, and his body burned, for preferring
Christ before Mah^met. Diverse also of his Disciples were beheaded, others were
made Gally-slaues, for refusing Mahomet, and adhering to Christ. Thus has God
his Chapel, or rather his Sanctum Sanctorum, in Satan's temple. Turks who dye
for Christ, will arise in judgment against Christians, who embrace Mahomet. Who
knows not, that the Turks themselves acknowledge Christ to be a Prophet, a
great Prophet, a most holy man? triumphing, that they are Lords of the two
Sepulchers, the one at Jerusalem, the other at Mecha? I might enlarge, that
almost incredible story of Matthew Paris, in the sixteenth year of the Reign
of King John: that the irreligious King offered to abandon Christ, and to
stick faithfully to Mahomet; but the half religious Turk, the King of
Morocco, gave King John's Ambassadors to understand, that if himself had been
to choose a Religion, he would have chosen to be a Christian.

But small inducements may not make one to shift the Religion he was borne in:
and every giddy-brain'd shallow, is an vncompetent judge in this case. I dare
auow, of all the religions professed under heaven, no profession in the world
has more insensate fopperies, yea, blasphemies, than their Antilop, their
Chymaera, their Coran, (common use and custom will bear you out to call it
their Alcaron.) Take a taste of them. Mahometus in Alcorano, dum vino and
maxim rubeo vellet gentibus suis interdicere, sin^ie in quolibet vuae rubeae
grano habitare vnum Diabolum: Petrus Montanus de Incantationibus, page 200.
Mahomet taught, that every red Grape had one devil or more within it; but
some have found the devil rather in Sack, than Claret; and if they swallow
the stones or kernels, when they eat the Rasins of the Sun, they swallow
many devils. That the Angels and God, pray for Mahomet; which God, since they
make but one person, to whom shall that person pray? That God swears by the
Devils, where he esteems the devils to be greater than God. For all the world
suppose, the things they swear by, to be greater than themselves. And
Auerroes, that great Arabic Philosopher, and Mahumetan thinks there are no
devils. Julius Scaliger Exercitatione 355. and Auicen palliateth and excuses
their foppish lies and sensuail Rules or Axioms by expounding them
Allegorically.
And that Mahomet divided the moon. I have heard much of the man in the moon,
and of the Bush of briars at his back; which perchance, encrooked over to his
Pole, and scratcht his neck, and made him a scald pate, That after this life
they shall marry, and be given in marriage: that beautiful Ganvmedes shall
serve at the Table, and in a word, have their fill of all be astiall corporeal
pleasures. See all these chings punctually cited out of their Azoars, by Cardan
de S^btilitate, lib. 11. page 213.


The grand Epicure certainly, if he was not a Forerunner of the Great Turk,
yet would quickly have turned to his Religion. Is this a belief to be
preferred before the Christian? Then let Garlic be valued before the Bread of
Angels, the celestial Manna. Then let us barter and exchange our Gold for
Brass, our Pearls for counterfeit Stones; the Fruit of the Tree of Life,
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God, for the Apples of Sodom, which
being touched, vanish into ashes. It is true, that the Turks do call
themselves Musselmans, that is, true believers, (as every Nation of the earth
presumes, they believe aright) yet since the Turks refuse the trial of their
Religion, by the touchstone of Scripture^, even of those Scriptures which
themselves profess; since the old Testament which they receive, has in a
thousand places prophesied of Christ: yea, all the Prophets, not only from
Samuel, Acts 3.24. but from Enoch, who was the seventh from Adam, Jude 14. yea,
in all fair probability, even Adam prophesied of Christ, and in all
certainty, before the expulsion out of Paradise, GOD himself forespake to
Satan, concerning Christ, Genesis 3.15. I will put enmity between thy seed, and
her seed: it shall bruize thy head, and thou shall bruize his heel; which was
really accomplished on both sides, when Christ was nailed to the Cross; the
devils inuisibly on the other side of the Cross, says Origin: I say, since
God himself fore-promised this, not of the seed of Adam, but of the seed of
the woman; and that it cannot be interpreted of any other, but Christ, who was
the only Stone cut out of the rock, without the help of man's hand, Dan.
2.24. id est, absque coitu and Semine humano, de Vtero virginali, says Hierome
on the place, and Augustine on Psalm. 99.5. (which according to the Septuagint,
and Augustine, is the 98. Psalm) since the Turks confess this much of this,
Damascen, cited by Baronius ad Annum 630. thus of Mahomet, Christum dicit
verbum esse Dei, and eius Filium; sed Creatum and Seruum; Eumque fatetur ex
Maria, sine semine generatum; adding, that the Jews did crucify Christ's
shadow, but not Himself.
and yet cannot bring one place in all the old Testament, that ever prophesied
of Mahomet.

Let Mahomet be branded for a Iuggler, a Mount-bank, a beastiall people
pleaser; engrossing belief to him and his contrary to Truth, Reason, or sound
Religion: which Mis-beliefe he has established by the sword, and not by
Arguments; vpheld by violence and compulsion; or tempting allurements of the
world; forcing, or deluding the souls of men, rather than persuading by
evidence of verity. I cannot end yet with his person, but thus return unto
it. That great seducer Mahomet, was a salacious Iustfull Amoroso; and his
intemperate lasciviousness, was waited on by infirmities and sicknesses
correspondent to his lewdness. Hippocrates calls Coitum, (...), paruum
morbum Comitialem; but he, for his lust, and by it, was tormented with the
Great-falling-sicknesse; and that disease, is a plague of an high-hand; and in
him, a testimony of a very sinful soul, in a very sinful body. For, whereas
it is appointed for all men to die once, Heb. 9.27. for that one first sin of
Adam; Mahomet, who had so many, so great sins, was stricken also with many
deaths. For, what is the Falling Sickness, but a reduplication, a
multiplication of death? He fell with pain, looked ugly, with a foming mouth,
and wry-distorted countenance in his fits. He rose with horror, like a pale
carcass, and lukewarm corpse, between the living and the dead. He was the But
against which the Almighty shot his arrows: bearing the image and figure of an
Apostata in his body by relapses; and the torments of a vessel of wrath, in
his soul, for his Imposturage. Whose sickness is not so much denied, as
gilded over by his own followers. And after death, he (promising to rise
again) lay till he stanke, and his side was eaten with dogs, says Eulogius
the Martyr, (who lived the next age after) in his Apology.

But, (that I may come to the next point) as for our most holy, blessed, and
glorious Savior, Jesus Christ, (O pardon me my Lord, for mentioning thy
salutiferous names, when I am to confound that Rake-shame, and purge my lips
from the corruption they may contract, in speaking of such an hell-hound,) I
say, concerning our gracious Redeemer, the Turks themselves do not, they
cannot say, that ever he sinned, or was sick; He healing all, and all manner
of diseases, had not one: His soul had her fullness of grace: his bodily
temperature, was most pure. In his face, syderium quiddam illuxit, says
Hierom. His whole body was speciosum, quia formatum virtute Spiritus Sancti, in
cuius opere, non potest esse error, aut defectus, says Lyra on Psalm. 45.

As for the Christian Religion, it is most rational, and accordant to the
rectified Dictates of nature; and was planted in holy simplicity, watered with
the blood, not of Murderers, but of Martyrs, (Sanguis Martyrum, semen
Ecclesiae) and whereas all other Religions have decayed by Opposition, the
Christian Church gathers strength, and grows under its Burden; being the
pillar of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. Like an upright pillar, is more strong by having
more weight upon it. Graecam Phil^phiam, si quiuis Magistratus prohibuerit, ea
statim perit. Nostram autem Doctrinam, a prima vsque eius Praedicatione,
prabibent Reges, Duces, and Magistratus, cum vniuersis satellitibus, illa tamen
non flaccescit, vt Doctrina humana, sed magis floret. Clemens Alexand. Strom.
7. The quick spreading of the Gospel, may stop the mouths of Saracens, and
drive wonders into the believer. It was like Lightning, which spread it self
all abroad, beyond sense. And the publishing of it may be compared to the
Horseman, Revel. 6.2. Who rode all abroad, and was victorious.
And is acknowledged to be most agreeable unto the general, confessed
Principles of Reason, in both natural and moral Philosophy. As may appear,
cuidenced by Clemens Alexand. Stromat. ^.


But I return to the person of our blessed Savior Christ (of whom never good
enough can be spoken) and resume, that the Turks themselves, confess him to
have been a most holy Prophet, a worker of many wonders, greater than Moses:
that Pilate his Judge pronounced him to be just; that the people being beyond
measure astonished with his miracles, said, Mark. 3.37. He has done all things
well. He was the wonder of men, not only (...); but (...): God and man, the
Son of God; the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his
person, Heb. 1.2. The image of the invisible God, the first borne of every
creature; all things being created In him, and By him, and for him, Colos.
1.16. (...), not (...) In him, there, Christ is the cause- Ideal, or exemplary:
By him, there, he is the cause Demiourgicall, or Architectonicall, not properly
Isntrumental, but by indivisible Cooperation. For him, there, he is the cause
supremely final. I cannot say much of any of these, because I intend to say
somewhat of each. Moses was admonished of God, when he was about to make the
Tabernacle: See, says God, that thou make all things according to the Pattern
showed to thee in the Mount, Heb, 8.5. From which foresight of Moses, Plate
took his Ideaes, says Justin Martyr. Now, as the Tabernacle had an
intellectual esse, in the notion of Moses, ere it had its esse material, and
the form of Artificials is first in the mind of the worke-man, before it is
in the outward work, says Aristotle, Metaphys. 7. (though otherwhere himself
is the greatest Opposer, often times of Platonicall Ideas, which he confuted
but verbally, says his greatest defender Aquinas.) Likewise for natural
things of this world, I will say, as S. Augustine did, to another purpose; Who
dare say, that God does any thing irrationabiliter? He framed all things,
(...) says Mercurius Trismegistus; and the manner of making all things, was
directed, as well by the Reason, as by the Power, of an infinite Spirit, says
Anaxagoras. For, Recta ratio, est lex, summi Iouis, says, Cicero 2. de
Legibus. See this confirmed by Scriptures, Pro. 3.19. Ecclosiast. 1.10. Esa,
40.12. Psalm. 104.24. Ier. 51.15. The Idea of all things was in God, ere they
were actually produced; and this Idea was Christ. For In him, were all things
created, says the Text, in the original. Aquinas i^ Colos. 1.16. Loco Jdearam
nos habemus vnum, scilicet Verbum Dei-Artifexenim facit artificium ex hvc, quod
facit illud participare formam apud se conceptam, and fic Deus omnia in sua sa^
pientia dicitur facere, quia Sapientie Dei se habet adres creatas, sicut ar^
aedificatoris ad domum factam. Haec autem forma and Sapientia est Verbum, ideo
omnia in ipso condita sunt, sicut in quodam exemplari.


Created In Him and By Him (as by the efficient cause) Colos. 1. at the latter
end of the 16. verse. All things were made by Him, Ioh. 1.3. And lest the word
(All) might be thought in this place, not to comprehend, the seuerally-singular
parts of multitude (because it does not so otherwhere) the Apostle adds
remarkably, And without Him was not any thing made, that was made. Where he
intimates that God made not the world by Christ, as the workman does the
work, by the Physical instrument, (for this sauoureth of Arrianisme) but that
Christ was indiuisibly coworking with the Father: yea, all the works of the
Trinity, quoad extra, sunt indiuisa. Again, it is not said, (...); nothing was
made, but in a more emphaticall phrase, (...) not one thing, not any thing; by
which the Divinity of our blessed Savior is clearly proved. So Heb. 12. By
Christ, God made the world.

Lastly, all things were created not only, in him, and by him, but for him.
And though, concerning his humane nature, We are Christ's, and Christ is Gods,
1. Cor. 2.23. and the Head of every man is Christ, and the Head of Christ is
God, 1 Cor. 11.3. yet, in regard of his Divinity, He is equal to his Father;
yea, all things were created for Him: As he is the Mediator between God and
man, God has appointed him heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. Deus ipse sine
Christo, idolum est, says Tertullian: God is worshipped with false worship, if
he be not worshipped through Christ. And I, for my part, solemnly profess, I
desire not heaven, or joys thereof, without Him. Whatsoever we do in word or
deed, let us do it in the name of Jesus Christ, Colos. 3.17. Our prayers are
then accepted, when they are closed, either with his Prayer, or with his Name.
Yea, always rejected and turned into sin, if there be not evermore, a tacit
or implicit reference to Him: yea, an actual expression of Him, and imploring
his aid, when we are lifted up by Devotion, or cast down by Temptation: of
which more at large by and by. O that thou had observed this, and called upon
Christ when thou wast tempted! He has promised, I will not fail thee, nor
forsake thee. Therefore, silly seduced soul, it was the height of the sin,
that thou did forsake Him; Him who is the Fountain of living waters, and
have hewed out, for thy self, Cisternes, broken Cisternes that can hold no
water, Ier. 2.13. These Cisternes are thy excuses, pretensions, motives, or
false guides, which seduced thee; and these come now in order to be laid open.
Whereas thou have said it, and (as I hear) sworn it, and others with thee,
and for thee, That thou were circumcised by extreme force, and therefore thou
hopest, thou have not lost Christ, that they ravished thy body, but not thy
Belief, That thou did strive, till thou could strive no longer, against
their violence; and then with humble patience, were content to dye under their
hands: I must needs say (if so it were) thou were then a glorious Confessor;
and if thou had dyed then, under their butcherie, Thou had washed thy robes
in the blood of the Lamb; Thou had shined as the Sun in the firmament, and
been one of the primest Saints in heaven. For, though every one shall have the
Penny of eternal happiness, called in Aquins Supplement, aurea: and the
Essentials of heavenly bliss, are neither more nor less, but every one shall
possess enough, to his full contentment, and a surplussage be remaining: (for,
the entering into the Masters joy, supposes the joy to be greater and larger,
than he that enters; as the house is greater than its inhabitant, and
continens maius contento:) yet the accidentals of Beatitude, may be more or
less: one may have more Talents, more Cities, than another; Virgins and
laborious Pastors have their Aureolas assigned them by the School; but the
Martyrs reward is simply above the Aureolae of Teachers, or Virgins (as it is
in Aquins Supplement, part. 3. Quest. 96. Articul. 12. I dare not say with
Gerson, per Martyrium, deletur in proprio sanguine, quaelibet culpa, simul and
poena: yet I hold it probable, that what grace soever a man had before, if he
lost it by sin, he shall always and wholly recover it, by Martyrdom: so
holds Scotus and Valentia, Tom. 4. Disput. 7. Quest. 6. Punct. 10. in fine:
and certain, with Caietan, That an universal absolution from sin and
punishment, is given in the preception of Baptism and Martyrdom: in primam
part. Thom. Quaest. 68. Artic. 2. Given, I say, by God, for Christ's sake: in
Baptism, for the present estate; in Martyrdom, for ever: so that he presently
mounteth up to indicible joys of heaven. A Martyr is a Scale and Signet on the
finger of the All-mightie; One of the masterpieces of GODS work: a Rubie of
Christ's Crown; most precious is his death. Oh that thou had then dyed, thou
had been a perfect Martyr! Thy cause was good; thy willingness to suffer,
rather than to abjure (as is reported of thee) was good: if death had presently
ensued, Thou had been a consummate Martyr.

These two next Sections were not preached, by reason of the straitness of
time, yet thought fit to be inserted.

For the first, Non Poena, sed Causa, facit Martyrium, says Augustine; and
after him, the gloss on the Psalms: and not all that are persecuted, but they
(...) which suffer persecution for righteousness sake, are blessed, Math.
5.10. Augustine ad Bonifacium, Epist. 50. Dominus cum latronibus crucifixus
est; sed quos Passio iungebat, causa separabat. Idem in Psalm. 42. potest esse
impiorum similis poena, sed dissimilis est Martyrum Causa. And one may be a
Martyr, not only for points de fide, but Omnium virtutum Opera, secundum quod
referuntur in Deum, sunt quaedam Protestationes fidei, per quam nobis
innotescit, quod Deus, huiusmodi opera, a nobis requirit, and nos pro eis
remunerat, and secundum hoc, possunt esse Martyrij causa; vnde and beati
Ioannis Baptistae Martyriu^, in Ecclcsia celebratur, qui non pro neganda Fide
(Aquinas shouldsay, pro defensione fidei or to the like sense) fed pro
reprehe^sione Adulterij mor^em sustinuit, Aquin. 2a. 2ae. quest. 124. artic. 5.
in corpore Artic.

Concerning the second point necessary to Martyrdom, It is a prompt and
willing mind to suffer. The good Thief was not a Martyr, in respect of his
Cause, but in regard of his Alacrity to dye for Christ, we may so account him,
at large. He that is haled to death grudgingly, is no Martyr, though he were
put to true death, for the chiefest point of faith. But he who is prompt and
forward to suffer, though the excessiveness of torment do choke and swallow
up the exercise of Reason and Sense: so that the Patient feels no pain, nor
knows any thing in his extremity; yea, though he has not in the act of
Martyrdom, any present actual intention to dye; yet, since, as a designed
Martyr, he might praecogitate thus, I resolve to endure and suffer not only,
whilst I do know my misery, and feel my pain: but when pain has
tyrannized over, both my knowledge and my sense, till I have grappled with
death: I say, this man's suffering is the effect of his intention, and his
intention continues virtually in the effect: He is a true glorious consummate
Martyr. That the use of reason may be overcome in a transcendent passion, is
unquestionable. Ipso momento temporis, quo ad voluptatis peruenitur extremum,
poene omnis acies, and quasi vigilia cogitationis obruitur, says Augustine, de
Ciuit. 14.16 And not only poene, but Delight steals away the intellect of a
wise man, says Aristotle, Ethic. 7.9. yea, if one should be created and
preserved, in the height of any kind of pleasure, and not be surfetted nor
abated of it, he would never have one wise thought, and I should not think him
to be a reasonable creature. For, Reason is drowned in Pleasure. Much more
easily may the use of Reason be devoured by pain: for we see the fairest
beasts, frighted from their chiefest delight, by fear of pain. Nemo est qui
non magis dolorem fugiat (the Schools read it amiss, when they cited it,
lugeat) quam appetat voluptatem, says Augustine, in lib. Octoginta-trium
Quaest; Quaest. 36. Now then, as he, who commits Fornication, if, in the
moment of his dearest delight, he uses neither Reason nor Will, yet sins
(nevertheless,) and that mortally, because he exposes himself to a Passion,
in which he cannot use Reason, says Scotus, Sentent. 3. Distinct. 15. Quaest.
1. circa medium: so in the passion Martyrs, if excessive pain do prey upon
the intellect, and the sense, leaving them for the time, both senseless and
vnintelligent, yet is the Crown due to their heads, as to an Act of Fortitude,
elicitiue, their mind being confirmed by it, and as to an Act of charity
imperative. For, greater charity none has, than this, that a man lay down
his life, Ioh. 15.13. Faulus Diaconus writes of S. Cyprian, that he answered
the Pro-Consul Galerius thus, Consultum mihi melius esse non quaero, quam vt
Deum meum adorans ad ipsum tota mentis Auiditate festinem: and he adds,
Ceruicem obtulit gladio. I cannot pass by what S. Cyprian himself, Epist. 9.
ad Martyrs and Confessores, says of the admirable resolutions of primitive
Martyrs, steterunt serui Christi voce libera, mente incorrupta, virtute diuina,
telis quidem saecularibus nudi, sed armis Fidei credentes armati. Steterunt
torti torquentibus fortiores, ac pulsantes ac laniantes vngulas, pulsata and
lanitata membra vicerunt. Inexpugnabilem fidem, superare non poterat, saeuiens
diu plaga repetita: quamuis, rupta compage viscerum, torquerentur inseruis Dei,
iam, non membra, sed vulnera. Fluebat sanguis, qui incendium Persecutionis
extingueret; qui flammas and ignes Gehennae glorioso cruore sopiret. Concerning
the third requisite to Martyrdom, it is bodily Death. Mors est de ratione
Martyrij, says Aquin. 2a 2ae. Quest. 124. Artic. 4. not only Mors in facto
esse, but Mors in fieri. Inflictio Mortis (as Aquin terms it) so that death
follow. Augustine de Ciuit. 13.4. Dictum est homini, morieris, si peccaueris:
nunc dicitur Martyri, morere, ne pecces. The prison, with all its engines, of
chains, hunger, cold, and instruments of various tortures, make not a perfect
Martyr, if he survive, unless suruiuing a while, he dye of the pains,
torments, or wounds inflicted. I confess, S. Cyprian writes ad Martyrs, and
they were living: So Tertullian says, there were designati Martyrs; iam inter
Martyrs deputandi, as Lucianus the Confessor, says to Celerinus the
Confessor. Cyprian Epist. 25. part. 1. makes mention of such, who being first
in trouble, gave good example of virtue, and were honored, equally with
Martyrs: for their hands made the Crowns, and they drank the cup of Salvation
to their Brethren: and yet he sets a trauerse between them, and others, who
did undergo Consummata Martyria, as he calls them, which is by death only.

A glorious Saint would have rejoiced to sit at thy feet in heaven: thou had
come nearer to Christ, than millions of blessed Spirits: and perchance, by so
much nearer, than some Angels, by how much the more thou resembledst Christ, by
being baptized, in the Baptism of blood for his glory, (which the Angels
cannot do) as Christ dyed to save and glorify thee: But, if thou were not
forced, if thy tongue, or thy heart consented to Circumcision; if thou did
put any trust in it, (for we have heard and read, that the Turks compel none
to their Religion; and that Mahomet left this rule to his followers, to say
unto them, who differed from them in profession; Let me have my Law, and take
you, yours; you are free from that which I do, and I am likewise free from
that which you do.) I say, if thou heldest up thy finger, or did cast away
thy hat, or sufferedst thy self to be drencht with Opium, or exchangest the
marks of thy profession, or by using any other abiuring tricks, or initiating
ceremonies to that hellish irreligion, like other Renegadoes (which, as we
hope, you did not at first; so we are uncertain whether you did or no) thy
Repentance had need surmount thy Penance, and many tears must flow from thine
eyes to wash those sins away.

From thy excuse, that thou were forced to conform thy self, which is one of
the Cisternes, which not we, but God must try, whether it will hold water or
no; let me come to those faults, for which (I am sure) thou have no just
excuses. You went in Turkish-guise, your apparel proclaimed you to be a
Turk, at least in semblance; the exchanging of your ordinary clothing for the
Mohammedan you cannot deny, you were seen and taken in it, taken (I hear say)
willingly to come to our side, but taken in such an attire as did discriminate
you from a Christian; you cannot say, that daily they put on those clothes; you
have publicly confessed, your yielding to their allurements, rather than to
their violence. Habemus confitentem Reum. Oh why beginning in the Spirit,
whilst they mangled thy flesh, did thou end in the flesh, by subiecting thy
spirit unto them! Indeed God commanded the Jews, Deuteronomy. 22.12. Thou shall make
thee fringes on the four quarters of thy Vesture. They shall wear fringes and
blew Ribbaend, Numb. 15.38. as Memorials and Remembrances of their Duties. The
Scribes and Pharisees would ouer-doe the matter, and make broad their
Philacteries, and enlarge the borders of their Garments, Mat. 23.5. Likewise
the Christians in the Primitive Church distinguished themselves from Gentiles,
by wearing the Cloak, and not the Gown; and after that custom taken up, the
Cloak was in high esteem, Super omnes exuuias and peplos, Augusta vestis;
superque omnes apices and titulos. -- Suadeo reuerere^ habitum (says
Tertullian.) Again, Grande pallij benefi^ium est; sub cuius recogitatu improbi
mores ^el erubescunt. -- Gaude pallium and exulta ^ melior iam te philosophia
dignata est, ex quo Christianum vestire caepisti, Tertul. in his Book de
Pallio.
as a badge of humility, as a sign of Christian Philosophers, imitating, yea,
out-going the ancient Greek Philosophers, in simplicity and honesty, as
far as they did, the warlike and bloody Romans: whose Gowns betokened Lordly
Domineering, and were lined with pride, though fringed with Calcei, proprium
Togae tormentum immundissima pedum tutela, Tertul. ibid.
dirt. Cause there was, and good cause, for the Jew and the Christian, of those
times, to profess their Religion, by their very Apparel. But the Turkish
Turbant was nastic in the cause, senseless in the use. Mahomet, besides that
he was an unhandsome man, and his whole race to this day, the ill-fauouredst,
that are seen in the world, descending from one man; among many other foul
diseases, was always plagued, not only with a Scabbed head, but a Scald pate,
h Mr. George Sandys, in the first Book of his Travails.
which occasioned himself (as some say) to wear a white Shash (woollen would
have made his scald pate sorer) therefore his Turbant was of linen; a fair
outside, for a purulent and stinking inside: And his followers must do as he
did, though they go to the devil as he did. The present use, even as they
intend it, is full of ridiculous folly. They will have no hair on their head,
except one lock on the top of their crown, (so perhaps had their Mahomet, who
was a man of much Matter, and of Running head) and by this lock, they hope to
be lifted up to Paradise; and this they cover, as the rest of their head, with
a Turbant. Men besotted, not knowing the power of death, consuming their lock
at length: nor the power of the Resurrection, which abhors so unnatural and
deformed a sight.

To this thy great fault of wearing Vestures, of Turkish fashion, did thou
add a greater of bearing Arms against Christians, in one of the Turkish
ships. Would you fight under the Banner of the Halfe-Moone, against the
Streamer of the Cross of Christ? and live as a Bird of prey, in a man of
War, and a Piraticall Thief of the sea, upon most innocent and oppressed
Christians? What had Christ deserved at thy hands, that thou should turn
thy weapons against thy Countrymen, friends, and kindred, against Christ
himself in his members? Any blood of the Christians, shed by thy assistance,
will not be washed from thee, but by a fountain of tears; for a little blood
discoloureth much water: no purple is so unchanging, in-growne and lasting, as
the purpured blood of Innocents: And when thou have wept, whilst thou can
weep, yet then utter the prayer of the Prophet, Jeremy 9.1. Oh that my head
were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears. Christ himself shed three
sorts of tears, Tears of compassion on Jerusalem, Luke 19.41. Oh power forth
thou the like, for those that are in any misery. Compassion is above a common
gift; for one gives himself by it; magis dat, quise dat, quam, qui de suis,
says Gregory. The second sort of tears, which Christ shed, were tears of
good will: when Lazarus was dead, and Christ saw Mary weep, and the Jews
weep, he wept also, Ioh. 11.35. whence perhaps proceeded that iniunction
(that we might be like to our Savior) Weep with them that weepa, Romans 12.15.
Thirdly, there streamed from Christ, tears of compunction recorded, Heb. 5.7.
not for sins (or if for sins, for our sins, not any one of his, who had none)
but, when he was in fear or danger. Follow thy Savior, thy guide, thy
deliverer; power forth tears of compunction. There is no branch of thy
offense, but must be laued and bathed in tears, and the spot soked-out, by
weeping. Even thy partaking with Turks against the Arms of Christians, though
some, (who themselves are suspected, (...) have been faulty, as you wear) do
sleighten the offense, must cost thee many a sigth, many a bitter sobbe, many a
prayer, and fruits of good works worthy of Repentance. For thy souls sake, I
desire thee, labor not to lessen thy fault; say not, Thou did, what thou
did, to a good end, viz. in hope to escape their furious ungodly tyranny.
Thou did forget thine old lesson, though it be the Pearl, the Crown, the
Glory of Christianity, Their damnation was just, who did (but) affirm, that
S. Paul did say, Let us do evil, that good may come, Romans 11.8. More
gri^uously may they be damned, who do evil, that good may come. A Christian
ought to hate sin, with so perfect an hatred, that he ought not to commit one
sin for all the pleasures of the earth, nor for all that Satan offered unto
Christ, in his vaunting lie, viz. for all the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them. Yea, if it could be possible, that the Kingdom of heaven, and
the joys thereof should be propounded, as a reward, for the acting of one
sin, we ought not to do that one sin, for to purchase Heaven; and I had
far rather be, as Christ was, in hell, without sin, than in heaven with the
joys thereof, Jude verse 6. as some Angels were with sin.

I come to thy false-guides, and most silly motives that ensnared thee, and
they were, (as I have been informed) these three; first, the example, with the
persuasion of other Renegadoes: secondly, the sense and feeling of present
misery, with the fear of worse to come: thirdly, the baits and allurements
of immunitie present, and prosperity promised. Against all, and every of which,
thou should have been armed with a Christian Panoply.

The example of other Reuolters, should rather have terrified, than persuaded
you; since some turn for spleen, others for gain, the most for fear, none
for conscience sake. Cherseogly became an Apostata, to be revenged of his
father, who had taken his wife from him, amidst the solemnity of marriage.
Vlacciali denied the faith, to plague his fellow-gally-slaue, who called him
Scald-pate. Like will to like; Scald-pate to Scald-pate; Vlacciali to Mahomet.
Others change Faith for Gain; and here the treacherous villainy of Factors, is
notorious; who being entrusted with much goods of their masters, turn Turks,
to be masters of those goods; destroying their souls to cozen the honest-braue
Merchants-Aduenturers. Among all the Reuolters in Africa, you cannot name one,
who whilst he was of our profession, served God daily, honored Christ duly,
lived consciously, euidencing his fruitful faith, by multitude of charitable
works. But, such as are among us, though not of us; such as are to choose
Religion; Ambo-dexters, Nulli-fidians, such Amphibia, as can live, both on Land
and Water, or such as have stained their souls with some black sins: these
are the Chamelions which will change color with every air, and their belief,
for matters of small moment. A Sparrow will be taught to imitate the exquisite
melody of the Nightingale; but she will chirpe at the end, says the learned
Andrew Libauius. Nemo potest fictam personam diu sustinere: and
Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne,
may be the Mottoes of Hypocrites. In point of imitation, we are to follow the
best men, not the worst, says Augustine, in Psalm. 39. He who of his own
deuoire without a pattern does well, is best to be approved; he, who secondeth
the first, not in time or place, but in worth, and makes the former his
sampler, deserves the next esteem. Contrarily, he that leads the way in
evil, is guilty of a great offense; but he, of a greater, who is a follower
of evil example: Augustine in Psalm. 108. on those words, peccatum matris eius
non deleatur, thus; Quemadmodum Bonorum Jmitatio, sacit, vt etiam propria
peccata del^antur; sic malorum imitatio facit, vt non solum sua, sed etiam
malorum quos imitati sunt, merita sortiantur.
for he would not take warning by his brothers fall, which he would have done;
and as he is an Ape of one precedent, so is he a leader and drawer on of
others, which he should not be. Nor are you to follow good men alone, but good
men, only in good things. Follow not Noah in Drunkenness; David in Adultery,
and Murder; S. Peter in Denial of his Master. Follow not that which is evil,
but that which is good, in the 3. Epist. of S. John, verse 11. Be ye followers
of me, even as I am of Christ, says S. Paul 1. Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of
God. Ephesians. 5.1. and that must needs be in all goodness only.

I pass over to the next branch, The persuasions of Renegadoes. Judah cannot
want an Adullamite, his friend in show, to carry to Thamar, her promised gifts,
Genesis 28.20. nor Ammon a subtle Ionadab, to draw him to villainy, 2 Samuel 13.5.
And there will still start up a man of Belial, a Sheba, to blow a Trumpet, and
say, We have no part in David, 2 Samuel 20.1. All these, and the like, are
recounted for our terror; that we might avoid the Inticers, Broakers, and
Panders unto sin; and what says the Word of God; My son, if sinners entice
thee, consent thou not, Pro. 1.10. First, perchance they told thee, That he who
does, as most do, fewest will find fault with him: and that there are more
Turks than Christians. By the same reason, a Turk must turn Gentile and
Pagan; because even at this day, there are more Infidels than Mahumetans. Go
not by number, go by weight. Profer stateram and appende: bring forth thy
balance, and weigh; and see, that much chafe is weighed down by a few
grains of good corn: the narrow and uneven path, leads to life; the broad
way to destruction. Secondly, perhaps they told thee, Thou might keep thy
conscience safe and steadfast, and GOD placed never a bone in thy tongue, but
thou might turn it at thy pleasure: O blind guides, leaders of the blind!
even just like him, who said, Iuravi lingua, mentem iniuratam gero. This
hypocricie is a double sin, quia. and iniquitas est, and simulatio.
Dissembling of Religion, comes near heresy; Tam pro iniquitate occulta, quam
pro incredulitate aperta. The Heart is the Father, the Mouth is the Mother of
speech: if there be guile or hypocrisy, the issue is adulterous. Did not God
frame thy body, as well as thy soul? Thou were to present thy body, a living
sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God; and this is your reasonable service,
Romans 12.1. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy
soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength, Mark. 12.30. Where,
all the parts and faculties of the soul, and body are understood. k
Praecipetur nobis, vt nostra tota Intentio, feratur in Deum, quod est, Ex toto
Cord; and quod Intellectus noster subdatur Deo, quod est Ex toto mente; and
quod Appetitus noster, reguletur secundum Deum, quod est Ex tota Anima; and
quod, Exterior actus noster, obediat Deo, quod Est, ex tota fortitudine, vel
virtute, vel viribus Deum diligere, Aquin. 2a. 2 ae. Quest. 45. Artic. 5. in
Corpore.
He likes not the half service of the Soul alone, he loves the
whole-burnt-Offering. All is too little that we can do, that we can give. Causa
diligendi Deum, Deus est; Modus, sine modo diligere, says Bernard, And that
Charity is commanded, which is, out of a pure heart, and a good Conscience, and
Faith unfeigned 1. Tim. 1.5. But thy heart was not pure, thy Conscience was
erroneous, thy Faith was feined. When they tempted, thou should have prayed:
In a great suggestion, when one is cunningly set upon, to forsake his Savior,
it is a new sin, a sin, Vastans Conscientiam, ship-wracking a good
Conscience, Then, not to call actually on Christ; then, not to Love God, above
all things. The affirmative Precept binds not, at all times, alike, and on
all occasions,

But, first, When we are devoutly musing or reuoluing, of Gods Love and
Favors, of old, bestowed on us. Favors, either positive, or privative;
belonging, either to this life, or to the life eternal.

Secondly, When at the present; we receive from the hand of God, some singular
Blessing, concerning, the public, or our own particular.

Thirdly, When a man of Discretion, receives, either of the Sacraments.

Fourthly, When a man is Contrite, and humbled extraordinarily, by the sight of
his sins; or desires the invaluable benefit of Preistly Absolution.

Fifthly, When God's Honor is quaestioned, or his Name blasphemed.

Sixthly, When we are at any solemn Exercise, of Religion, in any place.

Seventhly, When privately, we are in a serious delightful speculation, and
Contemplation of things divine.

Eighthly, When one is very sick, or approaching to his Grave, or thinks he
lies on his Deathbed.

Ninthly and lastly. Though death be far of, if when we are terribly tempted,
inwardly, or out-wardly; either by our own Concupiscence, or by Satan, or by
his Agents, if we do not practice at these times, especially, according as we
vowed in Baptism, (that is) if we renounce not then, above other times, the
Flesh, the World and the Devil. If we do not then, fervently Pray; then
actually implore Christ's aid: if we do not then, really Love God above all
things, sum, appreciatiue, and unite our selves to him, with all our Heart,
Soul, Mind and strength, we are debtors to that Law, Damnation is our Due, in
Rigore.

l You may see ^ome of these points, imperfectly handled, by Nauarrus, (...)
Manual: by Sotus, de Natura (...) Gratia, 2.22 by Valentian on Aquins Sum:
Tom. 3. Disput. 3. Quaest ^^. ^uncs. 1.
In these things, when you were tempted, you were faulty: you called not on
God, though he said, Call upon me, in the time of trouble: you sought not for
Comfort of Christ, who proclaimed, Come unto me, all ye that be heavy laden,
and I will refresh you: you did not adhaere, to your first love, nor cleave
unto your Savior. For these regardes, among other, thou were justly (for a
time) forsaken of God.

The second motive might be, The sight, of others Freedom, and the sense, of
thy Misery, their Credit, thy Chains, without hope of help; thy praesent
Pain, and Fear of future worse harms. Oh, but thou should have remembered,
what Christ charged thee, Mat. 10.28. Fear not those, which kill the Body, but
are not able to kill the Soul; but fear him, who is able, to destroy, both
Body, and Soul, in hell. Thou should also have called to mind, what is
said, James 1.2, Count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse Temptations; know
that the Trying of your faith, works Patience; and let Patience have her
perfect work. For it is thank-worthy, if a man, for Conscience sake toward
God, endure grief; suffering wrongfully, says the Apostle, 1. Peter 2.19.
Which he divinely establishes, by our Calling, and by the Example of Christ.
A thousand places may be added, bending toward this point.

As, Iam. 5.8. Heb. 12.3, and. 7. ^erses 1. Cor. 11.^2. Act. 14, 21. Luke 22,
42. Rom 8, 18. Luke 14.27. and the whole Army of Confessors or Martyrs, Heb. 11
For, Reprobus tam alienus existit a verbere, quam extraneus erit ab
haereditate; and, Melius est, innocentem esse, in camino ignis, cum Filio. Dei,
quam in c^^lo, sine illo. Hierom in Epist. ad Eustochium. Ne in immensum
volumen extendam; quaere, and inuenies, singulos Sanctos, aduersa perpessos
Chrysostom, Homil. 4. in Philip: thus, Pro Christo pati, munus est, maioris
admirationis, quam mortuos excitare: In the one, I am a debtor to Christ; in
the other Christ is a debtor to me. Angustin Ciuitat. 18.49, says Christ by
suffering Judas, and using him well, gave a pattern to the Church, of enduring
evil. -- Passione ostendit, quid sustinere, proveritate, Resurrectione, quid
sperare, in aeternitate, debeamus. Ambrose, calls Patience, the Mother of the
faithful. The Fathers have wrote, whole tractates; Tertullian, a Book de
Patientia: Cyprian another Book, de Bono patientiae.
The Last Motive, why you yielded to their temptations, might be, The
consideration of your present enlargment, your freedom from all Taxes, your
worldly reputation among them, and the diverse gifts, which, as rewards, are
usually tendered to their new Proselites, and their alluring Promises, the
Baits of unstable Souls. What perchance they could not effect upon you, by
you, by dried Bull-pizells, by knotted Ropes, tip't with black-and-blew; by
Whippes discolored with thy blood, by multiplied blows, fiercely inflicted on
thy Belly, by yokes, by manicles and pedicles of iron; by unwholesome vapoures;
the cold dampes, and nastinesse of Dungeons in the night; by reproaches,
hunger, thirst, nakedness, scorching heates, labor, and torture in the day,
(for, this is the misusage of poor Captiued-Christians, by the barbarous
tyranny of savage Mahumetans) I say, what those Miscreantes by such
extreamities could not compass; the enticements of pleasure, and worldly
preferment, did work about, on thee, to their desires. The sawning sunshine,
might make you put of the habit of Christianity, which the storm of
Perfection, perhaps, made you keep close. Here you should have remembered the
Apostolical Thunderbolt, upon those; that are Lovers of pleasure, more then
lovers of God, 2. Timoth, 3.4. From such turn away or, the Example, of that
chosen Vessel of Honor, Galat. 6, 14. God forbid, that I should glory, save in
the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the World, is crucified unto me;
and I unto the World. n Other places against the delights of this world, are
2. Peter, 2.18. -- Romans 12, 2. John 5, 30. John 6, 38. Ecclesiastes 2, 1. --
Job. 21.1. Luke 6, 25. Romans 13, 13. 1 Timoth, 5, 5. 1 John, 2, 15. Matt. 49.
Matt. 16, 24: fortasse, non est Laboriosum homini, relinquere sua; sed valde
laboriosum est, relinquere semet ipsum: minus est, abnegare, quod habet; valde
multum est, abnegare, quod est. Gregory Homil. 32, in Euangel.
For, how can a Christian be bettered then the world? when he is better then
the World. Matt. 6.20. We must lay our our treasure, where Rust, Moth or
Theiues, things senseless, sensitive or reasonable may not hurt. Our hearts
must be set against the World; for, if it did love us, we should not love it;
but since it hates Us, let Us hate it; and let our conversation be in Heaven;
and let us with the Apostle, Philip. 3.8. account all things but loss, all
things but dung, that we may win Christ: but you (poor soul) contrarily, by
seeking to gain the World, did loose Christ. False pleasures, and
seeming-gaine, withdrew you from Him, who is the Great, the Only Gain. For,
if you be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.

Let me not be thought, (beloved in the Lord) to be too severe, in aggravating
the Circumstances, of a prostrate Poenitents Sin. I profess, my heart is
moved with sorrow, for him: and pity, toward him: I grieve with him, who
grieueth: I bear, part of his burden. And whilst I strike, I groan; whilst I
reprove, my Bowels earne, and my faint Passions melt. But, which is better, a
pleasing, pleasant neat Physician, or an healing? Non quaero medicum
elegantem, sed sanantem, said the Wiseman of old. As I expect mercy, I would
not add weight to the oppressed, nor, break, the bruized reed. But, since in
my hearing, such a Fault, was said in effect, to be payde-for too dear, with
such a Penance: since too many in this Congregation, out of a Compassion
vncharitably-charitable, Lessen such an offense: since it is presumed, that
Diverse praesent, have run the same course, with the delinquent (though it
cannot be proved as yet) and since it may turn to the terror of others
hereafter (who of this Maritime-towne may be taken Captives) I have labored,
to cut-out the Core; to show the Renouncing of Christ, to be a most heinous,
abominable, and execrable sin. I acknowledge, We must not be too bitter Sic
necesse est, vulneratae animae, medicamen^um temperetur, ^e minia medi^^^enti
austeritate, amplius vulneretur. Godfridus Abbas Vindocinensis, lib. Epist. 1.
Epist. 12.
Salt Water is not so fit, to cleanse and whiten some things as the fresh, and
somethings are better preserved, with Sugar, then with Lalt. The good
Shepherd, cast not away, the lost-sheepe; but, laid it on his shoulders,
rejoicing, Luke 15.5. Yea, therefore dyed, that, it might not dye. When there
was mors in olla, Meal was cast in. 2. Kings, 4.41. An ouer-earnest impetuous
Reproof, kills, insteede of cutting Ferrum de manubrio prosilit, cum de
corruptione, sermo durior excidit, says Gregorius Magnus.
Yet, the naughty water and barren Ground were healed with Salt, by the means
of the same Elisha 2. Kings. 2.21. The good Samaritan, powered, as well Wine as
Oil into the wound. Fere dulcia omnia, in bilem, and amarorem commutantur. The
Word of God is likened to Honey. Psalm. 19, 11. Yet Honey applied to wounds,
breeds smart, says Plutarch in the beginning of Phocions Life (...); etiam
mel habet satietatem. Therefore it is good, to widen the Orifice; and to search
the wound, to the bottom. Palliated Cures do breed more pain. Therefore that
thy Shame before Men, may take of, the shame, which otherwise would be Great,
before God, and all the Angels of Heaven, and all the blessed Saints at the
Dreadful Day of Retribution; and this thy present Humiliation, may find
acceptance with God, Condemn thy self, that thou may not be Condemned: The
readiest way to Heaven, is by acknowledging thy offense, to have deserved Hell.
It will be a godly sorrow, breeding future Comfort, patiently, and willingly,
to hear a Recapitulation of thy sins. With Lots-wife thou have looked back
to Sodom. Thou have given cause of offense to many Quod est proximi peccatum,
est tu^m peccatum; si tibi placet; much more, if he fell, through thy example.
Perditionis exemplum ostendentes, rationem animae perditae reddent, says
Divine S. Augustine.
Thou conuersed'st with Turks and Renegados, and they are able almost to
corrupt a Saint: A little leaven, leaueneth the whole lump Citius, quae amara
sunt, mutant dulcia, quam quae dulcia sunt, amara. Natura ita comparatum est,
says Bernard, vt cum honum malo coniungatur, non malum, a bono melioretur, sed
bonum, (...) malo contaminetur.
The Leprosy infected the very stones, of the Leapers-house: and the infected
stones, were to be carried away: yea, the vninfected stones, were to be scraped
within, round-about Leuit. 14.41. Therefore have thou need of much clensing.
Thou have changed, thy Habit and Vestmentes, in token, of change in Religion:
thou have denied thy Faith. Thy sin of being Circumcised, was a bloody sin;
Thy deforming of thy head, thy Crimen crinium, I will call, naturally, morally,
in a double sense Capitale. Thy fighting against Christians, was an offense of
an high-hand, lifted up against Christ. Thou were over head and ears. Wholly
under water; thou were Totally fallen; and if thou had then dyed, without
Repentance, thou had been as certainly damned, as the Devils of Hell. The
present remorse shows, thou were not Finally fallen: thou have recovered both
thy Head above, and thy Body out of the waters, which might have swallowed thee
up. And now, continuing in the estate of Repentance, and Goodworkes thou art as
sure to be saved, as the Angels of Heaven.

I should sin against Christ, against this our weak Brother, for whom Christ
dyed, if I left him in thoughts of Despair, and annexed no Comfort: Therefore
will I now come to the third, and last inference from my Text. That the present
damnable estate, of them, that believe in Circumcision, does not hinder, but
rather include, the blessed estate of him who repenting after Circumcision,
desires to be received into the Body of Christ's Church. I must be brief. The
sum is, Repentance is of so great a power, that it tyeth Gods hands from
punishing. The first hearty Groan of a truly Contrite, and fully poenitent
soul, finds Mercy with the God of Mercies, though thousands cozen themselves
into Hell, by self presuming, thinking they have repented. Repentance washes
away sins, reconcileth and reuniteth Us unto God, it purchases Grace, it
prepares Us for Glory: it is secunda tabula post naufragium. If Caine,
Achitophel, the Jews who urged our Saviors death, if Judas, if, He that
sins against the Holy Ghost, of the Devils themselves could sufficiently
Repent, and continue in it, I should not doubt of their Salvation. That sin
cannot be committed, which cannot be pardoned through Repentance. Let not the
bold, daring presumptuous sinner hear this Truth: I speak to a Contrite
Heart, to a Sorrowful soul, a Conscience, in agony and anguish, to keep it
from Gulf of despair. I cannot but add, That innocence it self, given to
Adam, was not so great a gift, as Repentance, which God vouchsafes to us;
Aquinas 2^. 2 ae. Quaest. 106. Artic. 2. Donum Innocentiae, secundum se
consideratum, est maius donum, quam donum poenitentia; tamen, respectu
Subiecti, est minus Beneficium. A whole, and perfect Garment (to the eye of
man) is better then the same in pecces and snippets; yet a Garment in pieces,
may be so sewed, and decked, and the seames so laced, with Gold, and enriched
with Pearl, that, to the same man's sight, it will seem better, then the
former entire Vesture: So, a Broken and Contrite Heart (dis-reputed by men) if
it be beautified with Tears as Pearls; and the Rentes sewed, covered and
embrodered with several Graces, as withneedle work, and wrought-Gold, (which
is the trimming of the Churches Raiment, Psalm. 45.13. --) is more precious in
the sight of true judging men, of Angels, and especially of God himself, then
he, that needs no Repentance. Wherefore, let us not fly, cum Adamo, ad
latebras, sedcum Petro ad lachrymas.
for the estate of Innocence was conferred on him, who had no opposite
disposition, but Repentance is given to us, who in our Naturals, and by our
personal misdeedes, deserve nothing, (without the death of Christ) but wrath,
punishment, and hell.

No marvel therefore, if the Angels do rejoice more over one sinner that
repents, than over many righteous, that need no Repentance; comparatively
with others, or in their own unguided opinions. I proceed, by how much the
offense is the greater, and the Repentance more viuid and vigorous, hearty and
fervent; by so much the more is the joy of Angels increased. Of Angels did I
say? yea, of God himself, Jpsa Spiritus-Sancti substantia, quae est quicquid
ipse est, contristari non potest, cum habeat aeternam atque incommunicabilem
beatitudinem: magisque, sit ipsa aeterna and incommutabilis beatitudo,
Augustine. de Genesi ad Litteram. 4.9. Deus (...) est and imperturbabilis.
Ambrosiues thus, Gaudet Spiritus Sanctus, saluti nostrae; non sibi, qui non
indiget laetitia.
in whom though there be no parts, nor passions properly; yet, since
metaphorically, and (...) He is said to be jealous, and Angry, for our
transgressions, Ezekiel. 16.42. My jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be
quiet, and no more angry, and verse 43. Thou have fretted me in all these
things (...), contristabas me. They vexed his holy spirit, Esa. 63.10. (...),
afflicted it. And, I am pressed under you, as a Cart is pressed that is full of
sheaues, Amos 2.13. And not only Christ, as man, did weep for Jerusalem,
(for his enemies in Jerusalem) but, The holy spirit may be grieved, Ephesians.
4.30. Grieve not the holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed to the day of
Redemption: He may be also said, to rejoice in Goodness, to delight in the
Repentance of a sinner. And if You, our dear afflicted Brother, be now
thoroughly sorrowful, for your enormous sins, I dare say, There is joy
extraordinary, in heaven at this time, for thy sake. I have showed, that
Repentance remoueth away the Sword and the Fire from Paradise; that, it opens
the Gate of heaven. I had thought, at large to have handled these points
following.

That, no man is left wholly to himself to be judge of the degrees of his
Repentance, and reconciliation with God; but in great perplexities, has need
of the Keys of the Church, committed to Gods Priests or Ministers. Not the
learned themselves: (who would be partial in their own causes, though upright
Judges of others) for even the learned, and best of these, have some times
called in for aid of their fellow-Ministers; much more, have the
halfe-learned, and the unlearned, need of counsel, comfort, reprehension, of
the spiritual food of the Body and Blood of our Lord; of Absolution and
Benediction ministerial. That God has given the guidance of souls to the
Ministers of the Church, who have a true Ministerial Power, to remit Sins,
and to inflict Poenitentiall Punishments. That Church Discipline ought to be
strained up higher, and, both in more use and more esteems. That, the old just
severity of the Primitive Church did, like an Indulgent Mother, Alijs
animalibus, intra ven trem, vbera in mammas desinunt, mulieri superne ad
pectus,: vt in promptu sit, Osculari, Fouere, Nut^ire infantem, quia pariend^
and alendi fin^s, Amor est, non Necessitas, ^^utarch. Nullus pater tam Pater,
quam Deus, Nulla matter tam Matter quam Ecclesia.
Admit even those, that had more than once offended. That, Penance is not a
cold, fruitless, unnecessary ceremony. Augustine Homil. 49. inter
Quinquaginta, alloquitur fideles adulteros, (not us we use to ^ay, a faithful
Drunkard, who sets up his rest in drinking) but, the Faithful men that
sometime had been Adulterers. Agite poenitentiam, qualis agitur in Ecclesia,
vt pro vobis, oret Ecclesia. Nemo, sibi dicat; Occulte ago: apud Deum ago, qui
mihi ignoscit, quia in cord ago. Ergo, fine causa dictum est, Quaecunque
solueritis in Terra, soluta erunt in Coelis? Ergo sine causa, sunt claues datae
Ecclesiae Dei? Frustramus Euangelium? Frudramus verba Christi? And in the last
Homily of the fifty, he prefers the Pardons of the Church, before the
Pardons of Emperors: Certiores sunt Claues Ecclesiae, quam Corda Regum. Quibus
clauibus quodcunque in Terra soluitur, etiam in Coelo solutum promittitur: and
multo est honestior humilitas, qua, se quisque humiliat Ecclesiae Dei; and
labor minor imponitur, and nullo temporalis mortis periculo, mors aeterna
vitatur.
Then, had I thought, to have closed with earnest exhortation to the Repentant,
that, if he knows any other sins, or Circumstances agrrauating his own
sins, more than he has revealed, and which do trouble his conscience, he
would reveal them; and not think this punishment can cover or cure his
offenses, not known. And, that he would all the days of his life, labor to
work out his salvation, with fear and trembling, and in holy ^uties of
Christianity. Quis nauseabit ad Antidotum; qui hiauit ad Venenum? I would also
have besought the Auditorie, not to triumph in the misery of a Penitent; not
to object hereafter, that offense unto him, that God has remitted, by his
Church: but, rather to show their charity, their liberality in Redeeming of
Captives, in preventing such sins; which is a work, most acceptable to God.
Lastly, if any other of this company have done any of the like offenses, which
yet lie hid. I would have made it manifest unto them, that they have no remedy
so good, as public acknowledgement of their sins, that they had need make
their knees as hard as horn with kneeling; to cry and call to God till they
grow hoarce; to weep till their eyes be blood shot; to hunger and thirst
after mercy, to gape and gaspeafter comfort: and when they have done all these
things, or the like deeds of mortification, they would be more willing than
they are now, to humble themselves to our Church, and by her absolution, either
receive Pardon from God, or, (if it be before received) Increase of Grace
Spiritual.

These things, and more, I propounded to have handled: but I have made a great
trespass upon the time already; and therefore conclude with Prayer unto
Almighty God.

Vni Trino Deo Gloria.
A RETVRNE FROM ARGIER.

A Sermon Preached at Minhead in the County of Somerset the 16. of March, 1627.
at the readmission of a relapsed Christian into our CHVRCH.

By Henry Byam Batchelar of Divinity.

Revel. 2. cap. pars 5. verse. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
and repent, and do thy first works.

LONDON, Printed by T.H. for I.P. and are to be sold by Richard Thrale,
dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crosse-Keyes, 1628.

REVEL. 2. cap. part 5. verse. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
and repent, and do thy first works.


I Shall be forced to do what Israel promised Sihon king of the Amorites,
Numb. 21. pass through his country, without turning aside into the Fields or
Vineyards: Or as your Saylors, whom time forbids most while to draw
Landskips, but with a Sea-marke or twain, they make directly for the Harbor.
He whose name is Wonderful, Isai. 9. Heb. 1.6.
and whom all the Angels of God must worship, (...) and (...): Bids John write
in a Book what he saw, and send it to the seven Churches of Asia, cap. 1:
verse 1. and here unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write, I pass by
that strange assertion of some men in favor of unwritten Traditions that tell
us the Apostles received commandment, Vide Chemnit. exam. council. Trident
part Ia. de Epistolit Apostolorum.
not to Write, but only to Preach: and yet S. Peter, Paul, James, Jude, write,
and S. John is bid Write, I must leave on one side, the dignity of the Pastors,
and their duty on the other; and how what is written to the Churches, must be
sent to the Pastor of each Church; Laudunens. in loc. Mal. 2.7.
either because as Anselme will, their sins, their souls shall be required
at his hands; or because the Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they
should seek the Law at his mouth. Yet many, with another spirit then was his
who spoke it; say they are wiser than their teachers; and for the Scriptures,
praesumunt, lacerant. Hieron. ad Pau^iuum. Cap. 1. v. vlt.
O what senseless sense do those presumptuous Ignorants often times impose upon
it? But the wisest will remember they are but Candlestickes, and because they
do remember it, they are golden Candlesticks: but the Candles, the Stars
themselves which give the light, are the Angels of the Churches, those whom God
has singled out and set apart to teach his people.

The letter to the Church of Ephesus, does follow. I know thy works, and thy
labor, etc. The first part whereof may be divided into a proof, and a
reproof. First, what God approues and commends: secondly, what he dislikes and
discommends. Many were their good works, especially their undergoing the
Cross and persecution patiently. They made a difference between weakelings,
and such as offended presumptuously; they could not forbear them which were
cuill. Though they were ready to bear home the straying sheep upon their
shoulders, 1 Cor. 5.5.
yet the incestuous Corinthian must be cut off. Their Pulpit was not open to
every title-lesse wandering Preacher, but his calling must be known, ere his
doctrine must be heard, and therefore they did examine such as came unto them
in the name of Apostles. And all this did they for the name of Christ: and what
makes much for their commendation, they did all courageously, they fainted not.
In Genesis Homil. 30.
And yet after all this, comes in a nevertheless, and they are reproved.
Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
love. Chrysostom speaking of the Pharisee in the 18. of S. Luke, that did pray
so earnestly, and fast so strictly, and pay tithes so conscionably, and yet had
a poor Publican preferred before him; tells us that he suffered a strange kind
of shipwreck. He had made a good voyage, and lost all at home in his own
harbor: this can self-conceit do. I may say as much of these Ephesians. They
had made an excellent voyage, and were laden with many gracious commodities,
and so one leake in the harbor did endanger all. This can the want of love
do. Thou have left thy first love. Remember therefore from whence thou art
fallen, and repent, and do thy first works.

The parts are two 1 An Exhortation, the first discouers the wound, 2 A
Direction. the second declares the remedy*
Or here is Remember for the time past. Repent for the time present, and Do the
first works for the time to come.
Or here is 1 Their misery or sin. They are fallen. 2 The height or greatness
of their sin. Whence and whither they fell. 3 The salve, Repentance. 4 The
Roll which ties it on, or the application. Do thy first works.


1 S. Bernard has a true saying; He that knows not his own misery, i^
incapable of Gods mercy. And the Laodiceans in the next Cap. were in a woeful
case, that said, they were rich, and needed nothing, and yet were wretched,
miserable, poor, blind, naked. The first step to repent, is to know our
offense; and the way to arise, is to know our selves down. The whole need not
a Physician, Luke 5.31. Romans 3.23. cap. 3.2.
but they that are sick; and the sin-sicke Publican calls for mercy. Indeed we
have all sinned as S. Paul tells us: All in many things, as S. James. And though
Noah were said to be a just or upright man, yet it was but insua generatione,
in regard of the time wherein he lived, and comparatively. And Zachary and
Elizabeth were just before God; that is, sine fuce. What they did, they did
unfeignedly, and yet just by the favor of acceptance, not in the rigor of
examination. We may not therefore wonder that these Ephesians fell, and that
their silver was mixed with some dross, which could not endure the fire. Nor
may we think their fall little, whom so severe a Commination does attend, as
is the removing of their Candlestick out of his place.

2 The sin laid to their charge, is the leaving of their first Love. Ad
Ephesians. cap. 1.15.16,
S. Paul tells us, that he ceased not to give thanks to God for them, because
they had faith toward Christ, 1 Reg. 7.21.
and love toward all his Saints. S. John tells us, they were sallen from this
love: their faith is not questioned, These are the two pillars Iachin and Boas,
which bear up the entrance or porch into the Temple. Tortul. aduers. pr^^^ of
the ^^inity.
Faith and charity must go together, and must be numerus sine diuisione,
distinguished they may be, divided, sundred they cannot be, and be at all. And
therefore it is not said, They were fallen from love, L^^a in loc. ^^anch. tomo
7. de perseuerant. Sanctorum.
for so they must have come within the compass of S. Paul's Nothing, 1 Cor. 13.
but they were fallen from their first love, a tanto gradu, from that feruency
which formerly they had. Either they loved not all the Saints, or they loved
them not in that measure: they were partial, or they were cold in their
affections.

This is that sin which called for so heavy a punishment, and without
Repentance and Returning to their first estate, would (notwithstanding their
many other religious actions) bring on them an everlasting misery. And yet do
we scarce love any Saints much less all; and we never did esteem that
doctrine which teaches us to loose our purse-strings, and power out. We have
fed our Auditory so long with Sola fides, ^ Cap. 1^. Ambrose. (...) Hip. (...)
Pap.
that Charity is frozen amidst the fire of our zeal, and Lazarus is dismissed
with that cold, comfortless alms in S. James, Depart in peace. And most of us
are become Custodes non Domini, slaves to god Mammon; we have not power of our
own. And if any be so tender hearted, as to relieve, restore, compassionate
his brothers misery; some shall untruly judge him for no true Christian; and
other new reformers shall near challenge him of old Religion. Thus dare
presumptuous impiety fall not only from her first love, if she had ever any,
^^cl^s. 7.8. Pro. 5.22.
but from love it self, and yet shall challenge heaven for her inheritance.
She shall add sin to sin, and bind many together, and yet forget her self
to be holden with the cords of her own sin. She shall fall, never any
Ephesian worse, few ever like, and yet persuade her self she stands upright.

The Church of Ephesus is only taxed for defect in Jove, but many of us are
like Mephibosheth, lame in both fecte. We are fallen, 2 Samuel 9.13.
we are fallen not only from love toward all the Saints, Romans 8.33.
but from the faith we had in the Lord Jesus. Persecuion can separate us from
the love of Christ, Ephesians. 6.16.
and the blast of affliction can make us throw off the shield of faith. Yea,
many times we fall away non persecutionis impetused voluntario lapsu, the
demand of a doore-keeper, or the voice of a Maid, will terrify us, as it
befell Peter; and we are prone upon the least occasion to renounce, disclaim,
Phil. 2.10.11.
defy that excellent Name by which we have hope, the blessed name of Jesus. A
name which every tongue must confess, to which every knee must bow, then which
there is no other name under heaven whereby we must be saved; Cic. in Verrem.
lib. 2. of Sotor.
and of which a Heathen could give this testimony, Vt vno verbo exprimi non
possit. It is a name of wonder.

But some have thought it tolerable, Tertul. apol. c. 27.
if not lawful in time of pesecution to deny Manente apud animum proposito: so
the mind be free. Indeed what have not some thought, or what monstrous
opinions were there ever heard of, but could find some one or other to defend
them? One commends the quartan Ague, another writes in praise of Folly;
Anaxagoras thinks the snow is black, Danaeus in cap. 4 Aug. de Here Is. Gab.
Prateolu^.
and Catilina si iudicatum erit meridie non lucere certus erit competitor. He
will swear the sun shines not at noone day. The Basilidians, the
Dauid-Georgians, not only defend that damnable opinion of denying, but (so
commonly does one absurdity, one sin beget another) they scoffed at, they
scorned, they cried shame on all the holy Mar^yrs for their sufferings. But we
have not so learned Christ. Those Chameleons live not in our Element, nor come
they within the verge of the Church. Omnis Aristippum decuit color. He is none
of ours. No no: the resolved Christian will scorn to bow his knee to Baal. He
knows there is a woe to him that has a double heart, Ecclus. 2.
and is faint-hearted. He knows we may not take the name of God in vain,
Math. 10.
much less deny him. And that we must not fear those which kill the body,
and are not able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able to
destroy both soul and body in hell: and that whosoever shall deny his Savior
before men, shall one day be denied before God. Thom. Aquin. 2a. 2 ae. q. 3.
art. 2. Math. 10.23. B. King, on Jonas, Lect. 29.
This makes the Schooleman resolve, that upon pain of damnation, we are bound
in some case^ to abide the trial, and confess our faith, when it shall
conduce either to the honor of God, or the profit of our neighbor. And that
indulgence of our blessed Savior, of flying from City to City, is neither for
all men, nor all times. This made the Saints, the servants of God, not only
not deny, but to proclaim themselves Christians, and to run upon those
insufferable torments and jaws of death, Aquin. 2a. 2ae. q. 124. art. 3.
ex zelo fidei and charitate fraterna, etc, says Aquinas. Out of the feruency
of their faith, and to hearten and encourage their Brethren. The Martyrs have
often come forth and offered themselves to the fire, or other fury of their
enemies. Apolog. cap. 1.
This made Tertullian cry out, Christianis quid simile? etc. What may be
compared to the Christian? question him, and he is glad: accuse him, and he
says guilty: Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. c. 13.
adiudge him to death, and he will give thee thanks. This made Antoninus Pius
give a liberal testimony of them in his time, It is their desire in Gods
quarrel rather to dye than to live.

Not to speak of Isaiah cut in twain, Sixtus Senensis lib. Sanct. lib. 1.
Jeremy stoned, Ezekiel beheaded, Daniel in the Den, and his three companions
in the Oven: and indeed which of the Prophets have not been persecuted and
slain? Act. 7.52. 2 Machab. 6. ibid. c. 7.
nor of Eleazer beaten to death being fourscore year old and ten? nor of that
honorable woman, and her seven sons, enduring to the amazement of the
tormentors. And though it be most true as one says, Erasmus virginum and
Martyr. comparat.
Parents atrocius torquentur in liberis quam in seipsis. The poor Mother
suffered more Martyrdomes, than she had children, and every stripe their
backs felt, went to her heart, yet she exhorted every one of them, with a
manly stomach, and prayed them all to dye courageously, never deploring that
she had brought them forth to such misery, but ouerioyed that she should be the
mother of so many Saints.

And though I know it to be true what the Orator has vetera exempla profictis
fabulis iam audiri. Cic. 3. in verrem.
Yet will I touch at a few of those holy Saints and blessed Souls in Heaven
Who willingly, joyfully, constantly yielded up their spirits in his quarrel,
who first trod out the way, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 4. c. 1^.
and shed his blood for them. Policarpe, When many urged him to deny his
Savior and save himself, answered resolutly, fourscore and six years have I
served him, neither has he ever offended me in any thing, and how can I revile
my king who has thus long preserved me? And when the Proconsul threatened to
burn him, his answer was; Thou threatnest fire for an hour, which lasts a
while and is quickly quenched, but thou art ignorant of the everlasting fire,
of the day of Judgment, and of the endless torments which are prepared for the
wicked. And being now come to his last, he turns from his persecutor to his
Maker. O God (says he) I thank thee, that thou have graciously vouchsafed
this day and this hour, Idem lib. 3. c. 32. Gr. 35.
to alot me a portion among the number of Martyrs and servants of Christ.
Ignatius, when he was sent from Syria to Rome to be meat for wild beasts. Now
(says he) do I begin to be a Disciple, I weigh neither visible nor invisible
things: Let fire, Gallows, Violence of beasts, bruising of bones, racking of
the members, stamping of my whole body, and all the plagues Satan can invent
light upon me, so I may win my Savior Christ. Simeon, Fox 3a persecutione.
Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 6.
Bishop of Jerusalem being an hundred and twenty years old, was scourged many
days together, and at last crucified. Peter a Noble man of Nicomedia, had his
body rent in pieces with the lash, afterward, vinegar mixed with salt, was
powered into his wounds, and last of all he was fried to death upon a Grediron.
Sanctus, Idem lib. 5. c. 1.
one that would neither confess his name, kindred, or country, but only that
he was a Christian, had his body fired, seared, scorched with hot plates of
brass. Forty Martyrs, Fox indecima persecut. ex Basil.
young Gentlemen, for professing themselves Christians, were in the depth of
winter compelled to stand in a Pond all the night, and in the morning, taken
out and burned. Take one Woman among the rest, Blandina, Eusebius. lib. 5 c. 1.
who was tormented from morning till night; the executioners tormenting her by
turns, and after a world of cruelties, she was wrapped in a net, and tumbled
before a wild Bull, which tossed her too and fro upon his horns; and for a
farewell, she had her head divided from her body. Jacques de Lauardin Hist-of
Scanderbeg. lib. 11.
I have read of some, and those some of the valiantest the world did see within
their age, who, after all kind of ignominy and Turkish cruelty practiced upon
them, were fleaed alive by little and little, for fifteen days together. Heb.
11.32. Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 40 Gr. 41. Ibid. cap. 41. Gr. 42. Jbid. cap. 40. Idem.
lib. 5. c. 1.
And (to borrow the Apostles words,) what shall I more say? for the time would
be too short for me to tell how some had their eyes pricked out with sharp
quilles, as Metras: some were beaten to death with cudgels, as Ischyrion: some
had all their teeth beaten out of their head, as Apollonia. And what should I
speak of the setting them in the stocks, and stretching their legs unto the
fifth hole? Fox decima persecut.
or of the iron chair, wherein they sat broyling to death? of holes made in
their necks, and their tongues drawn out backward? their eyes pulled out, and
the hollow places seared with hot irons? D. King on Jonas, Lect. 24.
powning in mortars? rolling in barrels armed with pikes of iron? D. Benefield
on Amos, Lect. 7
Women's breasts seard? Gab. Proteolus lib. 7. 7.
Virgins faces whipped? their whole body abused, prostituted and tormented? I
am faint in telling, and you be weary in hearing, but they vnterrified,
undaunted, endured all courageously. Erasmus virginum and Martyr. comparat.
Tertul. apol. c. 50. Hemming in Psalm. 84. verse. 7.
Tyrannornm ingeniosa crudelitas, says one. The bloody Tyrants set their wits
on work to invent torment; but nihil proficit exquisitior quaeque, says
another: the more the torments, the more the Martyrs. Their blood was like
corn sown, one brought forth many. Yea the persecutors themselves were
astonished to see their constancy, and how they went to their Martyrdom,
Nasians: Orat. 32 de Machabaeis.
tanquam ad epulas, tanquam ad delicias, Hosius Confess. fidei cap 6 8.
Nasians: Cygneorum Carm. lib. and Orat. 32. de Machabaeis. Heb. 12. Moses and
Maximus etc. 26. Epist. inter opera Cypriani.
tanquam ad nuptialem thalamum, they went to the fire as to a feast, as to a
dainty feast, as to their bridal bed.

Wherefore let us also seeing that we are compassed with so great a cloud of
witnesses, cast away every thing that presses down, and the sin that hangs
so fast on. Let us remember from whence we are fallen, that so we may repent,
and do the first works. We can offer up no greater Sacrifice to our Master:
We can purchase no greater happiness to our selves: We can leave no better
example to others: We can bring no greater comfort to our friends, then under
the hand of the merciless Executioner undauntedly to acknowledge whose
servants we are, and with a free, though fading spirit to confess our Savior.

First, We can offer up no greater sacrifice to our Master: Cypri. epist. 9.
and Epist. 25. etc. Lib. de Duplici Martyrio inter opera Cypriani tomo. 3o.
You shall first understand who ought properly to be called a Martyr. Cyprian
makes two sorts. The first of them who shed their blood, the second of them who
are ready so to do for Christ's sake: And to those last torments were wanting
(says one) they were not wanting to the torments. Zacnh. tomo. 6. in cap. 2 ad
Philip. verse. 30. apud Aquinam. 2a. 2 ae. q. 124. art. 4.
Zanchius acknowledges that the Church did usually call this later sort
Confessors, yet he will have Epaphroditus a Martyr, and Hierom does some where
call the blessed Virgin a Martyr, quamuis in pace vitam finierit, and
Policrates Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 28. G. 3.
calls John the Evangelist a Martyr. And Chrisost. tells the people of Antioch,
that a man may always be a Martyr, for Job was one and suffered more then many
Martyrs did, Homil. 25.
says Bernard in his Sermon of Abbot Benedict pretily differenceth Martyrs
from Confessors and somwhere else tells us of three kinds of Martyrdom without
blood. We must first conclude with Cyprian and Augustine. The cause, not the
sufferinge, makes a Martyr. in senten. Gab. Prateolus. Elench Here Is lib. 3.. 5.
We disclaim the Campates a kind of Donatists, who would have all voluntary
Deaths Martyrdomes. I think S. Augustine calls them Circumcelliones. August.
de Haeres: cap. 69. Prateol. lib. 13.. 16. Zanch. tomo. 6. in epist. ad Phil.
Cap 1o. Idem ibid. August. tomo. 8. in Psalm. 118. Vbi Supra. in Cap. 2. verse.
30. in 2am. 2ae. q. 124. art: 4. Apud Zanch. vbi Supra. in cap. 1.
And likewise Pelibianus who taught them to be Martyrs who slew themselves in
detestation of their sins. But so (says one) Judas should have been a
Martyr. Secondly as Talis Causa so talis paena. They are Martyrs who testify
the truth Vsquead mortem, even sealing it with their blood. The other whom the
Church calls Confessors, are Perinde ac Martyrs, aequiuoce Martyrs, so
Zanchius: designati Martyrs, so Tertullian interpretatiue, inchoatiue secundum
quid, and mental Martyrs, So Caietan. And therefore we may be bold with S.
Augustine to blot out some, and question other some even the holy innocents
themselves, question I say not their bliss, but their testimony that the
dignity of proto-martyrship may remain unto S. Steven. The sum of all is
this. He is properly a Martyr, who is tormented to the death for the word of
God, Revel. 1.9.
and for the testimony of Jesus Christ. Of King Henry and Queen Mary Martyrs,
both for the honor of the dead, and the peace of the Church, I say nothing.
Academ. quaest.
Perchance the question then was, or most while was for bounds as Tully
speaks, but now it is for the whole possession and inheritance. Cic 1o.
Officiorum.
Nay it is vter esset non vter imperaret. I am sure Heaven cannot hold us and
Mahomet, and blessed is he that shall lay down his life in so good a cause.
Math. 10.42.
A Cup of cold water shall not loose his reward. Whosoever shall forsake
Houses, Mark. 10.30.
or Brethren or Sisters, or Father or Mother, or Wife or Children, or Lands for
the Name of Christ, shall receive an hundred fold more for the present, and in
the world to come eternal life. What shall he have that forsakes all? He that
offers praise and thanksgiving honors God. Psalm. 50. verse. vlt.
He that gives his bread to the poor members of Christ, feeds his Savior,
But he that gives himself, his life, his blood, does give all, and therefore
more then all. He that gives his life can give no more, John 15.13. Remember
therefore from whence thou art fallen: thou could offer no greater sacrifice
to thy Master.

Secondly, We can purchase no greater happiness to our selves. I should much
wrong you if I should labor to prove this. If heaven be better than earth; if
the Crown of life, better than the pains of death: if things eternal, better
than temporal: if to be always happy, better than ever in hazard, in fear,
in trouble, then he that suffers for the name of Christ, does to himself
purchase name, fame, heaven, happiness; and with Mary has chosen the better
part, which shall never be taken from him: then he that loses his life shall
find it, Math. 10.39. and he that dies with Christ, shall live with him, shall
reign with him, 2 Timothy 2.11. and the momentany afflictions which he does here
endure, shall cause to him (...), a more excellent weight of glory, 2 Cor.
4.17. In a word, p Chrysolog. sermon. 40. Calvin institut. lib. 3. cap. 8. 7.
participes passionis shall be gloriae participes (as says Chrysologus) If we
share with him in affliction here, he will impart to us blessedness hereafter.
So happy are these men whom God vouchsafes that special honor as to dye for
him. Write them blessed, as the voice said, Revel. 14.13. no men more, no men
like. And therefore remember from whence thou art fallen. Thou could
purchase no greater happiness to thy self.

Thirdly, we can leave no better example to others. S. Paul, Philip. 1. c.
12.14. tells us that his durance turned to the furtherance of the Gospel,
insomuch that many brethren in the Lord were emboldned through his bands, and
durst more frankely speak the word. In Ecclesiastic History you shall read
continually, how one Martyr led the way to another, and the noble resolution
they showed in their death, made hundreds then alive to take the same course:
yea so powerful is example in this kind; that the very heathen not only gave
them testimony of courage, but were won to the faith, Beda History Angl. lib.
1. Palatina, and the 3. Conuers. of England, part 3a.
and sealed the same tostimony with their blood. So did S. Alban beget his
heads man to the faith, and had him his companion to the Kingdom of God. So
did the constancy of Pope Sixtus the second, strengthen S. Laurence; and S.
Laurence brings Romanus from a persecuting Soldier to be his fellow Martyr.
Tryphon did the like, and almost who did not? The Phaenix ashes (some say)
yields another Phaenix: but the Martyrs by life and death begat many. Semen est
sanguis christianorum. Tertul. apolog. c. 50.
Now if they that turn many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for
ever and ever, Dan. 12. How happy are those faithful witnesses in heaven,
whose holy lives, and vnterrified, unappalled deaths did strengthen some, and
raise up others, and draw thousands from the very sink of Atheism and
infidelity, to know and acknowledge their most gracious Redeemer? And therefore
remember from whence thou art fallen, thou could never leave a better
example to others.

4 And last of all, we can never bring greater comfort to our friends. The
Heathen when his child was dead, comforted himself with that inexorable,
unavoidable law of mortality, sci^ me genuisse mortalem: but what unspeakable
comfort would it be, to say, I know I have begat one who is now a Saint in
heaven? This made those three Mothers, 3 Conuers. of England, part 3a.
Chrysolog. sermon. 134. etc.
Felicitas, Simphorosa, and that other in the Machabees, to encourage each of
them their seven children in their torments; and the comfort they received in
their childrens constancy, was much more than the pains they endured through
the Tyrants fury. This made the Mother of Simphorianus run after him when he
went to his Martyrdom, still crying out, son, son, be mindful of
everlasting life, look up to heaven, etc. And this made that women in
Theodoret, Histor. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 16.
renowned for her care, as well as constancy. When Valens the Emperor had
threatened death to all vn-arrianized Christians at Edessa; and Modestus the
Governor with his Soldiers, stood ready in the Market place to execute the
decree; A woman leading her little child by the arm, broke through the
press, and labored to get in among her fellows. The Governor demanded her,
whether she went: she tells him, she would drink of the same cup the rest
did. And being further demanded what her child made there, and why she had
brought it, her answer was, That he also might dye that blessed death. Indeed
great was the joy of the whole Church, Erasmus virginum and Martyr. Comparat.
and Cyprianus de. lapsis: tomo 2.
vbi Martyr constanter exhalasset animam pro Christo. Great was their joy, if
any dyed courageously; and great their sorrow, their grief, if any fainted
cowardly, wretchedly, wickedly. Remember therefore from whence thau art fallen:
Thou could bring no greater comfort to thy friends.

Tertullian writing to the imprisoned Christians, Cap. 4.
whom he calls Martyrs, exhorts them to endure constantly by the example of
Lucretia, Mutius, Empedocles, and such others, who suffered much, to little
purpose, only to get a terrene fading fame among men. Tanti vitrum? Ibid.
quanti verum margaritum? If they did so much for glass, what should we do
for gold? if honor were bought at so dear a rate, why should we grudge upon
the same terms to get heaven? Nazianzene some where tells us, Cygneorum Carm.
lib. page 1051. a.
that the Heathen were only valiant, when the danger could not be shunned, it
was much if it were so. But what bad Scaeuola burn his right hand for missing
in the murder of Porsenna? or if he stood in danger, what is that to Lucrecia?
Cic. orat. de Prouinc. Consul.
or to those noble Virgins, who threw themselves headlong into Wels to save
their Virginity? Who made Brutus and Torquatus kill their sons? Who compelled
Regulus to return ad crudelissimum hostem, Cic. 3. officiorum
ad exquisita supplicia, to those merciless enemies, to that strange death of
his at Carthage. B. King, on Jonas Lect. 27.
And what made the Stoickes so prodigal of their lives, that they little
regarded the very extremity of tortures? and when they were upon the rack,
they would cry out, O quam suaue! as if it were sport? Surely nothing but a
thing of nothing. Honor, and a name amongst men, while the noble Martyr shall
have the acclamation of the Angels, and an euge of his Savior. Heaven is his;
and as Nathan told David, 2 Samuel 12.8*
if that be too little, he shall have more; his name shall never perish from
the earth. As Cicero said of Metellus, Pro domo sua ad pontifices.
Calamity has made them immortal, even here also. Their prisons were visited
as places made holy by the inhabitants. Men, women, young, old, did kiss the
chains, in which they had been fettered: preserve the swords for Relics by
which any had been deprived of their life: their ashes sacred: their memories
blessed: their anniuersaries kept, the day of their death being their
natalitiae, the first of time in which they began truly to live. And what
could be wanting, where Miracles were plentiful? God even at those very places
where the Martyrs lay witnessing their blessed state by many miracles: but I
forbear. As S. Ambrose said of one of them, De virginibus lib. 1.
Appellabo Martyrem and praedicauisatis. The name of a Martyr is a whole world
of commendations. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
and do thy first works.

But this is not all, here is a Quo vadis; here is, a whither we fall, Cap. 2.
verse. 13.
as well as whence we fall; and a Terminus ad quem. As God said by Jeremy, The
people have committed two evils, They hue forsaken me, 1 San. ^.8.
the fountain of living waters, and have dug them pits, even broken pits
that can hold no water; and as elsewhere: They have forsaken me, and worshipped
other gods, no gods; They have gone from Christ, to Antichrist; from God to
Mahomet, that same inimicus homo, that has done so much mischief to Gods
vineyard. John 19.
Wherefore as Pilate sometime said of him, in whom he confessed, that he could
find no fault at all: Ecce homo. I shall say to you of this cursed Caitiffe,
and scourge of Christendom, in whom I can find nothing but faults, Prateolus
ex Ricoldo Haeres. lib. 2. in Bayras Polidor Virgil de invent. lib. 7. cap. 8.
and those monstrous ones. Ecce homo, take a view of him. And though I cannot
affirm, whether he were genere admodum vilis, as some: or nobili genere natus,
as others: Whether he were descended of Noble, or obscure Ancestors: nor
whether his Parents were Jewish or Pagan, or both, or neither: nor whether he
were an Arabian, or a Persian, or neither: nor whether he was buried at Mecha,
Purchase. lib. 3. cap. 3.
or Medina, or at neither, but devoured of dogs (the hellish history of his
life and death being as obscure as hell:) yet all accord that he was what Tully
said of one, Jn Verrem. 3.
Immensa aliqua vorago aut gurges vitiorum turpitudinumque omnium, the very
puddle and sink of sin and wickedness. A thief, a murderer, and adulterer,
and a Wittall. And from such a dissolute life proceeded those licentious laws
of his. Ph. Morney de veritate Christian relig. c. 33.
That his followers may avenge themselves as much as they list. That he that
kills most Infidels, shall have the best room in Paradise: and he that
fights not lustily, shall be damned in hell. That they may take as many Wives
as they be able to keep. And lest insatiable lust might want whereon to feed,
to surfeit, he allows divorce upon every light occasion. He himself had but
eleven Wives, besides Whores; Purchase lib. 3. c. 9. 5. Ant. Gueuarra. epist. ad
Comitem Myrand.
but the Grand-Signior in our days kept three thousand Concubines for his lust.

Licurgus, his laws allowed Manslaughter: Phoroneus permits Theft: Solon
Solinus tolerateth Adultery: Numa Pompilius makes it lawful to conquer and
keep: The Lydians and Baleares suffer, nay, command what I shame to speak:
And even he whom we must acknowledge the first and greatest Lawgiver under
God; Moses himself will suffer something propter duritiem cordis: but take all
the worst out of all these, and out of all other the worst of all; 1 Reg. 12.10.
and Rehoboams little finger shall be bigger than his fathers loins. The
wickedness which Mahomets laws alone maintain, are more and more monstrous
then them all.

Not to tell you of the Angel he met ten thousand times huger than the whole
world: Hemming. lin Psalm. 84. cap. 8.
nor of those Angels that lusted, now hanged in iron chains till the day of
judgment: nor of their fair Hostess taken up into heaven, and made the
beautiful day star. Nor of Seraphiel his Trumpet, which is as long as a
lourney of fifty years, Purchase lib. 3. cap. 5.
some say, five hundred: and that is more suitable to some of his relations, as
namely of an Ox so huge, that it is a thousand years journey from one of his
horns to the other; and of a Key seven thousand miles long (the doors
themselves must needs be great) and of the Bridge that is made over hell; and
of the resurrection of Birds and Beasts: and how death shall be changed into a
R^mme; and what that Atheist. Agrippa said for the Ass, this damned
circumcised miscreant dare say for his Ram and that the Ram, Cornelius Agrippa
de vanitat. scient. Purchase. lib. 3. c. 13.
(more charitable then his Masters) does pray for his persecutors, for those
which sacrifice him. I should be loath once to mention those whet-stone lies of
his, but that you may see what a jolly fellow those men serve which fall away
and turn Turk. And therefore let it not distaste if I add, How Hali his sword
would cut Rocks asunder, (but you must understand 'twas an hundred Cubitts
long) How Mahomet found the Sun where it lay resting it self in a yeallow
fountain. How the Moon brake in two pieces, and fell upon the Hills of Mecha,
but Mahomet made it whole again. How he tells of an Vtopian land white as
milk, sweet as Musk, soft as Saffron, and bright as the Moon: yet this is
nothing to his Paradise, Hemming. in Psalm. 84. c. 8.
the ground thereof is gould watered with streams of Milk, Honey and Wine. How
there his followers after the day of Judgment, shall have a merry madd world,
Purchase. lib. 3. c. 5.
and shall never make an end of eating, drinking, and colling wenches. And
these (if you will believe it) are sweet Creatures indeed; for if one of them
should spet into the Sea, all the waters thereof would become sweet.

This is a taste of his infernal doctrine, of those strange lies and strong
delusions with which he has bewitched the world, and led men-hood-wink't into
the Abisse of perdition.

This is, So Denis in his Treatise against Mahomet Printed at London. 1531.
Whittaker against Campian. in his answer to the tenth reason.
or is like that Dragons tail. Revel. 12.4. Which drew the third part of the
Stars of Heaven and cast them to the earth, this is that same Abaddon and man
of sin. This is Mahomet, one that has brought more souls to Hell, then all
other sects and heretics besides. I take that saying of a Reverent Divine,
(whose memory I honor) to be spoken somewhat in heat of opposition and
forcedly: That the Romish Antichrist alone has more enlarged the infernal
kingdom, then all Jews, Nero's, Mahomets, Arrians, (...) Nestorians,
Macedonians, Euticheans, and the rest. Truly I confess (as things now go)
Many a Pope is rather a Bite-sheepe then a Bishop (so one terms him) and much
is the woe and wisternesse that Rome has brought upon Christendom. Many
soul, D. Fulk. in. 2. Cor. 2.. 7.
false, frenzie-full positions has she obtruded to the world on pain of
damnation to be believed, and so great is her Merchandising that she dare set
Heaven it self to sale. Mr. Mountag. appeal. c. 5. and. 8
But if Turk and Pope together cannot make up that one Antichrist, and he may
not be both of these, nor yet a third out of both these. I add, nor a third
besides these. I should rather probably conclude with learned Zanchius and
others more. The Turk is he. Tomo 7o. de preseruant. Sanctorum. and ib. tract.
de fine seculi. and tomo. 8. Respons. ad Arrianum.
The Turk is he who though he profess himself the Prophet of God, yet
exalts himself against all that is called God, and does most blasphemously
deny God, neither acknowledging the Trinity, nor that holy One, the power of
God. The Turk is he who reigns in that seven hilled City of Constantinople
and sits in the very Temple of God. Jerusalem is his, and a great part of
the world runs after him. The Turk is he who as Hanibal was said of Rome, or
Scipio of Carthage, is the very scourge and plague of Christendom, and Hammer
of the world; Cic. Philip. 4.
An enemy implacable, who does count it his greatest sport and recreation, as
one said of Anthony, to mangle, murder, wallow in the blood of Innocents: yet
with that Strumpet in the 1. Reg. 3. cap. is content to share the prey, but
it is with the Devil. The one seeks the body, the other the soul.

Good God is it possible that the great Princes and Monarchs of Christendom
can so long endure both to hear and see this extreme misery! Jacques de
Lauardin History Scanderbeg: lib. 6.
And cannot the intolerable servitude of their Christian Brethren, their
chains and bonds so hydeous and shameful, their complaints so many, their
torments so merciless, their blood sanctified by Baptism less valued then
the blood of beast cannot these kindle in our hearts the holy fire of
compassion, and whet our swords against that Common enemy? Lucan lib. 1o.
Cannot this put an end unto those woeful wars of ours; Nullos habitura
triumphos? Where one Member wounds another to the hazard of the whole body?
Revel. 19.2.
that so we might avenge the blood of Gods servants, which has so long time
called, cried for revenge and set a bound to Turks pride and Propagate the
glorious Gospel of our Savior. While now our discord is his advantage, and
our wars his opportunity.

There was one Luther. vid vb: Supra.
who sometime, So Fran. Oliverius apud Sleidan. lib. 14. and Polidor Virgill
lib. 7. c. 8.
said. We might not wage wars against the Turks, and that it was no
Christian warrfare: Aliquid humani passus est. He was a Man and so he spoke. O
might I live to see the time when our Roberts, Godfreies, Baldwins would set
foot in stirrup again! and might I be one of the meanest Trumpettors in such
an holy expedition.

But we must Leave the wound and him that gave it, Prateol. Haeres. lib. 11..
38.
that we may provide a plaster. The Montanist like a timid Surgeon does
forsake the cure, and the merciless Nouatian does not only pass by the
wounded man, with the Priest and Leuite, without reaching an helping hand; But
ingeniosa and noua crudelitate, as says S. Cyprian wickedly though wittily
kills out right. Indeed that impure Puritan Nouatus was all for Judgment, and
would not affoard one drop of mercy to those miserable wretches who in heat of
persecution fell away. No tears, no submission, no satisfaction, no possible
repentance might serve the turn, whereby they might be reconciled, and
received to the Church again. Tomo 7o. de perseuerant. Sanctorum.
Now Zanchius is of opinion that the Nouatians were not so unlearned or
unskilled in the scriptures, but that they knew, At what time soever a sinner
repents of his sins from the bottom of his heart God would forgive, but
they verily believe, that such as committed those grand sins as to deny their
faith, their Savior, could never have the grace of true repentance. But we
have promises and examples to confute their errors: And the Church did most
worthily exclude and banish them, Lactantius lib. 6. cap. 24.
who were so difficult and inexorable to receive others. God commands not
impossibilities, but such is his goodness, knowing the weakness and frailty
of man. He has left a door open whereby man having gone amiss and returning
may enter in, In Homil. Marianis Sermon. 15.
To think God cannot forgive is against his Omnipotency, to think he will not
forgive is against his Goodness, To doubt of either is against his gracious
Come unto me etc. Matthew. 11.28. Proverb. 28.
For he that confesses and forsakes his sin shall obtain mercy. And he
that taught us to pray for remission and forgiveness, intended (who dares
doubt it) to forgive.

But there are sins, and there are crying sins; Acts 18.14. 1 John 5.
(...) and (...), sins and audacious sins; and sins to death. There are
indeed, and to deny our faith is none of those little ones and peccadillios:
But he that loves friends, lands; life, more then Christ is unworthy of
Christ. Math. 14. And how detestable such offenses are, they may testify whom
a present vengeance has ceized on, De Lapsis.
and who in the midst of their escape have felt the powerful revenging hand
of the Almighty. Cyprian will tell you of one stricken dumb, and of another who
presently possessed with an unclean spirit bit her tongue in pecces, Poena
inde caepit, vnde and crimen. And diverse such like. Math. 18.6.7. Bucan loc.
17. Althamer. in council. loc. script. 12 Vid. Aquin 2a. 2 ae. q. 14. art. 1.
etc. And Zanch. tomo. 4. lib. 1o. cap 9.
In a word it is a Millstone sin and sin of offense: and woe to him by whom
offense comes. But it is not a sin against the Holy Ghost, though it come
near to that sin, nothing nearer when it is not done, Animo peccandi
willingly, wilfully, and maliciously. And so did Theophilact plead for S.
Peter in Luc. 22.
that he had (...) the seed, the root of faith was left behind. And Gregory
Apud Zanch. tomo 7. de perseuerant. Sanctorum. In Homil. Marian. Sermon. 5.
Platina. Carranz. etc. Cyprian.
That some sin of ignorance. So Paul, some of infirmity, so Peter, and other
some out of a desire and mallicious propensity to sin. To the prince of the
Apostles I may adioyne that Prince of peace Solomon that great one, who fell
into so great Idolatry. And Manasses who exceeded all men in abomination of
sin, yet is he afterward numbered among the friends of God. And Marcellinus
the Pope, who burnt incense, yet at the last suffered for the faith, and Casta
and Emilius and a world beside, who first fell, and then repented, and so
repented, that they not only obtained pardon of the Church in Earth, but the
glorious Crown of Martyrdom in Heaven. In Homil. Marian vbi Supra.
Yea I know some that tell us how for this very cause the Devil hasted to take
Judas out of this life, least knowing that there was a way to turn to
Salvation, He might by penance recover his fall. I press it not; but yet
Nouatus must hear will he nill he; Cyprian.
That the Church was ever ready to receive those which return, her Arms are
open, her breasts naked, and she cannot forget her Child, and if she could,
yet I know who cannot. And therefore though this sin of thine be a
scarlet-sinne; Acts. 8.22.
Yet will I not say to thee as some S Peter to Simon Magus si forte remittatur.
Repent of this thy wickedness, and pray to God that if it be possible thou
may be forgiven, yea I know thou will be forgiven. But Thou must repent and
do thy first work.

I cannot but approve their saying, Canus. Bucanus, Alsted etc. 2, Cor. 7.
who derive poenitencie from poena sorrow within, and shame without, but this
is not enough, it must be (...) A godly sorrow which does cause a gracious
repentance, fear and grief does accompany the damned, but a Religious soul
begins in sorrow, walks on in hope, resolves on Reformation, Herman
Coloniensis tit. Conuers. a peccat.
adds wings to his resolution, and to finish and perfect all labors to do
The first works, the works of Grace. This made one define Repentance to be,
an earnest hearty serious sorrow for our sins, enlivened with the hope of
pardon, and accompanied with a firm purpose of Amending what has bin amiss.
This made Another say that to Repent is iustitiam denuo operari. Lactansius
lib. 6. cap. 24. The Book of Common prayer in princip. ex Math. 3.2. Rhem.
testament, in Math. 11.. 3.
Not only to be sorry for what is done, but seriously to intend, purpose and
live a better life, and accordingly has our Church somwhere translated
Poenitencie into Amendment of life. How ever the Rhemists have found a knot in
a Bullrush, and dislike what they can never amend. The common division of
Repentance is into Contrition, Confession and Satisfaction, But many think it
more common then safe, and in detestation of Auricular confession, or for fear
the al-sufficiency of Christ's satiffaction were hereby questioned, they cannot
brook, they cannot once endure the name of Confession or Satisfaction.

And yet the Papists make them not essential parts but Integrall the
Materials or quasi materia. Either as something of or something belonging to
repentance: either as parts of poenitency, or ibid and Council. Florent.
acts of the penitent, necessary either vt precepta or media Council. Trident.
in Catechis. ad parachos. insacrament: poenitent.
as things of nature or conducing to the perfection of Repentance. Many of them
have said no more, and for ought I see we say as much, for when no stone is
left unmoved, and sick man like we have tossed us from side to side, we are
still in the same place: We admit them all in some cases. As for confession to
the Priest, our Church approues and presses it: indeed as B. Vssher in answer
to the Jesuits challeng page 92.
Medicinal not Sacramental, and though the Keys be grown Rustie yet are
they Rich. But we have not now to do with any secret sin, but with a known
Capital offense. And though with the Greek Church we content our selves
oft-times with confession to God alone, Canus part 5a derelict. poenitent.
yet here together with them we do admit, approve, urge a public
exhomologesis open confession and Church discipline.

As for Satisfaction our intent is not to make Level with the Almighty for our
sins. S. Thom. ex Anselmo. Satisfactioest compensatio Offensae praeteritae ad
aequalitatem Iustitiae.
We know the disproportion between Man's weakness, and Gods justice. D. Fulke
ad 2. Cor. 2.. 6. in Rhem. Test. and against Stapleton Fortress. 10.
difference.
But public offenses may not be smothered privately, and he that has given
scandal and offended the Church, must to the Church give Satisfaction. Said I
that he must? Nay he will, he will willingly. He will cry ignosee pater for his
sin, and ignosce frater for his Example. All his grief is that he did sin,
and not that he does suffer, and freely and ingeniously he will confess, That
whatsoever is laid upon him, whatsoever his penance be either for the
humbling of himself, Lib. 1o. c. 9.
or for a terror unto others it is all too little. Irenaeus will tell you of a
woman seduced by Mark the Heretic, which did spend her Council. Trident. sess.
14. sub Iulio terti^ sess. 4. Can. 3.
Book of common prayer.
whole time in bewayling her offense, and of others which did in manifesto
exhomologesin facore. publicly acknowledge Ib.
and lament their sins and wickedness. Eusebius will tell you of an
Heretical Bishop, Lib. 5. c. 28.
Natalis who clad himself in sackcloth and ashes falls down to the feet of
the Bishop, Lib. 3. c. 11.
and with a world of sighs, and tears craves pardon. Socrates will tell you
how Ecebolius for renouncing his faith lay along in the Church porch and cried
unto such as came in. Tread me, Tread me under your feet, Lib. 1o. de
poenitent. cap. 16.
for I am the unsavory Salt. And Ambrose will tell you of Many who did even
plow up their face with tears, wither their cheeks with weeping, prostrate
themselves to the feet of the passengers, and with their continual abstinence
and much fasting they made their living bodies the very Image of Death. I might
add unto all these old Origin that Library of learning and Ocean of woe. In
Suida, and inter sua opera post libres (...).
But we will pass from voluntary submission to Canonical satisfaction.

And here give me leave to say somewhat of the Laws Ecclesiastical and
punishment inflicted by the Church, that which many ignorantly condemn, and
many most maliciously hew at. Lib. de poeniten.
Tertullian will tell you that such like offenders as these must pastum and
potum pura nosse. Bread and water must be their diet, as the Prophet David
said. My tears have been my meat day and night. That they must pray, and
sigh, and weep, pray to God, humble themselves to the Priest. De mirabil.
Sacrae script.
S. Augustine, will tell you that they must never think their penance enough
they must always sorrow, always ory peccaui, life and lamentation must end
together. De poeniten. lib. 2 cap. 1o.
S. Ambrose; The more a man throws himself down by sorrow and submission,
the more abject he is in his own sight, the more accepted shall he be in the
sight of God. But this is general.

The Church did appoin certain forms of penance according to the quality of
the offenses, Apud Carranz. cap. 37. euisdem council.
and for denying the faith Grandem redeundi difficult atem sanxit antiquit as
it is a Canon in the Agathon Council about a thousand years agon. Our
forefathers (say they) did command and enjoin a bitter penance to all such as
had denied the faith. Indeed some (as 'twas said of Novatus) would admit no
reconciliation, some would receive only once all such as fell after Baptism.
The usual practice was to enjoin a three years penance, at the least, to
such as did in time of persecution and against their will deny: some had their
punishment prolonged even unto 8. or 9 years or more; and some were put of ad
magnum diem, Carranz. in Council. Ancyran. Can. 6. Ibid. Can. 1o.
Even till the hour of death or day of Judgment. And if he were a Priest that
fell. He lost his orders, nor might he ever recover his former strate, but by
enduringe the brunt of a second persecution. And last of all, Lib. Eccles.
Hist. 7. cap. 2. tomo 1o. Epist. 10. Bysh. Alloy in Miscellan names 4 sorts. ex
Con. Nicen. Moses and Maximus etc. inter operae Cyprian. tomo. 1o. epist. 26
if any were restored either of the Laiety or otherwise, it must be done by
laying on of hands and confirmation of the Bishop: And this Eusebius calls the
ancient custom, and Cyprian, that to do otherwise were to ruinate and not
restore. Now during the time of these long appointed penance, Some were
Audi^ntes, and might only stay the Sermon: other were Orantes and might be
present at prayers, but must depart when the Eucharist was to be administered.
To admit them to the Communion, was to give that which is holy to dogs, some
some, De Lapsis. Exam. Council. Triden. partevit. (...) ad^gen^tis.
and to press to the Altar was Domini corpus invadere. So Cyprian, yet all
this while there were Relaxations, moderations, mitigations, or as the new word
(after Chemnitius) has it, indulgency from that rigor and severity, and there
was a peculiar reserved power in the R.R. By shop Council. Ancyran Can. 2 and.
5. F. Th. Chauius. de contrit.
He might either lengthen or shorten the time as he saw cause. For as one says
out of Hierom. Apud deum non tantum valet ^tensura temporis quam doloris. God
regards not the length of the penance, but the Contrition of the party; not
how long, but how heartily we humble our selves.

This was the Discipline of the primative Church, this was the remedy they did
provide against those crimson. 2. in Verrem.
Capital offenses, that as the Orator said, they might eur^ not cover the
wound, and labor to profit, rather then to please the patient. So Clerus
Romanus ad Cyprianum inter eius opera tomo 1. ep. 3^.
That neither the wicked might be encouraged by their Facility, nor religious
minds disheartened by their Cruelty: and yet of the twain, it was better with
Domitius to be thought severe in punishing, then dissolute in praetermitting,
passing by the wickedness.

Thus were some strengthened in the faith, and armed against lapses, others
were made to see the greatness of the sin, and terrified against relapses. All
were framed, ordered, tuned, to a most wished happy harmony, in the Church of
God.

Yet Master Cartwright, Reply page 41.
that disturber of Sions peace, will cry out against the Churches severity,
extreme, excessive severity: and though he somewhere tell us, That Murderers,
Adulterers, and Incestuous persons must dye the death; Ibid. page 36.
The Magistrate cannot save them, (such is this mild Moses mercy toward those.)
yet here pardon, pardon, pardon. And lest he might seem any way to favor the
proceedings of the Roman Church, though when she was younger by 14. hundred
years, then now she is; He tells ye, Jbid. page 149.
that if offenders be not meet to receive the holy Sacrament of the Supper,
they are not meet to hear the Word of God, they are not meet to be partakers
of the prayers of the Church, and if they be for one, they are also for the
other. Ibid. page 13.1. Calvin. Jnstitut. lib. 3. cap. 3. 6. Jbid. lib. 4. c.
12. 8.
But this is he who thinks it more safe for us to conform our indifferent
Ceremonies to the Turks, which are a far off, than to the Papists, which are
so near. Indeed his Master tells us, that the Church did use too much rigor.
And would know, si Deus tam, benignus est, vt quid Sacerdos eius austerus vult
videri? God (says he) is merciful and gracious, why should his Priest be so
austere and rigorous? Jbid. lib. 3. c. 4. 10. Art. 33.
And yet Calvin here in our case will have the sinner yield sufficient
testimony of his sorrow, that the scandal which the offender has given, may
be obliterated and taken away. And it must be palam in templo, and so does our
Church teach The offender must be openly reconciled by penance.

Indeed we might be as unreasonably plausible as of there some are, and with
those Hesterni, Cyprian tomo 1. epist. 10. Pro. 22.28. Tom. 1. epist. 40. lib.
6 cap. 19.
as Tertullian calls Praxeas, we might remove the ancient bounds which our
Fathers have set. We might be as unhappily, indiscreetly, merciful as
Foelicissimus in Cyprian, or another, if it be true in Socrates; we might after
a welcome home, admit them to the Church and Sacraments, Cyprian de lapsis
but it would prove a worse persecution then the first; and we should call them
A medela vulneris, it were the way to kill outright, Jdem tomo 1. epist 10.
Sermon. de Benedicto Abbate.
and not to cure the disease. Quae nimis propere minus prospere. The words are
Bernards, but it is a proverb of our own: More have than good speed. This made
some holy men of old pray; that those which had fallen, might know and
acknowledge the greatness of their fall, that so they might learn non
momentaneam neque praepraperam desider are medicinam. Clerus Romanus ad
Cyprianum inter eius opera, tomo 1. epist 31.
That they might with all fearful humbleness expect, and not audaciously
presume a pardon. But to soder those rents, to daube the breach with untempered
mortar, to incarnate on the splintred bones, to cry peace, peace, in a present
peril, and the greatest danger; what is this else, but to precipitate and
plunge a poor distressed soul into a more perplexed case and desperate
disease? It is a terrible lenity, as says S. Augustine; Terribilis lenitas,
blanda pernicies, stulta misericordia. Bern sermon. 42. super Cantica.
a courteous mischief, as S. Cyprian; a foolish pity, as S. Bernard:
Misericor diam hanc ego nolo: God keep all poor sinne-sicke souls from such
Physicians. Let the righteous rather smite me friendly, and reprove me; but let
not their precious balmes break my head. Let me know my danger, and whence I
am fallen, that I may repent, and do the first works.

If much be remitted of the ancient severity, as we see there is, and the
punishment be much less then those primitive times did usually inflict: it is
not because the sin is now less, or the compassion of the faithful greater;
for that ancient discipline is to be wished for again, Church-booke ante
Comminat. Tertul. de p^nitent. cap. 1.
but these delicate times will not suffer it. And the Church is forced to
condescend to the weakness of her children. Many men are become pudoris magis
memores quam salutis. They will rather hazard the loss of heaven, than endure
disgr^^ (...) account it) on the earth.

And this is the very cause why many, and as I am informed, many hundreds, are
Musselmans in Turkey, and Christians at home; doffing their religion, as they
do their clothes, and keeping a conscience for every Harbor wheere they shall
put in. And those Apostates and circumcised Renegadoes, think they have
discharged their Conscience wondrous well, if they can Return, and (the fact
unknown) make profession of their first faith. These men are cowards, and
flexible before the fall; careless and obstinate after it: but what good will
it do them, says Lactantius, Bern. in Psalm. Qui habitat. sermon. 11. lib. 6.
cap. 24.
non habere conscium, and habere conscientiam? to have no witness without, and
one within? to hide their sins from men, and to appear as they are to the
righteous Judge, from whose eyes nothing is hid, nothing is secret? to be
baptized with Simon Magus, and yet live in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity? These are those cursed wretches to whom proprius interitus satis non
fuit: Cyprian de lapsis.
who will not perish alone, but both by their example, and their exhortation,
draw others into the same pit of perdition also; who do add sin to sin, and
multiply and aggrauate their offenses, by hiding, denying, excusing,
translating sin. So that they may be Men here, they care not to be devils
afterward. If any such be here, who has received the Mark of the Beast, and
lives unknown; yet for Gods sake, for his own sake, for that sweet Name by
which he is named the Name of Christ: by the hope of heaven, by the fear of
hell; by his friends on earth, Gregory Nyssen. in the end of his Homil of
Repentance. Si vis curam, agnosce languorem. P. Chrysolog. sermon. 30.
and the holy Angels in heaven, who joy at the conversion of a sinner, by
whatsoever is dearest unto him, and nothing should be deerer than his soul. I
shall, I do beseech such a one to be merciful to his own life. (...) etc.
Get thee to some learned Priest, open thy grief to the Physician of thy soul:
He will, compassionate thy case with a fatherly affection: show unto him
without blushing, those secret sores of thine: and he will (or be he branded
for ever with the ignominy of Irregularity) he will save thy credit, and salve
thy wound. Credit? alas, alas, what is Credit if the soul must perish? or
what is Reputation, which cannot compass one drop of water to cool a flaming
tongue?

And you whom God suffered to fall, and yet of his infinite mercy vouchsafed
graciously to bring home, not only to your country and kindred, but to the
profession of your first faith, and to the Church and Sacraments again. Let me
say to you (but in a better hour) as sometime Iosuah to Achan: Give glory to
God, sing praises to him who has delivered your soul from the nethermost
hell: Magnify him for his unspeakable goodness and mercy toward you: labor
not either to cover, or lessen your offense.

When I think upon your Turkish attire, that Emblem of Apostacy, and
witness of your woeful fall; I do remember Adam and his figge-leaue breeches;
they could neither conceal his shame, nor cover his nakedness. I do think
upon David clad in Saul's armor, 1 Samuel 17.
and his helmet of brass. I cannot go with these, says David: How could you
hope in this unsanctified habit to attain heaven? how could you, clad in this
unchristian weed; how could you but with horror and astonishment think on the
white robe of the innocent Martyrs which you had lost? Revel. 6.11.
How could you go in these rewards of iniquity, and guerdons of apostacy? and
with what face could you behold your self and others?

I do assure my self, the torments you endured, were grievous, and the hope
for your delivery, was little or none: but Seneca puts it down for an Axiom;
that a man cannot be much grieved, and long together; and that the pains will
be either sufferable, or short: Ep. 97. Philip. decimn.
if it be not always so. Yet what says Cicero of Trebonius miserably slain
by Dolebella? Sickness does often times punish many of us here, as much and much
more, than stripes could torment you there. Tertul. 76.
Howeuer the longest day has a night, and the torments and tormentors cannot
last for ever: but montes vruntur and durant. Aetna and Vesuuius burn and
continue. We should think upon the pains of hell which last for ever.

I know you were young; so was Daniel and the three Children: Eusebius. lib. 6. c.
40. Gr. 41. Eusebius. lib. 5. c. 1. Fox. Zuinger.
so were Dioscorus the Confessor, and Ponticus the Martyr: add (if you please)
our English Mekins, who all at fifteen years of age endured manfully
whatsoever the fury of the persecutors pleased to inflict upon them. I might
adioyne to these some of ten years old, and Vitus of seven. And (though we
call them the weaker sex) yet has the Church her Women-Martyrs, not a few,
who have endured as courageously as ever any then did. Ambros. de virginib.
lib. 1.
Witness S. Agnes at 12. years old; Cecilia, Agatha, and a world besides.

In a word, youth and torments, and what ever else may be alleged, do
somewhat lessen and extenuate the sin, but they cannot clear the conscience.
We are bound without fainting to resist unto the death.

I would be loath to break a bruised reed, or add affliction to affliction.
Let not what is said or done, encourage any of you to rejoice in your
neighbors fall, nor triumph in his misery. Far be all unchristian
vpbraidings, reproaches, twittings, from your Christian hearts; but as S. Paul
said of Onesimus; Receive him as a beloved brother for ever, and do it with
the spirit of meekness, considering your selves, Gal. 6.1. Ille body ego
eras, so ille apud Bern. de resurrect. Domin. sermon. 2.
lest you also be tempted. God forbid that any of you should grieve his soul,
for whose return the Angels do rejoice in heaven. Prophets, Patriarchs,
Apostles, Angels, have fallen, and who is he that is assured of his strength?
or who can say he shall stand fast for ever? Though you traffic not for
Turkey, yet may you be Apostata's at home, Tit. 1.10. ^ Tim. 5.8.
denying in deeds, and worse than Infidels.

But you that go down to the sea in ships, and occupy your business in
great waters (for the state of the world cannot stand without buying and
selling, traffic and transportation) what shall I say of you? Pittacus
reckons you neither amongst the dead, nor the living. The grave is always open
before your face, and but the thickness of an inch or twain that keeps you
from it: One breath, flaw, gust, may end your voyage. But if Paul escape
drowning, yet he sees a Viper on the shore, and if all dangers of the sea quit
you, yet a mischief from the land may overtake you. That African monster, to
which so many poor souls have been made a prey; The Turk, (which God forbid)
may bring you under his Lee. Ioh. 21.18.
And as our Savior said of Peter, you shall stretch forth your hands, and he
shall gird you, and lead you whither you would not. If such a calamity should
ever befall any of you, yet remember your first love, the God of love, your
blessed Savior: fight a good fight, 1 Timothy 1.
keeping faith and a good conscience. So shall Christ hear when you call, and
shall deliver you in the needful time of trouble: He shall bring you back
unto your home in safety; and as you have confessed him before men, so shall he
confess you before his father which is in heaven.

The first works come now in the last place to be spoken of; this is one of
the lissoms or twists of that coard which will hardly be broken. Eccles. 4.12.
Remember, repent, and do the first works. Works must be one, or it will
never hold, Sermon. 16. in Cantica.
but add them, and you shall make S. Bernards rope; strong enough to draw
souls out of the devils Jail. I should here tell this poor penitent, what
one tells the Citizens of Luca. P. Martyr.
It behooves him to make good what he has formerly and faintingly denied. He
must cast off his barbarous barbarian habit, and putting on a Christian
resolution; he must boldly confess his Savior in the same place, where he did
first deny him; or because Durus est hic ser^o, as they say in the 6. of S.
John, this is an hard saying: and it is indeed, and requires a special
fortitude and most heavenly resolution: and non omnes capiunt; it must be given
them from above: yet in the whole course of his life, let his repentance be
made manifest, and let him ingraue in his heart those words of the Apostle,
(...). Romans 8.38.39.
Nor death, nor life, nor Augels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor Turk nor Atheist, nor
any other Creature, shall be able to separate him from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

And I should say, somewhat of the Ephesians, of them, and to them; for I fear
me they have a populous posterity, Heb. 11.6. Iam. 2.17.
even in our own land. Works without faith are unprofitable; and faith
without works is dead: nor will every work serve, but there must be Romans 12.
feruency in prayer, 2 Cor. 9.7.
cheerfulness in giving; a Titus 3.1.
promptness, Colos. 1.10.
fruitfulness, and an 1 Cor. 15. vlc.
abounding in every good work: 1 Cor. 9.26.
so run, so fight, spero meliora must be your Motto. Do what you can, yet know
you can never do enough. Lippe-religion does but set an edge upon GODS anger,
and make man the more in excusable; James 1.22.
and therefore see that ye be Doers of the Word, 1 Cor. 9.25.
and not Hearers only, deceiving your selves. And so hear, so do, as men
that strive for the mastery: they do it, as the Apostle says, to obtain a
corruptible Crown; and the height of their hopes is but vnius horae hila^is
insania: Psalm. 37.37. In Homil. Marian. sermon. 16.
I went by, and lo they were gone; but you shall escape that strange dark,
durable fire of hell, where the worm dies not; and shall be received into
your masters joy; into the blessed fellowship of Saints and Angels, into the
glorious liberty of other the sons of God: as children, heirs, co-heires
with Christ, you shall be glorified with him. To whom be ascribed all Honor
glory, power and praise for ever,

AMEN. FINIS.

