A Manuduction TO Theology.

Written in Latin by Barthol. Keckerm. done into English by T. V. Mr. of Arts.

Pro. 14.6. Knowledge is easy to him that will understand.

Ecclus. 6.35. Be willing to hear every godly discourse.

Printed by Aug. Math.

(...).

An upright heart seeks after knowledge.

TO THE SERVICE AND GOOD OF THE Church of God, under the Patronage and
Protection of the thrice worthy and religious, his much honored Friends, The
Lady Anne Neuill, Wife to the Right Honorable, Lo. B. of Chichester, The Lady
Anne Fetiplace of Chilrey in Barkshire,
AND His much esteemed Cousin, Mistress Mabell Blenerhasset, wife to the Right
Worshipful Master Thom. Blenerhasset Esqui^e, and one of his Majesty's
Justices of Peace for the County of Cumberland, T. V. Consecrateth himself,
and his labors in this Translation.

A PARENETIQVE DIRECTED ESPECIALLY TO THEM that call themselves Catholics.
GOod R. there be now some years past, since I gave the onset to the
Translation of this Book, a Book of small volume, but of great valor, of a
little price, but very precious. The Author himself is famous, well known to
have been a man rarely qualified, and beautified with admirable endowments,
the characters whereof are to be seen in his writings; a man, by whose
exquisite skill and exact endeavors I persuade my self we should have had (if
the thread of his life had been a little more lengthened that (...) our fathers
dreamed of lively portrayed, fully perfected But I list not to stand any longer
on this theme, this only will I ad, that it is hard to say whether the Author
does more commend the Works or the Works the Author. In this little
Theological Tract (wherein summarily are delivered the heads of Christian
Religion) I have traced his steps with all diligence and faithfulness, and
that out of a longing desire from my hearts root in Christ Jesus, to further
the simplest of my Country-mens growth in all godliness, wishing that they
would not think light of my labors In t^mplo Dei offert vnus quisque quod
potest: aurum, argentum and lapides pr^ciosos, alii b^^suni and purp^^^am and
coccum offerunt: nobiscum been agitur, si obtulerimus pelles and caprarum pilos
et tamen Apostolus contemptibi^^o^a nostra magis necessaria indicat. Hier^ in
prolog^ Galea^o.
(slender though they be) for whose sakes they were primarily undertaken. And
those are all unlettered and ignorant persons, which are either such as have
lived under the Gospel, and that so long, that Heb. 5.12.
for their time they might have been teachers, but by reason of their gross
and dull ears they be but babes in understanding, and have need to be
instructed in the very first Principles of Religion; or they be such as do
live in the bondage and captivity of more then Egyptiacall darkness of
Popery, who being beclouded with the mist of erroneous doctrine, have not as
yet had the clear beams of the Gospel shining in their hearts. With the
former sort, or at lest such of them who seek for knowledge as for gold, Pro.
2.4.
my pains (whatsoever it be) I am persuaded will not altogether be lost. But
for the latter I am afear'd, I shall but be accounted to sing a song to deaf
ears. For such (alas!) is the bewitching Cup of that Whore of fornications,
Revel. 17.1.2.
although her vanity and vileness be as open as the sun, that she not only
keeps fast in bondage whom she has once lulled asleep, but DD. Halls Quo
vadis? p. 15.1. edition.
entangleth also every day more and more lovers, the Lord of Heaven permitting,
the Devil of Hell seducing, the Locusts of the infernal pit assayling both by
Sea and Land to gain unto them Proselytes. Ierem. 3.3. Ezec. 16.30
Such is the impuq^^ce of this whorish presumptuous woman of Rome, that she
does not after the manner of other women. For other harlots are wooed, Ezec.
16.34. Ezec. 23.40.
but she does woo* others have gifts sent unto them from their lovers, but
she sends to her lovers gifts and fair promises of preferments and
promotion, if they will take part in her whoredoms. And this (to give one
instance for all) that learned and religious Doctor thinks to have been the
chiefest motive of DD. Carriers Apostacy, DD. Hakewel^ Answ: to the 2. letter
page 25.
in that perceiving his ambitious hopes to quayle at home, he would try his
fortune there where Abbeys and Bishoprics and perhaps Cardinalships are
promised to such as with more diligence then others negotiate for the Pope. Her
Proctors and Factors she sets about this work are the Jesuits and Seminaries,
men that have devoted themselves to all ill services, Quibus quaes^ui sunt
animi superstitione capti, Li^* alicubi.
that is, as Saint Peter seems to me elegantly to express it, 2. Pet. 2.3
Through covetousness with fained words make merchandise of men's souls, and
so in fine, (...) not only perverting, but subuerting silly souls, as the
word imports, Act. 15.24. And surely such as the mistress is, such are her
messengers, she of a most impudent face, they of most impudent carriage: she a
strumpet queen, they her bastardly brood. These DD. Halls Quo vadis? page 76.
Pandars to their own mother, for the enhansing of her power, and the
enlarging of her pomp, according to their commission, get themselves with all
ill-speed to foreign Nations. What Sta^ is not haunted with these ill spirits?
yea what house? yea what soul? etc. DD. Halls Censure of Travel, p. 57. We see
the proof of their importunity at home. No bulwarks of Law, no bars of
Justice (though made of three trees) can keep our rebanished fugitives from
returning, from intermedling. Id, Ibid. page 56. His Holiness knows full well
what a sweet morsel he lost, when this Kingdom shakt of his tyrannical
yoke, and therefore for regaining hereof, Revel. 16.13.
he blows over whole Jesuits like Apri^ocks heretofore, here and there one
succored in a great Man's house, now you may have them in every Country village,
I.D. so that we may say (I fear me) of them, as Richard Grosthead, a good B.
of Linc. in H^n. 3. days, said of the Popes Legates, So many disguised daily
come into the Realm, that the very names of them recited would be tedious
for any man to hear. Fox Mar^yrol. page ( mihi) 326.
svvarmes of these Locusts into England, where sitting theeuishly in the blind
corners of our streets they entrap the simple folk, and lurking in their
secret dens of darkness they ensnare the poor and wavering minded, making
them, being once caught in their grin Mat. 23.15.
two times more the children of darkness then they themselves are. Which indeed
how can it otherwise fall out, sithence their doctrine and their doings be both
of darkness The doctrine of the Papists a doctrine of darkness
Their doctrine, as it is a hotch potch of beggarly rudiments like a beggars
cloak full of patches, some of Iudaisme, some of Turcisme, some of Paganism,
some of Pelagianisme (and in sum what is it else but a Vt quicquid passim in
variis regionib est sordium, tandem per diuersa flumino in mare vnum
deportatur: ita quicquid blasphemiarum in variis ac diuersissimis sectis
reperitur, totum id confluxit in Romanam colluuiem. Tilleman Hesbus.
compound of errors?) so in nothing more does it bewray it self to be raked
out of the pit of darkness, then that it will not abide the light of Gods
Word to be tried by. For what 2. Cor. 6 14.
Communion has darkness with light? are not these two (...) Hereupon, well
knowing what would betide them Iuel Apolog. page 116. The Religion of Papistrie
is like a Curtain made to keep out the light. B. R.
if the Gospel should clearly shine forth in all men's hearts; they mufflle the
understanding of the simple people, giving them to wit, that all is Oracles
that they speak, not giving them once leave or leisure, yea, which is more,
interdicting them to search the holy Scriptures with the Acts 17.11.
Noblemen of Beraea, and to see whether those things be so as they speak
them. Let our late worthies, who have descried the imposture of the Church of
Rome, let them speak in this case and hear their verdict. Nos luci fidimus,
(says blessed Apolog. ^celesie, Aug. p. 147.
^ewel) isti tenebris, We trust and desire to be tried by the light of Gods
Word, they put their confidence in darkness, Vt latro crucem, ita isti horrent
verbum Dei. Iuel.
whereupon it is that a thief stands not in more fear of the Gallows, then
they do of the Scriptures: We labor to plant knowledge in all (says the
reverend, and my much honored My Lord of Chichester in his Preface to his
book entitled, Directions to know the true Church.
Lord of Chichester) and are desirous that every man may know the things
needful for his salvation; they labor to hold all in ignorance: their hope is
not in the goodness of their cause, for they see the ruins of Babylon falling
every day; only their care is to blind you, and keep you ignorant. If the
light of knowledge might freely shine to the world, Popery would soon be
ashamed of it self, says DD. Halls Quo vadis* p. 32.1. edit.
another worthy in our Chapter And not to be infinite in this kind, M. Anton. de
Dominis (who was once welcomed by us from the Tents of Antichrist, and is ours
still, if covetousness, the root of evil, and hypocrisy, the color of good
has not put out both his eyes) confesses in that little book wherein he
expresses the reason of his departure out of the Chapter of Rome; the Prodromus to
his larger and more fruitful labors, that this closing up of the Scripture
from the people, gave him occasion to suspect their religion, and to fear his
estate, and to think on conversion freely professing there in these terms, M.
Anton. de dominis Archiep. Spalat.
Scripturae summa apud nos ignoratio, that there is nothing whereof the Papists
are more ignorant, then of the Scriptures. Nay, a certain Bishop of Italy was
not ashamed to tell Claudius Espencaeus, Master Sheldon ex Claud Espenc. Coment
in cap. 1. Epist. ad Titum.
a famous Pontifician, that the learned men of Italy it self were afraid to
study the holy Scriptures, least thereby they should become Heretics, and
that therefore they employed themselves in commenting upon the Popes
Law-bookes, Decrees, and the Decretals; the which book, though full of lies,
contradictions, impertinences, yet because it is the Popes book it must be
respected, whilst the holy Scripture lies as it were in the streets
neglected. And therefore to bar their seduced followers utterly from this
godly exercise of reading, they bear them in hand that to read the Scripture
is very Quia ex^perimento manifestum est, si sacra Biblia vulgari lingua passim
sine Discrimine permittan^tur, plus inde ob homiuum temeritatem detrimenti quam
vtilitatis oriri, id^irco etc. Index lib. prohibit confect. a deput. Concilii
Trident. reg. 4. Quid quod populus non solum caperet fructum ex Scripturis, sed
etiam caperet detrimentum acciperet enim facillime occasione^ errandi tum in
doctrina ^idei, tum in praeceptis vitae and morum. B^^larm* lib. ^. de verbo
Dei. cap. 15. see DD Hakevv^lls Answ. Likewise to DD. Car. second letter, page
11.
perilous and the cause of erring from the faith. Sed execratione ac
detestatione dignior est ista vox quam responsione. Hiper. de quot id. lectione
S. Script lib. 1. page 175. Wicked impostors! as if God our heavenly Father,
who has made his Will and Testament, and has revealed it by writing unto us
his children, would not have it Vehementer ab istis dissentio, qui nolint ab
idiotis legi diuinas literas in vulgi linguam transfusas, sieve quasi Christus
tam inuoluta docuerit, vt vix a pauculis theologis possint intelligi, sieve
quasi religionis Christianae praesidium in hoc situm sit, si nesciatur, etc.
Erasm. in paracles. ad Christian. philosophiae studiu^.
read and understood by us? Blasphemous wretches! as if God, who can neither
be deceived nor deceive, causing his holy will to be penned both as touching
his own worship, and also as touching the means of man's salvation and that so
powerfully and yet plainly withal, Woe unto you (says Christ) that take away
the key of knowledge, Luke 11.52.
that he should seek hereby to Neque adeo inhumanus fuit Deus, vt voluerit
huius rei ignoratione per omnes aetates homines torque^i, cum neque vllum in
Sacris Scripturis passus est esse locum, quem siaccurate pensitemus,
interpretari non possimus. Aug. Steu^hius in Genes. cap 2.
entrap and enfold his glorious Creature Man, the Creature of his good will,
with the mists of ignorance and error? Far be it from the thought of every
good Christian, once to think that from such a good tree should come such bad
fruit, that from such a blessed cause should proceed such a disastrous effect,
that from the light should flow darkness, Dei ordinatio non potest esse
peccatorum obstetrix. Cyprian.
from the reverend reading of the Scriptures, errors. The Papists doing^ works
of darkness. Ioh. 8.44.
As for their Doings, that they also are of darkness, it would (if I should
particularize them) require a large volume. But to single out and to instance
in one, wherein they much resemble their prince of darkness, the devil, who
has been a murderer from the beginning. Let their cruel and barbarous
butchering of so many Saints of God, merely in the matter of Religion; let the
bloody stabbing and violent murdering of so good and gracious Kings, which
showed themselves like good Ezekias forward and bent to reformation; Though we
be in DD. Carriers books no less then Schismatiks for obiecting the
heinousness of of this horrible Treason, yet we will not leave to object it,
but cry and thunder against it, being as his Sacred Majesty has rightly
observed not only a crying sin of blood, but a roaring and thundering sin
of fire and Brimstone DD. Hakvv, Answer to DD Carr. Cap. 2. Sect. 13. See
likewise the worthy Sir Francis Bacon (now Lord Saint Albon) his Essaies, Part
and. Ess. 1. O Religion.
Let the devil in the Vault, who was the contriuer of that matchless Treason,
and the Powder Pioners, that should have been the Actors of the intended
Tragedy; let all these speak if they belong not to darkness, if they be not
the sons of the night? John 3.2. They that dig through houses in the dark,
etc. Job 24.26.17.
Quo male agit odit lucem. Ask the Powder-plotters, if they hated not and
shunned the shining light, least their deeds should have been reproved,
censured, condemned, as they were, and as it fell out happily to this State and
Country by the watchful eye of his providence, who is the Psalm 121. ^.
keeper of our Israel, and never slumb^rs nor sleeps, but is always ready at
hand to shend and defend his people, whom he has set his love upon, even for
his own mercy and goodness sake; howbeit we have by our sins deserved to
be cassier'd out of his favor, to be overtaken with imminent dangers, and to
be ouerturned with the power and powder, the fire and fury of our enemies. Ps.
124.6.
But ever loved and blessed be his merciful goodness and patience, that he
has not given us over as a prey unto their teeth. Their snare was broken, and
our soul was delivered. O let this mighty and wonderful deliverance be
written on the posts of our gates, let us be ever talking of it to our
neighbors and friends, to our children, and strangers, that all with joint
mouth and consent of heart may praise the Lord God of Israel for ever.

Now I do from my soul desire that the blindfolded Papists, and ignorant
Catholics (as they will be termed) would but a little consider of these
Doings, of this Doctrine, and then tell me if they be not nuzled in most
pernicious heresy, v. Hispan. reformat. C. 10
and most tyrannically held under the very power of darkness it self. Quod si
illi haec o^a tranquillo animo and ad audiendum dis^endumque compara to
spectare velint, non tantum probabunt institutum nostrum, qui relictis errorib
Christu^ eiusque Apostalos secut^ sumus sed ipsi etiam a se desicient, seque
vltro aggregabunt ad parts nostras Iuel Apolog. page 148. See the occasions of
Master Copleys conversion, and among the rest you shall find the Powderplot.
Copl Doctr. and Mor. obseruat. cap. 2. sect. 6.
They that have but the least spink of ingenuitie, will bewray betime, and will
timely bewail their woeful estate. These (to use the words of the Ezech. 20.43.
words of the Prophet) shall remember one day their ways, and all their
doings, wherein they have been defiled, and they shall loath themselves in
their own sight for all their evils that they have committed. And they shall
know that the Lord is God, when he has wrought in them this conversion for
his own Names sake, not according to their wicked ways, nor according to
their corrupt doings. Such desperate ones as Jeremy describes, Ier. 18.12.
Noluerunt veritati consentire nec victi. and, Quod volumus, sanctum est.
August. vincent. epist. 48.
But for the ignorant, obstinate, obdurate Papist, who will not hear and
understand, and be converted, who spurns at the very motion of Reformation,
and being settled on his lees grows bold and impudent in the cause, (for who
so bold as blind Bayard?) Let him be ignorant, Quaerimus vos quiae peristis,
vt de inu^ntis gaudeamus, de quibus perditis dolebamus. August. vincent. Epist*
48.
let him be mis^ed, Si sapitia, been and recte si autem non sapitis, nos vestri
curam gessisse non paenitebit. August. lib. 3. contra epist. Petilian. c. 59.
ad sinem. Proleps.
let him be misled still. These men shall one day know that there has been
many Prophets among them, who are clear from the blood of all men; and they
shall find that their blood must rest upon their own hard hearts and
stiffe-neckes.

What Sir? may some of them say, do you so hastily include us all in the pit
of confusion, because we profess another Religion? I tell you truly, we
have as good hope to come to heaven as your self. Do we walk in any other
save in the steps of our -- with them still,
Custom has borne most way, and ever will,
And good or bad what their forefathers did,
They Will put in practice too (else God forbid.)
G.VV. Tantum sc. isti debent inscitie ac tenebris superiorum temporum. Iuel.
Apol. page 138.


forefathers and progenitors? Do we profess any other Religion, then that
which they bequeathed unto us, and which we will live and dye in too?

The Moales speech in Mast. Scots Vnio. page 37. of his Philomythology.
We our forefathers customs still obey,
Do as they did, and follovv their blind way:
Not striving busily our wits to approve
By searching doubts, but rather show our love,
By loving even their errors that are gone,
Or reuerendly believing they had none.
True, it is like enough you will do so, whatsoever be said to the contrary.
For as the wise King says of a fool) Bray a fool in a mortar and he will
never be the wiser. Prou. 27.22.
The holy Spirit has branded those people with black, who practiced that long
since which you plead for now. 2. King. 17.41. v. Mast. Scots Vnio, in the
Ep^mythium. p. 48.
So those nations feared the Lord and served their images too: So did their
children, and their childrens children: as did their fathers, so do they unto
this day. It was but a Pagans argument to Theodosius the Emperor; Seruanda est
tot saeculis fides nostra, Ex Ambros. Epist lib. 5. Epist. 30.
and sequendi sunt maiores nostri, qui secuti sunt foeliciter suos. And the
Emperors Letter to the States of Germany assembled at Worms against Luther,
sounds and runs in the same tenor. Our predecessors were obedient to the
Romish Church, Fox Martyrol. page 851. col. 2.
and therefore we cannot without great infamy and stain of honor, degenerate
from the examples of our elders, but will maintain the ancient Faith and give
aid to the Sea of Rome. But here first of al we desire no better Advocate for
our selves then Gratian: I will set down his own words. Si consuetudinem
fortassis opponas, Distinct. 8. cap. 5.
duertendum quod Dominus dicit, ego sum via and veritas. Non dixit, ego sum
consuetudo, sed veritas. Et certe (vt beati Cypriani vtamur sententia)
quaelibet consuetudo quantumuis vetusta, quantumuis vulgata veritati omnino est
postponenda, and vsus, qui veritati contrarius est, abolendus. Secondly, M.
Caluins note on the fourth of John's Euangell and the 20. Verse is here worth
the noting. Ioh Calvin. in Euangel. Ioh.
Verae pietatis desertoribus solenne est, vt patrocinium sibi ex Patrum
exemplis quaerant. It Is a very ordinary thing with Sectaries and Apostates from
religion, to urge for their doings their Fathers examples. (...). Acts 7.51.
Oh ye Apostaticall generation, which do as much as in you lies to resist the
Holy Ghost, as your Fathers have done so will you do too.

But your tame-blind obedience well befits Mast. Scots Philomytie. page 40

Such earth-bred, do^eish, dull, and sluggish wits,
But ayerie Spirits acquainted with the light,
Will not be led by custom from the right.
No love, no friends, no predecessors shall
Pervert their judgments; they examine all.
Your Fathers have stepped awry in some points of doctrine, and you having once
entered their bypath will needs run into the desert of error. This is the
practice of some in France observed out of Calvin by Rog. on the artic of
Religion. art. 21
your Fathers living in the stinking air of Popery, could not choose but be
tainted with some infection of Heresy; What then? Dare you say they died in
their pollution? Did God reveal unto you the time, the hour of their
conversion? Do you not know that God might have his secret working performed
upon them, even at the very last gasp? Do you not acknowledge that God can
save such as are not pertinacious in their Heresies, even, Inter pontem and
fontem? When there is no sensible hope? When there is no sensible hope? When
their soul is at the pits brinke, he can call it back again, that the pit
shall not shut its mouth upon it. I have often greatly wondered (says M. D.
Luther) how that in all the time of that tyrannizing Sect of the son of
perdition, Luther. in epist. ad Galat. cap. 2. tom* 5. operum. ^ol. 311.
for so many hundreths of years together, the Church should subsist in the
midst of such great darkness, and in the throng of so many errors. Afterward,
I conceived that there were certain called of God by the Word of his Gospel
and Baptism, who walked in the simplicity and humility of their heart,
thinking the Monks only, and such as were anointed of Bishops to be holy men
and religious, but themselves to be profane and irreligious, and in no wise to
be compared with the other. Whereupon finding themselves empty of all good
works and merits which they might oppose to the displeasure, and rigor of
Gods justice, they clung close to the passion and death of Christ, and so in
that simplicity were saved. Neither was this the case of simple ones only,
but even of their deep Doctors, their holy Hermites, there sanctified Monks,
1. Ioh. 2.19.
of whom I may truly say, That howsoever they lived among them, yet were they
not of them, Which assertion though it might have been doubted of all their
life time, their habits, and cooles, and manner of living, coloring it out to
the world that they were Papists, yet the point of death approaching put the
matter out of question; when for all their regularities and obseruances, We do
justly conclude that many Papists especially our forefathers, laying their
whole trust upon Christ and his merits at their last breath, may be, and
oftentimes are saved.
as Monkish as ever: for all their comport and carriage, as superstitious as
ever; for all their means and manner of living, as Popish as ever could be
devised* they will be found to have dyed true Protestants, casting from them
all trust and relyance on their own works, and putting their whole trust and
affiance in the mercies of God through Christ Jesus. Such was that good Hermit
Agatho, good in name, and in truth good. Such was that blessed Saint Bernard,
His Majesty's Speech in the Parliam. 1605. De Agathone vide Luther. vbi supra.
fol. 313. De Bernardo in 4. cap ad Galat ^ol. 400. ^om. 5.
the best Monk that ever was. Both which on their Death beds to have renounced
themselves utterly, and to have had recourse only unto Christ, you may read
in that worthy Author before cited. And I think verily (says Luther) that
Jerome and Gregory, and many other Fathers and Hermites were after the same
manner saved. and the ground of this his thus reasoning is, for that we are
not to doubt, but that even in the Old Testament many of the Kings of Israel,
and other Idolaters likewise were saved, for because it pleased God even in the
hour of death to turn their hearts, causing them to cast away all their vain
confidence they put in their Idols, and to apprehend that promise of God as
concerning that seed of Abraham which was to come, Genesis 22.18.
to wit, Christ, in whom all the nations of the world should be blessed. Vide
in hanc sententiam DD. Hakevv. in his answ. to DD Carier, an English
Italionated Doctor. c. 2. sect. 19. p. 127. Potens est dominus misericordia sua
indulgentiam dare Non tamen quia aliquando erratum est, ideo semper errandum
est. Cyprian epst. 73. vetiam, Directions to know the true Church, page 83. Non
intelligendi viuacitas sed credendi simplicitas tutissimos facit. Aug.
Apostolus de iudeis dicit* zelum Dei habent sed non secundum scientiam: pares
estis omnino, exceptis duntaxat illis, quicunque in vobis sunt, scientes quid
verum sit, and pro animositate su^ peruersitatis, contra veritatem etiam sibi
notissimam dimicantes. August Vincent. epist. 48.
Hence proceed our charitable censures of such of your Fathers, who living in
the darkness of superstition^, could not so well see the way to heaven, and
to reformation in their life time, as their meek hearts could have wished. But
as for those obstinate wretches, furious spirits, branded with the mark of the
Beast, and therefore firebrands of hell, too too heady in the pursuit of
error, and too too headstrong in their erroneous opinations, as the Lord gave
them up to a reprobate sense, that they should not receive the love of the
truth and so be saved, and they now fry for it: So assure your selves, if ye
insist in their steps and resist all good admonitions, you can never fly their
Mat. 23.33
punishment. For it is just with God, that those which have been pares culpa,
shall be also pares paena. Quos similis culpa coinquinat, par quoque paena
constringet. Gregor.
Be partakers of their sins, you shall certainly be sharers in their
punishment. O then ye Mat. 3.7.
generation of those vipers be forewarned of the heavy vengeance to come. Do
not with the deaf Adder always stop your ears to all godly and Christian
admonitions, but take the^ at length to heart, and say not with your selves, We
have had rank Papists to our Fathers, we have had such as have derided and
mocked your Orthodoxe Religion, for our patterns and presidents: for I dare
boldly affirm in the words of our Savior, that unless ye repent and be
converted, you shall likewise perish. August. vincent. epist. 48.
Be not like them in Saint Austine, Verum est quod diciti^, to profess all
true that we say, Non est quod respondeatur, and that you have nothing to say
against it, Sed durum est nobis traditionem Parentum relinquere; but it seems
a hard thing unto us to forsake the faith and tradition of our Fathers. For
(consider it well in your hearts) why should your Fathers examples mislead you
into error?

O what a senseless part is this in you, Mast. Scots Phylomythologie. p. 41.

Your Fathers faults and errors to allow?
And not much rather to reform your own,
By shunning the defect which they have shovven!
Shall the vain conceit of your Fathers worth, Ezech. 20.18.19.20. Quos
Christus vocat secum in aerernum mansuros, pater forsan reuocat s^cum in
aeternum ar^u^o^ v Bern. Ep. 2.
weigh down Gods holy Word? Will you confer, nay prefer man to God? If the
Fathers of your bodies lead you one way, and Father of Spirits bid you go
another, have you not learned to obey God rather then men? Will you not grant
that which reason has always held for certain and grounded truth, Viuendum
est legibus non exemplis? Go to then, think not to shroud your doings with
your Fathers exemplarie dealings. For as it is well uttered by the Heathen
Orator, Demosth. contra Aristocrat.
Impudens est Oration dicere, sic sactum est. But let the bright and clear Law
of God shine in your hearts, let it dwell in you plentifully in all wisdom,
hear the Word of God from others, Si non de dignentur legere, male^ mihi sit,
ita enim in tanta causa invare ausim, nisi tandem capiantur. Petr. Mart. Loc.
com. c. 6. clasi 1. sect. 14.
read it by your selves, Ab eo speranda est intelligentia, qui and pul^antibus
aperiet, and quaerentibus demonstra^it, and petentib. non denegabit. Hilar in
Ps. 1^5. Mu^tum domine d^ tua bonitate prae. sumo, quoniam tu ipse doces
petere, quaerere, pulsare, and tu domine, qui iubes petere, fac accipere:
consulis quaerere, da and inuenire: doces pulsare, operi pulsanti: and confirma
me infirmum, restaura me perditum, suscitame mortuum, etc. August. Meditat.
cap. 39. sect 9.
pray to God for a right understanding of it, mark it well, ponder it in your
heart, and examine all your tenants and courses by it, and then the Lord
opening your eyes to see your own mis-doings, and your Fathers mis-leadings,
you will confess your Fathers follies, wherein you have lived, and profess to
leave them with all speedy reformation in new obedience unto God holy Will and
Commandments. And this I pray God that of his infinite goodness he will
grant unto you, that so, by the conversion of your souls, his holy Name may be
glorified, his Angels gladded, his faithful confirmed* your hearts comforted,
and the borders of Christ's Church enlarged; and that for the merits of Christ
Jesus, his only true natural Son, our alone all-sufficient Savior and
Redeemer, Amen.

An Apologetique to the Christian Reader for the work in and about the
Translation.
(...). Gregor. Nazian. Monostich. Horat. Carm. l. 3. od 6. Revel. 1.8.

Hinc omne principium, huc refer exitum.
Of all thy studies and intentions see,
That God the Alpha and Omega be.

DAveniam Scriptis -- remembering that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 12.7. The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit vvithall. (...)
The Spirit, that is the gifts and graces of the Spirit of God are bestovved
upon us, not to be wrapped up in a Napkin and hid in the earth, but for
manifestation. Whereupon the ancient Greeks well expressed man and light by
one common name (...) as Plutarch shows in the confutation of that common
Mott. (...)
(...), and what our Savior spoke with a primarie direction to his Apostles:
Vos estis lux mundi, Ye are the lights of the world, may in a secondary
application be affirmed of every Christian, or else Saint Paul would not say,
Among whom ye shine as lights in the world. Now least any one should exempt
himself, therefore every one is put in the Text. (...)
For as there are none furnished with all gifts, so there are none but they
have some gift, and the doner will look for his own with advantage. As every
man therefore has received the gi^t so let him minister thereof to others, for
the good of others. (...)
Look not every one on your own things, but every one on the things of other.
A good lesson for this incroaching and monopolizing world, wherein every man is
for himself, as the proverb says, and as the Apostle complains, Every man
seeks his own things, and none the things of Christ Jesus. But what says
the Scripture? Non prohibet Euangelium nisi cupiditatem, non precipit nisi
charitatem. The Gospel (says Austin) does not prohibit any thing more then
incroaching covetousness, it inioynes nothing so much as dilating charity. It
is a poor center of a man's action, Himself. It is right earth, as a great
Scholar speaks. Wherefore, let us attend then to the Apostles rule, who
wills, that every one should seek another wealth; and he prescribes us no
other rule, then that he himself walked in. Non quaero quid mihi vtile sed
quid multis, I seek not mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they
may be saved.

By him that desires thy profit and proficiency in knowledge and godliness T.V.

The Attestation of a friend touching this Book, inserted in a Letter to the
Translatour.
-- In your Translation you have labored, that they that will read may have
delight; and that they that are desirous to commit to memory might have ease;
and that all into whose hands it comes might have profit, 2. Mac. 2.25

Adam Airay S. S. Theol. Bac.

M. D. Esquire To his good Friend, T. V.
WHat Thou do teach, by others heretofore
Has likewise bin. But yet by no man more
To the true life. That by thy godly care,
Thou and thine Author equally do share.
Thou praisest him Translating, but if he
Understood English he would more praise thee.
Thou to our Nation have his Doctrine shown,
Which to our vulgar else had not been known;
As much by this thou get'st as ere he wanne:
England, praise Vicars, Dantsk her Keckerman.
Mich. Drayton.

Errata.
In the Preface read Rob. Grosth. Page 45. in the margin, for Syst, T^. read
Syst. Log. p. 50. offices, r. p. 60. in the margin. r. afflictiones. p. 72. in
the margin (...) and (...) p. 80. for not certainly, r. no certainty. p. 85. r.
doctrine. p. 86. r. other are bare proprieties. p. 87. r. accident. p. 95. for
hearts. r. sects. p. 96. for Matthias John, r. Matthew. Illyric. p 121. in the
last line, r. as before. p. 123. for Christ, r. Chrysostom. p. 126. for Heb.
7. r. Heb. 12. p. 142. in the margin, r. 139. p. 153. r. peruersly. There are
also other mistakings in figures, which you may be pleased to mend of your
selves.

A GODLY AND Devout Treatise, teaching with what due preparation we ought to
come to the holy Communion, which is indeed an Abbridgement of the Systeme of
Divinity, and may serve for a Catechism of Christianity.
WHat is Christian Religion?

It is that worship and service which every good and godly man ought by virtue
of bond and obligation to tender unto God himself. Theologia disciplina est
non contempla^rix^ sed practica Syst^ Theol. page 2. I^ diuinas scripturas
recte legit, qui vertit verbain opera. Bern.
Wherein is chalked out unto us the way as well of living here honestly, as
living hereafter happily; as Augustine says in his book of true Religion, the
first Chapter. The only course of living well and happily consists in true
Religion, whereby we know the only true God, and worship him in holy
pureness. Hoc Philosophiae genus in ^ffectibus situm verius, quam in
Syllogismis, vita est magis qua^ disputatio, etc. Eras. in Paracles. ad studiis
Christian. Philosoph.
For by religion the soul of man, which before by sin was separate from God,
being now reconciled, is again tied and reunited to God, from whence Religion
has its very name: For when we re-lige, as it were; that is, oblige and bind
over again our souls unto God, then we empty our selves of all superstitious
worship contrary to Gods service. So says Lactant. lib. 4. ca. 28. and l. 6.
c. 1. We are by the tie of Religion bound and obliged unto God, Syst. Theol.
page 4.
whereupon it is called re-ligion, not as Cicero will have it, of relection, but
of religation, in as much as God does hereby bind us over to his service,
whom it is our part to serve as our Lord, and to obey as our Father. For in
very deed this is the duty of man, wherein the sum of all, and the summitie of
a blessed life does consist. This is the very first step in wisdom, to know
what it is for God truly to be a Father unto us, and him with all sanctity to
worship and reuere, obeying his will, and wholly deuoting our selves to his
service.

Which be then the principal parts wherein Christian Religion, or, the special
actions wherein the worship of God stands.

There be three of them. 1. The meditation of the word of God, and consequently
of faith in Christ our Savior, which is especially comprehended in the word of
God, to whom we must refer all in our meditation. 2. The use of the
Sacraments instituted by Christ. 3. Invocation of Gods holy name joined with
the love of God, and our neighbor. Of the foremost and last part of Christian
religion, we have spoken elsewhere, and at another time; at this opportunity it
is our purpose only to treat of the middle or second Branch of Christian
Religion, or the service of God, and therein touching the use of the principal
Sacrament of the new Testament, namely the Lords Supper, which is called
commonly the holy Communion, as also the Eucharist, that is, a most eminent
sacrifice of thanksgiving to Christ our Savior.

Wherein consists the true use and due preparation to the holy Communion?

In two things; to wit, in Knowledge, and Devotion.

Of what sort is that knowledge, which appertains to our commendable
preparation unto, and our lawful using of the holy Communion?

It is of two sorts, General, and Particular.

Of how many kinds is our general knowledge?

Of two, either it is Primary and independent, or Secondary, and arising from
the former.

How many parts has the former kind?

It consists of a double doctrine, the one of God, the other of Gods Word.

What is God?

God is a spiritual essence, Syst. Theol. page 10.
1. before all, Ibid. p 93.
most perfect, eternal, 2. infinite, 3. almighty, Ibid p 105. and seqq.
of incomprehensible wisdom, goodness, 4. mercy, 5. Justice, Ibid. p. 116
subsisting in three persons, the Father, Ibid p. 117
the Son, and the holy Ghost.

What are we to consider in God?

Two things, the Essence, and Person.

What, and of what sort is the Essence of God? Si non est vnus, non est.
Tertul. Deus est vnus imo, si dici potest, vnissimus, Bern. Syst. Theol p. 14.
contra Tritheitas and Manichaeos.


It is most simple, and only one, so that God, in regard of his Essence, is
simply one, as the Scripture witnesses, Deuter. 6. verse. 4. Hear oh Israel,
the Lord our God is one God. 1. Tim. 2. v. 5. One God, and one Mediator.

What is the Person?

It is the manner of being in God, whereby Gods Essence is made relative, (...)
Justin. Mar. and Damasc. Syst. Theol. page 19. De Deo loqui etiam vera
periculosissimum est. Arnob. S. Th. p. 56. and 58.
and respective; which relation notwithstanding neither multiplieth the
Essence, nor diuides it into parts, which may in some sort appear by the
degrees of light and heat. For in the Suns light, there are certain degrees,
as morning, or twilight, and noon-light, or perfect sunshine. And yet for
all those degrees, the light is the same. So in heat lukewarm, and scalding
hot, though they make two degrees, yet they make up but one numericall
caliditie, Ibid. p. 16.
which in a higher degree is in boiling water now, before being in the same
water inclining to fervent heat, in a lower degree. So then, that we may apply
this instance to our present purpose, In Deo est alius and alius non aliud and
aliud. Vinc. Lerinens. Meus Deus tam non ha^bet hoc and i^^lud. quam non haec
and il^a. Bern.
in some resemblance, the Persons of the Deity, or these diverse manners of Gods
being, do not multiply the divine essence, no more then the diverse degrees of
heat or light, do multiply the light or heat: so that I speak right when I say
there are mo persons in the divine essence but it cannot be uttered without
blasphemy, to say there are in God more Natures, or mo Gods the^ one.

How many persons are there?

(...). Nazianzin. Qui n^scis Trinitatem, i^o ad Io^^danem.

Mat. 3. Aug. Syst. Th p. 46. vide etiam p. 35. and seqq. Dicamus tres sed non
ad praeiudicium vnitatis, dicamus vnum sed non ad con^^sionem Trinitatis. Bern.
v. Syst. Theol p. 49. (...). Na.

Quomodo pluralitas in vnitate sit, aut ipsa vnitas in plurali^tate, scrutari
hoc tomeritas est, credere pietas est, nosse vita, and vit^aeterna est. Bern.


Three, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, which is proved by manifest
Testimonies of holy Writ. Matt. 28.19 Go teach all nations, baptizing them in
the name ( so by the authority and appointment) of the Father, the Son, and
of the holy Ghost. John 15.26. When that Comforter shall come, whom I will send
to you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the
Father, he will testify of me: where they are all three plainly named; The
Father, from whom the holy Spirit is sent; the Son, who sends; and the
holy Ghost who is sent, 1. Ioh. 5.7. There be three which bear record in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these three are one in
essence or nature

How prove you that these three Persons be that one God?

First, I must have it granted, that these three persons are distinct, because
he that sends, is distinguished from him that is sent, and he from who^, is
distinguished from him that is sent. Now Io. c. 15. plainly says, that Christ
is he that sends, the Holy Ghost him that is sent, and the Father, from whom
the Son sends the holy Ghost. Whence I do necessarily infer, that these
three manners of being in God are distinct: which being granted, I shall
easily prove this threefold manner of being, or these three Persons in the
divine Essence, to be that true God. For first, as touching the Father, the
very adversaries themselves yield, that he is truly God. Christus est Deus
(...) contra (...) (...) contra Apolina^. (...) contra Nestor. (...) contra
Eutych. Syst. Theol. page 52. and seqq.
And touching the Son, we have manifest testimonies of the Scripture, Romans
9.5. Of whom (namely the Israelites) are the fathers, of whom Christ came as
concerning the flesh, who is God above all, blessed for ever. If above all,
therefore above those, who by reason of their excellent gifts are called Gods
That the holy Spirit is God, these Sentences of Scripture plainly prove: Acts
5.3. Peter says to Ananias, Why has Satan filled thy heart, that thou
should lie against the holy Ghost? And presently he adds v. 4 Thou have
not lied unto men, but unto God Therefore the holy Ghost is God. Another place
is 1. Cor. 2.10. The Spirit searches all things, even the profound things of
God: And the verse following, For who knows the things etc. Whence we may
thus reason, whosoever knows the secrets, the profound secrets of God; or
which is all one, whosoever is omniscient, is God: but the holy Ghost is
Omniscient. Ergo. The Mayor is evident, the Minor is expressly in the Text.
Secondly, whatsoever is in God, is God: but the holy Ghost is in God: Ergo. The
Proposition is of certain truth, for that God, who is a most simple essence,
void of all difference and composition, cannot consist of any thing which is
not God. The assumption is in the text, verse. 10. where it is said; As the
reasonable soul is in man: that is, of the essence of man, so the holy Spirit
is in God. Hitherto may that testimony 1. Cor. 3.16. v. August. Enchirid. cap.
56.
be referred; Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God, and that the holy
Spirit dwells in you? where the latter words do expound the former: for it is
all one, as if the Apostle had said; Know ye not that ye are the Temple of
God, seeing that the holy Ghost dwells in you, who is God? But if the
adversaries say, that the spirit is nothing else, save the effects and gifts of
God, they are most manifestly confuted, and confounded by the words of the
Scripture, 1. Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. There are diversities of gifts, but the same
spirit; there are diversities of ministrations, but the same Lord, etc. And
verse 11: All these gifts works that one and self same spirit distributing,
etc. Whence arises this argument; He that distributeth a gift, is not himself
that gift that is distributed, but the holy Ghost is the distributer of all
those gifts: Ergo. The Proposition is clear enough. The Assumption is plain
in the text, where it is said, that the spirit works, and distributeth all
those gifts. Another argument out of the same text may be this: He that is
endued with a will, he cannot be a bare virtue or accide^t, but is a substance
subsisting by it self, but the holy Ghost, etc. Ergo. The Mayor is clear: for
whosoever wills, he understands, and whosoever wills and understands,
he must be a substance by it self subsisting. The Minor is clearly set down
in the text, where it is said; The Spirit distributeth to every one as he will

I have heard the doctrine concerning God, Fuit principium es^endi DEVS,
sequitur cognoscendi principium VEREVM DEI. non (...) Verbum Christus, sed
(...) Verbum Christi. Syst. Th. p. 167. Qui Scripturam ignorant, 'Christum
ignorant, Hieronym.
tell me now besides what the holy Scripture is?

It is that testimony and witness which God has given to Mankind, as touching
his own nature and will, and as touching those things which appertain to the
salvation of man.

How is the holy Scripture divided?

Three manner of ways: first, by reason of the time wherein it was revealed:
secondly, by reason of that authority it has in proving: thirdly, by reason of
the matter which it handles.

How is the Scripture divided in respect of the time wherein it was revealed?

Into the Old and New Testament. The old Testament therefore is that part of
the Scripture, which God revealed to the first of mankind, and people of the
Jews which lived until the Ministry of Christ, which he revealed, I say, by
the Prophets, as by his Scribes and Notaries. But the New Testament is called
that part of the Scripture which God has revealed to mankind after the birth
of Christ, by the Evangelists and Apostles, as by his Pen men or Notaries.

How is the Scripture divided, in respect of that authority it has in
proving?

So it is divided into the books which are Canonical, and those which are not
Canonical, but Apocryphal?

Which do you call the Canonical Books?

S. Th. p. 169. item p 173. Hi constituunt (...). Chrysostom.
Those which are of undoubted authority, in proving the Articles of Faith, or
which are the square, and rule of our faith: for Canonical is derived from
Canon, which signifies as much as a rule or square.

Of what sort are the Canonical books?

Of two sorts, either of the old, or of the new Testament.

Which books of the old Testament are Canonical?

The Canonical Scripture of the S. Th. p. 82.
old Testament is divided into four rancks; the first contains the five
Books of Moses; the second, those Books which are called Historical, as
these; Joshua, Judges, Ruth, the two Books of Samuel, the two Books of Kings,
the two Books of the Chronicles, the Books of Esdras, Nehemiah, Ester. The
third, Books which are written in verse, which are called Poetical, as these;
Job, the Psalms of David, the Proverbs of Solomon, Ecclesiastes, and the Song
of Songs: the fourth comprehends the Prophets, which are either greater
Prophets, in number four, or lesser, to wit, twelve.

Which Books of the new Testament are Canonical?

The Canonical Scriptures of the new Testament is divided into the history of
the Evangelists, the Acts of the Apostles, the Apostles Epistles, and the
Prophecy, or Revelation of John.

Which are called Apocryphal, or not Canonical?

Which are not of infallible truth and authority in proving the Articles of
faith, S. Th. p. 190.
and consequently which are not the rule, and square of our belief, but
contain precepts of life, and historical instructions.

Which are those Apochriphall Books?

Among the Books of the old Testament, as we have before said, there are some
found not to be Canonical, such as the Book of Tobias, Judith, Wisdom,
which falsely is ascribed to Solomon; Ecclesiasticus, or Syracides, the third
and fourth books of Esdras, all the books of the Maccabees, Baruch with Jeremy
his Epistle, the Prayer of Manasses, the fragments of Ester, the additions to
Daniel, as is the Song of the three Children, the History of Susanna, the
History of Bell and the Dragon. None of all these books are to be found in
the Hebrew tongue, in which Language only God would have the books of the old
Testament to be written, neither were they written by the Prophets, or any
person immediately called of God. Neither does Christ, the Evangelists, or the
Apostles cite them at any time: and to conclude, there be many untruths in
them. Wherefore when the Papists urge any thing out of these books against us,
we must answer, that those books contain not the infallible Word of God, and
consequently that they have no firm force, or validity in proving.

How is the Scripture divided, in respect of the matter it handles?

Into the Law and the Gospel: for that part of Gods word is called the Law,
wherein we are taught what we ought to do, but the Gosspell is that part of
Gods Word. wherein we are taught, what we ought to believe, and consequently
wherein we have the remission of our sins promised us by faith in Christ.

I have heard sufficiently touching the division of the Word of God, I pray you
also instruct me in the proprieties of it?

That will I willingly do, so I first admonish you, that hereafter we shall
always take the holy Scripture for the Canonical books only, and not at all
for the Apocryphal.

What is the first propriety of the holy Scripture?

S. Th p. 171.
The first propriety is, that it deriues all its authority from God alone, not
from the assembly of godly men, which is called the Church

How prove you this?

I prove it by these reasons: first, the testimony of God has not any
authority from men. The Scripture is the testimony of God alone: Ergo It has
none authority from men; yea, the most holy men that be; and consequently not
from the Church, which is nothing else but a company of godly and sanctified
men. The force and pith of the argument you shall find, 1. Ioh. 5. If we
receive the witness of men, the testimony of God certainly is greater.
Secondly, that must needs be before the Scripture in natural order, of which
the authority of the Scripture depends: But the Church is not before the
Word of God: Ergo. The Mayor proposition is evident, because that which
depends of another, must needs come after that, on which it depends. The
Minor is thus proved: That which is gathered, governed, regenerated by the
Word, or by the Scripture, that is in order after the Scripture. But the Chapter
Ergo. The Mayor is plain, the Minor is proved by 1. Pet. 1.23. We are
regenerated, and borne a new by the word of God. James 1.18. He has begotten
us by the word of truth. Ioh. 17.20. Which by their word shall believe in me.
Thirdly, the foundation of any building depends not on the roof, or upper
rooms, which are built upon the foundation, but contrarily those same upper
rooms, and the roof depend upon the foundation: but the Word of God is the
foundation: Ergo. The Mayor is plain in it self. The Minor is confirmed by
that, Ephesians. 2.20. You are built upon the foundations of the Prophets and
Apostles. The Papists object to us that place, Object.
1. Tim. 3.15. Where the Church is said to be the pillar and ground of truth.
Answ.
Whereto we answer, that this argument is sophistical, or a fallacy, a Dicto
secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter: For the Church is not called the pillar
and ground of truth, in regard of it self, but in regard of Christ the head,
S. Th. p. 181.
in regard it is the keeper of the Scripture, for so much as God has made the
Church only to have to do with the treasury of his Word, and in the Church,
as on the pillar and door of his house, or palace, he hangs those holy
Tables, which every man must go thither to read. No otherwise then the
Magistrate hangs up on pillars, and gates of his Court, Tables, containing in
them his Laws and Decrees, to the end that his subjects may there read them,
as in a public of the Scriptures, yet not so, as if the authority of the
Scripture did depend on them, but because God uses them as his servants and
Ministers to propound, and to beat into the memories of men his holy
Scripture; even as a Prince uses a Crier for the promulgation of his laws
unto his subjects. And here take this similitude with you: a man goes to the
University, as unto the very shop and storehouse of learning, yet hereupon it
follows not, that the truth of that learning we are taught there in the
University, does depend on the authority of the University. Besides, this
must Ergo. For suppose we grant them their Mayor (which notwithstanding is
false, as we have manifestly proved), yet they are never able to prove their
Minor, as shall be shown anon more distinctly.

What is the second propriety of the Word of God, or the holy Scripture?

S. Th. p. 176.
That it be entire, perfect, and sufficient to salvation, which is proved by
that, Ioh. 20.30. Many other signs did Jesus which are not written in this
Book; but these things are written that you may believe, that Jesus is the
Christ, that Son of God; and that you believing, might have life by his name.
Out of which place I thus reason: That which is so written, that by it we may
believe in Christ Jesus, and so obtain eternal life, that, I say, is
sufficient to life eternal: But the Scripture is so written: Ergo. Again
thence I thus argue: The holy Scripture was written to this end, that we might
believe in the Son of God, and get eternal life: Ergo, Whatsoever Word is
not written, profits, or avails us nothing to faith, and to eternal life,
which must diligently be noted against the error of the Papists, Quod non
legi, vsurpare non debeo. Amb. Non sum aliorum sermonum discipulus, nisi
co^lestium, Origin.
which say, there are two words of God, the one written, the other unwritten;
upon which pretense they will needs obtrude unto us Traditions, which they call
Apostolical, the Decrees of the Popes, and the custom of the Church. Of which
the Council of Trent in the fourth sessio^ thus speaks: Whosoever does not
with like affection of mind, reverence the Traditions of the Church, as he does
the holy Scriptures, let him be accursed. But against these Traditions, first,
note the sufficiency of the Scriptures. Secondly, this argument: The Traditions
of the Church either agree with the holy writ, or they dissent from it. If they
be consonant to it, then they say the self same thing the Scripture says, and
so they are Scripture: for that ought not in all reason to be done by more,
which may be performed by fewer. Or they dissent from the Scripture (as all the
traditions of the Popes, as namely, that tradition, whereby the Cup in the
Lords Supper is prohibited to be administered unto the lay people, and such
like). And if they disagree with the Scripture, they cannot fill up the
Scripture, for that which is repugnant to any thing, does not fill up, but
rather quite overthrow it. Another testimony of the perfection of the holy
Scripture is most manifest, in the 2. Tim. 3.6. The whole Scripture is given by
inspiration from God, and is profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, to
instruct; that the man of God may be perfect, and perfectly instructed to every
good work. From whence we may frame these arguments. First, the Scripture is
a totum, an entire thing: Ergo, it is perfect; for a totum is that, which
wants no necessary parts. Secondly, that which suffices us for doctrine,
Adoro plenitudinem Scripturarum. Tertul.
for reproof, for correction, and instruction, that is full and complete: for
there is none that can show any thing besides, whereunto the scripture should be
profitable. But the Scripture is sufficient to those things: Ergo. Thirdly,
that which makes a man perfect, and furnished to every good work that same
must needs be perfect: but the Scripture does so. Ergo. The Mayor is therefore
true, because there is no effect which is more perfect then its cause, or
because a perfect effect presupposes the cause to be perfect, and nothing can
give that to another, which it has not it self, if the Scripture therefore
make men perfect, then it must also be perfect.

What is the third propriety of the holy Scripture?

That in the Articles of faith, S. Th. p. 199.
which are necessary to salvation it be plain, easy and perspicuous; easy, I
say, and perspicuous; first, in respect of them to whom it ought to be a light
for their salvation, according unto that, 2. Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid,
it is hid to the^ which perish: whence it necessarily follows, that the
Gospel is not hid, but clear, and open to those which do not perish, as Peter
says, 2. Pet. 1.19. You do well, in that you attend to the word of the
Prophets, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, Psalm. 19.15. The word
of God is clear. Psalm. 119. The word of God is a light to our feet and
steps. Secondly, the Scripture is easy, as it is an instrument, which it
has derived to it from the principal guide, the holy Spirit, who is that true
teacher and interpreter of the Scripture, Ioh 14.26. The advocate which is the
holy Ghost, he shall teach you althings. 1. Ioh. 2 27. That anointing, that is,
the holy spirit, teaches us of all things. Also, Ioh. 16.13. When that Spirit
of truth shall come, he shall lead you in all truth. Lastly, it is easy, if
that in the handling of it we use convenient means, and expound one place by
another, according to the rules of good and lawful exposition, which you may
read in the 201 page of my Systeme of Divinity. S. Th. p. 201.
If then any shall demand, who has the authority to interpret the Scripture,
if the Pope of Rome be he? I answer, that every one is the best interpreter
of his own words, whereas therefore the Scripture is the Word of God, and of
the holy Ghost, and not of the Pope of Rome, therefore the holy Spirit has the
authority to interpret, as that true advocate and teacher of verity. But why
then does the Bishop of Rome challenge to himself this authority to interpret
the Scriptures? I answer; because he knows well enough, how bad his cause is,
and therefore dares not submit his Tenants to the Word of God, or the
Scripture, if it be rightly understood, and therefore will he wrest, and stretch
the Scriptures at his own pleasure. Touching which point, I would have you
note the words of a certain Apostate from the faith, Caspar Schoppius Papist,
who is now at Rome with the Pope; he in that Epistle he wrote touching his
defection from us unto the Papists, about six years ago, set out at
Ingolstadium, in the 24 page, says thus, The sum of all controversies
betwixt the Catholics and the Lutherans consists in these two things; That
besides the holy Scripture, the Traditions of the Apostles, and of the Church,
are necessary to be believed. And that the holy Scriptures themselves, neither
can, nor ought to be interpreted of any with authority, save of the Catholic
Roman Church. In which two Doctrines, if one be once persuaded and settled, he
will easily yield and adioine himself to the Church of Rome in the rest of the
chief points of faith: For if I were to dispute with the Heretics, about any
article of faith, it must needs be that there be somewhat set down in the
Bible, touching my opinion, or that there be nothing at all to be found for it.
If there be nothing in the Bible for me, presently then I say, that it was wont
so to be observed by tradition from the Apostles, in the Church of Rome. But if
there be somewhat contained in the Bible, touching mine opinion, and the
Heretic will interpret it another way then might serve my turn, then
presently I oppose to him, the Church of Rome, that it has so interpreted it:
so that every Dispute ought to be reduced to these two heads. Thus far he.
And truly this is it that the Pope of Rome labors for, that he may wrest the
Scripture as seems him good; and then it is, as if any offering to fight with
another, and the weapon should be a sword, he would fight upon this condition,
that he may be suffered to weild his adversaries sword as he will. And so it is
likewise, as if any would have a suit in Law, tried before the Judge according
to the laws, but upon this condition, that it may be lawful for him to
interpret the law on his own side; just so the Pope does, for he says, I will
dispute with you out of the Scripture, but so, that it may be lawful for me to
interpret the Scripture on mine own behalf. I would have this also noted,
that if the Papists demand, who is the Judge in the controversies of faith? We
answer, S. Th. p. 174. item p. 203.
that the chief and highest Judge of controversies of faith, is he who is the
Author, both of faith and of the Scripture, to wit, the holy Ghost. According
to that of Ioh. 16. When the comforter shall come, he shall reprove, he will
judge the world of sin. And then only the Scripture to be the Law and Sentence
of this judge, according whereunto judgment must be given concerning
controversies of faith, as it does most manifestly appear by John 5.45. There
is one who accuses you, even Moses, i. e. the writings of Moses which give
judgment against you; and yet more manifestly, John. 18. verse. 48. He that
rejects and receives not my words, has one that judges him. This word,
etc. It is not true therefore which the Pope of Rome says, that he is the
chief Judge and decider of controversies: for he is not fit to be a judge who
is accused and found guilty of deprauing and falsifying the word of God.

I have heard you sufficiently about the former sort of knowledge of Christian
Religion, or touching the principles of Divinity, to wit, God and Gods word:
Now I desire to be instructed in the second kind of knowledge, arising from
the former, that is touching the parts of this heavenly Doctrine which does
spring from the Doctrine which is of God and of the holy Scriptures?

You tell me right, and I perceive you well understand the method and
progress, which ought to be observed in understanding the doctrine of
Religion, and therefore now will I instruct you touching the parts of Divinity
or Christian Religion.

How many parts has this secondarie or derived knowledge?

Two: whereof the former, is of the end it self, the latter is of the means
that lead us to that end.

What is the end of Divinity?

Salvation, or life everlasting.

How many ways is the salvation of man considered?

Two manner of ways: either as it is perfect and complete, or as it is but
begun and imperfect: or, either in respect of the life to come, or of this
present life.

What is perfect and eternal salvation?

It consists in 3. things. S. Th p. 210.
First, In most absolute perfection of body and soul. Secondly, In that
unutterable joy wherewith we shall triumph before God, the holy Angels, and
godly men. Thirdly, In that most evident Majesty, glory, and honor, wherein we
shall triumph over death, Satan, sin and sinful men. And this is that which
Peter says, 2. Pet. 1. v. 4. We shall be made partakers says he, of the
divine nature, of divine perfection, joy and glory. And Phil. 3. v. 21. Christ
shall transform our base body, that it may be like the glorious body of
Christ. Esaias 64. v. 4. 1. Cor. 2. v. 9. The things which eye has not seen,
nor the ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man to conceive, are
those which God has prepared for them that love him.

What is imperfect salvation, or that which is begun only?

S. Th p. 211.
It is a taste of eternal salvation, or that comfort and joy of conscience
which we have in this life arising from the forgiveness of our sins, and
from that confidence we have toward God, whom we certainly know to be
reconciled unto us by Christ Jesus: so that no calamity whatsoever can be able
to separate us from his love, no not death it self, or that anxitie and horror
which usually we feel at the hour of death. Of this the Apostle speaks,
Romans 5. v. 1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace, i. e. a
joyful and merry conscience in the very midst of calamity and death, Romans 8.
v. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall oppression? shall
anguish? etc.

I see now what the end is I may expect to reap from this heavenly doctrine,
which how much the more it is desirable, so much the more I long to know the
means, by which I may be conducted to this end?

The means whereby thou may come to this most desired end, Parts Theologiae
duae, (...) and (...). S. Th. p. 212.
are two. First, the knowledge of thy misery. Secondly, thy redemption out of
that misery;

The former part of this heavenly science touching the diseases of the Soul.

How may I come by the right knowledge of my misery, or of the sores of my
soul?

If thou shall weigh well with thy self these four things. 1. That which went
before thy misery. 2. The efficient cause of thy misery* 3. The parts of it. 4.
The exemplary cause, or glass wherein thou have represented unto thee thy
misery.

What is that which went before the misery of mankind?

Quanto videmus maiora fuisse bona, qua amisimus; tanto gra^iora cognoscemus
esse mala in quae incidimus Vrsm. S. Th p. 218.
That happy and blessed estate wherein man was invested by God before his fall,
or the image of God which was in man.

What is the image of God in man, or rather what was it?

It was nothing else but that absolute and perfect estate before the fall,
consisting in the perfection of the understanding and the will of man, and
further in the majesty of man whereby he far excelled all other of the
creatures; or, that I may speak yet more plainly, the Image of God in man was
either prime and principal, or secondary and depending of the former. The
prime Image was both in his mind and in his body. S. Th. p. 224.
In his body there was perfect health and safety. In his mind there was
understanding without error; will without stain of sin. That other image
which depended or arose from this, was that majesty and alacrity was in man,
springing from the perfection of his body and soul; touching which, the
Scripture speaks, (...). Nazianzen.
Genesis 1. v. 26 Let us make man according to our image, and according to our
likeness: Ephesians. 4. v. 24. Paul calls true righteousness and holiness the
Image of God. Hitherto must be referred the whole doctrine touching the state
of Man before the fall, and touching his living in Paradise, anent which, you
may read Genesis 1. v. 27, 28, 29. and all the second Chapter of that Book.

What is the cause of man's misery?

The fall of our first Parents, or the defection of Adam and Eve, S. Th. p. 233.
from God in their first estate of innocence, which was by the eating of the
forbidden fruit.

What have we to do with the fall of Adam and Eve, seeing then we had no
being at all?

Adam and Eve did represent all mankind, and therefore they had given them
felicity and the Image of God for all mankind; wherefore in regard, they by
their offense lost that which they had received for all mankind, they lost it
not in themselves alone, but in all their posterity. Even as if a King should
give any one some Privileges for himself and his post^ritie, and he that had
these Privileges granted, should be attainted of Treason against the King,
then surely he himself should loose all those privileges which he had gotten
of the king, and his posterity should get no benefit of them neither.

And was this so great a matter to bite an Apple, and to eat of it?

The eating of the Apple was a most grievous offense not in regard of the Apple
it self, the loss thereof was but small, for there were Apples good store in
Paradise: but because that eating flowed and issued as it were from the
fountain of most horrible sins, V. Aug Enchind ad L^ur^^t ca 4^. and 46.
to wit, from pride, man thereby affecting the seat and Majesty of God, Qui
manducouerunt vt essent quasi Dii, perdiderunt quod eran^ facti homines
immortales. Augustine.
and so became guilty of high treason against Gods Majesty, as God mockingly
casts man in the teeth, Genesis 3. Behold Adam is made like unto one of us, that
is, he is made as it were one of the persons in the Sacred Trinity. Another
sin is unbelief, in that our first Parents did not believe Gods words to be
true, when he said, in what day soever ye shall ea^^ of it, ye shall die the
death. But contrariwise, in that they readily believed the devil, who spoke
unto them by the Serpent as by his instrument, and told them, that they should
not die at all, and so they gave more credit to him then unto God. The third
sin is contemptuousnesse, and disobedience, for we ought to obey God in all
his commands, even in those which we think are but of little reckoning. The
fourth sin is unthankfulness, for man was created after the likeness and
Image of God, and therefore it was his duty to obey Gods Commandments in token
of his thankfulness for the benefit. The fifth and most grievous sin was that
apparent revolt and falling from God to the devil, namely when man went about
to attain to be like unto God by the Counsel and help of the devil, and so
conspired as it were with the devil against God.

I have also heard of the cause of misery, or of the diseases of the soul,
tell me now further, what be the parts of our misery?

They be two: Sin, and the punishment for sin; for in these two things our
misery consists. First, that we are sinners: And secondly, that we for
sinners are liable to temporal and eternal punishments.

What is sin?

S. Th. p. 247. Geminu^ peccati formale, pugnantia cum lege and ordinatio ad
poena^. Vrsin. (...), 1. Io^. 3.4. Est dictum factu^ concupitum contra ^ogem
De^. Augustine.
It is a stepping aside from that rule of perfection and righteousness which
God requires at our hands. Or it is whatsoever is repugnant to the Law of God.

What sorts of sin be there?

Two: Original and Actual.

What is Original sin?

It is that stain and corruption of humane nature, S. Th. p 251. Nihil peccato
originali ad praedicandum notius, nihil ad intelligendum secretius. August.
Peccatum originis est carentia iustitiae originalis d^bitae inesse. Aug.
Peccatum originis est, quod trohimus a natiuitate per ignorantiam in mente, and
per concupiscentiam in carne, Hugo.
of the understanding and will of man, whereby a man even from his very birth
is carried, and haled along to sinful actions; of this sin speaks the
Scripture, Genesis 6.5. The imaginations and thoughts of man's heart are only
evil continually: Psalm. 51.7. In iniquity was I formed and conceived, and in
sin has my mother brought me forth. that is, My sin was conceived and
borne with me. Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin. Also; By the disobedience of one man, many were made sinners.

What is actual sin?

It is that obliquitie or prauity, S. Th. p. 268. Committendo quae vetantur vel
omit^endo, quae mandantur nam boni virte^t non tantum recte ^gere, sed etiam
recte ociari.
by which the actions and doings of a man, are carried in a course contrary to
the Law of God, or else when a man offends against the will of God, not only
in inclination and pronenesse, but in deed it self.

I have heard of the former part of man's misery, namely, of sin; what is the
other part of humane misery?

The punishment of sin.

How many kinds of punishments for sin be there?

Two, Temporary and Eternal.

Temporary punishment, what is it?

S. Th. p. 285.
It is that misery which a man endures in this life, as poverty, disgrace,
diseases, and at the last death it self, which is called, the wages of sin,
Romans 6.

What is eternal punishment?

It is that unspeakable sorrow, torment, and disgrace, which the damned shall
suffer in hell with the devil and his Angles. S. Th. p. 286.


I conceive now the parts of man's misery, show me also the exemplarie cause*
whereby as in a glass, I may come to the knowledge of my misery?

The glass wherein we may perfectly see our misery, is that high and strict
rigor of the law of God, both in exacting that righteousness, which we are
never able to perform, and also in threatening most grievous punishments which
they must abide, which do not satisfy the Law of God, either by themselves,
or by another.

Whence may we know that rigor of Gods Law?

First, even by every Commandment of the Decalogue, of which we cannot in
this life perform so much as one perfectly; the sum of which Commandments
are contained in those words, which Saint Matthew has, Chap. 22. Luke* 10 Thou
shall love the Lord thy God, etc. Secondly, by those grievous comminations,
which are added to these Commandments: Cursed is every one that abides not,
etc Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal 3.10. This then is our greatest misery, that we cannot
satisfy the Law of God, sithence we are not able nor apt of our selves to
think any good: 2. Cor. 3.5. and consequently that according to Gods word we
must be cursed both in this life, and in the life to come, unless we can
obtain from the great mercy of God, redemption and remission of our sins;
which is another thing, even an excellent remedy against our misery, that this
heavenly discipline sets out unto us, and which we mean now to handle.

The second part of this celestial Science, which is touching the freeing of
Man from his misery, that is, from sin, and the punishment of sin.
I Know well my misery, I would gladly know how I may be freed from this
misery, or what remedy there is for these diseases of my soul?

The remedy is two fold, either prim^ and independent, or secondarie, and
depending of the former.

Which is the prime, or independent remedy?

S. Th. p 296.
It is our free predestination and election, when by God has decreed from all
eternity, to redeem and save everlastingly some certain men by his Son, of
which these sayings of the scripture bear witness; Ephesians. 2.4, 5. He has
elected us in Christ before the foundations of the world were laid. He has
predestined us, whom he might adopt for sons in Christ Jesus, (...)
even out of the good pleasure of his own will. Rom 8 verse. 30. Whom he has
predestined, them also he called. Romans 9. Disputare vis mecum ^ mirare mecu^
and exclama, O altitudo! Augustine.
I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy: therefore election is not in him
that wills, or in him that runs, but in God which shows mercy, Psalm.
15.16. Acts 13. verse. 4, 5. And so many of them as were predestined unto life
eternal believed Mat. 20. verse. 16. Many are called, but few elected.

I have heard, as touching the prime remedy of our misery, to wit, election
unto life eternal, now instruct me in the other kind of remedy?

That is divided into three heads, 1. Redemption: 2. Justification: 3.
Sanctification.

What is Redemption?

It is the setting of us free from sin, and the punishment of sin, wrought
by Christ Jesus, the Son of God our Redeemer.

How many things offer themselves to be considered about our Redemption?

Two: the efficient cause, or Author of Redemption: Secondly the object of it,
whereunto redemption appertains.

Who is our Redeemer?

Jesus Christ: for he is made unto us of God Wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. 1 Cor. 1.36. 1. Tim. 3 16. There is one
Mediator betwixt God and man, even the man Christ Jesus.

How many things are we to consider in Christ our Redeemer?

Two: his person, and his office.

How many things are there to be considered in the Person of Christ?

Two: to wit, the parts of it, and there Union.

Of how many parts does the person of Christ consist?

S. Th. p. 312.
Of two: the divine nature, and the humane. And this I prove, that Christ
consists on these two Natures, because he is true God, and true man. That he
is true God, we have spoken before, when we proved the Son to be God. And
truly that there is another Nature in the Son of God, besides the humane
nature, may be proved by two manifest arguments, the former whereof is this:
In what person soever there is made a distinction and limitation, so that one
thing is attributed to it, by reason of one part, and another thing agrees
unto it, by reason of another part, in that person of necessity there must be
two natures: but in the Person of Christ there is such a limitation: Ergo. The
Minor is proved out of Romans 1.3. where the Apostle says, that the Son of God
was made the seed of David according to his flesh. Whereupon it necessarily
follows, that there is another thing in Christ besides his flesh; for when as
I say, that man is immortal according to his soul, it must needs follow, that
there is some other thing in man beside his soul: for every limitation, argues
a diversity in that which is limited. The other argument is, to whom many
things are attributed, which can in no wise agree to humane nature, in him
there must needs be another nature or essence distinct from the humane nature.
But unto Christ many things are so attributed: Ergo. The minor is proved by
that, John 8. v. 19. Verily, Verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was I am.
This can by no means be understood of the humane nature, because Christ's
Nativity was two thousand years after Abraham. That trifling exposition which
the Samosateuian Heretics give of this place, before Abraham was, to wit, the
father of the faithful, I am, is altogether unsound, and not sounding with the
text, neither with the scope and intention of Christ in this place; For he was
to answer to the objection of the Jews, who had said in the verse going
before, Thou art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen Abraham? Now
what an answer should this have been, if he had said, Before Abraham was the
father of the faithful, I am; for that should have been as ridiculous an
answer, as if when one should say to me, thou art not yet forty years old, and
have thou seen Sigismund king of Polonia? and I should answer, Before my son
shall get a son, and be a father, I am; would not all laugh at such an
answer, given to that question? and that Christ is Man, it needs no proving,
because all grant it.

Why is not the sole humane nature of Christ, Persona est 1. substantia 2.
singularis 3. Intelligens 4. Non pars alterius. 5. Non sustentata ab alio. 6.
Incommunicabilis. v. Syst. Th. l. ^. c. 5.

Totus totum me assumpsit ut toti mihi salutem gratificaretur: quod n.
inassumptibi^e est incurab^le est. Lumbard.


called a Person as well as every one of us be called persons?

Although the humane nature of Christ consists of a soul and a body, even as
we do, notwithstanding it can not subsist a part by it self, without
adjoining it to the divine nature, whereas we can subsist every one by himself
severally; otherwise he is like unto us in other things, sin only excepted,
as the Scripture witnesses, Heb. 2. v. 14. Because therefore the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, even Christ also was made partakers of them. And
v. 16. He took not the Angels, but the seed of Abraham, whereupon he ought
to be made like unto all his brethren in substance; namely, according to his
soul and body: S. Th. p. 320.
Which may be observed against the Vbiquitaries, who conceit there was another
kind of humane substance in Christ, then such as we have; namely, such a one as
can be in one, and the selfsame instant of time every where in all places
both in heaven and earth, and so they confound the divine and humane nature one
with the other.

I have heard what be the parts of Christ's Person: now show me what is the
union of those two parts in Christ's Person?

It is that indissoluble knot, whereby the humane nature is so surely tied unto
the divine, and the divine nature so linked to the humane, that of them two is
made but one Person, and that those natures for ever cannot be dis-ioyned the
one from the other.

What are we to consider in this union?

Two things, to wit, The cause of the union of the two natures in Christ, and
then the proprieties of this union?

What is the cause of the union of these two natures in Christ?

The conception of the humane nature in the Virgin Mary's womb wrought by the
Holy Ghost, S. Th. p 323. Assumpsit quod non erat, non amisit quod erat. August.
and then the Nativity and Incarnation, whereby after that most strait
conjunction of the humane nature with the divine in the Virgin Mary's womb, S.
Th. p. 316. (...). Cyril.

Salua proprietate vtriusque naturae, suscepta est a maiestate humilitas, a
virtute infiro mitas, ab ^teruitate mortalitas. Leo. V. Pet. Lumbard. l. 3
sent. distinct. 2^.


the man Christ was borne and brought forth into this light, See Syst. Theolog
page 323.

How many proprieties has this union?

Three: First, that it is exceeding fast and sure. Secondly, that it can not
possible be dissolved. Thirdly, that by reason thereof, those things that agree
only to the one nature, are notwithstanding attributed to the whole Person,
because of either of those two natures. See Syst. Theolog. page 320.

I have heard as touching the Person of Christ, now it remains, that I be
instructed in the office of Christ, and first of all that you tell me how the
office of Christ is called generally?

S. Th. p. 326.
It is in general termed the office of a Mediator.

What is a Mediator?

Generally a Mediator imports such an one as does reconcile the party
offending to the party offended, which reconciliation consists in these three
things. 1 The Mediator must take intercession for him that has grieved the
party offended. 2. He must satisfy the party offended for the injury and
wrong done 3. He must promise and likewise provide that the offender shall not
offend any more. Non mediator homo praeter de itatem, non mediator Deus praeter
humanitatem sed inter diuinitatem solam and humanitatem solam mediatrix est
humana diuinitas and diuina hummitas. August.
And therefore when we say Christ is a Mediator, it is as if we say that
Christ is that Person that has appeased God, whom Mankind by their sins had
most grievously offended, and who has given satisfaction to the justice of God
by his Passion and Death, who prays for sinners, and applies his merit unto
them by faith, who regenerateth them by his holy Spirit, that they may begin in
this life to hate sin, and to be wary that they offend God no more.

Of how many sorts is the office of Christ our Mediator?

Of three sorts. Prophetical, Sacerdotall, and Regal, in regard whereof our
Savior is called Christ, i. e. anointed and appointed unto this triple office,
because in the Old Testament by Gods own command, there were anointed Prophets,
Priests, and Kings.

Which is the Prophetical office of Christ, and in what does it consist?

It consists in two things. S. Th. p. 333.
1. In the Office of teaching: And 2. in the Efficacy of his teaching: for
Christ is called a Prophet. 1. Because he has revealed God and Gods will unto
Angels and unto men. For God could no otherwise be known, then by the Son,
according unto that: The Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he has
revealed him unto us. 2. Because he has appointed and preserved in his Church
the Ministry of the Gospel, and bestows on his Church able Teachers and
Ministers, fitting and furnishing them with gifts necessary for teaching,
Ephesians. 4. v. 3. Christ has given some to be Prophets, other to be Apostles,
and Teachers. 3. Because he is powerful by the Ministry of the Word, and
inclines the hearts of such men as are elect, to believe and obey the Gospel,
Luke 24. v. 25. Then he opened their understanding, that they might understand
the Scriptures, Act. 16. v 14. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia, to attend
unto those things which were spoken by Paul.

Which is the Priestly Office of Christ, and wherein does it consist?

S. Th. p. 340.
It consists in three things. 1. In the purging of our sins 2 In the virtue
and applying of that purgation. 3. In his Intercession for us: for as the
Priest in the Old Testament had two Officers, the one to make atonement for
sin, and the other to pray for the people. So likewise the Priestly Office of
Christ herein consists. 1. That he should offer himself as a Sacrifice to
his eternal Father for our sins. 2. That he should make intercession for us
unto his eternal Father.

What are there to be considered in the first part of Christ's Priestly Office,
to wit, in the satisfaction for our sins?

There be two: namely, the causes or means whereby Christ wrought this
expiation, and so satisfied for our sins, and 2 the Proprieties of that
Expiation.

What be the causes by which Christ wrought this expiation?

These be of two sorts, either Prime, or arising from the prime causes.

What is the prime cause?

The obedience of Christ in that he humbled himself, S. Th. p. 342.
and was subject to the Law, to the end that he might satisfy for us, who had
broken the Law. According to that, Romans 5. v. 19. As by the disobedience of one
man, to wit, of Adam, many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, to
wit, of Christ, many shall be made righteous.

What is the other cause arising and springing from this prime cause?

It is twofold. The Passion; and the Death of Christ.

Of what sort is the Passion of Christ?

It is of two sorts. External, and Internal.

What is the External Passion?

It is both that anguish which Christ endured in his most Sanctified body; and
also that ignominy and shame which he sustained for our sakes.

Which was the Internal Passion?

That wonderful sadness, and heaviness, S. Th. p. 347.
which Christ felt in his soul for our sin; Of which it is said, Deum pati
plus est quam omnes homines in omne aeternitatem pati.
Math. 26. v. 38. My soul is heavy even unto the death, where by death he
understands not only corporal death, but eternal, as if he had said, my
soul is as heavy and sorrowful, as their souls are which must for ever be
damned.

How many were the torments of Christ in soul?

Two.

Which is the former?

The former was in the Garden S. Th. p. 348.
before he was apprehended and led to public judgment: Audi vtramque vocem,
tum carnis iu^^^mae, Pater, si possibile sit, transeat a me calix: tum prompti
animi, Non tamen vt ego volo sed vt tu v^s fiat. Ambros.
for there began he to be afraid of himself, lest God should leave and
forsake him, whom he then beheld as one who was grievously offended by the sins
of Mankind, and consequently who was extremely angry with him that had taken
and translated upon himself the sins of the whole world.

Whereby do you know the greatness of these torments, and sufferings in the
soul of Christ?

By two tokens. First, in that Christ there needed Angels to comfort him, and
to hold him up, lest being too much afraid by that horrible sight of the angry
and wrathful God, he should have fainted, See Luke 22. v. 13. and hence it was
that he uttered that speech, My soul is heavy unto death, even to eternal
death.

What is the other token of those most grievous torments in the soul of
Christ?

His bloody sweat: for this was a manifest sign that all the natural forces
in Christ were much weakened and as it were bound from doing their office, by
reason of that great torment and terror, so that nature could not keep the
blood any more in the veins, but was feign being congealed, and clotted, to
cast it out as it were, and drive it to the exterior parts, of which great
violence and terror, the like example can no where be read in any History.

Which is the other suffering or torment of Christ in soul?

The latter was that which a little before his death he felt upon the Cross,
when he strove against that temptation of his perpetual separation and
abiection from the face of God, whereupon he sent forth that doleful cry, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? where by a Metonymy he calls that
fearful temptation (wherewith those are wont to be troubled whom God has
cast from his sight, and quite forsaken) desertion or forsaking. For requisite
it was, that Christ should endure such a temptation, that he might deliver us
from eternal damnation.

I have seen the Passion of Christ, now tell me his death?

The death of Christ, S. Th. p. 355.
is the separation of his Soul from his Body, whereby he satisfied for, and
purged our sins and delivered us from eternal death. And so much the very
shedding of blood and water out of Christ's side did manifest, of which John
speaks, John 19. v. 34. One of the soldiers (says he) pierced his side, and
presently issued out blood and water; by the blood, Christ signified that our
sins were ransomed, and satisfied for: by the water, that we are washed from
the filth of our sins.

It follows now in order that you instruct me as touching the proprieties and
benefits of Christ's Passion, tell me therefore what is the first propriety of
Christ's Passion?

This it is, that it was altogether necessary, in regard that mankind could no
way else be freed from eternal death, but by the death of the Son of God:
And that for this reason, because the most high God is most just, and therefore
never remitteth sins without satisfaction; sithence, that by nature he hates
sins, and can in no wise endure them: for he that is justice, most eminently,
cannot away with injustice, even as the fire cannot abide water. As it is said,
Psalm. 5. Thou art not a God that wills wickedness. Again, plain places of
the Scripture do testify the same, Romans 8. v. 3. That which was impossible to
the Law, that has God done by sending his Son, i. e. that which by no other
means could have been performed, was done by the death of the Son of God,
Heb. 2. v. 14. Therefore because the children are partakers of flesh and blood,
he also in like manner was made partaker of them, that he might abolish by
death him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil; and in the verse
following, and might set at liberty those which through the fear of death
were subject unto bondage all their life long, that is, that he might redeem
those which otherwise should have perished eternally, unless Christ had
wrought their Redemption. And truly if there had been any other way to have
satisfied for sin, then that might have been performed, either by our
selves, or by some other creature. But we could not have done this for our
selves. 1. Because whatsoever good we do, we do already owe it unto God, and
that which we owe unto God, is not the price of Redemption or satisfaction:
but it is due debt. 2. Because we add somewhat to the score of our debts
every day, and therefore we can never be able to satisfy and pay them. And
that we do daily add sin unto sin, See John 15. verse. 15, 16. Psalm. 130.
v. 3. Math. 6. v. 12. Math. 18. v. 25. Thirdly, Because sin is a hurt and
injury to God, and so an infinite evil, and therefore also deserves either
eternal punishment, or one equal thereunto, out of which (if it had been
laid upon us) we could never have been able to have freed ourselves. No other
creature could satisfy for us, for example, Not the Angels: first, Because
man, and no other creature may be punished for that sin man had committed,
the Justice of God requiring that it should be so, as it is said, Ezech. 18. v.
30. That soul that has sinned, even that shall die. Secondly, Because no
creature, no not the Angels are able to escape and free themselves out of
eternal punishment. Homo debuit sed no potuit, Deus potuit sed non debuit,
etc. O sapientia potens attingens vbique fortiter ^ o potentia sapiens,
disponens omnia suauiter Bern.
Whereupon it follows, that it was requisite, that he who should satisfy
the Justice of God for our sins, should be truly God, and truly man. Man he
was to be, because man had sinned, and therefore Gods Justice so requiring, he
that should pay and smart he must be man, as it is said, Heb. 9.22. Without
shedding of blood, Non satiabar dulcedine mirabili, considerare altitudinem
consilii tui super salute^ generis humani. Aug. Opus sine exemplo, gratia sine
merito, charitas fine modo Bern. O foelix culpa, quae tale^ and tantum meruit
redemptorem!
there is no remission of sins: wherefore that Christ might shed blood, it
was meet he should be man. And he was to be God too: First, that by the power
of his divinity, he might undergo the infinite anger of God against the sin
of mankind, with which anger Christ should certainly have been overwhelmed,
if he had been but bare man; Because God is a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4. v. 24.
and therefore as man he desires the cup of his Passion might be taken away
from him, as being that which he could not bear, as he was man: And as man he
cries out upon the Cross, Oh God why have thou forsaken me? Secondly, It was
needful that he should be truly God, who would satisfy for our sins, that
his suffering and punishment might be of infinite worth, and so equivalent to
eternal damnation: For, because we by our sins had deserved not only
Temporal put Eternal punishment, it was necessary that he who would take in
hand our deliverance, should undergo not the temporal punishment alone, but
the eternal too; the eternal not by reason of the extent and continuance of
it, but in value and equiualence, that is, his punishment was to be equivalent
to eternal punishment, or to have an equal proportion with eternal
punishment, But no man's punishment can equiualize eternal punishment, but only
of him who is himself eternal who is truly God, whereupon the Fathers said
very right and devoutly. For God to suffer it is more, then for all men to be
damned eternally. 3. Because the satisfaction must needs have been of
infinite worth and valor, to the end it might sufficiently serve for the
purging and ransoming of all men's sins. But none there is that can work such a
satisfaction of infinite valor, unless he himself be infinite, that is God.

What is the 2. propriety of Christ's passion?

That it was truly expiatory, and satisfactory, that is, our sins by virtue of
Christ's expiation were forgiven us, which must be noted, 1. against the
Samosatenians, who blasphemously say, that the Passion of Christ was only
exemplary, that is, that Christ by his Passion would give us only an example
to obey God in all things, and to bear the Cross which God shall lay upon us
patiently, as Christ before us patiently did bear his Cross. This dangerous
doctrine, that throws our consciences headlong into the pit of despair,
arose from no other spring, then the denial of the Godhead of the Son of
God. For, because there was none could satisfy for our sins, except he were
God, as we have also a little before proved, and the Samosatenians deny
Christ to be truly God, therefore no farly was it, if they thought, that the
Passion of Christ was not satisfactory but only exemplarie But to their
blasphemies we oppose; First, the Divinity of the Son of God, proved and
euicted already by evident testimonies, to wit, when we necessarily enforced
that Christ who suffered for us was the Son of God, and hence it will follow
that his suffering was of infinite valor, and consequently, that it was
satisfactory. Secondly, most apparent testimonies of holy writ, Esaias 53. v. 4.
He himself carried and bare our infirmities truly, and v. 5. He was tormented
for our sins, and he was broken for our iniquities, Romans 5. v. 9. Now then
being justified by his blood, we shall be saved. 2. Cor. 5. v. 18. All these
things are of God, who has reconciled us unto himself by Jesus Christ, and
verse. 21. He made him who knew no sin to be sin for us. 1. Tim. 2. v. 5, 6.
There is one God, one Mediator of God and men, even the man Christ Jesus who
gave himself, a price of our Redemption. An example is one thing, and a price
or ransom is another thing, Galat. 2. v. 20. The Son of God has given
himself for me, for if righteousness be by the Law, then Christ died with out
a cause; as if he had said, Christ dyed to that end, that by his death he might
bestow on us righteousness, in satisfying Gods justice thereby for our
offenses: but there is a very plain place, Gal. 3. v 13. Christ redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, when he was made a curse for us: for it is written,
cursed is he that hangs on the tree. 1. John 1. v. 7. The blood of Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, purges us from all our sins. 1. John 2. v. 2. He
is the propitiation for our sins. These are the most pregnant places of
Scripture for this point, whereunto we may add this argument. If the Passion
of Christ was but exemplary, surely he would never have cried out with a loud
voice, My God* my God, why have thou forsaken me? for those words are not set
down as an example for us to follow, nay rather we ought to do quite contrary
to them, even to have always sure confidence in God, and never to think, or
cry out, that we are forsaken of him, as it is said, Romans 8. v. 15. we must
Cry Abba Father, in thee do I settle my soul. Again, if the Passion of
Christ was but exemplary, how were then the Fathers saved which were before
Christ, and so had not his example? and how was the thief saved, that could
not imitate Christ in his example, whereas he was now hanged on the Cross as
well as Christ, and that before his conversion. Secondly, this same propriety
of Christ's Passion must be noted against all such, as attribute the purging of
their sins, and the merit of the forgiveness of them to almsdeeds, or other
works of their own: for if so be that there is no remission of sins, but
by shedding of blood, as we have shown before, and almsdeeds, or other
works, even the best of them shed no blood, certainly then by no works of
ours whatsoever can there be wrought expiation or remission of sin.

What is the third propriety of Christ's Passion?

That it was most sufficient, neither need we any more expiation, which is
proved by that Heb. 9. Verse 26 Now was he in the end of the World made
manifest by that that offering up of himself once to take away sin. Per
Christum hominem iustitiae Dei plenissime satisfactum progenere humano Bellarm.
lib de ascensment* in Deum, grad. 13. cap. 3.
And Verse. 28. Christ was once offered up, that he might take away the sins
of many. And yet more evidently, Heb. 10.12. This Man after the offering of his
sacrifice, sits for ever at the right hand of the Father. And verse. 14. By
his one oblation; that is, by that his oblation, which only is most perfect
and sufficient. Object.
Now that is said, Col. 1.24. I fulfill the remainders of Christ's suffering or
passion in the flesh; Solu.
It must not be so understood, as if the passion of Christ were not of it
self sufficient, (...) Christi sunt duplicia quaedam (...) in carne, sua,
quaedam (...) in membri^, quae sunt Chrsti, quia membrorum. Zanch.
but needed some additament to fill it up, but there by a Synecdoche, the
passions of Christ he calls all such, as the members of Christ were to
suffer: as if he said; I must also endure those afflictions, which Christ shall
feel in his members, as he expressly annexeth; I fulfill the remnant of Christ's
passion in the flesh, for the body of Christ which is his Church: that he might
plainly show, that he spoke not of that passion which Christ suffered for our
sins, but of the crosses and afflictions which the Church must sustain in
this world, Omnes sanctorum affectiones, vel sunt (...), quibus puniuntur
peccata, vel (...) quibus probatur fides, vel (...) quibus confirmatur
doctrina, and de his loquitur. Melanct.
which church by a metaphorical kind of speaking is the body of Christ. And
this which we have spoken about the sufficiency of the passion of Christ, we
must note again against the Papists, who teach and say, that expiation and
purging of sin, is partly by good works, which shall be confuted in the
doctrine of justification, partly by the Mass, which shall likewise be confuted
in the point of, and concerning the Lords Supper, and partly by Purgatory,
which (they say) is a fire, in which the souls of men after this life are
tormented with temporal pains, and are purged from sins, and from which the
souls of such as are alive by favor and by prayers, may be delivered, as the
Council of Trent says in the fifth Session. Against which observe these
reasons: First, in the sacred Volume there is no one testimony of Purgatory, no
not so much as one example of any one that was in that Purgatory fire: Ergo,
it is a nice invention of their own brain; They urge a place, Object.
1. Co. 8. verse. 13. where it is said, that by the fire shall be made manifest,
and proved, every man's work of what sort it is. But they apply this to
Purgatory very foolishly: Solut.
for the Apostle speaks as touching the edification of the Church, and says,
that the time shall come, when it shall be tried and examined, how much every
one has profited in edifying the Church by the word of God, and the holy
Spirit, which two he calls fire, by a metaphor. He adds further, Verse. 15.
He shall be saved but even as it were by the fire: where abiding still in the
metaphor and similitude, he says, that not all those who have not edified
aright, shall straightway be damned for ever, but that they shall suffer a
trial in their own conscience, because they have not so faithfully discharged
their office as they should. Secondly, observe two manifest sayings of the holy
Writ, wherein you shall find but two places only that must be in the next
world pointed out unto you, the one for the blessed, the other for those, who
are eternally damned. Mark the last. Ioh 5. Verily, verily, I say unto you, who
so hears my word, and belieueth in him that sent me, shall not come into
judgment; and by consequence not into Purgatory, which is a part of
Judgment; but shall pass from death to life. Revel. 4 verse, 14. Blessed are
they henceforth which die in the Lord. Henceforth; that is, from the very
moment wherein they die. There is also a plain place, Luke 23.43. where Christ
says to the thief; To day shall thou be with me in Paradise: whereas he (if
any) needed this Purgatory fire.

I have heard sufficiently, as concerning the first part of Christ's Priestly
office, namely, the purging away of our sins; tell me what is the second part
of the Priestly Office of Christ?

S. Th. p. 357.
It is that effectual application, whereby Christ does all sufficiently and
powerfully apply that his purging performed by him unto the faithful, so that
by it they may obtain remission of sins, reconciliation and peace.

What is the third part of this Office of Christ.

It is his intercession for us.

What do you mean by intercession?

I do not mean any prayer, or suit, whereby Christ would get unto us again
the favor of God, as one man is said to interceed for an other, that he may
procure him somewhat; but I understand, first that perpetual value and force of
the Sacrifice of Christ, namely, in that Christ presents his passion, which
he suffered for us, unto the eternal Father. Secondly, the Fathers consent
resting in this Passion of Christ, contented and agreeing, that this Passion of
Christ shall be of force for us for ever.

Which is the third office of Christ?

His Regal office: S. Th. p. 359.
for Christ is not only a Prophet, and a Priest unto us, but he is also a King.

In what points consists the Regal Office of Christ?

In four: First, in that he governs the Church by his Spirit, and by his
Word; and does not only show unto us by his Word what we ought to do, but by
the work of the Spirit in us, enableth us to do them. Secondly, in that he
defends us against our enemies, Satan, sin and death, that they have no
power to hinder our salvation. Thirdly, in that he beautifieth his Church with
excellent gifts, and appoints the Ministry of his Word, making men obedient
unto this his own ordinance. Fourthly, In that at the end of the world he
shall appear to be judge of all men, and shall condemn the wicked to eternal
punishments, S. Th. p. 368.
but shall make the godly to shine with eternal glory.

I do already conceive the Office of Christ what it is, and of how diverse
sorts it is: now I would have you tell me what the object is about which Christ
exercises this his Office?

It is the Church.

How many ways is Church taken.

Two ways: in a large, or in a more strict signification.

What is the Church taken in the large acception?

It is the multitude or company of all such men, S. Th. p. 371.
as have the word of God preached unto them, in which company there be many
hypocrites which do not believe truly, and therefore are damned for ever.

What is the Church as it is strictly taken?

It is that number and company of men, S. Th. p. 38^.
which are elect of Christ by faith unto eternal life. And this company is
wont to be parted into two ranks, the one Militant, the other Triumphant. That
company of the elect and godly is called the Militant Church, which remains
yet on earth; but the Triumphant is that company of the faithful that is
already in Heaven. And so the rule of the Fathers is to be understood: Non
peruenit ad pramia Christi qui relinquit ecclesiam Christi. Cypr.
He shall never be a member of the Church Triumphant, that has not been a
member of the Church Militant. But whereas the Church is divided into the
visible and invisible Church, Non Deus buic pater est, cui non Ecclesia matter.
(...).
that is no true division to speak properly, but only a distinction of diverse
respects in the church. For the church is said to be visible, in respect of the
men themselves which are in the Church, and may be seen, and invisible, in
respect of the internal graces, to wit, of faith, and other gifts of the holy
Spirit, which are not so obuious to the senses. Which must be noted against the
Papists, who would have the Church to be a glorious appearing company, which
may by the very senses be pointed out, and acknowledged by the external pomp
of ceremonies, as Bellarmine affirms: The Church is as visible, as the common
wealth of Venice. Contrary whereunto our Savior speaks, Luke 17.20. The
kingdom of God comes not with observation; where it is apparent enough out
of the text, he speaks of the Church in this world, namely, that it shall
be no such glorious company, as should be known by external ceremonies and
observations, or by solemnities, apparrelling of Senators, of Counselors, and
other such like

What are to be considered about the Church?

The Head, the Members, and the Proprieties.

Who is the Head of the Church?

Christ alone is the Head of the Church as well of the Millitant, S. Th. p. 374.
as of the Triumphant, which is confirmed, first by a apparent testimonies of
holy writ, Ephesians. 1.22. God has put all things under the feet of Christ, and
has appointed him over all to be the Head to the Church, which is his body.
And Ephesians. 4.15. Christ is the Head, by whom the whole body is coupled and knit
together. Col. 1.18. Christ is the head of his body, the church A like place
there is, Col. 2.19. It is proved, secondly, by reason, because every head
ought to infuse vigor and lively virtue into all the members, as our head for
instance infuseth vital spirits into every part of our body for sense and
motion: but Christ alone can infuse that lively vigor into the members: Ergo.
True (say the Papists) Christ is the head of the Church but he is the invisible
Head, Object.
therefore there is need of another visible Head, who must be Christ's Vicar on
earth, and Peter the Apostles successor; to wit, the Pope of Rome. Whereunto we
answer, that in this strange doctrine of the Papists, Solut.
there are contained many puddles of error. The first error is, that Christ
has need of a Vicar, or Deputy in earth, whereunto we oppose these
arguments. First, there Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them: that is, immediately am I Ego fidenter
dico, quia quisquis se vniuersalem sacerdotem vocat, vel vocari desiderat, in
elatione sue Antichristum praecurrit. Greg Mag.
as the Hebrew phrase teaches. The second error is, that they think it a
righteous thing for some one man, and he a Bishop, or Minister of the Church,
to attribute unto himself this power, to be the universal Head and Governor
of the whole Church, whereunto we oppose these arguments: First, because
Christ does plainly forbid primacie in the Church, Matthew. 20. Luke 22.
Secondly, because the Apostles themselves divided the Office of the Apostleship
among themselves, for that they saw, that one man could not be over all
Churches, as the Scripture witnesses, Gal. 2.7, 8, 9. where Paul says; When
they saw that the Gospel of Uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the
Gospel of Circumcision unto Peter, and when James, and Cephas, and John, which
were counted Pillars, knew of the grace given unto me, they gave unto me and
Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that we should do the Office of the
Apostles among the Gentiles, and they execute the same Office among the Jews 3.
Moses, who was a far greater man the^ Pope, could not bear the burden of
judging the people of Israel alone, but was constrained to part it, as it is
Exodus 18. much less therefore can the Pope govern the Peter to have bin head
of the church, Planum est, Apostolis interdicitur dominatus, Bern. Quicunque
desiderauerit primatum in terra, inueniet confusionem in caelo. Distinct. 40.
cap. multi.
whereas notwithstanding, 1. Christ flatly forbids Peter and his other
Apostles, to seek after this headship; and 2. Paul to the Gal. 2.7. in plain
terms says, that James and Peter and John were counted, or thought to be
pillars, that is, by an erroneous conceit they were taken to be such by the^,
who might by the abuse of that title, deceive the Galath. Object.
They object that place, Mat 16. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock, super hanc
Petra^, will I build my Church. Solut.
Whereunto we answer, that he says not, and upon thee (Peter) will I build my
Church; but we say this is the intention and scope of Christ's speech namely, to
commend the confession of Peter, Tu es Petrus and supra hanc petram, etc.
saepius exposui, vt super hunc intelligeretur, quem confessus est Petrus
dicens, tu es Christus filius Dei viui. Non enim dictum est ei, Tu es Petra,
sed tu es Petrus. Petra autem erat Christus, quem confessus Simon dictus est
Petrus Aug.
which he sets out by a Paranomasie, or allusion unto the name of Peter; as
if he said, I rightly set upon thee the name of Peter (see the first Chapter of
John, where Christ gave Peter his name), because thou in the name of the other
Apostles, have made such a confession, and uttered such a doctrine, as upon
which, as it were on a Rock my Church shall be builded. First then, Christ
commends Peter, and in the person of Peter, all the Apostles, for that they
believed Christ to be the Son of God. Secondly, he shows the profit and fruit
of that confession, to wit, for that this doctrine and confession was to be the
foundation whereupon Christ's Church should be built, so that it should never
be ouerturned by Satan. Otherwise that Peter never understood these words of
himself, as if he were that stone, upon which the Chapter is reared* he himself
professes openly, 1. Pet. 2.4. where he says, that Christ is that very stone,
upon the which the Church was to be built. The fourth error is, that they take
for certainty, that Peter was Bishop of Rome, and so consequently, that he was
at Rome, which notwithstanding is uncertain, neither can it be firmly proved,
that Peter was ever at Rome, but the contrary; for that place which before we
cited, Gal. 2. is very remarkable; namely, in that Paul did so divide the
Apostleship, and part it with Peter, they shaking hands of the motion, that
Paul should go to the Gentiles, to convert them, and Peter should labor in
the conversion of the Jews: This promise, the right hand being given upon it,
Peter should have broke, if he had gone to Rome to convert the Gentiles;
neither do we read that two Apostles went into the same City, especially, it
being so far off, to preach the Gospel. Wherefore sithence by the confession
of all, it is apparent, that Paul preached the Gospel at Rome; what need was
there that Peter should come thither, especially at the very same time, as the
Papists say that they were both at Rome in Nero his time. II. Out of the last
Chapter of the second to Timoth. v. 16. In my first defense, says Paul, when I
appeared before Nero, there was none that stood to me, but all forsook me, I
pray God it be not laid to their charge: But if Peter had then been Bishop of
Rome, as the Papists will have it, what a disgraceful thing had it been and
unworthy a Bishop to forsake his brother and his own companion? Bellarm.
says, that Peter was at that time gone abroad to visit the Churches. But we
answer, that it was not meet that he should go away, then when he should have
assisted his brother, but should rather have put off the visitation unto some
other time, which he would have done, doubtless, if he had been at Rome.
Again I say, that Bellarm. coins that answer of his, because he neither backs
it with any place of Scripture, nor of any Historian, but speaks it out of
his own brain. III. This may be concluded by the circumstance of time, for
they say that Peter was 25 years at Rome, and 7 years at Antiocheia, which he
make 32 years, and yet they say that Peter was crucified at Rome under Nero,
and that he came to Rome the 2 of Claudius the Emperor. Now Claudius reigned
but 13 years, and Nero 13, so that both their Regiments lasted but 26 years;
Secundum Hieronim.
how then could Peter come the 2 of Claudius, and continue 27 years Bishop of
Rome, and yet be crucified under Nero. IV. We say that Eusebius and Hierome who
are of that opinion, do not agree with themselves; yea, and Hierome especially
manifestly contradicts himself. For when as he in one place had said, that
Peter was crucified under Nero, afterward expounding those words of Christ,
Matt. 23. Luke 11 Behold I send unto you Prophets, etc. Flatly affirms that
Peter was crucified by the Jews at Jerusalem. When the Ancients therefore are
opposite unto themselves, hereby it may appear that they knew not certainly
in this point, and consequently how much we are to detest the impudency of the
Popes, which set down for certainty, that Peter was Bishop of Rome. The fifth
error Peter's successor: for first, there is no sure ground to euince that
Peter was ever at Rome; how then could the Pope of Rome succeed Peter.
Secondly, if we grant this to the Papists out of pity, that Peter was at
Rome, yet it does not follow, that the Pope of Rome was Peter's successor: for
the Turk also has his seat at Constantinople, notwithstanding it does not
follow, that the Turk is the lawful Emperor of the East, or of Greece, the
Emperors before having their lawful residency, and abode at Constantinople:
for the place makes not the succession lawful, but two things there be which
make lawful succession: first, the power given of God; secondly, the imitation
of the Predecessors in life and manners. As Cyprian says in a certain place,
and after him Ambrose and Hierome: True succession is succession in doctrine,
and he cannot be said lawfully to hold the Chair of Peter, who holds not
the doctrine of Peter. But neither of these the Pope of Rome has: first,
whence will he prove, that God has given him that power to sit at Rome, as
the Monarch of the Church? surely he cannot bring so much as one letter out of
the Scripture of God, to prove this; nay, Christ enjoined the contrary to his
Disciples, to wit, that one of them should not desire to be above another. 2.
The true succession, which is in doctrine, the Pope of Rome has not: for if
the Decrees of the Pope, and the Epistles of Peter be compared together, there
will appear as great difference betwixt them, as betwixt light and darkness:
yea, we are about to prove by and by, that the Pope of Rome is the Ringleader
of idolaters, so far is he off from being Peter's successor in doctrine.

Which be the Members of the Church?

They be all the faithful which do believe in Christ unto eternal life; for
they all are united to Christ, even as the members of our body unto their head.
They are united, I say, by the holy Spirit, who produces such like motions in
them, as are in the humane nature of Christ assumed; that is, he makes that
the faithful become partakers of the Sacerdotall, Prophetical, and Regal
power which is in Christ. About which matter Peter, epist. 2. c. 2. v. 9.
speaks most sweetly, You are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy
Nation, a people whom God has chosen as peculiar to himself, that the virtues
of him might be manifest, who has called you out of darkness into his admirable
light. See concerning this most comfortable doctrine, to wit, the union of the
members with Christ the Head, in the Syst. of Divinity. page 376.

What sorts be the members of Christ?

They be of two sorts, the Ministers of the Word, and the hearers. Here the
Papists challenge us, that we have no lawful Ministers in the Church, and by
consequence that there be no lawful sheep, because (say they) where there are
no lawful and true Pastors and Shepherds, there can be there no lawful or
true sheep. Solut.
But we deny the Antecedent, where they say, that in our Churches there be no
lawful Pastors, because he is a right Pastor, who rightly and lawfully
executes his charge, which is don by the pure preaching of the word, and the
administration of the Sacraments. But (say they) from whom had your Luther and
Calvin their callings? We answer: That we depend not on Calvin and Luther, but
of the Prophets themselves, and the Apostles. As for Luther and Calvin, they
were neither Prophets nor Apostles; but if they would know what kind of calling
Caluins and Luther his was, we answer; It was ordinary: for Luther by the
public authority of the University at Witenberg, was created Doctor of
Divinity, and so was he called to teach by an ordinary vocation. Yea, but the
University at Witenberg, it was Papisticall? Answer; True, it was so at that
time, yet it called Luther to the sincere preaching of the Gospel. For the
Papists themselves say not, that when Luther was called by them to teach, that
he was called to teach heresies, but to teach the Truth. Therefore when
afterward he taught the truth, he taught it, being ordinarily called
thereunto, although he taught it not according to the Popes mind and his
Bishops. Yea, but he taught errou^s of Papistrie before? I answer: that that
fault of Luther made not his vocation void; the same we say of Zwinglius,
Calvin, and others, which were created by Bishops; where notwithstanding it
must be considered, that unto that ordinary calling, there was somewhat
extraordinary adioined, to wit, in that God set forth, and adorned those first
Ministers of the dostrine of the Gospel with a singular virtue to discover the
terrible abominations of Popery, for the rest of our Ministers, which have,
and yet do teach in the Reformed Church: they were called ordinarily by them
who have authority, and as yet to this day are so called

Now I much desire to hear of the proprieties of the Church, and first tell me
what kinds be the proprieties of the Church of?

They be of two kinds, some of them do notify and point out unto us where
the Church is, other are proprieties.

How many demonstratiue proprieties of the Church be there, or how many be the
true marks of the Church?

There be only two; first, the purity of doctrine and sacraments Secondly,
obedience and sanctity of conversation answerable to the word of God, which is
proved out of the tenth of John: My sheep hear my voice. Mat 28. Go, and teach
ye all nations, baptising the^. Ioh. 5.4. Ye are my friends, etc. Ioh. 13.32.
By this shall all men know, that ye are my disciples, etc. The Papists say,
these are not the notes of the true Church: Object.
for, say they, all heretic^s can challenge to themselves thus much, S. Th. p.
393.
that they have the pure word of God, and the lawful use of the Sacraments.
Solu.
Therefore I answer; that that which is but by an accedent, does not take away
that which is per se. Now it is but by accedent, that the heretics take this
usurpation on themselves: for what is there more excellent in the Church then
the pure Word of God, and the lawful use of the Sacraments? But in setting
down the marks of the Church, they do not agree among themselves. See the
396 page of my Syst. of Divinity. Yet generally they say, that these are those
marks, 1. Antiquity. Object.
Whereto I answer; that if they brag of antiquity simply, Solut.
the Devil also is a most ancient Serpent, neither is he in that regard any
whit the better; Id est verius quod prius, id prius quod ab initio, id ab
initio quod ab Apostolis. Tertul.
therefore we ought to seek after antiquity of true doctrine, which we say
and affirm to be in our Church, in that, namely, her Note and Mark is the
pure Word of God, then which nothing is more ancient. But your Church (do they
object) began but with Luther some 80 years ago, therefore it is not the true
Church? I answer: that it is an untruth that our Church did but begin then. For
our Church begun presently in Paradise, and was also in the time of the
Prophets. The second mark they make a continual succession, Object.

Pietatis successio proprie successio est aestimanda. Greg Naz. Non habent
haereditatem Petri, qui si them Petri non habent. Ambros.


or a perpetuity of doctrine in the Church, and so condemning our Church, as
in which there has been no such continual succession, they insult over us
saying; Where were your Churches before Luther those 600 years, wherein you
say, the world was obscured by the darkness of Popery? Solut.
Whereto we answer, that the Church is sometime more clearly manifest, sometime
it is more obscurely apparent; if therefore by succession they understand the
state of the Church always alike flourishing, then we say, that it is false
that such a succession is a propriety and mark of the true Church: for the
visible state of the Church consists in religious worship, Ecclesia est quae
aliquando obscuratur and tanquam obnubilatur multitudine scandalorum, aliquando
tribulationum and tentationum fluctibus operitur atque turvatur. Cum Arriani
etc. August
and in doctrine, wherein the Church is not always like unto it self, having
her obscurings, and as it were eclipses, such as the Sun and Moon have; and
sometimes it is wrapped about with errors, so that it cannot show its head by
any visible estate, or ministry, whereunto the Scripture bears manifest
testimony, 2. Chro. chap. 28. where it is plain, that the estate of the Church
was altogether obscured, insomuch that Elias thought with himself, that he
alone was left alive of all the members of the Church, being privy to none
beside himself, that worshipped God purely; yet even then the Lord said unto
him, S. Th. p 389.
I have reserved unto my self seven thousand, which have not bowed their knees
before Baal. So in the time of Christ his living upon the earth, the state of
the Church was a most corrupt state, so that beside Christ and his Apostles,
there were very few members of the true Church; yea, and before Christ's birth a
little, Marie, Joseph, Zachary, and Elizabeth, and a few more, which lay so
secret, that there was no show of them to any man, made up the true Church.
Such like unto these was that estate of the Church those 600 years under the
Papacy, of which time there was express prediction before, Revel. 12. that
the time, to wit, should come, that the Church should be obscure, as it were
hid in the wilderness. But therefore can any conclude, that there was no
Church? No surely, no more then it does follow; This man is hid, therefore he
is not a man. There were in that most thick darkness of Popery, and under
the Kingdom of that Antichrist of Rome, S. Th. p. 408.
true members of the Church, although by reason of that cruel tyranny of the
Pope they lay hid, neither was there so few of them as the Papists feign, which
at that very time under Popery had the pure doctrine and the Sacraments, but
there were very many of them, even whole Countries that were not defiled by
the corrupt Doctrine of the Papists, as the Albingenses, and the Valdenses, and
they of Picardie, who propagated the holy Truth in Bohemia, and Polonia, in
spite of all the Popes resistance. As also a hundred years before Luther,
there were the Hussites, Brethren of Bohemia, who maintained the true Doctrine
of the Gospel, Etsi Papatus non sit ecclesia vo^uit tamen Deu^ in Papatu
seruare ecclesiam. Theod. Beza.
as those times would give them leave. Yea, and further in all and every of
those years, there were by Gods working, continually raised up Witnesses and
Teachers, who openly, and before all, showed their detestation of the Pope, and
Popish errors, which Witnesses of the Truth, even in the time of Papacy, they
are all gathered together in a Book most worthy the perusing, which we ought
always to oppose to the Papists, which has for its Title, Catalogus testium
veritatis: that is; A Catologue of the Witnesses of the Truth. The third Note
the Papists do make universality, Object.
because forsooth the Church dispersed over all the world, S. Th. p. 404.
ought to be Catholic? I answer: Solut.
That the Papists here do contradict themselves, when they say, the Church of
God must be Catholic, and yet the Romish Church must be that Church of God;
which is all one, as if I should say; the Church must be the universal
Dantiscan Church, or the universal Cracouian Church, or a particular universal
Church; for to be the Romish Church, and to be a particular one, is all one.
Again, we answer, that we do not deny, that the Church ought to be
Catholic, in that sense wherein the word is used in the Creed, as afterward it
shall be made plain. And we say, that our Church has always been, and now also
is Catholic, because that after the Apostles had gathered the Church out of
all Nations, there did always from time to time remain some relics of the
true Church in all Nations, although those relics were hid and obscured, as
that book Catalogus testium veritatis, which we have a little before cited,
does testify, that in the very time of Popery, there was always in Greece,
Italy, Spain. Germany, Bohemia, Polonia, some found that opposed and resisted
the Pope. But whereas the Jesuits object unto us, that in America, and in the
East Indies, there are no Protestant Preachers of the Gospel as yet, but all
Papists, and especially Jesuits laboring the conversion of the people? I
answer them: first, that the Pharisees also did run about both by sea and
land, to draw men unto their faith, and yet for all that, their religion was
not true. Secondly, I say, that the Papists have slain more in the Indies then
they have converted, as you may see by a place, which I have cited in my
politiques l. 1. c. 4. that in a very short time a hundred forty thousand men
were murdered by them. Thirdly, I am sure the Devil also goes a compassing the
whole world, and seduceth many, yet is he for that never a whit the better.
Fourthly, I auerre, that our Ministers also have taught the true Gospel in
America: inasmuch as Calum sent thither two Ministers of the Church from
Geneua, the one whereof was Ioannes Lerius, who committed that story to
writing. And at this day there are Orthodoxe Ministers in the East Indies*
which do publicly preach the true Doctrine of the Gospel, carried over
thither by the Merchants of the Low Countries And doubtless toward the end of
this world, the true Religion shall be in America; as God now is preparing the
way for it by the English and Low-Countrie Merchants; that that of Christ may
be fulfilled, Matthew. 23. The Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole
World, that it may be a witness to all Nations. For GOD in all his works is
wont to effect a thing successively, and therefore first he sends unto those
nations some light of his essence and his truth, by the Papists, and afterward
will make these things shine more clearly vnvnto them by the true and
faithful Ministers of the Gospel. Object.
The fourth note the Papists say, is unity and good agreement? Solut.
I answer: Consent and unity is but so far a mark of the Church, Vt est
ecclesia Dei vna, sic est Diaboli vna Babylon Aug.
as the consent is in truth and goodness, and not in evil and falsehood: for
such an agreement in evil and falsity is among the very Devils, and what
greater agreement and consent then among robbers? so also among the Turks,
there is very great consent, so that Mahometisme is far and near by them
propagated; yet does it not hence follow, that Mahometisme is the true Church.
Secondly, I answer, that in our Church there is great consent in the truth; for
howsoever after Luthers time, there arose many Churches, the Devil being
always busy to cast his plots against the true Church, and to stir up in it
diverse hearts; yet the Orthodoxe Professors are at good agreement about the
Articles of Faith, as that excellent Book, called, the Harmony of Confessions,
does testify; wherein it is manifestly proved, that there is exceeding great
consent betwixt the Churches of France, England, Scotland, Bohemia, and those
which are in Germany near unto Rhene, and in other Provinces: for that
disagreement which is betwixt the Lutherans and the Orthodoxe Professors, does
not straightway quite dissolve the unity which is betwixt the true church.
Thirdly, I deny that there is so great agreement in the Romish Church, as they
boast of, for it can be easily shown, that the popish Writers agree not in
any one Article among themselves, as it does appear out of Bellarmine, who
ordinarily disputed against other Papists, and alleges their oppositions, and
contradictions to themselves: this may further appear by Ioh. Pappius and
Matthias. John his book of the Sects and Dissentions, and contradictions among
Popish Doctors, printed at Basil, 1565; whereunto the Papists have not as yet
answered. Andr. Chrastouius likewise has written a book he calls Bellum
Iesuiticum, The good agreement the Jesuits have among themselves, who neither
is as yet confuted. That same book of Chrastouius was printed at Basil in
quarto 1593, and it contains 205 Jesuitical contradictions.

Which is that bare, or secondary propriety of the Church?

To the Church of the new Testament, this propriety does also agree that it is
Catholic and that first in respect of places, S. Th. p. 404.
not because it possesses many kingdoms, but because it is scattred over the
whole world, and not tied to any certain place, to any determinate country, or
city. Secondly, in respect of men, because it does consist of men of all sorts,
gathered out of the condition of all men of al nations, Act. 10. Thirdly, in
respect of times, because it shall continue all times, even unto the end of the
world, as it is said, Mat. 28. I will be with you even until the end of the
world. Fourthly, in respect of unity, because the Catholic Church is at all
times but one, to wit, in unity of doctrine, and consent in that doctrine. And
thus much we have spoken of the proprieties of the Church. Now if we shall
examine and try the Popish Church by these proprieties, it will appear to be
no pure Church, but be very corrupt, even as a rotten apple is an apple
corrupted, and no otherwise, then a man that is infected with the plague, is a
man, but no sound man. And that the Popish Church is not the pure Church, I
will prove it by two manifest reasons: the first, an idolatrous Church is not
the true and pure Church, but such a one is the Popish Church, Ergo. The
proposition is evident, because God does abhor nothing more then idolatry;
therefore he says, Fly from idols; and, No Idolater shall be saved. The
assumption I confirm thus: That Church which gives that honor, which David
gives unto God the Creator, in the very same words unto the creature, to wit,
the Virgin Marie, that same Church is idolatrous. But the Church of Rome does
so go now, that the Church of Rome does attribute that honor which is due
unto God, unto the Virgin Marie: I prove it by a most evident testimony out of
that same Psalter of Marie the Virgin, which was compiled by Bonauentura, who
lived 250 years ago, and canonized of the Pope of Rome, so that he is
accounted among the Saints, and the title of a Seraphicall Doctor, which is
more then Angelical, given unto him. This same Psalter was by the permission
of the higher powers printed in Latin at Brixia, and Bononia in Italy eight
years since, being before printed at Ingolstadium in the Dutch tongue some 20
years ago: in the Preface whereunto it is expressly said, that it was
compiled, the holy Ghost inditing and dictating it. And further, that very
Psalter is in special use in the Romish Church, but especially is it current
among the Monks of Saint Bennets Order, which are called Cistercians. Now in
this Psalter, all those things which David attributes to the high and most
mighty God, Ye have this Psalter in Bonauentures works printed in seven Tomes
at Rome 1588 vol. 6. page 502 in Latin, in English ye have diverse passages of
it, and amongst the rest, these in Foxes Martyrology, printed 1583. fol. 1600.
Missale Roman. edit. Salmanticae A.D. 1588. feria 6. in parasceue p. 223.
are by them put upon the Virgin Marie, as Psalm. 51. Have mercy upon me, O
Lady, and cleanse me from all mine offenses. But that of all other is most
blasphemous, which they apply unto her out of the Psa. 109. according to that
distinction, The Lord said unto my Lady, sit thou mother mine at my right hand;
where Mary is made the mother of God the Father, as though the Father had bin
incarnat, and made man, that I may not say further, that to be set on the right
hand of God, is to have a like power, and equal glory with God himself.
Again, that the Romish Church is an idolatrous assembly, I prove it out of the
Romish Mass book, where in the Service appointed for Good Friday, it is said,
that the Priest so soon as he has put off his shoes, and then approaches to
adore the Cross, shall kneel three times, before he kiss the Cross, and
then afterward the Ministers of the Altar, they must also kneel, and three
times adore the Cross. II. Arg. That Church which approves manifest crimes,
is not the pure Church: but the Church of Rome is such. Ergo. The Proposition
is herein manifest, for that the Papists themselves do yield sanctity and
holiness of manners to be a note of the Church. The assumption I confirm, for
that the Pope does dispense for Incest, Sodomy, and other most grievous crimes.
See the Taxes, Fines, or Nundinations of the Court of Rome described at large
in Musculus his Common Places. 2. It is confirmed out of Costers Enchiridion,
where you shall find it written, Coster. Enchirid. c. 5. propos. 9.
that a Priest committing fornication, or keeping a concubine in his house,
does not so grievously sin, as he that does marry. This does Gretzer allow
of in his History of the Jesuitical order: page 115. Gritzer Ingo^flad. A.D.
1594.
Most truly wrote our Coster, that a Priest should not so grievously offend, if
he should commit Fornication, then if he should marry. And he adds; Yea,
it is truly spoken, that a Priest does less sin in committing Adultery, then
in marrying a Wife. Bellar. 2. lib. de Monach. cap. 30. It cannot be truly said
of a Nun that has vowed continence, that it is better to be married, then to
burn, for both in her is evil, to be married, and to burn; yea, worse it is
to be married, then to burn, whatsoever our adversaries say to the contrary,
that it is written, 1. Cor. 7. It is better to marry, then to burn. Here that
is worthy marking, which Sleidan sets down in his first book, that a certain
Italian Bishop, Casa by name, has written a whole book in the praise of
filthy Sodomy: where we may note for a conclusion, that although al those
things be granted to the Papists, which they most gloriously dispute about the
Church, yet they can gain nothing hereby, because they ought to make it plain
first unto us, that the Popedom is the true Church; which in that they have
not as yet proved, nor shall ever be able to prove it, they do but delude
themselves with a vain title of the Church. And whereas they say, that it is
absurd, before the point of the Church be discussed, to take in hand to
dispute of any of the Articles of faith; that also can little avail them,
because we do dispute, and judge of doctrine and faith by the word of God,
and it may so be disputed, although that point of the Church be not before
handled: S. Th. p. 390.
for the Word of God is before the Church, and above the Church, neither has
the Church any authority to wrest the Scripture, as we have formerly proved in
the common place of Scripture. But here I would have noted the exceeding fraud
of the Popish Writers, that when they have made a great stir about the
Church, and stood long upon it, at length they conclude, the Church to be a
Council, consisting of the Pope, the Cardinals, and Bishops; and so exclude
all other, which are neither Cardinals nor Bishops, from the Church; at least
removing them so far, that they shall not make up the Church, properly so
called, and principally, that hereby they might the more establish the insolent
pride of their Spirituality, against the manifest Word of God.

You have made plain the Doctrine of Redemption unto me, now it follows,
that you instruct me in the matter of Justification of man before God; wherefore
show me I pray you what is Justification?

S. Th. p. 413.
It is the absoluing of sinful man from his sins; or it is a forgiving of
sins by the mere grace and favor of God for the merits of Christ imputed
and applied unto us by faith.

What are to be considered about Justification?

Four things: 1. the principal cause: 2. the isntrumental cause: 3. the
effect and fruit: and lastly, the necessary adiunct.

What is the principal cause of Justification before God?

The principal cause is either primarie, or secondary: the prime cause, is the
grace and mercy of God, the other cause is the merit of Christ, or the death
and passion of Christ made ours, imputed unto us, or appropriated unto us, so
truly, that the Passion of Christ should besteede us as much, as if we our
selves had hanged on the Cross, and had died for our own sins* Hereof we
have manifest testimonies of the Scripture, Ipse peccatum and nos iustitia* nec
nostra sed Dei, nec in nobis sed in ipso, sicut ipse peccatum non su^um s^d
nostrum, nec in ^e sed in nobis. Sic ergo sumus iustitia Dei in ipso, vt ille
est peccatum in nobis, nempe imputatione. Aug. S. Th. p. 420.
Romans 5. verse. 8. As by one man many were made sinners, etc. Romans 4. verse. 5,
6. Blessed is that man, unto whom God imputes righteousness, without the
works of the Law. 2. Cor. 5. verse. 8. He made him which knew not sin, to be
sin for us that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Gal.
3.15. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, whilst he was made a
curse for us. Philip. 3. verse. 8. That I may be found not having my own
righteousness, but that which is by the faith of Christ. Now there is no
opposition in this we say, that a sinner is justified by the mere grace of
God, and yet by the merit of Christ, because it was brought about by the mere
mercy and grace of God, that Christ performed that meritorious work for us:
for Christ was in no wise bound unto us, to die for us, but he out of his
mere grace and mercy did undergo death for us.

What is the isntrumental cause of Justification?

Only faith in Christ, insomuch as by faith, even as by a hand and instrument
we lay hold on, and apply unto us the merit and satisfaction which Christ has
performed for us.

What is faith?

S. Th p. 427.
Faith is not only a bare knowledge of the History of Christ, but it is also a
sure confidence of the heart, whereby we set down in our selves for certainty,
(...)
and be persuaded that our sins are forgiven us of God for the death and
passion of Christ. Note here two maine errors of Popery, whereof the first is,
that faith is only a certain Historical knowledge, and no true and sure
confidence of the heart: whereunto the Scripture it self directly speaks,
Romans 8.20. where faith is called a sure trust and persuasion. See my Gymnasium
logicum, wherein you have this in that Theme Fides, somewhat opened. The
second error is that we come by the remission of sins, not by faith alone,
but also by the merit of good works; contrary unto those sayings in the
Scripture, Ephesians 2.8. By the grace of God you are saved through faith, and not
of your selves. Romans 4. Abraham believed, and that was imputed unto him for
righteousness. Again, Unto him not that works, but that belieueth in him,
which justifies the wicked, his faith is counted for righteousness. Luke 8
Mark. 6. says Christ, only believe: Si credis, fidei cur alia infer^? quasi
iustificare non sufficiat sola. Chrysostom.
which is all one, as if he had said; By faith alone thou shall obtain
everlasting life. So then although these words be not manifestly extant, By
faith alone we are justified, yet the sense is manifestly put down, and other
words thereunto equivalent are contained in the Scripture: for whereas the
Apostle says, Romans 3.28. We conclude, that a man is justified by faith without
the works of the Law. Certainly it is all one, as if he said, We conclude
that a man is justified only by faith; for a man must needs be justified either
by faith, or by works; a third way none can be able to show, Paul plainly
says to the Galath. Gal. 3.15. Non opus est lege, quando impius per solam
fidem iustificatur. Ambros. Ephesians. 2. Tit. 3.5.
We know that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith
of Jesus Christ. Not By those righteous deeds which we have done, but by his
own mercy he has saved us through the Lauer of regeneration, and renewing of
the holy Spirit. Therefore it remains that we say, that faith alone does
justify a man. And that no man is justified by works, and so consequently,
that our works do not merit for us forgiveness of sins, I prove it by
evident testimonies of holy Writ, I. Tit. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye saved
through faith, Quantaelibet fuisse virtutis antiquos praedices iustos, non eos
saluos fecit nisi fides. Aug.
and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, lest any
should boast. Secondly, Philip. 3.9. Romans 3.24. II. We are justified before we
do any works, as S. Paul expressly witnesses of Abraham, that before he had
done any good work, he was justified before God. Romans 4.2. where he says; Non
praecedunt iustificandum sed sequuntur iustificatum. Aug.
If Abraham had been justified by works, he had wherein to boast, but not with
God. To him that works, the wages is not given upon favor, but debt: but he
that works not, but belieueth only in him, who justifies the wicked, his
faith is imputed unto him for righteousness. III. Arg. is taken from the
propriety of our works. Our works are debts, therefore by them can we deserve
nothing. Antec. is confirmed by Luke 17. Nihil es per te, Deum inuoca. tua
peccata sunt, merita Dei sunt, supplicium tibi debetur, and cum praemium ad
venerit, sua dona coronabit non merita tua. Aug.

V^^ etiam laudabili hominum vitae, si remota misericordia, eam discutias. Aug.


When you have done all that you can do etc. 2. Good works are not ours, but
Gods; now by that which is another, and not our own, we can merit nothing.
Antecedent is proved, Phil 2.13. God it is who works good in you, and
perfects it, Ephesians. 2.10 We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works which he has prepared, that we should walk in them. Thirdly, our
good works are not perfect, therefore we can merit nothing by them; for three
things there be required of him that will merit; first, that he has that, by
which he will merit of his own: secondly, that it be no debt: thirdly, that
that be perfect: Ipsa nostra iustitia, quamuis vera sit, talis tamen est, vt
potius peccatorum remissione constet quam virtutum perfectione. Idem. Nostra
siqua est humilis iustitia, recta forsan, sed non pura; nisi forte meliores nos
esse credimus quam patres nostros, qui non minus veraciter quam humiliter
dicebant. Omnes iustitiae nostre sunt tanquam pannus mulieris menstruatae. Bern.
which three conditions our good works have not, as it is said, Esaias 6. All
our righteousness is like unto a menstruous cloth. And Philip. 3.8. Paul
calls his works dung.

I understand what justifying faith is, now tell me the cause thereof whereby
it is begotten in us?

The principal cause whereby saving faith is engendered, is the holy Spirit,
the isntrumental cause or means is either ordinary, or extraordinary.

What is the ordinary meaner, whereby the holy Spirit works faith in us?

S. Th. p. 436.
It is twofold, namely, the Word of God, and the Sacraments.

The Word of God you have already touched, now tell me what is a Sacrament?

S. Th. p. 439.
It is a holy sign instituted of God, whereby God makes the belieuers sure of
his favor, the forgiveness of their sins, and other benefits likewise by
Christ his passion and death to be bestowed upon them.

Of what sorts are the Sacraments?

Of two sorts, Sacraments of the old and new Testament.

How many Sacraments were there in the old Testament?

Two, S. Th. p. 448.
to wit, Circumcision, and the Paschall Lamb.

How many Sacraments be there in the new Testament?

Two only, S. Th. p. 451.
Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord?

What is Baptism?

It is a Sacrament of the new Testament, whereby sprinkling of the water in the
name of Father, Son, and holy Ghost being made, we are initiated and grafted
into the church, and whereby there is sealed unto the faithful forgiveness of
sins by the blood of Christ, and regeneration unto life eternal. See more in
my Syst. of Divine. page 451. and in the Comment on Vrsins Catechism, page 429.
according to the last Edition.

What is the Lords Supper?

This we shall handle afterward in the opening of our particular knowledge,
wherewith we must furnish our selves, in regard that the knowledge hereof
comes nearest unto our lawful and seemly preparing of our selves to the Lords
Supper. Here only would be noted that e^rour of the Papists, who have made
seven Sacraments of the new Testament, to wit, Baptism, Confirmation,
Penance, the Eucharist, Extreme Unction, Orders and Matrimony. But that
number of Sacraments is neither vpholden by any testimony of holy Writ,
neither is it propped by the authority of any of the ancient Fathers, but it
is a new devise, hatched not above 200 years ago in the time of Lombard, the
Master of the Sentences. Besides, every Sacrament should have a sign and thing
signified; but Penance, Orders, Matrimony have no signs at all. Further yet,
every Sacrament has annexed promise of grace, and appertains to all belieuers
in the Church: and to conclude, it is more then manifest, that all Sacraments
ought to be instituted by Christ; every of which marks of a Sacrament cannot
be auerred, and truly attributed unto those five Sacraments the Papists feign,
no, to none, save Baptism and the Lords Supper.

What is the extraordinary means of Faith?

Miracles, S. Th. p. 465.
which are extraordinary signs, whereby God after a wonderful manner,
Miracula necessaria erant vt crederet mundus, post quam vero tam mundus
credidit, qui miraculum quaerit magnum est ipse prodigium. Aug.
wrought and confirmed faith in the time of the Primitive Church And here must
be observed a double error of the Papists; First, in that they are of opinion,
that now there is need of miracles; whereas this is only the use of Miracles,
namely, to confirm doctrine at the beginning, and first setting a broach of
it; and therefore must cease after the doctrine be sufficiently confirmed.
Second error is, in that they think, that miracles is a mark of the true
Church, Quasi hoc no^ scriptum esset venturos qui maximas virtutes ede^t ad
corrumpendem veritatem. Tertullian.
when as even very Hypocrites oftentimes have done miracles; yea, and can do
them, Mark 13. v. 22. Luke 21. where it is plainly told us, that toward the
end of the World, there shall arise false Prophets, which shall work miracles
But 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 9. is a notable place against the Papists that do so brag
of their miracles. The coming of Antichrist is in the power of Satan, with all
power and signs, and lying wonders; whence it may appear, that before the end
of the World to do many miracles, is a mark of Antichrist; and the Apostle
calls those miracles lying wonders; time and long experience testifies so much:
for in the Monasteries, how many sleights and inventions do the Monks find
out to deceive the common people and make them believe that they work miracles.

I have heard the causes of Justification, tell me also what is the fruit of
Justification?

It is that peace of conscience, S. Th. p. 41^.
by which a man is made sure of the grace and favor of God, and of eternal
life, which must especially be noted against that detestable error of the
Papists; who in their Trent Council, Session 6. boldly affirm, that a man
cannot hereof be certain in this life, but ought always to doubt of it; and
they add, that there can be no greater sin before God, then that a
miserable sinner, should assure himself of Gods favor; yea, and further they
add, that whosoever shall hold that opinion, ought to be accursed. To this
their abominable error, we oppose most plain places of holy writ, Romans 8.
verse. 15. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage, but that spirit of
adoption, by which we cry Abba, Father; which spirit bears witness to our
spirit, that we are the sons of God: This is a very horrible impiety that we
will not receive the testimony of the Spirit, but doubt of the truth, and
certainty thereof* 1. John 5. He that belieueth in the Son of God has the
Testimony in himself. And surely if God would have had us to have doubted,
Hoc dixit Deus, hoc promisit, si parum est, hoc iurauit. Aug.
he would never have sworn, that he would be compassionate unto us. But now
he has sworn thus much very evidently, Ezech. 18. As I live (says the
Lord), that is, as truly as I am, and live, I will not the death of a sinner,
but that he live. Also, John 5. Verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoever
belieueth in the Son, has eternal life? And, Woe be to thee then (says
Saint Austine) if thou believe not God, when he swears to thee. Object.
But the Papists object; They that are weak, Tria considero, in quibus tota
spes me a consistit, Charitate adoptionis, Veritatem promissionis, Potestatem
redditionis, etc. Bern.
are subject to falling, and they cannot be sure of the grace of God. Answ. Who
so are weak they may easily fall, I limit the proposition thus, unless there
be one that is mightier, who vpholdeth them. Now God it is that holds us up,
and that helps our infirmities. And therefore certain we may be of the
forgiveness of sins, and of the grace of God, not by our own nature indeed,
which is weak but by the help, and assistance of the holy Ghost, making us
strong according to those sayings of holy Writ, Psalm. 37. verse. 24. Though the
righteous fall, he shall not be cast off, because the Lord puts under his
hand. John 10.38. I give unto my sheep eternal life, neither shall they
perish for ever, neither shall any one take them out of my hand, my Father
which has given me them, is greater then all; that is, he can supply their
wants readily, and uphold them mightily. Romans 8.38. I am persuaded, that
neither life nor death, neither things present, nor things to come, shall be
able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ. Object.
Again, they object that place, 1. Cor. 10. He that stands, let him take
heed that he fall not. Solut.
I answer: That the Apostle there speaks of hypocrites, which do persuade
themselves falsely that they stand; and further he speaks also of the
weakness of men, touching which we cannot be enough admonished, to the end
that we may think salvation not to lie in our own strength, but in the grace
of GOD only. They urge also that place, Object.
Eccles. 9. A man knows not whether he is worthy love or hatred. Whereto I
answer, First, Solut.
that this is a fallacy not being limmited, we ought then thus to limet it; A
man knows not of himself, but he may know it, God revealing it unto him,
and the holy Spirit witnessing it. Secondly, a man knows not by those humane
causes, and by the event of Fortune, and the chances and changes of these
outward things. And therein the Text it self is a mouth to expound it self,
for there it is said, that a man by external changes, such as are riches,
poverty, health, sickness, honor, contempt, that a man cannot by these
things nor any other external estate, judge, and certainly know, whether he
be in the favor of God, or be hated by him. And therefore that there argument
is not sound, which argue thus, as many do, I am rich, Ergo. I am the son of
God: or, I am poor, Ergo. God does hate me. This judgment then whether we
be in the favor of GOD or not, we must take from Gods Word. Sithence
therefore it is certain that a faithful soul may be assured of the favor
of God, and the forgiveness of sins, and may be made partaker of the peace
of Conscience, as it said, Romans 5. verse 1. Being justified by Faith we have
peace: thence another thing does necessarily follow, to wit, That a man when
he is once received into the favor of GOD, and has obtaitained remission of
his sins, that he (I say) cannot fall away from the grace of GOD, nor loose
his Faith, nor be obnoxious unto eternal damnation For because we ought not
to doubt of the grace of GOD, therefore, neither can we fall away from the
Grace of God: for if we could fall away from it, then we might doubt of it;
but we being once received into the grace and favor of God, that we cannot
altogether loose that grace of God, the Scripture witnesses, Romans 8.1. There
is no condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus: if no condemnation, then
perpetual favor, and if no condemnation, then also no time is there wherein
they may slide from the grace of God, and fall into condemnation: for by no
condemnation, is excluded both all the kinds thereof, and all occasions of
falling thereinto. Hitherto appertains that place, which before we have
cited, Ioh. 10 My sheep, none shall take out of my hand, Ipse ergo eos facit
perseue rare in bono, qui facit bonos: qui aute^ cadunt and per^unt, in
Praedestinatorum numero non fuerunt. August.
which is all one, as if he had said, My sheep shall never be taken out of my
hand; which must be diligently noted against the Papists, who affirm, that a
man after that he is taken into the favor of God, may fall again out of his
favor, even as if he had never been in favor, but may have of a merciful
God, an vncompassionate, and irreconciliable God, even as when one falls out
of the favor of the King in stead of a gentle and kind master, he has now an
angry and cruel King But here they object that place in the 51. Psalm, Object.
where David after that horrible sin of his was committed, prays, Restore
unto me the joy of my salvation, therefore, say they, he had lost the favor of
God. I answer, S^lut.
that the Papists do not half well enough look into the text, for it is not
said, Restore unto me my spirit which I had lost; but he says, restore my joy,
my comfort again to me. Therefore that text makes against themselves; for if
David had lost that grace and spirit of God, then had he lost that his
salvation, but he speaks otherwise, he says only restore comfort unto me;
for a true belieuer, when that he falls into sins, the holy spirit for all
that remains in him, yet it does not cherish his conscience, but it grows
sad and heavy, and so cease to be glad, and merry before times he used to
be, he does therefore desire of God that he would take away this sadness and
heaviness of heart from him, and that he would restore unto him a joyful and
gladsome spirit.

I have heard as touching the fruit of Justification, what is that you told me
was necessarily conjoined and annexed thereunto?

Not (...) only, but (...).
Because the just man falls seven timeseuen in a day, therefore to Justification
there must always be adjoined Repentance.

True repentance of what parts does it consist?

Of two parts, one of them as it were contrary unto the the other; to wit,
grief, or sorrow for sins committed, and the offending or displeasing of
God, and then comfort and confidence of the forgiveness of sins, which is to
be had, by and for the merits of Christ. See the 467. page of my Syst. of
Divinity, and in the comment upon Vrsins Catechism, page 640. Here note a
double error of the Papists, whereof the first is, That unto true repentance
there is required Confession to a Priest. Quid mihi ergo est cum hominibus vt
audiant confessiones meas, quasi sanaturi sint omnes languores meos. Curiosum
genus ad cognoscendum vitam aliena^, desidiosum ad corrigendum sua^ Quid a me
quaerunt audir quisum qui nolunt a te audire qui sint. Aug
To which error we oppose our judgments: First, because such a Confession is
no where commanded of God. Secondly, because there is no one example for it of
any Saint throughout the whole book of God* no example I say, but which
teaches us to make confession of our sins only to God: So does David Psalm.
51. Against thee only have I sinned O Lord. And the Publicane Luke 18.
Standing in the Temple confessed his sins only to God, and thence went away
justified: Whereupon (says Christ.) Confess thy sins to God, for to do
this to man it is not safe for thee, for that men may either discover them or
upbraid thee with them. Non gloriabor quia iustu sum, sed gloriabor quia
redemptus sum. Gloriabor non quia vacuus peccati sum, sed quia mihi remissa
sunt peccata. Non gloriabor quia profui, neque quia profuit mihi quisquam, sed
quia pro me aduocatus apud Patrem Christus est, sed quia pro me Christ's sanguis
effusus est. Ambros.
The other Popish error is, that Repentance which they call Penance is
satisfactory, as if we by our repentance did satisfy for our sins: unto
which detestable error, those places of the holy Bible are to be opposed, by
which we have before made clear that the passion of Christ does sufficiently
satisfy for all our sins.

You have already sufficiently instructed me about Redemption: now take the
pains, I pray you, to instruct me about sanctification?

Sanctification, Regenaration, and new Obedience, or conversion unto God, are
all one in signification. And it is nothing else save the changing of our
depraved, or corrupt nature into better, and then a settled resolution to avoid
sin hereafter, and to frame our lives to some new course which may be
pleasing unto God, and beseeming our profession of Faith and Religion; S. Th.
p. 471.
which regeneration in this life certainly cannot be perfect, but only
inchoate, and always conjoined with a combating, and a reluctance against
sin, or of the flesh and the spirit, As the Apostle very largely setts it
down, Romans 7. Galat. 5. The good (says he) that I would, I do not. But in
that other life we shall perfectly be regenerated, sanctified, and reformed unto
the Image of God; yet for all this, Gods will it is our regeneration should be
begun in this life, and that good works be done by us, as our Savior
commands, Math. 5. Let your light so shine before men, etc. 2. Peter 1.16.
Labor to make your vocation and election sure by good works, that is, Labor
to give unto your selves a sure, and to others, an evident testimony, that you
have true Faith from whence do spring and arise good works; for Faith without
works is dead, and indeed is no Faith. 1 Thessalonians. 4. This is the will of God
even your Sanctification. Romans 6.12. Make your members henceforth weapons of
righteousness. And most dreadful is that speech. Heb. 13. Without holiness
none shall see God: Wherefore if it be demanded whether good works are
necessary unto Salvation. I answer, That if we take Salvation for our first
entry thereunto: namely, Remission of sins, and justification; then good
works are not necessary: because it is most necessarily required, that first
our sins, be forgiven us, before we can do any good works pleasing unto
God: good works therefore are of no force to procure remission of sins,
which we do obtain only by Faith, contrary to the Papists tenent: but if the
word be not taken for the remission of sins, but for life eternal, which
hereafter we shall be possessed of: there is need then of good works, as a
mean and way, but not as any meritorious cause of salvation; for then indeed
shall we be clothed upon, if we be not found naked: that is, in that other
life, we shall be fully renewed and conformed, if that we begin that
reformation and sanctification in this life. And this is that which the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 7.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness without which
none shall see the Lord.

How many parts are there of our Sanctification.

Two: Good works, and Prayer; For in these two stands our whole Regeneration
and conversion; namely, to do good works, and daily to call upon God by
Prayer.

What are good Works, or what things are required unto Works which are good,
or pleasing unto God?

Three things be requisite to good works: First, that they spring from a true
Faith: For Whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin. Romans 14.23. Heb. 11.6. Without
Fath it is impossible to please God, etc. Secondly, that they be commanded by
God; for what works soever are enjoined by men, and not by God, those are not
good works. Ezech. 9.19. You must walk in my Commandments, and not in the
Commandments of your Fathers. Matthew. 18.9. They worship me in vain, teaching
for doctrines men's precepts. Thirdly, that our good works be always referred
to the glory of God; and not unto vain glory and hypocrisy. 1. Cor. 11.31.
Do all unto the glory of God. Mat. 5.16. That men seeing your good works, may
glorify your Father which is in heaven. Hereby may easily be discerned, what
is to be thought of the most of the Papists works, wherewith they think that
they worship GOD, such as are their Watchings, and Pilgrimages to holy
places, and adoring of Churches with Shrines and Images: for such works are no
good works; First, because they are not done out of Faith, but out of a most
pestilent opinion of meriting and satisfying for sins. Secondly, because they
are not commanded by God, but invented and appointed by Popes and Bishops
against the express commandment of God: as that of Fasting and abstaining
from Flesh on Friday; which manner of Fasting and difference of meat is
expressly against the Word of God. Matt. 15. That which enters into the mouth
does not defile the man; but that which comes out of the mouth, that defiles
the man. 1. Tim. 4. The Apostle expressly and plainly names the Forbidding of
certain meats, and so of Flesh, among the doctrines of Devils. Colos. 2. Let
no man condemn you in meat and drink, or in respect of Holydaies. Romans 14. I
am persuaded by our Lord Jesus Christ that nothing is unclean, or common of it
self; but to him that thinks any thing to be common or profane: for the
Kingdom of God is neither meat nor drink, but righteousness, peace and joy
in the holy Ghost.

What is then the rule and square of our good works, and so consequently
whence do we know what works be commanded by God?

The Moral Law, or the Decalogue is the only square of our good works, S. Th.
p. 475.
whereby we may know, what works are acceptable unto God. This law is reduced
to two heads, to wit, the true worship of God, S. Th. p. 480.
and then the works of charity, which we perform to our neighbor. The
worship of God is set down in the former part of the Decalogue; and the love
of our neighbor, with the works of charity, is comprised in the second table.

Which is the other part of sanctification?

Invocation of Gods name.

How many ways is God inuocated, or called upon?

Two ways; S. Th. p. 487.
the first way is Petition, or begging of those things whereof we stand in
need: and the second is Thanksgiving for those which we have received: both
which kinds of Invocation is either public or private. As touching both of
them, read my Syst. of Divinity, page 487. Honorandi sunt sancti propter
imitationem, non adorandi propter religionem, and Angelos honoramus choritate
non seruitute, nec eis templa construimus No^unt enim sic se honorari a nobis,
quia nos ipsos quum boni sumus, templum summi dei esse nouerunt. Aug.
And here must be observed two maine errors of Popery: First is, touching the
Invocation of Saints: secondly, about the worshipping of Images, and adoring of
relics. As touching the former of these twain, we in opposition thereunto
maintain, that God alone is to be called upon in Prayer; that is, the devout
affection of our mind, is to be directed even unto God, and not unto Angels,
nor unto the Virgin Mary, nor unto the Apostles, nor yet unto those fourteen
Helpers, as they call them; by whose mediation and merits, the Papists do most
blasphemously say, that they are rid, and delivered from all adversities; as
are, George, Erasmus, Basil, Pantaleon, Vitus, Christopher, Dennis, In
Antoninus his time, under Paul's picture was written, Per hunc itur ad Christum:
and under Dominicks, Sed per istum sicilius. Flac. Illyric.
Dominick, Achatius, Eustachius, Gyles, Margaret, Barbara, and Catherine. Hence
is the Mass of the fourteen Helpers. But unto this their praying unto Saints,
we oppose the plain Word of God: whereby will be convinced* that we owe ^he
devout affection of our minds only unto God: Deuteronomy. 6. The Lord thy God shall
thou worship, etc. Which place Christ repeating, Matthew. 4. expounds thus: And
him only shall thou serve; producing it against Satan's* temptation. See the
like places, Exodus 20. Psalm. 50. v. 15. Psalm. 95. v. 6. Psalm. 90.9. and 10. The
Angels themselves forbid this, and refuse to be worshipped, as being
idolatrous* Judge. 13.16. where the Angel says unto Ma^oah: Martyribus no^
sacrificamus sed ^ni Deo. Aug.
If thou will make a burnt Offering, offer it up unto the Lord* and not unto
me? Revel. 19 Verse. 20. also the 22. v. 9. the Angel forbids John and
stays him from falling down before him, and worshipping of him. Whereupon he
says to him; See thou do not this, for I am thy fellow servant: that is, I am
also a creature as well as thy self. Paul, Coloss. 2. expressly condemns
worshipping of Angels. Ab alio orare non possum, quam a quo sciam me
consecuturum: quoniam and ipse est q^i solus praestat* and ego sum cui
impetrare debetur, famulus eius, qui eum solum obseru^, qui ei offero opimam
hostiam, quam mandauit orationem de ^arne pudica, de anima innocen^i, de
spiritu sancto profectam. Tertull.
And note I pray you a very plain place, Romans 10. How shall they call on him,
in whom they have not believed? Whence thus I argue: We ought not to believe
in the Saints; therefore neither ought we call, or pray to them. And the
Apostle further in his Epistle to the Galathians, Chap. 4. verse. 5. blames the
Heathen, for that they called on them, which by nature are not Gods. Whence I
also argue: Reuera Sanctum erat corpus Mariae, non tamen Deus: reuera virgo
crat Maria and honorata, sed non ad adorationem nobis data. Epiphan.
The saints are not by nature Gods: Ergo, they are not to be called upon: or if
they be called upon, then is committed most filthy idolatry. Yea, but the
Saints may mediate for us, therefore they are to be called upon. Whereto we
answer, denying the Antecedent, that the Saints can mediate for us with God:
First, because we have one only Mediator, to wit, Christ Jesus, as it is
written; There is one Mediator betwixt God and man, even the man Christ Jesus.
1. Tim. 2. v. 5. like places hereunto, see Ioh. 19.11.13. Romans 3.35. Ibi sunt
spiritus defunctorum, vbi non vident quaecunque aguntur aut eueniunt in ista
vita hominum. Aug.
Romans 8.34. Heb. 2.17 Heb. 7.25. Heb 9 12. Secondly, the Saints cannot be
mediators, for that they do not know the gronings, and sighs of our hearts,
and understand not our private troubles and afflictions: for these be the
conditions of an advocate or mediator; first, that our mediator be nominated
and commended unto us by plain and evident testimonies: secondly that that
same intercessour be perfectly righteous and holy: thirdly, that he also know
the gronings and afflictions of him, for whom he means to mediate: none of al
which agrees unto the saints; for the Saints are neither appointed unto us by
God to be our intercessours, neither have we any command in holy Scripture,
that we are to make the Saints mediators for us, or to call on them. Nay,
rather quite contrary precepts hereunto, which we have before cited. Again we
find not through the whole volume of Gods book, any one example of any Saint,
that has prayed unto a Saint, and entreated him to play the mediator for him.
Neither does the second condition agree to them, for that they are not
altogether pure before God, that they may mediate for others: but they
themselves rather have need of a mediator: as it is said, Job. 15. Yea, in his
Saints he found uncleanness. Thirdly, the Saints are ignorant of our
afflictions and affections, how can they therefore interceede for us, if they
wo^ not what we ask? for God alone challenges this privilege to himself,
to be the searcher of the heart, and the discouerer of the thoughts and
groanings of men. Yea, but (say the Papists) the Saints as the friends of God
have all our groanings and prayers disclosed unto them in the glass of the
Trinity. Note Si quando homines exorare opo^tet, ianitorib. prius occurrere
oportet etc. In Deo nihil tale, ad quem confugies? ad Abrahamum? non te audiet.
Ille s^lus precandus and exorandus qui and scriptam in te da^^ ^ationem delere
potes^ and incendium res^inguere. Chrys^^^.
Whereto I answer: first, that if the Saints come to the knowledge of our
groanings by God, what need is there, that first we should call on the Saints,
and to what end is it to have any such mediators with God, sithence he to whom
they mediate, knows better what is wanting to us, then the mediators
themselves? For it should seem to be a preposterous course to use any
intercessour unto a King, if the King knew the party, for whom the mediator
would interceed, Solent tamen pudor^m passi misera vti excusatione per i^^os
posse in ad Deum, sicut per comites peruenitur ad regem; age nunquid tam demens
etc. v. Amb. in 1. cap. epist. ad Romans
better then the mediator himself. And how absurd should it be, if the
intercessour should say: Tell me, I pray you, O my King, what this fellow asks,
for whom I am to mediate? Secondly, I say, that the Scripture has broken that
prospectiue glass al to shiuers. Esaias 62. Hear from heaven thine holy
dwelling place: for thou art our Father; Abraham hears us not, and Israel is
ignorant of us: but thou art our Father, thy name is from everlasting. Where it
is plainly affirmed, that Abraham and Israel, which long ago were dead, and
whose souls rested with God in the Heavens, did not in any glass behold and
know the gronings and afflictions of the Church militant on earth; and indeed
that the Saints departed are not privy to our affairs done upon the earth,
nor know any thing in specialtie, what happens among the living, that place
in the 2. of Kings, Chap. 22. witnesses, where God says unto Josiah, a most
religious and holy King: I will gather thee unto thy Fathers, that thine eyes
may not see all the evils: which I will bring upon this place, Esaias 57. The
just and the righteous are taken away from the sight of the evil, that in his
years he may not behold the calamities, which are to be sent upon the land for
wretched impiety. Eccl. 9. The dead know nothing any more, to wit, of those
things, which are done upon the earth. Hence therefore is it rightly inferred,
that the Saints cannot be mediators And indeed we have no need of them to be
our intercessours: first, because God knows our afflictions better then they,
yea, better then the Angels: secondly, because God is more merciful then any
Saint, and more desirous that we should live, Ideo ad reg^m per tribunos aut
comites itur, quia homo vtique est rex, and nesci^, quib. debeat rempub.
credere. Ad Deum au^^m, quem vtique nihil latet, etc. ^. Amb. vbi supra in 1.
cap. ad Romans
then any Saint can be. Now that we do use the intercession of some Noble man,
or great man unto Kings (which is their most plausible argument), it is for the
great defect and weakness that is in man: for that Princes are not acquainted
with all men's grieuances: secondly, because Princes are more affected unto one
man, then unto another; but no such respect of persons is there with God, as it
is said, Acts 10. The Papists bring us in a distinction betwixt (...) service,
and (...) adoration: and say that the one, to wit, Service is due to Saints,
the other, that is, adoration is due to God. Against which distinction, you may
read a most clear disputation in the exposition of Vrsins Catechism, page
739. where it is proved by holy Scripture, that (...) and (...) both the one
and the other agrees unto God, and neither of them both unto Saints. Only this
one thing I will not let pass, that the Papists themselves break down their
own distinction, which I prove by this reason: All those things which David in
the Psalms gives unto God, he gives them all by the way of adoration: but all
those very things which David gives unto God, are attributed unto the Virgin
Marie in Bonauentures Psalter: Ergo. The other error of the Papists is, about
the worshipping of Images, and so also of that worship, which they make unto
the Relics of the Saints. And first of all the Papists hold, that those
prayers which are made in, or at certain set Chapels and Churches, and before
the Images of the Saints, are of greater efficacy, and greater worth, then
those which are in other places powered forth before God: quite against the holy
Word of God, Ioh. 4. The time shall come, when the true worshippers shall
neither be at Jerusalem, nor in this mountain, but in spirit and truth worship
the Father. Matthew. 6. Christ bids, go into our chamber, and there the doors
being shut, to power out our prayers. 1. Tim. 2. The Apostle wills men to
pray in every place, lifting up pure hands. Now against relics and images,
let that place be well observed, Esaias 24. My glory will I not give unto
another, nor mine honor unto the graven images. But we (say the Papists) do
not worship images, and we know, that it is said in the second commandment;
Thou shall not how down thy self unto them, etc. To this what shall we
answer, but that they say one thing, and do another: for we have already
proved, that they fall down, and worship the cross; Behold the sign of the
Cross, come and let us worship it. Again, it is impossible, that ones whole
affection should be bent and settled on an image, and yet that he should not
direct some devotion unto the Image; Placuit picturas in ecclesia esse non
debere: i. e. quod colitur, aut adoratur, in parietib. pinga^ur. Concil-Elibert.
as one of the Ancients has well said: It cannot possible be that the
affection should be withdrawn from that, where on our whole sense is fixed,
and fastened. Therefore Lactunirus says, that there can be no true worship
performed, where it is done with respect unto images. Thirdly, we say, that
both these are equally forbidden of God, namely, the worshipping of the image
it self, (...). Atha. Quis ergo iste honor Dei est. per lapideas and ligneas
formas discurrere, and inanes atque examines figuras tanquam numina venerari,
and hominem, in quo vere imago Dei est, spernere. Clem. Romans
and the worshipping of God at, or before an image. For this you have a plain
place, Leuit. 26. 1. You shall make you none idols, nor graven image, neither
rear you up any pillar, neither shall you set up any stone or image within
your land to worship before it: for I am Jehovah, the Lord your God. But images
(say they) are Laymens Bibles, and therefore they may be borne with, as
certain historical documents for the good of lay people: whereto I answer:
first, that it is no little blasphemy to affirm, that images are Bibles, that
is, the Word of God: for the authority of Gods Word, and of the Bible, is the
greatest that may be, and it is unspeakable: But who dare say, that the
authority of images is as divine and eternal, as that of God himself.
Secondly, Images cannot be Lay-peoples Bibles, because the Bible contains the
true doctrine of God: but Images are deceitful and lying Teachers, teaching
lies, as it is manifestly written by Ier. 10. and by Habb. 2.18, 19. Further,
we ought not to be wiser then God, who has instituted, that his Church should
be taught, not by dumb Pictures and Images, but by the lively preaching of his
Word, and the lawful use of the Sacraments. And these things be spoken also,
as touching the adoration of Relics, for the worshipping of them is confuted
by those very same places of Scripture, by which the worshipping of Images has
been overthrown.

You have led me by the hand through all Divinity, and so have helped me to
some general knowledge, whereby I may insome sort be prepared unto the holy
Supper of our Lord: now it remains that you furnish me with some particular
knowledge about the same Supper of the Lord, whereunto I desire to prepare
myself?

S. Th. p. 449.
You say well indeed, and I will do it very willingly, so be that, before all,
you note that the word Sacrament is no where extant in holy Scripture, but
there are diverse words aequiual^nt unto it; as Romans 4. the word Sign or
Seal; where Paul calls Circumcision the seal of the righteousness of
Faith. A Sacrament then is a holy sign or seal annexed to the word of God, as
unto tables and letters, wherein God promises unto us his favor, and the
forgiveness of sins by the death and suffering of our mediator* Jesus
Christ. Now signs be of three sorts: Some there be, which are only
Significatiue, (...)
and noting out somewhat, as the Meare-stone signifies the fields, which it
parts, to be diverse: (...).
Some are Memoratiue, representing us the memory of somewhat, and exciting our
affection and will, thankefully to think on it: as when one friend gives unto
another some excellent book, or a piece of Gold to be a sign unto him of his
friendly remembrance. Lastly, some Signs are Confirmatiue, (...).
whereby some benefit or other promised unto us by any man, is made certain
unto us. As the seal hanging at the Kings Letters Patents does not only
signify and put the party in remembrance of some benefit, but it does
especially certify him; as namely, by which he, to whom the letters are
granted, is certainly assured to obtain that benefit or good thing, which is
promised him in the Letters. A Sacrament then is a Seal or Sign assuring us
the forgiveness of sins, promised in the Letter Pattens of the Gospel. In
which short and plain description, the whole nature of Sacraments does
consist; neither is it here any whit needful that the godly heart should be
troubled or molested with any subtilties either of Papists, (...).
or of Vbiquitaries.

I conceive what a Sacrament in general is, I would have you to show me what
the Supper of the Lord is?

It is a Sacrament of the New Testament, S. Th. p. 454.
or, it is a holy sign ordained by Christ in the new Testament, that by bread
broken and eaten, we may be admonished and certified, that the body of Christ
was broken upon the Cross, and given for us: and by wine powered out, and
drunk, we may be remembered and assured, that the blood of Christ was shed
for us, for the remission of sins.

How many things are we to consider in the Lords Supper?

S. Th. p. 440.
Three things, as in every other relation; first, the two terms of the
relation, the Relate, and the Correlate: secondly, the foundation and ground of
this relation: thirdly, the end or final cause of this relation.

What is the Relate in the Lords Supper, and what is it called?

It is called the sign, or the thing, which puts us in mind, and gives us
assurance of some other matter.

How many kind of signs be there in the Lords Supper?

The Relatum or sign in the Lords Supper is twofold, Substantial and
Accidental.

Which is the Substantial?

It is true bread, Sub vtraque specie sumitur ipse totus Christus, sed si in
altera tantum sumeretur, ad alterius tantum, id est, animae vel corporis, non
viriusque pariter tuitionem valere significaretur. Ambros. Aut integra
Sacramenta percipiaut, aut ab integris arceantur, quia diuisio vnius eiusdemque
mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio fieri non potest. Gelasius.
and true wine.

Which is the Accidental?

It is the breaking of the bread, and the taking of it; likewise the pouring
out of the wine, and the taking of it.

What is the Correlate in the Lords Supper?

It is called the thing signified, or that thing whereof we are put in mind,
and assured in the Lords Supper. The ancient Church called the Relatum, the
earthly matter, as is bread and wine, for both of them spring from the earth;
and the thing signified, it called the heavenly matter; whereupon it rightly
and religiously taught that the Supper of the Lord did consist in two things, a
terrene or earthly, and a celestial or heavenly matter; and therefore that it
behooued those which came unto the Lords Supper, to think that there they
should receive two things, to wit, an earthly thing after an earthly fashion;
that is, bread and wine with the mouth of the body, and an heavenly thing after
an heavenly manner, that is, the Body and Blood of Christ by a true faith.

What be the things signified in the Lords Supper?

The thing signified is of two sorts, substantial, or accidental.

What is the substantial?

Even whole Christ our Mediator, according to both natures, divine and humane,
but especially according to his body and blood, inasmuch as in his body, as the
subject of his pasio^ he suffered for our sins, and by his blood shed he
purged our sins. And this it is which Christ says, This is my body which is
given for you; that is, in the Supper of the Lord you are pu^ in remembrance,
and assured of my body, as it hung upon the cross, and also of my blood which
was she^ likewise for you upon the cross.

What is the accidental?

Even all those benefits, which do accrue unto us by the passion and death of
Christ, as the forgiveness of sins, regeneration, sanctification, and in fine
life everlasting; as Christ says, My blood which is shed for you for the
remission of sins.

I have heard of both the terms in the Lords Supper to wit, the Relate and the
Correlate: now I would be instructed about the foundation and ground of that
holy admonition and certification, as you called it?

The fundame^tall or efficient cause of the Lords upper is, S. Th. p. 446.
partly in respect of the thing it self, or the Sacrament, partly in respect
of us which do use the sacrament.

What is the foundation, in respect of the Sacrament it self?

It is twofold, the institution of Christ, and the agreement or correspondencie
betwixt the sign, and the thing signified.

What are to be considered in the institution of Christ?

Two things: First, the History of the institution of the LORDS Supper, set
down by the Evangelists: secondly, the especial words of the institution,
which are, This Bread is my Body which is given for you: This Cup is the new
Testament in my Blood.

How are those words to be understood?

S. Th. p. 457. Dominus non dubitauit dicere hoc est corpus meum, cum signum da
ret corporis sui. Aug. Hoc est corpus meum, id est, hoc est figura corporis
mei. Tert. Panis dicitur corpus suo modo, cum sit sacramentum; non autem
dicitur rei veritate sed mysterio significante. August.
They are to be construed according to the nature of signs or sacraments,
which are not transubstantiations of things, but as we have a little before
noted, significations and seals of things. These words therefore are not
substantially to be understood, as if the Bread were the substance of the Body
of Christ, for by that reason bread should have been crucified for us, bread
should have been given to die for us; and so the Cup likewise should have been
shed for us upon the Cross, the Cup should have issued out of Christ's side.
Neither are they to be understood consubstantially, as if the body of Christ
were included in the bread, and the blood of Christ included in the wine; for
Christ says not, in this bread is my body, or in this wine is contained my
blood, neither would our Savior teach his Disciples, Vt quid paras dentes and
ventrem? creed and manducasti. Idem. Antequam sanctificetur panis, panem
nominamus; diuina autem illa sanctificante gra liberatus est ab appellatione
panis, dignus autem habitus est dominici corporis appellatione, etsi natura
panis in eo romansit. Chrysostom. (...). Macar Seruator noster nomina co^mutauit,
and corpori quidem id, quod erat symboli ac signi, nomen imposuit; symbolo
autem, quod erat corporis, causa mutationis manifesta est iis, qui etc.
Theodoret.
where his body or his blood was, for they saw that well enough, in that Christ
was sitting with them at the Table. But those words are to be understood in a
commemoratiue, or certificatiue signification: as if Christ had said, the bread
does for a certainty signify unto you, and gives you notice of my body, which
is delivered unto death for you; and the wine does most certainly notify and
assure you of my blood which is shed for you, for the remission of sins.
Christ's speech then is altogether the like, as if when a Prince has granted to
any one a fair Manor, and he give withal unto the Grant his letters with his
Broad seal, and delivering the man these his letters with the seal, he
should say, Lo, there is your Manor. Now he gives not the land substantially
into his hands; and by conseque^t it will follow, that that speech of the Prince
must not be understood substantially, as if those letters and the sealewere the
very substance of the demain or because the demaine were enclosed in the seal,
but it is a significatiue and certificatiue kind of speaking, which must be
thus understood and interpreted these letters of min^, and this seal do import
and assure thee of the certain having and possessing of that Manor, farm, or
demain. Wherefore we conclude, that the body and blood of Christ according to
the substance thereof, is neither in the bread, nor in the place where the
Supper of the Lord is administered; but in truth in heaven, as it is usually
said, he ascended into the heavens, from whence he shall only come at the last
Judgment; but that the bread and wine do give us notice and assurance, that
the very body which now is in heaven, was given for us on the cross, and that
the blood of Christ was shed for us: which must be observed against the Papists
and Vbiquitaries, who seek after the body and blood of Christ in that very
place where is the bread and wine.

What is the other foundation, in respect of the Sacrament?

It is the agreement or meet analogy betwixt the sign, Si sacramenta aliquam
similitudinem earum rerum quarum sunt sacramenta non haberent ne sacramenta
quidem essent. Aug.
and the thing signified, or it is that fi^nes, whereby the bread may signify
and certain us of C. body given for us, and the wine may notify and assure us
of the blood of C. shed for us. Wherein consists that fitnes which true bread
has to signify the body of Christ?

It consists in 3 things: 1 that like as the bread is broken, so the body of C.
was broken and torn upon the cross for us: as Paul says This bread it is the
communion of the body of Christ. 2 That like as bread has the force of
nourishing, so the body of Christ given for us unto death, has power to
refresh our consciences fo^lorne, and almost spent and pined away, by reason of
sin. 3. Like as bread does not only nourish, but it does also strengthen our
body; so the body of Christ in like manner delivered unto death for us, has
power continually to cherish and sustain our drooping miserable consciences.

Wherein consists the correspondencie that Wine has unto the Blood of Christ?

In three things also; first, even as the wine is poured out into the cup, and
poured also out of the cup: so the blood of Christ sprung out of his body, and
was shed upon the cross. Secondly, even as wine has the power of reviving and
quickening, or of heating and moystening of our body, and of increasing vital
and animal spirits; so the blood of Christ, or the merit of the blood of
Christ has the power of quickening our benumbed and dry consciences, by reason
of sin. Thirdly, even as wine makes glad the heart of man, and has great
virtue in it to cheer up the mind: so the merit of Christ, or the blood of
Christ works an unspeakable joy in our souls: whereof David speaks, Psalm.
51. Restore unto me my joy again.

I have heard what the foundation of the Lords Supper is in respect of the
Sacrament it self, or the things themselves; now tell me what is their ground
and foundation which do use it, or the foundation in respect of us?

It is true Faith, whereby we do so look upon these signs, as they
signify, remember, and assure us of the body of Christ, Siquis manducauerit ex
ipso non mori etur in eternum. Hoc pertinet ad virtutem Sacramenti non ad
visibile Sacramentum. Qui mandu cat intus, non ^oris; qui manduca^ cord, non
qui premit dente. Aug. Quasi non possit tangi quum iam ascenderit, at vtique
poterit, sed affectu, non manu; voto, non oculo; side, non sensibus. Be^.
of the blood of Christ, and so consequently of his whole merit: and so
likewise of certain remission following upon that merit. For in the Supper of
the Lord remission of Sins is not granted unto us, neither has the Bread or
the Wine any power to purify from sins, as the Papists peruresly do imagine.
But our Faith is confirmed and strengthened by these signs in the remission of
sins, which was granted and given unto us, before that we approached the
Supper.

Wherein consists that Faith, which we must bring to the Lords Suppur, thereby
to be confirmed and strengthened.

It consists in two things: First in a sure trust and confidence, whereby we
believe for certainty, that Christ's body was given and his blood shed for
us: that is, for that person that comes to be partaker of the Lords Supper.
Secondly, it consists in application, whereby we appropriate unto our selves
Christ's passion, steadfastly believing that we as Christ's members are so made
one with Christ our head, that as he suffered for our sins, even so the
pardon for all those sins for his passion sake we should as certainly be
persuaded of, as if we our selves had been crucified, and there have given our
own proper bodies, and shed our own hearts blood.

I have heard as concerning the foundation and ground of the Lords Supper; it
remains that I learn somewhat of the end or the final cause, for which the
Lords Supper was instituted, and for which it becomes me to communicate at
the Lords Table?

The end or final cause is first in respect of Christ, then in respect of our
selves In respect of Christ, Reliquit nobis Christus (...) i. e. Monumenta suae
salutaris passionis, quae proposuimus iuxta ^iu* mandata. Basil.
the end is the commemoration of that his most bitter Passion, which he
endured for us both in his soul, and in his body. A commemoration (I say) that
is a gratulatorie remembrance, to the end that for that so great a benefit,
and unutterable love toward us, we should in the public assembly and
congregation, in the very face of the Church, yield together with that
remembrance most hearty thanks. As Christ says, Do this in remembrance of
me, in an Eucharisticall or thankful wise. Whereupon this Sacrament is also
called the Eucharist, for this principal use of the Lords Supper. In respect
of our selves the use of the Lords Supper is either Primary or Secondarie.

What is the Primarie use of it in respect of our selves?

It is two ^old: First, the confirming and establishing of our faith as
touching the forgiveness of our sins, for Christ's body given unto death for
us, and for his blood shed upon the Cross likewise for us. The other use is
the nourishing, strengthening, reviving, and chearing of our consciences, which
were by the burden of sin oppressed, dried up, and disconsolate.

Which is the secondary use arising from the former?

It is threefold: first, the consecration of our selves, that even as Christ
offered himself once upon the Altar of the Cross for us; so we should in this
public action of the Church offer up our selves, and our whole life, even all
that are ours unto God and his son. Secondly, the public confession of our
faith, to wit, that by these external symboles and tokens, as by a military
mark and signet we may testify, unto what company we belong, and to what
religion we adioyne our selves. Thirdly, the obligation of our selves, that
we should also by this public action in the sight of the Church, bind our
selves to love our neighbor, and to do the works of charity, especially to
them that are partakers with us in the same belief and religion. And hereupon
it was, that the Ancients called this Supper of the Lord (...), that is, a
loue-feast; and that they were always wont, which came unto the Supper, to
give some alms unto the poor, that so they might testi^ie, how that by the
use of the Lords Supper, they were obliged to perform works of love and
charity toward their neighbors. And this is the true doctrine of the Lords
Supper, drawn out of the only Word of God, and taken from the nature of
Sacraments. S. Th. p. 459.
But contrariwise, the Mass is an horrible monster, an idol composed by
Antichrist, and consisting of diverse horrible blasphemies; whereby the whole
dignity and excellency of the Lords Supper is defaced, and quite taken away,
namely, while they say, that Christ in the institution of the holy Supper,
before that ever he gave his body and blood unto his disciples, did under the
bread and wine offer up himself truly, though after an unbloody manner, for
the honor of his Father, and that he did appoint then his disciples, and all
Ministers afterward to do the like. As the Mass Priests indeed after a few
words uttered, like Magical Spells and Charms, and after a few histrionicall
gestures and ceremonies do bear us in hand that they do. And further they
blush not to affirm, that this Sacrament is a sacrifice, a most true
propitiatory sacrifice for the sins, punishments, and all wants not only of
the living, Si Deus dimisit peccata per vnam hostiam nec dum iam opus est
secunda. Chrysostom. Saluatoris hostia semel oblata absoluit omnia fidaque in omne
te^pus produrat. Aaroni successores dati fuerunt; Dominus autem sine
transitione and successire sacerdotium obtinit in aeternum. Athanas.
but of the dead too. And so most blasphemously tread, as it were, under foot
the Passion of Christ, which as formerly we have proved, is the alone and only
propitiation for our sins, which was only to be made and performed by
Christ, and not often to be reiterated, as are the express words of the
Apostle against that idol of the Mass worthy to be observed. Heb. 10.12.
Christ having made that one only offering for sins for ever sits at the
right hand of God: And verse. 14. By that one oblation has he consecrated for
ever those which are justified. You may read more abuses and abominations of
the Popish Mass very plainly propounded in the explication of Vrsins
Catechism, at the eightieth question.

You have fitted me for the Lords Supper by knowledge, both general and
particular: now it remains, that you prepare me also by true devotion. What
things then, I pray you, do appertain unto that true Devotion?

Two things: first, that you bethink with your self, how often you are to use
the Lords Supper* secondly, that you consider well, how you may use it worthily.

How often must I use the Lords Supper?

Non est audaciae saepius accedere ad Dominicam mensam sed indigne accedere,
etia^sisemel tanid fiat in tota vita. Chrysostom Scio Romae hanc esse consuetudine^,
vt fideels semper Christi corpus accipiant Hiero. Accipe quo^tidie, quod
quotidie tibi prosit: sic vine vt merearis quotidi accipere. Qui non meretur
quotidie accipere, non mer^tur post annum accipere. Ambr.
Very often; where truly there can be no certain number of times prescribed
unto any man: because every one out of his godly understanding, is to set down
that with himself. But in the Primitive Church, the Christians surely did use
the Lords Supper, as often as ever they came together to hear the Word of God;
as may appear out of the 3. of the Acts, where the Christians are said to have
met to hear the word of God, and to the breaking of Bread, that is, the Supper
of the Lord. But it would be very convenient four times in the year, or twice
at the least every year to approach the Lords Table; and that for these
reasons. First, Because frequent and solemn thanksgiving is by us to be
performed for that so excellent benefit which was affoorded unto us by Christ's
passion. Secondly, because Christ in express terms commands. How often soever
you shall do it in remembrance of me; where the word how often soever,
enforces an often usage: that is, So often, as often as you shall come; so
that it presupposes, that we are often to come. 3. And thus far are we
indebted to our faith, that we often strengthen it, so much we owe unto our
consciences, Qui vu^nus habet, medicinam quaerit; vulnus habemus dum sub
pecca^o sumus, medicina est Sacramentum. Bern.
that we may often hereby cherish, quicken and cheer them up: for by this good
help and means, we stir our selves up to lead a new life, whilst that we
consecrate and offer up our selves to God by the use of the Lords Supper. Thus
much we owe likewise to the Chapter that we may hereby make open profession, and
give a public testimony, that we be fellows and members of it. Lastly, thus
much we are bound to perform for the avoiding of corporal punishments: for 1
Cor. 11.30. it is said, For this cause many are weak and sick among you, and
many sleep, etc. where the Apostle teaches, that God punished many in the Chapter
of Corinth with diseases and death, because they did not rightly use the L.
Supper. Now if God did lay his punishing hand on the^ by diseases and death for
the wrong use, how much more will he punish for the rare use of the L. Supper.

Teach me now further how I may worthily use the Lords Supper, and so how my
devotion must be qualified?

Qui sibi nullius maliest conscius, hu^c oportet singulis diebus accedere: qui
vero peccatis occupatus est neque poenitet, ei nec in festis accedere tutum
est. Nec. n. semel in anno accedere liberat nos a peccatis, si indigne
accesserimus: quin hoc ipsum auget damnatione^, quod cum semel tantum
accedamus, ne tum quidem pu^e accedimus. Chrysostom.
That indeed is it, which above all other is most necessary, because of that
most sharp sentence pronounced by the Apostle, 1. Cor. 11. v. 7. Whosoever
therefore eats this bread or drinks this Cup unworthily, he is guilty of
the body and blood of Christ; that is, he is held guilty of the violating of
this sacred sign and seal, whereby the body and blood of the Lord is
represented, and withal assured unto us. Whereupon he further adds; Let
every man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of this Bread and
drink of this Cup; for who so eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own damnation, not discerning the Lords body, that is, not using
with reverence those most holy signs and pledges, whereby we are assured of
the Lords body, and so consequently not discerning, or putting any difference
between common bread, which we eat every day at our tables, and this bread,
which by reason of the use and office of certifying and assuring is made holy;
and so likewise of the Wine.

Of what sorts is that devotion, I pray you tell me?

It must be of two sorts: either Antecedent, going before the receiving, or
Concomitant, and joined to the receiving of those holy mysteries.

How is the Antecedent devotion called?

It is called, The examining of a man's self, according to that we erstwhile
urged out of the Apostle; Let every man therefore examine himself, etc.

What is the true trying of a man's self, and of what parts does it consist?

The examination, or proouing of a man's self, is nothing else but the sifting
of ones conscience, what a man thinks of himself; and this examination is
threefold.

Which is the first examination?

The first examination is as touching our misery, which again is either
general, namely, when we consider with our selves the misery of whole mankind;
which did betide us by the fall of our first Parents, which does consist in sin,
and the punishment of sin; or special, when our thoughts are occupied about our
own peculiar misery; which examination stands in 2 things: first, in the
acknowledging of those sins, which thou every day have committed, either by
omitting good things, which should have been done, or committing evil, which
should have been left undone, and that both in respect of Good works, which
we ought to do, as also in respect of prayers, and daily inuocating on Gods
Name, which has been either altogether neglected, or but coldly performed,
together with a due and diligent consideration of those punishments both
corporal and eternal, which we might for those our sins fear would justly
fall upon us. Secondly, In a serious grief and repenting sorrow for those our
sins. It were, me thinks, very meet to make such an examination of our
selves on the third day (as it were) for examples sake, on Friday before the
celebration of the Lords Supper; and on that day to be read both the first
part of sacred Theology, and also the 20. Chapt. of Exodus the 28. of Deuteronomy. and
thereunto to be added that prayer of David out of the 51. and 38. Psalms.

Which is the second examination?

The second is concerning our faith, Apprehensio. Applicatio. Si credis peccata
tua non posse del^ri, nisi ab eo ^ui soli peccasti and in quem peccatum non
cadit, been facis: sed add adhuc vt credas quia per ipsum tibi peccata
dimittuntur. Hoc enim est testimonium Spiritus Sa^cti, dimissa sunt Tibi
peccata. Bern.
namely, whereby we recover our selves out of our former sorrowful
meditation, fixing our faith and belief on Christ, thinking on his person, his
office, and especially his passion and death, and applying that his passion and
death to our selves, every one of us assuring our selves, that for that his
passion all our sins are forgiven. Where it will also be expedient to read
over the whole doctrine of the remedies against our miseries, even unto the
doctrine of Justification, and thereunto to adioyne the 26. and 27. chapters of
Matthew the 17, 18, 19. of John; the 53 of Esaias, and likewise the 8. of the
Epistle unto the Romans.

Which is the third examination?

The third must be occupied about our sanctification, or new life; which
consideration is absolved by a double resolution, and steady purpose of heart:
the first, of doing those good works hereafter, which are to be performed
either toward GOD, or toward our Neighbor. The second, of daily calling on
God by prayer, where it shall not be impertinent to recall the whole doctrine of
sanctification, and to read the fith and sixth Chapters of Matthew; the 12,
and the following Chapters of the Epistle to the Romans; the 12 of the Epistle
to the Hebrews; the latter Chapters of the Epistle to the Galath. the Epistle
to the Col. to the Ephesians. both the Epist. of John and of James. And this may be
done upon the sabbath day.

Thus far I have heard of that devotion which ought to go before the use of
the Lords Supper: now tell me also somewhat of that devotion, which I ought to
use at the receiving of the holy Communion?

That devotion is either external, namely, that we do soberly and reverently
approach unto this holy action, in regard of our outward gesture, or internal
and principal, which consists in these four points, First, that thou render
unto Christ most devout and hearty thanks for that his passion and death, which
for thy sake he suffered and sustained. Secondly, that thou taking the sacred
bread do make sure thy faith and appropriate unto thy self the merit of
Christ's passion, and so of the breaking of his body upon the Cross, cherishing
and strengthening thy conscience with that assurance; and then taking the wine,
that thou bethink with thy self, how that the blood of Christ was shed for
thy sins, and so withal reviving and filling with joy thy drooping
conscience. Thirdly, this devotion must be also in consideration of thine own
self, that thou do hereafter dedicate and consecrate thy self wholly both in
soul and in body, and all thy works unto God. Fou^thlie, that thou do also
remember the Church, in whose sight thou use the Lords Supper, firmly
resolving with thy self to abide always in that Church, and to do the works
of charity unto the brethren. For the better effecting of these 4 points of
this internal devotion, every one may use some pithy form of prayers about
the very act of receiving. And so have we finished the doctrine of true
preparation unto the Lords Supper, and together with it have laid down the
sum and epitome of all Divinity. Now what remains, but that we earnestly
entreat of God, that sithence his Word is a Lantern unto our feet, and a
light to our paths, that he would illuminate and open our hearts, that we may
understand the undoubted truth of his holy word, and be piously transformed
unto those things which we understand, so that we may not in any thing
displease his heavenly Majesty, and that for Christ Jesus sake our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
A BRIEF Direction how to examine our selves before we go to the Lords Table,
how to behave our selves there, and how to try our selves afterward.

By T. V.

Printed by Aug. Math.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Religious Lady, the Countess of Devonshire, health
and peace in Christ Jesus.
Right Honorable,
ALL that is mine own in this little book, namely, these short directions how
to examine our selves, before we go to the Lords Table, how to behave our
selves there, and how to try our selves afterward, gathered for their sakes,
which love the most concise method and way of Preparation, I make bold to
consecrate unto your name, and that in a double respect: First, in regard of
your Honors great goodwill and bounty to my Uncle, my Lords and your Ladyships
servant, of whom (setting aside the affection of a Kinsman) I dare say thus
much without flattery, that he is one that truly fears God, and is faithful
in all his business. Secondly, in regard of your Honors great affection to the
Gospel, and exceeding good respect toward the Ministry thereof, which does
make your name renowned over the whole Land now, and will make your memory
blessed hereafter. The Lord keep you and all yours, and remember you in mercy
according to all the good you have done to the house of God, and the Officers
thereof. I betake your Honor to Gods holy protection, and humbly take my leave.

Your Honors to be commanded in the Lord Jesus, T. V.

A brief direction, how to examine our selves before we go to the Lords
Table, how to behave our selves there, and how to try our selves afterward.
BEfore we must dare to come to the holy Communion, we must diligently and
carefully sift and examine our selves.

First, the subject of our examination is our selves, and not others, as the
Apostle says; Let every man examine himself, and so let him eat, etc. 1.
Cor. 11.28.

Secondly, the matter wherein our examination must chiefly consist
(presupposing our general and particular knowledge) is of three sorts. The
first is, as touching our repentance: the second concerns our Faith. The
third is about our Charity.

Touching our Repentance thus. We cannot choose but know (our consciences
witnessing unto us) how grievously we do daily offend against Gods holy
statutes, both in thought, word, and deed: wherefore we seeing our hideous
sins and misdeeds; for which, if God in his justice would deal with us, 1.
Contrition for, 2, 3. Confession and Detestation of 4. Resolution to forsake
sin.
we might expect nothing but destruction and damnation. Let us enter into the
closets of our own hearts, and see whether we find our selves inwardly sorry
for all our misdoings: Secondly, confessing all our sins unto the Lord: and
thirdly, growing to an inward hatred and loathing of sin, both in our selves
and others: fourthly, fully purposing to conform our selves according to Gods
holy Laws and Commandments. Which sorrow of heart for bypast sin, and good
purpose of mind to prevent sin hereafter if we shall find in us* then may
we persuade our selves of true and unfeigned Repentance.

Touching our Faith in this manner. Sin was that by which man became miserable,
and because he brake the commandments of God, and lightly regarded the behests
of the most High, therefore was he not only turned out of his most blissful
and happy estate; but stood guilty of eternal death and condemnation both of
body and soul for sin. When man, sinful man, stood in this doleful case,
destitute of all help and succor either from himself, or other creature
living in the world, it pleased God of his own love and free mercy graciously
to behold wretched man, and to send him a Savior, even Jesus Christ the
righteous, promising remission of sins, liberty from the snare of the devil;
and in stead of condemnation, everlasting life to all those, which with a true
faith and steadfast belief lay hold on Christ's merits, applying the promises of
God in Christ to their own souls in particular. This, when we shall have
diligently weighed in our minds, then let us turn to our hearts, and see
whether we Apprehensiue persuasion.
feel our consciences assured by the Spirit of God, that the punishment of our
sin is fully in Christ discharged; and that Particular application.
whatsoever ^ee has done for man, appertains not only unto others, but even
to us also. And thus, if we shall perceive our hearts affected, we may
persuade our selves of a true and lively faith.

Touching Charity on this wise. As charity is the fruit and effect of a true
and lively faith (so that it is impossible we should have a sound faith, but
we must be fruitful in good works and deeds of charity; for as the light
can in no wise be separated from the sun, nor heat from the fire; so
neither can these two inseparable virtues be disioyned, Ego non credam veram
fidem esse intra, nisi bona operavideam extra. Ioh. Huss.
but if faith be the root, good works and charitable deeds will be the fruit,
insomuch that hereby may we more then probably judge of the pureness and
sincerity of our faith:) So likewise many be those fruits and effects of true
charity and Christian love; which if by our search we shall find in us, we
may certainly assure our hearts of the possesion of that rich gemme, and
precious virtue Charity. They be set down by Gods own Spirit: the Penman is
the Apostle Paul 1. Cor. 13.4* 5, Reconciliation, which we must affect and
seek after, Mat. 5 23. Ephesians. 4.32
etc. Love suffers long: is bountiful; love enuieth not; love does not boast
it self; it is not pussed up; it disdaineth not; it seeks not her own
things; it is not provoked to anger; Entire affection, which we must harbor
toward our neighbor, Romans 12.17, 20.
it thinks not evil, etc. This place when we have read distinctly and
discreetly, let us enter into a serious cogitation, and examine our selves,
first, whether we be reconciled unto such as we have offended, and heartily
forgive such as have offended us: Cui semel ignoueris cura vt ille sentiat bona
fide id esse actum et si qua in re illum iuuar^ potes experiatur te amicum.
Lud. Viues.
and secondly, be read^e withal to do them all the good we can: And this
affection, if we shall find in our selves upon our survey and examination, we
may persuade our selves of true and sound Charity.

III. The form of our Scrutinie is after a judicial manner of proceeding.

First we must examine our selves, Examination as justices.
and take a catalogue of our sins, the devil himself has in store against
us, by which we have offended Gods justice.

Enditement, as Clerks.
Secondly, then according to the ten words of the Law, we may frame ten several
actions and inditements; as for instance (because I would gladly speak to the
capacity of my weakest Brethren) muster up before thee all thy Atheistical
conceits, or at least so many as thou can remember, and then indite thy self
for the first commandment; look and see whether thou have not set up an image
or an idol in thine heart, and so indite thy self for the second
commandment. Call to mind thirdly, whether thou have not by swearing and
blaspheming taken Gods Name in vain; remember fourthly, whether thou have not
often profaned Gods holy Sabbath: fithly, whether thou have not been
disobedient and refractory to Parents and Governors: sixthly, whether thou
have not harbored in thy breast murdering malice and envy: seventhly,
whether thou have not set open thine eyes to uncleanness and vanity:
eightthly, whether thou have not injured thy neighbor in his goods. ninthly,
whether thou have not wronged him in his good name, nay, whether tenthly, thou
have not given the reins loose to all concupiscence; and so for the breach of
every commandment, frame a several indictment, and plead guilty. This may
thou do by thy self, yet if thou art weak, and desire help, thou shall
find the indictment drawn at large for thee in The Practice of Piety, Page
565, 566. and seqq. of the eighth Edition. For further help see Master
Theologus schooling Asunetus in Dents Plain Man's Pathway to Heaven, Page 322.
and seqq. of the fifteenth Impression.

Thirdly, Verdict of condemnation, as Iurers.
then add thereto so many several sentences of condemnation and so
forthwith, fourthly, pronounce a perpetual confusion due to us, Sentence, as
Judges.
with a shame for that which is past, with a grief for that which is present,
and with a fear of that may come hereafter. (And when we can thus bring our
selves into the worst taking that can be, Tunc optime habet, says Bucer, qui
pessime habet. For having thus pronounced this shame of face dew unto us, God
will cease from his sentence of anger; nay, he will say, This man has
condemned himself, I need not to condemn: seeing he has straightly examined
himself, I remit all, I will examine him no further, he is free, let him
come, and so let him eat of my Bread, and drink of my Cup.) Then being
constrained to conclude we are unworthy; we must in the next place go out of
our selves, and faint after the righteousness can make us worthy, M. Greeneham.
which cannot be effected but by Faith, which comes by the blessing of the
Gospel: whereby we (being conscious of our own unworthiness) do seek
wisdom out of our selves, and sue for obedience in the Son of God Christ
Jesus our Lord.

These are those duties which we must think upon, before we come to the Lords
holy Table: now for our behavior there, observe thus much.

The duties which are required of us in the celebration of the holy Communion
are of two kinds, See Master Brinsteys True Watch 1. part, page 183 of the
eig^t Edition.
either General, or common to this, and other times, or Peculiar and proper to
this service.

I. The general and common duties are to join with the Congregation in
confessing of sins, in singing of Psalms and Hymns, in hearing with
reverence and devotion Gods holy Word preached, in praying, and the like.

Secondly, touching the proper duties more peculiarly belonging to this
service, and our behavior in the receiving of those holy mysteries, as the
Church has retained it, there is a commandment given, that we lift up our
hearts to the Lord. Corpus Christi dicimus esse cadauer, nosque oporter^ esse
aquilas, vt intelligagamus in altum subuolandum esse, si velimus ad Christi
corpus accedere* haec enim aquilarum mensa est non graculorum. Chrysostom.
And we must indeed be as Eagles soaring up to heaven, by having careful
meditations on heavenly and invisible things, arising from the due
consideration of the things themselves offered unto us, that is, the outward
elements of bread and wine; as also from a regardfull contemplation of every
action in that holy ministration.

First therefore when we see the bread and wine set before us on the Lords
Table, we know that they are appointed for the nourishing and strengthening of
our bodies, but here we must not stay. Our hearts hereby are to be led to
meditate on the body and blood of Christ; which is appointed to be our souls
nourishment to feed us to eternal life; for so he professes of himself, Ioh.
6.55. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.

Secondly, when we see the breaking of the bread, and pouring out of the wine*
our hearts are to be led to the meditation on the cruel death of the Cross,
which Christ suffered for the remission of our sins, when his most blessed
body was broken, and his most precious blood shed for the redemption of mankind.

Again, when we see that the bread which is broken and given unto us by the
Minister, is all of the same loaf, or at the least of the same grain; and the
wine whereof we drink, that it comes from the same grapes, and received by
us in the same cup, we are hereby to be led to the meditation on that
communion, which we have with all Gods Saints, which are partakers of those holy
mysteries, and to the consideration of that union, which we have, or should
have among our selves, as members of one mystical body, whereof C. Jesus is
the head.

Lastly, when we eat that holied bread, and drink that consecrated wine, we
know, that they turn to nutriment for our bodies, and so consequently that
they grow into one substance: hereby are we led to a further meditation on our
incorporation into Christ Jesus, to be made one with him, and he with us: so
that hereby we may assure our hearts of our reconciliation with God, and of all
the benefits of Christ's death and passion: for seeing Christ is become ours,
how shall not God with Christ give us all things?

And these are those holy Meditations whereupon we must bestow the best of our
thoughts in that so sacred a business: now as touching the trial of our
souls, after the receiving of those holy mysteries, note but this.

After that the Lord has fed our souls so graciously at his own table, we
must take heed we prove not unthankful to the loving kindness of the Lord.
And therefore it is required of us, and that not for a day or a week, or some
small time, but even for ever continually to retain a thankful remembrance of
those blessings, whereof we are made partakers in Christ Jesus; as also never
to let slip out of our mind that interchangeable promise, which has past
betwixt God and us. The Lord promising to be our God, and we promising
henceforth to become Gods faithful and obedient servants, to serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the remainder of our life. Whence the
ordinary custom in these days may worthily be reprehended: for* howsoever
men for a day, or a short space seem to have a Christian sense of that holy
duty, whereto they have bound themselves by their promise; yet notwithstanding
within a while they return with the dog to the vomit, and with the Sow, to
wallowing in the mire. Wherefore to good purpose it is, that we propose to our
hearts a trial of our selves, even after our receiving: for though a man by
the sight of the soil may gather by some guess, what fruit will come up; yet
when he sees the fruit, the matter is far more sure. And therefore because
those Accidents Antecedent, as repentance from dead works, faith in Christ,
and lou^ toward men may sometime deceive us, it is good (to put the matter out
of all doubt) to try our selves afterward, if we can hear the Word more
joyfully; if we travel for the righteousness of faith more soundly, and make
the score of our sins less then they were before And these indeed are
comfortable fruits of the truth of our holiness.

FINIS.
(...), Or Recapitulation of the chief Points handled in this Treatise.
CHristian Religion is the serving of God in Christ. The actions thereof are 3
most eminently. 1. Meditation of Gods Word, which testifies of Christ. 2.
P^ayer unto God through Christ. 3. The use of the Sacraments, instituted by
Christ. Of the two first elsewhere, here only of the third. Page 1. and seqq.
That we may use the Sacraments aright, we have need of Preparation, which in
this Book is both largely deciphered and concisely proposed. Preparation
largely deciphered consists in 2. things, Knowledge and Devotion. Our
knowledge is either general in points of Religion, or particular about a
Sacrament. Our general knowledge is either primarie and independent, or
secondarie and derived. The primary and independent consists of a double
doctrine. ^. Of God according to the Essence, which is one, and persons which
are there. Page 4. II. Of Gods Word, or the Scripture, of which see the
definition, pa. II. The division which is threefold. p. II. The properties
which are 3 I. It deriues its authority from God alone pa. 16.2. It is perfect
and sufficient to salvation. p. 20. 3. In the Articles of Faith, and matters
necessary to salvation it is easy and perspicuous. pa. 23 The secondarie and
derived knowledge consists of two parts. I. Of the End it self, Salvation,
considered in respect of the life to come, perfect; or this present life,
inchoate, p. 29. II. Of the Means to come by that End; and that's a double
knowledge, I. Of thy Misery. II. Of the Remedy for thy misery. Thy misery is
thoroughly known by the consideration of 4. things, I. That which went before
misery; the Image of God. II. The Efficient cause of thy misery; Adam^ fall.
III. The parts thereof, to wit, Sin Original and Actual, and the punishment
for sin Temporal and Eternal. IV. The Exemplary cause or glass representing
thy misery, which is the rigor of the Law. page 32. and seqq The remedy for
thy misery is twofold; Prime and Independent; which is Predestination to lise.
page 40. Or secondary and dependant divided into 3. heads: Redemption,
Justification, Sanctification. Redemption here is. I. defined. II. it is
further opened both by the Efficient cause thereof and by the object thereof.
The efficient cause of our Redemption is Christ, in him consider, I. his
Person, and so 1. the Parts thereof, the humane and divine natures: 2. the
Union of those two natures: II. his Office, of which 1. in general, as it is
called a Mediatourship: 2. in special, and so it is Prophetical, Sacerdotall,
and Regal. p. 41. and seqq. The object of Redemption is the Church, which is
largely taken page 71. strictly and properly, Of it are considered the head,
the members, the proprieties. p. 73. and seqq. So of Redemption, there follows
Justification, which you have I. defined p. 104. II. unfolded by the cause, the
effect, and the adiunct. The cause of justification is either principal, the
mercy of God, and merit of Christ: or isntrumental, Faith, which is defined,
and then further opened by the causes, which are principal, Gods Spirit:
isntrumental, and and those either ordinary, the Word and Sacraments: or
extraordinary, Miracles. p. 105. and seqq. The effect or fruit of
justification, is the peace of conscience, by which a man is assured of the
favor of God, and his own salvation. p. 115. The adiunct of justification is
Repentance, of which see p. 122. So of justification, there remains
Sanctification, or Regeneration, which is I. defined, and then further opened
by the parts thereof, 2. Goodvvorks and Prayer or invocation. p. 124. Thus
far goes our general knowledge, our particular knowledge I said, was
touching a Sacrament, and that is either common to both sacraments, where you
have the name and nature of a Sacrament; p. 142. or appropriate to the Supper*
which you have, I. defined p. 143. and then further opened by three
considerable things, the matter, the form, the end. The matter is both
elementarie and spiritual, which are called the terms of the Relation (for a
Sacrament is a Relation). p. 144. The form or ground, or foundation of the
Relation is, 1. in respect of the Sacrament, I. the institution of Christ, II.
the analogy betwixt the sign, and the thing signified: 2. in respect of us it
is Faith. p. 147. and seqq. The end or final cause of this Relation is
twofold, namely, in respect, I. of Christ, and it is a grateful commemoration
of his Death and Passion. II. Of our selves, and it is either primarie, the
confirming of our faith, or secondarie, and it is threefold, I. a consecrating
of our selves to God, 2. a public acknowledgement of Christianity, 3. a
profession of our charity. p. 155. and seqq. Thus have we briefly run over the
first maine part of preparation, consisting of knowledge: the other maine part
is Devotion, which consists, I. in a frequent use of the Lords Supper, page
159. II. in worthy receiving. And this devotion is twofold, Antecedent, or
going before receiving, which is Examination: Concomitant, or joined with that
sacred act, which is the deeent gesture of our body, and the devout affection
of our soul in the time of receiving those holy mysteries. p. 163. and seqq.
Thus far have you heard Preparation largely deciphered. Preparation concisely
proposed, is wholly spent in these three short directions: I. how to examine
our selves before we come to the Lords Table: II. how to behave our selves
there: III. how to try our selves afterward; written for their sakes that
study piety, and love brevity. p. 169. and seqq.
FINIS.
A Postscript to the Readers.
GEntle Readers, I am to satisfy you anent ^vvo things you have met vvithall
in reading the foregoing Treatise, first, that the reasons and arguments now
and then are very concisely proposed, the syllogismes vvanting one of the
premises, or the conclusion, or both. And my reason of thus doing was,
because I vvrote unto men endued with Logic, at least, natural, which
having the pith of the argument, is able enough to suggest inferences. The
other thing is, that whereas there is sometimes cited Ke^ker. System of
Divinity, you would be pleased to have recourse unto that which was printed
at Geneua Ann. Dom. MDC. X^. where according to the order of pages, you shall
find the points enlarged, which are here but briefly touched.

FINIS.

