The refutation of the bishop of Winchesters derke declaration of his false
articles, once before confuted by George Joy.

Be not deceived by this bishops false books. Hear now the the other part,
and judge truly of the truth. For the verity will have the victory.

M. D. XLVI.

To the reader.
THou shall understand (good reader) that ^n the year. M. D. xivi at easter or
pash time I received this bishops book called his Declaration written agenst
me, what time, for such trouble and unquietness as I sustained in flying and
fliting from place to place, it was witsontide folowi^g ere I could peruse his
book and gather out these principals and (as thou see) refute them. And yet
then because there went forth a straighte commandment fro the emperor (by
whose procurement I know not) but well I weet, the bishop was in those partis
ambassiador not long before that no englysh books be no more pri^ted at
Anwerpe ne in any other places of his nether parts of Germany, I could not
get this my answer the^ printed without troublous time for that the popes
friends so fiercelye hunted for us and our books and resisted our labors
with so grievous nihibicions co^dempnacions, banishmentes and burninges. If this
book therefore seem to sharp tothed, consider in how sharp a time it was
written and by whose counsel and labor then most tirannously and ungodly so
many good books, holy bybles* and testamentes, yea and the innocent christen
holy members of christ were burned. Behold how mercilessely and most cruelly
and vniustelye with all speed, good men were then vexed, taken, presoned, and
condemned for heretics. No marvel then if any christen heart moved with
piety and zele to Christ to his holy word and his poor church beholdinge
this cruel persecucio^ could either co^taine tears, refrain speech or pen.
And I namely whom this bishop that year at Anwerpe diligentelie hunted for,
and in this his declaration now claundereth with heresye. untruly reports
my words, and gods holy words he violently wresteth unto his false doctrine.
In this time therefore very sorrowful also I was to see so many simple
unlearned, having no judgment to decerne his false doctrine ^ro the true,
hitherto so perellousely deceived and seduced into so many da^pnable errors by
his false books and falser preachinge. For so long as no answer was made, ne
his false doctrine confuted, his first tale so craftelye handled and painted,
might appear to many to seem trwe, and the popes false doctrine to be the
gospel, especially to such as be more ready to believe lies then the verity, and
to them which yet more favor the romish religion then christ's and so highly
yet depend of and esteem this bishops lerning, that they be addict and sworn
into it, as into any oracle out of gods mouth. Right heuey I was th^rfore
that this my answer cold not be printed so sone as it was written, that the
diligent indifferent readers saying and heringe both the parties might have
iuged which of us stands upon the trwe part, which judgment he geuethe, the
that by his spirit gives the discrecion to decerne al men's spiritis and
doctrine through Jesus Christ. Amen.

A.
Ab ista tua malicia, englyshed, for this thy malice. fol. xix, b Thautoritie
and understanding of scriptures must depend of the bishop of rome his chirch
after Wynchest. fo. xlii. b. Adam and Eu^s repentance fol. xxiii. b. Abolysh
what it is. fol. c.xli. b. Adsueraunce of salvation fol. c.lviii. b.
Antichristen apprehender fol. c.lxxvii.
B.
Barnes burnt in smythfeld. fol. ii. Barnes was vergiffen eodem. Byshoprikes
must fall. fol. v. and vi. The bishop described of Paul. c.xlvii. b.
Backewarde plantacions. fol. c.lxi. Bishop eats his own words. fo. ^ii.iiii
Bishops whom they abuse. fol. cxxxi. Bishop confounded with his own example.
fol. xix Belief is no work of man before justification fol. c.v. b. and.xlvii
The bishop writes for the pope, fo. xlii b The bishop is afraid lest he
should be justified by faith only. fol. lxx. b, The bishop believes not his
own doctryn fol. lxxviii. The bbshop omitteth.v. words in his allegation.
fol. lxxix The bishops works. fol. lxxxiiii. b, The bishops office. fol.
lxxxvi. Belief in Christ is none of Winchesters works. fol. lxxxiii Baptism
comes after faith. fol. lxx. b lxxi Baptism is the testification to the
chirch fol. lxxi.c.lxii. and.lxxx.
C.
Contentation. fol. xv. Certainty of our eleccion. fol. xlviii. Covered with our
brothers clothes. lvii. clxiii Charity justifies not. fol. lxi.lxii and.cl.
Christ before Ihon baptist. fol. lxxv Commandments be not so lyte. fo. cxv.
Children dying before vaptisme. clxi.clxii. Christ made our rightwisnes. fol.
clxiii. Christ thought as he said. fol. cxxii. Cause placed after theff. cxxv
b. xviii b, cxxvi Charity has a sondrye operation from faith, fol. cxliii. b
Concupiscence is sin. fol. clxvii.clxix. Concupiscence lies lurkinge in ^he
soul. fol. clxix
D.
Degrees of heuines. fol. xxii. Dimisia sunt ei peccata expouned. fo. xciii.
Doctrine of the pharisais. fol. cxxii. Dead saints called not upon. fol.
cxxxi.i. Divide not gods honor fol. clxxxxiii
E.
Exclusion of works from faith justifying folio.xxxvii b. lviii Evil wedes
grow with the corn. fo. lxxx, b Enstruccio^ book, foli. cxxx, b Ears of Idols
cut of. fol. cxl b
F
Faith material formed and unformed fol. lv. b. Faith material god gives it
not. fol. lv i. Faith, hope and love, distinct, but not divided. fol.
lvi.cxxii. Faith by which work it justifies. fo. lvi b. Faith iustifienge
what it is. folio.lv iii. Faith is the life of the just. folio.lxi, Faith and
not works fulfill ye law. lxvii.cxvi b Faith certifieth us of our re. lxxvii. b.
clxx b Faith is an hard condition, foli. cii, b Friar forests confiteor
folio.cx, Faith believes, hope abides, folio, cxii Flesh is a perellose
Hydra, foli. cxv. b Faith and works lie not together in one bed. folio, c,
xvii.c.xxx, c, xxxi. Freely for his penance and works, folio cxx. Four
things appropriated to god only. folio.cxxxvi. Faith hope and love compared
to.iii, sisters, folio.cxliiii. b Faythes proper works. fol. cxlv. Faith is no
bare foundation ne cold gift fol, cxlviii, b Faith hope and love ordered of
Paul folio, cxlviii, b Faith as little as the mustard seade. clxiii. Faith and
gods promyses be correlatyues. fo. c.lxxiiii. b
G.
God is honored as him self prescribes it. folio.cxl. George is not to be
called upon. fol. xxxiii b Gedions sword. Idem God makes us to work with him.
cxxxii. b God gives us common gifts. fo, cxxviij, God works a strange work
in us. xxij. b God is not honored after our devises. folio.cxxxvij. Graces
three in one soul. fol. cxliiij. b. Gratis what thing it excludes folio, vi,
Good haithen deeds, folio.xliiij Gods fotesteppes be not seen. fol, l. b. God
necessiteth no man to evil ne to good folio.lij God works al things in
every thing. folio.clxxxiiii. Gifts three in the justified, fol. lv. Gods
gifts not idl^. fol. lvi.
H,
In hope we be saved. fol. xcix Hopes own seu^rall operation. fol. cxij Head
of the church changed. fol, cxli. Hope with her works. folio, cxlv, Hertes
two, new and old folio.clxxx. Heart new. folio.clxxxij. b.
I.
Impossible is the law to be fulfilled of man. folio.vii.cxv, cxbi. Impossible
things wherefore god comma^deth. folio.vij. b. lxx.vii.cx^iiii. b, cxxvij. b
Iose^h wrought a strange work with his brethren, folio.xxii. b. Justification
how it is esteemed of us. xxviij Justification by only faith, xxxvij. Justified
before baptism. fol. lxxix. b Joys faith. folio.xci. Iairus his only faith.
folio.xcii. Jacob does on his elders brothers clothes folio, clxiiii. Jobs
works feared. fol. clxv, Iustifications.iiii. folio.clxxx. Iustificacions.ii.
folio.clxxxij
L.
The lord auengeth al wrong. fol. xxxij, Libert^e fre man has not. folio,
lii, Love to our selves depely roted. xcxv. b. Lerning to believe, is one of
Wyn. works before faith, fol, cvii.cxi, Love has her own several act. foli.
cxii, Love justifies not. folio, clv. b, clv^, clvii,
M
Man forgeueth because he believes. cxxv. Merit is diffamed. folio.v. b Merits
of Christ, folio.vi. Merits be fallen. Eodem, Mercies many, fol. clxxix. b.
and, clxxx Merit by participation, fol, b iii, b Meatenes called worthiness.
clxxxvi, b
N
Necess^tie voluntary fo, xlix, b Necessity without compulsion Eodem Necessite
to sin, where it should be sought lij Nisi an exclusive. f^lio.lviii b. No idle
gifts. fol, lix, b Nature of man corrupt. fol. clxv
O.
One and the same work is both good and il lii. b. One gift justifies. fol,
lv, Only faith justifies. lvii, lviii, clii, b, cliii clxxii Office of faith,
fol, lix Offices of faith, hope, and love Eodem, b Operor a ^erbe passive with
Win. fo. cviii One mediator. folio.c.xxxiiii. Original sin. fol. c, lxvi.
P.
Pretentat cornibus ^iam testudo. cxxi. Popis infinite treasure chist. fol. v.
b Participation to merit. xxv. Paul's.vij. arguments. fo. clxxij. b Precept of
forgeuenes to hard. xxxiiii. b. Popis faith. folio.xli. Predestination. xlvij.
b Pre^estinatio^ sought and found i^ crist. xlviii b Penance follows baptis.
fo. lxxiiii. b Penance follows faith justifying. xvi. b
R.
Repentance what it is. folio, xvii Repentance ^resupposeth the preachinge of
the law and gospel. folio, xx, Repentance legal and euangelike. xx. b. xxi.
Repugnance in Win. words, folio.xxv. folio.xxvi, fol, lxxxiiii Reco^c^liacion,
what it is. fol. xxxii, b. Repent^unce certifieth the congregation folio.lxxx.
b Rightwisenes, two manner. cliii Receites of the bishop. clxxix
S.
Sclaunder given and received, fol. v Scripture divided in to the law and
gospel folio, clij. b Scriptures must assure us. fol. xv Sins where we
should behold the^, xx, b Sacrament of ye sheep skynnes. fo. xxiii. b Skatre of
sin is sin. fol. clxvii Strange works works god. folio.li Sum is gods
name essenciall. fol. liii, Servants wherefore we be unprofitable, folio,
l^iii. Sacraments give not grace. folio.l^xiii Stoney heart first taken away.
fo. cxxx, b Saints not to be called upon. fo, cxxxvij b Suscepit Israel. folio
c, lxxx. b Stonney heart folio, c.lxxxiii,
T
To taste christ's passion. folio.i^i. b. Trayterouse touches of our bysh.
c.xxx. b
W
Works all our best, filthey, folio, vii, Works iustifye not, fol, xx^vij,
lxxvi, Word exterior and interior fol, xlv, Wherefore we be predestined, folio,
xlviii Works and faith together may not iustifye, fol, lxxvi, b Works make
us uncertain, fol, lxxvii b Works e^cluded from iustificacion, lxxxviii Works
before justification ar syn, lxxxix Work one in the mids of the earth, c, b
Works and faith concur not in iustificati, fol. cxvi^ii, b Works of god in
man, and not of man, folio, c, xxix, b, c, xxx, etc, workers with god, folio,
cxxxii, b Works three in justification, foli, c, xxxi, b Works may not
sustain the judgment of god, fol, lxxiiii Worthynes on our part justifies.
clxxxi fol. clxxx^i. Uayne vocables. folio.xxvii. Uoluntarie necessity.
folio.xlix. b Use of baptism. folio.lxxi, Use of benefitis deserve not another
benefit. folio.cxiii, Wynchesters collet, fo. clxxi, b Winchester maintains
the popes justification. folio, cx Wynchest. peruerteth Peter's words taking Ab
for propter, foli. xc, b Wyn, parador. xxxviii, b Wynch. defends the pope
against his adversaries folio, xliii, Wyn, refused gods calling, fol, lxxxi.
Win, spoke into my favor for the truth. folio.lxxi. b Win. sin yet sleapeth
in the gates. lxxxij. b Win, false faith correspondinge his justification.
folio.x^. b Wyn. compares Christ's promise to the lyinge man. fol. ci. b Win.
confuted with his own example. lxx^i. b Wyn. justification.xl. years ago. fol,
cix. Win. abused use to merit, fol, cxiii, b. Win. division to make division.
cxvii.cxviij Wyn. rydle needs an oedipus. fol, cxx Wyn relatyue (which)
folio.cxx, b Win is afraid to settle and place his condition. cxxi. Wyn. and
his, confound the^ selves. cxxiii. b Wyn. works before his justification.
folio, cxxviii. etc. Wyn. is but a feeble defense for his Rome bysh, folio,
cxxxvi. b Wyn. plays.ij. parts at once. clxxxi, b Wyn. denies his own
words, iii. and, iiii. Win. brings into light the thing he would hyde fol.
clxxi Wat the heremite cxv, b We must ask to do that we be boden to do folio,
xviii
y
yoke of your conditions fol, lxxxvii
The refutacion of Wynchesters declaration.
YOur entrye to the matter is fit for your process: Steven Gardines the
bishop.
for neither did I ever write such articles, ne Barnes was burnte for
preachinge only faith iustifiethe. I was by Barnes choice, his scolemaister at
the which time we entreted the article of only faith justifies: as shall
hereafter appear.

MY entry into the matter was very fit for my process: Joy.
for although another might perchance write these articles, yet do this your
own derke declaration and pertinate defense of the^ show the same to be
yours, although they had not borne your name. For never did the child so
lively resemble his own father, as do these articles and their declaracion
express the bishop of Romes antichristen doctrine, by you both preached and
in your other books written for his defense, therebye declaring your self to be
his own obedient sworn son. It had been therefore more honesty and less
shame, yea and more godly for a christen bishop being of a christen kings
counsel, pretendinge to be his friend and faithful subject, for the
estiewinge of so violente a suspicion, yea rather so bold a manifest
declaration, your self to stand yet so still upon the popes part against
your so gentle and loving a prince, to have utterly renyed and renownced them
for your articles, seeing they be so directely against ye word of god, against
the old holy doctors, against the abolyshment of the pope, only stinkinge of
Pelagiane, leauened with the popes pharisaical sower leaven. Ye speak to me in
your preface as excusing your self of doctor Barnis death, that he was not
burnt for the article of only faith justifies. How ye handled doctor Barnes
your scoler, better learned than his master, I can not tell. But this well I
wot by your own words, in your preface, that anon after, the master and
scoler could not agree upon this article of our faith, and his master had
openly forgeuen him, Barne^ was v^rgi^ff^n,
the scoler was sent into the tower, and in conclusion brent in smithfelde.
How smothely soever ye have here first of all for your defense painted your
excuse in wasshinge your hands with pilate yet by your own words, the
contention in this matter of faith was only betwixt you and him, only you he
troubled, only you he offended, only you, he openly (to use your terms)
encombred with shamefacenes only you complained of him so grievously to the
kings majesty. And who compelled him to recante openly, I can not tell.
Only you accuse him of heresy in your book, ye might say perchance with the
old holy spiritual pharisais and bishops, Nobis non licet interficere
quemquam. It is not lawful for us to kill any man. And so after ye have
accused and condemned pore christ, deliver him up into the seclar hands to do
execucion, because so holy bishops would not pollute their sacred anointed
fingers with innocent blood. But this is plain: openly he asked you forgeuenes
at saint Mary's spittel, where ye gave it him in an outward sign, but whether
in heart, god knowethe it. And he stondinge at the stake asked the shryue the
cause of his death and he said he knew it not. And the^ last of al, doctor
Barnes as one suspecti^g only you, said these words. If doctor Steven bishop
of Winchester be the causer of my death, our lord my god, for christ's sake,
forgive it him, as I would my self be forgeuen. And besides all these
evidences, the common fame can not be stylled. But this so weighty a cause in a
bishop, that should be an edi^ier and no destroier, a feder, a nourisher to
minister life, and not a bloudsouper, I leave it to the judgment of God, when
doctor Barnis and you shall both shortly stand before the judgment seat of
Christ,

It is of like truth that ye affirm of me, The bishop.
that I should by these articles prove that works must iustifye. I never went
about to prove that, how so ever it likes you to report of me, I never wrote
so, I never preached so, I never affirmed so ne enterprised to teach Barnes
so.

This is my just report of you in my former book gathered of your articles.
Joy.
That ye would prove that works must iustifye, that is, when I allege
then^ber and the leaf of hi^ book, it is of his first ^ pri^ted bok^ in the
greater volume
with our works, we must merit the remission of our sinnnes, which whither
it be of like truth, with my former saienges, your own words wtin.viii.
lines following declare it, saying. Ye would not be afraid to use that
speech, that with our works we must merit the remission of our sins, if I
and other had not diffamed ye word, merit. And in the next leaf ye say, we
with the grace of god doing the works of penance taste and feel the passion
of Christ. Which taste and feeling comes by doing the works of penance.
Which what else is it then by doing the works of penance to deserve the taste
of christ's passion, feeling thereby ye remission of our sins? joan. 6.
For to taste and feel christ's passion is to taste and feel certainly our
remission of sins as Ihon declares it, by the eatinge of his flesh, and
drinkinge of his blood, by our faith, thereof the justified to live. And if by
doing the works of penance (as ye teach) we deserve this taste and feeling,
so deserve we by your penance doing our iustificacion. And eue^ by and by ye
confirm this your false doctrine of meritinge, saying. That good men have
called it meritinge to use the benefits of Christ's passion. Which your
iuglynge I shall disclose, when I come to the place. And in the last line of
the same side, ye say. And sinners be called to grace to do the works of
penance, whereby to recover yt favor of god with remission and forgeuenes of
their sins. And in the next lefe, ye say. So as Christ merited and deserved
thoroughly, we by participation in vsinge his gifts, merit and deserve. And say
ye not that they that will enjoy the remission of their sins must fulfill
your condition? which condition ye declare to be stuffed full of all your own
good works, calling them Winchesters works. Turn to your.xlix. lefe
folowinge, and ye shall see it true that I say. What else do ye seem to prove,
but by works to merit our iustificacio^? And yet is your doctrine so intricate
perplexe and repugnant, that in many places ye fight against your self to
seek out your shifts to make your popish part to seem true to foles, that
have neither learning ne judgment. What else did I confute with the
manifest scriptures against you, then your meritinge by works your
remission, you ever sweatinge your feeble defense with pelagians papistry, as
it shall appear hereafter? And therefore never deny it for shame that ye ever
went about to prove it or to write it or to preach and teach it. Ye have gone
about it in dead, for ye never could hit it with all the shaftes ye have
shot. It is great shame for one that would be seen so highly learned, and a
bishop to, so sone to eat his own words, and deny his own hand writing,
when he sees his part naught, and so false that he is not able by scriptures
to defend it.

The bys.
I would not be aferde to use this spech (with our works we must merit the
remission of our sins) had not you and other, to the world diffamed and
sclaundered the word (merit).

It is in deed a sclaunder, Joy.
not of us given, but of you superciliouse pharisais received: who for your
concupiscence of the flesh, A sclaunder given and a sclau^der received.
and of your eyes, and for your pride, be the very world in deed, as Ihon
painteth your romysshe court. For a received sclaunder is when a thing well
done or said, is sinistrely of malice evil taken, as Matthew describes it.

But as touching the church of Christ taking it, I tell you again as Elyas
told king Achab. It is you and your fathers house of rome for that ye have
forsaken the lords precepts, and be gonne after Baalim following your fathers
false doctrine Pelagiane, which have diffamed the very only true merits of
christ's passion with your own stinki^g merits of your sinful works thereby
to deserve remission of your sins. Which ye so laden with mo merits then ye
need of in your superfluouse supererogations, that ye sell so dear your own
overplus merits your misses, fat fastinges, myndles prayers, vnwylfull
watchinges, etc. Your holy father Paul.iii. of Rome has yet in store, and need
be, his churches treasure, an infinite chistefull of your saints merits, yea
and of Christ's merits to, wherout by participation, for money, he is ready to
lash out this your marchaundise of merits, and yet in nothing (to use your
words) diminishing theffecte of christ's passion. This is your diffamacion of
merit, whose good name ye ought to restore by gods word, if ye will not be
seen to stand upon your father the popes side. Of what else foundation stood
al your abbeis monasteries chauntries, yea and your bisshoprikes to, but upon
these your popisshe merits, in prayers and mysses, for the dead, to pluck
them out of your fained purgatory? And therefore be they worthily subverted
Christ so prophecienge of them. Every plantacion which my heavenly father has
not planted, Math. 5^
shall be vproted. Your byshoprikes therefore do but tarry the verifienge of the
same. Neither I, ne any true christian knows any other merits for sin
then the plenteouse merits of christ's passion, by his most preciouse
blood, perfitly and perpetually deserving for all that believe in him
forgeuenes of their sins. And am certified by this his almyghtye everlasting
word. That man is freely justified by the grace of god through faith in Jesus
Christ: so that this word gratis, freely, Romans 3.
excludes all the merits of any work of the law, from faith iustyfyenge,
but not from the faithful justified man. If this saying be sclaunderouse to
merit, In his pistle to etesipho. and dialo i. Auste^. in. psalm: xxxi. and
lxx. and in his pistle.lii. etc.
so be Hierome and Austen great sclanderers of Merit, which constantelye
affirm against the Pelagyans man to have no merytes. If thou wylt (says
Austen) be quite and void of grace, bost thy merits. And god croneth his own
gifts, and not thy merits. And the scriptures affirm every where all reward
celestial to be given us out of the free mercy of god for christ's sake, To.
iiii. and.xi
and not for any of our merits, Ye might have seen it clearly, if ignorance
and malice had not blyndened you, by the so many mighty arguments made of
Paul. ex conte^tione, of these contraries: works and grace, merit and free
gift, ryghtewysenesse of the law and of faith, from uncertain to certain,
from to have any thing of grace, and of duty deserved, from the waueringe
infirm imperfect deades of the law, to the ferme promise received by faith,
that merits and grace, ne faith and works being so contrary in this cause of
conte^cio^ can never be co^currant into one, and the same act of our
iustificacion.

The scripture holly consents that all our best works of the law be sin
and filthy, and therefore not to have that dignity to deserve remission of
sins, as I have sufficientlye proved it in my co^futatio^ of your false
articles, which ye have not yet, ne ca^ disprove. The law is the will and
mind of god, holy, spiritual, just, and good, and requires such perfect
holy, and just works, as be not corrupt ne stained with any carnal affect of
man, but such works were there never performed but only of him, of whom
the father testified This is he in whom I am pleased Wherefore man so long as
he is called flesh, can not deserve by doing the works of the law. God
promises rewards to the fulfyllers of ye law, Romans viii.
but because it is impossible for man called flesh to fulfill it, therefore he
sent his son Christ to fulfill it, that his fulfyllynge by our faith
apprehended, should be ours, thus made of the father our rightewisenes, our
holiness, wisdom. i. Cor. i.
etc. And here I write it yet again, that ye lay so heuily to my charge. Even
that god commands to man, Romans viii.
so long as he is called caro (which is as long as he lives) things
impossible, i.li. retract. ca. ix. In en^h. ad ^auren. de gratia ^ li. arb. ca.
xvi. homili. in Io. xxix. et episto. xxiiii
as Paul, and Christ, and Austen testifies saienge. Man has not in his
power to be good, eather not seeing for his ignorance what manner one he ought
to be, or else, if he see it, yet is he not able to be such one, as he sees
him self to ought to be: And therefore says he in many places. God
commands impossible things to man, that he knowinge his own imperfection
and impossibilite, should seek help of him in who^ is all perfection, and help
in our need. And all to depresse man's arrogance, and to show him to him self
to be but a sinner, so to be saved only by the grace and mercy of god and not
for his own merits not to glory in our selves. i. Cor. i. Ephe. ii.
Thus is the law the vssher of ye scole to take us forth to christ, it
shows us our sins, it wounds us but heals not, It provoke us by faith
to seek health in Christ, that all the glory might be given to the grace of
god in Christ Which gives not his glory to any other nether by participation,
Ephe. i.
nor by retaliacion. And then ye say plain contrary to all your own
doctrine in your hole book thus.

Christ's passion in the sight of god, The bys
is (onl^) sufficient sacrifice for the sin of all the world, so full and so
perfect, as needs not any addicion or suppleme^t of any man's desert to the
appeacynge of gods just wrath against man for sin.

By this exclusive (only) and your absolute speech, Joy.
it should follow that all men without faith, should be saved. yea and without
your conditions to. Ye should have added therefore, is only sufficient
sacrifice to the beleuers in him. But how stands this piece with your so
many good condycyons, so full of your works to deserve your remyssyon? which
all, ye say, be required to that tainement of our justification. All your
principles, arguments, reasons autorities violently wrested, your collettes,
versicles, with sancte marie and omnium sanctorum meritis, With sancta maria
ora pro nobis, sancte Georgi, with all your like papistry, tend to the contrary
that ye have here said. To merit by participation.
For even your own praphane vain voice of your participation, makes christ
but half a deseruer, half a satisfier, and but a party patched savior. For
what is it else to merit and to satisfye (as ye say) by participation, then to
divide part or half to him, and part to us. It behouethe a liar, ever to have
a good memory, lest his words fight against him self, compelled to utter his
lies with his own mouth, as your self has here done openly. Divide not gods
essenciall indivisible names from him. Halt not thus (for shame) with Baalis
bishops into both parts, as Ely the prophet forbids you, Either let
christ be an hole entire sufficient savior, deseruer and satis^ier for sin,
or else none at all: Divide not his glory to your sinful merits and
satisfactions. Christ is not divided says Paul. It was he that al alone
trod the wine press in his bloudye robes none of all the world to have
helped him, Isaie.lxiii.

Christ only is our hope, only Christ is our life, our way, The bys*
only Christ is our savior, holly thoroughly perfetly abso^utely, totally,
entirely. etc.

If christ be such one, then away with all your meritinges, Joy.
satisfaccions contentacions for sin, away with all your conditions for
thattainement and enioyinge of the remission and salvation. Here may every
reader see how shamefully repugnant is your doctrine

The contencion is not of the preciousnes validite and effect of christ's
passion but of the use of it. The bys.


Joy.
A goodly shameless shifte lo. Be ye slypte now from theffect so suddenly to the
use? Even an evident token of a gilty conscience, that mis^rusteth and is a
fraide of his own doctrine, Do not the remission of our sins pertain to
the preciousenes of Christ's passion? Is it not the validite and th^ffect
thereof that justifies and absoluteth the beleuers from sin?

Say ye not your self first of all. Theffecte of Christ's passion,
requires a condition? ye never said the use thereof requires the condition.
Theffect thereof was ever the mark that ye did shote at, and I confuted it. The
contencion was ever betwixt us. whether by faith only, or by works or by
faith and works together man is justified, and at the same mark yet bend ye
al your feeble ordinance in this your declaracio^. And as for the use of
Christ's passion ye never spoke of till now for a shifte as one weary of his
false part. The use thereof presupposes the having thereof which is the
justification by only faith. Which once obtained we well use it in yt we
remember it with perpetual thanks giving, lauding and praising our heavenly
father, through our savior christ for so rich inestimable a benefit. What
faithful man doubted of this use after he had enjoyed the gift? And this use
of it, is the gift of god. Now what contencion and matter can ye move or make
of this use? Except ye will contend to show your high wit and wilye
rethorike to find a knotte in a rishe, as have the proverb. In your scole
with Barnes, ye say ye traueled to enstructe him of the conditions before
theffect and agreed upon faith to be one, and then ye brought in mo co^dicio^s
and works as to forgive your neyghbor, and your incorporacio^ into christ by
baptism or returning to him by penance. which all, for that they go before
the forgeuenes (after you) they can not be ye use of the thing not yet
obtained, wherefore nether with hi^, ne in your articles is there, ne could be
any contention of the use of christ's passion. But I will by way (as they
say) of communication, admit your cauillacion, and trappe you in your own
words, thus saing in the next side of your lefe.

And we with the grace of god, doing the works of penance, taste and feel
the passion of Christ, The bys,
and as good men have called it meritinge and deserving to use the benefits
of Christ's passion.

Before ye were in the use of christ's passion, Joy.
and now ye be fled to the meriting to use the benefits thereof. And this is
your mistye maze ye would lead your readers into, more to wonder at your high
lerninge and wyly wit, not perceived ne understood, then to get any fruit
thereby. This is your iuglynge cast with your wide words of (use, and meritinge
to use) as ye iugled with your confuse condition so full of your young
conditions. Now every man sees the benefits of Christ's passion to be
infinite and innumerable, and every one to have his proper use

And thus have ye brought us into a confuse wild wilderness wherein ye may
with your wilye romyshe fox, wind your self into many perplexe ways as into
an C. angles. Among therefore so many benefits, for your pleasure, to take
your course with your word (use) let ye remission of our sins in christ by
faith (if it so like you) be one of these benefits. To use a benefit well, is
to increase it, remember and acknowledge it with thanks giving dailye to
thautor thereof. This use we must deserve with the works of penance (say you)
ere we have the benefit used: a goodly godly dream lo. I had wend that the
use of this benefit, as to acknowledge it, to remember it, to encreace it, and
to thank god, had been also the gifts of him that says, without me ye can do
nothing, no not so much as to think well, to will well, or to begin any good
work: Or else after you and your good men, these benefits we must deserve to
use them with ye work of penance Now has penance her use, ergo we must with a
another former work deserve the use of penance, and so with a another former to
deserve that use, and thus have ye brought us by your fo^d dreme into your
infinite intricate and endeles maze of your meriting to use If (ye say) I
observe not how charyly ye speak, saying thus. And we with the grace of god doi^g
yt works of penance taste and feel ye passion. Uerely I so observe it, yt I se
it makes against your self. For christ's passion is tasted and felt by faith.
And god gives no man such a grace as by works to deserve another grace, for
so should he make his grace no grace, as Paul proves it. Romans xi. Then ye
say adding.

The bys.
And by the strength of christ's passion we deserve to do penance for sin.

Joy.
This tale repugneth to the former head sentence. For there penance deserved to
taste christ's passion: and here by christ's passion we deserve to do penance,
here is wondres shiftinge with these two things one to deserve ye the other, now by
penance to deserve to taste the passion and anon by the strength of the passion
to deserve to do penance. Such is the inco^stant doctrine of ye unlearned
papists, plaing fox to hole with their penance and christ's passion. Ye know
well yt christ's passion not tasted by faith profits nothing at al ye
infidele turk or false christian, but is the savor of death unto death to
the^. And how then can ye by ye strength of it do penance before it be tasted,
by faith? ye said first that penance goth before ye taste: ergo that penance
before faith tasting the passion ca^ be but a sower and an unsavory penance
eue^ such one as was in Esau Judas and in the turks penance, which yet have
not by faith tasted ye sweet savor of their forgiveness in christ's passion And
even this lo, is your popysh penance ye would teach before faith justifying.
Now then since there be so many works, and parts of your popish penance,
tell us plainly by which part or work of your penance, taste and fel^ ye
christ's passion? nether by your broken contricions and attricions never
healed, ne by your never satisfied satisfactions ne satispassions in your
purgatory, ne by yours to skant contentacions or whisperinge dome absolutions,
ne by your auricular confessions, having not one word ne promise of God to
taste so great a benefit, do ye taste and feel Christ's passion, or by which
work of your penance enjoined unto your gostly children do they taste it? I
have herd (the more shame it is) your ghostly fathers in their auriclar
confessions to have tasted and groped right knauyshelye their goostly. But
never thereby to have tasted Christ's passion. For yt only so bitter cup, none
tasted thereby so to merit but Christ, and yet ye skof, with potestis bibere
calicem. etc. May ye drink the cup which I shall drink? It appearethe
here by your words, saying, It to be necessary some to taste and feel of
Christ's passion by your penance and alledginge of the text, yt ye never
tasted it your self, ne tasted the true understanding of Christ's words, by
potestis bibere calice^. etc. Judas did all your works of penance. He came
and confessed openly, (which agrees better with gods word then auricularly)
his sin to the high bishops your predicessors he made restitution to them of
the monye, which they gave him to betraye Christ, he was heuye, contrite and
attrite. They gave him their absolution with. Quid ad nos? what is that to us?
if thou have betrayed the lust blood. Tu videris. Take heed to thy nowne
charge, and let us alone. And yet so far was Judas from ye taste of christ's
passion, for all these his and your works of penance that of a desperate
mind he hanged him self* And wherefore came Judas with his and this your
penance to this wretched end? verily because it proceeded not out of the
root of faith in Christ ne of the knoweledge of the mercy of god in Christ,
out of the which faith and knoweledge what penance or work soever procedethe
not, To. xiiii.
it is syn. And yet will you so i^pudently contend and sweat for your works of
your penance to go before faith iustifyeng, and to merit ye faith where by we
taste and feel Christ's passion and the remission of our sins. Here is
wholesome doctrine that ye teach. Ye say good men have called penance
meritinge and deserving to use the benefits of christ's passion. Even such
good papists as ye be to restore your misteres, merit meretrix to her
spiritual spouse the pope and to you again. If your penance should deserve
to use these benefits of christ's passion, so should one deed and ever the
worse deed deserve to do a better (a wise doctrine, I warraunt you) set in a
circle without head and tail, ye should look upon ye scriptures rather the^ on
your good pope holy men. Which scriptures tell us, yt al our best deeds be
corrupt and filthel^ stained with sin, Isay. 64.
so yt they be not able nether to deserve any reward gostly ne to sustain ye
judgment of god, Ps. c, ^i.
but will condemn you before him so far of be they to merit, And therefore
said Auste^. Thy good works ar ye gifts of god lest you should think the^
to be thy merits. Romans ^x.
It is not in the willer nor doer to will or to do well but it belongs to the
mercy and grace of god preue^ti^g thy will with his grace to do good. what is it
yt god bids us to do but he biddethe us to ask grace of him to do the same,
telli^g us plainly yt if it were in our power to do it, so were it no need for
us to ask the doing thereof. For no man asks the thing which he has.

The bys.
Penance has been called likewise satisfaccion, as wherein man satisfies, that
is contenteth God.

It has been likewise so called in deed, Joy.
even of like papists, with like authority out of no scripture, but likewise
against gods word in like blasphemye to christ's merits, and his
satisfaccions. To satisfye is to content god, ye say. And here ye make a
sudden stop, ye should have added boldly, to content god for sin, as ye
say in your book of your necessary enstructions, affirminge that it declares
a desire in man, to content god his father for his sin. And yet in the same
book, Hebre. vii.viii.ix.x.
as in this, ye say clean contrary. That christ only is the sufficient, full
and perfect satisfaction for sin, which is the truth. The fathers almighty
voice so testifienge of Christ, to be his derely beloved son for whose sake
only he is contented, satisfied, and appeared. God give ye grace once to
euomite these antichriste^ popish blasphemies, and to know christ's only
sufficient satisfaccion and merits for your sins. If you could satisfye and
content the justice of god against your sins with your rightwisenes of
works, so were Christ dead for you in vain. Paul to witness. gala. ii.
neither were you subject to the rightewisenes of god. Romans x. But yet happy is
your sely satisfaction, that she has gotten her a new name called now
(co^te^tacio^). Co^tentatio^
The fathers justice could not have been contented with man, until one had
contented and satisfied him, fulfyllinge the whole law in every point, but
such one was only that innocent lamb our savior Christ, as testifies the
scripture. wherefore away for shame, with your counterfaited contentacio^, and
with your sinful satisfactions to. And at last to wynd^ up your tale of
merits, ye bring us in a blind collet out of your popish portewes, with.
Meritis and precibus beat Marie and omnium sanctorum. by ye merits and
prayers of blessed marye, and of all saints, for want of scriptures. Peter
byddeth you to speak and allege the scriptures, for your doctrine, Therout to
give a rekeninge thereof. For the ferme word of God must assewer us of the
true doctrine and not the dead dreams of lyenge men.

That thing which I command the to do or to say, do it says the lord
Deuteronomii.xii. nether shall thou add to, ne minishe any thing thereof.
Nether will we receive of you any thing in this contencion which the word of
god has not or with the word fights, yea should there an aungel out of
heaven affirm it. God has sufficientlye showed it by Nadab and Abiu, Leuiti.
x, where he would not any strange fire to be offered upon his altar nor
brought into his temple, but vehemently did he so abhor humane tradicions
and men's dead dreams, that with their own strange fire he destroyed them
as he shall destroy you and confound you with your own strange doctrine,
as in this your declaration it shall be sufficiently declared.

Men in ye state of grace purchased by christ's mediacion do the works of
justice, The bys,
and sinners be called to grace to do the works of penance / whereby to
rekouer the favor of god with the remission of their sins, Joy.


These men in the state of grace, do not the works of justice but out of
faith iustifienge. But tell us plainly what color ye rekouer under your word
rekouer? To rekouer is to obtain again a thing lost. ye should have said
playnelye. By ye works of penance, sinners obtain or purchase grace lost
which is the favor of god and remission or their sins: And now what else
have ye covered, then that penance deserve forgeuenes of sins* which is our
iustificacion. And yet ye say before, ye never went about to prove it 'that
works must iustyfye. And yet in so saying, as works of penance to rekouer
grace and remission ye both would prove it and also make grace no grace, ne
Christ's passion of none effect. For a just confutation of this your
doctrine. I shall therefore prove it clerelye by scriptures, that man must be
first justified by faith, Repentance follows faith iustifienge.
ere either he repent holsomely or be baptized with water. And because ye have
diffamed true repentance and iuggled so long with your do penance, making
the people believe they have done it. when they have done or said all their
penance enjoined them by their goostly fathers, ye shall know, that repentance
is a turninge to the lord god, whereby we of ye sincere fear of god humbled,
aknowledge our sins, and all our hole life we make new: So that the hole
life of a penitente faitheful is a perpetual mortificacion of his flesh and a
reuiuinge of the spirit, even the perpetual custody of his life fygured in
baptizme of water, wherein the dopinge and buriyng signifies our mortification,
our sins buried in Christ his death: and the lifting up out of the water
teaches our arysinge with Christ revived into a new life. Also the hebrewe
word (his) and the greek Metanoite, in latyne, Resipiscite, signifye to be
turned to a better mind or change your life. Which word Joan and Christ
used saying. Resipiscite in propinquo enim est regnum coelorum. Repent ye, or
change your life, or be ye turned in mind for the forgeuenes of sins is
nigh And Christ began his preaching likewise saying. Be ye turned or
repent ye, and believe the good tidings of your remyssyon. They preached not
only saienge repent ye, as ye dream, and there stopped, but they evermore in
all their sermons, as did his apostles, added the cause why they should repent,
which cause employed and contained therein the promise of remission of their
sins saying, for the remission of your sins is at hand. For so much
signifies the gospel and the kingdom of heaven in those places. Which promise
apprehended by faith, anon the herers prepared them to repentance turninge
their minds, converted to god whom they before knew by faith beleuynge him
for his mercyes sake in Christ to receive and to forgive them. For who
turnethe him self, to God, whom he nether knowethe ne beleuethe to be
merciful to him, ne loves him before he turns to him? For they preached
first the law whereby came the knoweledge of their sins, and eft sone the
gospel of forgeuenes promised in Christ, which by faith apprehended, then
began the true repentance. Also we are often commanded to repent by these
words of god spoken of the prophets. Conuertimini ad me and salui eritis,
conuertimini ad me and ego conuertat ad vos. Be ye turned to me and ye shall be
salfe, and I shall be turned to you. Where ye se that God commands us
nothing but he bids us ask the same of him, as Auste^ confirms and
declares it, your self alledgynge his words, saying Iube quoduis modo des
quod iubeas

Ergo we must ask our repentance and conversion of god, saing Convert nos
deus salutaris noster, and Convert me domine and ego conuertar. Convert me,
LORD and I shall be converted. If this prayer be of faith, as it must nedis
be, if it be made to the father in christis name so must faith go before the
conversion and the peticion and prayer before the thing obtained, therebye.
Again, when I am promised of god to be saved if I turn to him, there my
faith, first apprehendinge the promise proceeds to the precept in turning to
him, as does the servant beleuinge his masters promised covenant, address him
to his service and fulfillinge of his masters commandments, although his
service in folowinge his master be placed before the cause, as your self here
after gives an example, saing, he that follows me is my servant, placinge
theffecte before ye cause, in your lxxxviii. lefe and second side of this your
book and in the lxxxix lefe ye say. In this speech. I join that is out of al
kind of causes to theffect, as to follow me is no cause to be my servant but
rather ensues of service and of the covenant which is the cause why that he
folowth me, and imports that he was my servant before he followed me. Even so
do the scripture place theffecte of our conversion before the cause, which is
faith first apprehending the promise in this and like speches. Be ye turned to
me and I shall be turned to you, be ye turned and ye shall be salfe. Repent ye for
the remission is nighe. And thus lo, be ye confounded and proved to teach
false doctrine and to peruerte the scripture, by your own wordis and by your
onwe example. And that faith iustifyinge must nedis go before repentance, and
our conversion to god as the scriptur teaches us, contrary to your popish
papistry. But I know how falsely ye iugle with your do penance in your book
of enstructions, saing Resipiscite and credit euangelio. thus englyshing it
saying. First be contrite and knowledge your sins, and then receive the
glad tidinges of remission. etc Because theffecte is placed before ye cause
therefore ye would make foles believe theffecte to be before the cause contrary
to your own words in this your book in the.lxxxix. lefe, and by this
placinge, ye would prove penace to be before faith iustifyenge: But if ye had
read but.ii. lines before in mark, ye should have learned plainly the
preachinge of the gospel, that is of ye glad tidinges of ye promised remission
of sins, which is ye cause of repentance as Io. bap. affirms it. Math.
iii. to have gone before theffecte of repentance commanded. But this
licenciouse liberty, to pervert the holy gospel, that ye take to your self
also by your do penance, as ye do upon Peter's saying to Simon Mago: Resipisce
igitur ab ista tua malitia, Englyshi^g (ab) with (fore) thus saying. Do
penance for this thy malice. when the text is. Turn thy mind from this thy
malice: so feign would ye hold still your popish sacrament of do penance,
to merit forgeuenes of sins. The true conversion to god presupposes the
knoweledge of sins which comes by the preachinge of the law: It
presupposethe also the preching of the gospel whereby comes faith, and
knoweledge of the mercy of god, promising forgeuenes in Christ. wherefore ye se
it necessarilye that repentance and the conversion unto god must follow faith
justifying conceived by hearing the gospel: Also faith iustyfyenge must goo
before baptism faith iust^ fien^ is before bapti^^ Mat. xxvii
For Christ bodde his Apostles go forth and teach all nations ere they
baptized them. And what think ye they taught them? Uerelye even the law and
gospel as he had commanded them, and then as many as believed they baptized
them: So that faith justifying them, went ever before the baptime of water, as
it is to see in the acts of the apostles.

Albeit I see how falselye and how unlearnedly ye bring in your Baptizetur
unusquisque uestrum in remissionem peccatorum, for the contrary as I shall
declare your ignorance and falsifieng of ye scriptures, when I come to the
place. A note worthy to be observed.
And here note it (christen reader) that so long as we see our sins in the
law and in our consciences accusing and condempnynge us: and behold them not
by faith in the promised forgeuenes in the gospel of Christ's death, to have
suffered for the remission of them, thus our faith rechinge the mercy of god
our father unto Christ's passion suffered for them, Christ thus made of him
our ryghtwysenes, and our satisfaccion: all our heuinesse and sorrows
contricions and attricions are but such repentance and heauynes, as took
Cayne, Saul, Achitophel, and Judas, which call it an extorted legal heuines
(and ye will) contrary to the willing euangely call heauynes and wholesome
repentance: which legal heauynes is like the extorted heauynes and heuye
fearful paynefull repentance that is wrested out of the racked and pyned
Malefactors, confessing their sins for very fear and pain only: ii. Cor.
vii.
which unwholesome repentance after the world, Paul teachethe it to be repented
and cast of. But the true holesom repentance after god, being his gift,
begynnethe at the contemplacyon of our sins by faith, forgiven in Christ's
death and resurreccion, his ryghtuousnes, his satisfaccion and merits felt
and tasted by our faith certaynelye and fermely to be communicated unto us. In
the book of nombers we read that the children of Israel were not healed ne
delivered from the hot styngynge serpents so long as they looked upon them,
but rather with fear and pain, the more vexed, with their venom. But when
they turned their eyes from those serpents stinging them and beheld the
brazen serpent exalted and hanged upon the tree, then were they healed. And
likewise, so long as we behold our sins in our own consciences accusinge us
or in the law forbiddinge sin, workinge wrath and making sin the more to
abound, we may well fear, be heavy, full of horror for pain and dread of
dampnacion, but as for any quietness, rest, and peace of conscience, we feel
none until we convert and turn our eyes by faith lyftinge them up beholding
the brason strong serpent christ god and man exalted upon the cross there
sufferinge for our sins, appeacinge the fathers wrath, making the satisfacion
with the oblacion and sacrifice of his blessed body. wherefore your
repentance, before our sins be here known and seen with the eyes of our
faith in christ lyfted upon the cross there sufferinge for them and purgynge
or washing them away is but Judas his repentance.

Also it is to be noted, Romans vii.
that as there be diverse degrees to ascend from under the law unto the grace
of the gospel of remyssyon, so be there diverse heauynesses ere we come to the
wholesome and fruitful repentance under the gospel perpetuallye and gladlye to
be Practysed.

For we must first feel and taste of a desperate state deduced to hell, ere we
be reduced to heaven, mortyfyed ere we be reuyued. Paul entering to clyme these
degrees of the law in like heaviness, Romans vii.
and mortificacyon said that sin was then dead, when he lived without the
law showing him his sin, but when the law was comen and had showed him his
sin, then was he dead and his sin alive. For sin now known by the law,
the law works wrath even her lyuelye office to fear and to condemn the
sinner, to make sin the more aboundaunte thrustynge man to hell and slays
him. And here may we see with Esaye the prophet, God to work in us a
strange work to do his own. Isa. xxviii.
In which strange work workynge, yet we know him not (for he will be for a
little space a hydden god) no more then did Iosephes brethren know him for
their brether Joseph but took him for some cruel stranger all that while he
dissembled with them, feared them, threatened them, and troubled them, whiles
he hydynge his face from his own brethren so vexed them with great heaviness
and fear, Genes. xlii.xliii.xliiii.
or he would be known to them, yea and all that whiles in so workynge that
strange work it was great pain to Joseph to hold in his tears, Joseph in
this straung work with his brethren fygured god in christ
for that he must have wroughte so strange a work with them to work his
own bretherly loving work, at last to open him self to them. This work also
god fygured to Moses, when he did set him in the clyffe of the rock
telling him, Exo. xxxiii.
his hinder parts he should se but not his face. The former compunction and
heauynes, even gods strange work in us before faith iustifienge, his heuye
hand yet coueringe our face, we know it not to be his work, ne as yet believe
we god to be our sauyoure and forgeuer in Christ, until he show us his
hinder parts: that is the incarnacion of Christ, sent and suffrynge for our
sins. Adam as soon as he had sinned, had an heuye conscience, horryblye
feared with the wrath of god, unto death and dampnacyon, Genesis iii.
flyenge from his voice and presence even in the midde day, which heauynes
was but a desperate repentance and far of to merit any grace, as it
appears by his flyenge away from God calling him.

But yet the mighty mercyful voice of god so stayed him, and rubbed his sin
into his remembrance, that at last the gospel of the blessed promised seade
preached: Adam conceived faith by the hearing thereof, and began trewelye to
repent, for now he saw his sins not in his own naked gyltye conscience
accusynge him, ne in the precepte condempnynge him, but in the blessed seade
Christ, forgeuynge him. And then to confyrme and to testifye as it were with
seall oblygatorye that GOD had iustyfyed him for his faith only, in that
seade to come, he added his sacred sealled Sacrament, even the skynnes of the
slain sheep, to kouer Adam and Eues naked shamefastnes, signyfyenge to them
that blessed seade, to be offered up an innocente lamb, with his ryghtewysenes
to cover their transgression, and with his blessing to cover their
malediccion, upon this his bloody sheep peltch when so ever Adam looked, he
might well weep and repent him self that ever he had committed that sin
which as it should bring so innocente a lamb to so gylteles a death, so
could it never have been forgeuen without the sheddynge of so innocente
precyouse blood. And here at the contemplation of his sin in Christ's death
to come, began he frutefullye to repent, doing on daily that coote,
putting him into a perpetual remembrance and into repentance, the contynual
custodye of his life, evermore seeing his sins purged in the sead to come,
even in the lamb of God, that takethe away the sins of the world. But now
I return to your book wherein ye add thus. saying.

And now I add this gathered out of scripture, The bys.
( Joy. where I pray you) yt like as in other actions or qualities being in
god essential, we be called by participation, by the names attributed to god,
and for so miche as we do participate, have also the thing in deed: And
therefore as god is goodness it self, we by participatio^ from him, be good. As
god is light it self, we by participacion from him be light. As god is
wisdom it self, we by participation from him be wise, So as Christ merited
and deserved thoroughly, we by participation in using his gifts, merit and
deserve And as Christ satisfied fully, so by particion we also satisfy.

Joy.
He that gathers not with me (says Christ) skatereth, ye have not iustlye
gathered with him, ergo ye have skatered by your participacion. If your
gathering be true in these your expressed accions and essencyals of meritinge
and satisfienge, so must it be true in gods other actions and essencials: but
blasphemouse and false, is the like gatheringes in his other names and accions.
Wherefore your gatherynges in these be blasphemouse and also ungodly. The
minor I prove by your own like demonstracion. God participateth to man his
names of wysedom and goodness by which he created al creatures, and yet
follows it not, without blasphemy that the same man by particicipacion of
those names of wysedom and goodness of god, should create any one of the lest
creatures that ever god made, no not so much as a wynge of a gnatte can he
make by participacio^. Now how say you, Is this well gathered, that because god
participateth to us his names, yt therefore we may do his divine actions? God
imparteth his rightwisnes to man where of man is called just, yet it follows
not that thereby by participacion man might iustifye him self, or any other,
let god imparte to you his benediccion, and let us then see whether therewith by
participacion you withal the fingers ye have, can so bless an infidele or
turk, yea or your own self, that he or you be blessed and chosen of god. The
lord tells you that he will curse your blessings because ye have applied
your hertes unto such blasphemies of his holy names. Mal. ii.
Here may every man see how vnlernedly, how blasphemously and fondely ye
gather to make your antichristen doctrine to seem true to the simple
unlearned, to seduce the^ into errors Ye must beware how ye gather with god
from his essencial names, to his divine actions, participated to synful man.
For though in our regeneracion and incorporacion into christ we do Christ
upon us, as writethe Paul. Gal. iii, and so be covered with his ryghtwysenes,
holiness, wisdom, merits. etc. yet may not we there with work his divine
accions only appropriated to his godhead, ye speak shameful repugnaunces in
your words, saying as christ merited thorowlye and satisfied fully so do we
merit and satisfye by participacion. How stands these together? he thoroughly,
and fully, absolutely, totally, perfitely, as ye say before and yet we by
participation, as it were partly half divided to him, and part to us, when
your words be al and wholly, and fully, to him, what part leave ye for us?
But admitted your term of participacion, although I know the scripture has
it not expressly, but the doing upon us his rightwisenes, his goodness and
other names, yet albeit it folowethe god participateth to us his goodness and
wisdom, and so we be good and wise: it follows not that we having these
names do the self same divine accions and works of god which he wrought with
his wisedo^e and goodness in the creacion of ye world of nothing he
participateth to us christ's merits ergo therwt we merit as did christ for us
ye remission of our sins? I deny your argument, but it follows ergo we by his
merits be forgeuen and saved and not for our own, he participatethe to us his
satis^accions ergo we satisfy for our sins? nego argumentum but it follows
ergo by his satisfaccion done upon us, the fathers justice is appeaced and he
is pleased with us as the fathers voice out of heaven has declared it, your
argument (if ye be not deceived to deceive other) is a mere deceit called of
sophisters. fallacia secundu^ quid ad simpliciter. If a man should ask you
how, and wherein, the wisdom and godnes and light in god differe from these
things in us, after the kinds of diffirences, really or rationally, genere,
or specie etc. I think ye must be compelled as your gatheringe here declare
you to make such an answer as should prove your wisdom but folishnes, ^. Cor.
iii
as Paul says, and the light in you to be but derkenes, Math. vi:
as christ affirms it, and your merits and satisfaccions to be sin and
wikednes, yea blasphemy to christ's merits and satisfaccions Paul was both
holy just and good and yet with those names could he not do ye goodness he
would do, Romans vii.
but that evil which he would not do. If christ meriteth and satisfies for us
fullye and perfetly as the pistle to the hebrews declares, so is there no
part of your meriting ne satisfyeng by participacion left for us. Away
therefore with your profane vain vocables as Paul bids you, i. timo. vi.
where ye read falsely and in ye greek vnlernedly, nouitates for manitates, to
smite me there with, when with ye same rod ye worthily smite yourselfe vsinge
these your newefound stertinge terms of participacion, conditions, effects,
to merit to use ye cannot tell what, and dare not or cannot use and speak the
plain simple wordis of ye scripture left us of the holy ghost. It is an
evident token that ye suspecte your doctrine to be false and mistruste your
part when ye fly from the scriptures to such sliber shifts as to merit by
participation. ye abuse your patched participation placyng it impertine^tly.
For the scripture calls us good wise, just, holy, etc. because by faith in
our regeneration of the spirit we by adopcion made the children of god do
christ upon us his vestures as his rightwisenes, holiness, wisdom, merits and
satisfaccions, covered now with his, as with our own of which doing upon us or
clothing us, Psalm. 111 ^phe. 4 6. gal. 3. Rom 13. colloss. 3.
there is often mention in the scriptures and not of your participacion: For
these so excellent his divine essenciall inseparable names kouer non from
their contraries but such as have done Christ upon them incorporated into
him ere ye can make ready your participated merits to place the^ a part post as
ye do. ye deal not justly with Christ, to couple your vain merits, and
insufficient satisfactions with his so painful merits and full satisfaction
expressed out of his most tender innocent body and blood in his so bitter
passion. Ye ought not therefore by participation join so contrary merits
together so iniuryouslye to christ's death and to his glory which says I will
not give my glory to any other. For it is I alone (says he) which for my nown
selves sake do away thy sins, and not for thy patched merits It is I says
he ye trod the wine press all alone, not one to help me It is I that wylbe
alone, and have no pere ne match. etc. We esteem not therefore (as ye do) our
justification so vile a thing, as to be bought and deserved with our sinful
works. But we esteem it so preciouse as to be bought and deserved with the
most precyouse blood of that innocente lamb our sauyoure Christ. The
remission of our sins, in which we affirm our ryghtewysenes to stand is so
rich and of so precyouse a price, that it can not be recompensed ne satisfied
with any good deed of ours. And therefore could it never have been gotten ne
bought unless it had been freely given us. But so came it not to christ. For it
cost him no small price, It cost him his own most preciouse blood without
which so worthey and so rich a price the justice of god could never have been
satis^yed ne the redempcio^ paid for us. These thingis when we teach men,
then are they monished that as often as they sin, so often do they shede that
most innocent blood of christ. Also we teache our filthiness to be so lothely
and stinkinge that it could never have been washed away but with the only
fountain of this most preciouse holy blood. This doctrine who so hear it,
conceive they not (think ye) a greater horror displeasure and fear for their
sins then if we should teach them falsely (as ye do) their sins to be so
easily wiped away with a buzing absolutio^ y^ prestes hand laid upon their
headis, with a Lady psalter penance, or with a will work of ours, with an
evil will done, as for the choice of a meat and such like? yea and if there
be any spark of gods spirit in the^, home afraid will they be, and tremble
being once purged, any more to walowe them selves wrapped again in the myer,
whereby (as much as in the^ lies) they trouble and infect the purity of this
so sweet and clear a fountain. I have washed my fete (says the faithful
soul) and shall I defile them again? Canti. v.
Now is it plain whether of us two make the forgeuenes of our sins most
vile, and do most sclaunder to the dignity of our iustificacion, As for your
popish doctrine in this article is but a spightefull mock and skorne, to say
god to be appeced and pleased with your own friuole sinful satisfaccions and
merits, that is with dirte and derme. But we affirm the offense and our
sins to be much more greuouse the^ with such manner light trifles (I call the^
no worse) to be purged and wyped away, yea we teach ye offense committed
against the high majesty of god to be more waightye, and therefore so much
the more to be abhorred then with these your easy and vain of naught worth
satisfactorye merits to be remitted. And therefore it to be the only
prerogatyue and price of Christ's blood to satisfy and deserve our remission.
As for you if rightwisenes fail, ye teach it to be restored by your own
satisfactory works, but we affirm it with gods word, to be much more
preciouse then may be compared and recompensed with any work at all ours. And
therefore for the restoringe thereof we constantly teach almen to fly only to
the mercy of god apprehended by only faith in Christ Jesus.

But I did never utter this proposition in these terms, The bys.
to say that man must merit remission of sin, nor have not read it in this
form:

No. But ye say it by participation, Joy.
and under your form and color of your conditions ye speak it plainly. Ye
say that by the works of penance men taste and feel Christ's passion, which
the scripture says is tasted by feeling remission of sins ye say that
sinners be called to grace to do the works of penance whereby to recover
remyssyon of their sins. And in your collette ye pray ut mere amur assequi
quod promittis. That we might deserve to obtain the thing God promysethe
which is remyssion of our sins. And in your second article ye say They
that will enjoy the remyssyon of their sins, must fulfill pour condicyon,
which, as ye declare it, is stuffed full of your merits and winchesters good
works. And all your arguments reasons gatheringes and deduccions tend to
the same popish point.

The bys.
Without I would encounter with you in raylynge I have nothing to say here
unto: etc.

Joy.
I rail not on you, I tell you of your false doctrine, confutinge it with gods
word. It is you that rail upon me and rebuke me most impudentlye causeles
for writing the truth, and confutynge your popyshe Antichristen doctrine,
whereby ye seduce the people into errors, into theyrs and your dampnation, and
in many places ye belie me deadely: and sclaunder me most haynouslye with
heresye and be not able to prove it. It is you yt pervert and falsefy gods
word to stablish your antichriste^ heresies. It is your deuillysh dryft, and
wicked counsel to thrust gods holy eternal word of salvation out of that noble
realm. persecutynge it so cruelly with sword and fire so mercylessely burninge
the innocent lambs of christ for professinge Christ and his holy word. Ye
can say nothing against me alledginge the scriptures truly as I do, except ye
will impugn the verity as ye do, ye have not yet in all your books justly
soluted one text that I have brought against you, as every reader may see it,
if he list to compare our books together.

I for my self boste not my works to the world, The bys.
but do the office of an hand at a cross to say, this is the right way, etc.
Except ye do thoffice of a true hand and just minister, not only poyntynge
the right way into which ye hand nailed to the cross never entered it self,
Joy.
ye shall not be so excused with only pointinge before christ's judgment
seat. If ye be christ's or his apostels successor, ye must follow their examples
which did not point to other the way, standing them selves still, like idle
hands, but they went before their flock into the right way both in true
doctrine preachinge and also in example of godly lyuinge. And ye must remember
yt Christ commands sclaunderouse and false pointinge handis (as ye be one)
into wrong ways, to be cut of from the body as he did euel eyes, which be
euel bishops, to be castoute of their bysshoprykes. Nether do I judge you
otherwise then god biddith us judge the tree by her fruits, and to be ware of
you. Ye call me a runner about, and dare not appear every where. I am so i
deed, but for no offenses committed agenste god and my prince ne against any
other, which is my counforte in an upright conscience before god and his holy
church. I am by you drouen out of my natyue land from my friends to wander
and travel in a strange contrye, the more is my heuines and sorrow and pain
especially in my syknes and old age: whereof I may thank you and your popisshe
impes persecutinge the gospel and diuisinge your ungodly and vncristen acts,
inhibicions, enstructions condempnacions and articles whereby ye have and yet
make many a poor man to smarte. z^par. 24. Psalm. 103.
Sed dominus meus uideat inquirat et iudicet, qui ius reddit ac uindicat ome^s
qui patiu^tur istam iniuriam. But the lord will se to and search it, and be
your judge, which gives true sentence upon you, and delyuereth al yt suffer
this wrong.

When I traueled to enstructe doctoure Barnes I declared to him this
proposicio^ (Theffecte of christ's passion has a condition) nether derkely nor
confuselye. The bys,
And why ye should so call it, I see not, for both the matter is certain and
the words commonly used and understood. Theffecte of christ's passion is the
work therein intended, that is to reconcyle man to god and to bring him to
salvation. Joy.


If your terms of condition and effect had been so plain as ye say, so had
they neded no declaration to D. Barnes ne now to me, ye know yt christ's so
plenteouse a passion brought to man many rich and innumerable benefits and
effectis, as ye call them And again, your confuse condition, went great with
infinite condicio^s as your self declare her to contain all the wills and
pleasures of god. And is it not now a confuse derke speech to say. Theffect
thereof has a condicion^ who knows of which effect and of which condition
among so many ye speak? Now ye declar^ theffecte to be the reconciliacion of
man to god and the bringing of him to salvation. And yet is it not so clearly
ne clerkely declared, saying there be so many things yet contained in
theffecte and betwixt it, and man's salvation, standinge the course of man's
life. I will therefore help you to declare it. A reconciliation which is an
atonemente or a peace making presupposes a discord and inimite betwixt the
parties, whereof one has offended the the other. The parties at discord were god
and man. The thing that made the discord was the sin committed by man
against god his creatore. The atouemaker was christ god and man by sufferinge
his passion for the sin committed thereby so apeacynge his fathers wrath and
satisfyenge his justice that the manne beleuynge in Christ to have suffered for
his sins and to have risen for his iustifycatyon shall never have his sins
imputed unto him but be clean remitted and forgeuen. And thus we have your
effect of christ's passion to be the forgeuenes of our sins, which is our
justification and absolucyon upon this condition that we believe in christ. Thus
does paul in many places declare it, romans v. i. cor. v. collos..i
and also the fathers voice out of heaven upon Christ made for us that
oblacio^ expyatory purging our sins, that we might be perfitlye made
ryghtwyse through him. 2. cor. v.
Now it is plain what is mente by your effect. Even the remyssyon of our
sins through faith in Jesus christ. And thus according to the words of the
scripture will I hence forth call it, and let your strange termed confuse
effect pass with all your confuse conditions, save only faith in christ.
Which condition who so have it, he enjoys his remyssion, and if he has it
not, he is dampened, had he done all Wynchesters works contained in his
condition, Then ye say.

Barnes and I agreed upon faith to be one condition. The bys.
And because he was my scoler I would learn him mo conditions then fait^
required for man's forgeuenes of his sins, even this where in he openly
inuered against me, in his sermon. That is to forgive my neighbor or else I
shall not be forgeuen. And concluded upon that he had granted to me before
that the fulfyllynge of this condition was not the diminucion of the glory of
christ's passion.

Here ye show one of your iuglynge castes with doctor Barnes, Joy.
ye say ye would learn him mo conditions the^ faith, and ye bring in the
precepte of the forgeuenes of your neighbor whose fulfyllynge is required for
the forgeuenes of sin say you, And then ye run through as it were in wash
way to your conclusion that he had granted you, That the fulfyllynge thereof
diminishes not theffecte of christ's passion, as though the precepte were now
fulfilled and you at your ways end krowynge up your triumph before the
victory. But harken a little, and let me ask you this one question? Whether
faith in Christ be your first condycion going before your precept or no?
whereupon ye say doctor Barnes and you first agreed: By your own saienge it
is the first condition. Then thus. Faith in Christ implies in it self ye
ferme assiewred belief in christ to have suffered for her sins according to
gods promise which affyrmeth to the same beleuer that as he believes according
to his promise so comes it to him. Wherefore this man must nedis be
justified, ere your second condition be spoken of And yet ere ye come to your
conclusion I must stay your hastye iourneye in the fulfilling of this
precept of the forgeuenes of your neighbor even as ye would be forgeuen
your self of god. This is an hard precept of the law and is not so sone
fulfilled of man, as ye ween for.

It is not in man's power to forgive his brother with the same affecte as
Christ forgeueth us being his enemies. ^uke.xvii.
And therefore his dyscyples hearing this to hard a precepte for their free
choice (as ye term it) in continently prayed him saing. A dau ge nobis fide^.,
increase our faith, teaching us, faith to supple the impossibilite of the
precepts, and that no man can so forgive without the gift of faith
iustifyenge. And therefore I will deny it utterly to be any condition
required for the forgeuenes of our sins, till I be perfitlye assured, you or
any other to have fulfilled it according to the mind of the law geuer, and
without faith going before. And the cause why I deny it and exclude it from
the act of justification is this. romans iii
Paul excludes all the works of the law from the act of justification, this
precepte in your condition without faith is a work of the law, and therefore I
admytte it not into the attainemente of the remission of sins as cause or
condition without whose fulfyllyng his sins be not forgeuen, Another cause
is, I consider, 1. cor. x, and 1. Phi. 2.
this precepte of love who sekith not her own profit but other men's, is
given to man yet corrupt with his carnal affectes and stained with a natural
love to him self and with hatred to him yt displease him or hurt him and is
his deadly enemy which is his neighbor notwithstanding, whom he is
commanded to love as him self, and to diuyll and divide this natural love
from him self into his enemies bosom him to feed to comfort, to help and to
forgive as him self.

But this our love to our selves is so depely roted in our hertes, that we can
hardely depart from it to give it to our friends, much less to our enemies.
Mat. v
Also for the forgeuenes of my neighbor which procedethe of love, I am
commanded of god to have so perfyt love, Phi. ii. collos. iii. Romans v.
and to be so affected toward him as was christ toward me when I was his
enemy which then, dyed for me. yea who is glad to die when he has deserved
to dye. yea a man will skante dye for his friend. This precepte therefore of
love and forgeuenes was once only in one Jesus Christ perfytlye fulfilled:
when both the preyst and the leuite the holiest order among you and the Jews
slypte by their wounded neighbor lyenge half dead, and never turned their
faces toward him. In our common forgeuenesses, lurketh there no sin? Shrewd,
subtyle, false, and unsearchable is the heart of man who knowth it? Iere..xvi
Psalm. xix.
who sees his own sinful secret nature? Fro my secret unseen sins to my
self cleanse me lord, says the prophet. who forgeueth without little or miche
of these affectis? either because he would have him still to friend to do him
service or pleasure or for a vauntage or for fear of displeasure or for shame
or hatered, or fear to be noted as no christen man with many moo then one man
can search out of a another or espy in himself. Also since faith and love be
imperfit in man corrupt with his concupiscence, what perfect love can proceed
into the forgeuens of his neighbor? The law is both holy just spiritual
and perfet and requires even so persitly and spiritually and even of siche one
to be fulfilled. Be ye persit, says christ as your heavenly father is perfect,
and if we should say, that this work of love and forgeuenes were so
perfitelye, done that there remained in us no sin but that ye dignity of the
deed deserved forgeuenes, so neded that man not to pray in his pater noster
forgive me my dettes: but such a man I^an calls a liar. Joan. i.
But admit the fulfillyng of this your sec^nde condition after faith, yet it
follows not that this your forgeuer has also f^lfilled all the other
precepts of the law as the love of God above a^l with all his heart, soul,
mind. etc. and the last precepte, Thou shall have no concupiscence. He is
accursed says the lord that perfetly perfourmeth not, ^eut xxvi^
ne abides in all the precepts written in ye law, wherefore a man is not
justified for fulfyllyng of one or two of your conditions, but he must fulfill
all written in the book of the law, or else he is accursed.

Now when you or any other will come forth and dare say, ye have so
perfitely, as gods mind is, fulfilled this your condition and all the rest of
yours, and all the law, then will I dispute with you of your conclusion
whereunto ye hasted so swiftly, whether the fulfillyng thereof dymynysheth the
glory of Christ's passion, In the mean season. I will tell you as Paul says.
If you or any other could get ye remission for ye deeds of the law
workynge, so were Christ dead in vain for such men. Gala. ii.
God acciteth the man that will be justified by his works unto his judgment seat
and pleads with him thus saying. Isay.xliii. Put me in mind and we will
reason the cause in judgment. Show me that thing or work whereby thou will
trust to be absolved and justified. And here god begins with the first man
and so comes to the most holy fathers as Abraham and Moses, and concludes
all men under sin none to have deserved their forgeuenes by any of their
works, but faith. Thou haste made me thy servant to bear away thy sins
and thrustedst me down lade^ with thy iniquities. Man is therefore justified,
says Paul, freely by grace through faith in Jesus christ. wherefore your
condition of works cannot be placed in the accion of iustificacion. I exclude
therefore with Paul by this exclusive, Sola fide, all the works of the law
from the said accion affirming constantly with him. That by faith man is freely
justified without the works of the law. where is now your gloriacion, romans
iii
in your confuse condicon? exclusa est. It is excluded says Paul, and yet ye
will have no exclusive as to say sola fide. But skof it out with your karoll
alone alone Qua lege? or quo iure? by what autorite or condition. by the
condition or reason of workis? No no says Paul. Imo per legem fidei. But by
the autorite of faith. And therefore he concludes. Man by faith to be justified
without the works of the law, what can be spoken more plainly agenst your
condition and merits, for our free iustificacion by only faith, all the works
of the law excluded from faith in the accion of our iustificacion? Thus ye see
your operose condition clean excluded from this accion. And now to your second
Article: that is, to use plain speech, The bysho^ his.ii. articl^
They that will enjoy the remission of their sins, must believe. (for faith ye
say is your first condition) And because ye fantazie so many faithes and
knowleges and belyke have as many beleifes, I will restrain you to the only
belief in Jesus Christ to have suffered for our sins. And now let us adioyne
your next article in as plain wordis banishing your effect and this term
condycyon. Saying thus. His. iii. a^^^cle.
The fulfillinge of faith (for as yet I meddle with no more of your other
conditions but with only faith your first condition) requires the
knowledge of faith, which knowledge (say you) we have by faith. And thus have
we your paradox. Wi^chesters paradox.
That faith is known by faith. Is not this a proper naked mouse, whereof so
great a gronynge mountain has so long traueled? Who laughe not at this naked
saying, faith is known by faith? This is lo, your confuse article wrapped in
so many perplexe terms, when it is resolved into plain speech and sifted
from your combrose conditions and derke effects. If you and your doctrine
feared not the light it should never have been inuolued in such obscure, vain,
and perplex speech. The simple plain truth knows no deceytful colored
sophems ne any perplexed persuasions whereby as the serpent deceived Eve, so
would you deceive the simple of which wyly deceit and deceitful wylines in
such teachers Paul diligently warned the Ephesio^s, and abhorred it in the
simple verity to be myxed. Ephe. v i. cor. ii


It may appear in you evidently how malice blyndeneth you, The bys.
when rehersynge my words, ye ask me whether faith goes before works. etc.

Beware malice has not so blyndened you, that when, Joy.
as once before ye were promoted, ye saw and professed the truth, but now
drowned with the world ye be so blind that ye see not the son in the clear
myddaye. Malice blyndened me not, for I perceived your craftye iugglynge with
your confuse condition therein to wrap your works to justify. And purposely I
asked you, whether faith went before works even to souke out of your own
words, the same truth which ye impugned, even only faith to iustifye,
which ye have now granted, aunswering faith to have the first place. Only
faith justifies by his own grant.
Of which grant let this be the principle. The remission of our sins
requires faith i^ christ in the first place. Then thus, who so believes his
sins forgiven in christ the same is justified, this man so believes, ergo he
is justified, he is justified by no another of your condicio^s then by faith,
ergo faith only iustifyeth, The mayor is the scripture in an C. places That
who so believe in christ has life everlasting, the minor is evident in every
beleuer in Christ. Also whersoeuer is faith and belief into christ to have
suffered for her sins, there is remyssion of sins, here is faith first of
all into Christ: wherefore here is remismission by your own grant by only
faith which is your first condycyon. For as thou beleueste according to my
promise (says christ) so comes it to the, but thou beleuest in me to have
suffered for thy sins as I have ever promised, ergo it must needs so come
unto the thus beleuinge. Now if ye give us forth any mo of your condycyons
after this faith iustyfyenge, which is your first condition, so come they al
to late to iustyfy, for the faithful is now already justified by only faith
ere your other condicio^s ca^ be made ready or fulfilled. Then ye ask me a
question wakyng, because I said ye dreamed an externe knowledge. In deed I then
dreamed ye went about such a thing. And now I have my dreme: for that ye say,
faith is known by faith: And then ye coupled your new found faith (as I
said) to an externe knoweledge of your outward condition, so yt now by your
own wise deductio^ we be come^ into this your fynne narowe issew. Faith is
known by faith, for these be your words. The fulfilling of ye co^dicio^
requires first knowledge: your condition ye say, is faith. the fulfilling of
faith is to believe in christ: Then is this ye plain sense. To believe in
christ, faith into hi^ is first required, the^ ye add, which, knowledge we have
by faith: Now is this yor saie^g resolve it i^to plain speech. The remission of
our sins by christ's passion, has first faith into christ. This belief
into christ diminishes not the forgeuenes of our sins. Then ye say, they
that will enjoy their forgeuenes must believe in christ. To believe in christ
requires faith, which faith is known by faith. And thus by derkening the trwe
iustificacion with your vain terms have ye brought us in, two faithes, The
bysshop^ two faithes.
one to be known by the tothere. Now if it should be asked: whereby know you
your first faith? Ye must seek us out a another former faith thereby to know it,
and so be we like to fall into infinite faythes.

And here let us set together all your skatered sayings folowinge towchinge
this knowledge of faith by your first faith. First, ye say, by faith is all
our certain knowledge of gods will and pleasure, folio.xviii. and.xix.
And here it would be known, by which faith, ye mean, is all this knowledge, by
your former faith or by your latter says. For ye said, faith is known by
faith. And the^ ye say. That Barnes and you came to this. that we must have
^aith first of al to know what we should believe. And here ye iugled ageyn with hi^
in deed, which I espiyd before in your two faithes by one to know the the other.
^^e popes faith.
For I saw it before how privily ye went about to bring us into the popes
faith, and your popisshe believe to be extolled above christis faith. For the
thing that we should believe is the word of god in the old and new testament
perfitly contained: unto the which word read or herd of siche as god has
ordained to be saved, Act. xiii,
faith is given to believe it and to know god the father in christ, to cleave
to it and live thereafter. But you, and your holy father anticryst of Rome have
dreamed and decreed us another former faith which ye here call your faith first
of all, Faith first of all.
to know whether the bible and the holy scriptures written by the holy ghost
and with the finger of god, spoken out of goddis mouth be the word of god or
no: as though ye would with the serpente the devil deceiuinge. Eve, call it
into doubt whether we must and should believe the holy scriptures or no, except
ye had so admited it, so to make the holy ghost and the spirit of truth even
god him self a liar. and to doubt whether our faith given us of god fully and
fermely persuading us the^ to be gods very word be the true christian faith or
no? And thus bring ye the unlearned simple and all that yet believe in your
popish doctrine into doubt of all y^ is written in the holy bible: as whether
God created heaven and earth, and christ be the son of god made man, borne of
the virgin and have redeemed us with his death and resurrection. etc. Into this
dampnable doubt when ye have by your deuillyshe doctrine brought your
disciples, then to be delivered theroute, ye have usurped an authority above
and over gods word by bringinge in this your former faith to know what we
must believe, which your first faith is joined and stayed upon your fathers
holy decrees as ye well wete it. No man so hardly to believe or to receive the
scriptures as gods word unless he with ye court, church (I should say) of Rome
had granted admitted permitted and delivered them to us as to be the catholic
scripture. No ne any man so hardy otherwise to understand or believe the^, then
as this antichriste of Rome and you his bysshoppes by your falsely usurped
power have falsely expouned and interpreted the^. So that this your first faith
of al (as ye call it) is plainly placed upon and correlatiue to the popes holy
decrees. And you folowi^g your holy fathers steps by your tirannous
co^pulsio^ with fire usurping the same auctorite above god, and over his word
compel us yet so to believe it as ye falsely expowne it in this your deuellishe
derke declaracion and in your other false bokis. Thauctori^e and vn^erstanding
^f the scrip^u^e must do ^ende upon ^he pope ^ Gardiners ^^en and mouth
whose arrogant exaltacion above god and his holy word Daniell and Paul so
lively describe, and at last afirme you to be slain with ye same breath of
gods mouth whose course ye co^tende so mightily this day to stop and to
suppress. And even this is your popish drift with your derke termed effect
condition and dowblinge with our only simple plain faith to place the popis
faith first of all, thereby to know chrystis faith, even anticryst ever
contrary to Christ to his faith and to his word, to bring us in to the
knowledge of christ and belief of his gospel. To be confedered with the popes
friends and to write against his enemies, is a shrewd toke^ of a papiste.
which is an evident proof that ye stand yet upon his side to bring him in
again with his first faith of all, as (your books declare you) written for his
part and doctrine, against the popis enemies. I know it reported of diverse
papists, that the pope is more be holden to you for so defendinge him with
your pen agenste his adversaries then to any other of his cardinals and
bishops. And therefore ye may be glad of so high commendacions and praise and so
good a report of the popes frendis. But we yt be christen men under our most
noble king and have renounced the pope with his false first faith and falser
doctrine, will not admit this your popish assercion. That we must have this
his first faith of all to know what we should believe. For we know it by our
undoubted assewered faith which is the knowledge of gods mercy toward us in
christ given us of god that ye holy bible is his undoubted everlasting word,
and constantly we believe all that is contained there in when we read or hear
it, although your holy fathers authority had never so affirmed ne admitted it.

For by ye word of faith, as paul calls it, (...). l^. ^om. 10.
faith is given us, and not by ye false decrees of antichrist. And our faith
stayed upon gods holy word is the self same knowledge of god in christ. Joan
confirminge the same, ^oh. 17. ^sai. 53. Collos. ^.
i. Joan. v. sainge we be certainelye persuaded that the son of god is commen
and has given us mind to know him, which is the truth and we are in ye
truth. At last, since the scriptures be ye thing which we should believe, and
your first faith of all, must go before the knoweledge of the scriptures to be
believed, so must your first faith be joined to, and sustained, not upon the
scriptures, and word of god, but upon man's word. But every man is alyer, both
your holy father, and you to, ergo your first faith of al must need stand upon
and be stayed with lies.

The bys.
The^ I asked doctor. Barnes if a gentil felt him self moved to go hear a
preaching or read some part of scripture, whether would ye call it well done of
him so to do, or were it sin because it were before faith seeing faith is of
hearing. And he said it was good, etc

It is good as the heithen philosophers call their civil moral vertewes good
and the popes scole bona ex, Joy.
or in genere or moraliter and not ex fide yt is a good haithen deed. But
saying we be entered into the Christen religion grounded upon faith iustifyenge.
I answer that he being (as ye say) a gentyle, which is an idolater not yet
beleuinge in christ, his goinge, his hearing or reading is naught and sin
before god, though it apere good before men, for the tree is yet evil, and unto
the vnpure and synful, says Paul, nothing is clean for his heart is not yet
purified by faith. Wherefore as Paul says, what is not of faith is sin.

But because ye say he is moved.

I must ask you farther, whether this mocyon tells him that his haythen
gentylysshe relygyon is false and dampnable, and the christen religion to be
the true way to his salvation in Christ? which motion now thus conceived by
the spirit of faith, I say, this man, goethe forth to hear the word for the
confirmation of his faith into christ to be encreaced and more knoweledge of
the same to be augmented, (...).
thirsting his salvation, as did Cornelius the centurio^, which had his faith
iustifienge him, ere he went forth to hear peter's sermon. And as for your
vain replicacion of no grant, that heithen good deeds iustifye before faith
which comes of hearing, it is not worth a podyng. For because Barnes
granted the gentiles deed to be good which had not yet herd the word,
therefore ye conclude to hastelye, ergo, men be justified before faith, for
though your gentiles deed be one of your good deeds, yet i^ justifies not,
ye ask how he should have faith before he hears the sermon, since faith
comes of hearing? for Barnes (ye say) had granted, in that mocion he was
justified. Your argument therefore is naught worth For ye must learn by
christ's words, that as there be two manner of words, that is to say, the
inward, and exterior word, so are there two manner of hearinges, For faith
comes not only of the outward hearing of the sown that smyteth the
exterior ears, but especially out of the hearing of the interne word that
persethe the heart by the secret instincte and mocion of the spirit
regenerynge the faithful. Of which interne hearing the scripture speaks
saying. Audiam quid loquatur in me dominus deus. I shall hear what thing the
lord god pleasethe him to speak in me. And christ says all that have herd
and be learned of the father, they come to me, and we be al taught of god, of
yt which ears and interne hearing, Christ when he had taught certain
lessons spiritually to be understood out of his allegorike speches: he cried
loud, who so has ears to hear let him hear. Of this interne word of
faith speaks Paul saienge. Nighe in thine heart is the word of faith, Romans
10.
and also in many other places.

And because they nether mind to do any good deeds. The bys,


(Joy. None of your gentile iewishe good deades.)

They would persuade to the world that we can do no manner of good deeds till
we have no need of them. (Joy. As though a justified man were not bound ne
obedient to gods precepts, lo)

for our salvation, That is to say, till we be justified and clearly in gods
perfect favor, and assured by our own belief of life everlasting. And as though
we should say to god give me my wages before hand, and make me sewer that I shall
have heaven and then I promise yt I will forgive my neighbor Oh blasphemy, Joy.
pernyciousely perverting christ's holy word and doctrine, oh wicked lie most
impudente for never find ye these blasphemouse lies in mine ne in any other
christen writers books, we exhort you to moo good works in one lefe of our
books, then ye be able to do all the days of your life. And even this is a
good deed, with gods almyghtye word to confute your popish doctrine:
wherewith ye would yet mayntaine the pope, and bring him in again at your day
so sore longed for It is a good deed to stand on gods part with his word to
resist such antichrists with all your impes. For all our books, if ye would
suffer the^ to be seen, persuade, and exhort the readers to such good works
as god commands, and dissuade and dehort al men from your dampnable
superstitious works, rites, and tradicions of lyeng men. we with christ lay
first the foundation stone, even Christ him self in our ferme and constante
faith. But you peruertinge gods order in doctrine set your works, yea
and that Heathen infidele iewysh works, before faith If a jew or a turk
should come to your scole, would ye first teach him your good works and
popish ceremonies before the true belief into god through christ? and baptize
him ere he believe? The Jews and Turks do such good ciuyle works before men
as ye teach men to be justified thereby. They pray, they fast give almose,
hear and read the scriptures, pay their dettes, bye and sell, and make their
wares truly and justly, keep matrimonye, which they do not without the
common help and grace of god, and yet be they not justified by them before
god, but before men after your iustificacion without and before faith. But we
which have professed the christen religion, grounded upon faith in Christ,
teach the good works which be the fruits of the spirit of faith, and not
your pharisaik rightwisemakynge, ne your iewishe justification, For what has
belial with Christ and the derkenes to do with the light? gal. 5.
The tree must be first good, ere it brings forth good fruit.

And so if belief be required before iustificacion, there arises then a
marvelous perplexite, The bys,
how I should work well ye work of belief, before I am justified. But as we
say, my sins be forgeven because I believe, so because my sins were
forgeuen I did believe.

Go to, Joy.
and skoffe and deride God and his holy word whiles the lord that sits in
heaven laugheth you to skorne, and shall at last smite you suddenly with his
yerney scepter, declaring your arrogante ignorance in that ye here affirm the
work of belief to be man's work, when christ and Paul tells it you, if ye
had ever learned so far. Joan. vi.
That hoc est opus dei (and non hominis) ut credatis. etc. This is the work of
god and not of man, to believe in him whom god has sent, Neither for the
defense of any error, as ye falselye report us, do we enter into so hard a
matter of gods priuey counsel, as ye call predestinacion and make it the
immediate cause of our salvation, as your self blyndely stomble in to it, no
occasion given you, but to declare only your ignorance, as ye say, lest any
other, espienge it in deed should justly prevent you with the same strype. For
we say with Paul That god has chosen us in christ according to his gracious
good will and pleasure and not for our merits, Ephe. 1. and 2.
before to world, was made But wherefore? to do what we list? as reasons
the forlorn saie^g: If I be predestined to be saved, so shall I be saved do I
never so euel, god forbid. but we be predestined says paul to this end that
we should here be faithful holy and blameles before god by love. Ephe. 1.
which has predestined us to be his sons by adopcion through Jesus Christ.
Ephe. 2.
etc. that the glory of his grace should be praised. And that we be created
of god in crist Jesus to do good works prepared of god, and not of our selves,
Ephe. 2^
that we should here walk in them ere we obtain that promised salvation. And
that we be after our election and predestinacion called to be regenered of the
spirit by faith, which spirit of faith in Christ certifieth us of our
eleccion, having now the pledge and ernest of the spirit, 1. co^. 1. Ephe.
1. Rome. 8.
even Christ him self given us, testifieng to our spirits, yt he has chose^
us to be his. This assewraunce in faith is taught us every where in scripture
by gods promises, sealed both with the interne obsignacion of the spirit of
faith and also with the visible seals of his sacraments testifienge to us his
benevolence toward us in christ both by baptism and his holy supper.

And dare you then so arroga^tly say against this holy assiewerd certainty
and obsignation of the spirit in the promises of GOD received in the most
certytude of our faith, and be so bold as to impugn this ferme assewrance
and persuasion of ye spirit of faith, to persuade any man (as ye do) to
dubitacion ignorance unbelief and to doubt of gods holy promised eleccion and
his predestinacion in christ? will ye say against this. That ye faitheful be
saved by predestinacion and their eleccion in christ? whom god has
predestined and chosen they shall be saved, for god repents him not of his
eleccion, but it must necessarelye and immutably come so to pass in his elect
according to his ferme purposed decre in his everlasting immutable providence,
so that it lies in no man's hand to resist his will ne to take any of his
chosen from him. And therefore whiles we that believe to be predestined and
chosen in christ, Our predes^ination election sought and found in christ only
thus search and treat the knowledge of our predestinacion in christ, and
not in gods secret counsel, ne in our selves, in Christ, I say, within the
limits of gods express will and word, there is no such peril therein, ne
is it so hard a matter as ye make it, but ioyouse, sweet and counfortable to
every faithful humble cristian But if ye leave ye light and the way of his
word, and will search, treat, and measure it with your own fond reason and
curiosity of your wit (as ye here do) then be ye worthily cast up of god
into your own forlorn sense and ignorance, strayed away into labyrinths
inextricable into your own confusion, compelled to peruerte and to falsefye
the scriptures wresting them to seem to agree and to serve your ignoraunte
reason for fear (as ye say) of your mere necessity all things to be done,
dreamed out of your own feeble brain which cannot in the scriptures see with
saint Austen, the necessyte in ye will of god predestenynge to stand with the
free will of the predestined, to do good. And again with the necessity of
reprobacion in gods will to stand the liberty into evil in the reprobated, so
that his dampnacion be imputed unto him self, for his own voluntary fault. ^
volun^ary neces^ite.
Nether can ye see how this necessity is no compulsion, ne constrained
necessity but a voluntary necessity. God will have mercy of whom he list, and
harden whom it lyketh him. The cause inscrutable of his divine secret will is
worthily hidden from us, so profounde are his judgments that man's reason
cannot attain to the^ and yet will your fond wit be ready to accuse god of
vnrightwisenes, oneles he give you a reason to your mind, and a rekening why
(since all things depend of your mere necessity* and of the secret godly
just will) he should dampne any man?

As though the potter were bound to give a reckoning to his claye, wherefore
he has not made all his vessels thereof a like in honor. And as though gods
deep inscrutable iugementes and will, must be measured with your high wit.

Oh miserable man, that thou art (says Paul) which dare replye reason
with, and incuse thy maker on this manner: as though God were bound to
attemper the magnitude of his secret works to thy rude capacity. Are his
divine works perverse because they be hid to thy sinful reason and carnal
wit?

Be we therefore content with this answer of God, Mat. 20.
to the murmures in his vyneyarde. It is my will, It is my pleasure thus to do
with my now^e, and thus to use my creatures to my glory. It is god that has
made all things for him self, prour. 16.
and for his own will, even the wiked unto an euel day. And hardined pharaos
heart worthily, and yet is he not therefore thautor of evil as man's fo^d reason
gathers thereof. For we know that as the foot paths of the lord lie in the
seas, ^sal. lxxvi.
and his foot steps be not seen, even so lie his works in all things even
in the wicked forlorn, and be not seen to man's reason, which at his godly
pleasure so disposes and ordeineth ye secret deep iugementes of his
unsearchable will by his godly providence in all men, that as it pertains to
his wisdom to forsee all things to come, so belongs it to his power to rule
and moderate all things with his almyghtie present forth stretched hand.
Senharib was a wicked heithen king, and yet God used the same (him self not
knowinge it) to be his instrumente to scourge his people, Isay.x.
the king him self entendynge nothing else then ambicion cruelty, and
myscheife,. Here did neither the king ne his people the the Jews in this
work of god espy his jot steps, much less in his predestinacion and
reprobation, for if they had seen them, blind reason would have anon
concluded, God to be ye author of evil, or else not have justly punished the
king, saying he did but gods will and his message. Let god therefore as Isaye
says work s^raunge works unknown to us to work his own, Isay.xxvii^
as he did when he sprange forth in the mount Perazim, and declared his fury in
ye vale of Gibeon. All that is before written of this matter, it is written says
Paul for our doctrine to have counfort by the scriptures and hope thereby of
our salvation, Rom, xv
and not to fear us from the wholesome study and meditacion thereof, ne to bring
us into any perplex dout of our election and predestinacio^ i^ christ, as your
process appears after ye left Paul's words and fell into your own reasonynge
therein, calling the words of the holy ghost, idle reasonyngs, and wrappinge
them in irreverently, with the idle saings and reasonings of the greeks (as ye
term them) bringing in your absolute mere necessite, and man's life, death,
manners behauioure. etc. and every thing to be fixed (ye say both in skoffe
and derision) of God, and fastened in his place appointed, with nails,
ryuetted and clenched with mere necessity. etc. By such blasphemouse
skornefull speech and writing of the mere necessity of gods eternal most
mighty immutable will, wisdom and power, effectuousely to perform his
divine decreed operations and actions, unable to be resisted, ye openly
declare your self to be not so perfytly minded as ye ought to be thus
irreverently without fear, to write upon your creatore. Of which manner men
of so depraved and corrupt mind, Dauyd speaks saing The skoffinge fool says
in his heart, that god is not god. Psalm. 13. c 2.14.
Then ye reherce many that may be made obieccions against you of gods
in^allible foreknowlege and necessarily decreed will and providence and
predestinacion, but with all the colored rethrike ye have ye cannot assoyle
one of them. And as for fre liberty to do good, no man has it, til the
spirit of liberty, through christ, has taken away his bond liberty (if
such one may be called fre liberty) to sin and made in him a free liberty
to do good as the scripture and Austen every where declares it. And again,
That the necessite unable to be changed in gods decreed will, necessiteth no
man by coacction to sin but it is the voluntary necessity of man's corrupt
nature that drives him to sin in which corrupt nature ye should if ye were
learned, and not i^ gods ^ecret will seek ma^s necessite to sin. so that God is
no author of sin (which be far from all christen men's thoughtis) but just
and holy in all his works, and used pharaous worthily deserved voluntary
induracio^ unto his own glory. He tempted Job, and Satan temptid the same,
here is one and the same accion, but of unlike ente^ts wills and endis, For
god tempted, him to prove his patience, to exercise his faith hope and love
and to set him up an example of patience before all afflicted faithful men, But
Satan tempted him to bring him into blasphemouse murmurings against god by
impacie^cy, and so to despayer and to dampnacion. The scripture says that the
father delivered up his own son to be crucified for us, and christ delivered
up him self into their handis. And Judas and ye bishops delyured him up into
his crucifiers handis, But god did it for his glory and our redempcio^ Judas
and the high preistis did it of avarice envy and malice. So that the diversity
of the endis, manner, willis, intent and the affectis of the doers in the same
accio^, make it good to one and evil to a another, Ye provoke me much to
digress and to contend with you in the matter of predestinacion and fre
liberty, thereby craftily to call me into a new feld from our proposed cause of
iustificacion, as though either ye were weary of, or mistrusted your false part
therein, And especially in this place.

Antequam Abraham fierer, Ego Sum. In which text, ye play and daley before
time, aftir time, above time, yea and out of time to, asking me whether
(before) signifies time or no time, whereof ye say my plain scolers can no
skill. (And I dare sai, no more can you) For in this text ye tomble in your
tences present and paste, done, undone, or in doing, placinge ye present tence,
in god before the pretertence in man, as though, Sum, in that place, ego sum,
were a verb substantive, and not the essenciall name of god to Moses. Exo.
iii. that he should tell his people his name to be this word, sum, when he was
bode to say. sum misit me ad uos. that is to say, Jehovah, he that has his
being of him self, and all creatures their being of him has sent me to you.
For god is not measured ne tenced with time, ye should have conferred the text
and ye should have seen that christ's mind was first to declare him self to
the Jews to be very man in that he told them, Abraham desired to see his
day, that was of his incarnacyon, and then in end of the chapter he declared
him self to be very God namynge him self by his essencyall name expressed to
them in Exodo, where he said, ego sum qui sum Which is but as cold a speech
as to say. A man is a man. except the sharp demonstracion called emphasis be
intended upon the later, Sum, in an higher sharper and harder accent. So that
if that name ineffable might be expressed, as it cannot be of man, yet to
point us unto it as it were a farrof, the learned in the tongues insinuat it by
this latin nowne, existo existonis as one might say, I am that essenciall
being as I said before. So that ye have declared your ignorance in deed to
take gods essenciall ineffable name, for the verb Sum es fui, a verb of the
present tence: making no difference betwixt the first Sum and the last, in
this sentence. Ego sum, qui sum. For ye may time and tence the first Sum, but
so can ye not the later Sum. which god used when he bode Moses tell them,
Sum, has sent me unto you, and Christ used the same his essenciall name,
here unto the Jews, in this text Antequam Abraham nasceretur ego sum. Before
abraham was borne I had my being of my self and al creaturs their being by
me. This is the trwe englishinge there of as we may wtours to ska^t a spech
declare it. And therefore says Austen. Appende verba, and agnosce mysterium
etc. Antequam Abraham fieret. Intellige fieret ad humanam naturam. Sum, veroad
diuinam pertinere substantiam. way these words and aknowlege the mystery.
Before Abraham was made, understand thou, this word (was made) to pertayne to
his humane nature. But ye word (Sum) to pertain to the divine substance. But
it would ask to great a book to refute all your errors and ignorances in this
pese and in other of your book, and therefore I towche but some of them, and
haste me again to your sainge in your xlvii. lefe folowinge co^cerninge our
first proposed matter of iustificacio^,

A controversy there is, how god works this iustificacion in man, The bys.
whether to iustifye he gives him one gift of faith or two gifts of faith
and charity. And in this controversy one thing is very perverse, that these
which say that god iustifiethe man with one gift of faith only, will be seen
more to extol god in his favor unto man then they that say god gives three
gifts in the justification.

I say with Christ, saint Paul and with all the old holy doctors that god
to iustifye man gives but only the one gift of faith believing into Christ
unto the only accion of his justification, Joy.
albeit there be three gifts in the man justified, as faith, hope, and love,
not idle waiters to be set a work, as ye rail and ieste of gods holy
gifts. Neither Paul taught of god, bringing but the one gift of faith,
excludynge all the other from the act of iustificacion, does peruersely (as ye
say) in extollynge god thereby when he brings in Abraham only by faith
justified and therefore to give all the glory unto god. Romans iiii. and likewise
of every man by faith only justified and not of works. Ephe. ii. howesoeuer
it lyketh you to skof it out, I know of how fond a dream and false a
ground ye argewe against me and master Bucer to prove your charity to be
concurrante with faith in the act of justification, or else (as ye full wisely
say) charity to stand by idle till she be set a work. Gardiners faith
formed, and unformed shapt and shaples.
For ye have dreamed it with friar dunce, that there is a material shaples
faith and a formal fashioned faith. And that your material faith must stand
idle, as ye test of Charity, and can do nothing without her shape and
formalitie, whereby she is formed and shaped into accion formed with charity.
By which fond dream ye would make (I say) your shapeles faith to stand idle
till your cold charity had set her a work A goodly godly frierly dream lo.
But the scripture teaches us that faith in her own essenciall self and
consideration is as actual, effectuouse, and as formally fashioned as is
charity in her essencial self. For the syngle spiritual gifts of god admit
no such physic composition as ye dream. And as effectually as charity
loves god known first by faith in Christ so effectually and as formally
works only faith first her proper accions, as to believe in god
apprehendinge his promises in christ, and there is no idleness in either of the
gifts, for as God gives none of your material shaples gifts, so gives he
no idle gifts, as ye blaspheme him and his gifts, we teach therefore with
gods word, faith hope and charity, to be essencyally distinct, but not
divided in sundry: And we know, and teach it, that says in her self has
her own proper formal accions as to purify hertes, to certyfye the soul of
her forgeuenes in CHRIST, faith. knows god in Christ, faith sets ye
conscience at rest, faith apprehends the fre promises in christ, faith
seethe god and things invisible, faith pleases god, faith goes unto god with
many mo her own peculiar works expressed. Heb. xi. Faith declares her self
effectuouselye by the works of charity of hope of patience, almose. etc. But
by which of al these her proper works does faith iustifye? verily the
scripture says by her beleuinge in god through christ Jesus, him to be given
her, to have suffered and satisfied for her sins, made of god the father her
rightewisenes, holiness, wisdom and redemption. By this only act of faith is
man justified before she declares her self by her works of love, for the
thing loved must be first known by faith. Faith justifies in that she
works by belief into christ certifieng and inducyng us into the communion,
by which work faith iu^tifieth.
and doing Christ's ryghtwysnes upon us to be our own vesture common to him
and to us coueringe us thus beleuinge in him: Gene. 27.
as it was well fygured in Jacob covered with his elder brothers clothes and
vestures so well sauoringe in his fathers nose whereupon he received his
blessinge in that blessed sead contrary to the curse and malediccion.

This word only faith has and does maintain much bablinge when ye join it
to faith saying, only faith iustifyeth, The bys.
and defendinge y^, ye trouble the people. etc.

It mainteineth the more bablyng and gendereth the mo erroures by your popish
Antichristen doctrine teaching with other heritiques that faith and works
together must justify, Joy.
It is your popish Pelagians babbling, for your works, da^pning christ and
saint Paul in the places I alleged against you, and ye have not yet soluted
them, ye accuse of sich babbling Austen, Ambrose, Hierom, Uulgarye, Chrisostom,
Hugh Cardinal, Erasmus, so often in his learned and godly work of his
Paraphrase upon ye new testament with many mo both godly and learned men
afformynge only faith to iustifye.

Read Origene (and ye ^yste) upon this place. Arbitramur hominem fide
iustificari. etc. and call him and the other reherced, mainteiners of much
babbling. If to say only faith iustifyeth mainteyneth so much babbling, as
ye babble and blustre for your sinful works, so have all these said great
learned and holy men interpretinge the scriptures done much hurt and troubled
their readers. It is no marvel ye babble so boldly, and impugn so blyndlye
this verite of faith only justifying, for ye never knew what this faith is.
It is neither your acquisite ne your formed ne unformed faith, nether your
assenting historik faith, neither your explicit ne implicit faith, neither
your fained ne dead faith, neither the diuellis faith, nor yet your first
faith of all, that we join with the exclusyue, only, but it is the lively
iustifienge faith, faith iustifyinge.
even the ferme assiewred knowledge of gods benevolence toward us, which
grounded upon the verity of the free promise in Christ, is both reveled to
our minds, and presented into our hertis by the holy ghost. And therefore are
these words, Iustitia iustificatio and iustificari often times joined to
faith only, and never to Charity ne to works to iustifye before God, Paul
using in express words these exclusiues. Absque operibus and sine operibus
legis, gratis nisi. etc. That is frelye without the works of the law.

And where the Jew (as now do you) for his iustifycatyon obiecteth his
works. Paul tells him playnelye. Thy gloriacyon in thy works is excluded
by romans 3.
by the authority of faith. And to exclude all other accions, and merits of
works, he adds. Gratis per gratiam per fidem. that is freely through faith.
And Christ bids him believe only, and thou shalt have thy desire: Also
Paul expresses it with this exclusive, Gal. 2.
nisi, affirminge, we know it, man not to be justified of the works of the
law but by faith, which like speech Christ uses by the same exclusive,
luke. 18.
nisi, to prove only God to be good, sainge. Nemo bonus nisi unus, Nempe deus.
There is none good but one, that is god, as much to say as christ him self
expresses it, there is none good nisi solus deus, but only god. For the same
power has, nisi, to exclude in negative propositions, as have Solum and tantum
in affirmatiues.

They trouble the people with a fine distinction of offices, saying that in
iustificacion of man, The bys,
it is the only office of faith to iustyfye. And charity and hope there
waytyng without office whiles the man be justified.

Here ye play sir Thomas Moris part, which when he was suborned of you the
spirituality to write against the truth, Joy.
and could not solute the scriptures ne arguments laid against him, then he
skoffed and iested them out. Better learned men then you call the acts of
faith and charity, offices, ne a more proper term can there be given them, if
ye list to se what officium is, and whereof it comes, mary I mean not of
such offices as ye constitute among your officers, as butlers, cokes. etc. And
here because the truth of God, and your lies be at so deadly a discord you
having no truth for your cause to be defended, ye put to this shameless lie
of me, that I should write, Charity and hope there to wait without office
whiles the man be justified, which nether I ne any else but such as ye be
did ever say it. But I say it yet again to you this which ye shall never
justly avoid ne confute, The officie of faith, of hope, ^ of love
That it is the office act property or nature (call it as ye list) of faith
only to apprehende the free promised forgeuenes in christis most preciouse
innocent blood. Nether is hope idle. For it is the constant expectacion of
those things conceived by faith out of the word of god, which hope shameth us
not. Nether is love there idle, but is the fruit of faith even the good
affecte toward god and beneficence toward our neighbor to fulfill the works of
mercy. For the gifts of the holy ghost break not forth into works in the same
instant they be sown into ye soul of man, but receive their nourishment and
encreace and be nolesse idle then is the good earth and the grane sown lapped
therein all that time before the grane spiereth and apere above ye ground, The
holy ghost as he gives no idle but fruitful gifts at their dew tune, so
suffers he not his gifts to lie idle in his good soil, although ye have
little grace to consider and see it, but rather to blaspheme him and his gifts
with your skoffinge idle waiting, having rather respect to your idle waiting
servants in your skornefull allusion. Though your self sleep or wink and se
not at al times yet may ye not say in such times, that God has given you
idle eyes. And for that your superciliouse morositie, is so of^ended with the
term (office) of faith, what difference (I pray you) put ye betwixt these two
sainges. The eye only sees, and it is ^he only office thereof to see? neither
is there any man so brutyshe, as in this speech. It is the only office
expressinge the cause formal, of faith to justify, to exclude god the cause
efficiente out of his office. For (only as Paul teaches, excludes the
workis of the law and not god from the act of iustificacion as ye cavil to
seek euasions, verily if ye were of god, ye would never impugn so manifest
verities with siche trifflinge skoffes and cauillacions ne trouble and hinder
christ's chirch to seduce them with these your fond and false bokis. But ye
stand a little to high in your own conceight, beware ye fall not. Dominus
videt et iudicat. Que stat caveat ne cadat. he yt stond let him beware he
falls not.

The. bys
And so (only) is now shifted from faith to thoficie of faith, And these be
they that accuse other men of darkness.

Now harken (good reader) wether this be so derke a shift, Joy.
Only ye ear hears, and it is the only office of the ear to hear. this
bishop would have it the office of charity also to justify, and I, to exclude
charity from yt office, tell him that it is the only office of faith and not
of any other gift to iustifye. and have constantly confirmed it by scriptures.

But the scripture tells me that who so loves not remains in death. The
bys.
And therefore if the state of a justified man be life in Christ, which is
godly love has as well her office in justification to give life as faith has
her office to be in knowelege the most certain ground and foundation of it,
and hope her office to be placed and establyshed upon them both.

I deny your long babbling vain and dark argument which is this breifely in
few words. Joy.
The office (here be ye compelled to use this term office) of charity is to
give life ergo charity justifies. A like argument the office of charity is
to be pacient, ergo charity justifies. But what and if I deny your
antecedence, and prove it by scripture, that faith and not love is the life of
the justified. Abacuc. ii. The just man lives in his faith. For faith has not
this epithete, ut uiua dicatur, that is to be called lively except there were
life in her, whereof the just lives.

Abacuc. ii. Also Paul says. The life which I now live in my flesh, per
fidem uiuo filij dei. I live it by the faith of the son of god. And John
says, he that remains in love dwells in life, the cause why Abacuck and
Paul declares for that he that remains in love dwells in faith, which
is the life of the just, So yt to abide in love, declares the man to continue
in the life of faith. But I argew thus to you, Charity can not love god onles
she first know god. but by faith iustifienge god is first known, ergo faith
iustifienge is before charity louinge. Wherefore charity justifies not. For
the thing must be first known ere it be beloved, Then thus, faith
iustifienge is before charity loving, For the man is justified in the former
accion of faith knowing and beleuinge in gods mercy through christ. For faith
is a lyuelye faith in her own proper work of belief into christ, ere she
works by charity. But you would make charity egall in accion with faith, in
the work of iustificacion, which ye shall never do with all the popes law ne
with all his dirtye divinity, ye have. And to prove your popish part, ye
sweat greatly to join life to charity as though then ye had your purpose.
And in your.lv. lefe folowinge, ye say the scripture gives life to charity,
but ye dare not allege that scripture: as I have alleged life to be given to
faith, ye would here by adjoining life in charity, to be concurrant with faith in
iustificacion (as I perceive) make faith your material shaples dead and an
idle faith, till charity sets her a work giving to faith her form and
life. But this dream will not serve you, as I have told you before.

And then ye say hope must be placed and establyshed of faith and love
contrary to the hole order and treaty of them thorowout all the scripture, as
ye se it distinctly, orderlye, and plainly in all and in every part and
pistle of the Apostles, and in the prophets, first of faith, then of hope,
and last of all of love, if you understand them. Then ye prate pertly of your
works before your iustificacion. And I tell you Show me but any one of your
good works before your justification before god and I shall soon tell you
whether it be good or badde, yea and that by the true twich stone of godis holy
word that lies not.

Joy violently writes this text of scripture, The bys.
when ye have done all that I have commanded you then say you we be
unprofitable servants. etc, and all to diminishe thestimacion of good works,

Joy.
after. ^udolph in vita Christi.
This bishop violentlye wresteth this text with the monks exposicion of the
chartir house to serve for his and their merits whereupon theirs and all other
monkish howses were founded and builded till the gospel ouerthrewe them as it
shall shortly subuerte your byshoprykes to, as christ's own exposition of the
same text playnelye declares it. Your monkish gloss is. That be cause god is
rich enough. and want nothing, ne needs our commodity goodis ne profit by
our dedis, therefore we must say, we be servants unprofitable to him. But
christ tells us a another cause, sainge. Say that ye be servants unprofitable,
be cause ye have done but your abounden dewty. For what thank has that
servant because he has done but yt he is commanded to do? These be Chrystis
wordis to destroy your merits and supererogacion workis to merit more then ye
need which overplus ye sell to other men for money and land to be given to your
bishopriks, and abbeis, therefore ye may be ashamed to render any siche a
popish cause contrary to christis own wordis: ye say god has no need of our
commodite, profit, and service, It is trwthe. and therefore ye serve him
theraftir, redier to serve your lustis the devil the pope and the world. God
co^ma^deth us and al creatures to serve hi^, but aftir you, nether to promoue
ne to set forth his glory name and goodness ne one to profit a another. Christ
bids us so to let our light shine before me^ that they saying our good.
math. v.
works might glorifye our father in heaven. And what ye do to the lest of mine,
ye do it to me, says he, so that his pleasure profit and commodity by our
service consists and remains yet still in his church and his members. And
as the tolerances, persecucions, and inuries, done to his members he rekeneth
them done to himself, as it is to se, collos. i. act. ix. so accepts he al
benefits and works of mercy and service done to his church of the pore
faithful members of christ as done and common to himself. as ye se mat. xxv. For
which vtilite and profit done to him in his members he calls us (contrary to
your exposicio^) profitable and faithful servants to hi^, For he needs our
service in his church and members, and necessary it is yt all his creatures
so serve him, since he has therefore created them to celebrate his gloriouse
name, and given them and us commandment so to do. Albeit god is
omnisufficiente and almightye rich in himself, yet standinge the creacion of
al things in heaven and earth to minister and serve him according to his
precepte, it is necessary his glory and goodness to be spread and celebrated by
their service. God needs not our goods, ergo he needs not our service? how
folowteh your argument? saying he has created al things to serve him. ye be a
rich bishop having of al things enoughe and need not your servants goods,
yet seeing ye have servants it is necessary that they serve you, al though ye
be able to serve your self, wherefore I pray ye be as good for gods service as
for your own, for it stands and makes as miche for his honor to require our
service as it does for your honor to be served, orels ye would pervert the
universal order of the world, if kings and magistrates having, servants
should have no need of their service. Ye say god needs no service of us. when
he bids you therefore, to go into his vyneyarde to plough up men's hearts with
his word therein to be sown and planted, and to feed his flock. Tushe, may ye
say, god needs none of my service by your exposition, for he is able enoughe
to do it him self, my service can not profit him, and so his service and
precept forsaken, ye may go into the popes garden there to play the gardener,
plant, and sow his popish rites, tradicions and deuyllishe doctrine still as
ye have done to poison the simple souls with errors and heresies. To whom it
shall be said at last. O euel and unprofitable servant. etc. take him away
and his hands and fete bounden, cast him into exterior derkenes, where is
weping and gnasshinge of tethe. Then ye say. Gods service is profitable to us,
but if ye did believe your own saying, ye would serve him ernestlier then ye do,
and seek that profit in his service with the perell of your life, as did
Christ and his apostles with their true successors, forsaking all that they
had to follow him in his service of faithful and free preachinge his gospel.
Paul in his vocation ever sought the profit of the other to be saved with the
great pains, presonmentes, and perel of his own life, so that he said it were
more profit for him self to be with Christ then here still. Where ye se that
Christ's servants, serve not for their own profit, as ye say in your false
exposition, but for other men's profyt, for charity seeks not her own but
other men's profyt. Then ye say, the state of men's servants is to do their
masters profyt, and not their own. But I think every good faithful servant
to reke^ his masters profit to be his own and so should ye teach them if ye
will have good servants. Let us se whether this servant in the parable being
all the day in the field, (...) xvii.
doing his masters profytte, contrary to your exposition, did not also his
own? Had he not all his living of his master? which was no small profit to
him self. (...) xix.
Then ye bring in for your the other servant that profitethe him self and not
his master christ, this text. Si uis ab uitam ingredi serua mandata. If thou will enter into life keep the commandments, as though he keeping the
commandments should have therefore deserved heaven. And then as Paul says,
Christ had dyed in vain for that servant. But ye know to what servant
Christ spoke those words, even to the young rich lawier and pharisaies
scoler, taught of them to go to heaven, by doing good deeds and not by faith
in christ. The person of the speaker, and his question induced Christ, so to
temper his answer to his mind. For this lawier was so seen and noseled in
the law and works that he was (as ye be) persuaded by the pharisais to go to
heaven by his own doing and not by christ's suffringe: and thus went he forth
blyndened with the confidence of works. Now (I pray ye) what profit got
this your young pharisaicall scoler, who ye say so profited him self and not
his master by his service? although he said he had kept all the reherced
commandementes from his youth, he had no profit by that service, as ye say,
he had, for even here he forsook his master, and went his way heuely, christ
pronouncynge how impossible it was for such a servant to come to heaven.
Wherefore this text with all the former exposition of the the first text make
plain against your self and against all your servants, and their services
so wisely brought in for your fond and false purpose and are all your own
kayes to cleave your logges and your own hatches to open your locks. Even the
process and conference of the text before from the beginning of the chapter
whereof christ was moved to tell his disciples this parable of that bond
servant not to work for wages, but because it was his abounde^ deutye, would
lead you into the true understanding thereof, had ye grace so to observe your
own so often reherced rule. For Christ had given his disciples in the beginning
of that chapter all to hard and impossible to man, (...) xvii.
a precepte of injuries, and hurtes, so often to be forgeuen, and bodde them
beware, and take heed to them selves, seeing that needs must such sclaunders
and offendicles come. This precept of patience and love to forgive their
enemies, sclaunderers and hurters so often as they offend us, they knowinge it
to be so impossible to the nature of man to corrupt with the natural love of
him self, and again, saying faith to be so mighty a gift whereby the law is
fulfilled, rom iii.x. cetle. xxxii
when love is to weak to do it, prayed him to increase and strengthen their
faith. Then Christ tells them the power and might of faith, being as little as
the musterde seade, yet thereby should they do things impossible to the nature of
man to do, even to command the deep roted great wild fygtree to rende up her
rotes, and to be transplanted in the sea, declaringe thereby, that the law
impossible to man to be fulfilled, yet by faith, how faith not work fulfilleth
the law.
we beleuinge christ to have fulfilled it for us, do remove his fulfillynge so
transplanted in us, that we by faith fermelye have his fulfillinge of the law
as our own, he being made of his father our ryghtwisenes, in which his
ryghtwysenes, and not in our own we appearinge before his seat, and presence
have not our sins imputed to us, so justified, obteyning that last and
perpetual blessinge given to all his blessed chosen children. To confirm this
doctrine, and to destroy your false popish supererogicio^ works and merits.
Christ knytteth to the parable. Saying, which of you having a bond
seruante, (al gods elect be his bond servants to do his commandments of
deutye, and to serve him lokynge for no wages) ploughinge and fedinge your
catell in the field will say to him as soon as he come home, come, sit down
and eat, but will rather bid him, saying, go and prepare for my souper, and
dress the to serve me till I have eaten* which done, eat thou and drink: will
he commend or give him any thanks for doing but his duty? No I think. Here
ye see how Chrsti expoundinge him self, destroieth your merits to be looked
for your deeds of deutye and bond service.

And even so (says he) say ye and think it in deed, we be servants
unprofitable, for that we have done but our abounden deutye. Now go to, and
tell you us your other tale and monkishe dream, that we be servants
unprofitable, because god is so rich that he needs not our service. a faier
reason, and goodly gloss for your merits, ye be a rich and valeaunt bishop,
and be able to set up wype, and curry your own horse, ergo ye need no
service, but may do it your self. Do not the obediente ministration of his
angels and the obedience and service of his creatures al make for the glory
of god to be celebrated among us, although we know him omni sufficient?

Here thou see, christen reader) how impudently and arrogantlye this bishop
dare render another and contrary cause and exposition of the text then Christ
him self has left us in plain words, and then say, that I in expressing
and alledginge justly Christ's words, do violentlye wreste and write them.
But what is it that Antichriste dare not do and say against christ and his
veritye to falsefye the scriptures, to thentent he might wreste them to seem
to serve his deuyllyshe doctrine? We know that god is almighty, infinite
rich, and needs not our goods but yet as he commanded the first fruits of
every thing to be offered up unto him, so would he all his gifts in us, yea
and all our deeds, service, words, and thoughts to be consecrated into his
glory and honor, and into the edification and profit of his body and members,
which so doing we be servants faithful and profitable for him, and to
other, as the scripture calls us, and thus we sanctifye and celebrate and
magnifye his holy name, as he commands it, Then ye chopin this text of
zachary. Vtsine timore. etc. To prove your merits to deserve deliverance from
our enemies, and so to live and serve him in holiness and well doing. But ye
sleyghtly leave out him, by whose merits we be thus delivered.

Ye should have read the verses before, and then ye should have seen, that
GOD the father had erected our mighty health, even christ, that by him, and
his power and merits, we delivered from our enemies might serve him without
fear in holy living. But such pieces ye can omytte as impertinente to your
evil purpose. And these be the hatchets ye bring in, to open your lewd
locks.

And after this sort they use predestinacion, The bys.
which being signified to us for our counforte, do declare what care god has
of us whereby we should be the more encouraged to work having god to our
help. etc.

Joy.
Why then in your book of necessary enstruccions command ye the people to
beware of predestinacion and not to meddle therewith lest they fall into any
vain trust in it, these be your words, and teach that no man should be sewer
thereof, ne of his election? Now ye say it is written for our counforte, and
anon ye fear men from it, now it is a vain trust and then it is a
counfortable adsewraunce, and anon ye put all men in dout thereof and of their
election in Christ, making faith no faith, but a waueringe doubt, ne gods
promise of no effect. So inconstant and waueringe is your doctrine. Which
predestinacion, ye say, we use it as your hatchet to open locks. And I say,
your self use it, as a nose of wax against the fire.

But now I return to you master Joy.

(Joy, And I to you my lord. The bys.
)

And where ye appose me, whether when I considered theffecte of christ's
passion, I believed it or no? I profess I believed.

Then ye ask whether I believed it to be effectual to me. To this I answer
you That first I believed, it was and is effectual to me in my baptism wherein
I obtained remission of my sins and renouacion of life.

I perceive ye let great skorne to be apposed of me. Joy.
But yet I would ye answered me directely to my question, For I asked you
whether now seen your baptism when ye taught your scolers this conclusion,
then being a sinner, as every man is, when ye first considered your sins in
your self and looked upon your effect that is remission in christ's passion,
whether then, I say, ere ye looked to any other condition the^ upon only
faith, which is your first condition, ye believed Christ's passion to be
effectuouse to you or not? If ye did, so must ye neades be justified by only
faith and by no other co^dicio^, which ye must nedis grant magry your tethe,
For as ye believe, according to gods promise so must it infallibly come to you.
But in your answer, fearing lest ye should be justified by faith only, the
bishop is afraid lest he should be justified by only faith.
ye shift from this time, to your baptism where ye would couple your faith
divided, part to christ and part to your baptysme by both to gither to be
justified, as though not faith only in christ, ne christ's death were
sufficient, But I will stop ye in from that stertinge hole thereby not so to
escape, And must by your leave appose ye yet again, and ask you whether before
your body was doped into the font with the wordis of baptism, ye believed or
no. If ye say no, so make ye your godfathers and god mother liars and your
self to, which all affirmed in your person Credo. I believe, or else the priest
had chrystened an infidele. For the order of Christis doctrine is yt the
doctrine and profession should go before the baptism as ye see it both in
infantes and waxen. If one should come to you to be baptized, ye would first
enstructe him in our faith and hear him openly profess it ere ye put him into
the water as christ taught and commanded his apostles to do, saying, Go and
teach all nations my gospel and whatsoever else I have taught you and them
that believe baptize into the name of the father and etc. This order observed
the apostles in their acts first preachinge ye law to show them their sins
and then the gospel of remission in christ, the use of baptism:
which thing believed, the hearers be justified before god and regenered of
the spirit of faith thereby obsigned and sealed certifyed of their eleccion in
christ, And then is the exterior obsignacion of baptism with water the
testificacio^ to the church added to certifye them the same person to have
had received ye spirit of faith Bap^^^me is the testification to ^he church of
the regeneration of the spirit.
and to be regenered before of god, so that as circumcision was to the Jews
chirch, signaculum iusticie fidei that is the exterior seal testimonial of the
justification by faith, lo is baptism with water the exterior seal testifienge
to us that the baptized is justified also by faith, and certifieth the
congregation as a testification of the benevolence of God toward the baptized,
and of his spiritual gifts received. For the water says Austen, is but an
elemente and nothing without the word of promise, which is the word of
faith iustifienge before the person be baptized.

Baptizme with water therefore is the testificacion and seal, certifyenge the
hole congregation of his incorporation and member of christ's chirch to be
admitted into their societe to pray to hear the word with them and to
receive the lords supper. Besides that baptism in figure is ye perpetual
custodi of ye christen life by mortificacio^ and repe^tau^ce signified by the
dopinge into the water in the death and burial of christ, and his resurrection
us to rise up continually into a new life, ephe. iiii collos. ii. gal. iii.
as Paul teaches us. Romans vi. Thus did Philip first enstruct the queens
courtyer of Candace, and then asked him whether he believed with all his heart,
that is constantly and purelye, before he would baptize him. And Paul and Silas
observed the same order with the keeper of the presone, act. xvi.
when the keeper being in a desperate mind for fear they had been fled, would
have slain him self, but otherwise advertised by Paul, he comen to him
self, said. Masters what must I do to be saved. which answered. Believe
into the LORD Jesus, and thou with all thy house shalt be saved. After which
belief they were baptized.

This is sufficient to declare the use of our baptism with water, and that we
be justified by faith only before it, ere we can repent frutfully, and thus is
al your popish trysh trash contained in your other second condition clean wypt
away from thatainment of iustificacion. And if ye have any works else in your
condition, ye see that they must come bake and follow faith iustifyinge, and not
go before it. For when Peter affirms (whom ye allege for Paul) that by
faith hertes be made pure, act. xv.
he shows it, that by no externe visible ne material signs or creatures as
causes essenciall as by water and such like, men's hertes be purified, but
only of God through faith, where Chrisostom says. A sola fide illa assecuti
sunt and non operibus vel circumcisione. Of only faith have they obtained
those things and not for works or circu^cisio^. Then ye say. By yt sacrame^^
of your penance ye believe to recover the state of grace. I perceue that
although ye be a lawier, yet would ye seem to be seen in scole matter bringing
in dunces and such friars dead dreams now articled in louayn saienge. That the
sacraments of the new law iustifye and confer grace. Sed hoc uerum est ubi
non interponitur obex. But yt is true where there is no let to bar them out
from yt high preuilege. The scripture affirms Christ every where to be the
door bar, to let them and all other creatures from that privilege to give
grace and remission of sins, for else he should have dyed in vain. But ye
must ask your doctoure dunce and his fryerly faryne of lovaine, by what
scriptures he and they prove this dream, and then are ye all set a ground. If
your sacrament of penance should recover and give ye grace, and your penance
a weary work, so were grace tediously deserved, and then (says Paul) grace
were no grace, Grace is a fre gift given us for christis merits only, here ye
do with the scole men tectely with your (rekouer) declare your self a
palliated pelagian. Beware of such doctrine for it is naught, and vnkouer it
again with your rekouer. For ye kouered this pelagians pot before with your
penance as I have justly refuted it. For and if ye were asked by which part
of your popish penance, as whether by your confession auriclare, or by your
contricion, or your insufficient satisfaccion, or whisperinge absolucion, or by
any other deed enjoined you ye rekouer this state of grace, ye should bring us
forth but a nakedneste out of your condition. For if ye believe (as ye say ye
do) in any of the popis sacraments or in any part of them thereby to enjoy
theffecte of Christis passion, having no word of faith ne promise of christ
therein, ne word of institucion of the same to stablish and sustayn your faith,
ye shall have but a doutful wave ringe forgeuenes and as fearful and unquiet a
conscience when ye shall be apposed in ye article of death of your gostly
adversaries and assawted with sin, desperacion, the judgment of god, our
works may not sustain the iudgement^ of god.
death and hell, For your faith in your sacrament of penance not sustained of
gods promise, will then fainte and have a fall. The most holy repentant men
praid god not to enter into judgment with them according to their desertis, for
then should noman lyuinge be justified in gods sight. And again in the psalm If
thou, lord, shuldst look narowly upon our wykednesses, Lord, who might abide
it? Hitherto have I proved constantly by scripturs, Faith iustifynge to go
before baptism. And now what condition of yours soever comes aftir baptysme
the same must follow iustificacion, but your penance folowethe wrapped in
clothes as rocked in cradle, when ye world was yet. And even the^, Adam by
faith in that promised sead obtained remission and was justified as were all
the holy fathers long before Joan bap. was borne, and Joan bap. himself,
think ye not but that he was justified before christ preched? ye would make a
meruelouse world and bring us in a new strange doctrine, if there were no
remission of sins till christ had preached and suffered. was he not the lo^be
slain from the begininge? If ye look well of abells oblacion, and of the
sheep slain to kouer adam and Eues nakedness with the skynes, ye shall see
Christ's remission of sins long before Joan preched penance. when Joan
preached sainge, Repent ye and be converted to God for the remission of sins
is nighe: and said lo, this is the lombe of God that takes away the sins of
the world, and who so believe in him has life everlasting, did he not preche
the gospel annexed as the cause to persuade them to repentance? yisse trwly
and they believed in Christ ere Joan baptized them. And thus ye may see upon
how feeble a Maxim as ye call it, ye a rather a minime, ye laid your false
ground to argewe your popish penance to precede remission. where fore tell us
plainly and be short, whether ye will teach men to be ius^ifyed, by faith
only, or by workis only, or by faith and works both together? If by faith
only, so be we agreed, If by workis only without faith, so were the haithen
infidelis faithls jews justified, and Christ dead in vain, romans ii^.
and all the scripture against you, as Paul proves it, All men to be sinners, no
not one just by the works of ye law stoppinge every man's mouth showing al ye
worldholden gilty obliged to sin, no flesh by the workis of the law to be
justified be fore god, and in an hundred places moo in the scriptures. Esaias.
lvii*
I shall, says the lord, disclose thy good works (as thou take them) and
show ye that they shall never profit the. ^et. xiii.
Also Paul concludes mightily and manifestly his sermon declaring plainly the
law impossible to be fulfilled of us, and so to iustifye no man, and therefore
by only faith man to be justified, saing thus. wherefore we conclude doing you
to wete, ye men and brethern, that by this man I say, Jesus Christ, the
remission of sins is brought unto you, the remis^ion and absolution (I tell
you) from all the sins from which it was impossible for you to be absolved by
the law of Moises. By this Jesus christ I tell you, every man yt believes is
justified. And what so ever is not of faith is sin, of faith says peter
purifieng ye hertes. (...). xiiii. ^. xv.
wherefore works alone cannot iustifye. Nether faith and works together as
concurrant into the same act of iustificacion may iustifye. For the works of
the law (by which be understood all the ceremonial, judicial and moral
precepts (as Paul proves it) and all the old holy doctors, especial Austen,
called iustitia legis, iustitia ex lege. li.iiii. de spa^ et littera.
and iustitia operum. be excluded from that act as contrary to the
rightwisenes of faith, as the scripture sets them in so manifest opposition
and contrarity, that as the ryghtwisenes of the law was the cause of the
reieccion and fall of the Jews out of gods favor, so was ye rightwisenes of
faith the liftyng up of the gentiles into his grace and favor, as your self
(I think unawares) in the expoundinge of Paul in your predestination, here in
your.xxvii. lefe, have said it against your self, where ye set the^ with Paul
to be so contrary causes yt it is impossible for these two rightwisnesses to be
concurrant into this one effect of justification, and iustificacio^ of faith
and works be so contrary that whereas is ye one, ye other must needs avoid
and give place, as Paul in contencion comparinge them together esteemed his own
rightwisnes of the law as donge and dirte in respect of the rightwysnes of
faith before God. philip. iii. romans ix. and.x.
and said, that our rightwisnes which comes of the law was the fall of the
jews, because they goinge about to seek to stablish their own rightwisnes,
therefore were they not subject to ye rightwisens of god. Again sith your
doctrine is, noman to be sewer and certain of his forgeuenes, by your text not
well understood, nescit homo an dignus sit odio uelamore, And our best works,
as Isay says, be so sinful and spotted, and therefore not to quiet and
certifye our consciences, and agene faith to be the ferme certitude that
excludes al dubitacion and vncertainte seeing now that faith and works be of
so contrary effects, Works make us uncertain faith c^rtifeth us al
dubitation excluded
it must nedis be impossible these two inconsistents and repugna^tes to sich an
effect, to may go together into one and the same effect and accion of our
iustificacion. And by this means of your merits (if ye could) ye would make
Christ no hole intiere perfect savior, contrary to your sainge before: Now if
your condition so full of your good works be in any of the.iiii. kind of
causes to serve your effect, put it in formallye like a philosopher, and I shall
by gods word displace it. But I can never think it that ye believe your own
doctrine of works to iustifye, for if ye did sewrely ye would work beter
works then ye do. For what else do ye then write and strive against the
gospoll, yea ye work your brother Cains work, slaieng your brothern for the
truth, ye preson ye persecute, ye burn, ye banish, ye condemn al good books
and professors of gods word, to set up your own antichriste^ articles, and
da^pnable popish doctrine The^ ye say. The scripture requiret of a christian man
yt he be baptized whereby to be incorporated into christ. it is true. For noman
will baptize him till he hear his belif and know him to profess faithfully the
Christian religion. For the only vtwarde baptism makes not a christian be
fore God, as ye se it in Judas and Simon mago. For a very christian must be
first by his regeneracion of the spirit of faith incorpored into christ ere he
by baptism of water be incorpored into the congregation, for ye visible
incorporacion avails not (Says austen) without thinuisible incorporacion and
sanctificacio^ by faith. At last ye bring in this text. Baptizetur
vnusquisque in remissione^ peccatorum, which, as I remember, is the frist
scripture I have herd ye allege yet for your false doctrine, ye brought in a
colet and a versicle out of your porteus to prove your part besydis your
participacion in deed, And yet in this text ye make so great haste into
remissionem peccatorum to be conjoined to baptizetur, that ye leave out.v.
wordis, and even the chief matter, betwixt your first word and the last. For
the text is Resipiscite and baptizetur vnusquisque vestrum sub nomine Jesus
Christi in remissionem and etc. Repent ye, and let every one of you be
baptized in the name of Jesus Christ into the remission of sins. Now ye know
that noman will be baptized and there by profess the name of Jesus Christ, but he
first believe and know what is Jesus christ and his name, which is the anointed
savior, which who so believes him sichone to be to him, he is justified by
that same faith only in Christ Jesus to be his savior. But I will not greatly
steke with you for this little ouerskippe. ye speak of a good rule in your book.
How ye scriptures, albeit they seem contrary, yet is the^ but one verity, and
al one trwe word which must be gathered out by the conference of ye places
notinge what gothe before, and what folowth, which your own lesson if ye had
there diligently observed, ye had seen this text to have made justly against you
For note first what went before preached of Peter in that long sermon and ye
shall see that he preached to them both the law shewinge them their sins in
putting to death the innocent blod christ author of life, and quitinge a
murderer, and also ye gospel of remission and salvation in Jesus Christ as it
stands in every place of that sermon, and plain it is, that these men
believed that sermon whilis it was in preachinge as many as were predestined
unto life. wherefore they were justified first by their faith ere they were
baptized. And to confirm this, let us see what follows, and conserre all
together. When Peter had all done his exhortation, the text says. Qui ergo
libenter acceperunt sermonem eius baptizatisunt. And the^ All that had gladly
received his sermon were baptized, gladly to receive his sermon, what else is
it, then to believe his sermon which receiving by belief, ye see went before
their baptism. Baptism is the seal testimonial to the church of the
remission of sins
But yet wherefore says the text into the remission of sins? verily. Baptism
is the visible sign of the former regeneration of ye spirit by faith, and
testificacion to the congregacyon that the baptized has his sins forgeuen
him, and therefore to certify the Church that he is a member of them and
has received signaclum iustitie fidei, that is the seall and obsygnacyon of
the ryghtewysenes of faith to be incorporated into them, to pray, to hear the
word in their societe, is it added in remissionem peccatorum. that they now
doubt not of remissyon of his sins.

And therefore it follows immediately Et accesserunt in die illo. And there were
commen into that co^gregacio^ i^ that day about three thousand soulis, For
before they were thus certifyed of their religion, and faith and remission of
their sins, by that externe seall testimoneall of baptism with water, they
were not received into the church of the faithful. So that to be baptized into
the name of Jesus Christ into the remission of sins, be fore the hole
congregation, is by baptism, as by the visible sign openly our profession
into christ's religion to be declared and testified to the church, and that we
be conseigned with the seall and testimonye of the rightwysmakyng and remissyon
by faith. A like phrase is used where it is written, Joan preached repentance
into the remission of sins, he says not, preached repentance, as for or by
the which deed they deserved or should deserve remission, but that thereby
openly seen and known, the congregation should be certifyed as by a ferme and
infallible testimony, such repentant persons to have their forgeuenes not for
their doing penance as the papist teach, for that false doctrine the church
of christ never knew it, but for their faith only in Jesus christ, and so
the church not to doubt of their faith but to receive them into their societe.

And this is also one of winchesters works, The bys,
to go to god when he is called with the help of the caller. And this is also one
of Winchesters works, when god says, believe, I must believe.

Why then went ye not to him when god called you in cambridge ere the cardinal
called you to his service? Joy.
ye were there once so called that ye defended the truth against this papistry
which ye now maintain.

when I was brought before doctor Shirton dean of the cardinals chapel and
before doctor capon his almonor sent to cambridge to enquire for us that
professed the gospel and for our books, you standing by them at the cupborde
in peter college aule did speak for me and for my books as by name for
pseugmata Chrisost upon Gnes. which Ihon Oecolampadius had translated, And gave
us both your good word, so that I kept the book still. And what favorable
letters afterward ye wrote to master George Stafforde to give him warninge
when he was complained of to the cardinal for reading and declaringe truly
and faithfully the pistle to the Romans and showed him how he should temper
his lection in vtteringe the truth and excuse of him self, etc. I know it, and
remember it all. For master George did ever show me your letters. Also I
saw M. Chike^s letters both sent unto you and yours sent to him again as
concerning ye cause of ye gospel then in growing and favored of you gretely as
I and they perceived by your letters wherein yet I remember and forget not your
words. And when I was sent for to the cardinal and accused by the byshope of
lincoln langley by sir william Gascoine knight ye cardinals treasurer and by
the prior of Newnahams letters, which letters ye had, it was showed me what
good words and good counsel ye gave me, and even after it I did, and so
escaped the cardinals and the bishops hands. For ye said, I did wisely, if I
could keep me out of their hands for that time did M Bylney and arture apere
before him, and I was sent for, to keep them company to have helped them to
bear fagots or else to burn for gods word or to recant, But I thank god and
your good premonicion and counsel for that I took another way. But ah less
for pity anon after yt yours so gracious a calli^g of god to his truth in
cambridge ye cardinal called you from ye calling, and the world called you to
promocions, and he that called christ into the top of so high an hill and showed
him all the pleasures and glory of this wretched world, called you up to him
also, sainge, that he would give you them all if ye would fall down worship
and serve him. And verily, ye have worshipped him highly and done him the most
high service in persecutinge and writing against gods holy eternal verity
which ye once tasted and favored ye have done satan great plesures in slaying
and burning christis innocent faithful little floke, and yet ye cease not to
serve him. But take heed your Master is a false liar and a murderer from the
begininge, and though he has kept promise with you for these.xix, years, yet
will he in conclusion pay you with a contrary expectacio^ If ye by faith turn
not to Christ repent and change your life. ye be yet carried away of your
worldly fleshly stronger affectes for vainglory, And in a certain, slomberinge
securite your sin lurketh, yet hidden to your self, with cains brothers
murder, It sleapeth yet, but where? In foribus, says the text. In the gates.
gene. iiii
So that when your sin shall be awaked at ye day which drawth nighe, then not
only your self shall see and feel it a perpetual gnawinge worm upon your
consience even in the broad open gates where all men also goinge in and cominge
out, shall openly know that it is the very almighty word of god that ye
persecute with power pen and mouth. ye say when god callethe you, ye will go,
and when he beddeth you believe, ye wilbeleue. Ye know that god calls you
incessantly and bids you believe at all times. Io. vi Hebrew.xi.
And therefore make no (whe^nes) at it. Nether go ye to him with your fete, but
by faith and belief in Christ, as Christ, declares it, but as faith is non of
your giftis, so is belief in christ non of winchesters workis but the work of
god. Joan.vi. ye say, to go to god, and to believe be winchesters works. In
deed to go to god otherwise then by faith, may well be one of your own works
and not gods work. And to believe indiffinitly or absolutely without any
addicion of christ, as ye speak nakedly expressing nothing into which your
belief should tend, may be well also one of your works, for the devil so
believes as James says, and the turk believes with such a belief that there
is a god. But to believe in christ, belike is non of your works ye be so loath
to express and put to yt name to your belief. And when god bids you love
ye say ye must love. But yet ye do not so, for then should ye never hate. To
believe thus and to love ever, as god bids you be no light ne easy burdens of
ye law as ye make the^. Then when ye have reherced all the works of the law in
fullyng al gods will ye say thus.

The bys.
And all these works which seem a great heap of works, be contained in ye
co^dicio^ yt must be fulfilled for ye obteining theffect of christ's passion
being remission of sin and a new state of life. And thus have I told you
plainly my faith and also the works I mean of before justification and
likewise ye co^dicio^ which ye call so confuse and blind. And thus I taught
Barnes and otherwise then thus (which is ye catholic belief) I tha^k god, I
have not believed, nor dare not. etc

What is all this else then by your works to merit your remission and to be
justified by your own merits? Joy.
which ye said at first ye never went about to prove ne to affirm preach ne
teach it, and yet now ye say ye taught Barnes thus, and ye believe it to, If
ye should find such shameless contradiction, lies, and repugnau^ces in our
books, lord how would you triumph over us? But how dare ye be so bold as to
set your salvation upon so many hard and impossible conditions having not one
word of faith to sustain your belief?

Ye have in dead recited an importable heavy heaps of works contained in your
condition, as I ever understood it, and your self have now dclared it, and as I
first confuted it, and yet ye say I understood not your articles. But and if ye
ca^ fulfill al these conditions thereby to have remission and salvation, as ye
say, so may ye be heuey in your heart yt Christ has died for you in vayn.
gal. ii. But let us see some one of these co^dicio^s containing gods will,
which ye will fulfill (ye say) ere ye obtain your remission of sins. ^he
bishops ^^ndicio^s
your vocacion is to be and bishop a diligent superintendente watcher over
christ's flock to feed them with the pure word of god freely faithfully and
truly preached continually to them, to se that none want this gostly fode, ne
perish for lack t^erof, ye must tell them their sins what and who so ever
they be. Gods will is, to help, socour, and releue ye pore, hungry, naked, and
destitute, either counsel or any other thing, yea although they be your
enemies, and that with the same affects of love as Christ had toward us when he
died for us, and let his life for his sheep But ye persecute, preson, and
burn them for the truth, and will be cruelly avenged of them that resist your
deuyllysh doctrine. And if they were he retiques, whom the mouth of God, their
profession, their godly living and their constant pacient martirdom, declare
to be the very chosen children of god, yet does christ co^mande his disciples
to permit theuill wedes to grow together with the good corn until the
harvest be comen, lest in pluckyng up so cruelly the evil ye pluck up the
good with all. If Paul (says Austen) had been roted up an heretic, i. cor. xi.
ii. timo. ii.
he had never ben so good corn. There must be heresies (says Paul) among
you, that the proved men may be made manifest among you. Also he byddeth the
servant of god in your vocacion to be no brawler, no chider, ne mocker or
rebuker (so far of should ye be from so cruel persecution, and blood sheding
but to be pleasant, sweet and ientle to almen, ready to teach the ignorant and
sich as be out of the way, sufferinge the evil with mekenes and to enstructe
them that withstand your doctrine (albeit it were trwe as it is openly known
to yourselues and to almen to be false and erroniouse) that yet it would please
God at any time to give them repentance to turn to the knowledge of the trwthe
and so to rise by repentance out of the snares of the devil, But you mistruste
your own false doctrine so miche that ye nether dare dispute with them and us
with gods word ne suffer them to speak ne permit our answers to your false
bokis to be seen but condemn and banesh them. But what speak I to you that
yet will not know the gospel from heresye? but be so blyndened with blood and
mischif, that most blasphemously ye call gods holy word, heresye, and the
popis antichristn doctrine ye call christis gospel. whom god stryketh worthily
with this dampnable comminacion saying. woe be to you that say Good is evil,
and that as is evil to be Good and cete. If ye were trwe bishops and Christ is
successors, so should ye be sent as the father sent Christ, and as Christ
sent his apostles, to preche his word and not your own popish dreams, to
feed his flok and not to poysyen them, to gather in the out strayed and not to
persecute the trwe teachers and to hunt them out of ye realm orels to burn
the^ for not holdinge your ungodly antichristen doctrine and not beleuinge your
deuillishe articles, ye should be sent to edify and not to destroy, to plant and
not to pluk up by ye rotes, to water and not to burn: to go preach and not to
ride about like princes, having but meat and drink and sufficient living for
you and a minister. He bode ye also that in no wise ye should be called lords.
And that ye should not tangle your selves with worldly and seculare businesses.
Nether by gods will should ye have so great possessions, but the stewardes to
distribut them according to the first geuers minds, to the pore, to whom ye
be bound to restore, that as ye have so long holde^ unjustly from them. These
be but a few of your easiest conditions to be fulfilled or ye attain your
remission as ye say, and your salvation. Then is there yet among many, one
little one, and the last condition, called Non concupisces. Thou shall have no
concupiscens in ye, that is no lust ne desyer ne any affect contrary to gods
will and his holy spirit: Paul was a right chosen spiritual vessel, and
wrestled with this precept all days of his life aftir the law began to live
in him, and him selfded, and yet he confessed it with an out cryeinge that he
was ouermatched and ^om. vii.
all to weak to fulfill it crying to god for help sainge. Miser homo ego.
etc. Oh wertched man that I am, who shall deliver me out of this body of sin
obliged and gyltye of death? act. xv:
Saint Peter argewith also against your condition, of an inutilite and
impossibilite thus gatheringe his argument. The law was not given to iustifye,
nether were our fathers justified by it, and therefore shall not we be iustifted
by it. Wherefore then will ye now tempt god?

They tempt god that will rather follow their own imaginacions then gods
word, as would the Jews at that counsel, and as now would you go to heaven
by a another way then god has co^stituted to us, as though ye would be seen
wiser then god whom by this your pertinate obstinacy, as did the Jews ye
have provoked to cast his heavy wrath upon you, as did the Jews upon
them selves, even to lay siche a yoke upon the neckis of your disciples which
nether our fathers nor we (says peter) were able to bear. Here ye se peter to
call the yoke of your conditions imposible to be borne. wherefore he concludes,
thus. we believe, by the grace of our lord Jesus christ to be saved as were
they. Now if ye list to go a another way by other conditions to heaven then went
our fathers, trwly I tell you, ye be like never to come there. As many, says
Paul as be under the workis of ye law, which be your conditions, that is,
believe to be justified by the doing o^ them, ar obliged and whelmed under the
curse, which is contrary to the blyssinge in the blessed promised sead christ,
he proves it by Moses sainge. Cursed is every man that stands not, ^eut.
xxvii.
ne continues in all the precepts written in the book of the law to do them.
ye said before often, That Christ is an hole savior, and hole forgeuer,
redemer etc, wholly, totally etc. so that his sufficient sacrifice of his body
needs not any addicion or supplement of any manis desertis to the apeacinge of
gods wrath for sin. And why then here do ye patche his absolute and perfect
remission with these so many your patched to conditions for thatteinment of
your forgeuenes making him but a peesed savior by participacion? ye have
rehearsed here many of wincchesters works, but ye place the^ in a wrong place
underpropped with a false opinion, either to iustifye or to be placed before
faith iustifyinge. God commuandeth us to be holy and perfect as is himself, but
this burden of the law ye will spotte it out by your particypation, but yet
will not this gloss help ye before his judgment seat. Paul therefore to give
all the glory to god and non to our works, excludes all the works commanded
in the law, from faith, in the accion of our iustificacio^ tellinge the
Galathians. That if ye be circuncised Christ profits you nothing. By
circumcision understanding the hole profession and law of the jews, as do we
by baptism the hole Christen profession. upon which place. Erasmus a man of
nolesse lerning then judgment, writes in his paraphrase thus. perchance ye so
please your selves, sainge that we swerve not, ne fall from Christ but with
Christ we couple the law, that the expectacion of our salvation might be the
sewerer. But Christ (I tell you) as he would this whole benefit to be common to
almen, so would he it to be thankfully accepted and imputed to faith only. He
will not suffer any to be his fellow ne match in this matter. For if ye trwly
believe your perfect sauinge health to may be given you of this only Christ,
wherefore then pluck ye to you circumcision? If ye mistrust christ's only
remission, so knowledge ye not yet the benefit of christ of which they may not
be partakers that mistrust him. For by only faith and not for your merits is
it given you. These (I think) be sufficient for the refutation of this
declaracio^ of your condition stuffed ^o full of so many meritoriouse works
to deserve your remission contrary to the justification by only faith. yet
here ye harp mich of your good works before justification which (as I have
told you often) because they proceed not out of a good root which is faith
purifieng the heart, they must needs be sin, as Paul and Peter affirm it,
and as Austen constantly writes. What good works did Paul before his
justification? he persecut^d the christians to death, and yet he kept the law
and precepts after the pharisais fashion, which is called ye ryghtwisenes of
the law. In which rightwisenes (he says) if any should have had confidence, I
might have had as great a cause to rejoice as any other, I was circumcised ye
eight day, I was an Israelite in profession of the law as holy a pharisei as
the best and so zelouse for my rightwisenes of the law, that I persecuted the
congregation, and was as touching the rightwisenes and iustificacion which is
in the law blameles before al men. But these good deeds which seemed to me then
so profitable, as I believed to be saved by them, I now beter taught take the^
for hindraunce and damage, for that I now know christ to be my lord and
savior, for whom I esteem the^ all but for detriment and dunge that I might be
more profitablye joined to christ and be found in him not having my nowne
good deeds, and ryghtwisenes of the law, but that rightwisenes which is
through the faith and belief on christ which is the rightwismaking of god upon
faith. phi. iii. The bys.


Upon the confidence of the text ye bring a like kaye to cleave a logge
sainge As thou beleuest so come it to the. Christ spoke these words to
Centurio allowing his faith so much, etc. And it is a joy to see how ye will
apply this to al men how soever they have conceived their faith whether it be
catholyke or no. And then the arriane may be saved by his faith and the
sabelliane, the Lutherane, the zwinglyane, and Joy by their faith, for the
text serves al As thou beleuest so come it to the. And if any believed that
glotony were no sin, as thou beleuest so come it to the:

Now truly I meruell that siche a bishop as ye would be seen to be should
be so far carried away of these your so ungodly and corrupt affectes, as so
peruersely, so falselye, Joy.
and so ungodly to report me and so sinistrely to interpret my alledginge of
Christ's words. Ye say I apply them for all men's false belief. If I should
have so shamelesly belyed you or any man, I had been worthei the most shame
and rebukes T^rne to my words in your third article and look whether I apply
them not to you thus. If ye believe your sins to be forgeuen i^ christ's
death? thus saying. If ye so believe so be ye justified by your faith only ere
any other condition was known or spoken of, or else ye must make christ a liar,
which says, As thou beleuest so come it to the. Look (reader) and these be
not my words in that place alleged as christ spoke them to the true beleuer
centurio, and to every a like beleuer to the worlds end, beleuinge according
to christ's word and promise. But now I will (because I see you in a false
belief) verefy your exposition upon your own self, since ye have ministered the
occasion, beleuynge your self to be justified by your works, even so come it
to you as ye believe, eue^ a false faith to have a false justification, and like
salvation to like faith and forgeuenes. And as for Joy, through the grace of
god in his savior Christ, believes to be forgeuen and saved by the only
sufficient merits of christ's passion and his resurrection, and that CHRIST is
made of my father my only rightwisnes and rightwismakyng, my holiness, my
wisdom, my satisfaction apeacyng my fathers wrath for my syns never to be
i^puted to me for my faith only in Jesus christ, my fulfillyng of the law, my
free redemption, expectation, life and resurrection and the implecio^ of all my
just desires, my faith and confidence is in him only, and not in any of my
deades, which I aknowledge to be sinful, imperfit, and naught, worthei
dampnacion. And therefore this little faith which god has given me of his fre
benign mercy and favor in Christ, for which with all his other gifts I daily
give thanks I pray to be encreaced and not to take his holy spirit ne word
of truth at any time fro me, certi^ieth and adsiewerth me without any
dubitacion of my forgeuenes and salvation in and for my only sauyoure Christ.
And as I thus believe according to gods term promise in Christ, even so am I
in sewer hope and confidence in him only, to come to me, to whom be glory,
praise and thanks for ever. Ame^. And as christ understood his saienge
alleged of the true faith even so do I (and not of any man's false faith, as ye
so impudently belie me) understand it, and allege it, and read it with
belief in his promise to be fulfilled only of every true faithful.

The bys.
And it is as fond that ye bring in of Iairus, and makes nothing to the
purpose ye bring it for, For albeit the faith of miracles were alone with the
faith of salvation, which your autours abhorte (because Christ said to Iairus
believe only) do that prove that christ requires no another whereby to atteine
salvation?

Ye would mock out this text by wyndynge in impertinentlye your faith of
miracles. Joy.
Which faith, neither had Iairus, ne christ meant it, but only the true
faith in Christ, Iairus beleuinge him to be the very Messiah god and man and
savior of the world. And of this faith came Iairus to Christ, and Christ
speak thereof only, saying only believe and thy daughter shall be salfe. For
the faith to do miracles is such one as Paul speaks of to may be without
charity and without the faith iustifyenge, as is in the enchaunters sorcerers
and wytches which cannot stand with the faith of salvation as ye dream.
Wherefore these words of Christ. Only believe make all for the purpose.
Only faith iustifienge to obtain our desyers of god in Christ, whether it
be remission of our sins, our salvation our health, or the reuiuinge of our
souls, as it obtained to Iairus the reuiuinge of his daughter, a miracle
necessary in the beginning of ye church to confirm the gospel.

And you could find so plain a text of love, as to say. Only love me, and
thou shall be saved, or thy love has saved the, then yet might your
doctrine have some appearaunce of truth. Neither because (as ye blaspheme)
that Christ bode Iairus only believe, and so to have his daughter again
alive, therefore did he discharge Iairus of all good works, never any to be
done of him, what perverse papist, would so gather of christ's sayenges? And
you likewise infer of only faith justifies, ergo, say you, let us do no
good works. But we with Paul and the scriptures teach constantlye and
infer, ergo we must do good works. Now how say ye to the argument? For
it is impossible for true faith to be idle, but is as Paul says, effectuously
workinge through love although I see how falsely and vnlernedly ye interpret
the greek (...) with a contrary significacion, violently to wrest Paul's words
to your sinful sentence. Agens sci^ occult^ and innata sibi ^^rtute
True faith will be declared by her works as the tree by her fruits.

And therefore it is shame to you to gather upon christis words to Iairus.
Only believe, that Christ would have him thereby to do no mo good works but to
live ungodly in an idle false and feigned dead faith.

Joy brings in another miracle of Christ, when he said, The bys.
thy faith has saved the. And here Joy says is no condition but faith,

It is Christ that says it adding no another condition then faith. Joy.


To this I say, that this is not all the sripture. The bys.
And he that will truly judge of scripture must join altogether, for that is
not spoken in one place is spoken in a another and all at last must make one
word. That is in some part attributed to faith (as in this miracle) is in a
another attributed to charity, as when christ says Dimissa sunt ei peccata
multa quia dilexit multum.

Joy.
Can ye join your scriptures no better to gether for love to justify? truly
ye be but a young scoler, or else ye have had but a leude master. But had
ye gonne as long to scole with that converted penitent woman as ye have done
with Simon that gloriouse phariseye that then bode christ to dinner, she had
learned you in the same part of scripture even the same lesson that christ
taught her saying. Fides tua te saluam fecit. Luc. vii.
Thy faith has saved the go thy way in peace, ye would have the scriptures
joined together, and how say ye now? See ye not in the same place, to ye
same woman spoken before the same Phariseye and for the same remission and
saluacian, said unto her of CHRIST Thy faith has saved the? And ye had red
but.v. lines farther of the same matter and marked the hole conclusion of all,
ye should have seen it plainly. Thy faith has saved the. But belyke ye fetched
out this versicle, Dimissa su^t ei peccata, of your portews where it stands
alone without the circumstance of the hole gospel. which has in the
correct text. Remittantur peccata eius. etc. which manner of speech, mode and
tence, differe miche from your versicle, confer the scriptures and look how
often ye find Thy faith has saved the, only believe etc. If thoue can
believe etc. by faith man is justified, and siche like, and agene how often ye
find, Thy workis have saved the, for thy works or for thy love thy sins be
forgeuen the or saved for thy charity, and so for your purpose? For the
conciliacion therefore of these textes which (as ye have rend one out of your
portews, and the the other alleged of Christ in the gospel) seem to be contrary,
one to make for you, and the the other for me, we must confer the hole context,
but first, to go to the breast of the matter, be cause it were to long to
reherce the hole story, ye must note. That the phariseis faith and doctrine
was as now is yours, that they should be justified by their works, and therefore
christ, when he had reherced the works of this womanis love, upon which siche
false teachers only gaze and wonder as upon only Ioans vtward camels cote and
letherne girdle and not upon the faith whereof the works of love proceed, he
added propter quod dico tibi For the which thing I tell the (ye I say) which
art a pharisay and lokest but upon her workis. so that the pronowne, has heir
propir vehemence and pithe in the demonstracion to the pharisei which as he
saw but her workis and not her faith, so could he not believe it, no more then
you, that faith only should iustifye, but love and her works of the law, and
therefore for the the other doctrine of only faith to justify, they (as do you)
conceived great hatered against christ and all his, fore teachinge only faith to
iustifye so short away to heaven as they and you fantazye. And therefore to
condemn his, and yours hipocritish hatered and malice which fight so cruelly
for love (and have non at al) to justify, to condemn, Isaie, your hatered
with that sinners love, and it to be a testimony against yours selves in your
own opinion of your iustificacion full of malice ranker and envy, let it be so
said also to you yt love not, I will, or let it apere to you her many sins (in
your sight and aftir your opinion) to be forgiven be cause she has loved mich.
So that, her love, Christ made it not to the pharise the cause of her
remission but the probacion thereof into his own codempnacio^ judging him self
an holy pharisei for biddinge Christ to diner and the woman to be agreat sinner
not worthi to have had comen into his house but must have washed it aftir her.
It is an argument a postetiore, whereby the thing is showed to him that only
gazethe upon the externe workis and not of faith, and proved of the evident
signs folowinge faith as Christ's similitude declares it by the two detters.
This is the storye (to join the scriptures together aftir your rule) which
your self so lowdly observe. Acertain pharisei bode Christ to dinner (for no
great love ye may be sewer) but as you and such like now a days, will have
some good simple men at your table, either so soucke out, or to trappe them
unawares or to make a testinge stoke of their godly communicacion if they speak
the truth so circu^spectly yt ye cannot set hold of them. And a non as they
wereset comes in this notable sinner (meruel ye holy pharisei stopped not his
nose) sta^di^g behind christ with a box of ointment wepinge at his fete, washing
them with her tears runninge down by her chekes, wyping them with her hear,
and often kyssinge them in the anointinge. Here was great odds betwixt so holy
a pharisaye and so sinful a woman, In so miche that he thought, If Christ had been so holy a prophet as he was taken, he should have known who and how great
a sinner she was that towched him, and so aftir the pharisei to have thruste
her out of the house. But here Christ comen to call sinners to repentance, and
not siche holy phariseis, so just in their own conceight, so full of your good
conditions of workis, yt they will be justified by their good works and break
open heaven gatis with their holy dedis, having no need of Christis merits by
his passion, puts forth his similitude tectely, comparinge the holy pharisei
to the famous sinner present teachinge him and us that the common miss women
believing in Christ and repentant shall go be fore ye holy hipocrits bishops and
phariseis for all their holy holy works, into the kingdom of heaven, and that he
came not to call sich just hipocrites that will be justified by your good
conditions and there own good works, but to declare them to be farther of from
forgeuenes and salvation then the publicans and miss women yt in faith
acknowledge themselves sinners whom Christ is come^ to call to repe^ta^ce. And
here is to be noted yt christ by this smilitude of the two detters makes the
pharisaye in his own answer to condemn himself, and to iustifye the sinful
woman. There were two detters, says he, one ought five ho^dred pence, the
the other.l. And when nether of them was able to pay their dettis where be now
your meritis in your condition to deserve remission? where be your
satisfaccions with your contentacions for your sins by partipacion? Cum non
essent soluendo, says christ: when they were not able to pay, to satisfye ne
to content ne to deserve, then their creditor merciably and freely forgave them
both. Here ye must note, where Christ places his forgeuenes, whether before
or after love? He says when neither of them was able to pay he forgave them,
Ergo not for their love were they forgeuen. But now speak Simon ye pharisei
and condemn your self and your own false doctrine of works to iustifye?
which of these two shall most love his creditor? Mary quod Simon (I think he
to whom is most forgeuen. Thou have judged right. lo, here it is plain that
forgeuenes goth before love, Ergo for her love was she not forgeuen, but
because she was forgeuen mich, Thinnersion of the consequence
therefore she loved mich. And here christ inuerteth ye consequence, turninge
himself to the woman, but spekinge to the pharisai sainge.

See thou this woman? (he saw the woman and her works of love, but not her
faith) I am comen into thy house, and thou haste done none of these tokens of
love to me (he had given christ a dinner, but neither of faith nor yet of
love) Thou have not given water to my fete, she has washed them with the
tears of her eyes etc. For which thing I tell the (but the woman he told her
another cause) Remittantur peccata eius multa that is, let her great and
many sins be forgeuen (as thou iudgest and beleuest) because she has loved
mich. And now because we should see the inuersion of the consequence and the
euydent probation to the pharisey more clearly, Christ clerelyer to us and to
her expresses the remission to go before love saienge. To whom is little
forgiven he less loves, which imports. To whom is miche forgeuen, he most
loves, declaringe love and her degrees to follow the degrees of forgeuenes
procedi^g out of the degrees of the rote of faith justifying. But in conclusion
to certify the woman whose faith was known to him and to her only, and not to
ye pharisey that sees and wondrethe only upon his own holy works thereby to be
justified and by his own rightwisenes, he tells her constantly affirming for
the peace and tranquillite of her conscience all dubitacion and doubt set a
part. sainge.

Thy faith has saved ye, go thy way in peace, romans v.
as Paul says we justified by faith have peace. etc. Here is plain by your
own rule of the conference of scriptures, that of faith comes forgeuenes,
and out of forgeuenes comes love following faith and forgeuenes into ye just
confutacion of al yt ye have and shall hereaftir bring in for your charity to
iustifye. So that except ye frame the scriptures better and iustlier for your
part, ye shall (as ye so scornfully and skoffingly tell it me) bring but your
crooked keys to cleave your knotty logges. But since ye will needs strive so
fondelye and so vnlernedly against the truth, I shall by gods grace to my
poor and little talent by gods help defend it And tell if you eue^ here, yt if
ye were in very deed so well learned in the scriptures as ye covet and glory to
be seen in your books and show your self, and as ye make foles to believe,
and knew it in heart, descended unto your self to see your own ignorance as
with your lips and painted pen ye feign your self to teach in your
predestinacion, ye would never move pen ne open your lyppes thus arrogantly*
and so blyndly, and so boldly, ye and blasphemousely agenst the lord and his
anointed. For I tell it you constantly that such hipocritishe phariseis as
esteem them selves better for their shininge unfaithful works, then be the
sinners for their only lively faith into christ, do but bid christ and his to
diner to trappe them, and owe more unawares then they be either able or willing
to pay hi^. As like an vnhandsom hatchet to open your locks make ye of, spe
saluati sumus. that is. In hope be we saved. To open this lock that ye may see
how little it makes for your purpose, I shall by ye ioining of yt as goth
before, and that as follows, show ye what is hope, and Paul's mind. cap. viii.


He had before mightily proved, by faith only man to be absolved from sin,
treating sin, the law, faith, and grace, and here he comes to the work of
hope, which is exercised and shines in patience proved by tribulacion, whereof
he here makes large mention setting forth our consolacion in the mids of
our affliccions by the hope of our salvation to come calling hope the
expectation of those things which have be^ before conceived by faith, Hope
yt is to wete our salvation and the redemption of our bodies in the
resurrection, for in this hope, says he, we look and abide for our salvation.
For we must first know ye thing ere we can either wait and hope for it or love
it, and be first assiewered by our faith apprehendinge the promise thereof to
have it, ere by expectacion we wait for it, wherefore the scripture says:
first we be saved by faith, and then in ferme hope we wait for our salvation,
For if ye thing waited and looked for by hope were seen present, says Paul, so
were it not by hope looked for, for wherefore should a man hope for the thing
which he sees? For as much therefore as we se not the salvation which we hope
to have, therefore through patience we tarry and hope for it. Hitherto be Paul's
words whereby ye se yt we be first justified and saved by faith, as the order
and process before of his pistle declares it, ere we tarry and wait for it by
hope. Is this a Good argument, By hop, or in hope we abide in a ferme
expectacion for our salvation conceived before by faith, ergo hope sauethe? By
faith in hope we be saved, that is faith sets us in a perfect hope of
salvation, For the salvation is promised and received first into faith
beleuinge and knowinge it ere it be waited for by hope.

Men use now a days this blasphemouse sophistry, when they will i^pugne such
devout saings as have been used in our chirch, The bys.
when each man exhorts other to save his own soul, or desires a another to
save his neighbors soul, or else moves his friend by almos, prayer fasting,
and good deeds to work the wealth of his soul. Al which saluacio^s and workts
of salvation, good and devout men understand to be done (as in deed they cannot
be done otherwise) by the merits of christ's passion and gift of god. And yet
these beasts that put no difference between a key and an batcher diffame the
speech.

If you or any of your scolers should come to me with this fond speech to
desire me to save his soul, Joy.
I ought to teach you, and them, according to scriptures, that there is but
only one savior Jesus Christ god and man, and so show you the way to him,
as testifies Paul and christ, to go to him by faith into him, and to tell
you that I am no savior of souls, no not of my nowne. And as for the deeds
which ye so blasphemousely call saluations, and works of salvation thereby men
to save each others souls, in so detestable a blasphemy* as no godly ears may
hear as the scriptures abhor and detest the speech, so ought nether your
mouth to have uttered it, ne with pen to have written it, For the scripture
knows but ye only work of our salvation and redemption which only christ
Jesus once for ever and also perfitly, openly and so plentuouslye wroughte in
the mids of the earth, as witness the psalm. lxxiii.
when he offered up to his father in sacrifice his own blessed innocent body
to be crucified on the cross for our sins.

And as for prayers almos, fasting which god commands, and not you, the
scripture calls them the fruits of our faith and the fruits of the spirit
declaringe our obedience to god and his precepts testifienge our faith
justifying and our love to god and to our neighbors. Ne call us not beasts
because we will not use, but rather impugn with gods word those blasphemouse
speches of your popish chirch and devout papists pilers of the rome church
or rather of the court of rome, we be now god be praised under a another head
and in a another chirch. Is this a godly understanding of your devout papists,
To say that by the merits of christ's passion, men by their deeds should
deserve to save them self. ye blaspheme and diffame y^ merets of christ's
passion and rob him of his glory with your speech in so saying, and of his
merits to.

And even these lo, be your romyshe craftye kayes and your own beastly
hatchets ye use to deceive the simple christians and to seduce them from their
only and sufficient savior Christ into men's saluacions by works of your
own invented popish salvation.

After your lend diuiniti ye fall to fond policy, The bys,
askinge whether it be more profitable to take forgeuenes of sins without a
condition or tarry till the condition were fulfilled? which question is so
fondly conceived that I will answer merelye to it, as the prentis of London
did answer his master before the wardens, when he asked him, why son. Is
not a cold capod good meat? yes quod the prentis if I had had it.

Ye both falsely and truncatelye reherce my question which is thus in my
book. Joy.
whether you laden with sin Christ calling you and promising to ease you,
frelye forgeuynge you for your faith I ask you were it more profitable to you
by that only condition of faith to set hold of his fre forgeuenes now offered
you by Christ that cannot lie, or to tarry and send him word, ye will first
know and fulfill your conditions? And you answer as did the prentes, That his
master had spoken of miche good meat if a man coud have it, As though
Christ's words and his promise to be forgeuen for our faith, were but vain
rehersallis of vain things never offered ne promised ne let before us, as never
were the cold moton befe ne capons recherced of that vain lyinge man the
prentices master. Compare ye Christ's almighty infallible promises to vain
menis lies? And match ye Christ's ernest holy wordis with siche a profane
light jest? Now I se ye god worthily punishes in you one syn with a nothere
even your obstinate arroga^t impiete and co^tempte of god and his word, with
blyndnes, and has made folishe your wisdom, romans i.
and has casten you up through your own lusts into a forlorn mi^d, god give
ye grace to know nomo conditions and wais into your remission and salvation but
only faith in Christis most preciouse blood and shortly to repent.

And so your maship has said trwly that a man were beter, The bys,
if any thing could be beter then god has ordined it, to take remission of
sin without any condition. For then without any endeuore all should have it.

Joy.
And your lordeship should have learned ere this that God has offered and promised
to us all remission upon this only condition that we believe in Christ, and
not upon your condition of works, as I have justly by scriptures hitherto
proved it. Nether therefore folowth it, That then with out any endeuer almen
should have it. Is not faith an hard condition think ye? Shall every man believe
in Christ when he lestethe? and have faith when he will, without the sharp
assawtis of her contrary enemies as of infidelite desperation sin devil and
dubitacion? shall every man have it increased at his idle pleasyre, look upon
Abraham's faith so sore tempted upon Job Dauyd, and of his that said, lord I
believe but help my unbelief? and look upon the apostles faith tempted upon the
seas and in other places. Faith is a rare and mighty gift, given not without
the merits and intercession of our savior Christ. And if ever ye shall feel ye
batails of sin death hell the devil, the judgment of god and desperacion
preassinge agenst the spirit of faith in you, and wrestlinge with your spirit
and little faith to drive you in to unbelief and dubitacion of forgeuenes and
desperacion, whilis ye behold your sins only in the law in your own
conscience and judgment of god, your adversary accusing you, and not in the
death of christ with a constant and manly says in him, but to be brought into
this desperate state to see your self wetingly and willingly of a set malice to
have resisted and thrusted the word of salvation from you, when it was so
benignely offered you, to have closed up your eyes agenst the light, to
persecute the gospel, to write and speak against it, to impugn ye trwthe and
with your dampnable doctrine to have seduced so many soulis into hell and with
your false enstruccio^s to bring many into damnable errors, and with your
cruel ungodly actis and articles to be the author of somiche innocent
bloudshedinge with infinite moo accusacions ayenste you, ye shall feel them to be
to laboriouse and hard an endeuer, and harder a fre choice of you to assent
with your faith to break through and smit of, and avoid all these heuye
accusacions? If this shall be so hard and heuey a batail ayenste the trwe faith,
look never then that your false faith with your fre choice and assent to it
when ye list, shall stand and sustain and abide it, ye shall find it no small
endeavor ne light batail to hold fast your faith in Christ, if ye hade it as
little as the mustard sede. Many an holy man felinge this stryff and temptacion
have cried. Lord give me faith, lord encreace my faith, Lord strengthen my
faith for christis ^ake lord led me not into this temptacio^ If ye had red the
psalms with faith and the story of Job and trwly understood them, ye should
have seen how just menis faith has been tempted tried and overthrown, and how
they be first slain ere they be quikened in spirit, first drouen down into
hell ere they be reduced into heaven. first to taste of desperacion and damnacion
ere they taste of any strong faith and salvation. This is ye souldyers life, and
Hercules labor, by faith to feel remission and salvation assiewred us in our
soulis and not so easy a pleasant passetyme as ye yet dream^ in your idle
worldly welthines an^ sinful securite. True faith is n^ idle assent ne
acquisite qualite as y^ list to have it with your dremed endeavor, But as ye
course of ye wynd is not known so know ye not yet what faith is, as your bok
is plainly show your ignorance. But here I omit ye accusacion brought against
you for not doing your pastoral office according to godis vocacio^ and like
the successor of any one of the apostles, in which office (if any one of your
floke be found, to have perished for want of the very fode of godis word,
purely faithfully and freely not preched of you) his blood shall be required at
your ha^dis. Now say on.

We must take gods benefit as it is offered, The bys.
and not as we would have it.

ye say trw. For the benefit of our remission and salvation, Joy.
is every where offered us in the scripture. For our faith into christ, and not
(as ye would have it) for the fulfillinge of your condicio^s shewinge your
self therein to be wiser then god and to invent a another and better way (as ye
believe) to heaven then by Christ, as god has decreed and ordined, ye would
belyke set god to scole. as ye did take upon you to teach doctor Barnes
better learned then you.

Ergo by the gift of god I may do well before I am justified. The bys.
your handlynge of this my conclusion declares plain that ye understand not
what ye say. For ye ^ondely improve a conclusion that might stand and be
true. (Joy. yea after your truth) with your ^onde paradox of only faith
justifies, unless in teachi^g ye will so handle ye matter as Barnes did Thaia
man is justified before he believes. For if believe goth before iustificacion,
as a cause does theffect, then saying in scripture, belief is called a deed
and procedinge from the gift of god must needs be a good deed, it follows
necessarely, ergo I may by gods gift do a good deed before I am justified.

A wise argument lo, Joy.
as though to believe in Christ were the deed of man and not as christ affirms
it the work of god. Ioa. vi. saying. This is the work of god yt ye believe in
him who^ he has sent. ye shall know that by ye handlyng of your conclusion I
understand it better then ye wetesaffe, and have justly confuted it in my
former book, as every reder may se it, and your self know it, if arroga^ce and
malice had not blyndned you to not se faith in christ justifying to be ye rote
and fou^tain of al good works and what is not of this faith purifieng the heart
to be sin I have hitherto removed al your co^dicions as your penance baptism.
etc from the place before iustificacion and have compelled you by scriptures to
place them after faith justifying. And now ye be brought to these narow shift as
to seem to prove belief to go before justification which ye say is a good deed
ergo. But I shall drive you (as every reader shall se it openly) from this your
last shameless shifte that al me^ shall se you to stand naked of al euasions
without any mo sterting holes, First ye must grant that faith into christ is
the gift of god: now ye speak of belief. and ye set it confusely tantum as ye
sophisters say, without any thing into which ye accio^ and work of ye verb
should pass. And if ye will have it stand so absolutely, nothing added, so is
it as good a deed as ye devil does ye same. For as James says The devils
believe, and the turks and Jews believe. But speak you like a christian
expressing the very work of faith as it is gods gift, eue^ to believe in christ
jesus to have suffered for your sins. And now se whether this good work be
yours, as of you, or gods work in you? It is not yours says christ, but ye
work and deed of god. Io. vi. Mat. xv.
And age^ unto Peter he said flesh and blood has not showed yt this thing, yt
is to believe in me, but my father in heaven. And now let us se wether this work
thus to believe in jesus christ, go before iustificacio^ or be ye self same
iustificacion. The scripture says that who so thus believes is al ready
justified, yea and moreover is passed from death into life. Joan. 3.^.v
Now is your iugling with bare belief disclosed. Let us se what shift else can ye
make? yet say on a gods name

The bys.
But I moved Barnes of a deed before belief. That is the lerninge to believe by
bearinge sermons or redinge wherein the grace of god prepares man's will, as
the scripture says (so truly do ye say when ye call me Pelagiane) I asked
Barnes of that deed whether it were good or no, and pro^ed it good.

If your lerning to believe were ye deed of your gentile, Joy
so have I told ye before in what kind of goodness it stands. But ye may not
iugle I say, with your naked and bare belief but add to, in christ to have
died for your sins. And then the matter is plain. That this learning is
faith and belief it self in christ, taught and given us of god: for ye geuer
of faith gives there with ye lerning thereof. Redye never that so often repeted
text. we be al taught of god? And I shall give my law into their minds and
wryt it in their hearts, and how often pray ye the lord in the psalms to
teach you his ways, and not your own dead dreams. This lerning is the
knowledge and the same disciplyne to believe in christ to have suffered for my
sins, whereof god says by his prophet Isaye. In scientia uel cognitione sui
iustificabit iustus meus multos. liii
In the knowledge of him shall my rightwise one christ iustifye many: of the
same knoweledge speaks Iere, ix. wherein he would us only to glory. and the
wisdom says. To know the is the perfect iustificacion, xv
which thy rightwisnes and power in iustifienge is the rote of immortalite.
And where has god set forth this most absolute knowledge of him self
clerlyer then in the scriptures and in christ his express image? I call ye not
pelagiane for sayng god prepares ma^s will, but because ye write and teach
that when god promises to us any gift or grace we have fre will on our part
and assent by fre chose to receive it and to work with it, which is theffectuall
receiuinge and the worthiness on our part whereby we be justified And note well
(say ye) yt there must be on our part a worthiness. etc. these be Pelagia^s
heresies as every man may se in the pelagians pistles, and in austens books
agenst pelagiane and celestium. And these be your words in the, lxviii. lefe
of your book on the second side of the lefe in ye beginning declaringe your
self what an enemy ye be with pelagyane to grace, yea and that in many places
of this your most pestilent heretical book as I have and shall show you in ye
places.

As for the matter of iustificacion by faith and works, The bys.
was not meant between Barnes and me to be spoken of in this conclusion. And
therefore ye strive not with me but with your self and beat your own shadow.

Joy
No I think ye meant then rather to bring him to the fire. And it is best now
for ye to say ye meant not ye matter of your iustificacio^ and so not to defend
it any longer against gods word, for ye may be ashamed of your false part.
Notwithstanding yet all your declaracion in the defense of this matter al your
arguments gatheringes, and reasons tend into ye iustificacion by your
condition so full of good works. For ye say here folowinge to prove charity to
iustifye and so to set faith a work, as ye english fides operatur per
dilectione^, and that the scripture gives life to charity to justify, but ye
allege not that scripture. It is a great injury that ye do to y^ verb,
operor, which being so long a verb deponent in an active signification now
to press it down with a passive: saing fides operatur, faith is set a work.
So may ye by like poetry make loquor to signify I am set a work to speak and
to ask you. When christ said. Pater meus operatur and ego operor ad hoc vsque
temporis, My father and I am set a work unto this day, who did set them a
work I pray you especially when they created ye world of nothing? If charity
should set faith a work, so should she be before faith, both in gift and
operacion, contrary to Paul, saing, love proceeds out of faith unfeigned. ^.
timo. i.
But this absurdity and ignorance is groffer then needs refutacion, ye
should have learned better of Erasmus in his annotacions what the greake
signifies: and then ye should have truly thus englyshed it. faith which
effectuouslye works through love, or does by her natural in graffed power her
works by love,

Consider with your self whether this turni^g vpsidown in co^sideracio^ in the
doctrine of iustificacion. xl years past may be verefied on you or of me. The
bys.
I affirm the same iustificacion that was then taught, and you be the turners,
and by your own prophecy be noted for antichrist

If ye will affirm and stand still in the same Joy
justification that was taught and known xli year ago, so stand ye still in
tht popes false doctrine and in his iustificacion and is not yet abolyshed out
of your creed. The iusti^icacion by faith only has standen these five
thousand and five hundred years and more. Hebr. xi
For by faith Abel offered a plentuouser host to god the^ Cain, by which faith
he deserved testimonye that he should be rightwise. And as for ye popes
justification by his works began with him self of late, when he iusti^ied with
his indulgences pardons and pilgrimages and with his merits for building saint
Peter's church and for gifts and land given to his sinful seat, yea he was and
is so plentuouse in justifying for works that he steketh not to iustifye. and
will give clean remission a pena and a culpa. to as many as will lift up weapon
against our most noble king and his realm, and agenst al them that have
abolyshed his holiness. And if ye will stand still to this iustificacio^ so be
ye not the kings friend albeit we see how craftily ye turn and wind it in,
us not to be the kings friends which standing on the kings part in perell of
our lives with pen and mouth with the scriptures fighting against ye kings
utter foo the pope whiles you with mouth and pe^ fight sore for ye pope stand
upon his part in his defense against us and his enemies which have and shall be
the fall of him whom ye sweat so sore to sustain and set up, ye know that his
and your iustificacion.xl. years agoo stood up on merits and satisfactions by
works upon his penance absolucions and receiving of his invented sacraments
and even upon his false faith, and antichristen religion. and yet it stands
upon the same feeble foundacio^ as your self may see it in this your defense
of him and his iustificacion declaring your self stiffly to stand upon the
popes part, which since it be so great an offense against your prince, I
meruel it is not espied ne looked upon. It should be quickly espied in me or in
any other thus openly by books as ye do for the popis defense to write against
the popis enemies and to succoure the pope and his false doctrine in all that
ye may to retain him or to bring him the easilier in again at your day so
sore lo^ged for. For what else is the pope to be still in england then his faith
his doctrine and al his religion there to be maintained still depelier autorized
and fermilier roted then ever it was before? For this iustificacion which ye so
strongly defend is ye principal foundation stone of ye rome chirch which so
long as it still remains in england (color it and cover it as ye can) the
romish fox is not put out of his hole And he yt mainteneth this his chief earth
castle and covert, he must needs be ye foxes friend. When d. Butte herd friar
forest i^ sai^g his co^fiteor for his absolution (for he had once reca^ted and
was come^ to ideo p^cor and added ideo beatam Mariam et beatissimum ac
sanctissimum patrem franciscum orare pro me: By my trowth, quod he, and this
friar prove not a false herlet, let me brent for him: and in deed it proved
even so, For he fill to his vomit again and was brent with the idol of wales.
And if ye will not turn but still affirm the same popish iustificacio^ yt
has been taught these.xl. years of the popis disciples and of his apostles,
standinge still in his faith and defendinge his religion trust you whosoever will,
ye come not into my creed. When ye make answer to the bokis agenst your
unadvised vows and to the croppe eared fox, handle them craftilier and write
more circumspectely for bewrayinge your self. Ye bid me go bake fro my
bakwared iustificacion etc. But I tell you, by gods grace, I will never go bake
from chrstis rightwysmakinge by faith only in him to the popis and yours
antichristen absolucion as ye do openly and so declare yourselfe by your own
hand writing. And if I do not, ye say, I must place your studiouse work of,
your lerninge to believe with ye work of baptism. etc. before iustificacion. To
this ye be answered often before, except ye take the studiose work of ye lerninge
of your belief, for the spellinge and redinge that children learn ere they cane
their credo. which as I have proved it enioied their iustificacion before their
baptism and learn their belief aftirward. But take it for the lerninge of ye
belief in Jesus Christ to have dyed for our sins printed in our hertis, so be
all thus taught of god blessed, as has the psalm. Blessed is he whom thou
teacheste O lord, out of thy law. So that god by his spirit, in teachinge
gives faith into Christ, and his scoler in lerninge receives it at ye same
time, and is belessed in teachinge and taught in his blessed iustificacion by
the same lerninge. And as for the baptisede with water, God bids and
teaches us to prepare them before, both by the law and gospel taught them,
by the law to show them their sins and by the gospel to conceive faith into
christ for their remission, and thus the faithful regenered first of the
spirit, be often asked whether they believe the articles of our faith recited,
and if they say credo etc. then must they be baptized and not before, aftir
your arswarde popis iustificacion plantinge your herbs with ye rotes upward.

God justified noman without the gifitis of faith and love, The bys.
this ye gaunt.

(Joy, Yea, and put in hope to)

Which when man receiuethe, he reciueth by them iustificacion,

No sir, not by them, but by faith only he receives it, Joy
says the scripture. Ye would feign (I perceive) by your by word (By them)
tomble them in both together as the causes of iustificacion. But therefore I
deny your by word (By them) as by siche causes. for only faith has that
office and strength sufficient and is the Cause formal or isntrumental by
which only man is justified. I will disclose your iuglinge (By the^) in a
plain example. Albeit a man has both eyes ears and nose all together in
their places in one head, as be faith hope and love together in one soul, yet
it folowth not but is a gross absurdity to say the man sees by them: or
hears by them, but as he seethe and hears but by one only sense, so is he
justified but by one only gift given him for the same office and cause. For as
we give to every sense her distinct and several accion, so attribute we to
every distinct gift of faith hope and love her proper several operacion and
distinct accion. Faith believes. hope abides and waits for Charity leueth.
Faithis proper acion is to iustifye in apprehendinge ye promsed remission in
christ, hope by expectacio^ waits for the salvation conceived known and
believed before by faith* Charity loves the thing known before by faith, and
waited for by hope. Now go to and say on.

The bys.
When man receives faith and love, he receives by them iustificacion, wherein
I call man's deserte and merit. (Joy you so call it but not the scripture so
calls it) only the vsinge of the benefits offered of faith and love.

Joy
Lord what a confuse perplexe blyndnes is there in these latet words (wherein
I call man's deserte and merits in vsinge. etc. wherein ye say) In which wherein
mean ye? In faith or in love or the receiuinge by them iustificacion or in the
justification it self? Me think ye would the man to merit in the receiuinge
by them, iustyfycacyon but as no man receives by them, but only by faith,
iustificacion, so can no man merit by or in such a false receiving. your
receite by them is false and ungodly (as I have proved it) ergo the meritinge
therein is as false and vain. here would ye buyld your merits upon a false
ground and cleue them to the vsinge of crystes benefitis, as before but that
false foundation with the rest of your popish tymbringe, ye se, I have
clearly ouerthrone and subverted it: I meruel ye have so sone forgoten yourself
saying before (belyke your book was long i^ making, or else your memory is
naught) in the xii. and xiii. leaves, Sinners be called to grace to do the works
of penance to recover the favor of God with remission of their sins, and that
Christ is thonely sufficient sacrifice for sin, so perfect so total so
absolute as needs not any addicion or supplement of any manis desert and merit
and cete. Did not Christ, think ye, in that his so sufficient a sacrifice
merit for us and obtained us grace well to use his benefits? Do man merit either
in receiuinge faith or in vsinge his faith and love? ye ar an enimye with
Pelagiane to Christ's meritis and to grace. who works our will and moves it
to receive faith? Paul says it is god that works it in us for his own
graciouse good wills sake and not for our merits. Have ye not yet red, that as
Paul writethe to the Philippians in the second chapter? Deus est is qui agit
in uobis and ut uelitis and ut efficiatis pro bono animi proposito. That is to
say. It is god yt works in you, both that ye may will and also your will to
bring it into effect, ye and yt for his own good propose of mind. Paul
teaches us yt ye fre gift of god, and our works and merits be so contrary yt
ye thing, which is of grace may in nowise be said to be of works, or else
grace were no grace, rom, ^i,
ne works were no works. But you would, by the use of the first grace or
gift, deserve a better grace or gift, which saing makes the second gift but
a very second grace, that is no grace at al, for yt as it so deserved with
your abused use, ca^ be no fre gift ne grace. Give we therefore all the glory to
god, and shame and confusion to our selves remembringe. ii. cor. iii.
That we are not apt ne able of our selves to think any good thought as out
of our selves but al our ability and aptnes is of god who be praised and
glorified for ever. amen. For what has any man good that he has not received?
The bys.
And therefore the commandments of love with our hole hertes minds. etc. is
not so extreme as ye make it to a christen man whose faith speaks to god
boldly, da quod iubes as S, Austen says* Give that thou commaundest, by reason
whereof the yoke of the law impossible to be borne, is in christ easy through
the gift of god by christ in whom we may do all.

I am glad ye have granted ye thing for which ye rebuke and revile me so
spightfully, Joy
eue^ ye yoke of ye law i^possible to be borne of man. For now be fallen therwt
al your merits both in using and in deserving your iustificacion by the works
of the law, and your satisfactio^s with her co^te^ta^io^sly flat in ye dust which
fall ye well confirm with your first text saing, what has any man good that he
has not received? here ye bring in both scriptur and austen for the
destruction of al your own hole doctrine. For if we pray god to give us yt he
commands, so is it not in our power to get it, for noman prays for that he
has or can have it when he list. Nether is the commandment of love so easy as
ye wene for, ne be ye comen so easily ne so sone into christ to bear the yoke
of his law so easily yt it be so sweet and his burden so light to you. we
must be first sharply whipped and sewery scourged ere we come to this high
lesson of perfeccion. Remember ye not what christ said to ye young rich man? If
thou will be perfect, go sell all thou have, give it to the pore and come and
follow me. And who takes not his cross and folowth nothi^ going to his
passion when he is called he is not worthei to do him service. Every child he
loves he chastises, christ nourtereth up his children in the scole of his
cross and in ye profesion of their baptism practizinge them in the perpetual
mortificacion of their flesh to dye with him from sin and to burye them ere
they rise with him into their neweslate o^ holy and innocent lyuinge ye speak
of. Ye say, the yoke of the law impossible to be borne, is in Christ easy
through, the gift of God, but ye express not ye gift of faith ne love whereby
it is fulfilled and the yoke thereof so easy to be borne as the scriptur
declares it, when we by faith only apprehendinge the promise in Christ, do
upon us his rightwysnes his fulfillinge for ours rom, iii.viii.x.i. cor. i.
gala. iii. Belike ye fansy not faith in her proper place and office, ye have so
great mind to love. The continual batil between the flesh and the spirit in
every just man is not so easily faughten as ye dream in your pleasant
s^ombringe security and welthines, as ye may se in the lives and examples of
them whom ye banishe their native country, persecute at home presonne and
burn, and in the lives of christ and his apostles. Man called flesh is a
perellouse sturdy hydra to be ouercomen of the spirit, for when one head sin
is smiten of, three for one arise more fierce. And when al perchance be somewhat
tamed yet will not concupiscence and the love to our self let the spirit be
at rest but make business against it Subtle and shrewd and unsearchable is
man's heart. I have given you but a fore taste of this easy coming to Christ to
bear your easy yoke so pleasauntly. They that have experience of that sharp
thorney journey as Isay hedgeth it in, and of that bitter batail, as Paul
complained thereof when he felt ye law alive and working her offices in him,
can tell ye more of this. But wot ye what watte the herimite in cambridge once
said, ^atte the heremite.
when one said to him, Watte, I meruel y^ once being so lustye a rutfler and
so and ioyly a courtyer woldst take this straight religion upon the. Tusshe
quod watte. It is easy enough as I use it. And so belike the impossible heavy
yoke of the law, and the burden of your pastoral office dilated so wide be
lyte and easy enough as ye use them. The love of god with all your heart mind
and soul. etc. and to love your neighbor as your self be all lyte and easy
enough to you as ye use them.

Nether love nor faith can be in man perfect, The bys.
and they need both co^tinu al increase. It is truth, Joy romans vii
and therefore since the law is perfitly good just holy and spiritual, it
requires as perfect just and holy works in like degree of perfeccion out of
as perfect faith and love, whereby ye se the law impossible to be fulfilled of
man. For which saing lord how fiercely run ye upon me herafter as though ye
would gore me through with your byforked horns, and thrust me down quyck into
helwith a.M curses and excecratio^s And yet here your self say the same again
and again to, nothing afraid of Hieroms curse.

But he that knows our infirmities takes in good part our imperfection for
our savior christ's sake, The bys.
upon whom our saluaciou is grounded and neither upon works ne faith with
your division.

Joy
It is impossible for our weke sinful flesh perfitlye to fulfill the law And
therefore god sent his son to fulfill it for us, romans viii.
yt our faith reaching^ to us his fulfilling might cover ou^ transgression with
his rightwisene^ so to do christ upon us. gala. iii. i. cor. i.
Or else if y^ take it absolutely as ye speak it, s^ were every man's
imperfeccion tak^ in good worth and after you, every man should be saved.
Wherefore to have spoken perfitely and plainely^ after the scriptures, ye
should hau^ added (for our faith in our sauiour^ christ, god takes our
imperfeccio^ in good worth) and thus expressed the condition. for christ's
sake ye say And shall I be so bold to add, to mak^ all se were, and not for your
merits ne for the meriting to use his benefits, as ye say. Upon whom ye say,
our salvation is grounded, and nether upon works ne faith with my diuisyon.
Then tell us after your devise and division, how salvation in christ is
grounded upon faith with your well devised division? Christ spekinge to Peter
without any division of says, grounded his church upon plain faith as ferme
as the rock. And Paul says: one LORD one faith one baptism one church one
christ and one salvation, ye would not (I se) have me to divide faith in
christ from your condition of works ne from your first faith of all, but join
them together as Iermans lips to be the ground of salvation But Paul tells
you, works and faith to be so contrary unto this effect that they may not
both lie together in the foundation, titum. iii.
for when the benygne love of GOD our sauiuiour toward us was declared, he
saved us, not for our good works which we did, but of his mercy did he save
us, lo he excluded our good works called opera que sunt in iustitia. Yea say
also, ne upon faith with my division whereof I deceive the simple people: In good
faith, when I speak of faith iustifyinge and faith sauinge, I divide it not
into many members but say only faith in Christ and so make no division
thereof. For I speak plainly with Christ paul and all the old learned doctors,
excludinge from the act of instificacion all the works of the law. And I place
works aftir iustificacion as the fruits of the justified tree declaringe her
obedience and love to God and to his law. But ye be to busye with your term
of division to make siche division contencion and brawlinge about wordis, when
ye espy your part is naught ye goaboute to make sectis and diuison and
heresies in Christis church with your ^rophane vain vocables of Diui^ion,
participacion, to merit the use, meritinge to be the use, use meritinge, one
deed to deserve another, to merit grace, learning to come to belief, Faith to
come to the knowledge of faith, works to use the giftis, a faith first of al,
with many mo siche monsirose prophame speches to consound men and to make
diuysion heriseis and sectis among y^ simple people: The^ ye add. saying As
though works were at a contencion with faith. verily Paul so sets them a
sonder in contencion and contrariete in the act of iustificacion that he
utterly excludes works from faith, in plain and many wordis from that act to
set faith only to iustifye as may every man se it, where he settethe
iustitiam legis contrary and against iustitiam fidei, and commonly uses his
arguments ex conte^tioneor a loco contrariorum which is the most evident and
strongest kind of argumentacion. Also the contrary effectis of faith and
workis (as I have often out o^ paul declared them) show them to be so contrary
in the cause of iustificion that they in no wise may be concurrant into yt
effect. It is sone seen by your manner of argewinge, that ye never knew the
stacion or state of the cause of the pistles to the Romans and gala. Ne
understand ye the arguments of them. except of a set maliciouse porpose
(which God forbid) ye so wilfully so openly and not of ignorance impugn the
verite, Nether know ye Paul's wo^t and proper phrases in these wordis, lex
iustitie, iustitia legis, iustitia exlege, iustitia nostra, and agene, Iustitia
dei, iustitia ex fide and lex fidei iustificatio legis, and iustificatio fidei
ne the difference of these contraries ye know not. For when ye add. saying
like as the works of Moses law were at a contention with faith ye understand
not of what works ^f Moses law Paul speakethe ^hen he so often mencioneth
circumci^ion and the works of the law ex^luded from faith, nether know ye
what faith is. The bys.


And some talk of faith wherewith to ap^rehend gods mercy, as though faith had
^a^des to take and hold fast, and love none and they grant that noman is
instified with out charity, but yet faith properlye they say apprehends the
iustificacion whereof how properly they speak, I shall speak heart after at large.
(Joy, and I shall answer you as largely.

We speak of faith truly and reverently according to gods word and not after
your own vayn imagined material and formal faithes. Joy


And we say, by faith we set hold of gods merciable fre promises i^ christ
and our setting hold is beter understood of the lay man then your
apprehens^on, And we and our readers know as well ^aith to have no materia^l
hands, as faith to have no fete when Paul says, by faith we come to god. And
christ bids us all that be burdened come to him. If (...) li^t of your
liberalite to give to lou^ handis fete and wings to, to sethold and fly to god
aftir faith iustifyi^g has enbraced him in Christ and showed him now known by
faith to love, I will not ageine say.

The bys.
ye cannot tell what condicious. Barn ^ I spoke of.

Joy.
Of what conditions soever ye spoke ye say yt he and you agreed of faith to be
one, and the first. And here ye declare your second condition to be full of
Winchesters good works as your self call them, again the which good works to
justify I wrote and confuted them, and therefore I know of what conditions ye
mente as your self now declare them.

I ever affirmed that we be freely justified and freely saved. The bys.
And yet god in giving us this fredome for christ, works so in order, and so
wills us to observe it, which I call the condition. As for want thereof we
shall either not obtain this fredome, or lose our fredom when we have obtained
it.

Ye ever affirmed that ye be freely iu^tified by your works of penance
baptism. Joy
etc. both here and also in your book of necessary enstruccions which is a like
speech as to have a dynner given me freely for my money If ye can set these two
contradictories together in figure, freely and the same for money and freely for
works, so are ye he that can blow forth out of the same mouth both hot and
cold at once with one breathe. But yet here is but a derke and a slyber shift
that ye make to set freely and merits together, It is but an obscure ridle ye
add, and needs another oedipus to expoune it, ye mean some falsehead in this
pese to settle your crooked confuse condition I can not well tell where, ne upon
what vnstiethey stole, ye say (which I call the condition) my grammar master,
when he gave me englysh to be made in latin and came to the relative (which)
he would ever ask me, which what? because of the concord with his
antecedent. And here it is necessary I ask you ye same, which what call ye the
condition? Before ye called the works of the law, with your penance,
baptism, and the ful^illyng of all gods will and pleasures the condition, and
in the, lxix lefe following, ye call our worthynes your condition. And here
goo before your relative (which) many antecedents, o^ which, one is a
fredome, which I can not tell whether ye take it for the fredome in
iustifycacion, wherein the spirit of liberty through faith into Christ
makes us free from sin, or for yours and pelagians free choice and consent,
when grace is offered you, either to receive it or to refuse it, as ye wryt in
your enstruccion book and agene in this book i^ your.lxviii. lefe, which is
even plain pelagians herelye: yet be there mo antecedents nierer your relative,
as the workinge in order, and the orde it self, and the observing of the
workinge in order: here is a shrewd perplexe pese of work, to settle your
crooked combrose condition with freely. It is hard here to know which is your
condition. Here have ye shapt out shifts enoughe and dug ye up many (but
yet all to narowe and to straight) sterting holes The blind slymey snaile yet
for fear of to hard and hurtful resistance pretentat cornibus uiam, gageth
the way before with her leithey horns. The fredome ye say is given us freely in
christ, ergo we deserve it not by observing the order ye speak of so derkly.
Place once your confuse condition upon some certain seat, and if ye be not
afraied ne ashamed of your doctrine, call your condition by one or other
certain proper name It is a token that ye fear your part as false and naught,
that ye dare not speak in plain words plainly and tell us what thing here ye
call your condition. ye say, which I call ye condic^on, as for yours so
calling, ye be but a man and every man is a liar, nether will I accept your
wordis in this cause for truth, except ye confirm them with scripture or
arguments grounded thereof, no man is bound to believe your condition saying ye
dare not openly express it, ne cannot prove it by scriptures to be the cause
of your effect. you call it so: but tell us where the scripture so calls it?
ye should have added plainly with Paul, speakinge thus. Freely be we justified
by grace through ye rede^pcion by Jesus Christ by faith in his blood, ^om. iii.
and not as ye falsely say, freely by works of penance.

Joy depraueth gods preachings so abhominably and detestably as even in this
place God suffers him to write so indiscreetly of him as has not ben lykly
seen or herd. The bys.
For not being content to allege Christ's wordis in a sense of his own
imaginacion he utters it thus. christ so said or rather so thought. etc.

Here ye rage, Joy
here ye exaggerate and heap upon me a thousand blasphemies for saing ye
trwthe, That christ thought as he said, as he expres^ed his thought by his
word. The phariseis young scoler came to him to know by what dedis doing, as
ye teach, he might come to heaven, For they teach men to come thither by their
free chose and liberty to do the works of the law, their scoler, not yet
knowinge his own weakness to do it, ne thimpossibilite of the law to his free
liberty. For the yssew and end of this story is to declare man to have no fre
liberty of himself to fulfill the law, and also thimpossibilite thereof to
man, as Christ declares it, unto this man thus drowned and deceived with ye
phariseis false doctrine. Christ recites certain precepts, which all said
the scoler he had kept from his youth, He had kept them aftir the
phariseis fashion and yours concerning the outward justice and letter of the
law, but not as christ had expouned it of men's affectes to be repressed. When
he saw the arrogante boldenes of this young pharisei, he thought by a another
precept to bring him into the knowledge of his own weakness, and how little fre
liberty he had to do gods commaundeme^ts and how much free liberty and of
your bond choice to evil and to not do as Christ wills us to do, and again
how impossible it is to man to to do that god commands him, and hereof
commanded him that thing which as it lay not in his fre liberty to do it,
so was it impossible for hi^ to fulfill it, as christ expressinge his own
former thought says. Sooner shall the camel go through the nedles eye then the
rich enter into the kingdom of heaven, adding. That as is i^possible to man
is possible to god Now how say ye? Did not christ think to command that
rich man a thing impossible when he said. If thou will be perfect goo and sell
all thou haste and give it to the pore and come follow me? If ye say he thought
it not, so make ye him a dissembler to say one and to think another.

What so ever he then commanded him, he thought the same, but he commanded
him a thing impossible. Ergo he thought the same, ye minor is Christ's words,
solue the argument if ye can. Whiles I tell you yet mo of Christ's thoughts,
when he said, he came not to call just men but sinners to repentance he
thought not to call such obstinate arrogante pharisais that would be justified
by their condition so full of good works as is yours. psalm. lxvii^
Also when god said let their own table be turned into their own snare
thought he not to halter you with your own pleasant policy whereby ye
think to banyssh and to suppress his gospel^ ye allege the scriptures for
your false doctrine, and ye be haltered and confounded with your own textes.
ye make books thinking by the same to extinguish the verite and to confound us,
and se ye not thereby the truth the wyder to be spread, and the mo to know it
into your own utter shame and confusion? he told his, yt the haithen kings
should be tikled with these flateringe titles and names of your lordship and
your grace, and said to you uos autem non sic, But se that you be not so
called. Thought he not thereby to knock down your arrogant pride and to teach
you humilite? verelye he forsawe and thought even then upon your pride and
lordeships to be exalted above him self. But sone finds the wolf an
occasion to devour the innocent lamb for drinking of the sweet waters which
should be common to them both given of god to quench their thirst. Here may
every reader see the venom of your kancred heart how gredily ye hunt for
occasions to deprave, belly and to scla^der me causeles, ye say I allege
christ's words in a sense of my nown imaginacion. It is you and such popish
impes as yet defend his antichristen doctrine that wrest so violently the
scripturs to your own damnable devises. For of al sich scriptures Si vis ad
vita^ ingredi. etc. Si vis perfectus esse. etc. and forgive and ye shall be
forgeuen, ye gather with pelagiane your fre choice and liberty to do good, and
to keep the commau^dements, and to set up your popish merits and iustificacion
of works all damnable and iniuriouse to christ's blood as very enemies to
grace and to god. when christ proves by siche textes man to have no fre
liberty to do good and his commandments to be impossible to man, and that
no man can therefore merit his remission ne salvation. And eue^ your own words
fight against your own exposicions. God commands us things impossible to
show us to our selves nether to have free libettie to do good ne to be able to
merit our salvation, that we should not glory in our dedis ne reioise i^ our
worthiness but to render all glory merits and dignity to him, and that we
aknowleginge our own infirmite and impossibility should seek strength and
power at him, and that we should by faith enbrace his rightwisnes, his holiness,
his merits, and satisfaccio^s, and his fulfillinge of the law, for owr own,
thus to give all the glory and thankis to him for our remission, redemption and
salvation through Jesus christ. These saings. Forgive and ye shall be forgiven,
and siche like contain in them both a precept and also a promise (if ye godly
expended them) which promise as soon as faith a^prehendeth she addresseth
hirself effectuosly by love to ye fulfillinge of ye precept, i^ forgeuinge her
neighbor For there is noma^ yt forgeueth trwly unless he believe first in christ
is promise to have forgeuenes hi^ self. And therefore, when christ says,
Forgive and ye shall be forgiven, faith first sets hold upon hirowne promised
forgeuenes in the later sentence and so of faith proceeds to do the precept.
your self heraftir can place theffecte before the cause and yet tell us ye
cause to go before theffecte, And can ye not as well see and admit the same
order in Christ's word is as in your own examples? So that the man is not
forgeuen because he forgeueth as ye arsewardly imagen, but because he believes
God to forgive him therefore is ye beleuer both forgeuen himself and of that
faith he forgeueth his brother. Ye should therefore acordinge to your own
example and doctrine hereaftir, of him yt folowth you to be your servant, have
considered and learned, yt your forgeuenes of your neghbour, is the effect
declaringe you to be forgiven of god, and ye forgeuenes whereby god forgeueth
you to be ye cause of your forgeuenes of your neighbor, and thus ye effect to
be placed before ye cause. Sich inuersio^s of co^seque^ces in argui^g fro ye
effect to ye cause called arguments a posteriore, ye come^ speech and ye
scriptur o^te^ uses As to say. y^ flowers be spro^ge^ forth and spread. and ye
trees wax grene, ergo it is so^mer. And yet is somer ye cause of this effect
and theffect placed before ye cause. And christ told the phariseye. Her sines
be forgiven her because she loves mich. But i^ declaring ye very cause with
theffect he expresses her forgeuenes of god to be ye cause of her love, sai^g.
To who^ is mich forgiven they be bound mich to love: and eue^ thus declares it
christ i^ his parable. mat. ^ teachi^g us god first to forgive us ye greter
detts to thi^te^t yt we sei^g hi^ self merciful in forgeuing us, should be
moved y^ more gladly to forgive our brethern ye less dettes. So that his
former forgeuenes of us is ye cause moui^g us to forgive other, sai^g. Behooves
it not ye therefore to have pite and co^passio^ of thy fellow servant, seeing yt I
am so ready to forgive y^? yea I had forgiven ye before, as you know it, and
therefore you ought likewise to have forgiven hi^, where it is plain, our
forgeuenes of god to be ye cause which should move and excite us gladly likewise
to forgive our neighbor. and yt ye forgeuenes of our neighbor is placed first
as theffect before ye cause as it is there and i^ other placs i^ferred sai^g.
Forgive and it shall be forgeuen you. your own example of your servant following
you hereaftir brought in of you co^fou^deth your self, if malice had not so
bli^dned you, and for your malice god so worthily to have hardened your heart
against ye truth, yt in redi^g his word ye nether understand it truly ne with
fear and reverence enbrace it, but abuse it into your own da^pnacion and into
the destruction of many other souls. If one should come to you sekinge your
service, and you covenant with him saying, Follow or wait upon me and thou
shall have.xl. s. yearly. Is not this common covenant consented there upon ye
cause why he serves you? And yet is theffecte here in your own wordis placed
before the cause of his service for except the man had believed your promise and
trusted to your wordis he would neuir have done ye service. And even so i^ this
and like speches. Forgive and thou shall be forgiven, we first by faith in gods
promise apprehend our own promised forgeuenes of god which causes us to
forgive our brothern. For except ye observe this order ye shall find it but a
faint feigned forgeuenes. I will not say agenst it but that ye may be a good
lawyer and a ciceroniane rethricion bold and eloquent in doggish eloquence to
persuade blasphemies and lies by crafty colors to turn whight into blak and
to make foles believe ye krow is whyght lest ye lose your estimacio^ But as for
any good and godly lerninge or trwe understanding of the holy scriptures I
know there is but little or none in all your bablinge bokis. Had ye counseld bu^
with. S. Austen upon siche texts Si vis ad vitam ingredi. Si. vis perfectus
esse. etc. he would have learned you a truer lesson. or if ye had learned the
promyses and precepts contained in siche speches and considered the proper
cause with her effect ye should have seen the unbelief of the young scoler of
the phariseis i^ the promised perfeccion offered him of Christ to have been the
cause of his departure and to not fulfill the precepte of sellinge his good and
to give it to the pore, as is the belief of the entry into life promised in
these words (If thou will enter into life) the cause why man endeavors him
to the keeping of ye commandments. And yet is it god yt works both thought
will and endeavor in us to keep them, which when god commands us to ask of
him to keep his preceptis, ye se it not to be in our power to fulfill them,
wherefore ye be to haasty so fyercely to run upon me with so many excecracions
and fulminacions out of hieroms mouth, for saying the trwth with Christ and
Paul that is The law to be impossible to man, which your self have herto
before said and affirmed the same, spekinge of man's imperfection and
imfirmities, sainge that the yok of the law is impossible to be borne of man.
Read Austen for this matter. and confer them to gither with judgment as he would
have al menis writings to be iuged and tried by ye scriptures, lib. ii. de
pre^atorum merits. ^a. ii. and. iii,
and the sciptures to be red with faith. epist. lxxxix.cc.xcv.li. de. co^rept
and gratia in psalm. lxx. and.cxviii. and concio. xxvii. Ambro. ca. i. de lac.
and uita bea. ca. vi. Aug. ad ualenti. God commands things impossible to us,
that we might know what w^ ought of him to akske^.

As ye expowned my sayings, so have ye expowned scripture, The bys,
only as ye would have it, or as ye guess at it, without any consideracion how
one exposicion agrethe with another, ye be like your self i^ peruersitie
thoroughly. etc.

My confutacion and your declaracion be joined together in one book let the
learned Christen reders judge both our exposicions, and in this book to, Joy
if ye dare permit it to be seen. But in this piece ye triumph over me again,
ere ye have gotten the victory as though ye had me now under your fete. But yet
I stand, and have you in my danger to declare your ignorant blyndnes and
blind ignorance, how vnlernedly, impertinently and peruersely ye allege ye
scriptures for your popissh doctrine. as every reader shall see here aftir.

When I had proved to barnes that it was unadvisedly said of him that man might
not do well by goddis grace before iustificacion, The bys
I did first inproue that fond saing whereby he confounded y^ order of
iustificacion. And when I had declared that (as I have before touched) then I
told him how it followed also, that by the gift of god, man might do good
toward thatainement of iustificacion.

How truly ye report of doctor Barnes I know not. Joy
But and if ye had no another probacion then of the good work of your gentil
idolatar going to hear a sermon, it was but fond and feeble as I have justly
before confuted it. And here again I say That as god gives his son to shine
both upon the faithful and infideles, and gives them both form, beutye and
riches, so gives he them of his common and general influence and grace. as
well to the turks as to the christianes, victories, faier wether, corn,
catell, to move, to live, yea and to keep their promises faithfully in
contractes and confederacions and live in a civil moral justice, as men say
that know them, more justly and faithfullyer the^ some baptized with water.
They be merciful in helpinge each other with almose, they fast. etc. But
before god in any good work of faith in Christ, they have not to rejoice of,
which good works christian me^ ought to treat teach and prove their parts,
and not as ye do of the turks and jews faithles good works before men only.
How prove ye that the turk may do well to thatainement of iustificacion when
he never entendeth to known believe in Christ to be God and man, his savior,
ne to be justified by his passion? but only by the good works of Mahumets law
as ye by ye good workis of the popis law. by which your good dedis nether they
ne you shall ever be justified Where unto harken a little here how wisely ye
speak in your iustificacion by only faith. This I ask, who believes? The bys.
god or man? I think ye will say man by gods gift. and so god gives the gift of
faith, and man receives it. Do not here concur in two workis god and man?
which lie both in one bed, and be kouered with one kouerled to
thacomplesshment of iustificacion. And is god so jealous then that he will not
have it spoken when he works, and man also works with him by his gift and
help? Be not we called cooperatores dei in scripture ^ etc.

But harken you again and behold here your iugglyng castes. Joy
ye ask who believes, god or man? If ye had asked who believes his remission
of his sins in christ. I would answer you, ye justified man. or else I know
the devil believes and the turk to, so absolutely as ye speak it, but to
speak of the true belief into christ, who so believes he is already in the
same work of belief justified. And thus ye come to late to prove this man to
do any good work before he be justified or any concurrant work with god to the
same effect. For the very self same deed of belief into christ justifying
him, is his justification wrought of god in the beleuer in christ, and not of
ye beleuer. I se well enough your fallace in iuggling with a truncate belief,
omitting christ into whom y^ accion tends in the iustificacion, and al to
form your inform faith and material belief. I see also how sleithely ye slip
out from the i^uisible work of iustificacyon into the outward office of men's
prechyng called in that ministracion cooperatores dei, the instruments of god
in plantinge and wateringe, i, cor. iii,
god geuinge thencreace, as Paul declares them. Can ye conueye no clenlier
god and man into one bed? I told ye before ye should find the couerled to
skant (as Isaye says) to cover the^ both in this one accio^ of justification.
For to believe in christ, is not the work of man, the work^ of god i^ man and
not of man
but of god in man, as christ tells you. And if ye ask who receives faith
into ye ma^s heart so to believe in christ? I answer with Paul, non ego, sed
gratia dei in me, not I but ye spirit and grace of god in me, and not the man
by yours and pelagia^s fre choce, as ye and he techeth like false heretics and
enmies to grace For ye geuer of faith and grace, takes away first the stonney
heart fro man's flesh ere he gives him a new soft heart and put into him a
new spirit. Ezec. xxx.
It is god that works in us both the will to receive it and to believe therwt
in effect for his own good wills sake and not for your merits by your fre
choice as ye with pelagiane teach men in your book of enstruccions a book
full of repugnances of false and popish doctrine, Philip. ii. ii. cor. iii,
as it is to se to every learned reader, a book belyke penned of you, for it
sauoureth every where of your dampnable doctrine. And therefore fearing lest it
should have been written against, you among your selves have armed it with the
kings title and autorized it with his name, being afraid to iustifye your own
books. And ever there were any traiterouse touch committed agenst his
majesty, that was one, and the most ingratitude so unthankfully to abuse the
ientle noble clearnes and ye most benign ientlenes of so gracious a prince to
you which has promoted you out of the donghill to sit felowlike with lords
and dukes. And is this the thank and honor and humble service ye render
therefore to his majesty, to father a false book upon his highness into ye
denigracion of his clear fame making his grace to sustain the infamies and
sclaunders of your damnable popish book? It is verily no small offense, subjects
so to abuse the goodness of their prince, if it were well looked upon. The
bishops and phariseis in christ's time, when they coud not by their own
learning suppress christ and his doctrine, then they studied to extinguishe
him and his word with the secular autorite and power abusing the simplicite of
the magistrates. I have therefore iustlye by scriptures confuted your book
(yours I call it and not the kings book so unworthy his name or title) which
confutacion would god his majesty might read once printed and judge it by the
scriptures to know you in fell and flesh. Take heed. ye shall bewraye your
selves at last and mashe your selves in your own knit nets. But return we.
ye say that man on his part by his fre choice and assente receives the grace
of god offered him. And here ye harp agene secretly upon the same stringe, but
dare not make it to sown ouerloud. And then ye break out boldelye as though I
had granted and not espied your iugling with your naked shaples belief, and ye
ask it stoughtly as though your premises could not be denied. Do not here
concur in two works god and man which lie both in one bed? and covered with
one couerled to thaco^plishme^t of iustificacion? I answer, here is both god
and man, and here be.iii. works, one is ye receiving of faith which is ye work
of god in man (as I have proved it before (for no man comes to christ but his
father draw him. The second work is the belief into Jesus christ forgeuing the
man his sins, philip. i
and this is also ye work of god. Io. vi. the, iii is the remissyon of his
sins or iustificacion, which is also the only work of god. Now is not
your bed to short and your couerletts to skant in this act of
iustificacio^, to kouer and contain your man's concurrant work before his
iustificacion? Show us here any one work of man as his own and not given hi^
of god to do it? For he is here but as ye yren or matter under the smythes
hands to be made the saw wherewith god entendeth to work his works and as
the clay in the potters hands.

Then ye triumph with a true text, but falsely applied, saing. Be not we
cooperatores dei? that is workers with god? yis verily as instruments in ye
externe ministracion of prechi^g his word as Paul allegeth it: i cor iii
but not in the hyd invisible work of our iustyficacion before god, as ye
falsely allege it. There Paul speaks of another manner work, which ye would
confound with the work of iustificacion. God makes us to work with him.
And yet even that work of preaching do he not attribute to the^ selves but to
god only, esteminge them selves of no valewe but as britle vessels wherein god
puts his tresure and as instruments wherewith he works as the sawer with
his saw, and adds iuxta gratiam dei according to the gift of god given us
to work with him. A like key to cleave your logge bring ye in of Gedions
sword, which god used with Gedion as visible instruments to get the victory
of the Madianites, As justly might ye have brought in this text. in circuitu
impij ambulant Bishops, friars, and monks, walk round about in their
cloisters and galeries for your purpose which ye go so far about in compass to
prove that man works with god into the accomplishment of his justification.
Thus ye snak and rende out textes without any respect of the circumstance of the
matter, how impertinently soever they be to the thing ye would prove, ye pass
not thereof, so ye may at all auentures cast the^ at your adversaries head, as
do the dronkerds in their fury, what so ever come next to hand, be it pot
plater, or candel stick, it flies at his head. Because they called upon
Gedeon then a live present in batail animating him to fight for the^, therefore
your a like reason is, we must now likewise call upon Gedeon and his swerd, and
upon saint George, and siche like saints dead which nether hear ne know us.
The lord asks us sharply sai^g with a thretening. Isai, 6^.^
Pro uiuis ad mortuos? Will ye seek help at the dead for men living? Do not
every nacio^ seek it at their own gods? If we therefore be christians let us
fetch counsel and seek help at our only living god one alone for us al
sufficient, and nether at Gedion ne at Georg, The faithful. uicerunr regna per
fidem. They had the victories upon kingdoms through faith. what and if Gedions
sword was the word of god promisynge him the victory gedion at last with
faith apprehending it? ephe vi
Paul's interpretacion makes al for it. Belyke as ye imagine of george to be
called upon in bataile, so ye believe, that as he was valiant (if there were any
sich) in batall, so helps he now likewise fighting and flourishing in heaven
or in the air, so that what he once did alive, as to kill a dragon, the same
he now dead is yet ready to do again. Hitherto te^deth al your fond and vain
bablyng in hole two leaves following crieng, ^he bys.
ye swerd of god and of gedio^. and dn^o and gedioni After which sort knowing
that god uses the members of his church in the ministry of his works with
mutual prayer one to help another, we say.

(Joy. but the scripture never said it) God and our lady help us wherein god
gives the help, and our lady prays for it Joy. what then does christ if he
be at home.? which is an help to obtain helper. (Joy. And who shall obtain
us her help) And so in the honor of God and our lady. (Joy. Soli deo honor and
gloria.) God gives not his glory from him, (Joy, No, he parts it between him
self and our lady. so)

Here is a goodly dead dream out of the popis portews, Joy
and not one word of scripture for it, but plain against it. Say not the
scripturs that there is but only one mediator betwixt God and man with his
prayer Jesus christ, gala. iii i timo ii
and that the help of God is omnipotent and omnisufficient? we be here al
members of christ's church in the ministry of his workis with mutual
teachinge exhortinge helpinge and prainge one forother, ergo shall menis works
help God to iustifye or shall the departed into heaven do ye same ministry
there for us which they did here living? hitherto te^deth yor deduccio^ out of
yor pri^cipal purpose. Is it not ye diminishi^g of gods honor into ye
derogatio^ of his glory to attribute ye proper help and his proper essenciall
works reserved to his godhed i^ christ's only humanity deserved and father
them upon, or imparte the^ to man or woman? As Gedio^ dirst not say, My
sword, but the sword of the lord got the victory, so never bode they
Godion fight for them aftir he was dead. Nether does gods word bid us pray to
any saint departed, albeit being alive we help each other with mutual prayers,
what we do here for other, it folowth not, the same to be done of us in heaven,
or else let Paul preach in heaven and make tents. etc. If Paul being in heaven
in spirit, had been, or is, as profitable with his prechinge or prayers to the
congregation as he was here in body and soul, he would never have written these
words to the Phillipians thus saying.

As for myself to be in heaven with Christ it is miche better and far more
profitable: but to tarry here still in my flesh, I were more necessary and
profitable for you. Where ye see, Saints to be more necessary and profitable
to their mutall members when they and we be here together, the^ when they be
taken from us into heaven.

But this place of scripture, you ne your papistis, ever espied ne understood
it belyke, ne many othermoo like places against you. what else is me^t by Jacobs
vision beholdinge thaungels descendinge and ascendinge by the ledder, Genesis xxvii
the lord of powers only sittinge upon the top thereof, then the only
Christis intercession and merits by the ministracion even of thaungels to be
brought unto us? And albeit abraham's servant was committed to ye custody of
the angel, yet did he not pray to him in the iourneye, but unto the lord to
prosper it and to show his mercy to Abraham. Gene. xxiii
So that God therefore makes not his angels (and then miche less ye soulis
departed) ye ministers of his power and goodness, ne to be prayed to, so to
diuyde (as ye dream) any of his glory to them. Nether promises he to us his
help by ye service of soulis or spirits to thentent we should divide our prayers
faith and confidence betwxt god and the^. For it is platos plain philosophy and
the popis heresy to go and seek to God by angels and spirits of the dead
(and not by christ only) them therefore to be worshipped because they may get us
help with God. ^n epi, ^. cra^ill.
All the promises of God ar in Christ, etiam and amen, i^. cor. i
that is to say adsewerdly confirmed and fulfilled perfitly, wherefore there be
none confirmed in mary peter George or nicolas nor i^ gedions swerd by their
intercession and prayers us to be helpen, and therefore we cannot ask help of
them in any faith or belief, and if we ask it not in faith of the^, never let
us hope to obtain our peticio^s at them. Show me one word of faith to pray
to saints? These.iiii. things where in consists the glory of God we ought
only to attribute them holly unto him and not to imparte ne divide them to any
creature. that is to wete, iiii, things given to god only
adoracion, faithful confidence, inuocacion, and thanks geuinge. These be
appropried to god only as the scripture testifyeth euerywhere. And it is the
next sin against the holy ghost to attribut the only help of God to any
mortal man or creature and so to divide his own glory or any part there of from
him. Ye have nether scripture ne example i^ all the bible for your prainge to
saints, but ye plain contrary. And ye be commanded to teach nonother doctrine
then ye can give a rekeni^g thereof out of the scriptures. Ye bri^ge in to
confirm ye menis works must be concurrant with gods works in iustificacion
(for hereof yssewth all your deduccion) this childish fainge Christ's cross me
speed and saint Nicolas. And God and our lady help. God and S. George help.
who laugheth not at these fond probacions? lord, what shameless shiftis be
they compelled to seek, and how blind be they, that have hardened their hertis
agenst ye verity? Be these your scriptures to prove your part? It is as I
ever said. Seldom be these popish lawyers good and learned diuyns. Had the
bishop of rome no beter learned capitains to defend his false religion it were
sone fallen. But your puffed up authority and arrogant boldenes armed with
cruelty be mightier in mischief then your lerninge, ye may now lie as ye list
and write what ye will, when ye have banished and condemned all men's books and
answers agenst you. where find ye in scripture that, S. nicolas prays for
us, or that. S. george or Gedion fights for us? Be it in case George were the
patron of france, and the french men should call upon him as effectuousely as
the englyshemen in batail, should not saint George fight against him self?

And god helps by geuinge of help, The bys
and Nicolas by praienge for help.

(Joy. And what then does our only intercessor christ for all sufficient?) In
confession whereof we set forth the honor of god. (Joy. yea ye stele it from
him like thieves and murderers.) Even as god would have it magnified. (Joy.
unde uersus.)

Yea even as ye would have it honored and magnified after your own wicked
inuencion of which deuillyshe deuisers of gods worship and glory after their
own beastely wits, Paul thus says. Joy
romans i
when they had known that there was god, yet did they not worship him as god,
but showed their own vain curiosity and arrogancy, and curiouse vanity in
their own reasoning for gods gloriouse honor, In so miche that they obscured
their own blind ignorant hertis, and where they thought them selves to have
done most wisely for gods honor and glory, there they proved themselves stark
foles and fill to woe, shipinge and calling upon the creaturs instead of God ye
creator of all. Agene, behold how grievously Christ stryketh you with the
authority of Isay for honouringe God with menis precepts and tradicions? mat.
xv.
God told Abraham that his name was (el, shaida) that is one alone for all
sufficient and almighty And if ye believe him not to be siche one to help you,
then call to nicolas, run to George Marye. etc. and say, the moo, the beter,
as do your blind disciples. And if ye believe that Nicolas his help must help
God to help you, so make ye God no God, or if ye think yt Nicolas his ears be
not stopped ne kut of (as ye list to lie and jest of us) or not to be a sleep.
well, kry on hard upon him as did Baals prestes upon their God till Nicolas
answer you. Call likewise upon George, in batail, whylis yet God winketh at your
false and supersticiouse inuocacions, at last for your hardnecked idolatrye,
and for your persecutinge and shedinge of innocent blood, worthily to turn the
edges of your sathanik swerdis and there popish points ayenste your selves
most unhappily to fight for your false God. God never bode us go and call
upon any other then on himself only in christ and for his sake. And if ye
believe not him, get ye to some other helpers and sauiors by participation and
make them your false gods by adoracion and inuocacion. For unto whom soever ye
go and call upon in your anxt and need beleuinge the sa^e to help you, whether
it be niclas Ian or George, the same is your god in whom ye believe, For how
can ye call upon him (says Paul) in romans x
whom you believe not? And ye be married to yt god in a false says hope and
love committing with him as ye prophets testifye aduouterouse idolatrye. Beware
god is a jealous god and looks to have our hole faith confidence, hope and
love, with all our hole hertes. And how stands these together, timo, i.
only to god be honor glory and praise, and yet ye give his honor and divide
it betwixt him and mary and Niclas. etc. by participacion? He is content that
parents and magistrates have their dew civil honor and reverence, but gods
own glory honor and worship in spirit and verity by inuocacion of faith, I
pray ye let him self only enjoy it, totally entierly absolutely, and holy as
ye term it and rob him not of it ye may as well by participation impart^ his
godhed and his divine power from him as his glory and honor which be his
inseparable essencials. Your doctrine is blasphemose to gods holy name and
glory. Rpent ye. And to confirm this damnable doctrine ye pervert christis
wordis. sainge If any man honor me, my father shall honor him in heaven where the
text is. Si. quis mihi ministrat, pater meus cohonestabit eum. that is. Whosoever
ministers unto me (meaning in his vocacion by preching or gouerni^g truly in
his office) my father shall beutifye him in glory, even the same that Paul
says If we here suffere with christ in his trwe service any ignominy, we
shall be glorified with hi^ i^ heaven. For he sets ignominy agenste glory. But
your words sown naughtely, as to say, whosoever honors me (where honor is
taken for gods honor) and then continently to say My father shall honor him, as
though ye would have honor in both places to be taken a like, making God to
honor his creature with his divine honor. Ye must recite the scriptures as
they stand and alter not christ's words for your wiked purpose lest, as
Solomon says, ye be reproved as a lier.

God spends not his glory and honor ne has the less, The bys.


Ioy^
No but you asmiche as in you lies would rob him of them, and ye commit
that excecrable sacrylege that Paul speaks of Roma. ii. For as in his
adoracion, confidence, faith, invocation and in thanks geuyng consistethe his
glory and honor, so be they not diuisible from him. But because (as ye say)
GOD is rich omnisufficiente and aboundante in glory, yet therefore ought ye
not to steal any from him, as say thieves. It is no sin to rob the rich
that have enoughe.

The bys.
But god so spredeth his honor abroad and is thereby magnified among us.

Joy
He spreads it not abroad either to be stolen or divided from him as ye would,
and teach by your participation, but to be acknowledged of us and thanked for
it, which his glory and honor if ye usurp or divide them to any other so
dishonor ye and blaspheme god, and ye honor the devil. For god w^lbe
honored and magnified after his own prescripte words and not after your
vain imaginacions as they lead you though they appear in your eyes never
so gloriouse. deuter. xii.
There is no creature in heaven ne upon earth, except it be antichrist, but
abhors and puts it from him when it is offered hi^. But ye will eat still
of the tree of knoweledge of good and evil at the persuasion of the serpente,
decerninge and deuisinge to God what glory and honor ye list, and teach it to
be good without his word. ye say we cannot abide that christ suffered for
our example. yisse better then you, that never followed hys' example, and yet
will be called his successors.

The bys.
Also ye love christ but ye divide him from his servants his saints departed
vnde^ a wrong pretense of the preseruacion o^ his holy honor.

Joy
Christ will have his hole honor reserved to him self only, as Paul and Isay
say. Nether will his saints departed desire it but refuse it offered them, as
did the apostels and angels utterly thruste it from them, as did the aungel in
the apo. xxii. and not christ in the form of an aungel: Christ him self ye
call life, The bys,
but ye call his servants the saints departed dead me^ and for spyte cut of
their ears.

They be no living men but living spirits and dead bodies, Joy
nether can men cut of their ears, saying the spirits have nether ears ne
bodies ne heads, but as touching yt bodily part: be resolved into dust* They
be idle idols ears, that have ears and hear not, eyes and cannot se, whose
ears ye say men cut of, and by your own consent their stockish dead bodies
cast into the fire. because ye commit idolatry before them.

Thus divide ye christ and make strife between his gifts also with your only
faith to put charity out of office in iustificat^on. The bys


Only faith to justify makes no strife with charity which is pacient and
enuieth not faith to do her own proper office as ye of envy vncharitablye
contend and s^riue so falsely: Joy
But it is your popish doctrine that makes the strife and scisme diuidinge
your selves from all christen faithful and true religion. For as the land is
divided in situacion from all other, so would ye form it to your selves a
sondrye faith and religion from all other nations. Christ never changed the
heude of any church either in the Jews or gentiles, but he also with the same
changed the body even the church, or else it were but a monstrose thing an
antichristen church to have a Christen head and a Christen head to have
Antichriste^ ministers, as ye have studied long craftily to bring it to pass
in england till your time and day becomen, when ye may agene join your
abolished head to his own reserved body so craftily kept of you for the same
end. For ye know it full well, what must nedis follow so long as the popis
church stand, and his body lives among you. And even here if ye list, take
a taste of winchesters wylye wit to bring home agene his, in name and title
only with him and his holy abolished father. To abolish a thing is so to
skrape and blott it out into naught that nether s^nt ne sauore ne any vestigie
stepe or figne remain thereof. To abolish
But whether the popis faith and religion, with his rites ceremonies and
traditions be so abolished, I report me to all y^ realm. I bode ye in my
former book seek out ye text where charity iustifyethe, but yet have ye not
found it. And therefore ye now fall to your own fond wit with this fo^^
sophistical argument.

God justifies: god is charity, The bys.
ergo charity, justifies.

I deny your argument, Joy
for that your terms in the premises and in the conclusion be not of one and
like significacio^ as ye well know. The^ ye bid me read a certain text of Paul
again and do as plato was wo^t to do, saing, do it not touch me? I have red it
again and here I write it to you again to see whether ye ca^ yet se and feel
whether it touches you, and let all indifferent reders be iuges whether it hit
ye not and set ye not out in your own colors and it were apelles hi^ self had
pai^ted you saing. he yt will be justified by works and not by only faith in
Jesus christ, is in the way of perdicion eue^ in a corrupt mind carried away of
contrary lusts and affeccions, ever lerning and never come^ to the true
knowledge. For sich deceivers shall go forth worse and worse til their wykednes
be ripe leadinge other into errors, theirselues being blind and far out of
the way, auerted unto vain speech and false doctrine willinge to be seen
Doctors and teachers and yet understand they not what they say ne of what thing
they make their articles acts and enstruccions.

paraduenture ye will say ye make the^ not) but I dare say ye give evil counsel
both to the making and also to the cruel execucion upon the^ that will rather
obey god then men's tradicions.

To the atteinment of iustificacion is required faith and charity. The bys.


Joy.
This sainge I confuted in my former book thus. Faith only says christ and
Paul, is required to thatinment of iustificacion which is of God. Nether is
charity divided from faith but from the efficacy effect and office to
iustifye, for to this effect and office is faith only sufficient
effectuously: As from fire or fro the sone we exclude not heat ne brightness,
but yet has her heat and brightness their sundry effects and offices, for
the heat warmeth and with her brightness she shyneth and gives lihgt Here may
every reader se how falsely ye report my words and how maliciousely ye report
of me faininge and forminge your own false foundation thus.

ye say that charity is joined with faith and ye take faith and charity
for.ii sisters, but ye make faith the elder sister. The bys.
Hitherto ye say truth of me, Joy.
for in ye natural order of their proper operations faith works her accion in
knowledge of god and iustificacion before charity works hirs in louinge god.
etc:

And ye affirm that in justification, charity, Joy
that ye call the younger sister is not excluded. These be your words wherein ye
say the same. Isay.

No ye belie me deadly, The bys.
they be not my words as every reader may see it. But they be yours fained
false words thereupon to deduce your false doctrine folowinge. And here thrice
ye rather your false invented saing upon me which I never said ne thought ne
wrote them Isaye that chartie is with faith, but yet excluded from thefficacy
effect and office to justify so that she is not co^currant with says in the
accion of justification, as I give my plain example, but charity has a
sundry act and operation from faith as to believe in christ and to love him be
two acts as be to see and to here the sundry offices and acts of two distinct
senses albeit they be both together in one head. And Isaye charity is in the
justified man, but not concurra^t into theffect of ius^ification as any cause
formal with faith thereof, as ye falsely report me. Here may thou see, good
reader, what crafty falshed he uses to argew, ex non concesus. of that I never
granted it him, to make his false part appear true, I wrote more
circumspectely addinge a plain example, for I knew how sinistrely capciouse
this bishop is, lest he should take any advantage at my words, And now when
his own conscience tells him that charity is not concurrante with faith in
the work of iustificacion contrary to his conclusion, then he seeks his
shifts, first in the, xlvii. lefe thereto place love, because they that abide
in love (says he) abide in faith which is the life of the just. There he went
about to prove charity to give life, which I have refuted justly.

Then in the.lv. lefe, he says scriptur attributes life to charity, but that
scripture can he not yet find. And now at last, as mistrusti^g all this not to
help him. he says. That Isaye ye charity is in iustificacio^ and yt I say ye
same yt he says and belieth me falsely, for I never said it, as myboke
testifies. Another variance between you and me is ye say, The bys
Albeit both sisters faith and charity be in iustificacion, yet charity the
younger sister (as ye term it) stands still idle and only waits upon her
elder sister.

I never said these words as every man may seeit it in my book. Joy
When theirwith will not serueye, then be ye compelled to fly to lies. In deed
I call by way of doctrine faith and charity two sisters and faith to be the
elder because she is the rote of charity and is first in operation.

And now I will compare faith, hope, and charity to.iii. sisters or with
Sophocles to the.iii graces called charites, so connexed hand in hand as it
were inseperably linked together ut gratia gratiam pariat uel trahat, impugn
the similitude if ye ca^es These.iii. graces or gifts put into one soul are
not idle gifts of god as ye blaspeme his gifts, but be in their continual
encreace unto their proper distinct accions, and may be well called after
their author, or soul wherein they are. Entelechia that is a lively perpetual
vnwearye workynge substance, although the body sleapeth, which solicit the
good tree to bring forth her fruit in her time. which graces in their encreace
be known by their orderly operations and fruits. Faith in christ first
believes into him and justifies and teaches man al his good works to be
wrought in him of god, and not of himself, faith purifyeth hertes, and makes a
quiet conscience which is our holy sabbath and rest, so often commanded in the
law to be sanctified of us. By hope we continue i^ the thing now known and
promesed. By faith, and by expectacio^ patiently tarry for it. Faith believes
God to be trwe, hope taryeth till God exhibeth his trwth in time when thoccasion
shall be given. Faith believes God to be her father, hope taryeth till he declare
him self fatherly to us. Faith believes eternal life to be given us for
christis sake, hope waits for the day where in it shall be reveled unto us.
Faith is ye fou^dacio^ stone where upon hope and charity rest and lean fast
to it. charity extends her to god known by faith, and to her neighbor.
These.iii. gifts, I may also by way of doctrine compare to.iii. di^tinct
knids of leads throne into one and the same ground, which albeit anon they
apere not above the ground, yet nether is the earth ne the seades idle, (as
ye taunt and term it) but by the secret power of the most high seadisman
work their natural distinct operacions and officies ere they appear and
fructifye their distinct fruits. Neither add I any (onelies) otherwise to
faith then the scripture, and all the old holy doctors do, as her only proper
distinct operation requires, In the justified man they be al.iii. but not
concurrant into the one and same effect of justification. but each gift
severally tends into her proper accion and be not idle, no notherwise then
when the man having both eyes ears and nose, sees with his eyes only, yet
be not therefore his ears ne nose idle senses. Then by an other false
supposicio^ would ye deduce a falser conclusion, saying.

In deed theffect of faith is properly to illumine the understanding and of
charity to warm. The by
Now if the iustificacion of man employed only thexpulsion of derkenes from man's
understanding, theffect of faith would suffice: but seeing god in justification
moves man's heart and kindles love in it, why may not these two virtues with
their two effects by gods working concur in man's justification?

First the scripture teach you that to illumine the understanding is not so
properly attributed to faith but also to the declaracion of ye word saienge,
Joy
Declaratio sermonum tuoru^ illuminat and intellectum dat paruulis. The
declaration of thy words illumineth and geuethe understanding to the little
ones. And again, praeceptum domini lucidum illuminans oculos. The precept of the
lord is pure and bright illumininge the eyes of our understanding. And in
another place lucerna pedibus meis uerbum tuum thy word is lantern and light
to my fete. If ye had red diligently and understood the psalms ye should
have seen this propertye attributed to the word, but I will not steke with you
for so little ignorance. Then ye say. If the iustificacion employed only
thexpulsio^ of derkenes theffect of faith were sufficient, As though if the
iustificacio^ employed not only that effect but many other it should not be
sufficient but it implies many mo effects beside your warning with
charity and yet is it sufficient. For in the iustifycacion by faith only, God
purifyeth the heart, In the iustificacion is implied thexpulsion of dubitacion
of the remission, and is implied the peace and setlinge at rest of a tranquil
conscience and yet all these imp^yings let not faith only the less to
iustifye. But what and if I say, that God by faith warmeth the heart and
kindles it to love as by the rote of charity? I am able to prove it. Thus, God
gives no cold faith into manis heart but a warm faith effectuouly to warm,
ergo. Faith warmeth charity and kindles love with out the which warminge
faith, your charity were as cold as yse. Now is this your wise argument, God
in iusti^icacion kindles love in man, ergo charity iustifyeth. I deny your
argument: prove it if ye can, For God kindles not love by love, but ki^dleth
lou by faith For if love be not warmed by faith it shall be but a cold and
faithles love. I meruel ye be so blyndened and will not see the trwth but so
sinistrely of malice to seek these feeble childish shiftis had ye read but this
one text of Paul (malice not blyndinge your understanding) Porro finis
precepti est charitas ex puro cord and co^sciencia bona and fide non simulata,
timo. ^
The End of the precept is love procedinge out of a pure heart and out of a good
conscience, and out of faith unfeigned. ye might have seen plainly out of what
rote charity springs, and faith iustifienge, purifienge, and making a good
conscience to go before charity But harken what follows, a quibu^ quod
aberrarunt quidam, defeceru^t ad uaniloquium, uolentes legis esse doctores non
intelligentes que loquuntur neque de quibus asseuerant from the which doctrine
and order of faith and charity. etc. because some men have erred and gone
far from it, therefore are they fallen back from the truth unto vain and
lieng spech false reasons and arguments agenst the verity, willinge to be
seen and to be doctors of the law and teachers of gods law not understanding
what they speak, ne of what things they make assertio^s articles and sich lik
affirmacio^s, enstruccio^s, etc. now how say ye, have not S. Paul lively
described you here, and set ye forth in your just colors? Blame not me for
recitinge these words, but Paul for writing them and your self for verifieng
them of your self with your own deeds words and writing. Trewely, not with
all the learning subtilite, rethrike, and wit ye have shall ye prove
charity to help faith to justify, but only faith to do it, for ye strive
against the truth and as christ told Paul It is to hard for ye to kick
against yt prick. God once illumine your heart with his word to se once only
faith to iustifye. amen.

As for Paul declares ^lainly that albeit he speaks sometime of faith without
mention of charity, The bys
yet he means not faith, as a bare foundation, but faith with charity to
iustifye.

Albeit, Joy
ye be the popes lawer and doctor to, yet do I not take ye to be of so high
authority, as to believe these your bare words concerning the understanding of
Paul's mind But and if Paul have so plainly declared his mind, as charity
with faith to iustifye, saying ye be so well seen in Paul, express Paul's
mind with Paulis wordis for this matter, like a learned bishop. Nether we ne
Paul ne Christ call faith only iustifyinge, a bare foundation, for god gives
no siche idle, bare cold giftis, as ye prate of, nether christ buylding his
church of that rock of faith only in him, would have it called a bare
foundation, all this your extenuacion of faith to make it your material shaples
faith I tell ye, will not serve your popish purpose, the almighty power of gods
everlasting word preaseth to sore upon ye, for only faith iustifyinge. Ye
coud never have co^tended in a more difficile yea impossible argument and matter
to prove, then not oneli faith to iustifye, but charity to be concurrant ye
should have red it. Hebreus.x. how Paul declares his mind and order of these
giftis sayi^ge and affirminge, us to come to our great priste Christ with pure
heart in the certainty and asseweraunce of (faith) ourr hertis ^aith
sprincled, and theuil conscience put a way, the body washed with pure water,
we holdinge the confession (of hope) not waueringe (for he is ^aithful which
has promised) and consider we one another, Hope
into this en^e that we may provoke us (to love) and to do good workis, Love.
where ye see in what place faith first stands with her proper several
operacion, where hope with hirs, and last of al charity placed with her works,
which order of these.iii. giftis the scripture every where observes, placinge
faith as the foundation and rote of hope and charity and of al other vertews,
so yt as Paul says, what soever is not of faith is sin. And here, aftir
your long vain bablinge of faith ye brings knowledge and faith that has not
charity, (as though trwe faith and knowledge contrary to Isaye were not all
one, or were without charity) and faith not to give life but love to be ye
life of ye just contrary to all the scriptures, then ye would have your only.
only joined to only god and not to faith. As though when the scriptures with
ye doctors say, by only faith man is justified, they would exclude god the
principal cause efficient from our iusti^ication and remission which
plasphemye to think, who is so mad and brutish? And to confirm your
deuillish drift ye add stoughtly, And this i^ the plain teachinge and
agreeable with scriptures which must be understood as one part be
consonante with another without siche hacking as ye make of it, But not one word
of scripture bring ye for your teaching ne agreablenes, but lordly ye say.

Thus we must understand them, as though ye had ye same falsely usurped
authority over ye scripture and our faith as has your a^tichriste^ father of
ro^e to co^pel and co^mau^d us to believe and to understand what ye list, which
is yt usurped power and honor above god whereof daniel and Paul speak. For when
Christ ever referred his doctrine to the law and prophetis, yet will this
blody beast and her whelps compel men to believe their false doctrine and
falser faith for their own popish persons usurped false autorite only. God
gave abraham faith where with to believe in him, The bys.
and charity where with to love him. And abraham as he believed in God so he
loved him, both to gither.

(Joy It is trwe, if he coud do both at once with one act)

Here have ye condemped your self For first ye say, Joy
God gave Abraham faith to believe in him. And now as touching this first
gift what says the scripture? credidit. Abraham deo et imputatum est ei ad
iusticiam, Abraham believed in God and it was imputed him unto rightwisenes,
here ye se that same only act of belief in God, to be rekened to him for his
rightwysnes, ere love proceeds to her proper work for love presupposes the
thing known by faith ere she can love it.

As your self says within.xii. lives before, and that faith bri^ging
knowledge must needs proceed love, and yet blyndely, ye forgetting your self
harp still of this your only vntewned stringe. Charity loves, ergo charity
justifies. your self see it, and ye say and write it, that faith and love
being two distinct gifts, must needs tend into two sondrye, and distinct
effects, and yet be ye so blind that ye would violently make them concurrant
into the one effect of justification. And ye say, charity justifies, which
speech of faith, as to say faith justifies, offends your dilicate ears,
because, I speak it. As though all like speches, save such as come out of
your mouth through malice and arrogance, yea and that so proudly, should stink
as says the psalm. lxxii. upon you. I marvel ye sweat so sore with so many
words, for charity to iustifye and have so little charity your self and less
love to faith iustifienge, which is truth And as often as Paul names faith
not speaking of love, The bys.
so often and oftener, speaks Joan in his pistles of charity, without mention
of faith.

If the often speaking of a thing should prove, Joy
so do Joan speak as often of sin, without mention of faith, as does Paul
of faith without mention of love. I wonder ye shame not thus fondly to reason.
But show us where says Joan, charity justifies, as often as Paul says, by
faith we be justified? who sees not by these your vain shifts and febler
weak arguments, how falce is your part, when ye can neither by scripture nor
reason prove it, how often says Paul in one chapter. By faith all our fathers
have deserved the testimonye of rightwisenes? Then would ye by as f^nde a proof
make it appear that charity justifies, because christ says The father
drawethe us to him by faith. which to make it somewhat like ye falsely expowne
christ's words by putting to your own dream, saing that by love we be drawn
to Christ. But and if ye had red but two lines forther, ye should have seen
Christ to have expowned himself, sainge, us to be drawn and to come to him
only by faith: thus concludinge. Every man therefore that has herd of my
father and is learned of him he comes to me. To hear of ye father, the
scripture expowneth it, to believe and to have faith given us of him, as christ
affirmed it to peter: Mat. xvi.
and as Paul declares it, faith to come of hearing, And therefore to hear of
god, and to be learned of god, and to believe in him through christ be alone, Paul
calling it, auditum fidei, that is the hearing of faith, or faith had by
hearing.

And turn to ye pistle to the hebrews and look whether we come not first to
God by faith ere we love him, ye had need go study the scripturs yet beter and
learn to confer ye places, and not thus to allege the^ at rouers. Ye say a
little before, They must be understood as one part be co^sonant to the
other, without hackinge as I make of the^, but in so saing, ye twich your self
by the nose. Yt here openli chop your hackinge knyfe into your own sower herbs
with a false gloss hackt into your own potage. For ye never observed the
context ne conference of the places, which is a token but of a popish learned
doctor. And as for me, I have not, ne desire I any other way, as every reader
may see it, to confute your falsely alleged and falselyer expowned autorites
then by the circumstance and conference of y^ context and by like places,
nether can I, ne will I use any other weapen to confute your false bokis.

And as for the speech of (only faith justifies) the scripture has it not
And yet has it ben spoken by some learned men to exclude the works of moses
law. The bys.


Albeit the scrpture has it not in the same syllables, Joy
yet it has the very self same sense, as I shall so manifestly show it, and
prove it that ye shall not be able to avoid it. For christ says, as it is
written, both in Luke and Mark. Only believe and thy daughter is safe,
nothing else requiring of the man for the restoring of his daughter, but faith
only into him. In a another place he said. If thou can believe, I can help
the, and all things be possible to him that ca^ believe, here is nothing else
required then faith of the man for driuinge out that evil spirit of his
son. In all other his saluacions and help, and hearing and grauntinge their
peticions, christ required only their says into him, as all the story of the
gospel testifies. Now comes Paul as the most faithful treater, and
expouner of the law and gospel, which divides the hole scriptures and the
ministracion of the preachers and apostles of christ into ye preaching of ye
law and of the gospel. And here he proves the state and co^dicio^ of every
man, either to be under the law or under the grace of the gospel, whereof he
deduceth two manner of rightwysmakinge or rightwysenesses, one rightwysnes of
the law and the the other of the faith of the gospel, excluding with expres
wordis mightily and clearly the rightwisnes of the law from the iustificacion
by faith, as one contrary to the the other, affirminge constantly, and often.
That we be siewer and certain, man to not be justified by ye workis of the law
(which iustificacion he every where calls the rightwisnes of the law) but by
faith. And we conclude man to be justified by faith without the works of the
law. And clearly to exclude all the workis and rightwysnes of the law, that
the only rightwisnes of faith might stand clearly in sight, he says men be
justified freely, through grace, by faith. Now ye see, That there be but two
thingis in controversy, one contrary to the the other, to iustifye, that is to
say, the workis of the law, and the gifit of faith. But Paul constantly
excludes ye works of the law, and admits and affirms only faith to
iustifye. For nothing else then faith is annexed and joined to this
iustificacion, wherefore it is must nedis follow only faith to iustifye in the
iustificacion of faith Also man is not justified by any thing else then by
faith, ergo only faith justifies, man sees not with any sense else then only
with his eyes, ergo his eyes only see. What beast is so brutishe as to deny
or cavil agenst these so plain speeches? Of these Paul's arguments and
christ's words, all the old holy doctors gathered this ferme conclusion.
Only faith justifies, which you ne any else can justly impugn, ye have
hitherto therefore shet out al your shaftes at a wrong mark, which yet could
not see ne ever hit the truth ne understand what Paul means by the contrary
position of these his wont words. Iustitia fidei, and iustitia legis, iustitia
ex fide, and iustitia ex lege, iustitia pro pria and iustitia dei, with such like
phrases, often he says by faith man is justified, but never by charity, ne in
any place of the scripture is it written. And yet you of a set proposed malice
conceived agenste the verity, contend thus arrogantly to impugn ye truth and
all to show your wily wit, and high lerning in persuading blasphemies to
foles, lest ye should lose the false opinion, and vain estemacion which the
unlearned have conceived upon you. ye say some learned men have so spoken it,
as only faith justifies. And be ye so highly learned in your own conseit, yt
ye be ashamed or let scorn to speak ye same, but thus arrogantly and
unlearnedly to impugn such learned men's sainges? ye say, they said it to
exclude Moses law. And I tell ye, that Paul also therefore said it, eue^ to
exclude Moses law from the act of iustificacion. And why will not you say the
same also with the same learned men to exclude the same law of Moses? ar ye so
wise as to varye and again say these learned me^? what other law would ye exclude
then moses law? Be not the.x. preceptis contained in Moses law? ^n your. 4
article.
which I have constantly proved by the scriptures both here and in my former
book that Paul and Peter understood and proved it plainly even by the workis
of the law, the.x. commandments which ye call the moralls to be excluded
from faith in the act of iustificacion as in nowyse to to be concurrant into
that effect.

Which ye cannot avoid ne solute with all the learning ye have, And for the
text ye bring in of Paul. Neque circumcisio etc. makes directelye against
you, as I have plainly declared it before.

The bys.
And he that has not charity is nothing.

Joy
And why? because he has not faith into Christ which is the life of the just
and rote of charity. Then this is your argument. He that has charity is
somewhat, ergo charity justifies, your argument is naught: Nether yet this,
God makethe his promise to them ye love, as well as to the^ that believe, ergo
charity iustifiethe, this is naught also. A like argument God makes his
promise to him that works, writes, honors his parents, is paciente, ergo
works writing. etc. iustifye, these arguments be worthei the wisdom of him
who^ god has blyndned and made folish his wisdom snarled in his own wily
craftines.

Joan says, he that loves not god, knows not god. The bys.


And why? because he has not faith into christ whereby he should know god
the father in christ. Joy


So that without love I cannot frutefully believe, no not the believe of
knowelege. etc. ergo love justifies. The bys


Love is not the cause of belief in Joy
christ, but the belief into christ is the cause of love. ye must, I tell you
leave your iugglynge cast with your truncate absolute believe, and like a
christen beleuer, put to christ in your belief, or else the devil and the
turk believe without love, with the belief of your knowledge and with an
historike faith, ye say ye cannot believe frutefully without love. I believe ye
well: yt another with your love, ne without it, ca^ ye believe in christ. But I, and
all other faithful to whom god gives his gift of faith in Jesus christ, we
ca^ believe in him, love not being so concurrant into the act of belief in
christ as to say with love I believe in christ as well as with faith. As to say
in a like speech. I am not justified without my.v. senses, and yet do they not
iustifye me. ye speak in a like fallacy as the man told the boter wife yt she
made her boter with her ears. It is truth, quod she, I made it not with out
them, but had them when I made it. Your self lo, now be ye come to daley with
sich idle ridels. For no just arguments can ye make for your love to justify.
Ye should impugn this saying. That without faith and belief in christ
iustifienge I cannot love christ. And then let us see what ye can bring in for
the younger sister to help her elder in iustificacion, or theffect to help her
cause to work. ye argue, as the creues goes, like ye perverse gardener of
whom speaks Alexander Macedo, turninge the tops o^ your herbs into ye
ground and the rotes upward, from theffecte to the cause, from the top to
the root, all backewarke and arsewarde.

But ye now preasse upon me to show ye scriptures in this form of sillables,
The bys.
charity justifies, and yet ye have no scripture so framed for faith, as to
say, faith justifies.

No, but I have scriptures to show ye. Joy
That christ faide often and to many. Thy faith has saved ye, and Paul
oftener says, that man by faith is justified. and what difference is betwixt
these two sentences. To him that believes in him that justifies the ungodly,
his faith is rekened to him for rightwisenes, and faith justifies? what
differenc make ye betwixt these two sentences. By faith man is justified, and
his faith justifies him? And now show me as mich for your charity, where ye
have but once this sentence By charity man is justified and I will grant it
you that charity justifies, but as I know ye shall never show it nether in
se^ce nor sillables so shall I never to you grant it. But to answer you
according to your folyshenes and to stop your mouth, The bys.
who begin to appose me as children were wont each other in their primers to
ask, where find ye me two deus without a meus. This miche I say, I find in
Paul. deus iustificat and then in Joan, deus est charitas and so I find
charitas iustificat.

^oye
And is this all the scripture ye can find for love to iustifye? Then I se well
ye have not forgotten all your boys plays, nor yet all your bragginge
sophistrye. I am content to be called fool of you so worldly a wise, but yet
Paul tells me again. That the folyshnes of this world is wisdom before god,
and the wise of this world be very foles before god, But at least wise ye
should have rememberd the wysemans counsel, biddi^ge you, Not to answer the
fool accordig to his folishnes lest ye be made a fol^ your self. In good faith
I thought not of siche childish fashions and Plays when I said. Where find ye
that charity iustifyeth? but meant it simply and plainly askinge it you, to
show me the place in scripture which perchance meself had never seen ne hered
of before but now ye, knit up your syllogism thus sayng. Deus iustificat, deus
est charitas, ergo charitas iustificat. For quicquid predicatur de subiecto
predicatur de predicato. And so if deus predicatur de iustificare to say. Deus
iustificat and then charitas predicatur de deo deus est charitas, the scripture
y^ faith deus iustificat, says also charitas iustificat. And thus I give ye
words for words who deserve none other. For else I know yt charitas que de deo
predicatur est iucreata, and so differs it a charitate qua iustificamur.

Joy
Mary sir, I thank you with all my heart, for thus have ye soluted your own
false argument, as the sophisters solute such false sillogismes sainge, non
tenet syllogismus ubi ter mini non supponunt omnino pro eodem. But yet here me
thinks ye have forgotten your sophistrye and know not which is subiectum
copula and praedicatum in propositione. Ye say that in this your first
proposicyon. Deus iustificat deus praedicatur de iustificare. where ye show
your self not to know which is subiectum and praedicatum, ne copula. For
copula nusquam incidit in subiectum uel praedicatum. Ye say deus predicatur
look beter of your mayor, and how your argument should stand in ye third figure
if deus were predicatum in ye mayor and subiectum in ye minor. Ye be so high
in divinity that ye have forgoten your logik and sophistry.

But ye say they be but wordis for wordis ye give me. In deed wordis be taken
for deceights without any trwthe, as ye use your vain wordis in all your
bokis, all verite set a part. But in erneste, let these your trifles and
skoffes pass from so grave a cause. And show us in se^ce seriously as I have
showed you of faith iustifyinge, albe it not in form of syllables, where it
stands i^ scripture, Charity iustifiethe? For I nowmber not your syllables
but I seek out of you the very trwe sense only, from which ye now slip like ye
slyper ele and the deffe aspe into a another tale saying thus.

Now where as ye say, yt if the forgeuenes of our sins and our suluacion
should The bys
depend of the condition of our works, we should never be sewer and certain of
one iustificacion, for all our works be imperfect and foul. Thus I answer
you, That what sewernes ye would have, I cannot tell, but of this am I sewer,
that god has thus ordained, that baptism is necessary to attain salvation,
and yet all children be not sewer to be baptized. And this do scripture tell me
assewerdlye that a man must persevere in good doing to the end or else he shall
not be saved. And that he that stands in virtue, may fall and be cast out. In
all these your assewranees have ye not one word ne mention of faith into god
and Christ, ^oye
nor yet of his most adsewered promised forgeuenes apprehdesd by faith even the
very undoubted certitude it self. Whereby men may see how faithles and vnsewere
is your doutfull waueringe popish doctrine, which al these your assewerances
the turk and jew may have without faith justifying. ye say ye cannot tell what
sewrance I would have. wherein ye say not true. For how often have I laid before you
the assewred promises in Christ holden by faith, agenste your waueringe
workis? And yet I tell ye again. That if the kings majesty would promise you
before all his nobles another bishopryke now perchance void, and thereto put
his own seall and wrytinge to confirm his promise, would ye not reken your
self sewer thereof? Miche more then, If god y^ verite promise me forgeuenes i^
christ and gives me ferme faith to believe it, writing his promise with his own
hand sealled with Christis death and most preciouse blood, yea and gives me
thernest and pledge of this promise, even his own sone Christ and his holy
spirit, the pledge as Paul says and ernest of our forgeuenes and salvation
testifyinge unto my spirit that I am his chosen beloved predestined child in
christ, commandinge me to call and believe him to be my merciful father, should
I not believe in him and be assewered of my salvation forgeuenes and
perseverance in hope? al dubitacion and dout excluded? If I did not believe and
constantly hope for it, so should I dishonor gods vecite (which syn be satte fro
me) wherefore has God given me the certitude and undoubted assewrance, but in
hope to abide patiently waitinge certainly for his performance? will ye believe
beter, men then God? And to exercise this owr assewerd faith and hope, he
sends us continual cross and affliccions, And we have the continual reading
and hearing of his holy scripturs vt permaneamus fide fundati ac stabiles, that
we perseueringe grounded and fast roted in faith should not swerve from the
hope of ye gospel. And al be it, in ye straight and narow path of charity I
swerve and fall by ye way, yet have I gods promise apprehended by my faith
that I shall not so fall as to hurt me and be broken, but to rise agene. For ye
Lord has promised to put his hand under me to lift me up again, with an c. like
counfortable promyses to reduce repentant sinners into the way which promises
humbly with reverence and fear and thanks I enbrace It is thou, oh lord, that
assewerest me to persevere certainly and set me in assewerance. Psa. iiii,
How many promises have we, God to be our strength, our rok, bulwerk, castle
tower, defense, helper, for Christ our intercessour and reconciler his sake
with a thou said lyk confortable excercises of our faith to strengthen and
confirm our hope and expectacion in sewerty and perseverance? But your doutful
doctrine knows nether God ne Christ ne faith. But to confirm ours, yet aftir
this a fore said obsignacion of the holy spirit, God assewerth also his
congregation thereof with the visible seals of baptism and his holy souper to
put us in mind of his benevolence towerd us, and of his testament and covenant
i^ chrstis blod In baptism dewli ministered I remember and se his death burial
and resurrection Baptism
wherein also I am taught to be mortifyed, my sins buried in his woundis,
Roma. vi.
and to rise agene into a new life. And in the holy souper of the Lord, dewly
ministered, I remember and see with the eyes of my faith, The supper of the
lor^e.
in the breakinge and geuinge of the holy bread his bodi broken crucified and
given me into the remission of my sins, And in the holy wine likewise powered
forth and given me, I remember and see his most preciouse blood shed for me
into the remission of my sins. And even these be holy sacred adsewerances in
my faith and hope of my salvation thus daily excercisinge my faith and hope
into a perpetual perseverance in the same adsewerance while I live, which
as^werances (ye say, ye cannot tell of) A shameless ignorance in a bishop and
great infidelite and blasphemy is it in you, if ye will not know this so
manifest a sewerance offered and given into every faithful Christianes hand
heart and mouth,

Thus have I learned i^ scripturs, If we turn when god turns to us. The by^
If we believe when god illumineth us, If we love as god kindles us. If we be
baptized as god, commands us we shallbe justified.

Ye iugle with your (Iffes) and half turns. Joy
For as there is no man turned to god with fruitful repentance but he first
know gods merciable forgeuenes in christ by his faith iustifienge him, so is
there none but they first know God in christ, ere they love him, and believe
i^ god through Jesus Christ ere they be baptized into his name. For who
professes god ye father the son and the holy ghost and the christen
religion, unless he know it. It were a backward order and an vpsidowne
preposterous pla^tynge, the profession to go before the doctrine and knowledge
of the religion, as it has been a long season used, and therefore all such
preposterous religions (as ye see) degenered into apostacye and into all the
most filthy abominacions and idolatrye be now come to naught, as christ
prophesied of all such backward plantacions. And therefore your (Iffes) stand in
a wrong place. For your baptism with water is such a condition, that as al
they that be baptized therewith, be not therefore saved, so were not all they
that believed in christ, and all the chosen infantes contained under the promise,
dyinge before circumcision or baptism dampened, but without circumcision and
baptism of water saved by election and their belief.

And therefore your doctrine of your (Iffes) holds not. And if the queen of
Candaces courtman, so enstructe of Philip in the wagen* had died in that faith
before his baptism with water, yet had his only faith saved him by christ's
own words sainge, who so believe in me has life eternal. It is not ye baptism
with water, ne your penance yt saves us (as ye dream) for no element, ne
creature, ne man's work may do that thing. It is god only in christ that
regenereth with the spirit of faith, i. pet. iii. Titu. iii. Joan. iii. i.
Joan. v Joan. i
and by that invisible baptism be we saved of god through Jesus christ. If you
should tarry till ye have fulfilled all your conditions for your salvation, ye
should come to short of the gates shuttinge. And therefore merciablye says the
lord in Isay. He will make short his word of rightwismakinge, Isai, x.
and finish it in a plenteous abou^da^t rightwisenes, even in christ made of
him our rightwisnes holden by faith only. Children by your popish doctrine,
that dye before baptime, and ye infantes in Moses law diyng before the aight
day, should be dampened as ye teach, which is to hard for you to prove, when
the scripture is plain agenst you, as I am able to prove it and can show it
plainly. The baptism therefore with water wasshethe only the body, and the
minister brings the water and words only and no salvation nether as causes
efficientes ne formal. So that baptism with water is but the visible seall
instituted of god, Baptism
and ferme token of the former justification by faith in the regeneration of
the spirit, ye seall (I say) testifienge to the congregation that he is
incorpored into them. For thus it correspondeth (says Peter) the new birth,
whereby the spots of the soul be taken away. i. Pet. iii.


And thus is baptism with water, signaculum iustitie fidei, the seal and
testimony of the rightwisnes of faith as was circumcision, and not ye self
same rightwisnes it self, as ye teach ye may make it signum iustitie operis
operati sieve iustitie baptismi, after your scole men that is the sacrament or
seall of the rightwisenes of works or of the rightwisnes of baptism with
water, and man thereby to be justified as ye dream, and so Christ in vain to
have dyed. Besides this it is the figure of our perpetual mortificacion and
repentance as I have often declared the use thereof before. And as touching the
imperfeccion of faith and charity in man (as ye say) Albeit our faith (I
say) be as little as the mustarde sead, and as imperfit as was his that said,
lord I believe but yet help my unbelief, yet god accepts it for our
justification for christ's sake bidding us, daily to pray for thencreace
thereof. Then ye say, all our works be imperfitte.' It is truth that ye say.
And in so saying ye have condemned al your own doctrine of merits
satisfaccio^s, and conditions of works, to deserve remission. For no
imperfitte works may deserve perfect remission ne make perfect satis^accio^, as
ye well know it. And for this cause of our imperfeccion, indignity, and
impossibilite by works to merit our remission and salvation god has taken it
out of our hands and from our works and laid it upon christ as ye se in the
prophet Isaye, him by his perfect fulfilling of the law and by his so perfect
works to merit, to satisfye fully and perfitlye and so to obtain us ye
remission and salvation for our faith into him. And thus is he made of his
father and ours, for us our iustificacion our rightwisnes, rede^ptio^, our
holiness, our wisdom, our satisfaccio^, Romans viii
and our implecion of ye law, which all we by faith receive as our own for
that he is given to us, holy with all his that he either did or suffered in his
blessed innocent body and soul. And even these be our elder brothers clothes,
Genes. 27
done upon us by faith so swetely sauouring, which so delight and please our
celestial father, as did Jacobs elder brothers fragrant vestures savor in his
father Isaac his nose, that he gave him his brothers blessing, as shall our
father for ye same doing on by faith (and not for your participatio^) of our
elder brother christ his sweet clothes of his rightwisnes merits. Gala iii. i.
Joan. v.
etc. For who so ever be baptized of the spirit by regeneration of faith, they
have done christ thus upon them. And thus with Jacob be we made Israelites. And
thus be we all made ye sons of god, for that we have believed in Jesus christ,
says Paul, and not (as ye say), for yt ye have done your good works and
ful^illed your co^dicio^ Thus ye se how Paul, Ioa^, and Peter and christ speak
of ye baptism of ye spirit and not of ye visible baptism of water to give
remission and salvation. ye give imper^eccion to our works and to faith, and to
love, it is truth. But yet must ye consider yt thimperfeccio^ in our works so
minisheth and takethe so away the goodness and dignite or worthiness of the^,
that they may not be called good ne meritoriouse. But faith Isaye ^ being
imperfit and as little as the mustersede, or as weke as his yt said, help lord
my unbelief, yea or so matched in perel with temptacion, with fear, and
dubitacio^ as was peter's faith so boldly leaping into ye sea to mete his
master christ, when the sourges arose agenst him so high that with his little
weak faith he began to sink, yet as little as it was, it was ye good gift of
god, and saved hi^ for christ's sake from drowninge. For it is our perpetual
bishop and only intercessour in heaven that continually prays (as he did for
Peter and his fellows) lest our faith fail us, even in the mids of the
stormye tempestiouse floudes of the troublous sea of this world. For the gifts
and calling of god be sich as it cannot repent him of them in his chosen. Romans
xi.
Then ye say, Job said, I feared al my works, in which, faith (ye say) may be
comprehended. But it appears, that ye understand not Jobs words, for he never
feared his faith but his works only, which were evil and imperfit. And the ebrw
or chaldie word, signifies erumnas and labores meos omnes, that is to say, I
feared al my miserable works, and laboriouse miseries, which he called his own
evil works, for it follows sciens quod no^ parceres delinquenti knowing that
thou woldst not spare the trespasser. So that here ye see how that ye manakle
and rende out by patches the textes for your wicked purpose not consideringe
what gothe before ne follows, nor yet what the words properly signifye. If ye
could comprehend faith in Jobs works, so would ye make faith no gift of god,
ne belief gods work, but Jobs work so feared of him self And all the
scriptures agree with Job so speaking of his own works only and not of faith.
For many holy men fearing ye same, desired god not to enter into judgment with
them ne to judge them after their works. Then ye take in hand to describe the
sinful nature of man as borne out of Adam and Eve, saying that the powers of
our soul properly receive faith and love, and upon the occasion of the world
and the flesh and suggestion of the devil be ready to rebellion. etc. In which
saienge ye speak not truly of man in his corrupt nature as borne out of Adam,
conceived in sin roted in his soul, called altogether in scripture, flesh,
the old man, the body of sin and death, inimitie against God, naturallye the
child of wrath a contynuall rebellyon against gods spirit. For occasion or no
occasion given, ^^^es. vi.vi^i.
sich one is he before he be regenered as god painteth him, saienge, after the
hebrewe verite. Every imaginacion of man's heart is only evil, is, says the
text, and not prone or redye (as ye term it) yea and that at all times, even
from his youth, without the spirit of God regeneringe him, he is brydeles
runnynge into the free field of all carnal lusts. Of the power of this
corrupt man's nature, ye speak, as by his fre choice to receive faith with
love. etc. Uerilye this man has no such a Pelagianes power of him self to
receive faith, no more then had ADAM. him self power to come to God when he
fled from his voice in paradise so ferefullye with shame sekinge where to hyde
him from his presence. There is no sich proper power properly (as ye term it)
in man to receive faith or any grace, except that natural proper power be
properly taken a way and pourged with the spirit of liberty by faith
purifyeng the heart so making in him a new heart prepared to receive faith
making a new and free power from his natural bondage to sin. So that your
fre choice to receive grace may not here be placed with pelagians error
enemy to grace to set up your fre choice and bond liberty to syn.

For although the gylt of original sin be taken away in baptime yet the
skarre of it, The by^
and (as it were) the matter of it does remain. which as it trobleth and
lets manis perfection in vertew and thereby is maintained a continual strife
and debate, so is it not to be accounted our syn till we conceive it by
enbracinge and agree in to sich carnal mocion^.

Joy
In this your bare sayings without any scripture be contained many errors as it
must nedis come to the^ yt teach out of their own headis. First false it is
that baptism with water takes away the gylte of any sin. For it is God
only yea and that by Christ only that takes a way the gilte of sin. And
therefore Paul says plainly that the original sin which entered into ye
world by only one man Adam, Romans v.
is taken away (he speaks there, of ye gylte) by ye grace of God even by that
only one man and fre gift given us Jesus Christ, and not by any creature either
of water, word or minister, as cause without which the gilt is not taken
away. For there, Paul in a long contencio^ with many wordis sets only christ
his gift, grace, his iustificacion and his obedience against the gylte of
original sin of that only one Adam. And where ye say, The skarre (as it
were) ye matter yet remains, ye speak very fondly and grossly, yea falsely so
to teach and so to diuyde it, as though there were in sin a physik and
na^urall corporal composicion ex materia and forma as ye dream of the simple
giftis of faith hope and love. which all your dead dremes ye imagine to
stablesh your popish doctrine with the aristotilyk scolemen. The scripture,
austen and ambrose call plainly your skarre (as ye term it) evil
concupiscence, evil lus^e and desyer forboden in the last precept, and Paul
calls it the law of sin, the body of sin, the body of death and even syn
it self, And your own wordis folowinge say the same, in that ye affirm it to
trouble and let manis perfeccion in vertewe etc. For that as does and
works siche ungodly impediments so troublinge manis soul hindringe it from
vertew and fightinge against the holy spirit of god that would make him perfect,
must nedis be the mother of sin and sin it self stryuinge agenst the will of
God. Paul speking of this concupiscence, which ye call ye skarre, says he had
not known it to have had been sin, had not the law said. Thou shall not have
siche lust or desire in the. This sin original, although it be not imputed,
either to the chosen infants for their eleccion in christ, or to the faithful
waxen for their faith in Christ, yet is it not so roted out of the childerne of
Adam, but that it lies lurkinge in us as long as we live, as does heat or
fire in ye flynt and chalk, and as venom i^ the serpent, and is not seen till
either water be cast upon the chalk, or the serpent angered. For man is pacient
enough till occasion of wrath be given him, and well pleased so long as he has
his desire and mind fulfiled. and so of alother sins. ye say this skarre (or
rather concupiscence and syn as ye scriptur calls it) is not to be accounted
our syn till we conceive it by co^se^t. which saing is plain false. For whose
sin else should it be then his in whose soul it lies? Is not man conceived and
borne therein and therewith? It is, says austen, by traduccion drawn out of
Adam in a perpetual ysew i^to al his posterite, and was daugher of ye sin in
Ada^ and is mother of all the sins in us. ye say, It is not ours till we
conceive it by enbracinge and agreinge by consent to our carnal mocio^s, And
therefore, ye say s. James says. yt concupisce^ce (lo, here your self is
compelled to call your skarre and matter concupiscence which is sin) when it
conceiueth, brings forth sin. ye understand not what James says. For he
presupposes concupiscence to be i^ man (as David and Paul say) from his
concepcion, as an evil sead or plant ingraffed in to ye nature and soul of man,
as Austen declares it to bring forth openly evil frut, and therefore James
says not as ye say, that we conceive it not till we en^race and agree to it by
consent, But he says (if ye looked a little before) thus Every man is plukt
away, and (as it were) with a baight taken and holden of his own proper
natural concupiscence. And thence forth, he says, concupiscence aftir she has
conceived by consent, sin is brought forth into light, meaning sin actual
and not original. where ye see your skarre or rather concupiscence first to be
conceived into the soul ere she enbrace by consent any syne actual, as is the
woman a woman and apt to conceive before she conceyueth and as is the mother
before her daughter, and if the daughter be syn, nedis must the mother goi^ge
great with the daughter be sinful. The^ ye compare as wisely, Concupiscence to a
baron woman without a man, so making her man the agreement of his frewil
co^senting to the ill mocion, of which as out of man she conceiueth. ye should
have looked beter of your baron woman, and noted wether she co^se^teth not as
well as her man, and so in the woman also to be a mutual consent, lust and
concupiscence as well to be the mother of syn, as her man to be father thereof.
But concupiscence her self, ere she conceive and consent to commit actual syn,
is (as Paul tell you) sin it self, even the daugher (as austen says) of sin
ere she be ye mother of actual sin in sight, and ere she conceive (as ye
say) of her man. And although she (concupisence I mean) conse^teth not, but
lies secretly in the soul, so sone as it is created and joined to the body,
not yet stering, yet is she an hid venom and preuey, heat as it were in the
chalk or spark hid under the ashes not aperinge: unto ye which hid sin the
prophet looked when he said, who understands or sees his sins? and fro my
hid sins cleanse me, And shreud and unsearchable is manes heart said Iere.
whereof Joan said. If we should say that we have not sin in us, we deceive our
selves and ye truth is not i^ us. And therefore said Dauyd, Blessed is he to
whom god imputes not his sin, he says not blessed is he that has no sin,
but he that has sin, and is not imputed ne rekened to him for his faith.
Paul commanded the Roma. that sin reigned not, ne should have dominion over
them, so that they obeyed not it by her concupiscence. But to be clean without
concupiscence, he could not so be him self, as ye se in the.vii. cha.
complaining of it saying. I am sold a bond man under sin to do yt evil
which I would not do. etc, And as for your pare^thesis (although me^ might by
grace be without syn) it is so rare a bird as was ne never shall be seen, but
only christ, as the scripture and Austen affirm it. Now have I showed it to
you clearly by scriptures, yours (as it were the skar and matter of original
syn) to be no skar but sin it self, ne to be none so healed a wound but that
we must be regenered of the spirit, and taught by the baptism of water to
mortify that concupiscence, and that it is in mortifying, never mortified, till
at the last breath out of our bodies. Paul him self and al faithful felt this
concupiscence dwelling in the^ striving against the renouacion of ye spirit
whiles they lived. It is therefore so blody and so skabby a skar in the soul,
that it is ever in cure in the wounded half dead and half a live, who^ the
samaritane committed to the inholder. luc* x. and not so cleave a skar as ye go
about to cure it by baptism.

And so master Joy to return to our matter, The byss*
if ye would for policy fle from the work of love to the work of faith
because ye would be assewred, ye be no more assewered in respect by your own
work by faith then ye be by charity, but all our asseweraunce is in gods
promise. quia deus verax and omnis homo mendar.

No (my lord) I fly not from the work of love to the work of faith, Joy
as ye do from faith to love, they both flyinge from you. But I do enbrace them
both. But in the work of my iustificacion I observe the order and doctrine of
the scripture, only by faith to be justified, and so to proceed to ye works
of love, first assewered by my faith (which assewerance love can not give me)
into Christ, that he has forgeuen me my sins. Nether speak I of any other
assewera^ce by my nowne works (as ye would falsely impinge it unto me) but
only by the work of faith into Christ, which is not my work, but gods work
and his gift in me. But I spoke plainly of faith it self, which is the very
self certitude and undoubted adseweraunce, joined to gods infallible promise,
sealled with his holy sprit my pledge, pant, and ernest penny given me in
Christ's promise, with which my faith thus sealed I am assewered of my remission
and salvation through hope. But all our adsewerance (say you) is in gods
promise. Joy. But what asewerance have ye in gods promise except ye believe it?
Even here have ye condemned your self, and of purpose left out faith the
assewered certitude of gods promise, and not charity, ye will utter the trwth
and bewraye your self unawares, the infallible providence of God so bringinge
into light by your selves the same thing ye contend to kouer and to
suppress. For, this my former book against you (I dare say) ye would have
punished him yt should have brought it first into the realm, and now have ye
made laws yt none siche bokis be openly read ne sold in the realm, but have
condemned them. And yet has God so blindened and infatuated you in your own
false tyranye as to make your self to printe the same book agene and yet again
to, and to be openly and freely redd with yours, and sold in the realm. And for
one secret. C. by your own blind procurement are there now openly a M.
distributed in ye realm into many hands that never had the^ before.

The byss.
And therefore how soever ye and yours will test at it, I will return to my
common collet a prayer in the church. Omnipotens sempiterne deus, da nobis
fidei spei and charitatis augmentu^, and ut mereamur assequi quod promi^ti^ fac
nos amare quod precipis.

Joy
Now I pray ye return to it again, and into the popes portewes, your
versicles, litanies, matens, euenso^g, and miss to, that yet prayethe in the
same to merit to obtain remission of sins and salvation by their popish
works pardous, and pilgrimages. For in deed ye be drouen from the scriptures,
and compelled as every man sees to fly to your popysh portews and missale to
beg your false and beggarly autorities to confirm your doutfull doctrine. I
dare say, if ye had known the scriptures to have confirmed it, ye would never
have sought such shifts.

The byss.
Wherefore the some of our health begins continues: and is accomplysshed by
gods mercy. Quia neque volentis neque currentissed miserentis dei est: so the
seweraunce of our health depends upon gods promise.

I am afraid lest as ye iugled with your bare belief, Joy
so would ye do with gods promise, ye should have therefore added to it, saying
plainly (The asseweraunce of our health dependethe upon gods promise of
remission and salvation in Christ apprehended by faith.)

Mary (quod you) and that is truth. The bys
And here you will clappe your hands and extol the strength of treuth.

(Joy. yea and of faith to.

As though we pharseis, as ye saduces call us, wolt oppress it. The promise of
god is all. Et ideo ex fide, say you.

(Joy. And therefore out of faith (says Paul) is the heretage given. Given
he says and not deserved, vt firma sit promissio. that by grace and not by
Wynchesters works it be given, that ferme and sewer might be the promise)

Joy.
I think there was never haithen gentyle or Jew that so spightfully and so
blasphemously mocketh out gods holy word, as here do you of a set proposed
malice, sinning agenst the holy ghost. For here, because ye should not err of
ignorance, god has su^fred you to fall into the place of S. Paul which utterly
conuinceth and destroieth all your dampnable doctrine. Here Paul, setting the
law against the promise of the gospel, as one contrary to the the other in the
act of iustificacion, makes.vii. mighty arguments to prove only faith without
the works of the law to iustifye, because the rightwysnes of workis and of
the law cannot stand together. For that as comes to us by the promise (he
says) it cannot come to us out of the law, but the heretage comes to us by
the promise, ergo not out of the law, emonge the which arguments this is one.
If our iustificacion should depend of the works of the law, no man were sewer
of his iustificacion, both for thimperfeccion of his works, and also for
thimpossibilite of the law to be performed of man. And again, the law works
wrath and makes sin the more breeme to abound. Only that thing iustifyeth
which settleth, makes sewer and fast our consciences out of doubt, but that is
the fre promise of God received by our faith, and not the werkis of the law,
wherefore our faith only staid upon gods fre and undoubted promise iustifyeth.
Then he argues again thus, Every fre merciable promise of god in christ to
forgive us our sins is received by only faith, our iustificacion is the free
merciful promise of God in Christ, wherefore it must needs be received by faith
only. For our iustificacion were promised in vain, if we our selves might
deserve it by works. For not by the works of the law, says Paul, comes the
promise to Abraham or to his seade, him to be the air of the world but by the
rightwysenes of faith. For if they that will be justified by the works of the
law be therefore made the heirs, so is faith and belief in vain, and the
promise void and frustrate. For the law works wrath, and where as is no
law, there is no transgression. Wherefore out of faith is ye heretage given as
out of grace, that the promise should be the more ferme and sewer unto all the
seade, not to it only that is out of the law, as be the Jews, but also to
it that is out of the faith of Abraham, even to the gentyles, which Abraham
is the father of us all, if we resemble him in like faith. Into this plain
peese, when this bishop had brought him self so wrapped and masshed as
it were in a net, so accombred that he could in no wise wind out him
self, then begins he to mock, to rail, and to ieste upon Paul's words,
with Ideo ex fide, say you, and these words has the scripture, say you, ut
firma sit promissio, say you, And ye saduces tell us phariseis, we would
oppress the truth.The promise of God is all say you. And ye Saduces would
extolle the strength of the truth.

Joy. It is Paul the vessel of God that says all these words and not we.
And why should not we Christianes extol gods truth and defend it, against
you popish Pelagians, and with the scriptures confirm it against you
Antichrists? Be ye angrye that we extol, honor and praise true faith
joined to gods promyses against you rank phariseis, and perverse popyshe
pelagians? Be ye not content that we take gods part to defend his honor,
and magnifye his glory against your deuyllyshe doctrine oh antichristen
papists

And now ye will percase bring in Melancthons correlatiues of faith and
promise. The byss.
And that ye cause why we be justified by charity (says he) is, because the
promise cannot be received but by faith?

Joy
It is not Melanch. that says the promise of god in christ is not received but
by faith only, It is Paul, it is Christ that say it. For what avails a
promise and no man believe it? Be not faith and gods promises correlatiues in
the faithful beleuers, to whom god makes his promises? Ca^ ye separate the
faith of the just from gods promises, or his promises from their faith? Can ye
confute Melan. doctrine in so teaching? ye scorn his lerning and jest upon his
doctrine, and of all the learned men this day which write in Germany. And
why? verily because with their pens, and by gods word, they have given
your gostly father of rome his deadly head wound. ye may mock Melanchton,
and scornefullye skof and ieste of the learned Germans (as ye do) but confute
their doctrine justly, ye cannot, ne attain to their knowledge and learning,
ne come nighe their clear judgment. But it is the propertye of all arrogante
papists, to contempne and mock them whose books they be not able to bear
after them.

And thus they reason. Seeing our salvation depends upon gods promise, The
byss.
and a promise cannot he apprehended but by faith only, we must needs say
only faith justifies. And to make the matter plain, they bring in a
similitude. If one man promise another.xx.li. how can he to who^ the promise is
made apprehende the promise but only by beleuynge him that promyseth? And this
is the new scole of germany, where sophistrye is not banysshed, but has a
new garmente, and is clothed with pretense of simplicite. For in this
teachinge is a marvelous apperaunce of plainnes, and thoroughly considered, it
contains a mere deceyte. And note well reader that thou may perceive this
iuglynge sophistrye where it deceaueth the. It is not denied, but only faith
apprehends the promise therein is no controversy.

If ye this grant, what deceitful sophistrye what iuglinge call ye it man to
apprehende gods promise by his faith only? Joy
God promises me remission in christ's death affirminge him to be justified,
and to have life eternal that believes in him, and by faith apprehends this
promise of god. Call ye this iuglynge sophistry and mere deceit to believe gods
promise? Here lo reader, may thou see whother this popish bishop is carried of
his arrogante affectes, so blasphemousely to rail of only faith,
apprehending gods true promises? He grants him self only faith to
apprehende gods promise, and yet he impugneth only faith to iustifye to make
god false of his promise, as though Christ never said, As thou beleuest so
come it to the. Now let us see how ye can wind your self out of the briars.

The byss.
But mark well this when god justifies man: god ministers mercy to us,
which was the thing god promised to give us, as zachary prophesied, God to
give him self to us, who ^s all mercy whereupon is grounded our salvation.

Joy
In this prophecy of zachary, it is plain that God of his merciable goodness and
not of any man's deserts had made a promise to Abraham and to our fathers to
send us that blessed seade Christ our sauyoure, which promise who so believed
had remission of their sins. Of mercy was the promise made, and the thing
promised was remyssion of sins in Christ. And who so believed the promise was
justified, wherefore only faith justifies, now what can ye iugle or discant
upon this? Sing on a gods name.

Wherein we must considre distinctly and apart the promise of god, The byss.
and the thing promised, which is mercy.

I thought as mich ye would iugle with mercy, Joy
which in zachary is taken as every man may se by the conference of the text
for the fre merciable favor and goodness whereof without any merits of man, god
was moved thorough: Christ to promise, and now ye would make it the thing
promised, with which alteringe yet am I concente, if ye take mercy as the
scripture often takes it in other places, for the forgeuenes of sins in
christ to the beleuers. But yet go to proceed i^ your wicked porpose till ye
have haltred your self again.

As ^n their example (for I dare make no new) when one friend promises
another.x^ li. the promise is the bond, The byss.
the thing promised is the.xx.li. In which example, though I grant that I
apprehende my friends promise with believing him, yet I apprehende not that is
contained in my friends promise with beleuinge him, For I apprehend that with
my hands, if it be paid me. And so although we apprehende gods promise with
our bele^f, yet the e^hibicio^ of the mercy of god which is the thing
comprehended in gods promise, we apprehende that with all sich parts of us of
body and soul, as be conforted and healed by that mercy.

Joy
Be not here ioly iuglynge castes with apprehending with hands and with all
parts of body and soul, and apprehendinge with faith, now the exhibition of
the mercy and then the thing promised, and the promise to ^e apprehended, who
se not and laugh^ not at this antichristen apprehender and holy holder of so
siyber an ele by the tail? Because I receive my friends promised money with my
hand and his promise with beleuynge, therefore I must receive my forgeuenes in
Christ with a another instrument and mean then with my faith. For I must
receive my promised forgeuenes with faith only, and yet the exhibicio^ thereof
says he, I must receive with all the parts of body and soul, now go to, and
tell us your wise reason, and whether faith in receyuinge the promised
forgeuenes receives not al so therewith your exhibicion, that is in english,
the geuinge or gift?

As in the workinge of Christis miracles, The bys
the promise of health in body and soul was received by faith in the
understanding lightened by god, but ye health was received in all the parts
healed of body and soul.

But and if by faith only, Joy
the healed person had not first received his promised health, it had never
comen into his body nor soul, wherefore by faith only is the health promised
of body and soul received, and thus be ye confuted and confounded with your
own example contrary to your former apprehending. Now say on yet again.

Now if ye will yet wrangle and say that the promise of god is mercy, The
byss.
and god will surely fulfill his promise, so as the apprehender of the promise
apprehend also mercy, I will not vary with you. For our lady said. Suscepit
Israel pucrum suu^ recordatus misericordie sue. God has taken to him Israel
his servant remembrynge his mercy, that is according to his merciful
promise which the next verse declares. Sicut locutus est. etc. yet ye shall
note here a distinction in degree of mercy, between ye mercy in ye merciful
promise when our lady says, recordatus misericordie sue, and ye very receiving
of Israel to his service, which god death in ye iustificacion of man. For the^
he takes Israel the beleuer that sees god to his servant, which is a further
mercy. (Joy. Are not all mercyes and forgeuenes a like nyghe to ye beleuer?
Paul says, nygh unto the is the word of faith, even in thy mouth and heart.

The byss.
And the very mercy promised. So as Israel apprehe^deth the merciful promise
by faith. But being taken to service, receives the further mercy promised, in
receiuinge a new heart a new spirit, which god creates in man with the gift
of charity and resuscitateth in man life.

Joy. Joy
But tell us, ere ye wind your self any farther into this your laborouse
labyrinth and mysty maze, whether, when Israel received his merciful promise
by faith, he was not even then taken to service, and received a new heart,
and new spirit and was even then (ere charity wroughte resuscited to life) if
ye say no. So make ye Isreal's faith receiuinge the mercyful promise no lively
faith, no faith purginge the heart, no true faith, but a dead faith of no
efficacye ne power. If ye say yea: so is all your confuse babbling fond
vain lies. But say on.

Wherefore we may not properlye say, The (...)
we apprehende iustificacion by fa^the which is the exhibition of mercy.

But how happenethe it now yt to Joy
iustificacion ye give this new name of exhibition of mercy, and call it not by
her wont and plain name as the forgeuenes of sin, the absoluinge from sin,
or your effect of christis passion, or remission, as ye were wont to call it?
Trwly there lurketh some deceit in this your new found word (Exhibicion) but say
on again?

Which is thexhibicio^ of mercy promised by God to justify man, The byss.
unless we would call the promise of God and thexhibicion of y^ thing promised
all one.

Joy. Joy
when God of his mercy promises me remission of my sins, and even then, I
hearing it, receive it by faith only, am I not now in that same receiuinge
there of iustifiyed? Christ the write affirms it, as thou beleueste my promise
so is it to the. And what then prate ye and babble ye all in vain of your
distinct exhibicion and of so many receytes etc. but say on yet more,

The byss.
And here in is the sophistrye of this new scole slythely to passover and
iugle as this man speaks of under the board?

Here have thou (good reader) a long co^fuse talk of this bish. Joy
which as it is all out of his own brain dreamed without any scripture, so
has it nether head ne tail, but full of crooked cauillacions, and diuersely
divised distinccions, al to form and to fashion unto him self some slyber
shyftes, that ye simple readers might not espy him to be confounded and
confuted, but that he would have ever somewhat to say for him self agenst the
plain verity, which says. God has of his mercy promised us in Christ
our free forgeuenes, which promised forgeuenes we by faith only in Christ
receive and in so receiuinge it we be justified. This old breife and plain
speech of the scriptures, he calls the new scole and sophistry of ye germans.
But look thou upon these his new rehearsed receipts, one of the merciful promise
by faith, an other receite of the further mercy promised, and a another receite
of a new heart. ^is recei^is.
etc. and a receite of ye thing promised, and of the exhibition thereof, and
thou shalt see another manner strange termed nouities both of scole papistry
and sophistrye, yea and even confuse perplexity and perplex confusion it self
in all this said peese and in that as follows. For here you haste a promise and
the thing promised, (...)
a promise without the thing received, both dystincte. Here haste thou the
exhition of the thing promised, a receiuinge of the merciful promise by
faith, ^oy^
another receiving of the further mercy, and another receipt of a new heart. And
al these must be things distinct, and yet all knitte together in one bond,
one promise is apprehended by faith, the thing promised must be received with
body and soul, hands and fete. etc.

Then has this multiplier made us a promised mercy, and an exhibited mercy by
exhibicion, (...)
a mercy received one with faith and another with hands and parts of our
body a mere mercy, a further mercy, and I wene a mercy furthest of all that
shall never come nigh him. Anon he teaches of a mercy received by faith, but
the exhibitio^ thereof with another instrument. Then he minceth mercy divided
into degrees betwixt the further mercy in the promise and the nierer mercy in
the receiving. So as mercy promised, and mercy exhibited and mercy received,
and mercy fled so far from him, should not be all one. And here has this
mighty multiplier of mercy created us two new hertes, one created by his
faithles faith, and another by his cold charity, and yet has not this
marvelous maker first taken away his own stonney heart with his fre choice. And
at last (as he is an ingeniose artificer) has he iuggled us forth.iiii. new
iustificacions called of him exhibicions. One not properlye apprehended by
faith, another properlye apprehended by faith, the third is properly called
ye exhibition of mercy. And the fourth is kaught by his cold charity. And
this is all this highly learned lawiers divinity lo. For the which to be
confirmed, he brings in our ladies song Suscepit Israel puerum suum. etc.

But I dare say, that as for her, so holy, graciouse plain woman, by those
words, never thought ne mente all these so mysty mazes so full of perplexities,
and inextricable angles. In good faith when I saw him bring in suscepit Israel
puerum. etc. for his popish purpose, I meruayled greatly thereat, and thought of
some other strange subtyle knot (as it were) of another Gordias, not to be cut
in sunder of every man's sword. And here I remembered the sword of a good merry
florishinge fellow, which in construccion did diuyde and cut Suscepit a two in
the mids, and made these two words thereof saienge. Sus the wyld bore of
rome, cepit has taken away Israel puerum suum, our ladies son Christ called
Israel, in that by his antichristen religion he takes away and deuoureth
christ's faith and his word, alluding unto ye lxxx. psalm, describinge the
wild frothei bore of rome, wrotinge up the vyneyarde of christ in burning
his church. But return we to Sampsons fox tayed by tail to his fellows with
fire brondes to burn up the philistens good corn.

As soon as man believes, The byss.
god proceeds to the fulfyllynge of his promise for his part, and gives us a
new spirit and a new heart and so justifies us (Joy. What thing then does
your charity whiles man as soon as he believes is justified? ye will condemn
your self. The byss.
If we receive it and assente by our fre choice unto it, and work with it,
which is theffectuall receiuinge and the worthynes on our part, whereby we be
justified

Yea marye. Joy
It was time to add your (if we receive it. etc.) but yet your (if) comes
all to late to your man yt believes. For ye say that as soon as he believes
god justifies hi^, ergo he is justified and has alredye received his
iustificacion before your (if). But belyke ye would have said when god offered
to man faith, and if we receive it by our free choice and assent* then god
proceeds to the fulfyllynge. etc.

The byss.
And note well this, that there must be on our part a worthiness and therefore
howsoever ye will smyle at it, It is a good prayer, or a pro nobis sancta dei
genitrix ut digni efficiamur promissionibus christi. Pray for us holy mother of
god that we may be made worthy of Christ's promises.

Here thou see the bishop to play ii. parts at once, Joy
one contrary to ye the other. The first, he says, is gods part, in
procedinge to the fulfilling of his promise to the beleuer, the second is
plain Pelagians part, which was a rank heretyque and enimye to GOD and to
his grace, affirmynge man on his part to have fre choice to receive gods
gifts, and to assente to them when they be offered him, and so workinge with
them to make our selves worthy, as Wynchester says, to be justified
effectually, And here this mighty maker makes two iustifications, one for
gods part gotten by only faith, and another on our part gotten by Pelagians
fre will to receive grace and to work our own worthynes, whereby we be
justified, I thought Pelagiane would halter him self at last, or else ye must
thruste these two contrary iustifications both into one poke, where they shall
agree together as the fox and the hounde, and as Pelagiane and saint Austen,
for this is plain that heretic Pelagians opinion and heresye, which Austen
so myghtely confuteth in his books against pelagian and celestiu^, de gracia
christi and in li. de remi. peccatorum saying. Men labor to find in our
will that as is ours and not of god, but how it may be found I know it not.
In this peese every man may see, what an enemy with Pelagiane the bishop is
to grace, and would privily drope into the peoples hertes this present poison
of Pelagians scole. That the grace of god does but help our weak will and
infirmity: and so to make us chekmates. and fellow workers with god, us on our
part and him of his part, for our iustificacio^ divided betwixt us both.
diuidinge Christ, which was and is ever an hole entier savior. Against the
which heresy, god by his prophet Ezechiel, (...)
declaringe of what power our will is left to it self, speakethe thus, I shall
give ye a new heart, and put a new spirit in the mids of you. And I shall
take away the stoney heart from your flesh and give you a soft heart. Now tell
us. How can man's own natural stonney rebellious heart help god, and by his
free choice and assent work with god in his conversion to work his own
justification, either to will well, or to endeavor, or freely to chose good or
to assent, or to conform him self (as ye say) to gods will and to use his
gifts? when god says plainelye.

This stonney heart must be first taken away, and a new made put into man,
clean contrary to his first heart and will. But here may every learned
christen reader see how peruerselye ye handle the scripture, leaving out
quyte the taking away of the hard stoney heart, as though your fre choiced man
had none siche, ne were the son of Adam, leaping over it into a new heart
and new spirit, even sich one as was Adam created before he lost his fre
liberty to good by sin, you diuidinge his works betwixt the man and god,
affirming in the same, god to work his part, and the man with his free will
and heart, with his assent and your free choice. etc. to work his own
worthiness on his part, as two men should draw out a logge together both by
one line, one to help the the other. But answer me (by your faith) trewly to
these two questions? what thing works the man on his part in the taking
away of his stonney rebellious heart? If he works any thing with sich an
heart, The affectes of the flesh be inimitie to god.
it must needs be against god, and not with God, for what else can such an heart
work but evil, Romans viii
and against God, and not with GOD, but against his own health? Also whether
is this new heart and will, our own natural heart and will or no? These can
not be ours, for our own stonney is taken away and this new heart is contrary
to ours, so that we cannot have two contrary hertes and wylles at once.

Wherefore seeing they be gods gifts, let us not usurp them for our free
choice, but give that belongethe to god to him self, and that as is ours to
our selves, and make them not our works on our part (as ye do so pertelye
and distinctlye) settinge them checkmate against gods works in contention for
our part, as ye do with Pelagiane enemy to gods grace and glory, and to
myche a friend to your own blind nature. Repent ye and observe the true
Sabbothe, which god so often in the law and prophets commanded so
religiousely to be kept. Even in restinge and ceassynge from your own false
opinions, evil will, and worse works, and suffer god to abolysshe all that
your own is, and to work his will and works in you. And let us be so called
cooperatores dei, as Paul expouneth it of him self under correction saying,
not I have so wrought and labored in the gospel preching, i. cori. xv.
but it is the grace of god in me. We should be rather sufferers the^ doers or
workers with God, suffering hi^ to draw to work, to handle us with his holy
spirit, as the sawer drawethe and handles his saw and attribute ye work to
the chief workma^, and not to his saw. For it is god that works in us, to
will, to persevere, and to finishe for his own goodness sake and not for our
desertis. The first part of any good work is our will, the othere is enforce
and endeavor to prosecute and to finisshe it, and here ye see god to be the
author of them both. Thus ye se god to work all in every thing both
beginning, mids, and end, i. cori. xii.
who be praised, glorified, and thanked for ever. But you with pelagiane, will
work with, and help him and for the confirmation of this heresye of your fre
choice to receive grace and so to work your own worthynes, ye bring in your
authority out of the popes portewes. Ora pro nobis sancta dei genitrix. etc.
Pray for us holy mother of god (and yet was she mother but to his manhead)
that we might be effectuousely made worthy the promyses of Christ. For
scripture have ye none. In which prayer (say you) we acknowledge and truly
profess, that the promyses of god require in us a worthiness, which worthiness
stands, in our fre choice, to receive the promise. For the promises be not to
all men without condition absolute. Joy, No they be made to them that receive
them by faith which is the fr^ gift of god, and not to them that receive them
by your fre choice. Romans iiii
And therefore it is asked what and if some of them believe not gods promises?
shall their unbelief frustrat the promise? God forbid (says Paul) for god will be
found true of his promises when al me^ be found liers. For as he knows to
who^ he makes his promises, so forseeth he who shall by faith only receive
and cleave to the^. Then ye would prove us to have gotten to us this worthynes by
our free choice in receiuinge the grace and gift of gods merciable promise by
ye sainge of Wisdom. God tempted them and found them worthey of him This text
says that god found them worthy after he had proved their patience by
aff^yctions, but not by their fre choice for receiuynge grace, but because him
self in geuynge them his gifts of faith patience and other vertewes makes
them worthey.

And your own popysshe prayer, ora pro nobis. etc. is directly against you.
For no man prays for that thing says Austen which he has, or can get it
with his free choice when he list, and your self alleged Auste^s words for
ye same, saying. Iube quod uis, modo des quod iubeas, lord command what thou
will so thou geuest me grace to perform it. Then ye bring in Centurio, who,
ye say, because he said he was unworthy that Christ should come into his
house, therefore would ye prove us to be worthy of god. wherein me thynkethe ye
be besides your self and se not what ye say: to prove us worthy because
Centurio said he was unworthy? This should prove us rather to be unworthy,
except ye would make us worthy because we confess us with him to be unworthy,
and so be we unworthy in deed, or else our confession is false we making
our selves thereby liars and vnworthey. Thus may every reader see how false
doctrine will never agree with it self, and lies will ever break forth and
apere with ye long ears of the ass ietting in the lions skin, press ye
them down never so stiffely. At last, when ye have prynted deep and fast,
this Pelagians heresye of free choice in your readers hertes, then to blere the
eyes of some not so simple readers, but may perceive your iuglynge, ye would
seem to them to mytigate or to qualify your heresies with a mitigacion, His
worthiness is now call metenes.
and moderation of ye word (worthiness) calling it metenes after gods
acception, as ye might thus say with your wont false color of correction to
your scolers. Albeit I have taught you, with your fre choice and working with
the same in assentinge, to receive gods promised mercy and grace and thus on
your part to obtain your own worthiness whereby to be justified, yet this
notwithstanding, ye must mitigate the word, worthiness, and call it Metenes
after gods acceptacion. (Joy. A worthey cover to Pelagians pot, loo.) Guard. so
that al siche may be accounted worthey as conform themselves to gods pleasure
and use siche gifts of god as whereby god makes us worthy, both the gifts
received and other mo. (Joy. Lord how this slymei snayle pretenteth her
doutefull slyber way groped before with her leithey horns for fear of
resystence and obstacles? Here Pelagian perceiving, the deserving of his
worthynes by fre choice to be to gross to be hyden or colored, is compelled
now to fly from that speech to a new fantazyed phrase. That we must deserve
our worthy making of god, or our new mitigated Meatnes after his acception, by
conformynge our selves to gods pleasure and by using such gifts of god as
whereby god makes us worthey both the gifts received and other moo.

Joy. Behold, good reader, what s^yber shyftes pelagiane is compelled to seek
for his merits and free choice in endeuouringe and conforming him self to gods
will and by his free choice in meriting to use the gifts of god to make us
worthy and meat for god. Before he said. By fre choice, we on our part had
gotten and deserved this worthiness, and that there were works of penance
called the meritinge and deseruynge to use the gifts of god: Mary (as I
remember) he added by participation. So that this is the sense of his prayer
now to our lady, and not to our lord. That he might be made worthy, on his
part, and not o^ gods part to be made meat and conformable by his free
choice, bond to sin to the fulfyllynge of gods will. etc. And after all
these so intricate speeches, he makethe a plain note against him self saying.

The byss.
And it is to be noted, that we pray, that we may be made worthy (for we can
not make our selves worthy) but must receive all of god.

(Joy. Joy
No, of our lady we must receive somewhat, and part of our selves. Have ye so
sone forgotten your prayer to our lady. ora pro nobis, pray for us holy
mother of god that we may be made worthy?)

The byss.
Of whom is all our worthynes, and of our^ selves unworthiness.

Joy
Where is your fre choice by asse^t to receive grace and to work with it,
which ye called before theffectual receiuinge and the worthiness on our part
whereby we be justified? where then be your deeds of penance to merit the use
of sich gifts of god? where be your merits to deserve your meatnes, your
worthynes, and conformite ye spoke of whereby men may conform them selves to
gods pleasure and to use his giftis? The byss.


And ye in thateinment of worthiness, we be workers with god by grace as is before
said ye laid before we be workers by our fre choice on our part, Joy
for this worthiness. How stand these together? But when thapostles me^cioned
gods work in them, they said, nether the pla^ter ne the waterer is any thing,
but it is god that gives the encreace, and Paul says of him self laboringe
above all his fellows, as correcting his speech not I, but ye grace of god in
me wrought it. So yt they attributed al their works and labors, ye and their
will and endeuoures and worthiness all to gods grace wholly and nothing to the^
selves and so should ye do, if ye taught truly. But here ye harp again of your
vntewned ^arring conditions saing.

The promises of god require the condition of worthiness on our behalf wherein
is required our endeavor. The bys


ye should speak plainly according to the scriptures sainge. Joy
The promised forgeuenes of our sins in christ requires our faith which is
ye gift of god given us for christ's merits, and put your good conditions your
worthynes and endeavors in your purse, and deal them forth into your almose.
For by this scorpions tail added. (The condition of our worthynes is required
on our behalf wherein is required our endeavor) so smells of Pelagians fre
choice and merits contrary to grace that it poysoneth all the rest of your
doctrine. For our endeavor must proceed out of our will and
understanding, which both, if they be unto any good thing moved, it must
come all of god.

ye bring in a text of Paul, like a keye to cleave a logge, The byss.
for his speaking in that place, nothing parteineth to the iustificacion we
spoke of.

The kaye that I bring in of S. Paul Joy
openethe the door so wide that all men not being starcke blind (as ye be) may
see that our best, works iustifye us not. These be his words, i. Cor. iiii
where he speaks of his office of preaching, affirming him self to have done
it to trewelye and faythfullye that no man could blame him, no not my nowne
conscience, said he, can accuse me of any unfaithfulness or slaknes or
negligence therein, sai^g thus of him self. Nullius mihiipsi conscius sum. I
know me self fauteles, in nothing concerning my ministry gilty, Sed no^ per
hoc iustificatus sum, now conster you it forth and se whether in englysh it be
not. But yet for this doi^g, or by this, am I not justified. Wherefore if Paul
grant hi^ self not to be justified for so blameles laborouse, so perellous and
so high an office and so good a deed, look not you to be justified for any of
your good conditions yet not performed

Hitherto thou seeste (christen reader) how this bishops doctrine is patched
together of mere papistry and sophistry and of sha^eles lies, and heresies,
builded upon s^^^er soft sa^des, every where inconstant, like it self,
wauerynge, repugnante, slyppinge from one shyft to another, sekyng cauillacions
and corners to cover him self with colets, versicles, litanies, popish prayers,
with blind and balde reasons sukt out of his own wyly wicked wit, no
scriptures groundlye ne faithfully nor truly alleged for his part, ne for his
doctrine and declaracion. And as thou have now hitherto a taste thereof, eue^ of
ye same sowersauor smells all the rest of his book, as I shall utter it in
the next part of mine answer god wyllyng. For I know that the holy scriptures,
procedynge fro the mouth of the everlasting verity. (Albeit Satan with his
sworn Antichristis have ever contended to pervert, and yet cease not by all
their subtyles engines and fraud serpentyne and false doctrine, by teachinge
ignorance (as writes this bishop) to blot out of men's hertes the knowledge
of gods holy gospel, neuermore to be hard ne read, but utterly to be
extynguyshed with fire and sword as heresies, addinge their bitter
comminacions and cruel condempnacions in banyshing and burning this year so
many godly books and bybles) yet are they by the almyghtye merciable power
of GOD, so preserved roted, defended and nourisshed in the breasts of his
chosen, that like as the ferme strong palm tree, the greater weight be laid
upon her, the mightylyer she aryseth and spreadethe: even so, the word of
GOD, the cruellyer it is depressed and resisted with the tyranny of the bishops
and priests the stronglier it arysethe, the wyder it is dylated, the
myghtilyer it ascends the deper it is rooted, the fasterit standethe. For
there have been many excellent wits, both of the popis sophisters, of his
scole divines, of his rethricions and lawyers mighty in perswadinge blasphemies
and as subtyle by sophems to peruerte christis pure verity which have
stretched forth their venomouse tongues, excercised their wily wit is and
popish pens, armed with the seclare swerdes, with all their senews bent against
ye pore plain gospel, which all, as they have hitherto enforced into their own
confusion and wretched fall, so have they the highlyer promoued it against their
own wills. And yet these blind beastis, worthily thus cast of from god, see
not their own blody entents now plainly frustrated, and their own wiked
enforcements to have prevailed against them seluis. What, think ye, shall be the
end of themprowr now encensed of the pope to subuerte christ's gospel
received in germanye?

Shall it not be turned into their mutual confusion one to be the destruction
of the the other and each of them to be the minishing of ye others strength? one
to consume the the other, the worthi wrath of God at last to be powered forth on
them both? when the seclar arm thus long defendinge and enrichinge the beast
of Babylon shall at last eat up her flesh and burn up her citic. Collo. ii.
Christ in whom are hidden the treasures of all knowledge and wisdom, was
once forever reveled so plentuously and manifestly, that nothing necessary for
our salvation may be added ne desired, but we ought to be content with his
sufficient articles and sacraments left us in scripture al unwritten verities
(as they call the^ utterly detested. And even then were ye last days and hour.
as Joan and Paul testify, Heb. i.
whereof his sacraments and articles and his doctrine be called ye last yt should
be taught and delivered us, the fathers voice with great majesty out of heaven
commanding us to hear his son as the last and sufficient most perfect
teacher and master, us not to wait for any other after him, lest any thense
forth should be deceived by any further vain expectation and loking for any
false techers and writers as have this bishop with his Antichrists hitherto
seduced men with their false books and falser doctrine: from yt which our
lord preserve and defend this his church of england, to whom be praise for
ever. Amen.

And now unto you (my lord) send I this first piece to occupy your self in
making answer. It was Easter ere I had your book, and the^ had I little time
skant.xx. days to read it and to make this answer, and less quietness to
write. For in deed ye made me a runner about into uncertain seats and under,
and otherwhiles above uncertain sower elements. But the lord see to it, and
^e judge which takes out of your hands into lyberte all that yet suffer
wrong of you.


