NEVVES FROM GVLICK and CLEVE.

A TRVE AND faithful Relation of the late affairs in the Countries of
Gulicke, Cleue and Bergh, and what towns have certainly been taken as well by
Marquess SPINOLA, as by Grave MAVRICE, and how it stands with them in those
parts at this present.

Serving also to confute the false relation lately published in English.

TOGETHER, With Count HENRY of NASSAV his very late expeditions in the Country
of Marck, etc.

Faithfully translated out of Dutch by CHARLES DEMETRIUS, public Notarie of
LONDON.

Published by Authority.



LONDON, Printed for H. Holland, and G. Gibbs, and are to be sold at the
Flower de Luce in Paul's Churchyard, 1615.

The translator to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, thus have you seen in the premises a faithful report of the
truth, and nothing but the truth, translated out of a Dutch coppie printed at
Amsterdam by Nicholas van Gelkerken, a few days sithence, together with a
bewtifull map or platform of all those countries before named, the Towns,
Marches, Armies and Camps, even as at this very instant they remain: which for
your better satisfaction, you may see in the hands of the printer hereof, if
you repair unto him: And so fare you well. 20. October 1614.

FINIS.
A TRVE DECLARAtion of the great enterprise of both the Armies under the
conduct of the Marquess SPINOLA on the one part, and his princely Excellency
Count MAVRICE of Nassau on the other party, together with the names of the
places by each of them severally taken, and where the Camps are at this
present lying. etc.
GEntle Reader before we come to relate the preparation of defense taken in
hand by the noble Lords, the Estates, under the conduct of his princely
Excellency. We will first begin to speak of the Army conducted by the Marquis
Spinola, whereof some three months past a great rumor went, as well by taking up
of new forces, withdrawing of his old Soldiers, as also his marches, sieges,
and taking in of the towns and places, lying in the country of Gulicke, Cleue
and Berch.

In the month of August, the Marquis having gathered an Army together marched
from Brabant to the town of Tongeren, and so to Mastricke, where he increased
his Army, and here came his forces from all places marching. It was reported
his camp was then twenty thousand strong as well horse as foot. From thence he
went with his whole Army the twentieth of August, marching through the Country
of Valkenburch, toward the town of Acon or Aken; before which he came the two
and twentieth of August, dividing his Camp in three quarters, the one at
Bortset, the other at the Towns place of Execution, and the third at Saint
Saviors Hill, making presently his batteries close under the Town, charging
also every Soldier to bring five fagots to assault the Town fiercely and
with all speed, seeming to be somewhat incensed against this Town.

The Romish Catholics within, seeing they were so fiercely assaulted, fled
altogether with their goods into the Cloisters. And those of the reformed
Protestants Religion, seeing the same, were not a little amassed, and thereupon
thought it fit to confer with him; whereunto the Marquisse Spinola seemed
to be unwilling; notwithstanding at the entreaty and request of Grave Henry
vanden Berghe, the Prior of the Cloister of Acon, with the Abbess of Bortset,
who at three several times humbly entreated for the Citizens or Burgars, he
condiscended to a Parlee, and concluded upon the four and twentieth of August,
and the keys were delivered into his hands, placing for Governor of the
Town the Earl of Ritbergen, brother unto the Earl of Embden; permitting the
Soldiers, who on the behalf of the Brandenburger lay within the town, to
march forth with their full Arms, flying Ensigns, burning matches, etc.
Placing for the Garrison of the Town fifteen hundredth new entertained
Lutzenburgar Soldiers, and so marched forward with his whole Army toward
Dueren. The which those of the town understanding and perceiving that he would
assault them, durst not stay his coming, but resolved to meet him, and
delivered him the keys at his first approach, and so yielded themselves
without compulsion or any shot of Canon. The Marquis placing his Soldiers
therein, and so instantly set forward toward Berchem: Where he sent part of
his Soldiers toward Collen, to the end with the aid of the Burgers of Collen
to spoil and deface the Town of Mulhem, the which with great rage of the
Burgars of Collen, and the Soldiers of the Marquis Spinola was begun, and after
that they had beaten down the walls, they instantly began to fall upon the
new houses, but by the commandment of the Newburger, upon pain of death, it
was left undone, so as the Protestant inhabitants remain as yet reasonable
peaceable in their several houses. A garrison only there remaining. Then he
marched forward in good order with the whole Camp through the country of
Gulicke toward Rynbercke, where when he came, he made a Bridge over the Ryne,
where the whole Army of the Marquis marched over, ioining themselves to the
forces of Lingen and Oldenseel, who had long expected his coming thither,
marching all together toward Wesel. And by the way with those of Gelder and
Berck, he went toward Orsoy, as hereafter follovveth. There first entered in
five or six horsemen of Bercke early in the morning when the Milk maids
went out, and for that there was but slender watch held, they kept the gates,
and the other being presently at hand, marched without making any shot, having
by them two pieces of Ordinance, and about six hundred men strong.

Then the Marquess marched toward Wesel, and between the river of Lip and
Wesell lies strongly entrenched toward the field side of Lip, near the town.

And then a great part of the Camp in all haste attempted to shoot upon the
town, and by force to compel the same, even as with all speed they did,
causing such a fear in short time in the City, that the Burgars who being
courageous, with that have were astonished, and being altogether discouraged,
found it convenient to agree with the Marquess, which happened on the fifth of
September, condicioning liberty of religion, and reserving their old
privileges, but the Town should be kept with the Garrison of the Marquess
Spinola. The Ordnance and Munition of the Brandeburger being in the Town,
some days after was sent down the Ryne, toward the town of Rees, after long
conference and deliberation thereabout held, between the Marquess, and the
Duke of Newburgh.

And in the Marsh before Wesell, the Marquess Spinola has made a strong
Sconce to compel the town, and to hinder the passages of ships by the Rhyne.

As also three half moons the Marquess has caused to be made before the
three gates of the town, placing his Centinells or the outward watches toward
the Camp of his Excellency of Nassau.

Now shortly after that the Marquis had gotten Wesell, he purposed to have
made himself Master of Rees, to the which end he had already sent forces, but
his excellency was come there about an hour before, who in good time environed
the town and took it in.

Also it happened that the Marquess had gotten Santen an hour before that his
Excellency with his forces came there.

And even so it remains at this instant with the Marquess Spinola and his
whole army.

Now therefore come we to speak of his Excellency of Nassau and his army as
follows.

THE DESCRIPTIon of the Army of his euer-renowmed Excellency.
THE noble Lords the Estates with his princely Excellency their General,
understanding of the great preparation of the Marquess Spinola, also having
knowledge of the taking in of Acon, Duren, and other places, that he also
purposed to come down near toward Wesel, (the Marquess of Brandeburgh
craving by Embassage their assistance) they resolved to go against him, and
leauied soldiers out of all quarters, and first sent them up toward Sgrauen
weert, Elten, and therabouts, his Princely Excellency himself in person with
all speed from the Haghe, (accompanied with the noble Earls, Grave William,
Grave John, Grave Earnest, of the house of Nassau; and the Prince of
Portugal,) traveling by day and night came thither. First and foremost making
himself sure, and took in the town of Emericke with the forces he had with
him, presently marching from thence toward Rees, which he also in good time,
as is aforesaid, had gotten before the Marquess came: yea and had not his
Excellency staid the longer at the Haghe, upon the coming of his Majesty of
Great Britain, and the French Kings Ambassadors, upon a treaty of peace, the
Marquess certainly might have cast his cap after Wesell.

Then the Governor of Nymegen, by command of his Princely excellency, marched
out the tenth of September toward the town of Goch, with three great Cannons,
and coming about the village of Moock, there came to him five companies more,
marching in have toward Goch aforesaid, presently demanding up the town, but
the clergy would not yield thereunto: the Governor understanding this,
presently caused the parcullise of the gates to be set on fire, which they
within seeing, did bulwark up the gates with dung and other dirt, but the
Governor presently began to shoot with his Ordnance which he had at hand,
and to assault the town: the burgars seeing he was so furiously bent, fearing
to be surprised, made composition with him, and the eleventh of September,
yielded up the town unto him, who presently put in garrison the soldiers of
the Duke of Brandenburgh.

The twelfth of this said Month the Governor aforesaid marched toward the
Town and Castle of Gennep which he presently took, wherein he also put in
garrison the Brandenburgers men, sending also some forces toward Cleue,
Rauesteyn, and Sousbeck.

From the Camp where his Excellency first assembled, he sent the new Soldiers
to aid the Brandenburger, where he lay some few days after.

Then his Excellency caused to be made a Bridge before Embricke over the
Rhyne, where the new Soldiers marched over, and went up higher into the
country.

The Camp of his Excellency lies at this present on the Northside of Rees in
very good order, unto whom daily more men come, with horsemen round about.

His Excellency also caused an other Bridge to be made over the Rhyne before
Rees, with the half Moon, where a great number of ships lie, yea so many,
that it is a great pleasure to see, and daily yet more come out of Holland.
Here are already many men marched over the bridge on the side of Santen, and
Marien-bome, which his Excellency also has gotten: and here men think it will
come to blows.

And which is not to be forgotten, near unto Rees, his Excellency has a
goodly troop of horsemen which lie for a watch.

At a village called Bislicke, diverse meetings on both sides, have been to come
to an agreement, but every time as yet they have parted in vain.

THE DESCRIPTION of the March of Count HENRY of Nassau, to and in the
countries of Marck, as he departed out of the Camp of his Excellency his
brother, likewise the description of that which happened until this present
day, also is hereunto added what the Soldiers of the town of Gulicke of late
have effected and what towns they have taken.
AFter that his Princely Excellency, had lain a certain time between the
Town of Emerick and Rees: and had taken those Towns before named, also the
places and Towns which his Excellency caused by the Governor of Nimmegen, to
be taken, and garrisons therein to be put, his camp in the mean time grew
stronger both with horse and foot, which came from all quarters.

And having this strong Army of men together, a general Muster was made,
which the Marquis Spinola hearing, thought they would come upon him, and caused
instantly a battery to be made on the way of Rees: he had a day before also,
sent out some troops higher up into the country with certain Wagons who spoiled
and robbed the poor countrymen of all that they had, to the end our Soldiers
coming thither should find nothing: but what blessing he got thereby of the
poor Countrymen, I leave every one to judge.

The Marquis strengthening himself before Wesell, and not coming into the
field out of his trenches, yet his Excellency did undertake some thing, and
sent his brother Count Henry of Nassau accompanied with a good troop of horse
and foot, and some wagons with Ordinance, munition and victuals to the
countries of Marck and Rauensbergh, etc. to take in March, Ham, Vnna, Soest,
Camen, Dortmondt, with others: whereof this Count Henry has already taken
many, and put Garrisons therein.

They report also that Count Henry had sent some Soldiers toward Borkelo,
lying (between Groll and Lochum) to take it in, and to put a Garrison therein,
for certain reasons between the Earl of Stierum, and those of the town of
Munster.

Neither have those of Gulick been idle, but as valiant soldiers have also
attempted some thing, and the news are current that they have taken in these
places following, namely, Linnich, Wassenberch, Rangelrayd, Geilkercken,
Gangelt, Sittert, etc.

The Marquis seeing the course of his victory in taking of the Town of Wesel,
stayed for that his Princely Excellency came into field, and lay so close
under his wings, found It fit for the first to make strong and to entrench
himself, endeavoring to make a strong Fort near to the Rhine before Wesell,
whereunto his Soldiers have as great desire as a thief has to be hanged
and do plainly say this, we make for our enemy, as we made the Skonce of
Saint Andrew.

Also they say, that the Marquis (because he will not make the Burgers of
Wesell altogether his bitter enemies) has consented that the Soldiers lying
in the houses shall buy and provide their own victuals: for the which those
of the town must every week disburse two thousand Gilders, every one
according to his ability.

Moreover, there is news come out of the Camp of the Marquis Spinola, that
the Regiment of the Colonel Palant, being strong; about twelve companies with
three pieces of Ordnance, is marched toward Venlo and Geldor, and it is
thought they go to take the other remaining small towns, namely Brughe,
Dulken, Dalen and Glabberck. In fine, every one has a snatch at that he can
get, but the poor countriman must look to himself, therefore the old
Proverb is true, every one for himself.

It is reported also that his excellency will attempt some other matter of no
small moment, but where and what, the time will show. There is preparation in
hand to make a stronger bridge of ships for the passage of wagons over the
Ryne: and according to that preparation: It is also thought he will march
higher up the Ryne then Rees.

Aliquid latet quod non patet.

The Clergy have procured and effected so much this year, for to aid his
Holiness loving newborn son the Duke of Newburgh that a multitude of men
are already come to the field under the conduct of the Marquis Spinola, who
have already utterly undone many thousand poor men. But what confusion of
several nations of people, he to aid the Newburger brings into the country
he himself doubtless will find in time. If he had had such a prosperous cesse
as he had in the beginning, he had gone more forward in his designs, and also
the Archduke should have gained more by his twelve years truce, then by a long
continual war, and he had had fit time in these five years to have made
conquest of these countries, being friends to the united Provinces: and then
to come upon us.

FINIS.

