TWO GODLY AND learned Sermons, appointed, and Preached, before the Jesuits,
Seminaries, and other adversaries to the Gospel of Christ in the Tower of
London. In which, were confuted to their faces, the most principal and chief
poincts of their Romish and VVhoarish religion: And all such Articles as they
defend, contrary to the word of God, were laid open and ripped up unto
them. In May, 7. and 21. Anno. 1581.

By John Keltridge, Preacher of the word of God, in London.

Psalm. 119. verse. 128. I esteem all thy precepts most just, and hate all
false ways.

Prou. 4.14. Enter not into the way of the wicked, and walk not in the way
of evil men.

Imprinted at London by Richard Ihones, dwelling without Newgate, near unto
Holburne Bridge.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, Sir Fraunces Walsingham Knight, principal Secretary
to the Queens most excellent Majesty, and of her Majesty's most honorable
privy Council, etc.
AT such time (right Honorable) as I at the request of certain my dear and
well-beloved friends, had been at her Majesty's Tower of London: partly to
have some talk with the Jesuits, and other Seminaries deservedly there
imprisoned: partly to see if the Lord would have quickened them after great
preaching and much conference, with many and very learned men that came
thither: I did find, that the travail and study of theirs, has to this day
taken so small effect, as not only the Jesuits are more and more stiffned in
their errors: But also, they are become so senseless in feeling, so blunt in
attayning, so wicked and malicious in resisting, so disloy all and spiteful in
hearing, so sturdie and malaperte in withstanding openly the teachers of the
Gospel; as the people are upon the same dismayed, zealous and godly men
discouraged, and all fortes of people most pitifully distracted, that either
here or see them at any time.

Wherefore may it please you to understand, that for diverse causes, I have
given unto your Honor this brief and short Confutation of their Heresies.
First, that their damnable and gross errors though they may be seen of all,
may yet (especially) be known unto you: For I do think, that the reformation
and order to be taken for these Heretics, does lie (in especial) on your
shoulders, and is required at Gods hands of the Lords of her Majesty's most
Honorable privy Council: Secondly, that it may appear, whenever these
wicked men shall be called to an account, that then they will not be able to
deny or dissemble that which they affirm: For the most principal, though
not all their Articles, are confuted in this book. Thirdely, I am of opinion,
that esperiallye your Honor has to discern the spirits of these men, in as
much as you be in the number of those, that in Room, (together with many
other of the nobles in this Realm) were threatened to be burned by the Pope,
if he gat you either quick or dead: The last and the chief cause is this.

As your Honor has been always a favorer of the Gospel, and most
forward in Religion, so I trust that God will now move you, to have a more
care of his poor Church then ever you had. It is not unknown how God has
looued this Realm, sithence her Majesty's most gracious and happy reign
among us. The like rest with such quietness, the like peace with such
blessedness, the like comfort with such happiness, was never seen under any
Nation and people, as we have had under her Majesty. Now at length, after so
long and prosperous and peaceable government, to put this Realm in fear and
dread of that woonted Tirranie, which Antichriste the Pope practiced upon us.
To stir and move up by way of alienation the minds of men, and the
faithful hearts of England: to make us remember the blood that was shed of
old time by the Pope, to compel us again to sorrow over the bodies of our
dead, and over the Saints whose blood was shed, and over the multitude of
good men, that were taken from us: There are in the steed and room of those
blodie Fathers, risen and now in process of time grown up, their bloody and
unnatural sons. Among these, some would have hathed their hands in the hearts
of our people, as Saunders in Ireland of late was purposed to do, (and it is
not to be thought that he was there alone.)

Some write against us, as though we were Haereticques, and account us worthy
to be put to death: (what would these men do, if they had us in their hands?)
Of which sort is, John Howlet, and one, Campion: who both of them have
presented their minds most praesumptuously to the right Honorable the Lords
of her Majesty's privy Council: some also have spread abroad their damnable
and seditious Doctrine, through out many places in this Realm. Such be the
Jesuits, the Seminaries and other Scholars of the Pope, that be now in her
Majesty's Tower of London: Now, all these are come hither, and sent in of late
days by the Pope, to disturb us, and raise Tumults in this Common wealth. And
all these are the children of such Fathers, as persecuted the Saints: or they
be home borne children, and brought up in England, being the wicked sons of
wicked Parents: and they all have been maintained by that man of sin,
Antichriste. For all which things, it cannot be gainsay de, but that these
practicing Heretics, are most worthy to have the law of God in execution
against them, which he has set down for them in his Book. I do well
remember what our Fathers, and Forefathers did: David at the hour of his
death, called to mind the iniquity of a man of his, that shed blood: and when
he lay on his death bed, he said thus to his son Solomon: 1. Reg. 2.5.
Thou know what Ioab the son of Seruiah did to me, and what he did to the
two Captains of the host of Israel, unto Abner the son of Ner, and unto
Amasa the son of Iether, whom he stone and shed blood of battle in peace;
Do therefore according to thy Wisdom, and let not his hearie hairs go
down to the grave in rest. The same also said David, of the son of Gera,
the son of Iemini of Bahurim, neither did he accoumpt him innocent. It is
well known, what worthy and warlike fellows the Papists slew, and how they
were cunning men at the Battles of the Lord, and as ready to resist and fight
against Satan in spiritual skirmishes, as Abner or Amasa either ever were, in
defending their Cities for their master David: It is necessary therefore,
those good men should be remembered, in as much as they were slain so
trayterouslie: And now the rather, are we all to think upon that treason of
old, as there are risen up disloyal and wicked men to trouble us: Irreuerend
and disobedient persons, to provoke us: faithless, and hollow hearted
Papists, to disquiet us: foolish and erroneous Jesuits, to inueagle and
withdraw us from the Lord. These are they have practiced so many things against
us, this many years: these are the wicked, whom the godly have feared; these
are the disturbers, have disquieted this Realm; these are the conspirators
have withholden the hearts of the wicked, from their loyalty; these are they,
that if God had not been on our side, would long ere this have overthrown us.
We know that Papists, were authors of rebellion in the North. We know, that
as in the Shambles men sell meat, so in their private assemblies, have these
wicked ones, both bought and sold us of England. We know that many a time,
the Pope has sent secret messe^gers hither, and have stolen away many of the
Subjects hearts. We know that news has very often ben brought over, how the
time has been appointed, that King Phillip should have eaten bread, and given
his Soldiers drink in Le^d^^. We know that multitudes of Papists, having been
taken, examined, and imprisoned for the fame: they have said openly, that they
hoped one day, to see their golden day. It is seen of all men, what numbers
have been taken (...) Mass, in despite of the Gospel. It is seen of all,
how many have for treason, not only been taken, but executed in London. It
is seen of all men, that they have used witchcraft, sorcerie, and
inchau^tment, to destroy the Lords anointed. It is seen, how unquiet her
Majesty's Realm of Ireland has been, and all only through them. It is seen,
what signs and Crosses, the Papists have had brought over, as is their Agnus
Deis, and other Tablets, which continually they wear about their necks, as
tokens to be known by, if time served. And it is seen and perceived of all
openly, how that innumerable Bulls, and Pardons, have and are continually
sent over by the Pope. And can or may, true and faithful Christians see all
this, and not speak? Naie, the heavens and the earth, cry out against them;
and if both these should cast out their slain and dead bodies, which sometimes
the Fathers of these men have killed in this common wealth: we that live now,
were never able to abide the yelling and crying, the sighing and groaning, of
our Fathers, our Mothers, Sons, Daughters, Kinsfolk and neighbors, and of all
fortes of people some, for the unspeakable torments, wherewith these wicked
and ungodly Baalites have tormented them. And now they think the time to be
at hand, in which they may embrew their hands, and a freesh again be dronken
with the blood of righteous men, which hope, which trust, which confidence,
which desire, which practice, which sight, which thirst of theirs, cannot be
extinguished, if God either stay not their pretended purpose, or that some
speedy reformation, and sharp discipline be not sought after, for these
Heretics. And albeit, we be ready to pawn both our lives, and ourbodies, in
the quarrel of the Lord, yet have we a care of the Family and house of God, to
keep the wild Boar of the wood from deuowring it. Undoubtedly, as Achan
troubled Israel, Josh. 7.21.
in taking of the excommunicate and forbidden things, so have these Jesuits,
with their companions, that of late came into this Realm, greeuouslie provoked
the Lord, and moved us, in bringing over their whorishe, forbidden, and
Babilonish garments with them. Genesis 35.4.
True it is, that all the Trinckettes, and rubbishe they have, is nothing else
but Ceraphims, and the same strange Gods, or some such beggarly, and unmeet
trashe, as the Patriarch Jacob took from them of his household, when as for
very shame, he buried them under a Terebinth Tree in Schechem. Their worship
is all one, with the worship of Aaron, when he offended in making the golden
Calfe. Of which sin committed, Moses was so afraid, Exo. 32.20.
as in the same, he let fall the Tables of stone, and they brake: but Moses
dealt with them, according to their iniquity for all that, and he stamped the
gold, of which the Calfe was made off to powder, and made the Israelites
drink thereof.

And this was much that Moses did, but Asa the King did more then he; 1. Reg.
15.12.
For he put away the Sodomites, and bannished the Idolaters out of the Land,
and he removed Maacha his mother, and disinherited her of Crown and dignity,
for that she offered Sacrifice to Priapus. Notwithstanding, Iehu did more then
did he: 2. Re. 10.26
for he killed all the Prophets of Baall, and suffered not one of them to live,
he defaced the Temple of their Gods, and made a Drawght house of it for ever.
And Iehoiada the heigh Priest, 2. Reg. 11.4.
together with the young King Ioas, killed the Idolatresse Athaliah as she
fled for her life out of the Temple: Ezechias did wonderful things in his
days and he spared not an Idolater in the Land. How Josiah delte being but a
young Prince, and how he visited, and went through the Realm in his own
person the book of the Cronicles and Kings of Judah do declare: 2. Reg. 22.8.
He put the Idolatrous Priests to death, and was so zealous in the behalf of
his God: that he burnt their boanes, and sacrificed them up, upon their own
Altars. We are not ignorant (right Honorable) of all the Statutes,
Ordinances, and decrees from age to age, which the primitive Churches have
both made, and confirmed against the Idolaters of there time, what the
Emperor Constantinus did, appears in Eusebius, Eusebius. in vita. Con. lib. 3.
and how he delte in Phaenitia and in Cilitia with the Idolaters. Theodosius,
as witnesses Theodoretus, Theod. lib. 5 cap. 20.
did refer all his study to the suppressing down of the Idolatrous
Gratians. And I do remember, that Leo in his Epistle Leo. Epist. 66.
requires of Licinia, Eudotia, Augusta, that she would root out those
Heresies spread abroad, by the roauing Monks in Palestine. Therefore seeing
their children are sprung up in our days, and in their steed are risen up as
wicked and as great Idolaters as were they. It is very heigh time they should
be looked unto among us. For my own part I do protest, that if any thing has
made me to write, it is the Lords quarrel, and the fear of his name that has
done it. And in the same I have great reason moving me thereunto, which your
Honor shall understand, and they all perceive, that shall read this Book.
But it has grieved me most of all, and stirred me up espetially, in that I
have from time to time, seen and vewed the impudent behavior, and bold
presumptions of the Papists: Among whom, some men of late time, in a sound
speech, perfect tongue, fine wit, and choice phrase (as they did think of them
selves) have rashly encroached upon her Majesty, and upon your Honors, the
Lords of her Majesty's Honorable privy Council, with sundry of their
books: Thereby making us believe, that because they durst do it, they did it
well. Of these Master Harding was the first, that revolted and ran away from
Christ, but never returned, who by this time knows, whether he did well or
evil. And Osorius, did but the other day send abroad his Co^nfections, to
poison the young Fry of England: who, as he flaunteth it out in a leaf or
two, yet halteth he in many places, and speaks very roughly, and breaks
out every where vnpleasauntly, and then heals up the wound so rawly again,
as that his gleaned and piked up corn, stolen words, borrowed ware,
deceiptfull style, quauering Notes, and slanderous speeches against the
truth, be wundered at, and greatly pitied of all cunning woorkemen. Moreover
the other day was the like seen, for the Snow has not yet fallen upon the
ground, nor yet has the Sickle been put into the Corn, sithence one, to name
Campion, and an other, to name Howlet, have cast out Rebellious Pamphlets, and
offered combat to all the learned in this Realm. Now, all these men, for that
they wanted credit and estimation where they lived before, are content like
Maisterlesse men, to go abegging and ask for entertainment abroad:
Therefore have they praesumed to enter the Court gates, and there to open
their Pedlers Packes, and to set out to sale their counterfeit Merchaundies,
supposing that because her Majesty's Subjects upon hope of amendment, have in
all clemency been borne with all to this day: Therefore also they should
look for the same favor, and good words both of her Majesty and your
Honors hands, as a reward given them for their slanderous and Scismaticall
Libelles. May it please you therefore, with the same eyes, and like heart: as
you have to this day most Honorably continued, so also to turn back, and
look upon the learned with in this Realm. It will be known unto you, that God
has so blessed them in England with all kind of furniture, Timber, Wood, and
Stone, fine work, wrought work, and needell work, gold, silver, and all
other kind of Science, Art, and knowledge, both divine and human, as all
their outlandish falsehoods, robbery, pilfering and stealth, with their foolish
and misshapen Quiddities, loose arguments, broken reasons, falsified Scriptures,
colored and disguised Authors, are never able to be compared, or come near
unto us. For why? the Lord is on our side, and he rayseth up both the
eloquent and the good man: As for those men, what have we to do with them,
seeing they are bewitched with falsehood and lies? The Lord our God is he that
we must follow, his voice must we here, and as for those that bring not his
word, the Lord shall be revenged on them himself. For my own part, what I
have set down against our adversaries the Jesuits in this book, in the same
I will not be my own Judge, but I will refer that I have spoken to the
indifferent Reader, and he, all that I have done unto the Scriptures. The
Lord, the true and righteous evermore, the God of our fathers that has
always been with you, kindle your noble and virtuous proceedings more and
more, that you may be a light and fartherer in the same, to all those that
love and fear the Lord: And the Lord grant, that his countenance may
shine upon us, that his word may be known rightly, his laws and
commandments observed diligently, the virtuous and godly men defended
mightily, the wicked and obstinate punished seuearely, and his goodness and
mercy spread abroad openly upon us all. That her Majesty may reign long
time over us, to see the judgments of our God put in execution, that her Grace
may see an end of all unquietness, dissension, and strife, and establish peace,
unity, and concord in the Church of God. Amen.

Your Honors most humble to command, John Keltridge.
From my Chamber in Holborne at London. June. 10.
To the Readers, and faithful Christians, health and peace in Christ Jesus.
THe great love that the Lord our GOD has borne to the Church, neither is it,
neither can it be hid from any man: and if we which have now Itued in the same
many years, be not either stuffed and choked up with his manifold benefits,
or careless and secure, for that they have been so plentiful. Then will
every faithful and good man say, as I say, that of all Nations and Countries
under heaven, we have hitherto lived most happily. For if Wars were looked
for, the Lord has turned all to peace: If conspiracies and Treasons were
practiced, they have been revealed from time to time: If Insurrections were
made, they the authors have been suppressed immediately: If Forrainers and
strangers have determined any thing against us, their pretended devises never
took effect: If at any time they have purposed to spoil us, the Lord has
delivered them into our hands: If the heavens have portended any great thing,
or the earth has shaken her pillars against man: or the Elements in flaming
manner, cast forth their sparks of fire: yet have all these most strange
things (to this day) shown their force, declared their effects, and plainly
manifested their angry countenaun^^s, against other Nations and strange
people, not against us of England. So that I may say, happy are we, if we may
continue happy: and blessed be we above all other, if we be still blessed of
the Lord: and most of all are we to praise our God, if hereafter we shall be
able to stand, as hitherto we have done, which he only knows, not man. Of
this I am certain, and for the same I have a good warrant: that if our sins
be not come up unto the brim, if our iniquities be not ripe, or our manifold
transgressions, come up before God, then have we not to fear any thing: but
whatsoever kind of ^^^righting it be, howsoever men's hearts do fail them,
or what rumors and signs of alterations the wicked do forecast in their
hearts, all shall be turned to the best, if we have not provoked the Lord. In
very deed it is true, that the Lord is able to remove our Candelstitke: that
the Lord is able to carry us into a strange land: and he is of power to hang
up our Harpes upon the willowe Trees, and enforce us to sing a song of Sion in
Babell. Yet let Israel be of good cheer, and you the people of the Lord
comforted, for if you will fear the Lord and obey him, all things shall go
well with you, Deuteronomy. 28.2.
all the blessings of God shall be powered upon you, and you shall stand in
fear and dread of none. But and if you disobey the Lord your God, and cleave
not unto him, all the plagues and curses set down in his book shall overtake
you. Leui. 26.14. Lamen. 2.17
I tell you of a truth, that if we look not to our ways, and take heed to
such things as the Lord our God has forbidden us: without question he will
bring such a thing to pass, as all the ears of men that hear thereof, shall
tingle at it. For my own part, I am persuaded, that even now God has begun to
becken his hand, and shake his rod at us: and of the same, I will yield
certain reasons. Pride.
First of all, the pride of Sion is great, and her daughters have wa^dring eyes,
and stretched out necks, and they mince it in the streets with their feet,
as if only they had a care to live here, and to do nothing else. Security.
Secondly, the fullness of bread is great, and (...) are inglutted with the
Olive and the Grape, therefore begin free to to be careless. Whordom.
Thirdly, there is a grievous sin, which of all other I fear, which above
the rest I abhor, which of all is most damnable, which in the most is most
common, yet esteemed of over lighthe, by the most godly: which is whoredom,
that is so sparingly punished. For these sins am I persuaded, that God has
begun^e to show his displeasure, and angry countenance upon us: the Lord
has now forewarned us to look about, and to examine our selves against the
time of his coming. And assuredly, I am sore gr^uc^ for the same: for the
Papists, finding that we have displeased God, and knowing that the Lord never
strikes, but when he is angry: have now of late lift up their heads, thinking
to make a conquest, and to pray upon us, So that I see we are now in
distress, and two kind of inconveniences fall upon us for our sins. First,
the Lord is (...) honored, and the Papists they hope for a day: Secondly,
our people and nation is affrighted, and in part discouraged, (...) they fear
that because the multitude of Heretics are now inc^^sed: that therefore God
as he has warned us, has also forsaken us: and as he has touched us, has
certainly delivered us into their hands, which is nothing so. wherefore,
seeing the and the aduersaire, is so exalted against God in his pride: and the
poor Church so discouraged for her sins in great humility, I will say some
thing to them be the.

As concerning you the adversaries of God, and enemies to England: whether you
be called by the name of Papists, or termed as Catholics, or esteemed as
Jesuits, or thought to be Seminaries, (...) called by any other name among
men: Understand all of you, that if we have sinned, you have no cause to
rejoice: we have not trespassed against you, but against God: and if any thing
happen unto us, we are under the hands of the Lord, not under yours. What if
our fathers have erred? what if our Kings and Princes have offended? what if
our Rulers have trespassed? and we his people gone astraie? that appertains
not unto you, but unto our God. To him we submit our selves, to him we
yield, to him we acknowledge our sins: (...) for you, what have you to do
with us? why trouble you his people? and what have you to do with his
anointed? we will submit not selves to the highest, we will not be delivered
into your hands, nor into the hands of men. Know you that we will neither
choose to ^ye three days before our enemies, nor have seven years famine come
upon us in the land: but we will fall into the hands of God, let the Lord do
what seems him best in his eyes. Now if it should come to pass, that we were
again made slaves unto you, as we have been of oide time: yet would the Lord
be revenged upon you: your Sheepheards should be scattered, as was Gardner and
Bonner: your Princes and blasphemers should perish, as all those have done
that stood against us: your Runners and Deuowrers with the sword, should have
a deadly end, as has befaine to the persecutors of our Church: and you your
selves should have all the plagues of Egypt to trouble you, till you had
delivered us. what if we served you, seven or eight peers for our sins, to
reclaim us? yet would the Lord send an other Othoniell, Judge. 3.9.
to redeem us, and consume you. what if eighteen years? as we confess some
times we did: what advantage was that to you, when Eglon your King, Judge. 3.14.
with the Ammonites and Amalekites, were afterward destroyed for it, by Ehud of
Gera, the Captain of the Lord? What I pray you, aduauntageth it you, to rail
on the host of the living God, and to curse us, and to defy us before the
Lord: if afterward you and yours, be found all only to be they that are
cursed? for so it fell out in the days of Ezechias,when Senacherib defied
Israel, and rayled on the living God. Isai. 37.38.
And so fell it out at the beginning to Balack the son of Ziphor, Numb. 22.
that hired Balaam to curse Israel, as the Pope has hired and sent you out to
curse us. Therefore this people, if they will fear the Lord, shall not be
afraid of two or three Bees of the East, but even they shall see your dead
carcases upon the ground, and you the enemies of God to be drowned and swim
before their faces.

And now for the second point, for which I do perceive the people of this
Land are greatly troubled: namely, because that the Papists and Jesuits, with
other the riffe raffe, and scumme of this Realm, are now seen to appear,
who before this time have been hidden in the bytches, and channelles of
England: Let them all understand, that it is a small thing with God, and no
great or rare matter, to have wicked men and ungodly ones, to arise in the
Family of the Lord. For so it must it be in his Church and Congregation for
ever, that those that are his may be tried. Why? wherefore? for what cause
should you be ^^^couraged? it has been so of old, from the beginning it has
been thus. Look and see, search and understand, it will be found true. It is
a small matter, in great abundance of small herbs, to have a handful of
stinking weeds: in a mighty ground well eared with corn, to find some
Darnel, or some Cockle: in plentiful Gardens, and well ^^ored, to have a
bundle or two of Nettles: or in our great and mighty Church of England, to have
a few of wicked and perverse papists. The Israelites cannot do amiss,
though some Priests of ^^all (...) in the Land: the Congregation shall not all
perish, though Core, D^than, and Abiram conspire: the Prophets of God, and
all faithful persons must not be dismayed, albeit some offer up Incense to the
Quine of Heaven: and England must not be afraid, though some Iesuiets trouble
them. The Church of Corinthus had in it false brethren, that hindered them: and
Laodecaea, and Smirna, and Theatyra, in the Revelation, had among them, wicked
persons that withortwe them: and the Primitive Church, has not been without
Heretics at all tithes, that have withstoode them: neither shall England be
without Se^inaries, and scholars of the Pope to molest them.

I remember what Augustine says: August. ad Petrum. Cap. 43.
Firmissime tene, et nallaten^^ dubites, Aream esse Dei ecclesiam Catholicam,
et in ea vsque in sinem seculi frumento mixtas pale as contineri. That is: It
is to be thought stedfastilie, and not to be doubted of by any man, that the
Barnes of the Lord, do signify unto us the Church of God, and within them
(...) the end of the world, there will be Chafe mixed with good Corne^ that
is, wicked with good: evil men, among righteous men, and Heretiq^^^ among
those that are faithful. It is as true, and as pretty as it is plain that
Prosper says: Prosper. depromis. et praed. Dei, Cap. 7.
Nunc vero ecclesia aut Arca, velut mund^ et immunda animalia, bonos malosque
portare cognoscitur, vsque in praedictum finem, de quo Dominus et saluator
noster in Euangelio (...) est. That is: And now we are assured, that the
Church of God, which is as was the Arc, has in it both foul and cleant
(...), and is openly known as well to carry the good, as those that are
evil, even until the determined end and time, whereof our Savior Christ
spoke in the Gospel, which is vnttyil the end of the wor^e. So that now we
are not to be discouraged, but comforted: not dismayed but stayed: in as much
as the Lord will always fight for us, and permit the wicked for a season,
that their condempnation may be greater when he comes. And it must not be
unknown to you, that there have risen up Heretics from time to time, but
especially in the Primitive Church, and in the light of the Gospel, as the
Jesuits, and the Fanulie of Love, and the Seminaries do now in our age:
Euse. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
After Christ. 46 years, began Simon Magus: whom the Pope is (...) like as
can be; that selteth the holy Ghost, and hell and Heaven; and souls of men
for money. Beda.
After Christ. 58. years, or thereabout: (...) by Elymas Bariesus, he would
have perverted and turned Sergius Paulus from the truth: as Champion and
Howlet have labored of (...) to pervert the state of England. Iren. Lib. 1.
Cap. 25.
After Christ. 73. sprang up Corinthus: as like the Papists in this one thing
as might be that he lu^^^ after the satissying of the ^^^lie, and delighted in
meat and drink; and married women. Euse. Lib. 4. Cap. 7.
After Christ. 93. spr^ng up Basilides, before (...) Menander: whom in this
one thing, the Pope and his Clergy res^^^ bleth: in that they think that
Faith by perjury may be renouri^^^ Epiphanius Haer. 26.
After Christ. 100. years, arose up the Gnostikes, some call them Barborites,
all one with Papists, for they had in them a swelling pride, as has the Pope
with his Cardinals, and thought they know all things: and their women among
them were as common, as the strumpets and (...), be at Room for the Friars.
Haer. 29.
After Christ. 121. did the Nazarit^^ spread their Herefies abroad, altogether
in effect, as are the Jesuits: who gave them selves to the observation of the
Law, even alike as be all their Ceremonies which they use. Euse. Lib. 5. Cap.
13.
After Christ. 163. were the Montanists, very rife in the world: what they
differed from the sects of Jesuits, and their company I know not, all one
they were in many things: For they for bad marriage as papists do, they
absteined from (...) being vnla^^full, even as papists do: they used (...),
and defiled women as the papists do. And thus from time to time since Christ,
there have been most detestable Herefies in the Church: now I am of opinion,
that the errors of the papists, are a confused, and mingled Chaos, even a
trusse and Booget of Hertfies, gathered together of all sorts of Heretics
from the beginning: which, when time se^ueth I will prove, Here lies out
(...) and (...) hold, that God of his mercy will as well defend us: as he has
done the other his Churches that has been pestered with them since the
coming of Christ. And as for England, they can do it no (...), God is with
us. They cannot hurt us, God fights for us: the^r precious bau^^es shall not
break our heads, for so has the Lord (...): Their errors shall do, what God
will have done and that is mough to comfort us. For the papists them selves
and what gross and (...) opinions they hold, this short Treatise shall
declare: (...) Irequire at your hands, that shall read this Book. First that
(...) ^^differerently, without partiality. Secondly, that you way the, Articles
and sundry points, and how and where, the truth in them is to be looked
for. Thirdly, that you cast not your eyes upon the writer, or upon the
Adversary that is confuted, but that you judge (...) betwixt both. Last of
all, with a perfect, pure, and undefiled (...) this book to be read of thee,
that thou thy self may be com^^ted, thy conscience assured, thy mind and
bear satisfied, and thy adversaries mouths that would hinder thee for
evermore stopped. So I leave thee to the tuition of the Almighty, and do
advertise thee, to may for the conversion of these Heret ques, or for the will
of the Lord to be showed vp^ them, according ^^ that purpose and determination
of (...) which he has decreed. And so fare you most hattehe well.

Yours in the Lord. John Keltridge.

To the adversaries of the grace of God in the Tower of London or else where: I
John Keltridge wish amendment of life, conversion to the most ancient and
undoubted faith, with true repentance and contrition of heart, That they may
become lively and perfect members of Jesus Christ.
ALbeit the rare and strange coming of you into England, has kindled the
hearts of many men against you, and so them see on fire: as it is very apparent,
that the fla^erherof is not like to be extinguished, till either the godly
people see your conversion from your heresies: or conceive some hope that you
will return to God speedily. Yet we for our parts, that have endeavored by
preaching to bring you to the Lord, may not, and cannot cease continually,
either to pray with earnestnes, or desire with stedfastnes, or beg with
feruentnes, or entreat in all faithfulness at the hands of the Lord: that he
would lighten you by his spirit, or quicken you through his grace, or resolve
you by the truth, or confirm you by the word which you daily hear: that the
only true and perfect man Jesus Christ may be known unto you: which
knowledge and perfect understanding you cannot be ignorant of, if you shut not
your eyes, or withdraw your hearts from the hearing of the same. What you have
been hitherto we know, but what hereafter you shall be, that the Lord our GOD
knows, not we. We may hope very hardly, for you refuse the truth willingly,
your conversion (...) we not look for speedily, you persevere in your errors
so stouely: So that for that matter we deforre and commit all to to the Lord.
Notwithstanding, for mine own (...) some thing to say unto you, and for your
own behalf I have much to charge you with: For my self, whereas I have both
spoken heertofore, and do now also write: I have to lead me thereunto these
causes. First, my office and calling draws me, as being a Dispensar of the
word of God: Secondly my duty, which is to win all, but especially you
which are so far off: Thirdly, that care which beyond measure I have had, is
a prick and a spur within me, since the first time I was with you at the
Tower: And which should provoke me, I have a commandment given me from the
eternal God, to preach in season and out of season, in time and out of time,
whersoeuer I see the Church to stand in need. Therefore, I being espetially
moved above the rest: you have no farther to enquire after me. As concerning
the things I am to charge you withal: they are many, great, importable, and
such as you can never answer: They concern the Lord the high God, whose laws
you contemn: They concern the Church, from which you are fled: They concern
the truth, which you deny: They concern Religion, which you abhor: They
concern Christianity, which you are far from: They concern true Woorship,
which you repose in your Image^: They concern Faith, which you lay in Wor^^s:
They concern perfect and Christian adoration, this you claspe up in the
bosom of the Pope: They concern prayer, which in steed of God you give to
men: They concern Christ whose institutions you change: They concern the
perfect service of the Lord, which you infolde in the Mass: They concern our
Meditation, which you make but a sacrifice: Propitiatory, by the woork of a
Priest: They concern our atonement and reconciler Christ, and him whom the
heavens contains, you infolde in a Wafer cake: They concern the Gospel,
which you refuse, and you stick to the customs of your fathers: And they
concern the word of the Lord, which you hear not, but compelled: which you
slaun der being hardened, which you contemn being blinded, and which you
spurn and throw away, even before our faces to our great greef and your
confusion if you repent not. All these and many things more I am to charge you
with, having this purpose in my self: That first you are to be looked unto, and
if that you will not turn unto the Lord our God, and serve him after the
manner that we his People Israel do: either we must shut you out of the Tents
and dwelling places of the inheritance of our God: or we must find some way
to pacifye the Lord withal.

For I am certainly persuaded, that you have been kept over long, you and your
fellow Ammonites, yea these twenty years have you been pricks and thorns in
our sides, and now you come out of your holes wherein younestled, resisting
openly the host of the Lord unto their faces. But this may not be suffered:
least your example of gathering sud^ upon the Sabbath day, be an occasion also
that others shall violate and break the commandments of God.

I warn you therefore in time, and these Sermons of mine which I made unto you,
have I gathered together in a little volume, that you may read them: They
contain in them, a brief and short confutation of all such Heresies as you
do hold. With this speech (if you be not contented) I will then call back and
reclaim it when as I perceive and see through ly, that you are amended.

More I cannot say, more I may not say, and more I dare not say as yet to you:
whom not I, but a^ Christian hearts do think to be instruments of Satan,
raised up for our sins, as two edged Swoordes to rent and out in pieces, the
poor Church of England. For mine own parce, I will pray to the Lord our God
for your amendment, and I will beg that Discipline at his hands, which you
if you come not to him, are worthy to have: To whom I do commit you, that
has both life and death, faluation and condemnation in his hands.

Yours in the Lord, if you come unto the Lord. John Keltridge.
At London, June. 10. 1581.
The first part of the Sermon, wherein is (largely) confuted sundry gross
heresies, which the Jesuits, Seminaries, and other the Popes Scholars do
hold: preached at the Tower in their presence, that the truth might be known
unto them more apparantlie. 7. Maij. 1581.
IT is thus written right Honorable, right VVoorshipfull, and belooued in our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Deuteronomy. 6. v. 4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is Lord only: and thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
might. And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart.


THe love that our Lord God bare to Israel his people, though it be in many
places of this book showed openly, and declared plainly to them: Of all the
books of Moses, this of Deuteronomy, for the blessing and great benefite^ God
showed to his people, is the most co^fore table and heavenly book.
Yet in more ample manner it was never set down at any time to that Nation, as
in this the unspeakable love of the Lord their God: who in danger defending
them, in troubles delivering them, in extremities assisting them, in slavery
and captiui^e, upholding them by his mighty hand: did not only by Miracles
she we his power, or by his Provision for them, signify his love, or by his
outstretched arm manifest his care, or by fighting with Kings for their
sakes, drive all only an especial reverence into their hearts of his
Majesty: But very fatherly in affection, most loouingly in Mercy, and
tenderlte with long Patience: did the Lord instruct and teach them by Moses
and Aaron, that they might know the Commandments of the Lord and fear him.
Wherefore, as at the first to cause them to remember him, the Lord our God
appeared in fire and lightning; and in most terrible manner, to beat a care
and reverent fear into their hearts: So to ^omfore them again, was Moses sent
with this (...) and these Co^^t^ndements, (as re^embraunces and pledges of his
love) that in the same they might acknowledge him, and in trembling and fear
obey him, in knowledge increase their love toward him, and in reverence serve
him all the days of their life. Now, this book is a recapitulation, a brief
summarie, and short rehersall of all such Laws, Ordinances, and Statutes, as
the Lord had given to Israel: and a Commemoration of all his sundry, notable,
and famous benefits, as Israel and this People had receyned at the hands of
God: and therefore says Moses, Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God is Lord only.
These words have in them noted two principal things, common both in the
Law and in the Prophets.

1. First, an exhortation, In requesting, and in praying them: 2. Secondly, a
Commandment, In willinge, and in forcing them.
The Invocation or calling on them to hear that which appertains to God,
declares how ready the Lord is to save man.

The Law and constraint used by commandment, certifieth us, albeit we will
not come unto the Lord willinghe, yet for the commandment sake, and for
necessity we must obey him.

The exhortation is to the good and godly men, whom the Lord has always
used to stir up and prick foreward in his service.

The Commandment is to the wicked, wilful, and unbelieving persons, who
albeit the beanies and light of truth apppeareth, will not for all that
believe.

Wherefore, I am of opinion, that the (...) (1) the general Proposition, end,
purpose, and drifte of Moses is this, to exhort and require all such as are the
Lords, to have a regard to his Commandments, and to fear his name: and of
this I must speak two manner of ways.

First, generally. 1. To all that are here, and to such as shall hear
hereof hereafter. Next, perticularlie. 2. To certain persons whom I see in
this place, and I would they were (rather) in some other place then here.
The first kind of reverence and fear to be spoken of generally, is
appertinent unto all that love the Lord, who in yeale with perfectness, in
love with thankfulness, in great care with earnestness, ought both daily
and continually to serve the Lord their God: For who defends them at all
assayes, but he? who protecteth them, when they are in distress, but only
he? who is able in need to ease them? in myserie to relieve them? in dangers
to comfort them? in anguishe of soul and heart to deliver them, but only this
whom we should fear, whom we should dread, whom we should reverence the
Lord our God? For this cause in Deuteronomie, I find it thus written. Deur.
11.18.


First, that you shall lay up. Secondly, the words spoken by the Lord. 3. In
your heart. 4. In your soul. 5. You shall bind them as signs on your hands.
6. They shall be as Frontlets between your eyes. 7. Then you shall teach them
your children. 8. Even then when thou sit in thine house. 9. Then, when
thou walk by the way. 10. Then, when thou lieft down. 11. Then, when thou
risest up. 12. Then, shall thou write them upon the posts of thy house, and
upon thy gates.
The reason of this.

That your days may be multiplied: that the days of your Children may be
multiplied in the Land: for the Lord swear unto your Fathers to give it them,
so long as the heavens are abo^e the earth.

Yet there is a condition, for this blessing is granted upon a bond wherein
Israel was, and we now his people we bound also: Even to love the Lord our
God, to walk in his ways, and to cleave unto him, etc.

In the Prophecy of Isaiah, Isa. 8.19.
where as the Lord God does most greeuoustie denounce the heavy Judgments
upon Judah, Israel, and the Affirians, for not obeying and serving the Lord
their God: At the length, the Lord comfort his people, and encorageth the
Saints, and wylleth them not to fear, albeit they be as signs and wunders to
the wicked men: and he fetteth down his will, and his purpose of his fear and
reverence in two things.

First, In an Inquisition. Secondly, In an answer to the same.
The Inquisition is of the wicked men, and of Idolaters, that say unto the
godly, Enquire of them, that have a spirit of Divination: enquire of them,
that are Southsayers: enquire of them which whisper and murmr. The old
Idolaters and vpstart Papists are a like in all things: and the first kept
away the law from the people: these make ignorance the mother of devotion
Then at that time, this shall be the answer made by the godly. Should not a
people enquire at their God? should you go from the living to the dead? Nay,
to the Law and to the Testimony should you go, and if then you speak not
according to that word, there is no truth, and no light in you: wherefore,
they have first done us great injury, I mean the adversaries of the grace of
God, the Papists: who have drawn away, not only the simple and plain men
from the Lord, by keeping the book of God shut from them: but also, have
taught them an other law of their own inventions, and contrary to the law
they have received of the Lord: O that they had perfectly the Law of the Lord
in Matthew. Where, at such time as the Saduces had been put to silence by our
Savior Christ: and the Pharisees understanding thereof, gathered together
them selves also, to dispute with him. Math. 22.34.
One among them all, an expounder of the Law, could not temper his affections,
but boldly rusheth out and speaks: which shall be seen by you, in the
circumstaunces of the Text.

First, in a Question. The Question moved by a Scribe. Secondly, in a reply
to the Question. The reply made by our savior Christ.


The Question is the greater moved by the Scribe. 1. In the asking. 2. In the
tempting. 3. In the speaking to Christ.
The Question moved was, Master? Which is the greatest commandment in the
Law?

The Answer and reply by Christ, is this: Thou shall love: whom? the Lord
thy God: How? 1. With all thine heart. 2. With all thy soul. 3. With all thy
mind.

And this is the first co^ma^deme^t, and the greatest.

Moreover (for the answer of Christ is twofolde:) it concerns. The Lord
only, as before is seen in his service. Man only: which is thus. 1. Thou
shall love: 2. Thy neighbor: 3. Even as thy self.

And in these two, consists the Law and the ^ophets.

In Mark the Evangelist: This same perverse man, the Scribe, that did oppose
him self against Christ, after the Question moved, and the reply added the
revnto by our savior Christ: is ^pted to have spoken discreetly, and to have
set down his opinion, both soundly and wisely, concerning this thing. And
his judgment was this: Master, thou have said truly.

For, there is but one God. For, there is none other but he.
And to love him, 1. With all the heart. 2. With all the understanding. 3. With
all the soul. 4. With all the strength. 5. And thy neighbor as thy self.
Is more then all burnt offeringes and Sacrifices.

In these places rehearsed, you plainly see, that in the service of the Lord,
the principal thing required is this: That we obey him, and his
commandments. O how godly and pleasant a thing is it for Israel to know the
Lord, his statutes are in his mouth, his Ordinances shall make him blessed:
his seed shall inherit the land, he shall not fear by night, nor stand in
dread at noone day, for the Lord of hoasts is with him, the God of Jacob is
his defense: The Lord shall be a sheelde to that man, and the stay and staff of
peace shall be upon his head: he is sure not to be moved, and to the nethermost
hell shall he never fall. His paths are paths of righteousness, his ways be
the ways of life: Glory is on his head, honor and renown are a covering for
that man: happy shall he be for ever, and all generations shall remember him.
Yea, I will set forth the praises of such a man as fears the Lord, for it is
a good thing to obey him, and to have a care and reverence to his name: and
this fear and dread, this service belonging to his Majesty, is thri^folde in
this place.

Therefore, it either 1. Concerns God alone, not man: 2. Concerns God, as
well as man: 3. Concerns man only, not God:


The service due unto the Lord, is seen in Circumstaunces. 1. First, that
Israel his pople: 2. Secondly, hear or understand: 3. Thirdly, such things as
concerns their God:


This service is seen in those Epithites, and titles given unto the Lord in
this place, whom you only ferue. 1. First, he is (...) (1) Lord of all. 2.
Secondly, he is (...) (1) God, seeing all. 3. Thirdly, he is (...) (1) our God
in delivering all. 4. Fourthly, (...) (1) he is only one God, there is no more
among all.


The first name of Dignity here set down, as Augustine notes: Potentiam
denotat, She weth his power, For God rules, and governs all: And in ye same
he sat, the Firmament a^one that spreads it self as a Canapie, and the
earth beneath ye is inustoou^able, as be the Pillars of heaven: and betwixt
both, the fire, which burns not by the power of his word and the air which
infecteth not, for he restrains the gates of death. And the water, which as
in the house, presumes not to go over the thresholdes, and banks that are
limited. The Lord it is indeed, that lifts up, and pluckesh (...)
sha^exaltath and h^^bleth, that delivers, and casts (...) pleasure: he
brought Israel through the red Sea, and (...) his eni^^ies, as in a wall: he
brought in ye Waters and drow^ed them, but he led Israel his people on dry
land. The Countries of the Nations did the Lord give unto them and to possess,
returned with an angry cou^tenante, against the ^ings: he spared not the
Gi^nit with his Cha^^ots, nor the Mike Countries, with the walled Towns, but
brought in destruction for their sins, and gave them the slain, as a portion
for their ungodliness: wherefore, let all men praise the Lord, and serve, and
obey him above all.

The second title given unto the Lord is, that he is called, (...) which is as
much ^s, To see, and take a view, and to to perse through all things very
narrowly: For the eyes of the Lord are upon all the earth, he gives strength
to them ye trust in him, and understanding to them that walk uprightly: he
beholds the ends and coasts of the Sea, and stilleth the ra^ing of the
tempeste, (...) in his fury he mounteth forth on she ^^^ges of the wind, and
with the same he brings in all (...) things, to trouble sinners: who like
unto our God? whose eyes are upon the just, whose countenance is against all
those that do evil, to root them out (...) ^he land: he gives, and man
receives: he detayneth, and man perishes. For the cup of his wrath, is powered
forth upon malefactors, and as a man prepared to the battle, so is the Lord
girded to fight against the wicked. For why? all things are done by him, he
fills the hungry soul, and replemisheth with meate^, the needy Creatures:
His works are seen above and his wunders in the deapth. Among the holy ones
does the Lord reign, and fills with his blessing every living soul. The
hairs of our head are numbered before him, and the Sparo^e seeks for meat in
due season: let every soul therefore fear the Lord, and let nothing stay
him to acknowledge his name, for he is a God which sees all things, and
nothing may be hidden from him at any time.

This word our, and then God also our God, does exclude all foreign and
strange Gods: and proves that the Lord all on ly is to be feared.
The third title and Epithet given unto God, is this: (...)* (1) our God, even
the God of Jacob, and the God of Israel: which name of rem^nthraunce, no (...)
was put in, and added in this place, that Israel should never forgetts their
Lord God that fought for them: therefore is it said, The Lord can God, is Lord
only: as being none other that fought for them, but ou^ly he: For in deed,
the Lord kept the promise that he made them, and the ^athe which he sw^re unto
their Fathers: he wought them out of the house of bondage, and redeemed them
out of the strange land. For why? God was i^yned to their seed, and he would
not forsake them for their Fathers sake: the Lord gave unto them Jerusalem for
their portion, and the land of Mountains for their rest: he planted his
Posterity, to the which (...) sworn, and withdrewe not his word, though
they (...): therefore is the Lord worthy to be praised, and Israel must have
none other God, then him alone that saved them.

The fowrth name and rythe given to God, is this: (...): (1) Thy God is only
one. For there is no (...) then he: he is the Lord of Hoases, meyther will the
Kord (...) God give his glo^ie to any other. Ier^^e of this word, says:
Identitatem (...) alnatem notat: (1) That is, The (...) and unity of the same,
not the variety, or plurality of Gods, is to be noted and considered here:
For I do find that the most and best learned, have gathered out of this place
of Scripture, both the Unity in the Trinity, and the Trinity in the Unity,
which is to be worshipped: For the word, Lord, in the first place, may signify
the Lord God, the first person which made all: the word, God, in the second
place, may represent Christ, the word of God, that redeemed all: And one
only Lord, in the third place, may be well the spirit of God, who being
equal with them both, do make but only one true, eternal, everliving and
glorious God: Then you see, that I have two things here proportioned, and
drawns out unto me, whereof I must of necessity speak.

1. The first, that Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity is to be
worshipped. 2. The second, that all manner of Idol worship, and all service
not agreeing to this commandment, in this place, is to be abhorred.
The manner of their preaching, in time of Popery was known, when they handled
nothing else but the defense of their filthy and Idolatrous Ceremonies, and as
for doctrine of faith, of ma^ners, of life, of religion, or any other good and
wholsome Article of our beleese they never dealt with any of them.
For the first point, which is our Faith, we ought to hold concerning the
Trinity, I say this: As you, whereof I see too many here, Scholars of the
Pope, are not able to escape without suspision of great Sacrilege, for that
diverse of your sect, and your heresies, (with whom I do confess, I have
reasoned) have been of opinion, that in the body of the Bible, the old
Testament, no man was able to find out the name of the blessed Trinity: By
reason whereof, the people stood in a manunering, supposing it was a new
Doctrine: Your Massemongers and Idol Preests, durst not preach of it, for
fear of dulling the peoples heads, with so great and deep Mysteries. And
diverse of your Church of Room do think, that this Doctrine is to hie a
Doctrine for the people: yet what color so ever you all have, and bear of
zeal and Religion, I see plainly, that you do but cast away the souls of
men, for you read in an unknown tongue: you condemn your selves, for you
speak flatly against the truth: you do but dissemble in this weighty
Article of our faith, and of the Trinity, and how cunningly soever you gloss,
and do ceitfully soever it be, that you color your imquitie, the Lord shall
reveal it, and we do know it already: Wherefore, I will first of all begin
with this point of our faith, this ended I will come to the rest: In all
which I promise that no new doctrine shall be taught you, or vain matters opened
to you, or any doubtful thing delivered to you: But for that which I speak,
I will give you a good and sufficient warrant out of the book of God:

Thus I believe therefore, and thus I teach all that faithfully will believe
to hold and keep this ground of salvation for ever, which is. This reverend
doctrine of the Trinity, is in all holy and sacred wise, to be read of every
person that will be saved.
That Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity is to be woorshipped: For
there is the father who created all: there is the son and he redeemed all:
and there is the spirit the holy Ghost that does sanctify all. The Father is
made of none, neither made, nor created, nor begotten: The Son is of the
Father alone, not made, nor created, but begotten: The holy Ghost is of the
Father, and of the son, not made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding:
And as in the Scriptures all things that are taught us are of three sorts:
Either put in and set down, for man to believe and not to see: as was the
heaven and the earth made of nothing by the Lord: Either to behold and
contain by faith as is our redemption by Christ: either which is last,
sensibly to perceive, and naturally to take heed of and beware, as is our
obedience and disobedience in the commandments of the Lord: The natural man
is lead by reason and sense: the godly is directed by faith and hope.
So I am of opinion that the carnal and gross man, is not able to comprehend
the depth of this Christian verity, for that he refers all things to the
senses which deceive him: or to the outward apparaunces which overthrow him:
or to natural reasons which ou^e come hun: or to material and visible
apparitions, which are always drawing and with holding him, so that as he
measures his faith by his sight, and the truth by his corporal and palpable
blindness: so is he never able to attain unto ye lively and perfect truth
which rises of faith, and is given by the Lord. For my own part, I am not of
your opinion which divide your selves from the Church, by your foolish ^^nes
of Catholics, Jesuits and Seminaries: by which, as by s^les coats you have
been always known among the righteous: you shinke that this doctrine is
haro^e. If it be, it is no ^^^aile in you, for you be hard hearted, and
unbelieving perso^^: you think that the depth thereof cannot be attained unto.
The willful and blind, are more and more blinded by God in every thing, that
every child co^trolleth.
I easily grant you this: for seeing you serve not the Lord aright in matters
wherein children see your grosenes, wherefore should you presume to search the
depth of this secret: you think that the people is not able to comprehend
this doctrine: I think so too, for at your hands they cannot be taught at all,
your selves are ignorant. In the scriptures they cannot learn, for you keep
close the book of the Lord, and you hide these Mysteries from them. But they
be carnal, and you worldly, it is therefore over hard meat for them to feed on:
They then be as you are, and no marvel, if the blind leading ye blind, they
both fall at length: wherefore lie you still snorting in your Closets, rather
inglutted with surfeiting and riot, then experienced in articles of your faith:
and lie there so long as you list, suffer your own people to die for want of ye
light, as you have done, rather then as ru^nagates and maisterles men, to
trouble us in England. The Pope has always been known to be Antitichrist, in
sending forth such as dysturbe common wealths.
I tell you, the plainest Preacher yt we have, ca^ utter doctrine, you cannot
comprehend: and now as you fit, dumb and mute speaking nothing, you shall be
witnesses in your own consciences: that I will speak no other thing then the
truth. Therefore I make protestation of my faith, unto you in this manner:
There is in the Trinity, three persons, but one God, the persons be these: the
Father, the Son, the holy Ghost: In dignity, none desire to rise higher then
the other: in power they are equiuale^t, none goes beyond ye other: in glory,
they are glorious, none is worshipped more then is the other. Such as is ye
Father in divinity, such is the Son also in his exceltencie: as the Father
and the Son is in they^ brightness, so is the holy Ghost, equal unto them in
his highness: Majesty which power, Principality which right, Honor and
renown, which has been with them from all beginning, is common and proper to
all three: Three be they in person, one, and all only one in Goodhead. In
beede, the Father died not, but the Son died for us: ^he Son was begotten
of his Father before all worlds, the Father was not begotten of the Son: The
Spirit, the holy Ghost, proteedeth from them both: the Spirit, the holy
Ghost, is of them both, the Spirit, the holy Ghost, is with them both: The
Father and the Son, proceeded not of ye Spirit: yet are they united so in the
Godhead, as the one is not above the other, neither is there superiority in the
one, more then is in the other. The Rabbines were pitthy, and witty in many
things, though scrupulous, and superstitious in some things.
The Hebrew Rabbines, do assign and express ye Trinity by this name, God,
which is with them, Jehovah. This the Greeks call Tetragrammaton: which is a
name or word of four Letters to outward she we, yet there are but three
indeed: for, He, is put in twice, as in the second, and in the fourth place.
By these three Letters, they do express the Trinity. Iod, betokens
Principium, (1) A beginning, and aptly shows the Father, that began and
created all. The second Letter, He, signifies, To be, or to live: and
declares the Son, which is the life of all. The third Letter, Van, and which
is also a Conjunction Copulative, does aptly represent, The Spirit, the holy
Ghost, who is the knitting together of both. I am not ignorant, that the
Jews were a superstitious, and very foolish people, therefore held they
vainly, and observed toyishly, and held ignorauntly many things of no
moment, whereof this is one: That this word, Jehovah, was called of them, Nomen
inessabile, (1) A name not to be spoken; The things which are good, (though in
any man) refuse them not: such things as are amiss, (though in the highest)
allow them not.
And in a book of theirs, which is their book^ Senhadrin. I find it thus
written: He that pronounces the name of the four Letters, as the Letters
themselves do sound: shall have no part in the world to come. I cannot tell how
to think other wise of you present here, sometimes scholars to ye Pope, then I
do of them: but it is very like, ye you are drowned in this Jewish, and
blockish opinion: for howsoever it be, that you think of the Trinity, there is
none of you all, have done it, none of you that do purpose hereafter, none of
you ye ever I read of, or have found, that durst, or would, in ye days of
ignorance, preach openly, or speak publicly, this excellent and most
heavenly Doctrine of the Trinity: The Fathers of old were not ashamed
thereof, neither halted they ^^^^t good and evil, but rightly; and uprightly,
perfectly as prositably, and directly, as exactlie handled they every thing: to
express the Trinity, they used similitudes. A ugustine showed it, Per solemn
Currentem, fulgentem et Calentem: (1) By the sun which runs, which
glistreth, and heateth with his beams: Yet to the constitution of the body of
the Su^ne, these three properties do not come, as making three, but one body:
no more do the three persons, make three, but one God. Tertullian to Praxea,
describes it thus: Per fontem, fluuium, et riunlu^: (1) By the spring which
delivers, by the Flood which flows, by the River which runs: And yet it
is but one, and the same water, gushing forth into them both. Similitudes do
express heavenly and divine things: though they agree not in the comparison
in all things.
The same Tertullian, does open the same Mystery of the Trinity: Per radicem,
fruticem, et Truncum: (1) By the Root which gathers, by the Fruit which
proceeds, and by the body of the Tree which bears it. So in like manner,
may we say of the Trinity: the Father gives, ye Son saves, the holy Ghost
proceeds from them both: yet are they not three, but one God. In common
experience we may gather, and collect a proper similitude to express this: for
there is the body, and we stand by it: there is the soul, we are quickened and
live by it: there is the Spirit, we breathe and continue with it, yet these
make not three, but one man. This thing also Cyprian noted upon the Creed: for
this part therefore sufficient, and enough it is that I have spoken. I will
come to the other Particular point, which is this: First, that I promised to
speak particularly, not generally. Next, is a branch of the same, to
examine and try, whether any Idolatry may be admitted? and so to ponder and
way equally the opinions and dealinges of you, the Scholars of Room. Thirdsy,
shall appear the first point required in a Christian, what service that is
that appertains, and is duly to be given unto the Lord.

The thing general to be spoken of here, is this: That Idol worship, and all
false adoration, is condemned and forbidden in this place.

For this cause I have some thing to say unto you, whom I see before me at
this present, and in the same, I have to charge you deeply in the name of the
Lord: how to speak unto you, and by name to all you, I know not: This I am
sure of, you came lately from Room, and to a good end you could not come, for
you have not come to us in the Lord: And you be they to whom I will direct my
speech, as unto men foolorne, and cast off from out the Tents of Israel, for
you are Leapers. Tell me if you will, whether in your consciences, you find
not your selves guilty of sacrilege and Idolatry, yea, or no? The Lord
says, Hear O Israel, the Lord thy God, is Lord only: Then I conclude, and my
force is bent against you thus:

They that serve any other, save the Lord their God only, are guilty of
sacrilege, commit spiritual whordome, and be Idolaters. You, of late the
Popes Scholars, Seminaries, and of his College, even you woorship Images,
even you have Agnos Dei in your bosom, and you serve not the Lord your God
only, but Idolles. Ergo.
You are guilty of sacrilege, you commit spiritual whordome, you be
Idolaters.

And give ear belooued in the Lord I request you: be you Judges of that I
speak, and be witnesses of those things I utter. I call not you, that have
refused the Lord: I speaks otherwise, and think of you, as of those that be
without: and yet for all that belooued, if you will be belooued: and belooued
because the Lord may love you: and belooued, for I burn in zeal and love
toward you, as toward them I would have to love and fear the Lord. To you
all therefore I speak, demanding of you this Question: why rather you seek
after Images, then after God? why rather to Idol^es, then to the Lord? why
rather any other woorshippe, wherein you are ensnared, then the Lord your God
only? If you think I offer you injury, for I speak, you may say nothing: I
preach, you hold your peace: I have liberty, you are cut short: I may holdly
say what I can, you may not say any thing in defense of your selves. Then I
will do yet more for you; and I will walk equally twixt you and me: and
having hurthened you with that which I see you are faulty in, I will (...) all
that, before God and his Angels, and in the presence of all these, lay open the
truth, and declare that sincere and true meaning, which these words and this
Scripture aloweth. The Lord says here, Hear O Israel, hear the Lord: You
hear the Pope, and you fear man: The Lord says, Hear the Lord thy God: you
give ear to your inventions: The Lord says, I the Lord thy God, am Lord
only: you have other Gods, and worship Images. Then judge you, let not me he
your Judge, any otherwise then in this so plain a matter which you your selves
cannot deny: And for all this, see how favorably I will deal on your behalf:
You say, that beside this plain commandment, O Israel, the Lord thy God is
Lord only: That you for all that have a liberty given unto you, for the
worshipping of Images: How shall this be tried? In the deciding of the
Question, you will suspect me, I shall not be thought to be indifferent: but
see how plainly I will determine this controversy. You say, you may worship
Images: I say, you ought not worship Images: Then what Judge will you make
choice of? The Lord our God, shall be our Judge, there is no acceptio^ of
persons with him: and the Law and the Prophets, will we call as witnesses, and
the holy Scriptures shall decide this matter. Then the Question is moved
here, whether you may woorship Images, and have them in your Churches, yea, or
no?

This Question is two fold. Affirmative, for some allow of Images: such were
the Gnostickes, the Carpocratians, the Pythagoreans, the Maniches, and with
them do you hold: who of you some, are Jesuits, some Papists, some
Seminaries, some of one sect, so me of an other. Or, it is: Negative: and those
that deny it, are the whole Senate and assembly of good men, who be the learned
Fathers, the grave Doctors of the Churches of old: the whole number of
reformed Churches in the world: and our Churches of England at this day, and
the state thereof, that deny these your whorish and Idolatrous abominations.


Then it remains, either to affirm this as you d^^, or to deny it still,
which we maintain. For there is not the most gross Heretic, but has some
color of scripture for his Heresy.
That the truth may appear, and for that you are subtle and glosing persons,
insinuating, and creeping into the minds of men, deceyueable and peruerters of
the truth, alleging Scriptures for your heresies, and falsifying the manifest
and undoubted Verity: I will take this order and way to answer you: first we
will examine your places of Scripture: next, we will try whether they be duly
and truly alleged, yea, or no.

Harding, that Apostata, that twice revolted and denied the truth, and at last
dyed in his dampnable errors. That at the first, in the reign of King Henry
the eight, held with the Pope, that afterward was a Protestant, and professed
the Truth: that in King Edwards days most stoutly, and most courageously at
Paul's Cross in London, spoke against the Pope, afterward was a Turn coat,
and denied Christ, and withstoode the Truth: this Weather cock, this Bifrons
Ianus, that had two faces for both years, as Harding had two tongues, for
both times: In his heretical Pamphlet, and in his Treatise of Images, which
he cast forth unto the people of England, to pervert them, there he is of this
opinion. Hard. Diu. 1. of Images.
Concerning the antiquity and original of Images, they were not first
invented by man, but commanded by God: brought into use by tradition of the
Apostles, allowed by the aucthority of the holy Fathers, and by custom of all
ages, since Christ being upon the earth, etc. What sacrilege will not these
men commyt in corners, that openly will lay untruths upon the Lord, and
charge him with contrarieties?
A most dampnable and sacriligious opinion: Images of God? why, they are all
forbidden by him: Images of antiquity, whose original was good? the good
Fathers in old time, the good Patriarchs of ancient memory, never had any:
brought into use by tradition of the Apostles? why? where? in what place? what
book? what Evangelist? what Epistle? what writing of theirs, do you find it
in? If any of you all, whom you think to be so learned, and so near the
Pope, be able out of any good autenticke, ancient, and holy Father of old,
to she we unto me that the Apostles used Images, I will subscribe to your
opinion: so that either they or you can prove it by their own writings: the
Apostles them selves? These were the arguments of the old heretics, the
Capocratians, the Gnostickes, and others: and now they are they rai sed from
the nethermost hell again, to come and help the Pope, and the Jesuits his
Scholles.
But we will proceed, Master Harding has reasons, and the very same which
you use, therefore I will answer both him and you: And albeit, much has
been spoken by the reverend Father, the L.B. of Sarisbury, and most divinely,
and most heavenly set down, concerning this matter. Yet for that he was for
his time, and we live in ours: and because the Lord, is tied to no one thing:
and you also are to be satisfied now: and for that those excellent men of old
have not shut up every plain way, in doing good, but that the same as yet
lies open, to those that pass by: I must and will answer that place of
Scripture, which you bring for your purpose, and it is this. Ob.
In Exodus 25. God commanded Cherubins, two of them to be made of pure gold,
which were before the Mercy seat, etc. Resp.
You must now conclude: Ergo, Images, Ergo, your Images, Ergo,all Images are
lawful: The School boy will tell you, A Particulari ad Universal, non esse
argumentandum. (1) From a Particular thing, and from that which is special, to
a general, there can no argument be framed. Also, it was lawsull then, Ergo,
it is now, it follows not: It was in use, Ergo, it is in use now, holds
not: It was so, and so in that time, and at that present, Ergo, it may at this
present also, is no sequel. Yet I do request, and I charge you too in the
name of the Lord, that you enter farther into examination of this matter: then
shall you find, that how socuer Master Harding, for preferment and honor,
which he received in ample manner at the Popes hands, has revolted: yet that
by the Grace of God, we will answer him most fully, and you also, so that
you shall not, but wilfully deny the truth: God when he pleases is a law
sufficient by his word to do all: and by his word a sufficient law, to stay
all things commanded.
I might answer you, as Tertullian does, in his book, De Idololatria: And as
ye Bishop of Sarisbury, that reverend Father does: Which is, That God can
dispense with any thing, and is a law of him self: Yet if you examine the
place, you shall see how deceyueablie you deal with us. For first, these
Cherubins are Cherubins they were not Images, as are yours: Secondly, they were
before the Mercy seat, within the inner Veil, which is the holiest of all,
into which the hie Priest entered, as for any other it was not lawful for them
to enter therein. Those tipes and figures of things that were to come in the
law, are now abrogated, because they be fulfilled: and therefore the Veil
rent in pieces, to signify how all things were accomplished
For the first Tabernacle was made, wherein was the Candelsticke, and the Table,
and the Show bread: the other had the golden Censer, and the Arc of the
Testament, ouerlayde with gold round about, there was the golden Pot with
Manna, and Aarons Rod that budded, and the Tables of the Testament: and over
the Arc were the glorious Cherubins, shadowing the Mercy seat: And these saw
no man, but the high Priest only: wherefore, I answer you, that the Cherubins
were not seen of the people, but your Images are set in Churches before all ye
people: so that if your Images, were as were the Cherubins, then should your
Images be seen of none. Then what place will you assign for your Images? I
suppose none: unless you will make an other Tabernacle: then also give an
other law, then also use the whole Ceremonies, and Rites of the same, then
also look for an other Christ. Then also, as yet the Gospel is not known,
and the Apostles have not preached through out the world as yet: then you see,
how upon one inconvenience there follows an other: but I answer you
farther.

Cherubins were: the Cherubins described and set forth the glory of the Lord,
and so do not your Images, for you derogate from the glorious Majesty of God,
and give to Images that you ought not. Cherubins were extraordinary, and for a
season: your Images are ordinary, and daily used, and set up continually.
Cherubins were taken away, and are not now found: why then do you suffer your
Images to remain in Churches? A full answer to the Jesuits.
Take them away, as be now the Cherubins,and let Images be no more found in
your Churches, then be the Cherubins in the Tabernacle, and then shall you say
some thing. Cherubins were not lest, to the end that any should worship,
and fall down unto them, but your Images are adored of all: Lastly, and to
conclude, the Cherubins were ser in their places, and they covered the Mercy
seat, but yet at the commandment of the Lord, and by his appointment: then
upon your own words shall judgment be given: If you will have us to allow
of your Images, prove that you have the same special commandment for them,
that they had for the Cherubins: which done, we will then allow of them as you
do: in the mean senson, we will esteem of you, as you are.

Ob. 2. Papist.
As in the former argument, and fond reason of yours, you cannot but see your
own folly, so in this second bolte which is let go by some unskillful, and
wandering roauer on your side, there will appear great rashness. For the same
Master Harding, your Archringleader to the way of death, has most
dissolutely, and very carelessie, wrested an other place of Scripture, to the
self same purpose that the other was: and taken out of the book of Numb.
Chap. 21. Where it is said, That Moses made a brazen Serpent, and whosoever of
the people was stoong with the same, he looking thereon, lived. Resp.
Now this was an Image of a Serpent, Ergo, Images are lawful: In deed, Ergo,
your Images? it follows not: It is a clowted argument, and patched up with a
sowterlie Elench: The young Sophister will tell you, that. Ab eo quod erat,
adid quod est, necessaria consequentia esse non potest. (1) For from the thing
that was done, to an other more contrary thing that is done, no good and sound
reason can be framed. And yet we may say more unto you then so: Tertullian
does: who was sufficiently contented, for that the Lord God would have it so,
which commandment you can not show for your Images.

Ioh. 3.24.




Moses and Aaron on the face, and Israel have you entised to become Egiptians
with you: Many of the Saints have you racked, and innumerable companies have
you drawn unto you from the Lord, therefore you shall not escape the
judgments of our God, and look unto it, for they be at hand.

There remains yet one reason more of yours, which is thought to be so
strong, so firm, so certain, so undoubted, and of such force, as that no man
is able to gainsay it. It is taken out of Ezechiel the. 9. Cha. Where as, says
Master Harding, There is one clothed in Linne, and he had an Inckorne at his
side, and was commanded to write, Signum Thau, (That is, says Master
Harding, The sign of the Cross) In their foreheads. For as you suppose, this
Letter had the similitude of the Cross, and was all one with it: and
afterward as you affirm, Constantine the Emperor, by the Image and sign
thereof, overcame and got the feeld: and heard a voice saying, (...): (1) Under
this sign shall thou conquer, and have victory, and the King overcame his
enemies that day, and returned in glory. But what gather you of all this? you
must conclude, Ergo, Images are lawful: This is in deed, London and York,
Porchmouth and Dover, England and Room: Ergo, the next year you shall have
war. I marueyle greatly, at so frivolous an argument as you trouble us with:
of a truth it should not seem meet, for men of learning, for this is
stitched together so botcherlike, as nothing may be more vainly spoken, by any
Abbey lowbie in the world. Yet, for that you seem to make a color of some
matter, I will not stick to enter into your folly, and discover it to the
world. An answer to the place of Ezechiel and the Jesuits argument.
You say that one appeared: We know it was an Angel, and showed his
readiness: Therefore shall you be answered out of Ezechiel the Prophet, that
will be an equal Judge between us both. The six men seen, were the
Babylonians and messengers of Gods wrath: Lying toward the North^, Declared the
place from whence they came: Having weapons in their hand, Betokened
destruction: Whereas a man appeared in white Linen clothes, Was shown the
love of God to the faithful, who sent them a helper: Having a writers
Inckorne: Opened, that he marked such as should be saved: The persons are
described, that should be marked: namely, such as mourn, for Gods children,
cry out and mourn for the iniquities, and transgressions of the wicked,
seeing the glory of their God defated. The mark wherewith they are marked,
is, Signum Than, as some translate: which you that hold of the Popes side,
call the sign of the Cross. And as in other things, so in this do I wunder
at you: how impudentlie and boldly, how falselie and untruely, how corruptly
and unadvisedly, you have affirmed this, At Room as they say, there men have
great skill in the tongues: but it is unlike. For the Hebrew is so plain, they
cannot wrest it: the Greek is not so intricate, but they may attain it: But
here lies all, they read old Idolatrous vvriters, they read wicked
superstitious me^, they never confer that they do, with the Scripture: here
it is, that they fall both into the ditche.
those that have skill in the Hebrew t^gue can tell: And God be thanked for it,
how ever it be, that the Hebrew tongue is either hidden, or obscured, or dimmed
by you: yet we know well enough, that in shameless manner you falsify, both
the Scriptures and the Hebrew books: Master Harding blusheth not, to say,
that Jerome affirms Thau, To have had the similitude of the Cross: when as
in very deed Jerome avouches no such thing, but reprehe^deth the
Samaritanes, that superstitiouslie do lene unto the same: and the same thing
is condemned, not commended by Jerome.

Now therefore show unto me two things, which I will ask of you, such as
being present defend the Pope, and hold with Images: Can you prove that this
Signum Thau, is ye Cross which you woo? ship? when as you say to a piece of
wood, Aue Rex noster, (1) All hayle O King: Or can you prove out of this
place, that if Thau, were the Cross (which we deny.) Yet that either the Man
that was seen, or the Saints which were marked, or the Babilonians, which were
said to come upon them, did woorshippe, pray unto, or adore this Signum Thau?
and if you can do either of these, I will subscribe to your opinions, and
become one of you: If not, then know, you have abused the Lord, understand you
have misconstrued his word: think that you have beguiled his Saints, and be
you assured, the Lord will require it at your hands: And now to certify all
men in a truth: I will both answer you, and satisfy the Reader. It is to
be understood, that the Lord did nothing in vain: in his book there is no
light thing, no needless thing, no inco^modious and frivolous thing set down:
But every place, every Vision, every Prophesse, every word has his
meaning and proper sense, which brings unto the ignorant person some
knowledge. So that if any one of you, here before me, shall ask this
question at my hands, why the Lord God commaunde^ the Angel to write, rather
the sign Thau, then any other of the Letters, in the foreheads of the Saints?
I will give to that Questionist three reasons.

The sign Thau, how was it abused, by Papists?
First Thau is the last letter of the two and twenty Hebrew Letters, therefore
does it make up the just and perfect number: whereby is signified that the
Saints marked with this mark are such as be perfect and pure, and wise, and
such as shall make up and fulfill the number of the elect.

Torah:Therefore Thau the first letter of this word Torah, which is the law,
does represent that those which are marked with the same letter Thau, are such
as do endeavor to keep the law, of the Lord.

Thau,is the last letter of the Alphabet among the Hebrews: so those that are
signed with the sign Thau, are certified to be such persons as are and shall be
counted to be the last and the worst, the basest and the homeliest, the
meanest and most despised among men: And now, if any of you all, or any of
yours, are able to say any thing against this my Assertion, I will not hinder
you, but as patiently here you, as you have hitherto hard me: thus concluding,
that as yet you have said nothing to prove Images lawful.

Against you that worship them: against them that made them, against all such
as hold with them, the Lord God says much in his book: Isai. 40.19. Isa.
46.7. Ier. 10.3.
Now then shall we obey you or the Lord? Man, or God? Christ or the Pope? or
believe you, or the Scriptures? For if it be true, Non habebis Deos alienos
coram me: (1) Thou shall have none other Gods before me. Exo. 20.3.
If it be true, Per nomen externorum deorum non iurabitis, etc. (1) You shall
not swear by the name of any other Gods: Exo. 23.13.
If it be true, Nol^ adorare Deum alienum: Ne ineas pactum cum bominibus earum
gentium. Thou shall not worship a strainge God, thou shall not make a league or
a treuse with those men and with the Nations. Exo. 34.14.
If it be true in Leuiticus, Thou shall not turn thy self to Idols, and thou
shall make thee no molton Gods: Leu. 19.4.
Then Images and Idolles are not lawefull: If the Lord says well, when he
said. Ego Deus gloriam meam non dabo alteri. (1) I am the Lord God, I will
give my glory to none other: Isai. 41.
If the Lord says well, Confundantur omnes, etc. Let them be confounded that
worship the work of men's hands, etc. Psalm. 105.
If the Lord says well in this place, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and
him only thou shall fear: Then as yet your Images are not lawful: And if
Paul said rightly, 1. Cor. 10.20
The things which the Gentiles do offer, they offer unto Devils. If that John
is to be credited, 1. Ioh. 5.21.
Filioli custodite vos a simulachris. My Babes, keep you free from Images. Let
these peruerters of the truth, the Papists, take heed.
If in the Revelation Apoc. 18.4.
the people of God are commanded to depart and to get them out from among
them, least they be partakers of their sins. It is then high time to look to
you, high time to abhor you, high time to fly from you, least we also perish
together with you: O that your hard hearts were not hardened, that your
iniquities were not engraven with a Diamonde, that you were not justly blinded
for your obstinacy, that the Lord had not cast you off, that wilfully you
re^^^ted not the truth, that your throats were not open Sepulchers, that you
were not swifte to shed blood, that your ways were not execrable, and that you
had not denied the Lord to his face: I tell you, and I tell you in grief that
which I tell you: You have a two edged sword in your hand, and it is drawn,
and you come heather to wound us with all: Arrows and coals of fire are in
your mouth, to spit them out against the Saints: Serpents tongues are with in
you, and the poison of Aspes is in your lips, to infect all those are pure in
heart: Truly. you are the reprobate Silver, which God has rejected: Iere.
6.30.
We have offered the preatious Stones unto you, as Hogs you tread them under
your feet: Math. 7.6.
Our holy things have we cast unto you, you run away from them as Dogs: As
the wax, so shall you be before the Lord for it, and melte at the heat of his
fiery countenance: Psalm. 68.3.
As fire on the Mountains deuoureth the wood, so shall you perish in his
fury: Psalm. 83.15.
with the Bitte and with the Snaffle shall the Lord break in sunder your Iawe
boanes. Psalm. 32.12.
And be you assured, that the axe is already put unto the root of the tree,
and the heavy judgment of the Lord God approaches, yea it is at hand, if you
return not: Images? why? their names are abomination to the Lord. Images?
why? Psalm. 16.4.
They that make them are fools and infatuated, their doctrine is a doctrine of
vanity? Psalm. 16.4.
Iere. 10.8.
Images? why? the names of them shall be ^oted out from off the earth, and they
shall not be remembered any longer. Zach. 13.12.
O therefore fear the Lord, and he will love (...) the son least he be angry,
and you pe^ish from off the Land, if once his displeasure fall, O then happy
are all they that put their trust in him. Tell me of all you that are here,
which of the innumerable people and Nations under heaven has the Lord our God
spaced that have used Image^? whether the Sidmians that worshipped Astaroh: or
the Ammori^^ which served Melcom: or the men of Accaron, who adored Baal zebub:
or the Philistines that held of Dagon, or you or the Romans, that gave
themselves over to all Idola^^^^, then stand in a we and sin not, examine
with your own hearts and be still: One thing I will tell you, and admonish you
off. The Fathers have determined to give sentence upon you; the best and the
general Councels that are good and holy, have condemned you: our Church of
England, and all the reformed Churches in the world, have de^^^ede and set
themselves against you, and you are not able to stand to your opinions, and
therefore there is a grievous fall prepared for you, and it is at hand.

I would that you called to mind the words of Cyprian: Cyp. Tract. 4. De vani.
Idolor.
Vans igitur omnium Deus, neque enim illa sublimitas potest habere consortem,
cum sola omnium ^eneat potestatem. (1) There is one Lord God of all, and his
highness will not admit an equal: seeing that he has only power over all:
Lactantius Firmianus, albeit in many things he wrote well: yet in this, above
the rest, he is most principally commended, who in his second of his
Institutions, has this saying 2. Inst. lyb. De origin erroris. 2. Cap. 19.
Deus supra hominem est, nec in imo positus, sed in summa regione quaerendus
est, quare non act dubium, quin religio nulla sit, vbicunque simulachrum est:
(1) God, (says Lactantius) is above man and he is not to be sought after here
on earth, but abooue on high in the highest heavens: Wherefore, we doubt
notall to pronounce and say, that in that place there is no manner of religion
at all, whereas any Image or Idol is found. Gregorius is of this opinion.
Omne manu factum adorare non licet: Lib. 9. Indict. 40. Epist. 9. Cypr. aduer.
Demetr.
that is. It is not lawful to adore and fall down to any thing that is made
with hands: Cyp^ianu^ against Dem^^ris (...) did^v^rite very sha^p^y, and
merueleus whetly against this Idol worship, and after many reasons, at the
length does bring in that place of Scripture, to prove his assertion, which
I have now in hand: for it is written says Ciprian. (...) De^^is tuum
ad^rabis, The Fathers are wholy bent against Images in every place.
(...) alls soli serni^s: that is: Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
thou shall serve him only. I could say much unto you out of the Fathers, and
show you your gross errors by the judgment of so learned and reverend men:
but both the time does rall me back, and my purpose is not to compile a
volume: and the other Articles which you hold, do require that I should spees
delie run over this, that I may also say something of them:

This I say unto you, Lib. 5. de Just. Lib. 4. Lib. 11. Cap. 16.
read Lactantius, in his fifth book of True righteousness, he will inform
you sufficiently: reave Origin against Celsus, he will teach you perfectly.
Read Cyrill upon John, he will instruct you directly. Turn unto Athanasius
against the Gentilles, you shall learn prensely: and forget not at your
leisure to seek to Clemens, to James brother of our Lord, Liber. 5. Epist. 44.
for he has done every thing there moss exactlie. Or search out Augustine
to Maximus, where he flowteth and laugheth at their Paganism: there shall you
finds how purely he instructs them, how sharply he reprehendeth them, how
fiercely he strikes them, and how ^u^^tingly he forewarneth them, to avoid
the heavy hand of God in worshipping of Images: and so leaving you to the
force and strength of these men, I leave you for this time, to consider better
of this Article.

The second point in the third part of the first division.
There follows now in my first part, the second point remaining in my third
division: namely that there is a service which touches and concerns God, and
a service which touches and concerns man: Whereinto if you or any other
shall look, it will be found that this scruice which is appertinent unto God,
and unto man, is also two fold.

Service of God and man ^ The body and the mind go together in the (...)
woo^ship of God.
Internal, which is in spirit: for as God is a spirit, so also will he be
woorshipped in spirit and truth. External, which is outward, in reverence
and duty apparent even to man.


Both these are required in this place, and they be (...) vnted together, as
without b^the of them, the Lord our God cannot be truly woorshipped:
Theresice I will not seueare or divide the one from the other, but I will ^ucke
them as in a golden Chain, and make them Caepartuers and fellow companiorts in
enerye good action. Now this internal, and this external service of the
Lord, are both seen^ in diners circumstances of my Text, as follows:

True service is seen. 1. First, if you shall loone: 2. Secondly, the Lord your
God. 3. Thirdly, with all your heart. 4. Fourthly, with all your soul. 5.
Fifthly, with all your might.
1. The first, shows the readiness that is in us. 2. The second, shuts
out all other woorship, whatsoever. 3. The third, declares that nothing should
be precious unto us, but the Lord. 4. The fourth, takes away all
counterfeiting, and all dissimulation. 5. The fife opens, that no creature
else may have this service, but only the Lord our God.


The fall of man being in perfection, his vnstablen^^ (...) he is on earth: his
co^^upt^ mind in a^ (...) he do the (...) blyndnes and error in the light, his
grosnesse and hard heart in belief: did require a pure and undefiled law, to
bridle him.
I am not ignorant, that every man, in whom is the breath of life, and upon
whom the Lord our God has powered of his Spirit; is in some part, any, in
eueri^ part faulty in this co^^aundoment: which natural blin^nesse and
Ignorance of ours, shows the groat perfection (...) heavenly integrity of
the Lord: and again, condempneth us, as guiltis in eneri^ point; (...) our
hands at the barte continually, as being on able to (...) any lots of this
same, or to stand before God, if he call us to a reckoning. For, if that man,
were able to stand, and would never fall from his (...) and his heart vn^^^^ble
(...) (...) be (...) in Israelit; thon ^e (...) think ^ho (...) (...) that
(...) thing (...) of (...) that (...) We may (...) ^ and no doubt, the Lord our
God has so stra (...) us to observe these things prescribed, even to love
him, and him our God, and with all our heart, and with an our soul, and with
all out stight (...) sundry, weighty, and great causes.

Causes, why the Lord has given so straight a commandment: 1. First (...)
our own ^^^etchednesse, myseserie, and death. 2. Secondly to be a^cused, not
excused before the Lord. 3. Thirdly, to tremble and shake, when we ^span. 4.
Fourthly, that ^bndem^nation may appear in us, knowing that we are not able to
fulfill this. 5. Firstly, to make us affrighted, and to weaken out consciences,
seeing that we cannot live in ^^^^bedience. 6. Sixthly, to keep us by
discipline, as under a law for ever. 7. Seventhly, to teach us the ^nt^ and
perfect works of righteous nesse. 8. Eighthly, to exclude all other Idol
woorshippe, and to serve all only the Lord our God.


Man thynking that he ^^a^deth does fall: that he is in lyse, is yet in death:
that he is strong is vveake, that he can do all things, does nothing aryght
therefore has he inward and secret sins, which he must tame and subdue,
as well as the outward vices, subject to the eyes of men.
And now to come more narrowly, to every one in this place th^gener all: is it
to he thaught, that no man has an evil eye upon Abel, upon his brother? is
the heart of every man persen? Does none despise Jacob? Is there not one but
(...) a porsect Censar? or shall we make accoumpt, is there nener an (...)
person in this company? not one (...) you that has worn the golden Earinges?
or has not cast one stone against the house of God? or joined them selves with
Aaron, to commit evil? Is the leaven of Egypt clean forgotten? or has no
man sit down to eat and (...), and rose up again to play? Is the hearts of
you all pire (...) the Lord? what? not once at Samaria in all your life? not
once at Dan? not once at Bethell? no? not ^ne ^ine or affectioned to Priapus?
Of a truth, it may hard^^ be so thought, a man will not indge it, and God
knows it is otherwise: Why? man? he is full of presumptious ^^^es why? his
offeringes be unclean, and the fat of the (...) is tayn^ed. Many truct in
Chariots, and many trust in Horses, and diverse say, there is no help in our
God: and then which way can we be free from his wrath? The man that works no
deceypt, the man that has not slaundered his neighbor: the man that has not
put out his money to loan, nor his coin to Usury: the man in whose loule
there is no guile, is not, cannot, may not be found* I tell you, to love the
Lord, with all your soul, with all your might, with all your strength, with
all your heart, to love the Lord* and to love him only, is to fulfill the
whole law and the Prophets.

As the false Prophets of Iesabell knew the truth, in the days of nlyas the
Prophet: and as Amasiah did vvilfully resist Jeremy, and the Seribes and
Saduces Christ: so do the Jesuits and Papists resist us, against their ewne
consciences.
I do profess, and protest before you all, yea, before the Lord, and before
his Angels, that I never enter into the con^^^eration of this, but that I
wonder, how it comes to paste, that the adversaries of the grace of God, the
Papists, do not burst and cleave in sunder, when they see that honor, that
zeal, that affection, that loous, that might, that strength, which is due to
the Lord God, so wickedly, and so commonly to be given to Creatures? And now
tell me, you, whose faces, are faces of brass, you of the. College of the
Pope, you his Seminaries, you invested into the order of the Jesuits, how you
are able to answer, and to reconcile your selves unto the Lord? God says,
Love me, you love the Pope: God says, Love me with all your heart: but how
heartily, how faithfully, pray you to Saints? God says, Love me with all thy
soul: yet you sell prayers unto men, and the Souls of men do you give from
God, for money. God says, Love me with all thy might: and you ende^^^r day
and night, to Idolatry. God says, Hear me only, but you will not hear him
at all: and if you do, you are compelled unto it.

Then in consideration, that you have so boldly resisted the Truth, and so
faceingly stand against GOD: and so proudly list up your heads, and so
impudently persevere in your errors. I will breeflie say something unto you, of
so many your Heresies, and false allegations, as connenientlie I may: for I
know that you came not hither in vain. Some of you are Seminaries, and not
without cause so called, for you sow your Tares among our Corn, and you have
scattered the Cockle, among our Wheat, whersoeuer you come. Some of you be
Jesuits, and I wunder, that under so glorious a name: so vile and so
outrageous, so lewd and so pestiferous: so fond, and so monsterous an
Heretic can be contained. Jesuits of Jesus, as the Nazarites named them of
Nazareth, where Christ dwelt: And the Adamites, called them so of Adam: but
they followed no one thing of the customs and ordinances of those men, from
whom they took their names: no more then the Jesuits do follow Jesus.


Did Jesus ever know that man of sin, whom you worship, the Pope? did
Jesus adore Images, as you do? did Jesus pray to Saints, as your manner is?
did Jesus use those whorishe Traditions of Bell, Bull, and Candle, Oil, Salt,
and adiurations, as is common among your did Jesus pray to the Cross, and
whipped he, and scourged he him self, with his own hands, as you use to do?
Then I perceive you have but the name of Jesus, to deceyus men with all, you
have no one thing in you, which Jesus had. And for that you are Wookies in
Sheep clothing, and we now know you by your deeds: I will speak some
thing of such Articles, and most principal Heresies, on which you do hold.

The Lord says, Thou shall love me with all thy soul, with all thy heart,
with all thy might, and the Lord the GOD only shall thou serve. But you,
Harding, for the Church of Room. Did. 96
you love the Pope, he is, The Terrestrial God. The Pope, why? he is God in
deed: as appears also at the Counsel of Trident: The Pope, why, he is not a
Man: The Pope, why? In Sexto de Elect.
he has power over the Angels of GOD, as appears in the Council of
Lateran, under Leo the tenthe. The Pope, why? that which he does, is received
as Canonical, not to be broken: for so said Alexander the second, to Phillip
King of France. The Pope, why? he that offends, and breaks his Laws,
shall not be forgiven for ever: Did. 19. C. 51. Romans pontif.
for so said Nicholaus, to the Archbishoppes. The Pope, why? it is not lawful
to add or diminishe any thing, that he has done, as witnesses your own
Pope Adrian. Sinodo apud. Trecas.
The Pope, why? it is thus written of him. Qui decreta Romanorum pontificum
violauerit, anathema sit. (1) Whosoever ever shall break, or violate the Decrees
of the Pope, shall be as accursed; This was done at a Council by Leo, Pope the
fowrth, Cap. 5.
by the consent of three score and two Bishops. The Pope, why? whosoever
obeyed not him, as being in the Apostolical Sea, Papa. 7.
was coumpted an Idolater, as is found in the Decrees of Gregory.

Now whether or no, these are lawful, and whether you or no, be not
shameless men, to come hither to teach us such whorishe, and Idolatrous
abominations, that shall be tri^d in the book of the Lord.

First of all, you call a mortal man by the name of the eternal God: do you
think this is lawful? What says Esa^. Ego Dominus, hoc est nomen meum,
gloriam meam non dabo alteri, etc. That is, I am the Lord, that is my name, and
my glory will I give unto no other: Isa. 42.8.
You have not read what the Lord said of Israel, when as he purpo^^ to save
them. Propter me, propter me faciam, vt non blasphe^mer, et gloriam meam alteri
non dabo. That is, For my self cuen for my self will I do this, that I may
not be blasphemed, and my glory will I give to none other. Isa. 48.11.
If the Angel in the Revelation, Apoca. 19.10.
would not take that woorship, and adoration that John would have adored him
withal, but thought it a derogation from the Majesty of God to take it:
Damasus. 1. in the days of Julius, as in Platina: and Boniface. 16. in the
time of Honorius, and Simmachus the. 1. under Faustin. Consul, and Gregori.
the. 1. under Mauri. and Boniface the third, under Phocas: were the first that
had this worship and adoration given to them, being the first general Popes so
named: and at the consecration of them all, was much blood shed.
How sacrilegious and blasphemous, is that man of sin, the Pops, that has
so many thousands coming to him continually, and falling down and
worshipping him? Wherefore, because I am purposed to be short, and as before,
so now also in my writings, not to be tedious. I will refer all your
Romish tytles given unto the Pope, all only unto one. And these shall be by way
of Question determined: Namely, whether or no, it be lawful for you to give
that honor, and that worship to the Pope that you do? I say it is not
lawful, but it is a dampnable and most execrable thing: and this will I make
proof of, out of the book of God.

The Pope is not to be woorshipped. Rati. 1. He only that is Omnipotent, and
Lord of all is to be worshipped. The Lord our God is omnipotent, and Lord only
of all; Ergo. The Lord our God only, and not the Pope is to be worshipped.


For my own part, when any one of my premises is denied, then I can say that
justly, which now willingly I will not speak of. Yet we know that in
former tunes there were most godly, and most honorable, most ^^se and most
prudent men, that lived then: notwithstanding, there is no president found
among them of any such gross blindness as is in you, or any example of any such
honor or worship given to any one then living, as you do now to the Pope.
Abraham presumed not to go any farther then unto the Lord, whom he also adored:
If you read the Story of Jacob, Gene. 35.
with his long travail, great pain, and weary return home again, When as
all the good and honotable men of old time refused to be worshipped: how dare
the Pope take that (being inferior to them in thousand degrees) which they
durst not.
you shall find that he thought none worthy honor and reverence, neither
adored any but God whom he called omnipotent in Genesis: Israel albeit Moses
had been in the Mount, and had seen God face to face, and had talked with
him, and had seen his glory in the Tabernacle, and was changed in
countenance, for Israel could not abide to behold him, because the
brightness of his face was great: Exodus 15.
yet do you not find that this singular instrument of the Lord Moses was
adored or worshipped as your Pope is: read Deuteronomy. 32. and Psalm. 71. And see if
there be any honor or reverence or adoration given to any other, save only to
the Lord God? then I conclude, Ergo, none ought to be given unto the Pope

The holy order of the Priesthood is not unknown unto you: yet if you could
find either in Aaron, or in Eleazar, or after that in Ely and his sons, or
else if you made any show at all of the honor that was given to Iehosuah in
Zachary, Cap. 6.
ye may seem to be equiuale^t or come near unto yours which you attribute to
your Pope, no doubt you would cavil perilous^ie, and fight manfully for your
Popedom: Your Pope: Os Porci: that is, a Hog for his filthiness of life, and
after that changed his name to Sergius did, according to his former name,
usurp the name of God: and Constantinus the first, was also the first that
kissed the Popes feet, and fell down unto him. as witnesses both Nauclerus
and Platina.
but for as much as there is no resemblaunce unto that man of sin, made by
any one in the old law, you are lawless men, that so unlawfully will strive
and impugn the law of the Lord. And concerning the Chair and Cathedral
estate of Peter, wherein you suppose him to have set as Lord and chief of the
Apostles: I say thus much unto you: if in the Scripture there be any such
thing found of Peter, either that as Lord he ruled the rest: or as Christ's
Vicegerant he took the office, or as Universal Bishop he governed at Rome, or
as Supreme head Peter commanded all: or that Peter left any Successor
behind him, or that he was honored and reverenced, and called upon as your
Pope is, I will yield and subscribe unto all your opinions. But if you cannot
prove this you speak of the Pope, will you yield to us? will you confess a
truth, and renounce your errors? will you come to the Lord and acknowledge
your backsliding from the truth? This will I do, if any one of your side, can
find the name of Pope, or Supreme head, or Lord of the Angels, or a Man
that can not sin, or general Bishop, or successor of Peter, or a holy
Father, or governor of the whole Church, or any other of your Titles, that you
give unto him: I say that again, find them in any one place of the Bible,
old or new, I will subscribe and become as one of you. In contrary manner,
if not, then yield you unto us. How ever it be, we can convince you by the
Scriptures, therefore against the Pope, here is the second reason.

Against the Pope, the second reason. That which is not found in the
Scriptures, for the which you have no warrant, which derogateth from the
Majesty of God, is not to be done. The name of your Pope, the tytles of your
Cardinals, the honor and worship you give to the Pope, and them: takes and
derogateth from the majesty of God. Ergo. Your Pope is not to be worshipped,
as you worship him: and that you do, and give unto him, is not to be done.


This is not rare in Popes, to cause blood shed, and raise Tre^sons, and
tumults in common vvealths: for by blood, Engenius was elected, under
Ludouicus Prus: and Zachary Pope, in his time, stood against Caesar, and gave
the kingdom of France to P^pinus, after Christ. 755. and Childericus the
true heir was shaven, and then thrust into a Monastarie by the Pope: and thus
would he deal with England if he could.
Where find you, that death and life is in the Popes hands, as you do
affirm? that he may dispense with any sin, as he does? That he can redeem
Souls from out of hell and Purgatory, as you imagine? that he may give liberty
to whordome? free access to Treasen, without breach of law? that he may send
out his Bulls, with free release of all the sins, men have committed? Think
you, that we may suffer these horrible blasphemies? or that ^ee may snffer you
that uphold them? what? an other redeemer beside Christ? what? that a mortal
man shall have life and death, in his hands? what? that they? shall be
liberty granted; to finne? and free access to all wickedness? what? that
any one may redame the soul of his Brother from hell? or that a satisfaction
may be made after his departure? What? Bulls, Pardons, Indulgencies, or
Masses for any Soul alive, or dead? Why? where? what place? by whom? in what
Prophet? what Scripture have you this in? It is strange, it is unknown to us:
Abraham, never heard thereof, Isaac, and Jacob, never knew so much, Daniel,
Enoch, Job, these three righteous men never spoke it, they can save but their
own souls, in the day of the Lord. And shall we give more unto the Pope, then
we have done unto them? It is the Lord that binds the golden chain about the
neck, that gives Silver and Gold unto feeble men. The Lord is clothed with
glory and honor, for it is he that covers him self with light, Salvation
comes of none, but of the Lord: life of none, but of the living: glory from
none, but from God that is glotious. Ergo: God only, not the Pope, can have
any of these given unto him.
and spreads the heavens as a Curtain: The Lord opens his hands, and
fills with good things, and the gates of death are at his pleasure: He
sends his spirit, and they are created, and he ^arieth down to the
nethermost hell: He spared not the Families of Core, and the multitude of
Rebels were swallowed up quick. He, even the Lord does bind Princes to his
will, and he teaches his Auncientes wisdom: he can hold their feet in the
stocks, and he can chain them with chains of Iron. The Lord can save, and
defend his people: the Lord can deliver, and lift up, but far be it from the
sons of men: and let not disobedient children take it upon them, least he
strike, if he be angry, least his indignation do arise, and we perish. And
if any one will have life, or the people of the Land, look for redemption: let
them come to the Lord of hoastes, the God of I acob shall be their defense.
Cursed is he that trusts in man, and I wish all those that fear the Lord,
to say. Amen.

And now concerning my self, for that I speak unto you at this time, rather
then any other: it is, both because I would confirm the doctrine which my
brethren have Preached heretofore, and in part also, for the hope I may do
some good among you: I think this, and thus of you: you have from your
Infancy, been trained up in blindness and error, neither do you use to read
the scriptures, If Papists prayed earnestly, and lived soberly, and hardened not
their haits vvylfully, but would submyt them selves to the Lord vvyllingly:
then would they not err so grossly.
so much as to tranaile, and ware old in the Doctors. So that upon three causes
which may well be taken away, I easily perceive that you are hardened: for the
same poison which you drunk in your first years, is a cause why you are
broken out, into the ^^^^titude of your grievous sores at this present. Then
want of prayer to the Lord, does again putrify you so sore within, as busied
and occupied in their invocation to Saint Peter, to Saint Thomas, to the Virgin
Marie and others, you have not any leisure at all, to call on God: wherefore you
do not well, for those Personages, are great Personages, and being troubled
with a multitude of Suitors, they may not presently hear you, neither can they
prefer your prayers unto God so soon. Peradventure also they be abroad, or
busied in some weighty affairs, or else they have some other request, for
some nearer friend of theyrs, and you most wait yet longer. Wherefore turn to
the Lord, and he will hear you indeed, neither will he defer salvation from
day to day. Lastly, I am afraid, that one of you infecteth an other,
therefore, I do wish, that you may be severed asunder, when the Tempter is
gone, It is evident that the Kings and Keisars did vvithstand the Pope a long
season, till by maine and might the Pope took in hand to stand in arms against
them: For Carolus in his time, made an Edict against the Pope, and cut off
half his Crown: yet did the Pope swell and rise more and more, but in blood.
the spirit of the Lord, will walk more effectually. And I for my part,
together with my brethren, will pray for you continually, that the Lord God
would open your eyes, that you may see the truth: for undoubtedly, your
hearts are full of woormwood and gall, and I see that bitterness is within you,
even to death, if ye Lord God quicken you not. Who ever said that, that was
proper to man, which is to be given to God, but you? who ever affirmed that the
Pope was Lord and God, and King, and Keisar, save all only you? who has given
him power, by which as of himself he stands? who has given him honor, by
which through his might he strikes, he cutteth off, he saves, save only you?
who has given him the keys of hell and heaven, where he binds, and he
loses, save all only you? who has said, he is God, Vicegerant, in earth, by
which he ordains, and deposes but only you? who has made him equal with
God, and most like unto the highest, save all only you, his Scholars, his
Disciples, his Ministers, and such as are, and have been accoumpted
Heretics, and are of the same profession as are you? wherefore return, come
away, fly from the whore of Room. Apoc. 17.
O be not deceived, she has poisoned all ye Kings of the earth, with the
venom of her cup: Stay a while, pause and consider, and you shall see the
dampnation of this great whore, that sits upon many waters. With her have
the Kings of the earth committed fornication: with her have the Inhabitants of
the earth been made drunk: for she sits upon a scarlet colored Beast. A
Beast is Room called, for ye eruell, sauadge unnatural, and beastly qualities
found with in her, as appears in Daniel: Dan. 7.7.
Sitting in Scarlet, for that the was red, and inglutted with the blood of the
Saints. The outrageous pride of this whore of Room the Pope, is seen. In
that at this day, he has upon his Palace a Pillar of stone, that is valued
at. 20000. Crowns: He has his roose seeled with gold cover. His hanginges
are of precious stone, like glass: And yearly has he coming in out of the
common stews, an Annual reuenew (which is his tribute) of 20000. pounds,
from among the whores and common women of Room: so that he is the whore
that sits in the golden chayte.
Then having names full of blasphemy: for is there any one now, or was there any
ever heretofore, that had the same blasphemous titles, as has ye Pope? Then
having v^. heads, which are seven hills, on which Room did stand, and was
built, and so sometimes had seven Kings within her: The whore is said to have
ten horns, many kingdoms under her. Then she is arrayed in Purple and Scarlet:
For the glory of your Popedom, stands in outward Pomp, and we know that no
Prince in the world, is more ritchly attired, then is that monster at Room.
Then she has a cup of abominations in her hand: And not without cause, in as
much as all Heresies, false doctrine, and Superstitions of the late Churches
have come from her. Then in the forehead is there a Mystery written, Babylon
the great, the mother of whordome: A Mystery in deed, for none can comprehend
this secret, but the Elect: None can tell you, that this Room is that whore,
but such as God has touched: None can open this plainly to the world, save
only those to whom God has given it. And therefore, if your hearts were not
hardened, if in hearing you did not hear, or in seeing, you saw not, and were
not blinded: or if the Lord had not shut up your understanding, for your
wilfulness, it could not be possible, but in this light and beauty of our
time and of the truth, you should understand, and convert and be saved: and
defer not off from day to day, for ye longer you stay, the more fierce God
is: the longer you prolong, the more severe he is. This day, if you hear his
voice harden not your hearts: I tell you that the wicked man does most
prowdely keep his countenance, and will not be changed, the heart of the
godly man melts, when he hears of the Lord: Romans 2.5.
wherefore take you heed that according to your hardness of heart, and your
impenitent souls, which will not repent, you heap up vengeance against ye day
of vengeance, and against the day of wrath, and the revealing of the just
judgment of God. For wherefore should you stand thus in defense of the Pope?
wherefore should you hazard your selves for a mortal man? wherefore stand you
against the truth? is it for ye you are ignorant? you may see* Is it because
you have learned so? Our Fathers are to be followed no farther then you follow
the Lordet Read Origin in Esech. Hom. 7. read Augu. upon John. Tract. 49.
cap. 11
you shall have another lesson, the Lord God shall be your master. Is it
because you fear man? why? the Lord our God is greater, stand to him: what?
have your Fathers beleet^ed so? then be you other men, you shall not bear
their iniquities: what? have you learned this from them of old? why? what
then? They erred, go you vprightlie: they sinned against their God, provoke you
him not: they lived in miserable days and saw little, you have the law in
your mouth, and it is open to all: they desired, and could not have it: you
may have and will not take it. They had the Gospel kept from them by the
Tyranny of the man of sin, that bruised and stamped under his feet the Saints
of God: you have, and may have, and if you repent, you shall have all free
liberty and access to the Gospel with out danger: And tell me, what is he
whom you so reverence and adore? what is your Pope? came he from the heanens?
or is he indeed as you say more then a man? But what if a wicked man? what if
a Blasphemer? what the^ if he be a Sodomite? what if an Inchaunter? what if an
Heretic? what if a Scismatick? yea, a Simmonist? what will you say then, if ye
never any Pope, was yet Pope of Rome, but these, or the like, or greater
sins, have been found within them?

Tell me if that you mean well as we do? If this be true will you come to us?
will you recante? will you fly from the Pope? if you will? then speak, and
let all these be witnesses. And seeing you will not, then hear what I will
say: First you show that you are the wicked sons of a wicked Father: and him
you defend in his whorish ab^ominations. Secondly you will take no indifferent
proffer in a truth: Thirdly in wilful manner you will defend that you cannot
auouche iustlye: Fourthlie, you will yield to nothing but that you like off:
And last of all, if you were not compelled, you would not hear us at this
present: But now, Conditions offered of subscription to the Jesuits.
seeing that you are here, give ear to that which I do say: peradventure
you may have an other Prosilite, if you deal but in differentlie. Remember
what you do: you defend the Pope, I am against him: I show reasons, you will
give me none: I offer you the Scriptures as indifferent Judges, and you refuse
them: I show you the Law and the Prophets, which deny that you hold, and you
regard them not: wherefore I will conclude thus, that if any one of you all
here present, or any one of your learned Papists beyond the Seas, or any one
of your close Counterfeits in England: be able to prove out of any godly
person, zealous man, or any indifferent Judge whatsoever of any time: whether
he be Croniographer, or writer of History, or Ecclesiastical Doctor, or
famous and reverend for his time, or any discriber of Persons, or any one that
is learned, that has written of your Popes, I vvarrant you the Jesuits will
neither lea^ne, neither yield, neither confess their errors, nor agree to
reason, but against God and man will they stand vvilfully, having nothing to
say against the truth.
from the sirt hundred year of Christ (what time especially your Supremacy,
and general challenge began) that in the same is able to prove, that the Pope
and your Lord and Master for whom you suffer so much, has not been either an
infamous Whoremaister: or a vile Heretic: or a filthy Sodomite or an exceeding
gross Heretic: or a Scismaticke: or an Inchau^ter, or else has not been well
known to have had some great and damnable sin reigning within him: I for my
part, will subscribe, and hold with the Pope, as you do, and for ever
hereafter become one of yours. I as^e but this in like manner of you, that if I
shall prove this sufficiently and substantially, which I have both spoken and
written to you: that then you in like manner would become Protestaunts, and
forsake that Whore of Room. Something I will say unto you now conterrung this,
and when I have more ^eysure I will tell you more. Papa Zosimus forged and
counterfeyted the Council of Nice very falselye, and all for to be supreme
head of ye world. John Pope the 2. said, Animas piorum non videre faciem Dei:
That is, That the souls of the righteous men, did not see the face of the
Lord. Gregory the sixth, which was Hildebrand, one of the mo^sters of the
world: was an Inchaunter, and used other wickedness not to be named. Note here,
the great judgment of God: that this Idol of Room lyfted up to the heavens,
might be known to fall, to the nethermost hell: Who making him self equal to
God, to the Angels, to Peter, and to Christ have had found within them from
time to time such vices: as God and man abhorring, were never yet found in any
reprobate to be more common, then in them.
John the. 8. Pope, was a Simonist, and sold his Bishoprics for money.
Boniface Pope, was of all other most like unto a Pope, for he was cunning in
all kind of althinesse, and he was expulsed by Ottho Caesar. Siluester the
second was a Coniurer: I find in Stories, ye one Sforsia was poisoned by ye
Pope for his wife, and for that he might ye better have his pleasure of her:
Siluester the third was deposed, you know the cause I am sure. You have heard
of the pride of Paul, the second, who deposed the King of Boheme. Urban
dispossessed Conradine the right heir, and son of Conradine King of Sicilia:
It is a famous Story, both worthy the noting, for the great judgment of God
that happened then, and for the myserie and desperate state of those days were
seen then. For Platina the Popes Secretary, in his description of Pope Clement
the fifth, says thus: That at the Coronation of the same Pope, whereas there
were present, Phillip King of France, and Charles his brother, and John Duke
of Britain: the same John Duke, was overwhelmed with ye fall of a wall, and
died. See the great judgment of God, for this happened in the time of the
Coronation: when as the manner is, the Pope was led through the City. Also,
King Phillip, by the same ruin, was sore hurt and lamed: The Pope was stricken
off his Horse, and lost a Rubie out of his Miter, that cost six thousand
Ducats, I do remember, what a man of late time writes of Calixtus, that was
Anno salut. 1120. and he is one of your own Order, to name Theodoricus an
Abbote, and he witnesses that the same Calixtus, was called, when he governed,
by the name of Simon Magus: I could reckon up unto you an infinite company,
like unto these: but I will defer the speech of them, till some other time:
and whereas I was purposed to have given unto you, three other reasons, by
collection and just proof, gathered out of the Scriptures, against the Pope,
and the gross heresy of his Supremacy: those I have let slip, That which
now is omitted: may be seen, if you read Nauclerus, Pius Secundus and
Platina, and Volateran.
purposing if God will to make a knitting up of them another time. Only this I
will add at this present: That whereas I have said much concerning the Pope
and you also his Scholars, at this time: I have done it the Lord knows,
neither of spite to provoke you, nor of hatred to molest you, nor of contempt
to disdain you, nor of peeuishnes to smite you: but in a fear and a reverence
have I done it, and before the Lord, that if possible it may be, I may win
you. This is true. Verbum meum quod egredietur de ore meo, etc. My word shall
not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I will, and it
shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. Isa. 55.11.
And therefore I desire you, and I pray you in the Lord, that you would redeem
the time, knowing that those things which I have spoken, are not spoken by me,
but by the Lord. And for that you shall not in any thing mistrust me, look
into the Revelation of Saint Ihon: Apoc. 9.1.
and there shall you find that I have spoken nothing, but that which the
spirit of God prophesied of before, should happen to the Church of Rome, and
all her abominations, and all her filthiness are opened long before: the things
should happen, are expressed in three circumstaunces.

Three circumstaunces. 1. First, in the Angel: 2. Secondlye, that sounded. 3.
Thirdly the Trumpet.
The stately messenger, is a token of the certainty of the thing. The
sound, betokens it should come to pass. The Trumpet signifies, that it
should be blased and commonly known through out the world to all.


And the things to be known are these.

A description of the Pope.
1. First a Star: that is a Bishop and Minister, and who greater with you
then the man of Rome. 2. Secondlye, that fell: for your Pope from time to time
has gone from God. Now that which should be done, and should happen, is
this.
3. Thirdly, from heaven, for heaven and heavenly things has he forsaken, and
taught man's Traditions. 4. Fowrthly, to the earth: for as all things therein are
uncertain, so be all things taught by you, and by the Pope, most unstable,
most wavering and earthly. 5. Then, he had given unto him a gift, for without
Gods permission he does nothing. 6. The things given, were keys: you say
that he has the keys on his shoulders: yet I think you will scarce rejoice
in them, if you consider well. 7. But what keys? the keys of the bottomless
pit: for he opens hell gates to all that follow him. 8. Then, he opened the
bottomless pit, for all abhominatio^s, and all sin and iniquity, that leads
unto hell come from him. 9. Then, there arose a smoke from the pit, and you
know, that all filthiness has been spread abroad by the Pope. Room and
Romanistes, are never able to answer John, to this place.
10. Then, the smoke was like a furnace, for the abou^dance of his errors and
heresies, darkened Christ and his Gospel. 11. Then, the air was darkened by the
smoke of the pitifor what truth, what good and perfect doctrine, has not
been obscured by him, the Pope? 12. After that appeared Locustes, false
Teachers, Cardinals, Bishops, Monks, Friars, etc. 13. After that, power was
given unto them: even false and deceivable doctrine, pleasant unto men. 14.
Not power only, but the power of Scorpions, for your Abbie lowbies did so
sting the consciences of men, and of the weak, as they died an eternal death
by their teaching. 15. Yet they hurt not the grass: such as were upright, and
knew God: for the Elect can not be beguiled by you, do what you can. 16. But
only those that were not sealed in their foreheads: (1) such as God had not
praeordained to life, but Infidels, whom Satan had blinded. 17. Lastly, those
that were sealed, they should be troubled six months: Even a certain time
which God had appointed: for though Rome has troubled along time, all the
faithful, yet is your time limited, and we know that this trouble is but for
a season.
^ But enter in farther, see and look, whether this be so, yea, or no? your
whole Idolatry, knauerie, and bawdrie of Room is described, and it is showen
plainly, that the Romanistes, be the Locustes. Homoiomata A description of the
Locusts.


1. First, they are like horses: rebellious, bold, cruel, fierce, lecherous,
and impenitent. 2. Secondly, they are prepared: for they are armed, and ready
against the Saints. 3. Thirdly, unto battle: for they fight and they
encounter, and they are in arms against the righteous. 4. Fourthly, they have
crowns on their heads: for they of Rooome challenge honor and dignity, above
all. 5. Fifthly, their crowns are like gold: and they have no right to that
supremacy they claim: But they make a false challe^ge thereunto, and rob
others of their right and dignity. 6. Sixthly, their faces are like faces of
men: quick, politic, brabling and subtle: such as pretend humanity, and
courtesy, and love, and good will toward men: yet are they sauadge and
cruel, and such as eat up the people of God. Harding does defend the Stews
erected at Room.
7. Seue^thly, they have hair like vnt oath hair of women, which notes the
wantonness, idleness, whorishe apparel, and effeminate minds of the Clergy of
Room. 8. Their teeth, as the teeth of Lions: for you of Room have oppressed
the Saints of God, and devoured them. 9. They have Habergions of Iron: for they
be sturdie, and not moved to pity, countenaunced by Princes. 10. They have
wings: for they be proud, and lyfted up above Kings and Emperors. 11. They
have stinges in their tails: for the number of the Saints of God that are
slain, is innumerable. 12. They have a King and he is the king of the
bottomless pit: even the Devil and Satan. 13. Your Kings name is Abaddon,
and Apolyon: even a most horrible, cruel, and bloody deuowrer of the Saints
of God: a destroyer in doctrine, by the Pope and Antichrist: a destroyer of
men, both of body and in soul: in soul, with falsehood and lies, in body
with fire and sword.
This fear of the Lord, is to be known of all, for God commands it: This
reverence is to be observed of all, for else God punishes: and to be kept, for
we are bound unto it: it is always to be looked unto, and we ought
espetially to regard it.
You have had a most lively description of the Pope, with his Clergy, not at
my hands, but at the hands of God: Now follows, that I should say some
thing of the true fear, reverence, and homage which is to be given unto the
Lord God, and it is the last member of all: whereof if I speak at large, I
shall do great injury to this honorable and great assembly: If I say
nothing, I shall be suspected of you, our adversaries, and be judged able to
do nothing: If I clippe my speech, I shall leave but the half man to be
seen of you, whom I had rather you should see fully drawn out, and in his
strength. Therefore I am determined to speak, yet not fully, because that I
do, must be done breeflie: I will speak, but not to please, or satisfy you,
but to show that duty, which both I, and all other good Christians do owe
unto the Lord: I will speak that I will speak of, no otherwise then of the
most true and Christian Verity, which I find as undoubted, holy, and to be
evidently declared in the book of God. The fear due unto the Lord, and unto
none else, does exclude and shut out all other fear and reverence, and homage
given to any other whatsoever: for God will not part stakes with any man.
For in the last, and particular division of all, I noted, that worship which
touches and appertayned unto Man, thus, O Israel, the Lord thy God is Lord
only, and thou shall fear him, etc. Here is a reverence, that man owes to
his God, and to none other: To God? to the Lord? to the Lord only? To none
other? I say to none: No? not to Marie? no? not to Peter? no? not to the
Saints? What? not your Letanie? not your Orate pro nobis? (1) Your general
Prayers made unto the Saints: Pray for us, be they not good? I say they be not
good, they be dampnable: I say no, they be not good, they derogate from the
Majesty of God: I say no, they be not good, you ask help of Man, not of the
Lord: I say, and I affirm, that you commit sacrilege, and you do that
which is forbidden in the book of God. I find it thus written by David, Psalm.
50.15.
Inueca me in die tribulationis, et eruam te, et honorificabis me: (i) Call
upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall honor
me: I find not any commandment to pray to Peter, or to Marie. In the
Hebrews, Hebr. 10.
we are charged to draw near unto Christ, our high Priest, who being the
highest of all, has not that I do find, given his Joel. 2.
glory unto any other. In Joel the Prophet, Ioell. 2.
this is written, Who soever calls on the name of the Lord, shall be saved.
Wherein who sees not, that all other invocation is excluded? Unless you will
affirm that they the Saints, to whom you pray, be Lords also, and Gods of
the earth: What is plainer then an other Scripture: 1. John. 2.
If any man sin, we have an advocate to God, Jesus Christ the righteous, and
he is the propitiation for our sins. And again: Not for us only, but for
the sins of the whole world. If Christ be sufficient, then need we no
other: If Christ be a reco^ciler, the help of others is nothing. If Christ be
our aduocat then vain is the help of Saints.
In which you cannot deny these sayings.

1. First, that you are sinners. 2. Secondly, you have an advocate to God. 3.
Thirdly, a person most righteous. 4. Fourthlie, that all only is named, Jesus
Christ, such a one at makes intercession, and is a propitiation for us. 5.
Fiftlie, not for us only, but for all, even the whole world.
Now then, where is life, but in Christ? where have you attana^ment, but of
Christ? where shall you look for propitation but by Christ? Who makes
intercession, but Jesus Christ? who delivers us and the whole world, but all
only Jesus Christ? It is a strong reason, and a greater can not be (...), then
is this: Roma. 8.
There are not two Mediators of heaven and earth, but one only: Christ Jesus
is the mediator of heaven and earth, and of us: Ergo: None other (neither
Marie, neither Peter, nor any other Saint,) but Christ only mediator for us
(...). The Fathers of old knew no other, neither called they on the name of
any one, but only of their God. Seth, Gene. 4.26.
restoring Religion, called on ye name of God: and Abraham, soiourning, Gene.
12.8.
when he pitched his Tent, and had on the one side Bethel, on the other side
Haie, built there an Altar, and called on the name of the Lord. I am assured,
that Isaac would have worshipped the Lord, with that kind of worship, and
that service, that was most acceptable to God: yet can it not be found that
Isaac, Gene. 26.25.
or any other the Prophets, used the help of any dead man, but called on
their God. And so am I assured did Jacob, Gene. 32.
together with Moses, Exodus 34.
and also Sampson, The old fathers taught thus. Epiphanius in his book against
the Antidicomarianites. Gregorius Na. in Ioh. Lib. 9. Cap. 42. and Cycill in
John 16. and Chrisostomus. Hom. de Muliere Chanane^, and Theophilactus, ad
Coloss. and August. unto Honoratus, are all against the invocation of Saints.
when they lived: and not one of them used the help of any their fellow
Patriarchs departed, or brethren the good men that were dead, but all of them
prayed to the Lord their God: wherefore, your prayers to those departed are
vain, they do you no good: your prayers to them are gone, are devilish and
whoorish, they are forbidden by the Lord: they are to no end, they cannot
profyt you: they are detestable, they are condemned in the Scriptures: they
are superstitious, for they derogate from God: they are Idolatrous and
pernicious, they infect and hurt such as do use them: they are most filthy
and abominable, for no homage is to be given to them, but to the Lord. As for
you, your worship, your adoration, your prayers to them, whence have you them?
where find you them? what warrant have you for them? what authority? what
commandment from the Lord? as of all other your whorish abominations, so may
I say of this. You have no Author, no defense, no Protection, no color of the
same, but only from Rome: from Pope, from Cardinal, from your own
inventions, your own decrees, your own decretalies, or else from the old and
damnable Heretics. Contra. octo ginta Haer.
Epiphanins, that old and grayheaded father, Bishop of Cyprus, reckons this
among the Heresies of the Collyridinns (who came out of Thracia in Arabia, and
the upper parts of Scythia) for ye they also superstitiously as you do, offered
to the Virgin Marie: now once in a year was ye day very solemply kept, and
they celebrated it with great honor: and to say truth, they were women
Priests, who gave that so great homage unto her, as being the Mother, Lady,
and Mistress, of all Women. And unless that you took this custom from them
the first inuentors of the same, I know not what you are able to say for the
antiquity of Prayers given to her, or any other.

This I know, this I am assured off, and this I find in your own writers,
that till it was within these late years, you have not so much as any mention
made of your praying unto those that are departed: but all only the nations
and such as knew not God, have used to pray to them that are gone: or else some
of your own vain and fantastical Bishops, have brought in this custom,
who as every man was given wickedly, or bent frowardly, disposed idly, or
affectioned fylthely, The Popes, the Authors of all Idolatry.
or inneighled diuellishly, or drawn away superstitiously, or bewitched
heathnish like: have made, constituted, and ordained, laws for this kind of
prayer, and more I find not. Lib. 2. Yom. pr. haeresi quinquagesi.
Therefore in Arabia the stony, they that dwell there, as Epiphanius
witnesses, do woorship Moses for the miracles that he did, and pray unto him
as unto God: And at the Oak and grous Mambre, where the Angels appeared to
Abraham, they that dwell in Ph^nitia and Arabia, and in the farthest coasts of
Palestine, they do give the same homage the other do, Lib. 2. cap. 4.
unto the dead, as Sozomenus witnesses. Now whether you will d^^ as the
Gentilles do, or be like Christians? whether as God commands, or as they
will you? whether as the word and Scriptures allow off, or as man has
invented? that make you choice of. This I know: that the Saints of God have
refused woorship offered them, being alive: and I am sure they never asked that
of you when they were dead: And this one thing I note (where as the Letany in
which are so many Orate pro nobis: a Commemoration of the Saints that should
pray for us) was first instituted by Mamercus Bishop of Vienna in France,
Sidonius in Epist. ad Mamercum.
upon these occasions. First an Earthquake which then happened: then a great
Fire which at that time burned: then the grievous assaultings of wild Beasts,
which in those Countries mustered: and in the same no mention made that I read
of, of any praying to those that are dead, your late superstitious Prelates
have put in, Orate pro nobis: (1) A number of the Saints of God that must
pray for us. Lib. de Cura pro mo^tuis, Cap. 16.


Therefore says Augustine. Nonum est et supersticiosum quod pro mortuis
caeperunt orare: (1) It is both new, and a supersticious thing, in that they
have used of late to pray for the dead: And undoubtedly, if it could be proved
out of the Scripture, your own men would have gaggeled and thrust out their
throats more a great deal, with better proof then now they are able to make
thereof: And albeit Moses was a man, for life famous, for Miracles wondered at:
Deuteronomy. 34.6.
for talking with the Lord; and for the family, aritie God used with him, most
highly esteemed of all: Jude. 9.
yet, not one in Israel is found to have prayed to him being dead, and his
Grave and his Sepulcher, is unknown to this day. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob,
David, Samuel, no nor any one of the Prophets: Nor Christ nor his Aposties, nor
the Church (for many years) nor the godly did ever invoke the name of Saints
Ergo: also we ought not.
Though Elyas parted the water with his Mantell: and though at the grave of
Elyzeus, a dead man was raised from death to life: yet was there neither
adoration nor immcatio^ made to these by the Saints of God, nor yet any
Relics of theirs, as a memorial of such things done by them. Wherefore, you
do the Lord great dishonor, and us great injury, that will come hither, as
Roauers, and Maisterles men, to teach us, when in deed we have no Teachers,
but the Lord and his Prophets, and seek instruction at his hands, not at
yours.

I am not ignorant, of that blockishe and doltishe reason you have used,
concerning Marie the Virgin, the mother of Christ: neither is it unknown to
me, how you and your Colleages, The sacrilege committed in this Book, is not
to be named.
have usurped and much abused the Lord God, in your Sodomiticall, brutish, and
Heathenish book, called the Rosarie. The Lord no doubt will be revenged upon
you, and the Lord will ask it at your hands. One argument I will answer of
yours, concerning the Virgin Marie: who, as for the love wherewith God looued
her, she was blessed: so you for your false Adoration and Worship given unto
her are accursed. Rosarie.
You say first of all, O holy mother of our Lord, etc. Pray unto thy son for
us, etc. Your own men, are of this opinion, that the words used by the Angel
in Luke, Luke. 1.27.
whereas Gabriel saluteth Marie, are words of Adoration and Prayer, they are
not a bare salutation as we hold: I do find that in Egypt, there was one to
name, Marie, in the time of Valens, and Valentinianus, who was first an
arrant stru^pet: and after that was canonized for a Saint: now of that Marie
the stories are full, but for 400. years afafter Christ, there was no kind
of worship given to the Virgin Marie: but the Popes brought in all their
filthiness of late years, of their worshipping the Mother of Christ.
Wherefore, your first Idol worship, and your second superstitious and vain
iuuocation, is all only grounded upon this place, that the Angel is thought
to pray to Marie. To you I first answer thus: Read the Septuagints, and the
best Translations in Greek, there shall you find, that the words used there,
are no such words; as your blind, Popish, Idolatrous, ignorant and
unskillful Abbey lowbies, taught the people. Your old Tranflatio^ is, Hayle Mary
full of grace, etc. The Greek imports not so much: For the word is (...),
which signifies (...) (that is) rejoice: which word is of (...), as much as
grace and favor: so that the word the Septuagints use, is (...), that is, thou
that have found favor and grace in the sight of God: then this is not a prayer,
according to your doltish custom, that men must pray and say three or four or
more Aue Mariaes: but it is a salutatio^ of the Angel, by which Gabriell
declares the good will of the Lord showen unto her, and his acceptance and
favor which above other he has loved her withal. Now also, see how you err
and are deceived: For why was Marie belooued rather then other? what for her
own sake only? or for her righteousness? or because there was no blemish found
with in her? or because she deserved it? or because she was unspotted and
without sin? or because as most holy, she was worthy of greater Benefits? O
foolish, and slow to understand the Scripture, and what is written: It became
you to search and learn truly, the meaning of this place, and not to cleave to
your own opinions: wherefore mark the Scripture, understand and see, and
learn, and convert.

1 First, God says by the Angel, that Marie is freely belooued: that is, of
his mere mercy did he it, she deserved it not. 2. Secondly, the Lord was
with her: for God is with all his elect. 3. Thirdlye, she is chosen before the
rest, for God did think well of her, as of one, a Vessel of election rather
then any other: 4. Fourthly, she was in favor, and found it, she had it not
of her self. 5. Fiftely, belooued, in that she conceived and bare our Savior
Christ, and belooued for him the belooued of all, not for her own sake. 6.
Sixte lie, belooued and blessed, in that he whom she bare, was the Savior of
the world, not that she saved any.
Basil to Iulitta, vvylleth us to pray to God. Gregorius Na. in his Philos.
vvylled us to pray only to God. Lacta^tius says Lib. 2. Cap. 18. That we
ought only to pray to God. Ambrose, Lib. 3 de Spiritu Sancto: prays to the
holy Trinity. Hyllarius in Psalm. Refers him all only to God, that will
pray aright. But for praying to Saints, for praying to the dead for making of
any prayer to the Virgin Mary: it is not to be found in all their Books.
Wherefore, you fee first this was no prayer: next, that the Virgin Marie
deserved of her self, no more then any other: Thirdly, that the Lord did
freely accept her, and that he took her unto mercy. Now, if you can prove,
that any woorship, or service, or honor, or homage, is to be given to Marie,
or that you should and ought to pray to her, for my part I will condescend and
yield unto you. If not, then be no more erroneous, return, and amend, and
come home, and be saved. Why should you yield to men's Traditions? why should
you hold with that, which is found out by flesh and blood? why should you
stand to vain illusions, and devises of the Popes? why should you hold with
foolish constitutions and ordinances of your Fathers? why should we believe
you rather, then God? then Scripture, then Truth, then the Gospel? Search and
see, and find any such one thing as you maintain, then I know that my fellow
brethren and I will not only cease to preach against you, but we will think of
you, as becomes men to think of the members of Christ. But knowing that we
do know, we dare not, we may not, we can not, we will not be partakers of your
sins: for see and look, even as other, so also this abomination springs
of your Popes, and has risen from out of the sea of Room. Therefore, when
Justinian the Emperor, had made a Feast, called the receyning in of our
Savior Christ, which was, a remembrance of that day, when Simeon did receyne
him in his arms in the Temple.

The feast of the Assumptio^ of Mary. Concilium, Lugdunense.
Your Pope did transfer that was given to God, unto the Virgin Marie, so the
feast of Marie came in, in the steed of the feast and solemnized day of our
Savior Christ: as appears at a general Council, in your book of
Decretals, the year after Christ. 1273. Visitation of Marie.
You have a Feast, called the Visitation of Marie: brought in by Urban, Pope
sirt of that name, after Christ. 1380. who lived at that time, when as one of
your own Order, a Monster of the world, a Monk, brought in the first use of
Gunnes. Annuntiation.
You have a Feast of the Annuntiation of Marie: which was confirmed under
Ludouiens Pius, by a general Council, after Christ. 819. Conc.
Aquisgrangense. Conceptio. Presentatio. Horae. Canonicae.
You have the Feast of the Conception of Marie: allowed in a Council at
Basil, after Christ. 1439. You have the Feast of the Presentation of Marie,
after Christ. 1484. You have hours Canonized, in which you pray severally
to the Virgin, which was done by Urban the second, which was scholar to
Gregory the seventh, after Christ. 1090. and he troubled the whole world.
Salve regina. Coelorum.
You have Salve Regina: All hayle, O Queen of Heaven. etc. That worishh, and
Romish, that Deuillishe, and faithless Song: which was the work of Gregory
the ninthe. 1240. And you have certain times for Bells, to be roong to Marie,
which John Pope. 22. dedicated, after Christ. 1320. Belles.
So that no more filthynesse, no more superstition, no more damnable and
grievous enormities, may possibly be found out, or invented, then your Popes
have sought out, and imagined, to dishonor the Lord God with all.

And now tell me, if you be not ashamed of these fooleries, which in grief I
do repeat, but yet of necessity, The wickedness which the Papists do
commyt, is great, for they pray to many, they should pray but to one: they pray
to man, they should pray to God: they pray to the Saints, they should pray to
Christ: they should pray to the lyning, they pray to the dead: they pray to
the creatures, they should pray to the Crento: wherefore, there is no man that
wilfully will not err as they do, but he may see very plainly that their
blasphemy is outrageous, their sacrilege is perilous: and their dealing is
most of all dangerous, to the state of the soul.
I must rehearse, that your wickedness may be seen: show me, if these be
tolerable? If they be, what Scripture, have you? If not, why defend you them?
If you can maintain them, then speak for them? If you be sorry for them, then
run from them: If you hold them, then make proof of them: If you fly from
them, then denounce them. It is better to retire with modesty, then be
overthrown desperately: It is fitter to acknowledge your faults willingly,
then to suffer, and be accused publicly: It is more manlike to hold that is
right and good, constantly, then to accuse your selves, and burn in
Conscience inwardly: It is a more precious thing to the Lord, more acceptable
to men, and more commended of all, to revolt and return in time, then to hope
in error, to trust in evil, or defend an untruth, that your commendation
may be renowned, and your names famous among unrighteous persons. Wherefore,
give glory, to whom glory belongs, honor to whom honor belongs,
thanksgiving, to whom thanksgiving belongs, and prayer, to whom prayer
belongs, and repent, and beforie that you have derogated so much from the
Majesty of God, and given unto Creatures, that is none of theirs. It may be,
you will reply and say, Why? diverse of the Fathers are of our opinion: why?
many of the Doctors, say as we say: why? the School men, the greatest number
do as we do. But what then? men are men, and have always erred: the Truth
is the Truth, and will not lie: the Fathers have been faithless, and have
sinned: the Scriptures are sacred, and no filthiness has been found in them:
the Doctors have done amiss, the Lord our God, never troade his foot awrie:
the Schoolmen, have been but scoffers in many things: the scholars of the
Lord and his Prophets, never led you but right in every thing. Then take
these, refuse yours: allow of God, cast off men: receive the good, avoid the
evil: remember the word, eschew lies. And yet though you think, you have all
the world on your side, you are deceived: for albeit one or two of the
Fathers, or more have allowed in part, the prayers to the dead, and to Saints:
yet for all that, I can and will, appose others against them of more sounder
indgement a great deal, that do think it utterly unlawful, Errors of the
Fathers.
to pray unto the Saints. And what though Anathasius did think, that it was
lawful to pray to the Virgin Marie? shall we therefore subscribe? I tell you
no: for I will neither hold with Basil, nor with Gregory Nazianzen, nor with
Ambrose in this matter: but with the Lord will I hold. And yet I tell you,
that even these men, Contra Idola. Ambrosius. Lib. de spiritu sancto. cap. 12.
Denies it law full to pray to the Virgin Marie.
named by me, are contrary to them selves: For Athanasius says in his book
of Prayer, that, Men's fons est orationis: (1) The mind is the fountain, and
well spring of Prayer: And to the same, upon the fifty and four Psalm, he
says: Promptae semper in hominum praecationes, Dei aures sunt: (1) That is,
The ears of the Lord, are always open to the prayers of men. By which his
Testimonies, he is contrary to the other places of praying to Saints: for
first, Athanasius refers all to the spirit of man: and secondly, The
Fathers have not defended the praying to Saints.
gives all audience to the Lord, and none other. And Basil in his book, De
vita solitaria, is very flat against him self: and he speaks much in other
places against praying to Saints: For this he says, Ora ad Deum cum timore et
animi humilitate: That is, Pray unto God, in fear, and all humility of the
mind. You see, prayer made by him to God, excludes all other: For it went a
little before, Pete ex fide semper quod binum est operans. (1) Ask by faith,
doing that always which is good. Faith excludes here, praying to Saints,
seeing that Faith and belief, is not to be reposed in them: I may say the same
of Gregory Nazianzen, and of Ambrose: and Ambrose him self, is flat against
praying to Saints, and against all prayers that are to be made to ye Virgin
Marie, as appears in his book. Lib. 3. De spiritu sancto. ca. 12
Non quicquam adorandum praeter Deum, sicut Scriptura dixit. Dominum Deum tuum
adorabis. (1) There is nothing to be worshipped, but God. He gives an other
reason: For it is written in the scripture, Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God. Wherefore, I am of opinion, that some Miscreant and wicked man, moved by
the Spirit of error, has enterlaced, and in many places corrupted, the good
sayings of the Fathers, with evil opinions. Tertullian in his Apollogie, Cap.
17.
says: We must worship this only one, and true God, who with his word has
made the heavens, and the elements, and all spiritual bodies in the same.
Epiphanius Lib. 3.
against the Antidicomarianites: and against the worshippers of the Virgin
Marie, has many excellent sayings, concerning this thing, to whom I refer
you* Gregorius Nazianzen, in his Oration to the Subjects, that were affrayde,
says thus: Christus tanua et reconciliatio hominum ad Patrem factus: (1)
Christ is made the door, and the reconciliation of man unto his Father?
Cyrill upon John, Lib. 7. Cap 3.
says: That an entrance is made unto the kingdom of heaven, all only by
Jesus Christ. Wherefore, I do request you to read that learned Theophilact.
in his Epistle to them of Colossa: and Augustine to Honoratus, Cap. 10.
and the same in his book of True Religion, and they will satisfy you, in
this Question of praying, and to whom to pray. Wherefore, I will conclude with
two reasons, drawn out of the Scriptures: Psalm. 51.6. Job. 14.4. Pron 24.16.
Romans 3.10.
The first is this: They which sin as we do, can not be helpers of us, in
our prayer: for all prayer is to them that are holy and perfect: but the
Saints have sinned, and sin as we do: Ergo, Psalm. 3.8. Esa. 27.3. Hos.
13.4.
we have no cause to pray to them, but to the Lord that can help us. Also it
is evident that prayer is not to be given to any, but such as can help
themselves and other: Now the Saints can help neither themselves, nor any
other, but Christ Jesus only must do it. Then no prayer is to be given to
them: for this is the nature of prayer and such things are to be required
herein.

1. First, we must pray to God, for he hears the prayers of the whole world.
2. Secondly, to one that is able, and can do all things, which only is God.
3. Thirdly, that he be a worthy Person to whom we pray, and so is none but the
Lord. 4. Fourthly, that he be no creature, least we derogate from the creator:
so that the dead have no portion or inheritance in our prayers, but only the
Lord.
Now therefore, I will conclude, that Israel must all only serve the Lord
his God, and none other: neither in heaven, neither in earth, neither above the
heavens, neither underneath the earth, is there any one to whom we must give
homage, but only to him. Then, take the Cup of salnation into your hands,
and call on the name of the Lord. Sanctify your selves, and draw near to
his Tabernacle: A strong Tower is the name of the Lord, he that runs to him
shall be saved: In Jerusalem is salvation, and on the heads of the Goodly is
strength: no falsehood is found in the wise, and no halting in those that
fear God. Though the world do delight in Chariots, and the Kings of the
earth in their Horses, and great men in their strength, yet will we only call
upon the name of the Lord: we will say, glory to the highest, and praises unto
him in the uppermost heavens: we will offer sacrifice of thanks giving unto
our God, and pay our vows to the Almighty: we will singe to the Lord a new
song, and Sion shall not stay to praise her God: we will singe with Moses,
and praise the Lord with Aaron in his holy assemblye: we will not give his
power unto man, nor the strength of his arm unto a Forrainer: our Crowns
shall be set upon his head, and we will fall down to him as to our God: we will
give blessing, and glory, and honor unto him that sits on the Throne for
ever and ever, and all the Beasts of the earth shall subscribe unto us. But as
for you, you have not known the Lord, the God of Jacob, has not been your
defense: you have given his honor to the great Beast, and the Oragon has
frayed you, so that you have his marks of blasphemy in your foreheads: you
have served that great whore, and bowed your knees to the Woman of sin:
Therefore shall your portion be without the Gates of the holy City, and you
shall not see the Lambs, and his face for ever: In the Vinepresse of his wrath
shall you be trodden to pieces, and if you repent not, your portion shall be Fire
and Brimstone for evermore.

You are the sons of the bloody Fathers that have killed the Prophets: you
are the Children of the cursed seed: You are of the posterity of Amelech,
unworthy to live among Israel: You are the relics of Iebus, and of the
remnaunt of the Hittites, that have been pricks and thorns in the sides of
the righteous men: You are the Chemerims that have offered up of the Children
of God unto Deuilles: You have served Baall Hamon, and you have run unto the
Calves, even the golden Calves of Dan and Bethell. You have laid in wait for
the Lords anointed; and you have cursed ^auid to his face: The Preistes of
Nob have been slain by your hands, and by your Fathers hands have the
righteous men been eaten up: Wherefore we must require this blood at your
hands, if you will not return and come unto the Lord: Truly, your blood
shall be spilt at the Poole of Samaria according to the word of the Lord: and
that Room shall be as the house of Baasa. The Sword of the Lord shall wax red
with blood, and he shall rejoice in the fat of the slain: As did the Children
of Edome at the day of his wrath, so shall you see the bones of your mighty
men, lie in the streets: For the Lord has seen you and he has tried you;
you are already wayed in the Ballaunce, and you are found to light. And if now
you repent not, and return not: If now you amend not, and reuolte not from
your errors, as I found you, so I must leave you open to the hand of the
enemy. And it shall be my prayer both day and night, that the Lord would
quicken you, or that he would shorten you: that the Lord would amend you, or
that he would end you, that you be not reserved as flaming firebrands, till
the day of displeasure, to consume any more of the Saints of God. And for the
second part of this my Sermon, the next time that I come hither, and when I
have leisure, you shall know and understand more. (*)

FINIS. Primae partis.
THE SECOND PART OF the Sermon, preached against the Jesuits at the Tower, the
21. of May, 1581. being written in the 6. of Deuteronomy. ver. 6.
These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart.

Deuteronomy. 6.6.
THis brief and short sentence, beloved in the Lord, is a portion and
parcel of the words going before in this verse: where the Lord exhorting his
people to fear him, and to fear him only, did in a compendious manner utter
his will and pleasure in a few estminstances: namely to hear his voice, and
his word, with all their mind, with all their soul, with all their might,
with all their strength: whereupon successively did follow a reason of that was
spoken; that is, These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy
heart. Now, if you do remember, in my general division were noted the other
day these two things: First an exhortation, secondly a commandment: of the
exhortation we spoke then at large, and now we must say some thing of that
remains: therefore there is generally noted here out of these words
rehearsed, one thing, namely,

^ The only and sole commandment here set down.

And this commandment is seen in circumstances. 1 Who commands? The Lord
our God commands. 2 Who they be the commandment concerns? The Israelites
be they it concerns. 3 What is the commandment? These words that I command
this day shall be in thy heart, that is the commandment. 4 For how long a time
was this commandment given? even for ever and for ever, unto all is it given.


Circumst. 1. The Lord commands: and it is not without cause: whose power, it
we disobay him, whose love, if we do serve him: whose strength, if we refuse
him: whose mencie, if we embrace him:


Whose rigor, if we resist him: whose favor, if we stick to him, have not now
only, but from time to time been seen of all: Therefore is he omnipotent,
that he may rule us: and he is almighty, that he may fame us: and he is
stout, that he may bridle us: and he is high, that he may ouersee us: and he
the Lord our God is terrible, that he may fear us, if we go astray, and do
that which is amiss. Of this that I have spoken, and of him in this place that
is the Commander, I may give diverse reasons: yet will I only yield three unto
you, which I know may particularly touch us all.

The first is, a Personae magnitudine: that is, a reasonable persuasion from
the greatness of of the person, to fear him the Lord God. Deuteronomy. 4.39.
The Lord? why? who is like unto him? who may be compared unto him? Vnus and
solus est: he only is one and only God. Psalm. 73.1.
The Lord? Why? Solus bonus bonis: he is only good to the good. Isay. 30.18.
The Lord? Why? Clemens etc. He is bou^tifull and of long suffering: Nech. 9.6.
The Lord? Why? Deus est and creator: he has made all, he has framed all, and
he will be feared of all: Esaias. 49.13.
The Lord? Why? Suorum consolator: he comfort those that are his. 1. Par.
29.12.
The Lord? Why? Vniuer sorum Dominus: he is Lord of all: Ezech. 13.21.
The Lord? Why? Dux populi sui, he is a leader, a captain, and a guider of his
people. Out of all which, we may gather this conclusion: He that made all,
that framed all, that ruled all, that guides all, that protecteth all, is all
in all for to be feared by all: But, the Lord our God that here commands
us, that here forwarneth us, is he that framed al, that ruled all, that
guides all, yt protecteth all: ergo, The Lord our God is all in all, and
only to be feared by all



The second reason from the person of God, is taken a personae bonitate. (i.)
from the goodness of his person, if we fear him: Deuteronomy. 7.9.
He? the Lord our God? he is true and faithful: Psalm. 36.10.
He? the Lord our God? he is the Lord, the welspring of life: Esaias 49.5.
He? the Lord our God? he is the God of strength: Psalm. 89.18.
He? the Lord our God? the glory of the power and strength of his people:
Esaias. 33.22.
He? the Lord our God? is a righteous God, and a good and trusty lawgiuer:
He? the Lord our God? he is the light and bewrie of Israel: out of these is
made this conclusion: Who so with love has tendered us, with mercy has looked
on us, with life has quickened us, and by his righteousness has delivered us:
is to be honored and feared of all living creatures, and else none but he: The
Lord our God, in this place commanding us, is the same also that has
tendered us, and looked to us, and quickened us, and guided us: ergo, The Lord
our God is to be feared, honored, and obeyed of all living creatures, and else
none but he.



The third reason is taken three manner of ways from the person of God. 1
Amanu (i.) from his hand that strikes us: 2 Apotentia (i.) from his power that
reaches us: 3 Apoena (i.) from his scourges and plagues, which consumes us:
If we obey him not.

For he is the sword of the glory of his people: Deuteronomy. 33.29.
For he is a consuming fire; Deuteronomy. 4.24.
For the Lord he is a judge of the world: 1. Sam. 2.10.
he is as in Egle swift to anger; Exodus 19.4.
he is as a man strengthened with wine; Psalm. 78.65.
he is as a roaring Lion to the wicked, Isay. 31.4.
and as a deuourer and eater up of the impenitent: The Lord, he is terrible,
Deuteronomy. 7.21.
and a revenger of unrighteousness; he is swift to devour the families of the
wicked, and he will not spare the ungodly houses: therefore out of these places
of scripture, I make this conclusion:

His words are to be feared, and his laws and comandements are to be kept,
that is able, if we disobay him, to destroy us: But, The Lord our God is a
consuming fire, a two edged sword, as a flaming fire to the wicked that
disobey him: ergo, The Lord our God is to be feared and his laws and his
command ementes, but none other whatsoever contrary to his, are to be kept.
Now this commandment here, is taken two manner of ways. Exclusive. 1
Excluding all manner of false worship. 2 Excluding all other commandments of
men contrary to this. 3 Excluding all foraine power and jurisdiction of Turk
and Pope contrary to this.
Inclusiue. For God includes all kind of true worship within this
commandment of his word.



The second circumst. was this: Who they were, this commandment did concern
and touch? They were the Israelites and the people of God: hereof I may
principally yield two reasons:


1 First, because the promise made so Abraham should be kept, and that God
should be mindful of that that was spoken: namely, that he and his seed
should be blessed for ever: which thing has been must largely, and most
abundantly both seen and known to all the world: and continued so long as
Israel feared his name, and served him ye Lord their God. Was it not so of old,
and do not we know that it is true? Israel? why, they were the inheritance
of the living God: Deuteronomy. 4.20. Deuteronomy. 9.26. Deuteronomy. 14.2. 2. Sam. 21.3.
Israel? they were redeemed in his strength: Israel was a holy people to their
God: Israel was as the vineyard of the Lord, and he brought out the Heathen and
planted them: Psalm. 80.9.
Israel was elected of God, and the Lord loved them evermore: Deuteronomy. 10.15.
Israel was a royal Priesthood, Exodus 19.6.
and a holy nation counted of, till they forsook the Lord their God of host:
and then God forsoo^e them.

2 Secondly, this law was given to Israel, that it might be a witness unto them
of the just judgments of God, if they obeyed him not, as Moses did prophecy:
for, for this cause are they called by God, Rebels and runnagates from the
Lord. Deuteronomy. 9.24. Psalm. 106.40.
Then were they castawayes from the face of GOD. Eze. 16.3.
Then were they counted a wicked generation, and of the posterity of Cham:
Then as they sell straungely, were they called ignominiously by the name of
Apostataes: Then, Eze. 2.3.
Then, named hypocrites, for their dissembling with their God: Romans 2.17.
Then Incredulous persons, for their unbelief: Then were they called the
Slayers and murderers of the Prophets, John 7.28.
for in deed they killed them: Then, the Persecutours of the Gospel, Matthew.
23.34.
for they hated the way of life: Then were they called the betrayers of Christ,
for they killed him: And from that day to this, Acts 13.46.
have they and their seed been Vagabonds in strange lands: they have runn^
from country to country, Acts 3.13.
and they have had no place; for why? they provoked the Lord their God to
anger, and now has he punished them, according to the words of his servant
Moses long before.

Now therefore this appertains unto us: As the Ammorites, P^eresits, and
Iebusites, were d^^en ^ut of their own land, th^^ ^^^el might postede and
e^^oy the same: So were the Israelites dispossessed of their inheritance, for
their sins, that we might be heirs in their steed.
for seeing that this law was given unto them to keep, and they disobeyed it:
it is taken from them and given unto us, that we may love it. And in as much,
as all the day long the Lord stretched forth his hand unto a disobedient and
gaynesaying people, we have also to take heed that we harden not our hearts,
as they did in the day of temptation: wherefore in many trials* and in a long
patience and sufferable affection, did the Lords lead them from time to time,
that they might know him: At the length did he cast them off for their
stubbornness, and hardness of heart; and whereas they were accepted before,
GOD gave unto them the spirit of slumber, and their table was made a snare and
a net, and a stumbling block, as (...) recompense unto them to this day: And
whereas before they were branches of the right Olive tree, now are they cut
off, and we are taken in, in their stead: Romans 11.24.
Israel is cast off, and we the Gentiles are in their place: we must therefore
take heed, that we also live now according to the laws of our God, lest that
the Lord despise us, God is of long suffering, and of great mercy, but when as
he strikes, he is a consuming fire.
as he did them: for, his rigor upon Israel, and his mercy toward us: his
angry countenance showed unto them, and his loving favor to us ward:
declare both his severity and justice upon them, in refusing them, and his
clemency toward us that were strangers, in that he has chosen us as an
other Israel, and an other Church unto him self: for we are now the Israel of
God, and so long we shall be the same, as we either obey him rightly, or serve
him uprightly: or be ready to serve him, or swerue not from him, but keep the
right way: which that we may do, we will examine the third circumstance.

The third circumstance. What is the commandment commanded here? It is
this. These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart, etc.


Wherein I would that you noted many things. 1 First, the words commanded, are
the words of God, not the words of Man, Turk, Pope. etc. 2 Secondly, given
this day: notes, that as years do consist of days, so day after day making
many days, does declare, that God is to be loved and feared every day. 3
Thirdly, here is to be noted ye future time: these words shall be in thy heart:
which is a precise law, that in as much as no time is limited, but the future
time named, it does argue, that God is to be remembered at all times. 4
Fourthly, I do gather here, in that God says, These words shall be laid up
in thy heart: that therefore Rires and ceremonies are not to be required so
much in the true service of the Lord, as is the soul and spirit: For God will
be served in spirit and truth. 5 In that his words are to be remembered, is
not to be grossly taken, that no more is to be followed then those named in
this place: But by these words must be understood all his laws and
ordinances written in the Law and in the Prophets: and I refer this place,


Unto Deuteronomy. 12.32. thus written: God is of heaven heavenly, therefore bumane
traditions must not be mingled with his service.
Quicquid tibi in mandat^m dedero, hoc facies, neque addi aliquid, neque
diminui patieris a verbo meo: What so ever I command thee, that shall thou
do, thou shall neither add any thing thereunto, neither shall thou pluck any
thing therefrom: which (even very same commandment) is written Deuteronomy. 4.2.
Hearken you, O Israel, unto the ordinances and laws which I teach you to do:
it follows, you shall put nothing unto the word which I command you,
neither shall you take ought therefrom: And unto Joshua was the same law given
in commandment: Josh. 1.7.
and he was charged to observe all things, that Moses the servant of the Lord
did command him; the restraint was set down thus: Thou shall not turn away
from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou may prosper whither so
ever thou go: The Priests of B^al, the foolish Chemerm^, and the Scribes
and Phari^ies, were in the same manner blinded, as be our Iesurtes, Papists,
and Seminaries: their most principal and chief Ceremonies were al one; and
the same proof^ they use both of them for their superstitions; and the very
same customs they do allow of, because their fathers of old used them.
which law, and most sacred and holy ordinance of the Lord, when I consider of,
I wonder how you the adversaries of the grace of God, scholars of the Pope and
Antichrist, either burst not in pieces for fear, or hold not down your
heads for shame, or accuse not your selves in your consciences, or cry not out
unto the Lord in this extremity, when you see all things in your religion
and profession, either to be invented, either to be founded by man: either to
disagree, either to be contrary and dissonant from the word of God: either to
be whorish, either to be devilish, either to be Idolatrous, either to be
superstitious, which is the least fault you have of al: It can not be, if you
had read the law, as you flee from it: If you had experience in the
scriptures, as you shut them up: If you had exercises of prayer, as you have
none aright: If you had the Commandments of the Lord among you, as you deny
them: If you had true service, as you corrupt it: If you had the ordinances of
the Lord and his words with you, as you are far from them: But that you
should see easily, and perceive rightly, and judge perfectly, and deal
syncerely, and after an other manner to, than now you do in your daily
administrations, and unlawful sacrifices. Remember that curse that is laid
upon your shoulders, and upon the shoulders of your fathers, in the last of the
Revelation, Revel. 22.18.
for your corrupting of the word.

Therefore after a reward that is given to every one according to his works,
there is a description of Christ, whom we ought to acknowledge in this manner.

1 First, as being a and o, the beginning and the end: 2 Secondly, as being the
first and the last.
There is also a blessing set down unto those that shall fear his
Commandments.

1 Their right way shall be in the tree of life. 2 They shall enter in through
the gates of the city.
After this there are certain per sons named, ye are shut out of the kingdom
of God. 1 Dogs be the first sort: savage, wild, untamed and wanton persons.
2 Inchaunters be next: such as have been the most of your Romish Prelates. 3
Whoremongers the third: and you and the Romanistes speak against marriage, and
yet maintame whores in your Cloisters. 4 Murderers follow: such are you, and
such have your fathers been, that seek and thirst after the blood of the
Saints. 5 Idolaters also are without; and more vile, more ougly, more
monstrous, and more filthy, the^ are you of Rome, I know none under heaven,
professors of religion at this day. 6 Moreover, such as love and make lies, are
in the number: and these can be no other than you, and as you be, that
maintain false doctrine, and delight therein.


After all this, there is a message sent unto men: The messinger is the Angel of
God, and his message or tidings is heavenly and divine: namely, 1 That the
root and generation of David Jesus Christ: 2 That the bright morning star,
Christ the light, that brought light into the world,


Has of his meeremercy brought ^vs good tidings 1 How that the spirit and ye
bride, do cry, come: 2 How that every one that hears, may come: 3 How that al
those that are a thirst, may come: 4 How that every one that will take of the
water of life, may come freely.


But there follows a Protestation with a Comminatio^. 1 First, that what man
so ever he be: 2 Secondly, that hears: 3 Thirdly, the words: 4 Fourthly, of
this prophecy: 5 Fifthly, presuming to add any thing thereunto,


That then God shall add, unto that man, all the plagues that are written in
that book. Furthermore the Lord inlargeth that spoken before.

So that if any man shall presume 1 To diminish the words of the book of that
prophecy: 2 His part shall be taken out of the book of life: 3 His part
shall be taken out of the holy city. 4 He shall have no part in the things
are written in this book. 5 And all this is confirmed by the Lord, for he
will come quickly to see it done:


As they are more to be feared that can kill and destroy the soul, rather than
those only that do spill the body: so are the papists, the more to be
abhorred, as they do cast away both the outward and the inward man.
Now therefore look you unto this, O you the enemies of God: more then enemies
unto the Lord, for you make all other whom you can get, enemies unto him:
worse than common enemies, for you raise up strangers against him: crueller
than are the enemies, for they kill but the body, you destroy both body and
soul: Fiercer than are all enemies, for they use the sword, you abuse the
word, and bring in an other contrary to it. I charge you not without cause: I
lay nothing unto you, but that I may justly: Your consciences bewray you, and
you betray your selves: your coming over to us, presuming to teach, being more
fitter you should learn: entering and insinuating of you into the hearts of
men, and spreading abroad your damnable opinions, are tokens sufficient, I say,
to manifest unto the world what men you be: You? you have counterfeited the
Scriptures: you? you have falsified the truth: You? you have added and
diminished: You? you have put too, and taken from the word of God: You? you
have inclined both to the right hand and to the left hand, contrary to the
word of God: I appeal to your own consciences: I refer my self to that
spirit, which I know even now pricketh you: The profession of Jesuits and
the name of the^ was taken of two sundry per sons: the profession vpo^the
ererection of a college by a Pope. the name is taken, and was before the
erection of the house, almost 1050. years: for they be Jesuits of Jesus:
Haeret. fabularum Compend. 10. lib. 4.
and in the same, tell me whether I charge you wrongfully yea or not: Where have
you warrant for that profession which some of you here profess? Why are you
severed from men by an other name? and wherefore have you that same vnheardof
title of Jesuits? what Prophet, what Apostle, what good and ancient dusto^^e
of the Primitive Church sinde you this in? The time will not permit me now, but
hereafter I will show your original at large: But yet tell me, what
authority, what warrant, what Scripture you have, for your whippings and your
shauings? Truly, they are good marks for you to be known by, as of such as be
right Priests of Baal: Who as you whippe your selves, so they also launched
them selves to be seen of men: Or you be like unto the Donatistes, of whom
Theodoretus Bishop of Cyrus speaks: For they fat up them selves like
Porklings before they dye, and offer up sacrifices to them that are alive, and
whip one an other oftentimes. One merry and pretty conceited thing I do
remember written of them, by ye same Theodorete, which thing a young Gentleman
is said to have done: Now it fell out, that many of them upon a time assembled
together, being like unto mad men, and in a frenzy, The Arrian in killing
of him self, and the Donatist in his madness doing the same: and the Jesuit
in whipping of him, and shortening his time, agree al in one.
fell upon a noble and courageous young Gentleman; and among them one reached
unto him a naked sword, and bid him run him through, for he was weary of his
life: the young youth answered, that he was afraid to do any such deed: and
then peradventure if I should do it, your companions also would kill me: But
they forced him: at length the Gentleman upon condition condescended, so that
they would be all bound with cords, that he might be in fear of nothing: They
also yealded to that: This Gentleman bound them fast, then took he the sword
of them: which done, he would not run upon them or kill them, but took
whippes and whipped them. For my own part, of a truth I commend this young
man, and I would that our grayheaded Fathers in this Realm were of his mind:
Not that I do desire they should draw out the sword to cut you off: but
because you are so well used to whippings, as being a profession of your own
to do it: I would council them to have a care of the same, and no withered
arms in the trial of this matter. Now if you like your own country cords
better than ours, they shall do a good deed to ship you over to Rome
again, There can be no better law to tame them then is the same, to which
they are sworn, ^^d is so well allowed of them.
from whence you came; Then can you not complain of us, for we have done no
more unto you, then you would have us do: no, nor then you do unto your
selves: And weout al dout, if you should be touched according to your
deseruings, I do not find how you should escape we your lives: ye both
seditiously come hither to raise up her Majesty's subjects, and tumultuously
spread abroad rebellious pamphlets, and with so horrible sacrilege to the
Majesty of God, cause our people to refuse coming to the Church: Three which,
if both her Majesty were not merciful, and our learned and sage Fathers,
willing also to hear of your conversion and amendment, are able to cut you
short enough, for ever seeing Rome or the Pope any more: For my own part, The
false Churches use fire and ^aggot in much cruelty: therefore the true Church
may use some discipline, and some sharp punishment with out tyranny.
I will not add willingly affliction to affliction, or grief unto grief: yet,
what we suffered in those bloody and late days, the world knows: and for
the bread and good keeping you find in the Tower, you trussed us up at the
Gallows, and fiered us at the stake: The Lord grant that it be not laid unto
your charge. But thanks to our Lord God, that hither to has saved us from
you, I hope that for his names sake he will deliver us still. In deed you
begin to bussell now, and by little and a little to show your heads in
this Realm: but your hope shall be turned to distrust, and your day you look
for, to an unknown day, and what so ever it be that you trust unto, whether to
the hollow hearts of England, The church was nener without one Achitophel,
some Doeg or other, or one Judas to betray it.
or to the fair prontifes of those that sent you ^uer, or to some Oracle you
have, by which you have received courage: or to the foreigne powers, which have
bewitched you: or to the traiterous attemptes, that have been practiced: or to
the seditious tumultes, which the Pope and Spain have raised: or else to what
so ever it is, you trust, I tell you plainly you are beguiled, you are
deceived, you are blinded, you are infatuated, and your Counsel is brought to
naught. You may retire well enough with your companions: for of a truth, as
Achior said to Olofernes captain of the army of Assure, Iudeth 5.
so can we and so will we answer you: If we have done no great sin, or
committed no evil in the sight of our God, whereby we have provoked him, he
shall fight against you all: But if we have, then, if we repent not, the Lord
will surely deliver us into your hands: and if there be none iniquity in us,
it is best for you and for your confederates to go by, and to return back,
for I tell you, the Lord will fight for us. Now, if it should come to pass,
that God should deliver us into the hands of forainers, and into she hands of
the wicked: God, not man is to be feated, when man comm^^deth ha^^is, co^tratie
to God.
yet will we say as Shadrach Meshach and Abednego said to Nebucadnezar, We
would neither obey them nor their commandment, but let the Lord, do what
seems him good in his eyes: And in the mean season as we depend upon the
Lord our God that made both heaven and earth: So also we will not cease to
cry out against you, to desire the Lord to deal with you acco^ding to the
iniquity of your inventions: Psalm. 28.5.
To disperse your lying lips, and your deceiptfull tongues: Psalm. 12.3.
To reward you seuenfolde into your bosom, Psalm. 79.13.
and to power out of his wrath as upon the nations, and upon those kingdoms
that know not his name: yea let all the enemies of the Lord perish, and let
none prosper that love not the Lord our God. ^^d. 5.31.
As in the day of overthrow, so let the unrighteous men perish, I hope the
Lord will raise up in his fury, and lift up himself in the coasts of his
enemies: Then shall your iniquities be as ye in^quities of Galgall, Hos. 9.15.
For those ye Lord loves not, because of the malitiousnesse of their
inventions. And as for us, we will not cease to speak against you, and against
Rome, and against all the enymies of God, both day and night: for the things
that you commit are execrable things. Nothing that you do, pleases the
Lord: for you have not one jot of his law in your lips; but all that you
have, is of man.

God says, hear my words, you hear the words of a stranger, and of the
Pope: God says, do that I command you, you do as man commands you: God
says, remember me for ever, you forget him in all the things that you do:
and you use other ordinances and other laws then you hane commandment for:
You think I do you injury, no, I seek to reclaim you: you say I deal
hardly with you, nay, not so, I will deal frankely with you. These in^enti^^
of men, (...) success^^el, (...) Pope to Po^^^ till their ve^^mous (...) poison
(...) and (...) are so (...) with (...) mes, that (...) can inue^^ n^ more.
For if you can prove either that your own order of Jesuits, which some of
you profess; or that your Hermites, your Anchorists, your Nuns, your Friars,
your Monks, your Chanons, have so much as any color or show in the book of
God, I am contented to like of them: If you can find but the name of any one
of them all there, or their customs, or their rites, or their traditions, we
will think you have pro^ited maruellously: I am sure that your fathers could
not. And as for you, because I am to frame my speech as to men present, not
absent: I have deeply and straightly to charge you. What presumption was it for
you to come to us? We sought you not. What arrogancy to teach us? We are not
destitute of such as can instruct. What? was it because you would sow your
damnable errors here, Paul Floren of Cesa^s school a ^^^te, in Vienna, has
opened and this much more.
as you did of late amongst the Iaponians? a people that might have been
converted, now they are infected by you: that might have seen the light, now
they are blinded through you: that were forward, now they go backewarde by
means of you: that would have known Christ aright, now are far from him
through you: For with the Iaponians whom you have mocked, there are Iamambuxae
knights of the Valleys, for high personages in their spirituality: and they
commit horrible things amongst them: there be Tundi, in stead of your
Bishops, and they sell men's souls for money: These are all one with the
massing Priest, that did all for the penie.
there be Boulit in stead of Monks, and they make shipwreck of the men of
that country, they with their fellows take menie to be paid when they are
dead in an other world: there be Idols Amida and Zaca, which the men of that
country worship, as they were taught by you. Think you that it is unknown
to us? and are we ignorant of your dealinges? Simon Magus, Carpocrates,
Saturninus, and Basilides, were the first heretics that used charmed drinks,
associating and accompaning of spirits; al which the Iaponians had of the
Jesuits.
No, I tell you no: For we are certified even of the horrible and detestable
sacrifices which were taught the Iaponians, who do offer daily unto spirits:
and for that they should not hurt the standers by, your Colleges taught them
to give them of the fruit Crizam, which in banquet wise they set before them:
And come you hither, and have you hope to prevail here with us, and as
Apostles, as Apostataes I should say, come you hither into England to confirm
that your Copemats have spread abroa^e there? Why? you are beguiled, you have
no hope, you can not prevail: For our children laugh at you, when they hear
or see you: our young men condemn you, for they can indge of you: our fathers
and grave. Seniors control you, for they see into you: old and young, young
and old cry^ out and spurn against you: there is not one, only some
reprobate here or there, or one Sanders, or some Harding, or a runnagate out
of his Country excepted, that hold with you? But if GOD give you eyes and
grace, this you may see, That this honorable and great assembly have all
their eyes set upon you: and they would be right glad if happily the spirit of
the Lord would rest upon you at this present, and change you, that you might
become new men: We pray for all, that God (...) turn all, if he please.

We pray against all ^o many as are wicked and hardened, least they should
infect all: for so we are commanded:


And you see what harm we wish you, we labor to alter you, we labor to
convert you, we labor to labor to persuade you, we labor to teach you: And
as many of my fellow brethren and learned men have been here: So am I come
to say something unto you, that at the least whether it be to life or to
death, the word of the Lord may have his course: wherefore I will now come
to particular points, which you defend: wherein if you stand not as you have
done hitherto peruersely, I hope in the Lord to do good: if not, let the will
of the LORD be done.

Articles of our faith must depend on the scriptures: ^hen if (...) will (...)
leeue (...) they (...) (...) refe^^e the (...) the scriptures else (...) not
we to credit them.
In this place, GOD says thus; My words which I command thee this day, shall
be in thy heart: Tell me then seeing the words of GOD are only to be
looked unto: what word, what commandment, what scripture, or what place you
can prove it in: That your Mass is lawful; or that it is a propitiatory
sacrifice for the quick and the dead? What word have you to prove that
Christ is really, corporally, flesh blood and bone in the Sacrament? What
word have you for your administration of the Supper of the LORD, in one kind?
What word have you, ye you should refuse to come to hear the word of the LORD,
which you will not hears, but by compulsion? If I can prove that all these
your assertions for which you suffer and are in bonds, be untrue, unlawful,
most false, will you then yield and relent? For my part, I do ensure you
that if all the learned Papists in the world could from the first original
and spring of these gross Heresies, but all only proone these their bare
assertions in Scripture: I would, and so would all my fellow laborers
condescende unto you. I know it. For God, they use authority of Pope: for
Bible, the body of their Canon law: for Christ and his Apostles, the
inventions of men and Cardinals.
But this are you never able to do by any one place of scripture, if you wrest
it not: and for the manifest proof of the same, I oppose my self against you,
and against all your adverentes whatsoever: And first of all to your first and
former Article which I will handle in this wise: after of the rest in order:

1 First, we will see what your Mass is, by the name thereof. 2 Secondly, from
whence it came? 3 Thirdly, whether it be a sacrifice for the quick and the
dead? 4 Fourthly, we will prove it is no sacrifice at all, neither are men
justified by the work thereof.
1 Against the mass, and against the name, I say this:

Your old, foolish, and blind Priests, that were not able to tell the
original of their religion, have thought some one thing, some an other
concerning the name of your mass: but none have it right. One Guilielmus
Eysengrein a falsifier of the time in his rubbish gathered together, In his.
Cent. 1. part. 1. in distin. 1. de su^mis Pon.
against the Centuries of the Magdenburgenses, has in his gloss this
frivolous note: Heretice, ornatus sacrificii missae, a Christi passione
originem habuit: etc. Harken O heretic, The glory and the beauty of the
sacrifice of the mass, had his original from the passion of Christ: How the
mass differs from the supper of the Lord, al their ceremonies used there do
declare: of all which there was not one of the^ used by Christ at the table.
But I may say to this whote fellow; as Paul says: Thou fool, what art thou
that iudgest an other? look upon thy self: for even that wild head of his
may soon perceive, that he is the heretic, if he will look back: For
Christ is said to sit down to eat of the Passover, not to say mass: Christ
is said to have sit with his disciples, and to break the bread, and give the
cup, not to have offered at mass: and Christ satt down to supper and said,
take, eat, and again, take, drink: but Christ said not, he and they did
say mass: wherefore if you may commit such sacrilege as so fals^^^e and belie
Christ himself, Tom. 2 cap. 1.
then you may prove any thing. One Antonius Monchiacenus, a Doctor, a
Serbonist in a railing book of his against that reverend Master Calvin and
the blasphemers of our time* (for so says that blasphemous spirit of error by
his mouth, Satan) in that place cited, he dandeleth in his hands that place of
scripture in Deuteronomie, Deuteronomy. 16.10.
and tosseth the Hebrew and the Chaldie text, as if none had read it but he:
where he deriueth mass, of the Hebrewe Missath: which he calls an oblation:
as if that the Israelites of old had said mass, or offered up your
sacrifice, which was never heard off by them, nor known of us, till you
forged a kind of holy service in the same. Now how this fellow raueth, it
is a wonder to see: For the Hebrewe words are these, How can mass come from
the Hebrews, when as they never used it, they never heard of it, and their
order of assembling, they had from God out of the mount by the hands of Moses:
and their mass was not known 2000. years after this, and every thing in the
same sprang up by su^drie Popes, 400 years after that also.
Missath Midbhath Iadeca: That is, a free will offering of thine hand; now
what is this to the Mass? as if God spoke of it there? or as you had a
commandment for it there? or as if there were any such thing touched there?
It is pity that any man should wander, but it is morepitie to see you should
lighten others to be so dimmed your selves: Now for ye more full aunswering of
that man: consider what the purpose of Moses is. It is, that Israel should
keep the feast of Weeks, and that day was with them, as is Whitsonday with
us: Also Moses willed them to offer: Also to appear before the Lord with
their families: Also to remember they were strangers in Egypt: Then where is
the original of your mass? Now if you will call your mass of the Hebrewe
Missath: you do great injury to the word, and great iuiurie to your selves,
and much dishonor to God: To the word, because it will not bear it, for the
Ceremony of offering is abrogated: To your selves, for then must you be tied
to the whole law, as well as to any one part thereof: To God, for the Lord is
more dishonored, as Israel had commandment for ye they did by him and none
other. And ye was to offer once a year, which commandment you have not for
your mass at the hands of God: Secondly, that commandment was for a season,
in the law. Why do you against that commandment, and would have offeringes
now in the Gaspel? Thirdly ye commandment was but for a day and to be kept as
the day of Pentecost: The papists deal with mass as beggars do with bread:
they would have it, if they could get it, and eat it, if they could steal it
any where.
but you have mass and offer every day and every hour almost in the day:
Then, neither can your mass be proved here, neither can your whorish sacrifice
be allowed here, and that same poor man that had but that one little creuice
to put in the whole body into, must now go a gleaming and seek, some other
place, for he will not be suffered to have residenc^e in this.

The second thing I promised to speak of, is this: An inquiry and search to
know from whence your mass comes: It may be you will be as bold for your
parts, A goodly religiou: most ancient and holy: when neither the author, the
time, the person and inuentor of of the same may be justly named: for they most
do differ, one from the other.
as your predecessors have been for theirs: For they have affirmed ye your
mass came jointly and successively from Christ and his Apostles: which thing,
if it were so, the place, the chapter, peradventure the Evangelist himself or
that Apostle from whence you took your ground, would not have been without a
name all this time: But it may be you made choice of Eckius in ye description
of the life of S. Thomas: who together with Eysengrenius are of this opinion:
Sancti tres magi Episcops fuisse dicuntur, and missam celebrasse primitiae
Gentium, etc. Also Petrus de natal. Epis. Equilin.
That is, that the three holy wife men that came to Ghrist, are thought to have
been Bishops, and to have said and solemnised mass; who were also the first
fruits of the Gentiles: A most gross lie, if mass began with them, then
brought they it out of Persia, so the ge^riles were the fou^ders of your mass,
not Christ his Apostles: also if it began at the birth of Christ, it began not
at the supper of Christ: the^ why do you use it to remember his death, as at
his supper, when you should use it to remember Christ's birth at some other time
If we did not know ye you were as blasphemers, so also common liars, your
toyish fable might have carried some show of verity: but now there is no man
can bear with you any longer: for none of you al have affirmed your mass to
have been of any more antiquity then was the supper of che Lord, which is as
falsely as it is generally supposed to be confirmed in the institution of the
same. Now these Ianglers will have it of more antiquity then Christ himself:
for the proof of the same their is neither scripture nor good Doctor
avouched: but a bungerly Friar, that was after that made a Bishop among you,
and he is your founder: to whom what credit can we give being a man of your
own side, and one that lived not to hear them say mass? For mine own part,
your Petrus is so obscure, as I confess, that I find not certainly what time
he ^^^ed after Christ: and as he has belyed the spirit of God, So has he
committed a twosoolde sacrilege beside. For how prove you the wise men were
Bishops? Then where find you that they were three in number? The scriptures
affirm none of all these things: wherefore we repel them with this
aunsweare: First, GOD, rather then they, must be credited: Secondly these your
assertions are but vain collections upon no ground: Thirdly that which the
scripture says they gave unto Christ by way of Adoration and worship, that
they call mass: Papists if they could, would take hold of anything: and
multiplying ly^ upon lie, they take hold by nothing
for Mathewe says thus of the wise men that came to Christ, (...) they fell
down and worshipped him: not as you say, that they said mass to him. But what
is there ye you have not invented? what untruths that you have not defended?
what falsehoods which you have not maintained? what superstitions upon which
you have not incrotched? Wherefore we have no more to credit you, but the^
will we believe you when you speak ye truth out of ye word of God: For it is
not unknown unto us how al your trash and baggage of Rome was drayled out of
these late ^^nkes and from the beggarly froth of Rome many years since Christ:
This thing if it be unknown unto you, yet will I prove it before your faces:
So that if you stand any one iott therein, yet your own Rabbyes, and your own
decrees shall convince you. This I am sure of, that in all the old, best
learned, and autentike fathers, the word mass is not found for ye space of
three hundred years ^lmost after Christ: Loco commu^de Missa.
and so thinks Master D. Martyr. As for your place in S. Ambrose, it is
concluded not to be his doing, but to be foysted in by some other, and so
thinks Erasmus: And in your sacrifice which you call the mass now at this
time, it is evident that in ye former ages it had not ye name of sacrifice (For
by tract of time althings were maruellously corrupted) Platina does affirm,
that before Celestinus, the Epistle and Gospel were only read, which ended,
the sacrifice also ceased. Martinus Cassina speaking of your mass, affirms
the same: Read Chronico^. Sigeberti.
Nauclerus also is a sufficient and good witness to prove this: Now for the
general corruption of all things in your mass, and how grossly, and how
peeuishly, how hardly, and superstitiously every thing came up and was
established, Aeneiad lib. 1.
I refer you ^o Sa^^llicus, (...) those that will read further, le^ the
(...) searth out what Ho^mannus Gigas, The ancient fathers never spoke of
private mass.
and Flores Temporum write of the same; Then shall it app^are eu^dently, that
both your mass used at this present, is far dissonant, and nothing at all
coming ^eere the old mass that was said: and that your now used sacrifice,
is no order publicly used, then from the seven hundredth year of our savior
Christ: briefly, this I say: Your singing of Psaimes which Celestinus
constituted, how far is it from the purity, Read Guilielmus Durandus and
Albertus Mag^us de Mis^a.
and sincere use of those which were song in the primitive Church? and when as
Chrysostom is author that the holy and reverend and godly singing or old in
the prunitiue Church was both commendable and used in his time, Homil. in Math.
11.
who sees not that your corruption of chaunting was stolen from the Churches
of Asia and Greece, Introitus of their mass.
and from time to time, enlarged more and more by your Popes? The thiese
corruption began in singing psalms after Christ 426. years. Then also
Syluester begins his Pagiant, an^ (...) is put in and huddled up, Kyrie
eleison.
stoine from the Greek Churches, and translated to Rome: After that is brought
in among you your song Gloria in excelsis: glory be to God on high, Glori^ in
excelsis.
by Symmachus, as you affi^^^e, when as in deed, Hilary Bishop of the P^eks
was the author of the same, who in the East and West Churches, caused them
under him to sing that songue in the despite of the Arrians, ye blasphemed
Christ: now you stole this also out of other churches, to enrich your own.
Your Collectes were brought in by Gelasius and Gregory: In Epitaph. Fabriolae.
your Gradualls and descentes are referred to the same men, we your Halleluiah:
But yet it came not up upon your mass, but it was used long before, as I find
in Jerome: Your gatheringes of the scriptures together in the mass, you have
taken by your wouted dispensatio^s out of the scripture, Tractatus.
which before were never so used. Your Epistles and Gospells, those you
inserted in like manner, Epistles and Gospels.
by robbing the other Churches. Whither Telesphorus Bishop did first appoint
them, who lived after Christ 135. Or whether Damasus did institute them, that
lived after Christ 360. it makes no great matter.

The ordinance and certain rules concerning them, seem t^ me to come upon
some other occasion, For this read Albertus, and the Autor^d. veteri, and nouo
Deo
far disagreeing from your Romish Church. And Jerome in his Apology against
Vigilantius, complains of the ceremonies and gresse abuses then in dre, when
the Epistles and Gospels were first read: Your Offer to ^e the Mass, had
beginning 275. Offertorie.
years after Christ: and the Institution of the same had a sarre other purpose
in it then had yours: For Euthytianus, having a care to win the Gentiles by
little and a little, did for to get them wholly, permit oblations for a season,
that at length their superstitions might be forgotten: Now your Gregorius after
that, ordained it as a law for ever, that he that came to Mass, should not
come empty, but bring something with him: by reason whereof, your pursses and
your coffers are so enlarged at this day. Your Prefaces are all referred for
their antiquity to Gelasius: Your Canon, Read Albertus Eccle. 47.
which of all other is likest the Master ( Gregory that instituted it) has
devilish and idolatrous stuff within it. There is the remembrance of their
Saints, or rather of their Gods. There be your words of Consecration,
rather Coniuring: Ioh. Syracusan^ Episcop. part 8 epist. 7.
there is the Lords prayer so often repeated: there the breaking of the host
etc. So that all good and faithful men may see, how grievously you have
proudked the Lord, The blindness where with God has stricken these men,
appears, in that they obey the institutions of these wi^ked Popes, and will
not obey the word of the Lord.
in bringing in of uewfangled Ceremonies, which before this were never known
in the Church of God. Now therefore what delay should there be made, what
stay, what let should hinder you, that you should not come to the Lord, and be
sorry, and see your folly? Is it better to serve God, or to serve man? to obey
the Lord, or to hold with the Pope? to acknowledge the truth, or to be in
error? to remember the ordinances of those that are temporal, which ruled
you, which governed you being but usurpers and Termagaunts among men? or to
fear the eternal and everliving maker of heaven and earth, and to give ear
unto his words? I am grieved, I am touched, I am moved in soul and spirit to
see you so hard, so perverse, so untamed in affections, so unbridled in your
speeches, so careless of your selves, so stiffened in your errors, and so
impudent before this assembly, as I perceive you are. Is it for that you
suspect me for the antiquity of your religion? search and find it otherwise,
Children and fools, and Papists, are alike: for if you control them, they
fight: if you let them alone, they are worse: if you do becken at them, they
will return upon you with violence.
then accuse me: Is it because you be but vpstartes, and wresters of all
truth? Convince me then, and condemn me: Is it because your religion comes
of men? then be ashamed, profess Gods word: Is it because all your trumperie
proceeds of the Pope? revolt, return, amend, and deny him, stay upon the
Lord GOD: Is it because the inuenters of your Mass have been such, as was
also your service invented? filthy, ungodly, wicked, devilish, evil disposed,
naughty persons, and idolaters? Why? you may forsake them when you will: But
is it, because that I open to you the truth? because I tell you of the sins
of your fathers, and of your own? because I tell you of your manifold lyings,
Your own men speak worse of you than I do: Martinus Meyr, a Chauncellor:
Aeneas Syluius, a Cardinal: and the complaint of the whole nation of the
Germans, under Caesar Augustus, Maximilianus shows it.
great untruths, slanderous reproaches, filthy demeanor, ungodly life, evil
deeds, erroneous opinions, foolish Ceremonies, devilish heresies,
bypocriticall devises, humane institutions, Popish decrees, and whorish fables
which you have brought in, and would confirm in England? I exhort you then in
the name of the Lord, to eschew and abhor them all, you shall never be
told of them any more, we will forget them; If not, then heaven and earth
shall he witness, that I have told you of all your sins, and of all your
abominations this day: and yet you cease not to persevere still in the same.
You that are here, coming from the Pope, how can you stand so boldly, and
face it out so gazingly, and hear us so repiningly, and spurn so yrkesomely
as you do, without horror of conscience? Miscellanea Missae. All the
appertinaunces to the Mass.
We can not suffer you, we may not suffer you, we will never suffer you, to
defend so horrible and erroneous constitutions, as your forefathers the wicked
Popes invented? What sin was not committed by them? what abominations were
there not done by them? what stinking and slavish Constitutions were not
decreed by them? Your Pope Sixtus decreed (the first of that name) That no Lay
man, or any woman, should touch so much as the Cup or Chalice that the
Priest did sacrifice in, or any else of the holy vessels. Platina: in
descript. vitae Sext. Pont.
Your Pope Alexander the first, brought in the oblation of Wafer cakes, as he
calls it. Your Telesphorus commanded, that three Masses should be said upon
Christmas day: Pla. in eius vita.
and thereof we retain in our Church of England this word Christmas, which
came up of that custom used by that Bishop: for it was called at the first
Christmas day, as having a Mass said that day for Christ: wherefore I do
wish, that together with the sacrifice of Mass, the name of Mass may be
abrogated; and for that word, let the good and faithful men say, as they
said in the Churches of the East and the West, Sozam. lib. 8. cap. 20.
The Nativity and Birthday of Christ: let the remembrance and memorial of
this brought in by the Pope, be abrogated: For at Constantinople was celebrated
Natalis Christi. Maximus Taurinensis in Homilijs.
The birth day of Christ. And so also was it in the Churches of Gallia.
Wherefore, as your Popes have corrupted all things, so will we, and so ought
we to flee from them in all things: Now those that succeeded, have been more
diuelishly deluded.

Alexander the first, who lived in the days of Hadrian the Emperor, Liber
Cone.
was the first bringer in of the mixture of the Wine with Water, and before his
time it was never used by commandment at Mass or otherwise. This was he that
brought in Wafer cakes, when as before that, Liber Canticorum.
leauened bread was used at the Sacrament: Also he appointed holy water for
the people after Mass: and one Mass to be said in one day. Your Boniface
Pope, Lib. Conc.
divided the Clergy from the Laytie, and then seuering them, Platina.
set the one above, the other beneath: Your Vigilius Bishop of Rome, commanded
that none should say Mass, Petrus de Nar.
but with his face to the East: Your Johannes Portuensis, Platina.
in the sixth Synod held at Constantinople, gathered-together by Constantinus
against the Monotholites, was the first that ever celebrated the Latin Mass,
Volater.
which is religiously observed by you at this day: Valafridus an Abbas, under
Ludonicus Pius, 840. after Christ does marvelous ly complanie of these and the
like abuses brought in by the Popes.
Sabianus appointed hours for ringing of Belles, and Lamps to burn in the
Temple; this Bishop lived under Phocas the Emperor.

Now then, you have the original of your goodly religion: no doubt of many
years, long time, great antiquity which you so hold of, being a thing found
out almost but the other day. Yet if it were so (as in the same you be
shameless liars) that all your ordinances and decrees were of many thousand
years, what matter were that to prove the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the
same? For seeing that you have no allowance of them, nor any one thing among
you, that may be tolerated by the Scriptures, those opinions received commonly
by you, can be no other then damnable: and so I will conclude for this point of
your Mass, and for the beginning and entrance in of the same into the Church.

We have thirdly to enquire, whether your Mass be a propitiatory sacrifice or
not, for the quick and the dead? I affirm, Luke 22.
and I will prove it is not. In the scriptures I find not, that the supper of
the Lord is called a sacrifice: but other names it has: It is called the new
Testament: The Apostles call it the breaking of bread: Acts 2.
Paul calls it the Table of the Lord, 1. Cor. 10.
and a communication of the body and blood of Christ: and the Cup of the
Lord. But as for the name of sacrifice it was never used, it was never
mentioned in ye scriptures. But you say the Fathers called it so. Why? what
then? shall we bear their sins? or shall we answer their iniquities? or
defend all that they spoke? you are deceived: to the Law and to the Prophets,
Esa. 8.
if they speak not according to the word of God, As the Prophets had all
things by word from God: so must we allow of nothing in his service that came
not from Christ.
there is no truth in them. Now also you belie the Fathers, they called the
supper of the Lord a sacrifice indeed; but they called not your Mass a
propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and for the dead: this ought you to
prove and leave the other. Therefore I will come plainly and directly to you,
aunswering you first that you have no one place in the Scriptures or Fathers to
prove this proposition: Mass is a sacrifice for the quick and for the dead:
Secondly, I will prove by the Scripture, that there is no such thing:

My first reason is this: We are justified before God all only by faith,
therefore not by the work and deed at the Mass done by any. The argument
holds it self up, upon the authority of the word of God: Romans 4.2. Diverse
reasons against the mass.
For a Scripture says, Si ex operibus iustificatus pater Abraham, etc. If
Abraham had been justified by works, then had Abraham wherein to rejoice: but
Abraham had not wherein to rejoice: Therefore Abraham was not justified by
works.

Joel says: Iustus ex fide viuit. i. Joel 2.
The just man shall live by his faith. But, he that is justified and lives by
faith, is not instified by the work he works, and sacrifice he sacrifices
in the Mass: Ergo, there is none justified and saved by the work in the Mass.

In John it is thus written: John 3.15.


Whosoever believes in Christ, should not perish, but have eternal life: The
sacrifice in the Mass done for an other that is dead, by one that is alive,
has no belief which is reposed in Jesus Christ: Ergo, by the sacrifice in the
Mass, a man can not have eternal life:

For in John I find a reason showed, of the coming of Christ into the world:

1 First, for that God loved us. 2 Secondly, in that he had given his son for
us. 3 Thirdly, that all should believe in him. 4 Fourthly, in the same they
should have life by him:
Now in the Mass, neither is Christ known, nor our faith seen, nor the
love of God evident, nor yet life given us: but all is thought to be
accomplished by a work of man in sacrifice: therefore your Mass can not be a
propitiation for us. There is a most excellent place in the same Evangelist,
John 6.29.
as follows: A question was moved by the people, what work they should
work, ^o accomplish the works of God: It is answered by Christ thus: This
is the work of God, Christ was offered up for man: Frgo, a Priest at the
Mass may not offer up for man: for then takes he Christ's office in hand.
that you believe in him whom he has sent. Now I infer this: God sent his
Christ to die for us, not a man, not a Priest, not a Monk, to offer at Mass a
sacrifice for us: therefore the work in the sacrifice of your Mass, is not
the work of God: But what foolishness is it for you to say, that you can make
a propitiatory sacrifice for us? why, you are confuted again by scripture.
For Paul says to the Romans: Romans 6.
That there was one only sacrifice of Christ offered once for all: then I
conclude, that was done once, and was sufficient, may not be done any more, for
that is vain: Christ was once offered, and it was sufficient, Christ left
behind him no deputy to offer for man: Ergo, none must offer, none was left,
because none was named: and in so necessary a thing Christ would not have
forgotten us.
and it was good, and it was auaylable, and there need no more: Ergo, your
sacrifices at your Mass, for the quick and for the dead are in vain: And now
I demand again, why you should yet stand in your folly? Is it because you
are ignorant? learn: Is it because you are lead away? turn back then, and
amend: Is it because the light is kept from you? pray, and you shall attain
the light: Is it because the Scriptures are hard? resist not the spirit, and
you shall have understanding: For cast up your eyes, behold, and look on the
book of God. Read to the Hebrews the seventh chapter: It will appear
evidently, that Christ only being high Priest, dyed once for all, and being
offered up, there now needs no more sacrifice to the end of the world: The
order of the priesthood of Melchisedech was an order by wiard and promise by
it self, distinguished from Aarons priesthood: So that if Christ had left
behind him an high priest, he must be of the order of Melchisedech, not of
Aaron^ now, none was ever like Melchisedech but Christ: and none for ever like
Melchisedech hereafter again: then there is no priest hood behind to be looked
for.
For in the comparison of Christ with Melchisedech, (which is the more
honorable Priesthood) the Leuitical being abrogated, Melchisedech stands to
be considered, and is figured in similitude like Christ, for these causes:
Melchisedech was King and Priest, as is Christ, else none: Melchisedech was
king of peace and righteousness, as is Christ, but none other: Melchisedech is
said to be without beginning, and without ending: for neither his father nor
his mother, nor his ancestors, nor his death are written of: and such a one is
the son of God, to wit, an everlasting Priest. As he is God, most wonderfully
without a mother be gotten before all worlds: And as he is man without father,
wonderfully conceived of the holy ghost: Now as the comparison stands thus,
so also is there no comparison at all of Christ, with the sacrifising Priests
of Levy, but with the Priesthood of Melchisedech: whereupon I conclude thus:
Melchisedech was a figure of such a priesthood in Christ, as is not
terrestrial, but heavenly: but Christ offered daily in your sacrifice of the
Mass, is not heavenly, but terrestrial: Ergo, Christ is not, and can not be
daily offered up for us in your Mass, being heavenly and with his father: It
follows in the same place, Heb. 7.25.
that the priesthood of Christ is such a one as may not pass from one to an
other: Now yours passes from priest to priest every day, wherefore yours is not
like unto Christ's. Moreover, he that is a high Priest for us, must have these
properties in him: First, such a one as of him self is able to save: Secondly,
such a one, The things requited of the high priest, are not found in yours:
Ergo, yours are no priests.
as by whom we may come to God: Thirdly, one that ever lives, and one that
makes intercession for us. Then, he must be holy; then, he must be harmless;
then, he must be undefiled: then, he must be separated from sinners; last of
al, made higher than the heavens, and that needs not daily to have a
sacrifice offered up: Now that I may conclude and shut up this piece also: I
say, that all these things are neither found in your Priests nor in your
sacrificers: therefore all your sacrifices at your Mass, and else where, are
not lawful.

The fourth thing to be enquired of in your Mass, is this: That if it be no
sacrifice, yet whether or no it be a work sufficient to justify, or that a
man may be saved by the same, yea or no? I answer, that your Mass is no work
of justification: that is able to justify, for so you understand it: I prove
it thus, and you, if you will learn, shall know it thus: namely, Acts 4.12.
Acts 15.11. Ephe. 2.5. Heb. 7.25. Joel 2.32.
We have not two ways, or two means unto salvation, but one only way and
mean unto salvation: Now Christ is the way, the door and the life, and by him
only have we a mean and passage to his father: therefore, by the work of the
Mass (excluded and without Christ) you can not have any way or entrance unto
salvation. This we know, ye if your Mass were sufficient to salvation, then
it was first a vain thing for God the father to have sent his son, Gross
errors arising out of the Papists doctrine.
seeing he also might have found out a sacrifice of Mass here in the earth,
sufficient for us: Secondly, what cause was there, Christ should dye for our
sins, seeing ye you have found out another ordinary way unto life? Thirdly,
wherefore should Christ be made a sacrifice for us, if you your selves can make
a sacrifice sufficient? For which causes, you teach, as every one may see, very
damnable doctrine, and there is no standing for you against God: Can this be?
or has it ever been? Psalm. 5^.
or will it be proved which you affirm? Why? Psalm. 18.3.
what says the Scriptures? The Scripture says, that salvation is of God,
Psalm. 27.1.
of him only, of the Lord, of the almighty, of the highest, Esa. 27.3.
of him that is above, and of none other: Ergo, not of the Mass. Esa. 43.3.


But you say you are justified by the sacrifice of the Mass, James 4.12.
and not saved: well then, if so, then I pray you answer the Lord, Romans 3.24.
in whose name and fears I reason thus: We are justified by grace, in the
redemption of Christ: Ergo, not by the Mass, Romans 4.6.
and by the work therein: We are justified by acceptance in the mere mercy
of GOD: Ergo, not by your work in the Mass: And you are justified, if you
will be justified, Esa. 53.11.
and helped if you will be helped, and delivered if you will be delivered, in
the righteousness of Christ, who has borne your iniquities: Papists
confated.
Ergo, not by any work of yours in the Mass: And I know and I am assured,
that every one that shall be saved, Philip. 3.9.
has not righteousness by sacrifices which were for a time, but only by
faith in Jesus Christ through God: Ergo, not in your beggarly oblations can
there be any work sufficient to salvation, Augustine to Bonifacius says thus:
Cerium habemus quia Christus resurgens ex mortuis, tam non moritur, mors ill^
vltra non dominabitur, etc. i. We know for a truth (says Augugustine) that
Christ being risen from the dead, now dies no more, death shall not reign
over him: and in that place proves he neither any sacrifice to be auaylable
for us but Christ's, and that he was made a sacrifice for us, but all only once
for all. In Heb. cap. 9.
Theophilactus is of this opinion: Sic and Christus semel oblatus est: A quonam
ille oblatus est? a seipso non a quouis alio hominum. Qui etsi Pontifex sit,
hostia tamen ipse and oblatio: that is, as says Theophilact, Go to then,
Christ is once for all offered: tell me of whom was he offered? Of him self:
not of any other was he once offered: And although Christ be a high Priest, yet
was he made an offering and an oblation for us: Ciryll upon John the
Evangelist, Lib. 5. cap. 17.
says thus: Paul takes not away the second or the third remission of
offenses of men: But Paul denies, that Jesus Christ which was a sacrifice and
an oblation for us, shall now any more be offered up upon the Cross. For once
was Christ offered, and not for ever shall he be any more offered up hereafter.

Now then, what hope can you have miserable creatures, in your works by the
Mass? in as much as Christ only died for you: Christ only offered for you:
Christ only sacrificed for you: and your work meritorious in the Mass, was
not so much as ever heard of. The Author of our justification is set down by
Saint Chrysostom thus: The The second man came from heaven, Ser. 6. de
prodito^^
the second man came without finne: The second man came all only unlike to us
in iniquity: The second man came that did owe nothing either to death or
sin: The second man came, to be made free among those that were dead, Lib.
3. in Com. lib. Reg.
that death by death might be conquered. Eucherius says thus: Apertio regni
coelestis per incarnationem Domini saluatoris nostri nobis donata est: that is:
The way to the kingdom of heaven, is given all only unto us by the
incarnation of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. Isychius says: Lib. 1. in
cap. 4. Lon.
The only work and the effect of the cross of Christ, is the remission of
our sins. Maximus says very well for this. Christusommbus natus est, sed
fidelibus dat salutem (i.) Homil. 4. de Chr.
Christ in deed was borne for all, but he gives eternal life, to them
only that believe. And Prosper, has a proper verse, where he speaks of
faith, and of love that man should have to God: Quo fiat iustus, sitque beatus
home: that is, (...) By faith alone, and love of God
we just and happy seem,


Then seeing we can neither find in the scriptures, nor in the fathers, nor in
the schoolmen, that your mass is able to justify: you for your parts must
seek some other way to help, I for my part will leave you to the Lord, whom
I wish you to seek unto, more then you have done. But we will examine this
scripture: God says, these words which I command thee this day, shall be
in thy heart: It is apparent, I am sure, The word of God is high, yet
comprehended: it is larg^ yet learned: it is deep, yet attained: it is dark,
yet opened to the faithful: it is a rule for all, it is enough and sufficient
unto all: it is all in all, and without this is there nothing to deliver or to
aue any one man.
that the Lord God does comprebende in this remmandement, all the laws and
commandments set down by Moses: For in the words of God, which here
generally are but touched only, be all the words of the Lord understood:
Then if the law be so strait, the charge so great, the ordinance so firm,
and the certainty thereof so sure as may be none more strong, more ample, or
higher, or deper, or larger, or broader then is this: I can not but marvel
greatly, how, in what manner, by what means, what color, what show, what
proof you can have for your damnable and gross opinions which you hold
contrary to this prescript word of God: Among them all, for sacrilege most
offending, for derogation to his majesty most greiuing God, is this, which you
hold of transubstantiation: whereof you have no ground, but you have the show
and color of some foundation that is laid weakly by the men of your side: And
now it is straung to be considered. Christ is the bread, ergo he is in it
really, ergo bodily it does not follow: read Ambrose de Sacra. lib. 4. cap. 4.
and Ierom. in Isa. cap. 62. and Hilary de Trin. li. 8. and Athanas. Apol. 2.
There is but one counterfeiting color with which you ouerlay that reason and
work of yours. It is this: Christ said take eat this is my body: ergo say
you Christ is really, and bodily, flesh and blood in the Sacrament. The boy
that learned Seton but the last week, will find the falt of this argument:
but we will examine the words, and let your childish toys be as they be:
Christ says take, eat, this is my body: etc. Then see se what you do, look
unto it, and examine your selves in the same: For if that bread given was the
very natural body, and natural blood of Christ, you shall see that you be
never able to defend it, wherefore consider those words spoken, in the
interrogations and circumstances which afforde them selves willingly to be
pondered of all, that shall read them:

1 First, If the Jesuits say Christ is here really, then these heresies do
arise thereon: if they say Christ is in the bread spiritually, they are against
themselves: If that Christ is not there at all: then are they Ophits and
Nazarites, that deny Christ's institution: If they say he is in the bread after
a heavenly manner, then is he not after 'a bodily manner:
who spoke those words? you say Christ: and that two natural bodies, one at
the table, the other in the bread that was delivered: 2 Secondly, when spoke
Christ these words? at the meat eating: now ye bread, say you, was Christ's
substantiated body: Then Christ did eat Christ, Christ eat his own natural
body: 3 Thirdly, to whom spoke Christ those words? To his disciples he
spoke them and said, take eat: and that bread after the words of consecration
was that very body of Christ: Then also there were twelve Christ's, twelve
natural bodies, and Christ him self sitting at the table made ye thirteenth:
4 Fourthly, If they say he is there in his omnipotency, then also they have ly
ed, Christ is not there in his humanity: therefore take heed that the Lord
judge you not.
what time was this spoken? before Christ's death: Christ spoke the words,
take, eat: you inuert ye words and say, that the thing was done, which yet was
to be done: you take the time as past and gone, which yet is not come: you say
his body was given, which yet was not crucified: you say his blood was shed,
and his side was not yet persed: And you say the bread was his very body, the
wine his blood: and Christ was not yet offered up for man: 5 Fifthly what be
the words spoken? These: take, eat, this is my body: Christ says, take
this, and eat, it is my body: You say, take eat, it is a converted body:
Christ says it is my body, you say it is a transubstantiated body: Christ
says, it is my body, you say it is his natural body: Christ says, take eat
in a remembrance of me, you say, take eat, I am very man, you shall eat me:
Christ says, as often as you shall do it, remember my death til I come: you say
he is not to be remembered, but to be received; not to be thought upon, looked
upon: not to be absent, but to be present, not to be abut to be way, but to be
there: not to be gone, but to be known in the bread, carnally, and bodily,
fleshly, and really, as Christ was borne of his mother Marie:
The very cause of all these your erroneous and blasphemous opinions I take to
be all only this, Ignorance and want of reading the word aright are the causes
of all here^^es:
That you are men ignorant, brabblers, and no readers of the scripture:
otherwise you could not be deceived: For read the words before, read the
words which follow: and you shall find, ye the words of Christ are to be
otherwise taken then you take them: For they are spoken by a trope, by a
figure, by a Metonymie: As in the same Chapter, Christ says to his disciples,
Luke. 22.8.
Go and prepare me the Passover: The lamb is called ye Passover: yet was it
not ye Passover, but a figure and sign of ye Passover: Luke. 22.20
Also Christ says: This cup is that new Testament in my blood which is shed
for you: First I note ye Christ says not, this wine is my blood; Or this cup
is my blood: But Christ says, this cup is the new Testament in my blood:
This figure did the fathers we often times: and the scholemen too: Lactan^^^^
called the church the temple of God: Hylarie, calls it the house of Gods
Ambrose calls it the mother of all that live. Epiphanius: says it is via
Regia: the high kings high way: Jerome says it is the Ark of Noah and so do
they also speak of the supper of the Lord: Nazianzen calls it the supper of
the Lord a thanks giving: and again a Table: Ambrose calls it, a
spiritual restoratiue: and Dionisius calls it, a society, a communion, a
congregation, and an assembly: so that if the Papists and Jesuits did not
willingly err, they might see the truth.
In which words is a deuble Metonymie, a double figure: First the vessel is
taken for that which was contained in the vessel: as, the cup for the wine
which was within the cup: Then the wine is called the covenant or Testament,
(where as (...) the thing it is) it can be but the sign of the Testament,
(...) rather of the blood of Christ, whereby the Testamente was made. And
thus do I think of the body of Christ: for it was spoken by the same figure,
representing the body and the blood of Jesus, Christ. Now, for that you may
know both my faith, and what I think hereof: I will make open protestation of
that certain and undoubted verity which I believe: as also so far as in me
lies confirm and establish ye weak consciences of those that are here.

At the supper of the Lord you shall consider two things: 1. The person of
God. 2. The person of man.


In the person of God, 1 The institutor, which is Christ: 2 The cause of his
institution, which is the remembrance of his death.


In the institution of these things, 1 The external signs: 1 Bread for his
body and for his death. 2 Wine for his blood shedding and most precious
sacrifice. 3 The word for ye remembrance of both.
2 The internal meaning, And then shall you see all his spiritual graces, and
most heavenly benefits:



Which are these most excellent: 1 Faith, if we believe: 2 Assurance of life,
if we continue: 3 Salvation, if we receive these mysteries truly: 4 In
Christ's blood shedding, our blood is not shedd: 5 In his offering God the
father is pacified: 6 By his death has he overcome the power of death, and
he gives the spirit, which works unto life to all those that receive him
worthily:


Secondly, we have here to consider man: and it is to be done two ways. 1 In
his own person, 2 In the person of his neighbor.


If in his own person, then let him consider: 1 The time: He is warned to
fly sin: and though at all time he be put in mind thereof: yet now above
all times and (though never untimely) yet it is the best time to remember it: 2
The place it is holy, for we come before God: 3 The persons, and they are
these: 1 God the father. 2 God the Son. 3 God the holy Ghost.
These are al there, these are naturally there: these are in power there, they
are not really there: these are in grace there, they are not in state there:
these are in government of spirit and truth there, and they will not be mocked
at your hands: 4 The use of this the supper of the Lord.


The use is this. 1 That we stand in faith, and conform our selves to the
death of Christ: 2 That we examine our selves, and come with a loathing of
sin, meaning to sin no more. 3 That you be assured, that whatsoever has
been done before time is pardoned.


Then here comes in the last thing to be considered, which is The person of
thy neighbor: for there be two sorts at the table. 1 Thou thy self, 2 And
others.


For thy self call to mind 1 What thou wast. 2 What thou art. 3 What thou
shall be.
1 Without God, and borne in sin: 2 Made a new man, and strengthened in Jesus
Christ: 3 An heir with God, and copartner with him, if thou live thereafter.


For others remember 1 To lay aside all malice with hawtines. 2 To lay aside
all envy with bitterness. 3 To lay aside all revenge with greediness.
Then have you fulfilled all.

Now for my own part, I do protest simply before the Lord my God: The Lord
did foresee that these blasphemou^ heretics would rise up: therefore has God
given to us many examples to approve that which here he spoke: so that Papists
and Jesuits cannot be excused for ever.
that if I had but any warrant at al in ye scriptures, to satistie me in this
point, I would condescend willingly unto your opinions: But seeing ye whole body
of the Bible is against you, and we have the Lord wholly on our side, what
reason is there that I should credit you? And as for you, if you were not
blinded, if you were not deceived, if you were not most wonderfully drowned in
your errors, you might easily see the truth of this matter: If God alone had
used this figure in this place, if it had been found no where else, if the
scripture would not have permitted it, if the law and the Prophets did not
testify it, if reason and God him self did not condescend unto it; then you
might have persuaded us: but seeing that the Lord our God has not been against
our opinions, but has even by his own mouth justified all that we have
spoken, what cause, what reason, what moves you to coutende? Search and see:
look into the book of God, if (...) very same figure be not used in many
things, as it is in this one thing of his body. The word of God is compared
to leaven, that leaueneth the whole lump: Matthew. 13.33. Isay. 49.2. Ephe.
6.17. Apoc. 19.15. Ier. 5.14. Ier. 23.29. Ezec. 3.3. Esa. 55.10. Deuteronomy. 32.2.
Matt. 13.19.
the word is called a sword: the word is called Musterde seed: the word of
God is called fire: the word of God is a hammer: the word of God is bony: the
word of God is as snow: the word of God is as rain: the word of God is the
seed sown: yet for all this, the word of the Lord leaueneth not: the word
of the Lord strikes not: the word of the Lord grows not: the word of the
Lord burns not: the word of the Lord kills not: the word of the Lord
sweeteneth not: the word of the Lord snoweth not: the word of the Lord
rayneth not: the word of the Lord powers not down, materially, grossly,
earthly, and really, as the words portende: and so I say of the body of
Christ: you have it not carnally: you have it not fleshly: you have it not
verily flesh, blood, and bone, in the sacrament. The same manner of speech also
in the scripture concerning Christ, is found every where: Christ was the rock
that gushed out water: 1. Cor. 10.1.
yet Christ was not in the rock: and Augustine and Origin are of the same
opinion, that the rock signified Christ. Christ was in the same manner
compared to the rodd of Aaron that blossomed: to the golden pott, wherein the
Manna was: to the Manna that came down from heaven: Jesuits are in a damnable
and most dangerous estate, resisting this open and undoubted verity
to the brazen serpent that was lifted up in the wilderness: to the Prophet
Jonas that was three days and three nights in the whales belly: to the high
way in which men walk: to the door, by which men have passage: to the
sheepeheard, which is a keeper of sheep: To a Lion of the Tribe of Judah, which
deuowred: to a Lamb which is commonly slain for men: yet was not Christ
really in all these; no more is he corporally in ye bread at the table. Now, if
all only this kind of speech were used of Christ, you might say something: but
I tell you that not only of Christ and his person all alone is this used, but
of all manner of things too in the book of God. Christ said of Judas, I have
chosen twelve, and one of you is a devil, yet was Judas no devil.

Of the circumcision it was spoken, thus, My covenant shall be in your flesh:
for all that the circumcision was not the covenant. Genesis 33.20.
but a sign of the covenant: Jacob is said to have built an Altar to the
Lord, and to have called it by this name, The mighty God of Israel: There is no
dout, but Jacob knew ye the name Altar was not God, yet did he call the sign by
the name of him ye was signified. This figure is so common, as nothing is more
common in the scriptures.
It was written of John Baptist, that he was the burning lamp, and the candle
that gave light, and that he was Helias: Yet you all know that this was spoken
but by a figure. In Genesis, the seven kine, and the seven cares of corn are
said to be seven years: yet were they but representations of the same: Ahias
the Prophet the Sylonite gave unto Jeroboam the ten pieces of his cloak,
which was cut, and said he gave unto him the kingdom of the ten tribes: Yet
Israel was not in the pieces of the cloth: So in like manner say I to you
touching this, take, eat, it is my body: yet is not Christ a real and
natural body there:

And that you may see, how we have some thing more to say unto you, and that
we do not ground our faith and religion upon presumptions, I am desirous to
be satisfied at your hands, and to be answered unto two reasons that I will
make against you: For this I hold, that Christ is not really, naturally, flesh
blood and bone in the Sacrament: and I reason thus:

As Christ was with our fathers of old in their sacraments, so and after the
same manner is Christ with us in ours: But the body of Christ; was not really,
bodily, carnally, and grossly in their sacraments: ergo. Christ is not
really, natural, flesh blood and bone in ours:
For my first proposition, ^ Cor. 10.
I do refer you unto the first to the Corinthians, where you shall find
that we have no more privilege then have they, nor prerogative the^ had they
(...) salvation by any other, or by any other means then had they: and when
either you can, or be able to say ought against those undoubted and infallible
truethes, which we have spoken, then will I say more. My second reason is this:

He that is really, carnally, bodily, fleshly, even perfect man in the heavens,
is not so and in the same manner with us here in the earth: But Christ is
verily, humanely, really, bodily, with the same body he took of the Virgin
Marie, and perfect man in the heavens: Ergo, Christ is not really, flesh,
blood, and bone in the bread, here in the earth.
I do remember what Augustine says: Qui vult viuere, Super Johan. tract. 26.
habet vbi viuat, habet vnde viuat, accedat, credat, incorporetur vt
vinificetur: that is, He that will live, he has the thing now by which he may
live, he has the place where he may live: Let him draw near, let him
believe, let him be incorporated, that he may be quickened. And in the same
place it follows: Coena dominica est sacramentum Pietatis, signum est
Vnitatis, The Fathers never used to say, really, bodily, gr^^ly, flesh, blood
and bond in the bread.
and Vineulum est Charitatis: that is, The Supper of the Lord is the sacrament
of Piety, the sign of Unity, and the bond of Charity: so that it appears,
Augustine thought as we do think, and believed as we do beteeue: which was,
that we have a spiritual food, and a spiritual drink, in these external
elements and outward signs of bread and wine. Moreover, the Scripture is
evident and plain, and proves this which I have spoken, that is, how Christ
is bodily and naturally in the heavens, not bodily in the earth. Mark. 16.
In Mark it is thus written: (...): that is, Christ was taken up into heaven:
But he that is there, is not also bodily here with us: Ergo, Christ is not
bodily here on earth. In Luke I find this: Luke 24.
(...) that is, he went from them: But in body Christ went from them, and in
the same body Christ is with his father: Ergo, not bodily and carnally with
men upon the earth. Another argument: Semper pauper es habebitis vobiscum,
Matthew. 26.11.
non autem me: that is, The poor ye shall always have with you, but me you
can not always have with you: Where out I gather this brief: The poor and
Christ can not be together in one place: but we are assured and persuaded
certainly, that the poor of the world are always upon earth: Ergo, Christ is
not with them, nor where they be here upon the earth.

Then, seeing Christ is not corporally with us, nor in fleshly and bodily
presence: We have to inquire and search out the manner of his being here on
earth. For it is true, that we eat and drink his body and his blood, They
that will learn, they must apply one scripture with an other.
but after another manner then you affirm. None is ignorant, how that man
consists of body and of soul: Therefore it is expedient we should as well
be fed with spiritual food, as it is necessaris we should live by temporal
meat: of which thing, if any man here be ignorant, then is it because the
spirit of GOD has not quickened him: For if you read the sixth of John, you
shall find it most apparently. Also Christ says in an other place, Blessed
are those that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be
satisfied: Therefore as there is a spiritual, which is an internal
famishment, so is there a heavenly, Esai 55.1.
which is to the soul spiritual nourishment. Isayas says, Omnes sitientes
venite ad aquas, etc. Al you ye thirst, come unto the waters, Tertul. de Resur.
Carnis.
and you shall be satisfied. Tertullian has an excellent saying: Sermonem
constituens viuificatorem, quia spiritus and vita sermo, eundem etiam carnem
suam dixit, quia and sermo caro erat factus: Proinde in causam vitae
appetendus, and denorandus auditu, and ruminandus intellectu, and fide
digerendus: That is, Christ appointing the word of life, called the same word
his flesh, both because that the word is spirit and life, and because that
the word was made flesh: Therefore, as the only way to life Christ is to be
desired, and by hearing is he to be consumed, and by the understanding is he to
be chawed, and by faith is he to be disgested: Athanas. de peccato in Spir. San.
I do call to mind what Athanasius says: Dominus aijt, quae dixi vobis,
spiritus sunt and vita etc. That is, The Lord says, the things which I have
spoken unto you, are spirit and life: which is as much (says Athanasius) as
that which eye has seen, and that which is given for us, shall be given as
the food and meat of men. Wherefore, seeing it is evident, that Christ is
the bread of life; something must be spoken of the same, and it is to be
determined of all Christians, what is to be held for truth. I will for this
cause, briefly discuss this question in the examining of these principal
points: First, what is meant by bread in the Scriptures: Secondly, how
Christ is said to be the bread of life: Thirdly, wherefore he, and none
other should be this bread: Fourthly, how this bread is received by us.

To the first, which concerns bread, I say thus much: I am not ignorant that
it is diuerfly taken in the Scriptures: yet is all that which may be spoken
hereof, not so appertinent to the matter, as is worthy of very long discourse.
Bread is taken for loaves of bread sometimes: as in Matthew 15. and in Luke
11. Where the neighbor does borowe three loaves of the neighbor: also the
Manna is called bread, in John the 6. and by a figure, by Synecdoche, does
bread signify all kind of meat what so ever: and so said God unto Adam:
Genesis 3.
In fudore valius tui etc. That is, In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat
thy bread: So also in Esaias: Isai 58.
Frange esurienti p^^em tuum: That is, Break thy bread unto the hungry: The
like may be said of infinite places in the Scripture. Now here upon it
comes by a Metaphor, that the word of God is called bread: For as the one
feeds corporally, so the other nourishes spiritually to eternal life: and
thus do I think that the bread is called the body of Christ, by the same
analogy.

For this cause, We must take heed in handling the doctri^^^^ (...) we (...)
Christ as the T^^ke, and as Mahomet: that we divide him (...) ^under him not as
Nestorius (...) we (...) not (...) did, (...) him as (...) be (...) Christians.
it is easy for you to see the second thing we enquire after: that is to say,
How Christ is called the bread of life? And you shall consider thus: either
properly, or improperly are all things spoken of him: If properly, then also
they be such things as concern both the natures of Christ, his godhead, and
his manhood: Of which sort are these Epishetes given him in the scripture: That
Christ is God: That Christ is man, that Christ dyed, that Christ was incarnate,
and such like: and that Christ was Mediator; and that Christ is an
intercessor, and that Christ is made an Atonement for us.

Now if Christ be spoken of improperly, which must needs be by a figure, and
by Anagogen, which is a perfect similitude representing that is figured
therein: Then are all they of that sort whereof I spoke before, representing
him in some one excellent and notable property: of which condition are these:
whereas Christ is called the vine, the stone, the way, the door, etc. after
which manner, and by the same figure Christ is called the bread of life in
deed: and therefore Augustine brings in the place of John 6. De Doct.
Christ. lib. 3. cap. 16.
Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis, and sanguinem illius biberitis, non
habebitis vitam in vobis: that is, Unless you eat the flesh of the son of
man, and drink his blond, you have not life within you: It follows
presently: An answer to the former objection of the Papist.
Fatinus vel flagitium iubere videtur: signrata est ergo, praeciptens passion^
Domini esse communicandum, and suauiter and vtiliter in memoria recondendum,
quod pro nobis care eius crucifixa and vulnerata sit: which is as much to say:
What? shall we cate his body, and drink his blood? he commands us a wicked
and detestable thing. It is therefore (says Augustine) a figurative speech,
and it commands to communicate and be partakers of the passion of the Lord:
and to lay up profitably and commodiously in our remembrances, that his flesh
was crucified and wounded for us. To this appertains that of Athanasius: In
sermon in verba illa Christi.
Quae loquutus sum vobis spiritus and vita, quod perinde est ac sidiceret,
corpus meum quod ostenditur and datur pro mundo in cibum dabitur, etc. That is:
The things which I speak unto you, are spirit and life; which is as much
says Athanasius, as if Christ should have said; My body which is manifested
and given for the world, If this doctrine were not, our fathers could never
have been saved: or could never be confirmed: and salvation could never be
attained by man.
shall be given as meat to feed upon, that spiritually every man may have
something, and that Christ may be made a safety and defense for all, and
salvation to eternal life. Out of this therefore that I have spoken, no man
may deny, that our Savior Christ is called the bread of heaven, and the
spiritual food, because we all feed on him by faith unto eternal life: so
that now you have no more to apply it terrestrially, or to speak of it
grossly, or to interpret it carnally, or to comprehend it materially as you
have done: but to think of that saying, this is my body, as of a thing spoken
mystically and by a figure, to represent a spiritual meaning by the same.

The third thing I promised to speak of is this: Wherefore, and for what
cause Christ is called the bread of life? Albeit an heap and large company of
reasons might be gathered together, by which every one of them, I could prove
plainly, wherefore Christ is thus called the bread of life: yet, for that I
am not to discourse of at this present copiously, but to wade in them as
speedily, as I may: I will give you a very few, and in especial these causes.

1 First therefore here lies the comparison: For as much as man is not to live
here for ever: he has to learn the way to live eternally.
In that Christ does and perfourmeth that unto the soul, which the bread does
unto the body: by material bread life is preserved, by the spiritual food
Christ, salvation is attained: by the corporal bread, the body is nourished,
by the spiritual meat man is helped: by the first, we are strengthened
bodily, by the second, we are raised up eternally: by the first, we are
maintained to strength mightily, by the second, relieved by the spirit
effectually: The one is to keep us here: The other is to live with God: the
one is for a season in this life, the other for ever with the Lord: So that
this we know, as bread is to be taken that we may continue, so is not Christ
to be forsaken, least we perish.

2 Secondly: the comparison holds betwixt Christ and the bread: For that
bread profits us not, if it be not united to our own nature: if it be not
as good nourishment received, whereupon we feed to our comfort: No more is
Christ united unto us, if by faith we believe not, that he is incarnate: or by
hope trust not, that he has given us life: or by assurance persuade not our
selves, that he can deliver us; or by certain and undoubted confidence, be not
made his members unto glory.

3 Thirdly: as without bread man dies: There is none that fears god but he
is rau^shed and taken up to God, as it were, when he pondereth and co^sidereth
those spiritual and internal co^solations, which he attaineth by feeding, and
staying on Jesus Christ.
so without Christ man falls: as without bread, we continue not, so without
Christ we prosper not. It is far a more lively and precious food of the
soul, Jesus Christ, whom we speak of, then is that of the body, to which he
is compared: for with this men have dispensed withal for a season; And Elias
and Moses did fast a long time without the bread of the body:
notwithstanding, as they could not continue but for a time, no more may we be
long without Christ.

4 Fourthly: It is an excellent admonition that we have, in that Christ is
compared to bread: For as bread of all other is most common and most
necessary, whereon we stay: So is Christ the most rediest in need, the most
liueliest in force, the most strongest in power, the most playnest in truth,
the most desirous to save, the most valiant in death, the most bent against
Satan, and most ready and most prone to defend from destruction, all such as
call upon him.

There is yet one member and parcel ^ehinde, into the which we must look
also: And it is this: How this bread is received by us? August. in Sext. cap.
Ioh.
Our savior Christ shows directly how, John the 6. He that believes in me,
has eternal life: And again, He that comes to me, shall not hunger.
Therefore Augustine upon those words of Christ rehearsed, Spiritual eating of
Christ, what it is.
says, Qu^d paras dentes and ventrem? creed and manducasti: That is, Wherefore
preparest thou thy teeth and thy belly? believe and thou have eaten. And who
sees not, that this spoken, is understood of the silly creature, the poor
afflicted soul, the hungry conscience, thirsting and gaping after the
kingdom of heaven: and thereupon it is, that Paul speaks so confidently to
the Romans: Romans ^.
Who shall separate us from the love of God? shall affliction? shall anguish?
shall persecution? shall hunger? shall nakedness? shall trouble? shall the
sword etc? No, says Paul, But in all these we overcome, by him which has
loved us: So that I conclude, that on Christ Jesus we feed unto life: In
Christ we are immouable, we stand by him: In Christ we live, for he lives in
us: In Christ we dwell, who also dwells with us: In Christ we are fed with
the bread of life, and in Christ do we eat unto salvation and glory, if we d^
it, as he wills us, through faith. Seeing we are arrived, and now have fully
performed ye was promised: it is required of us to go further, to see if we may
find any other thing worthy either to be spoken of, or to confute: Not ye a man
shall think it so hard a thing to say any thing against you: But because ye
stepping over the threshold, and casting his eyes into the first elements and
entrance of your religion, he shall scarce tell which way to betake him, nor
what to speak first: all things among you are so corrupted. If you look into
that order that I have taken, in speaking to you, it shall appear ye this
consequently follows to be handled: Whether or no you have done well, A flat
alienation of Christ his institution.
in annibilating the word of the Lord, and propounding unto us your
preposterous doctrine, of the commixture and mingling the wine and water
together at the sacrament: As for the first institution of our savior Christ,
if but a child should look in to it, though he could not confute you, yet he
would chide we you, for your altering ye which in so holy and reverend manner
Christ ordained. Alexander Pope, as appears in his Decretals, De Conc. dis.
2. c. in sacramento^um.
Cap. 5. inacted, that bread and wine mixed with water, should be offered up at
the sacrifice. Your general Council held at Carthage, says thus: Nih^laliud
offeratur, Conc. Carth. 3. De Conc dis. 2. cap. c. vt in sacramentis.
quam quod Dominus dicit, hoc est, panis and vinum aqua mixtum: ye is, Let no
other thing be offered then that which God has commanded: which is to say,
bread and wine mixed with water. It is a wonder to see how these men are
blinded: for in their decree they go against them selves, and the written
verity. In that they say they will do no more then God willed: they did well
if they would have performed it: in that they say, that his institution was
with wine and water, it is a manifest untruth, there is no mention made of any
water at the supper that was upon ye table, not in all ye Evangelists: In ye
also they call ye supper of ye lord a sacrifice, in that do they offend to: for
Christ never spoke that word of his supper, nor his Apostles who were with him:
but as other your untruths, so is this brought in of your own invention: whom
we may not believe, because you were many; but we will believe a few, if they
speak the truth. For a scripture says; Thou shall not follow a multitude in
doing ye is evil. I am not unmindful of your council of Affrike, Conc. Afric.
tertium.
that decreed the self same: But of al other, your argument ye is made by
another general Council, where there is a reason given of this thing, shall
answer for it self, how they have ahused the supper of the Lord: for there
is given this reason of the commixtion: De latere eius aqua cum sanguine
egressa, Conciliu^ Wormatiense cap. 4.
vinum de vera carnis eius vita cum aqua expressu^ ostendit. Out of the side
there gushed out blood and water, which does declare, that wine is to be
mingled, if we will have life through his flesh, with water. Who sees not,
that this strange and great miracle done when Christ was dead, to make a
separation betwixt him and other men, How wicked and ungodly the Jesuits are,
is now seen: that defend a lie in so shameful manner, upon the authority of
a Pope, which was Alexander: but they run from Christ and from his Apostles.
has no force at all to prove commirtion at the table: For the mixture which
they take away from the miracle that was upon the tree, their commixtion is at
supper: That was, when Christ had given up the ghost: they should prove, that
Christ did it when he was alive, at the table: That was a miracle, to show the
strange cruelty of them upon Christ: and the commixtion at the table, should
have been no miracle at al, but a custom and ordinance, if it had been done by
Christ: That was a mixture of blood and water, and what is this, that therefore
you should mingle wine and water? That came out of Christ's sides, This should
be done at their Altar: that was for a miracle declared to the faithless
Jews: this must be observed in ye faithful Church: that was a sign to them
of the displeasure of God, and of their treachery to Christ: you forsooth must
apply it to a custom, to be observed in the house of God: Wherefore if you
will keep it, and retain it still, as unto them, so shall it be a token of
Gods wrath and curse unto you for evermore: And though there have been
sufficient tokens of the displeasure of God showed upon you: yet the more and
the heavier shall they be, Augustine did chide the people for not coming to
the table: Ambrose was wrath, for the slacknesse of the^ in the Church: and
Tertullian, and Irenaeus do complain because men came not in time to receine
the bread and wine: and Ignatius and Policarp do chid them of Antiochia and
Smirna, for their slack and slow coming to the table: but beside the
Jesuits, Papists, and such like heretics, none keep back the people from
coming to receive.
as you have most blindly, and over wickedly, very foolishly, and most
peruersely, charmed every good institution of Christ. O that ever you should
commit such sacrilege, as to keep true Christians, and the weak members of
his body from the table: I tell you, that all forts of people should have
occasion to curse you, if you were permitted to go forward in your diabolical
pretenses: Think you that the great man, though he be a Lay man: the
honorable man, though he be a temporal man: the plain man, though he be no
spirtuall man, is not as willing to receive, and as ready to come to the table
of the Lord, as are you or any other of the Clergy? Then why would you bring
in Innouations, and enlarge your whorish kingdom of Rome, and teach us that it
is not lawful for the Lay man to receive the supper of the Lord in both kinds?
I tell you, you are but robbers of men, destroyers of souls, patrons of
iniquity, defenders of untruth, such as chop and change for your own
commodity. And there is no one sort of our people, but the door shall be opened
to them, and the way made ready for them, and we will be as desirous to
instruct them, and to tell them how to come to Christ's table, as you are
ready to withdraw them from the receiving of so holy mysteries. But you, men
full of iniquity, and ready to spill the blood of the simple, and to cast
away multitudes of people, show unto me some cause, some law, some reason, some
scripture, some commandment of God, by which you may lawfully and by right
take away the wine from the bread that is delivered. Is it because Christ
ministered to his disciples and not to lay men? O wise and of deep
understanding: Wherefore do you minister at al unto them? wherefore then let you
any come? If it be lawful for them to receive bread, shall it be lawful for
them to take the wine? Why? Christ delivered both: ergo they must have both:
Christ said not only, take and eat; but take and drink too: Christ did not all
alone give the bread for his body, but he gave as well the wine for his
blood: therefore being given jointly, they may not be distinguished
severally: and being delivered by Christ equally, they may not be cut a
sunder by man irreverently. Your council of Constance, after Christ 1415. and
at their Session in June 13. Consilium Co^stantiense. By the meane^ of
Dioscorus B. of Alexandr^^, and one Chrysaphius, was a Council held at
Ephesus, where Entyches the heretic was restored; ergo, a Council can and
does err, and so does this of yours.
Did forbid to minister in both kinds at the Altar: But what of that? it
proneth not that therefore it was a thing lawefull because they decred it: for
the Scribes and Pharcsies took counsel together against Christ often times
and his doctrine, as well as you do against his ordinance and institution: Yet
may we not justify or allow them, no more then we dare or be able to think
well of you: And albeit your superstitious Eremites, some, not all the days of
their life, many, not in the space of many years, did ever receive the
communion: yet are they no law unto us, no more then are the Jews or Turks
that disalowe of all that Christ does: A simple man may see you are in a wrong
way: For both the institution of Christ proves it, The custom of the Apostles
aloweth it, The manner and ordinances in the primitive Church confirmed it, The
fathers and the Doctors have defended it, and our Church of England does
against you and all other heretics stand unto it, That the holy communion is
to be ministered under both the kinds of bread and wine, not under one. Luke
22.19.
It is evident in Luke, where as Christ our Sauinur is first said to give
thanks: secondly, to have broken: thirdly to have given: fourthly, the bread:
fifthly, to his disciples: then to have commanded them: but what? To do the
same in remembrance of him. Then also it follows, ye likewise after supper,
Mark. 14.22.
first Christ took the cup: then spoke unto them: then said ye the cup was the
new Testament in his blood: Then shed for them and for many for remission of
sins; Math. 26.28.
as Matthew says: where upon I conclude this: The Institution of our Savior
Jesus Christ is not to be broken: But when he was at supper, he gave the Bread
and the Cupp equally to all: ergo, we must give the bread and the wine to every
one, neither is his holy Institution to be broken. Paul unto them of
Corinthus says thus: No alteration of Christ's institution by the Apostles:
ergo, much less ought you to chop and change as you ^od
That which I received, I received of the Lord, and it was this: that the same
night Christ was betrayed, he took bread, and brake it in remembrance of him:
Then after supper he took the cup, and said, it is the new Testament in my
blood, this do as often as you do i^in remembrance of me. There follows a
Confirmation of the Institution with a reason and cause thereof: namely, As
often as you shall eat this bread, 1. Cor. 11.24.
and drink this cup, you shall show the Lords death till he come. Out of this
place I gather these collections: The first is, a Christipersona; from the
person of Christ, In good things we are not to gainsay the good doings of our
predecessors: and Cyprian ^o Iulianus says, that al allowed by the apostles,
al things set down by Christ, and all customs confirmed by the spirit of
God, are to be kept: ergo, this of bread and wine must not be altered.
thus knitt together: that which Christ did, that same did Paul imitate and
keep in his Church of Corinthus: ergo, we ought not (or any other nation
else) but keep the same custom in breaking bread, and giving wine unto all
that come in our Church. The second reason is this: taken a persona Paul's,
from the person of Paul: for Paul would do no other thing than that which was
lawful, which also is to be done of us: but Paul used bread and wine
indifferently to all without acception: ergo we also ought to do the like.
The third reason is taken ab Ecclesia, from the custom of the Church: and the
church of Corinthus was very precise in observing the ordinances of Christ and
Paul; wherefore seeing they in that Church had the sacraments ministered in
both kinds; the church of England, and all other godly and reformed churches,
ought to do the like. This without question was well and su^^iciently known to
the churches in the East and West (...) the space of many hundred years after
Christ, and until the image of desolation was set up, and the tyranny of ye
Pope fully established, these and such like deformities were not known. De
Consee. did. 2. Can. Cum om ne. Paragrapho. illud.
Inhus a Pope writing to the bishops that were in Egypt, sindeth great fault
with them for not delivering the bread and the wine unto the people: whereof he
yeldeth two reasons: the first for that Christ commended to the Apostles both
his body and his blood: The second, for that there was a commendation several
by it self left to all, both of the bread and of ye wine that was in the cup.
And Gelasius does write to certain bishops and says: Anathematizariomnes, qui
accepto corpore Christi, In decret.
abstineant a Calicis communione: that is, Those men are all accursed, who
taking the body of the Lord, shall abstain from the receiving of the cup. Now
this was one of your Popes too; for i^ is evident that this beggarly and
slavish decision, came in a long time after our savior Christ, and therefore
the greater is your condemnation, as knowing that these are the devises of men,
will yet for all that cleave unto the^ so steadfastly. The Tripartite history
does make mention, that S. Ambrose wrote to Theodosius the Emperor, to this
effect: Lib. 9. cap. 30.
O Imperator and Princeps conseruorum, etc. that is, O Emperor and Prince of
thy fellow servants: for there is only one God, king, lord, and creator of all:
with what eyes are you able to look upon ye temple of the high God? how will
you lift up your hands to heaven, which drop down continually with the blood
thou have shed unjustly? For I find that at that time seven thousand men were
slain, even good Christians, by ye commandment of Theodosius at Thessalonica:
A worthy and rare example of a most learned and famous doctor.
and therefore Ambrose proceeds in his Epistle to Theodosius thus: How can you
(O Emperor) receive the holy body of Christ with such hands? With what rashness
can you take the cup and put it to your mouth, to taste of his most precious
blood? when as by the fury of your commandment so much blood has been
shed without a cause? etc. In this it is most apparently to be seen, that in
the time of Ambrose, hoth the Emperor^ his people used to receive the communion
in both kinds: so that we are to suspect you now, more vehencently then we did
before: and we may think that you are some grievous and deceitful Gibeonites
come hither to epsy what Iosuah and his people Israel does, and in the end to
make some conquest, and to pray upon us: for if you did read and hold upon
the fathers of old, whom very glosingly you have in your mouth, to begyle the
simplicity of young heads withal, it could not be, that you should so much
differ from them as you do. For which of them all affirms as you do affirm:
or defends that you do defend: or mainteineth that you maintain: or stands
so undiscreetly in so manifest untruths as you do? Search and see, all the
whole Senate and good troop of famous and learned men, are against you: Even
Fabianus your countriman, and a Roman, that lived under Gradianus, and
Philippus, and continued till the reign of Decius, as witnesses Platina, gave
in commandment: Vt quisque Christianus singulis annis ter Eucharistiam
sumeret: Sabellicus and Volateran.
That is, That every one named a Christian, should every year receive the
supper of the Lord without exception it is commanded, and as appears in the
customs of the Church, they did receive it in both kinds, of bread (I mean)
and wine. August. Canone Qui manducant De Consec. did. 2.
Augustine says thus: They that eat and drink Christ, eat and drink him
unto eternal life: he that eats him is refreshed: he that drinks him is
quickened and lives. The gloss in that place says thus: Idest, Did. 2. Can.
si Quotiscunque.
in specie panis and vini: as much to say, as the words spoken by Augustine
are to be understood in both ye kinds, both bread and wine. Ambrose is of
this same opinion in the deciding of this matter upon the words of
consecration. Hilarious. ibidem Can. Si non.
Hilarie is as plain as he was grave, in this point. Si non sunt tanta
peccata, vt communicetur quis, non se debet a medicina corporis and sanguinis
Domins separare: That is, If thy sins be not such, but that thou may
communicate, no man must presume to separate Christ's body from his blood.
Cyprian is very hot with Cornelius the Pope, and says: At vero nunc non
infirmis, In Epist. 2. de Caena Dom.
sed fortibus pax necessaria est, nec morientibus, sed viuentibus communicatio
a nobis danda est: etc. That is, At this present, peace is necessary, not to
the weak, but to the strong, and the communion is to be given, not to the
dead, but to them that are alive, etc. And after this, Cyprian gives Pope
Cornelius a great charge concerning the soldiers that were then in arms, that
before they went to the battle, they should receive the supper of the Lord,
In Sophonian^ Proph.
both in bread and in wine. Jerome is a sufficient witness for his time of
this: who both allowed of receiving it in both kinds, and commanded all other
to do it: Therefore I shall need to wade no further in confuting and gainsaying
you, whom both the Scriptures, and the fathers, Pope Leo did make a petition
and in the same, did command that none should digress from the Apostles: you
do: ergo.
and all good men of all times for this grievous sacrilege have condemned.
Wherefore it follows: My words shall be in your heart. In this grave, vehement,
yet short commandment, from the Lord, from Moses, and for the law of the
Lord, and for the keeping of the same, I have to observe especially this: That
customs of men, antiquity in matters of weight, Chanons of Bishops, decrees
of Popes, opinions of fathers, constitutions provincial, and fond ceremonies
observed of old, are not to be allowed of against God. And as every good and
faithful Christian ought to believe this: so is it not possible that your
religion (for you call it religion) should stand, if you held not upon the
vain customs, and foolish inventions of your auncesters. I know right well,
that I have in many your articles said something against this your vain
authority: yet have I now more occasion, Against this vain, sacrilegious,
and usurped authority, did Urban Pope 25. and Cyprian to Pompeius, against
Stephanus: and Augustine to Paulinus inueyghe much.
as I see you more diuelishly bent, and more hautily at this present to lift up
your heads. For if the pride of your father the Pope were not in you, or that
it did not burst out at this present in your faces, when you hear the truth
auowched, and your lies impugned, we could conceive some good opinion of you,
and think, that of ignorance you did that you do: but now that we see how
you kick and spurn against the quick, and against the word of the Lord and
his commandments, oppose the decrees and constitutions of your Popes, we
plainly perceive, that of malice you withstand us: of disdain you contemn
us: of an evil heart you fight with us: and as careless and faithless
persons you thrust in your selves for to control us. Did. 21. C. in no uo
Testam.
What if Anacletus that presumptuous Herod, in his Epistle to the Bishops of
Italy, vaunted of his Popedom and royal state, which he set up above others,
as mistress and Queen of all the world? shall we therefore think that his
laws can move us? or his Decretals concern us? or his counterfeit holiness
delude us so, that we also though he have bewitched others, should now again
be inchaunted with his deadly cup of poison? I tell you no: we serve the God
of heaven; we serve the Lord of hosts, and we know it is better to obey God
than you: what? De maioritate and obedientia folit.
how? where? when? what time did the Lord ever say as Innocentius. 3. said
(the second Nimrod of the earth) that the sacerdotall dignity, was above the
imperial crown and majesty of the Lords anointed. And because that one man
said; that as the Sun was higher and greater then the Moon, so the Pope is
greater and higher then the Emperors: Shall we for him and his saying, obey
all that he did? I tell you no; but whatsoever the Lord commands, that will
we do. For that same decree of Pope Leo the fourth, at the Council holden of
threescore and twelve Bishops, may not prevail with us: we regard not his
edict, nor curse, do what he can: and the thing that he and all the other
agreed unto, was a damnable thing: For it was thus enacted: Si quis dogmata,
mandata, sanctiones, etc. If any man shall violate and break the ordinances,
Ex conc. 4. Leonis Papae 4.
decrees, appointmentes, constitutions, and edictes, inacted by the sea of Rome
for reformation of any thing, that same man shall be accursed. Now I tell you,
that that same proud Peacock is he, that together with his shall be unfeathered,
and accursed to: we will be safe in the name of the Lord, and dwelt in peace
under his wings: all the Hornets of Rome shall never sting us. Think you that
we are moved at Adrian Pope, Adrianus Papa. Synodo apud Trecas.
for all his severe law made? Quod nulli liceat vel addere aliquid vel demere
de decretis Pontificum: How it is lawful for no man to add or detract from
the decrees of the Bishops of Rome. You cann^ show me any one Pope by the
space of 400. years after Christ, but he has been tainted for his pride, and
for some damnable and gross sin.
You may fear, and you may fear in deed: for it is a fearful thing to you
all, to take away she reverend majesty from the sovereign God, and give it
to a cursed man, as your predecessors and you have done.

And I am assured, and I know, that no one Pope from the beginning of your
Popedom, within the compass of these thousand years, has lived so
virtuously, or behaved him self so reverently, or done that he did so
Christianly, or reigned so peaceably among men, but that he still incroched and
mounted up with Icarus wings a great deal higher then be ought to have done,
and at length has melted, and been tumbled down very soudenly: which
assuredly has been the great and heavy judgment of God upon your
Prelates, that the pride and most hautie look of the whore of Rome, might be
detested of the world. Has not every one for these your deformities abhorred
you? Verily, at this time the government of the world, which sometimes you
had, is taken from you: For, who can suffer it, and who will tolerate your
presumptuous hearts? what? are your decrees as antentike? as allowable? as
sound? as good? as holy? as true? as undoubted? as strong? and as cer^eine,
as are the writings of the Apostles? In verity, Epistola. 2. Anacleti
episcopis Italy:
so have all your Bishops said: and what by arms, what by force, what by
treachery, what by collusions and deceit, and what by thretenings and manaces,
Did. 63. Ego Ludouicus: Did. 63. Cap. Constitutum: In Job. lib. 35. Cap. 10.
they have attained to all that they have attained. It made the Emperor
Ludouicus the first to stoop to the Bishops. It made Henry the first, and Otto
the first, to subscribe unto him; and they both yielded up their right: For
Gregory the seventh caused it to be agreed upon to be idolatry, if any one
obeyed not the sea of Rome: And Adrian Pope, affirmed, and in the same
constituted, Ex 2. Action 7. Synod.
that the church of Rome was the head and mother of all churches in the
world, and that all other churches should stoop and obey her ordinances, It
is well known that Alexander the second writ to Philip king of France, that
all the decrees of the sea of Rome are as certainly to be held upon, to be
believed, and as surely received of all men, as are the Canons of the whole
world. This caused Bonifacius to list up his head so high above heaven and
earth, and writing to Ruffus, and to other Bishops in Thessalia, did chide the^
mightily for their resisting him, alleging out of ye decrees of Pope Gelasius,
9. q. 3. C. pater.
that the word of ye Apostle of ye see of Rome was never retracted: but by the
leave of so reverend a father (and if he will not, we will take leave) his
fatherhood has lied a little, and his lie is the greater as he would favor
that upon the Lord, 1. Sam. 10.1.
which is contrary to God and his word: The Lord says, he choose Saul: but
the Pope was never chosen by God. 1. Sam. 16.13.
The Lord did fetch David from the sheepefold, 1. Reg. 1.30.
and willed his people to fear him. And Solomon did the Lord set in the throne
of his father: but I do not find that the Pope, though he dwell at Rome, has
any room at all, no, not the breadth of a nail in the book of God. I know
that Josias was sent from God, The pope is one, the King another, the Pope of
Satan, the King of God: the Pope of man, the King is of the Lord: the Pope by
usurpation, the King by ordination: and therefore the Popes name is not in the
Bible: Kings be. Matthew. 20.
a defender of his people; and Iehosaphat was accounted as one of the worthies
among the Princes: and Ezechias is esteemed as a man renowned for his
holiness: But, for the Pope, he may get him a place in some odd corner of the
world by tyranny and bloodshed, but he was never ordained or set in place by
the Lord our God. This I remember Christ says: The Kings of the earth do
reign and strive for rule: but, says Christ to his Apostles, it may not be so
with you: of which I infer, that seeing the Pope is in the place of Peter (as
he says) and in the room of an Apostle, he must not therefore rule and reign
over us. Moreover, Reddite quae sunt Caesaris Caesar's: Give unto Caesar the
things that are Caesar's: But it was never said, Math. 22.
give unto the Pope that which is the Popes: for as I do find, his authority
is, and has been from time to time usurped: So that for my own part I tell
you truly, you that are here the hirelings of the Pope, and you the very
members of the very Antichriste, I am so far from believing either his
ordinances, or his decrees, or his Canons that he has made; that I will not
cease to pray continuallye day and night, that the Lord our God would
revenge the iniquity of the man of Rome, and pluck him out of that seat of
deadly sin, wherein he sits. For what is the Pope and his usurped
authority, that we should obey his ordinances? His customs are the customs
of Egypt, and his abominations are the abominations of Chanaan, and they are
not to be followed. Facietis iudiciamea, and praecepta mea seruabitis, Leu. 18.
and in eis ambulabitis: You shall do my judgments, you shall keep my
precepts and walk in them, says the Lord: I will tell you, the deapth of my
heart. You are like unto the men that the king of Assure brought from Babel, for
even as you do in Rome, so did they: At the first they served the Lord
indifferently: but in process of time, when the Lions were taken from them,
they returned to their old customs again, and did as the Nations and as the
Countries round about them did. From whom as I suppose you have made stealth
of your Demye Gods, 2. Reg. 17.27.
and retaining the manner of that service which the Nations did. You can give no
reason of your religion, It was said of old time, that men believed on the
Lord, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob did* and after that in the GOD of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: and after that men did believe in Christ, and in the doctrine
of the Apostles: but the Papists say, they believe as their fathers believed:
This did Lucius Papa 24. and Marcellus Pope reprehe^d: and they referred all to
Christ, and his Apostle^* not to Fathers.
if it be demanded at your hands, save only this: that you do as your
Fathers do, and that this your faith, is that, by which your ancestors were
saved. O be not beguiled; shall your salvation be grounded upon man? shall you
not answer every one for your selves? and every man for his own soul?
Yes, your fathers shall not defend you at the day of wrath: your fathers shall
not be able to maintain your cause, when both they and you shall give an
account of the works you have done: Your fathers downfall may not be your
rising; your fathers misery can not be your joy; your fathers curse shall not
be your blessing; but if all they did go astray, return you home unto the
Lord, and so shall you be delivered at the day of appearing of the just God:
And if you will follow the fathers, remember what the good fathers have said,
and follow them, I will not hinder you. It is good counsel, I tell you, that
Cyprian gives, who has this saying to a brother of his: Non est, frater
charissime, Lib. 2. Epist. Epist. 3.
quod aliquis aestimet sequendam esse quorundam consuetudinem, etc. That is, It
is not to be thought, my well-beloved brother, that a man should esteem ye
customs of al men to be retained among us as commendable things; For this is
to be regarded who they were yt they followed. Did not God say from heaven, this
is my beloved Son, hear him? Then it is Christ alone to whom we must give
ear. The advice of Augustine may be taken herein, that in his second book of
Baptism has such or like words: Lib. 2. Did. 8. Can. Veritate.
Veritate manifestata cedat consuetudo, etc. That is, Custom after truth is
known, must give place: For no man will allow of any custom, as he will of
reason and of the truth of any matter, because reason and truth go before
all things. I call to mind what Gregorius said unto Gulielmus Auersanus
Bishop, Did. 2. Can. Si consuetudinem.
Si consuetudinem fortassis opponas, aduertendum est quod Dominus dixit: Ego
sum via, veritas and vita, non dixit ego sum consuetudo, sed veritas: That is,
You will peradventure set some ancient custom against me: but it is to be
noted what God says: It is said by him, I am the way, the truth, and the
life; and GOD did not say, I am the custom, but I am the truth. Wherefore
Augustine said well: Ad Casul^num Praesbyterum. Did. 11. Can. consuetud.
Consuetudinem laudamus, quae contra fidem catholicam nihil vsurpare
dignoscitur. That is, We allow and commend that custom, that is not known to
have usurped any thing at any time, contrary to the true and Catholic faith:
Therefore I answer you here, if you can prove to me out of the Scriptures,
those Articles and points of religion which you affirm you hold by custom,
I will yield and condescend to your opinions: otherwise I am of the mind these
learned Fathers are of; That we must believe the truth before all your
customs: and if you do not think that my judgment is sound, you shall give
me leave to offend, to err, and to go out of the way with them.

There is now remaining the last thing, yet as good and necessary a thing as
any other, and it is this: God says thus, My words shall be in your heart:
what his words? the words of the Lord? You will hear no word at all: Is it so?
and the Lords words? how hardly are you drawn to hear them at this
present? Why? how? in what manner? where shall we lay them up? where shall we
repose them? In your heart and in your soul they should be laid up. And I do
ensure you, sithence my last being in this place, and from the time that I have
seen so dissolute and lewd behavior among you: and how pyningly, and how
untowardly, and how scornfully, and how irreuerendly, how hautily and how
disdainefully, you stand here before the Lord, before his Angels, in his
Church before us: I am not only astonished upon the wickedness and sin I see
within you, as I am amazed at the heavy judgments of the Lord that hang over
you. Contempt of his word? It was never noted but in Castawayes: Irreuerend
behavior when the word is preached? It was never seen but in the reprobate:
unseemly demeanor and disdainful looks upon the Prophets? You find it not
all only save in the Baalites, and Chemerims, or Saducees, or Pharisees, or in
some such like unto to them: Wherefore you are of that froward generation and
those untoward sprigges, That claue and rent in sunder, that gnashed their
teeth, Acts. 7.
and fell upon Stephan when they heard his preaching. Why? 2. Pet. 1.23. Matthew.
13.33. Ephe. 6.17. Mark. 4.32. Iere. 5.14. Ezech. 3.33.
Wherefore? for what cause should this be so? The word of the Lord is that
which assures: The word of the Lord is the leaven that leaueneth: The word
of the Lord is the sword that strikes: The word of the Lord is the grain
that increases: The word of the Lord is the fire that inflameth: The word
of the Lord is the honey that sweetneth: How then shall you escape the
judgments of God, the fierce wrath of the highest, the fury of his
countenance, and the displeasure of our God, that both unwillingly do come to
hear, and so like men of Bedlam, and as if you were possessed by some foul
fiende, rage and byte, when you understand the truth. Then if not for Gods
cause, yet for your own safety, regard and mark this reason, taken out of
the former scriptures alleged.

That thing which brings death with it, and destruction, and confusion for
ever, is neither to be done, or allowed, or committed by any godly man, nor by
you: The contempt of Gods word, your irreuerend behavior in this sacred
place, brings death with it, and destruction, and confusion for ever, if you
repent not: Ergo, This unseemly dealing in you, which brings with it all
these inconveniences, should be done, or allowed, or committed, neither by any
godly man, nor by you.
Consider then, weigh, and regard where and before whom you stand: Here is the
Lord that sees you; here be his Angels yt behold you: 1. Cor. 11.12.
For whose sakes also you should do the things that are comely: And
undoubtedly, a greater comfort should there be none to the godly man, or to any
one under heaven, then to feed upon the tree of life, then to drink of this
spiritual drink, Deuteronomy. 32.2. Mark. 4.14. Psalm. 119.104. Ier. 23.29. Esai.
55.1.
the word of God: This? Why? It is the rain that bedeweth: It is the seed
that grows: It is the rule that leads: It is the axe that heweth: It is the
fountain that springs; It is the well that draws the water of life, to all
that come, that hear, that believe, that will be saved: Then receive to your
comfort; comprehend unto life, attain unto salvation: hear and refuse not,
that the Lord may bless you. For there is a very comfortable reason, and a
strong conclusion gathered out of this place: thus:

That which brings life, and is commanded by God, is to be done of all, to
be allowed, and to be obeyed without exception: The word of the Lord does
bring in life, and is that which is commanded by God unto all: Ergo, The word
of the Lord, and the Gospel of truth which is preached, is to be heard of al,
and of you without exception.
His word? 2. Sam. 22.31. Psalm. 12.7.
it is pure, it is immaculate, it is tried in the fire, it will follow all
them that hope and trust in him: His words? they are chaste and mild
speeches, they are severed from the earth, Psalm. 18.33.
and purged more then seven times: His words? his ways? They are not polluted
ways, but they are leaders unto life, and the Lord is a protector of all
those that trust in him. As for you I see it; as for you, I do well perceive
it: as for you, you do declare it, That you are none of those that have his
statutes before you: His law is not regarded by you: the bright morning star
has not shined on you: You? you walk according to the ways of them of
Gomorrah: You? you trust in Pharaoh, and in his mighty power, you repose all
on the Popes shoulders, not on GOD: You? you are comforted in Herod, his
pleasant Oration and sweet style has bewitched you: You? you are protected
under the shadow of the great beast in the revelation to whom the most of the
Kings of the earth, do ^^ll down and give worship: you, you are angry with
Caine: you, you are hardened as was Sehon: you, you are the sons of the
fathers that have cast stones at the Prophets: you, you are bouldened with
Zedechias: you, you are still, and you will be Sacrificers still to the Queen
of Heaven: you, you are perverted as were false Prophets: you, you are proud
and stately as were the Scribes: you, you cover sin with sin, as the Jews
did: you, you have practiced and taken counsel against the Lord, against
Christ, against his anointed: but Achitophell with you, and you with him: you
with Absolon, Absolon with you, shall be overthrown both alike and have one
end: you, your interprises fall as they did, that Adonias did. You, you shall
he overthrown with Hamon: you, you with your Ioacim, and Ioacim with you, and
you all joined together, shall not be able to stand against one Jeremy:
wherefore, return, repent, amend, and convert, and come unto the Lord, and be
saved. Leu. 5.4.
The soul that has sworn, and has spoken the word that he will do evil,
yet if he repent and be sorry the law did admit him to be reconciled again
unto the Lord.

There was no man that had offended, Deuteronomy. 4.29.
no man that had trespassed, but if he sought the Lord his God with all his
heart, and returned, he was received: was there ever any in Israel, but when
they had transgressed, and served strange Gods, Gods of silver and Gods of
stone, and offended the Lord after the manner of the nations, that for all that
were cast off, 1. Reg. 8.33.
and despised of the Lord, if they came home? O then harken unto his word,
harden not your hearts, the Lord will accept of you as of Israel: learn to
do well, seek his statutes, look into the law of the Lord, see if it be not
an undefiled law: yea, it is a law wherein is no imperfection no vanity, no
leasing, no deceit: It is a law that suffers no manner of Image, Exo. 20.23
Exo. 34.1.7.
which you only stand upon: It is a law that admits you not to eat of the
sacrifices of the nations, nor of the fornications of the Gentiles, all which
you depend upon: it is a law that wills you to run from ydoles, and from
the abominations of Jeroboam the son of Nabat, that made Israel to sin:
but you are all one with him, and run a whoreing from the Lord: The word of
God, 2. Reg 20.30.
is most pure, nothing like unto it: O therefore, run from the inventions of
men. For why? Dagon may not stand before the Arc, Psa. 18.33. 1. Sam. 5.3. 2.
Par. 32.19
he shall fall flat upon his face: The Lord does not regard the works of
men's hands and the inventions of their hearts be far from him: The Lord is
hiest above all the world, like unto him there is none: before him was none,
and after him there shall be none such as is our god: his name is an undefiled
name, and it cannot be given to any other. Then defer not to come unto the
Lord, for Kings have not been ashamed of him, Princes have yielded unto his
lore, and the Kings of the earth have been subject to his commandment: The
whole world has relented to his voice and commandment, and all Nations
have subscribed to his hestes: who is like unto our God, that sits in his
throne above? and what man may be compared unto him? His power and his
righteousness is in the highest places: Psalm. 35.11.
his rules and his commandments, his wonders and his noble Acts within the
clouds: Psa. 77.13 Psa. 83.1. Psa. 89.9
None is like unto him and none may be compared unto our God: Then harken you
yt are here, and I require you again to harken: yet it is in vain: I speak
unto the wind, and I cast forth my speeches as into the air: my talk is to
disobedient Children, and my words are powered forth in vain: I see you
moved as men are moved in wrath, and you gather you together as the Adder
does, stopping his ear charm the Charmer never so conningly: you do evil,
you generation of the wicked, and your pride is looked upon from heaven: there
is one sits above laugheth you to scorn, and he has you already in
derision. Though you repine at him, yet can you not avoid his hands: though
you grin and mock, yet will he hamper you: your disobedience will he punish,
and your wicked cogitations will he bring to naught: your haughty minds
will he bring down, and your dead looks will he change: I tell you, there
is a fire gone out already, and if it kindle but a little, yea happy shall you
be, if you come unto him. For my own part, I hope it not, for your parts you
intend it not: For my self I think it not, for you, you determine it not: For
that which I think, I do ensure you I perceive it not: for this time not I,
but all present see it not: how you are moved we all see, how you are pricked
we all judge: how you will frame your selves herafter, that the Lord knows,
but none of (...) Concerning these (therefore) that are here, whom I perceive
you all are moved at: let nothing trouble you right honorable and well-beloved in
the Lord, they are as God will have them, you be as God has thought good for
you, and they shall, when God will return unto him: I must therefore say, Lib.
4. dialogorum:
as Gregorius says of such as were hardened in his time: Sionti sube^dem igne
aurum rutilat, palea fumat, ita sub eodem igne electus purgatur, pec^ator
crematur: (1) As under the same fire, Gold glistereth, chafe smoketh: so in
the same furnace the elect is purged, the offender is burned: As the king
Iosuah said, so must I say: who speakinge of the Princes that were destroyed,
said thus: It came of the Lord to harden their hearts that they should come
against Israel in battle, Josh. 11.20.
to the intent that they should destroy them utterly. And so is it here,
either you are come among us that you may see your selves and repent: or else
you be sent of the Lord, that you may harden your hearts, and have a more
grievous downfall. At this, let no man wonder. For the fiery pillar was a
light to the Isralites, Exo. 13.21. Exo. 14.22. Exo. 19.3. Exo. 16.20
but it was death and destruction to the Egiptians: All passed throw the red
sea, and were baptized in the Cloud and in the Sea by Moses, yet all saw not
the Land of promise: Mount Sinai burned and was death to the Isralites, but
Moses passed throw by the fire and went up to the Lord and was not hurt. Number.
11.33.
The Manna was Angels find and nourished many, it scrawled full of worms to
other: and the Quayles nourished, and were good meat, yet diverse of them died
with the meat in their mouths: So likewise is it in the word of the Lord, to
some it is salvation, to others it is condempnation. The Heavens are pleasant
and alike to all, yet rayned they down Haylestones upon the Amorites: Josh.
10.11.
Cense and Sacrifice were good, for all that Nadab and Abihu were consumed with
fire from Heaven as they did Sacrify^e: Many were stonge with fiery Serpents
and dyed, but the god^ye and righteous men were healed when they looked on the
same: All that came to Jordan did not pass over, Leu. 10.3. Number. 21.9 2, Reg.
2.8 2. Reg. 5.14.
yet the Prophet Elias had no sooner touched it with his Mantell, but he went
over on dry land: Many bathed in the river, only Naaman the Syrian was
^lonsed, of his leprosy: and by the word of the Lord, the godly (...), the
wicked are hardened, the godly have life, the reprobate are in death: I do
remember the To^er of Sil^^ defended many, but the 18 were killed, for it fell
upon them: and the Angel came down into the water of Beehesda at certain
times and stirred the water, for all that diverse went away Crep^^s as they
came, (...)
and were not helped. There were many Lopers in the days of Christ, (...) very
few, the ix. Leapers were all only they you read of cleansed: Great multitudes
touched the him of Christ's garments, but the woman a Stranger, was healed of
her flux of blooud: Diverse sat in the seat of Moses, all only Casphas gave
right sentence that one should die for the people: In like manner, many hear as
you do, but God opens and gives understanding: And so I conclude with
Paul, Romans 9.18.
of whom the Lord our god will, of him has he mercy, and whom he will he
hardens? And as for you, the Lord if it be his will and pleasure, open your
eyes: If not his will and purpose be fulfilled.

FINIS.
Faults escaped in Printing.
For the first part.
Page. 7. line. 9. read, he set. page. 7. line. 22. read, to possess and pa.
10 line. 2. read, and how. page. 11. lin. 35. read, with power, with right.
page. 16. line. 25. read, since Christ's. page. 26. line. 27. read, force.
page. 29. line. 9. read, There is. page. 36. line. 16, read, must. page. 4^
line. 29. read, slain by them. page. 43. line. 31. read, Apollyon.

For the second part.
Page. 7. line. 15. read, Even the same commandment. page. 11. line 22.
read. They all yielded to that. page. 13. line. 15. read. The Lord will rise
up in his fury. page. 13. Annota. For hat, read that. page. 14. Annot. 1.
read, has opened this. page. 14. lin. 17. read. There be Bonlij. page. 14.
line. 27. read, of the fruit Orizam. page. 16. lin. 1. read, condescend unto
the end. page. 17 line. 15. read, for Midbhath, Nidbhath. page. 17. line. 21.
read, that should lyghten. page. 18. line. 3. kept as at the day. page. 18.
line. 8. go a gleaning. page. 18. Annot. 2. read. They all, almost. page. 18.
Annot. 3. read, not Christ and his Apostles. page. 20. line. 7. read. Is no
other. page. 20. li. 18. For (...), read (...). page. 21. line. 4. read, then
in use. page. 21. line. 7. read, Enthutianus. page. 25. An. Vltima, read,
Valafridus an Abbat. page. 29. An. Vltima, read. To have any. page, 32.17.
read. But looked upon..


