THE CONSPIRACY A TRAGEDY, AS IT WAS INTENDED, for the Nuptials, of the Lord
Charles Herbert, and the Lady Villers.

Written by Mr. HENRY KILLIGRAEW.

LONDON. Printed by JOHN NORTON, for ANDREW CROOK, 1638.

The Introduction.
Enter Diana, and Nimphs. Dia. S Some back again, this way my self will take,
And as you go, call those chaster wood-men
To your aid, who often help us in the chase,
Mingle with every step a call, and if
An echo but resound her name, utter't
Again, until you are confirmed.
Exeunt two of the Nymphs. I Have lost a Nymph in whom I gloried more
Then all those prouder Trophyes to my name,
She excelled in Fame, in Birth, in Beauty,
And being Patroness of her, well I might
Be called the goddess of Strict Chastity.
She was her self a guard unto her self,
Her Beauty so commanding good, did keep
Her chastity; and her chastity, made
Her beauty safe, lust might sooner gaze to
Virtue in her eyes, then spy one of its
Known Deformities. --
Enter Juno. And much I fear, some Satyr, or worse power
Has betrayed her innocent Stepps, and now
Detaines her, adoring yet what he means
To spoil, or Jove again in some various
Shape of Love, wrongs both his Deity, and me --

Juno. And why bright Phoebe, may not a more
Equal Love. Endimion, Hippolitus,
Or a fairer youth persuade her not from
Her chastity, but you? --

Diana. Juno on the earth?

Juno. But this thoughts too likely, and to common
To be entertained: you think if ought be
Lost, it must be lost a far, pass Hymen's
Temple that borders on your groves, and search
The Caves. Nay believe heaven's a nearer
Enemy, if Jove do court her it is in
The shape of Ganimede, for such was he
That led her from your train. But turn and prove
How much you are lost in fears, not she in love.
See in this glorious perspective, where sits
Your so deplored Nymph, and the lovely Satyr
That ensnared her. Can you against his nobler
Breast bend a dart? or wish it thither?
See where Cupid stands, and laughes, ready
In his just offense, if you shoot, to shoot
Another. Tempt him not at so great ods,
Often times such beauty has inflamed the gods.
It seems you little deal in marriages,
That could be so ignorant of this day,
Then which, none was ever more expected,
More proclaimed. This was no midnight bargain,
Nor stolen match: but like unto the lovers,
Known and eminent. First, by their Parents
Thought on and concluded who were not sad
Judges, but Prophets of their after loves,
Then deferrd till Minerva had enriched
The one, and your purer Laws the other.
And last of all, when in this high manner,
Fame with her lowdest blast had askst the bonds,
And none was found so boldly bad, nor proudly
Envious to intrude, joynd they were by the
Sacred hand of Majesty.
Why droopes Diana?

Diana. Thus daily to behold the noblest of my train
Snatched from me, and Hymen's torch outshine the
Virgin Taper.

Juno. This day your power is not diminisht, her
Name, and not her Chastity is lost; she is
Only chaing'd from a pure virgin, to as
Pure a Bride.

Diana. And yet it joys me to see
My fears thus ended.

Juno. Express it in welcome of this Royal
Pair, who thsis have causd it; grace them with your
Best endeavors, and what the others want
Of Honor, they daily can bestow.
Let us join, and perform something, that may be worthy of their presence,
who of our ready Servants shall we grace with this employment?


Enter Tragedia. Trage. Me, great goddess.

Juno. Tragedia? the enemy of thtngs
Fair and prosperous; what has she to do
With loves, or marriages, unlesse't be to
Confound 'um? who so often before the Altar
(Happy with the Flowers and Virgins hands
That decked it) has offered up the Lovers,
A sad sacrifice. Delighting still, ere
Phoebus could withdraw, to hasten a night
Of sorrow ore the day.
From these solemnities be far away,
Thou, thy Buskins, Crown, and Robe, filling the
Scene with tumults, and with blood. Thy milder
Sister, gentle Comaedy, far sitter
For these sports. we will entertain; who can present
Soft, and sweet loves, Examples of this night,
Beginning sour, but ending with delight.

Trage. How much Divinest Juno speaks below
Her self, in preferring what she must scorn
To name. Can she desire to do something
In honor of this assembly? something,
As when the gods are pleased, and wish to see it
In so low a Strain? entertain Princes?
And in Comedies poor vain? would she have
An Epithalamion in these Lovers praise.
And hear it chanted in rude roundelayes?
As all profane. Let these be far away
Unworthy in this night to bear a part,
What a mockery would such be of their
Noble Love, to have its pure name smothered
By so gross a fire? their brave actions
Parralel'd with such country Jiggs, of Cupid,
Ridiculously immitating with
Their long passions? No, if Juno do
Desire to crown these hours above the rest,
And make 'em welcome, yet before the best
These do enjoy, through peace, and innocence
Let her perform something that is god-like, they
Which are happy need noe shows of mirth. Their
State is Comedy enough, sportes do not fit
This night but glory. If It be haeroicke,
Then it is opposite, which makes me offer
Thus my service, as most due to me, to
Show the will, that speaks the language of the
Gods, and as I am thus taxt with blood, and
Crewelty, it is not my lines that wounds them
But their faults represent.
And though they are with vice, and fate oppressed
Yet those which see a Tragedy, are blessed.

Juno. Thou have prevailed, make this night such as thou have spoke, or if thy
thoughts are higher, equal them.

For know the gods o're-see These hours solemnity.


Tragedia, If Juno smile, here I shall favor find
These like the gods accept the will, and mind.

Exeunt. Juno, Diana, Nymphs. The Prologue.
Tragedia. Blessed Theater: how fair, and glorious shine
Hathfild thy several spaces! how divine,
And heavenly Luster! all the lights above,
Leaving their mansions where they nightly move
To shade, and darkness. Have in this one Sphere
Combinde their aspects, and consented here.
Never was Roof (as at these Nuptial ties)
^ild with so bright auspitious Deities,
Such glad presages; all they once did mean
By Hymen's, Cupids, all their Geniall seen
Of loves, and laughters, that were wont to appear
To make an union fortunate are here,
All in this presence; from you Royal Throne
They fly throughout this Round, on every one
That here beholds, with hovering wings they light,
And breed in all a cheerful appetite
To what we shall present, which if you daigne
Still to send forth (great Princes) and maintain
'Twill make even Tragedy her self to smile,
Even me grow jocound, and forget the while
My dreadful person to prevaricate
From what I am, and change my sadder cries
To Peans, and to Epithalamies.
It will from those two lovers by its sway
Ravish their plighted hearts another way,
From them to their great guests, when they shall spy
The powers, that formerly vouchsaf't to tie
Their lasting knot again with the same grace
With which they once encouraged their embrace,
To smile upon their service, 'twill bring on
In their dear Breasts a Rare contention
Of zeal to your delight -- Such grace commands,
A strife of duty though from joined hands.
FINIS.
THE CONSPIRACY.
Actus 1. Scena 1
Enter two servants preparing for a Banquet. 1 SO, dispatch, dispatch, what
wines are those?


2 The late present from the Merchants.


1 It Is well.


Enter Polyander. Pol. Are all things ready fellows? the King' son entering. 1
They are my Lord.


Enter King, Polyander, Menetius, Comastes, Aratus, Phronimus, Eurylochus
attendants. King. Ha, ha, ha, no happiness like the Fools, Comastes?


Com. No, none Sir, he is mirth it self, and the cause of it in others, they
say all pleasure is a shadow, then that which we enjoy is but the shadow of a
shadow, hardly the Picture of what he embraces; our Delights are faint,
thwarted by the Conscience, started with fears, and after an hour of pleasure
a week of repentance; in which time we live by rule, and not by custom,
laugh not though the jest be good, nor rage though at a just cause; but sickly
whisper out our sayings, as though they were our last and eat our chickens
with the curtains drawn, when the Fool lusts with his whole soul too, and
sins till he is weary, knows no Conscience but his want that way; nor
remorse but disability.


King. Hah, ha, ha.


Com. Nature never showed her liberality more than to those she was sparing of
her best gifts to, she houses wisdom in a body full of decays, and requires
her whole strength to bear off the ruin, measures his legs with the
spiders, gives him pale and wan looks, scarce altered from the earth he was
made of, where to the Idiot she bestows a body equal with the bulk of trees,
and arms as Thunder-proofe, makes him a strong, a large, and healthy fool.


King. Ha, ha; ha.


Ara. Fit Lectures for such a Sholler.


King. Well Comastes, thou shall not want for a coat, if that will do it.


Com. Send me a mind to with it, and you have not a greater present for your
neighbor Princes.


King. Come my Lords, let us sit and fill up our cups,
Make them like our joys, still full, and flowing,
Thus it should be my Lords in a State that
Knows no troubles, let unhappy Princes,
Whom losses do afflict, and fears affright,
Make yearly feasts: But we, whose even affairs
Do follow one another, and do keep
There just Periods, though the reins are loose
And their guide sleep, seeming rather, so to
Have fallen out, than so caused; each day shall
Be a triumph, each hour a feast.

Ara. We may chance to find one out for Funerals.


King. A health to all, and a long peace.


Com. You are mellancholly Aratus. claps him somewhat rudely.


Ara. You are rude Comastes, and let me tell you --


Pol. His Lordship is one of those which say their Prayers backward for the
State, and ends in black wishes.


Ara. You are the Foxes that thrive by it.

Phro. Aratus your anger is unseasonable, and the King marks it.


King. How now Aratus, what is the matter? our table should know no frowns, then
least of all when we our self forbeares them.


Ara. Royal Sir I ask your pardon, he wakt me something rudely, and got a
froward answer.


King. What, all dead, fill another round, our wine moves not, here Polyander,
to thee, what think thou of Comastes happiness?


Pol. I think Sir, it is as dull as foolish, there cannot be a sense of
pleasure, where there is so little sense. Greatness is the center of all
happiness, and felicity like our lands, at first is tied to the Crown, kings
come nere unto the gods, and are like them both in power and pleasure, do
command all, enjoy all, are miserable only in too much, and want but what to
wish for, this is the dazeling happiness. It Is vain therefore to prefer
private joys before the Crowne-pleasures, the King may throw by his greatness
when he please, and be poorly happy, the beggar will nere sigh unto a Scepter.


King. Why I Polyander there is some life in this, a little heaven even in the
apprehension. Aratus art not thou of this opinion?


Ara. Not I Sir, nor of my Lord the Foole's there,
Kings are more miserable than they seem
Happy, flattered by themselves and others
Into a Joy that is not, and what they
Feel, they rather do believe, than find so.
Yet I grant too, a King may be happy
But never as a King. Felicity
Is a purchase, and no inheritance,
Nor has the prerogative more than one
Life in it neither, it dies still with the buyer,
Troubles are the good kings profession,
In the wars the first dart is thrown at him,
Where his happiness is in a glorious death,
Or else his God-like rays plucked from him
By some accursed hand, and so falls less
Happy, being but wishd so by a poor
Revenge he knows not.

Com. Very grave and unseasonable, thus your Lordship gets the reputation of
singularity, which the vulgar suspect to be wisdom.


Ara. Sir, you see how this place and my freenes are injurd.


King. Mirth, only mirth Aratus, he means 'twould better become a counsel
than a banquet.


Enter Timeus. King. Timeus welcome, nay, keep your seats, would thou had
been partaker of our sports.


Time. When that my actions or mine age shall make me worthy of your ease and
pleasures, I shall be a thankful sharer, but till then, your troubles will
become me better than your sports, and cares will sit more lovely on my brow
than roses. Sir, those that are about you seek to drown your virtues.


Ara. Your Lordship means none here?


Time. I name none here my Lord.


King. Nay Timeus thou nere lookst friendly on our pleasures


Time. I must confess Sir, I had rather see you bloody than thus wet, nor are
my wishes impious: Poliander?


Pol. My Lord:


Time. How basely that smile becomes thee: I had
Rather thou had answered me with a blow,
Than such a look: I thought to have asked thee
Something, but I see thou art unworthy
Of a brave demand. Thy skill lies only
In the curiosity of a meal.
To say at the first touch a th tongue, this is
A Chian, this a Falernian wine.
Straight by the color of the flesh to know
Whether the foul were cram d, or whether fed:
Prithee Polyander how sat the wind
When this Bore was slain? were not these apples
Pulld the Moon increasing? Degenerate,
I have seen thee put thy face into a frown,
And were so constant in that look, as if
Thou had no other.

Pol. Sir, when you shall find or make a cause, I Will put them on again, here
they will but sour the entertainment.


Com. You see, my Lord, they are not drowned, they live still under water.


Time. Like thine, beast.


King. Prithee Timeus let us enjoy our mirth while the gods give it, the time
will come that we shall wish for it, and not have it; on my Conscience thou
wishest for enemies that thou might cut them off.


Tim. I am sorry I have offended against your mirth, it was not my intent, I came
to bring you news.


King. News, what is it good?


Tim. It Is as you shall esteem on it, Sir, There Is a Stranger Prince arrived.


King Hither?


Tim. Yes Sir, his visits forced by a storm as he pretends.


King. What ere the occasion be, he shall be welcome. The time's far
spent. Aratus it shall be thy employment, from us fairly salute the Prince,
and tell him though the Seas have been unfriendly, the land shall court him.


Ara. Great sir you highly honor me.


Exeunt. King, Timeus, Pol Com. Men. attendants. Phro. So, now we have time to
speak, what think thou Aratus of these passages?


Ara. Well, bravely well.


Euril. Your speech struck desperately at the King, he will not swallow it
without some touch of Jealousy.


Ara. It Is no matter, he cannot cross us now,
None but the Gods can do it, nor they without
a miracle, great as was their providence
Which hitherto has saved us, we have not
Taken so many years to build a work up
And then to have it ruind with a push:
No, he that will shook, must first orethrow
A Kingdom, a Prince, a Law, so large
The extents are, nere did plot thrive like it:
It has infected with the holy sore
The greatest part o'th Realm, and catches daily
Like some unheard of new opinions
Streigthned at first, and prisoned in the breasts
Of two or three, gains strength by time, and ears,
And daily fed by curiosity,
Thrusts out at last the old and most received,
And grows the whole religion of the place.
When we have called our party forth, the work
Will seem done, the thin numbers which are left
Not deserving the name of enemies.
The Tyrant then will see himself no more
A Klng, only the wretched cause of war
His power being ravishd from him.

Phro. While the fruit^ thus ripe, why do we let it grow?


Eur. And spoil perhaps.


Ara. We will not longer, only a little ceremony detaines us, to crown our
King, that past, our actions, and our thoughts shall then contend in motion.


Euri. How sped your visit to the young Prince?


Ara. Most happily,
Oh had you seen with me there the dear cause
Of this our danger, you would have thought it
So no more, but stood contemning life,
Thinking your blood ill stord within your veins,
When that his service called it. Sure it was some such
Shape and sweetness, which first slav'd men
And gained a Rule before there was a kingdom.

Eura. You forgot your message to the Prince.


Ara. O it is true, our next part is to delight our selves in doing something,
pray bear me company, we may get thanks for it another day. Exeunt.


Enter Harpastes. Har. Devil, whether will thou hurl me? the ship
Sunk under so much ill, nor can the earth
Bear us both together, the greatest hills
Press not her face with half that load; one thought
Of goodness made me lighter than the waves
And at an instant taught me how to swim.

Enter Metampus to him. Mel. Harpastes?


Har. Melampus?


Mel. Are we only escaped?


Har. I hope so.


Mel. Then the storm has played the hangman, and saved us innocent.


Har. Innocent? what is that? it has saved us so much labor and a broken head
perhaps.


Mel. The wrack was great and full of horror.


Har. How the rogues praid, and rored above the waves, vowed whole herds of
offerings for their safety. But Neptune saved em charges and took the verger
beasts.


Mel. We escaped miraculously.


Har. I hope you will burn no bullocks to the Sea.


Mel. No, my vows were of another nature, I vowed To live well, and changed my
bloody purpose.


Har. Thou did not mean in earnest?


Mell. I did then, but I no sooner touched the shore and safety but my old
thoughts returned.


Har. Come we will go claim our hire, and swear we killed him before the
storm, our fellows dead pay will fall to us, we will demand for losses, I, and
our dangers too.


Mel. If mine eyes deceive me not, here comes one will deny the payment.


Har. It Is he, be resolute and follow me.


Enter Pallantus to them. Pall. How now friends, amazde at what is past: dangers
oreblowne are dreams, no more to be esteemed of, within this hour you would
have given a world to stand thus, were it yours, let not smaller losses then
afflict you, the greatest goods are trifles after such deliverance, our birth
day was not half to us so happy as is this minute, then we had no sense of
life, now we perceive and joy in it.


They assault him and he kills them. Pall. What moved these villains hatred?
sure they know me not, nor did I ere see them before this voyage, they could
not hope for money, there is more in it, here is a paper which He searches the^.
may chance to tell me something, by this I see they are murderers, what is
here, a beard and hair? black patches, sure it is their trade they are so
furnished, both of the same profession.

A Letter.
I am glad to hear you have found Pallantus, receive this man the bearer into
your company and council, and if your secret practices fail you, assault him
openly, and by violence perform the murder: let the one or other be done
speedily, my employments here for you, are many and instant.

Your Lord and friend, Timeus.


Art thou the Lord? my wonder then is done,
Thy treacheries is greater than thy hate,
And that too is something more than malice
Above the search of innocence, a knot
Unto the subtilest Traitors, a riddle
To thy self; were not thy home villainies
Enough, but thou must maintain thy Factors
Out for lives in foreign Kingdoms? bloody
Merchant. I have lain hid so long, am now
So new formed by time, no friend can know me.
Hate, thine eyes are more perceiving far than
Friendship; I have not dared to name my self,
Because with it I do name my Father,
And yet thou have it perfect; him with
Many more, who were too good to look on
So much ill, as thine and thy fathers lives,
Were made away -- ease; my breast, or too much
Rage, instead of a Revenger, will turn me
A stock, a fool; Hear me you banished gods,
For I may justly fear, if that your Powers
Are absent any where, it is from this place
Where tyranny does reign; on this Altar
I do vow to be your Martyr, if not
Your surviving instrument, nere to let
Fall your vengeance, till it light on those which
Slew the King, your King, the image of your
Goodness, which killd the Prince, and dared to say
That he was lost, lost indeed; which on the
Princess do intend a rape, their marriage is
No better, which killed my father, and last
Resolved on me:
Had I a thousand lives I Would gage them here
And think your Indgement yet not bought too dear.

Enter Aratus, Phronimus, Eurilochus, and others to him. Ara. In the name of
wonder what art thou?


Pall. Why? what am I Sir?


Ara. Nay, I know not, not does any but an Antiquary or a Conjurer, certainly
thou art no man, or if be, I am sure, none of the last Edition.


Pall. Were your troop absent I Would make you find, I were without those
helps, 'twas so long since you saw a man, a true one, that you know not when
you meet one, your Lordships glass showed you none this morning.


Eur. Whence came thou?


Ara. I, that i would feign know, heeres no hole open In the earth.


Pall. From Sea.


Ara. From the bottom of it I think, there is nothing like thee above water.


Phro. Of what profession art thou, a Soldier?


Pall. Yes.


Ara. Thou should be hanged for thy very looks, if thou were not, they are
excusable in no calling else.


Pall. These are some insolent scoffers which breath their wits on all they see
weaker then themselves against they meet the fool next, I wrong my self to
talk with 'em.


Eur. Do hear?


Pall. None of your wit yet.


Eur. Thou bleedest!


Pall. Was it that made me such a wonder? I do so.


Phro. And much blood is spilt upon the ground know thou the cause?


Pall. Yes, I was assaulted by two rank rascals which I let blood and cured?


Phro. Have thou not killd, and robbed 'em?


Pall. Sr. your thoughts are base, and you do ill thus to insult upon mine
innocence. Robbed 'em? monyes more below my thoughts then Earth, my education
has been noble, and though the Midwife lapt me not in Purple, nor Princes
gossipt at my birth, I have dard to be as honest as the richest, my word has
commanded more then all your Land or money. Those deeds which I have done,
dishonestly dard not to have looked on, they would have frighted your Lordship
if but told you toward bed time.


Phro. I never saw such fierceness.


Ara. I begin to admire this fellow.


Eur. Where have thou bestowed 'em?


Pall. Behind there, if you search 'em you may find more, if they had any money
the Sea washed them clean on it before their deaths.


Eur. Why, were they cast away?


Pall. Yes, but it seems they had a land-fate.


Ara. They search them. What Is here; a roges Limbs, Beards: their two heads a
piece.


Phro. Here Is a Paper confirms them most notorious Villains.


Eur. Sure I have seen some faces like them.


Phro. They were propper men.


Ara. They were so, did kill them both alone,


Pall. I told you once so, Iam no proud on it, to boast it ore again, and tell
you how I did it.


Ara. Trust me, thou art a brave fellow, and I admire thy stoutnesse, thou
lookst as if thou had been nursed in perils: dare thou withstand a bold
one, but as honest as it is great? what say thou, can thou like of us?


Phro. Thou shall not find us as we appeard at first.


Pall. While you talk thus I can, and in your business if honesty go yoakt
with danger: it cannot fright me then though it have more terror then Seamen
faigne at their return, or Cowards fears suggest, horred even unto a ly. I
dare face it, and wager a life i will conquer it.


Arat. Thy words go high as Thunder.


Pall. Pardon my words if my actions prove as fatal.


Ara. I believe thee, and dare promise thou will do wonders, let me embrace
thee, thou art welcome to our friendship; mine eyes did look on thee
unworthyly before, methinks thart comely now, thy scarrs are so many graces,
not set by an effiminate but by a manly and warlike Skill Business calls us
hence, thou shall not part one minute from me, thy wound needs help, Come,
thou shall heal before me. Exeunt. Om.


Enter Clearchus, Haimantus. Clear. Have you commanded all the Mariners aboard
each Captain to his charge; bid the Soldiers fill the decks with their full
numbers, and display their colors. Let nothing wanting that may add to the
glory of the Navy.


Hai. Sr there is not, all things are in their pride and height, the Captains
seem to lend brightness to the day, and like the Sun throws rays, and light
about them; nor looks their gold less awful then the Soldiers Steel, on
the Ships appear the joy and riches of a conquest, and yet keeps the
strictness of a joining battle, there want's nothing to make a warlike like,
princely and well commanded, Navy but your presence, Sr.


Clea. I would not have them think us such poor men that we are drove to
seek for their releife, to due for bread, and water, but rather that we come
like Noble wooers, full of rewards and presents able to return all favors we
receive, and equally to honor them which honor us. As great as they, It shall
appear he that is master of such a Fleet, may Style himself King, though
Lord of nothing else.


Hai. The people flock upon the shore, and with one voice say you come to
fetch their Princess, you have more then their consents already you have their
wishes too.


Clea. I marry Haimantus such a Jewel would
Make the rest look dim, there are two Ladies in this
I Will, if fame say true, the wonders of the World.
When nature made 'em she summond her whole
Godhead, and unwearied wrought till she
Had don, formed each limb as if she had begun there,
She seemed to practice on the
World till now, and what like beautiful she
Framed before, were but degrees to this height,
These the assent from which she now must fall
They made her older then the labor of
A thousand years.
Enter a Messenger. What Is the matter?


Hai. There Is a great Train, it seems from Court coming to your grace.


Clea. How nigh are they?


Mess. They are on entering my Lord.


Clea. We Will meet 'em.


Enter Aratus Phronimus, Eurylochus, Palluntus, and attendants to them. Ara.
Sr. the King congratulates your safety and is glad of your arrival, though the
cause were dangerous, you would have obliged him much, Sr. if you had been
bound for Creta.


Clea The King is royal and chides me kindly, he binds a stranger ever to his
Service.


Ara. His Majesty expects you will honor him with your presence this night at
Court.


Clea. I shall wait upon him, but my Lord I must first desire, you will honor me
with your company a Shipboard, I shall not need to excuse a Soldiers
entertainment, I doubt not but your Lordship knows it well, plainness is
half the praise on it.


Arat. Sir, you are the envy of our neighbor Princes, you so far exceed
them in a brave command. I nere was happy in the like sight before, and my
Lord, they that can boast the strangest, have not seen one so common and so
rare; your Navy looks as if she wore the spoils of a whole Land, or came to
buy them.


Clea. My Lord, you will make me proud, your presence yet will add unto its
glory. Exeunt omnes.


Enter Timeus and Coracinus. Tim. Found dead upon the Shore?


Cora. I my Lord, thrown into a cliffe by certain Fishermen.


Tim. Were they drowned?


Cora. No my Lord, there were many wounds found upon their bodies, and yet
their clothes were wet.


Tim. It Is strange, were there but two?


Cora. No my Lord.


Tim. That Is stranger yet, reward the men, and command them make no further
search, nor speak of it, let it die with you too, do ye hear? Exit.
Coarcinus.

The villains have robbed at their return, and got their Deaths that way, I
near could spare them worse, the State stands in greater need of theirs, than
of the sword of Justice. Rodia?


Enter Rodia? Rod. My Lord.


Tim. Is your Lady to be spoke with?


Rod. Always my Lord by you, but now she is coming forth.


Enter Eudora. Tim. Save you sweet sister.


Eudo. O you are welcome Sir.


Tim. Sure Eudora, Venus and the Graces had their hands to day about you, you
look fairer than your self, and move in the Sphere of love and beauty. Cupid
has taken his stand up in your eyes, and shoots at all that come before him;
pray Venus he miss me.


Eudo. When begins your serious?


Tim. These are the sweet looks that captivate the Prince in a free country,
and this the dress that must inchant him, ha?


Eudo. There is no charm in it certainly, it pleased me the least of many, no,
it is your fair Mistress which bears those Love-nets about her, if the Stranger
escape her he is safe.


Tim. Had better kill his father, and then gaze upon the spectacle, than look
upon her with the eyes of love.


Eudo. Nay then you are cruel, would you have him strongger then your self
was? if he be guilty the same doom must light on you too.


Tim. But I have prevaild so far that he shall be free from the Danger both
of love and seeing, she will not be there; nor must you make up his
entertainment.


Eudo. I was commanded to be ready and attend there.


Time. But now the Commissions altered and runs in another sense.


Eudo. I shall be content to obey either. May I not know the cause?


Tim. You may, we would not feed the Prince here with hopes to get a wife,
this was the storm that drove him in, nor must you only for this time
forbear his presence, but while he stays; he is unworthy of you.


Eudo. If you know him so, I shall then without
Excuse deny his visits, But I think
This business may be borne a nobler way,
Nor will the end fail though the means be fair
Leave it with me, if he sue with honor,
He will take an honorable answer.
Though he gain none from me, I Will get his love,
And send him home, no less a friend, than if
He were a husband, by my restraint you will
Only gain unto your self the marks of
Jealousy and malice, and fouler stains
If that the crime were named to the desert.
Besides it does proclaim in me too, such
A weakness as I am much ashamed of;
Had he a face adorned with the graces
Of both Sexes, beauty and manliness,
And these ingrafted on the body of
A god, I could look on, converse, I, and
Neglect him too, when I have reason; fear
Not me then.

Tim. I do not, I know thee strong, the honor of a Kingdom may lean with
safety on thee, but he will linger here too long, besot the State with
feastings, and in this ease give safety to treacherous undertakings, he must be
usd ill, there is reason for it.


Eudo. Is there then a policy in rudeness?
Why don't you rather send a defiance
To him, proclaim him enemy; this were
Nobler far, than to receive him in your arms
And then affront him, say health and wish
Poison in the cup, are you so much below him?

Tim. There Is greater thoughts in hand than curious rules of Ceremony, if he
send any present to you, return it back with scorn.


Eudo. Pride is ill becoming, and hated by the next proud man.


Tim. Then take um and laugh at him.


Eudo. No, where my thanks are too much, I Will rather return gifts for gifts; I
would be loath to have my faults reach further than my goodness.


Tim. He Will wear those gifts for favors.


Eudo. They will not prove so, yet he will deserve some as he is a stranger.


Tim. Not from you, rewards the State will give him, you hear my fathers will,
you must not see him while he stays.


Eudo. I do, and shall easily keep that I do not care to break.


Tim. Farewell.


Eudo. Must you be gone?


Tim. There Is a little business calls me.


Eudo. If be but a little stay.


Tim. Only the welcome of the Stranger.


Eudo. It Is too much to hinder,
I see a causeless and a nee lesserage
Hid in your breast the Prince may be noble,
Valiant, if you receive him then with scorn,
He Will prove a stronger enemy than those
Unworthy ones you fear at home, whose own
Actions daily ruin, and whose ill made
Knots will loosen faster than they ty them;
You have prevaild with me, I Will not be won
To see him now: but let it not appear
By your default, and that my retirement
Is only in scorn to him, which will be
Made plain, if that you change not this face you
Have put on, it becomes you at no time;
A Prince should always smile or look indifferent,
He has no need of frowns, as other men,
All lives are in his breath, and if they do
Offend, his revenge is known, and need not
Be declared by face expressions, where there is
Power to punish it is tyranny to rage,
Anger is no attribute of Justice;
It Is true, she is painted with a sword, but looks
As if she held it not, though war be in
Her hand, yet peace dwells in her face; learn once
Of me, and when you have no cause of a
Distemper, express none; now you have made
All sure, doubt not, but receive the Stranger
With fearelesse and confident embraces.

Time. I will, or at least I Will tell theeso when thou perswadst me thus.
Farewell. Exit Timeus.


Eudo. Thy subtle plots will ruin thee at last,
Valor and policy do seldom meet,
Yet here they are in their extremes in one,
But do most strangely divide the owner,
Makes him dread none, and yet confirms him not
Within a guard. Exit.

What can our wishes deprecate.
When vice is made both Law and fate!
When for the good o'th Commonweal
The counsels called to Plot a Meal,
And Beasts brought in with solemn cry.
As spoils got from the enemy.
Chorus. Whose life's the Table and the Stage,
He does not spend but loose his age.
The Kings eyes, like his Jewels, be
Set to Adorn, not to foresee:
And as his Crown: he thinks each thing
Runs round in a continved Ring.
But Sacrifices crowned be
And Gardlands fit for Destiny.
Chorus. Fates then we fear, have writ this lot
That Wine shall loose what blood has got.
Actus Secundus: Scena I.
Enter Clearchus. CLea. Is this your royal entertainment? a Common host would
have given one as civil; shown his guests their quarter, and then left them
to stumble out again; my receavers are all vanished -- An undeserving scorn
will trouble me -- neither of the two Princes were in the train; they might
have trusted 'em, I could have gagged a Kingdom for their security. The meanest
things displease me not, if they are the fullest offerings of the place, and
gratefully I can submit to the necessity: but where they are afforded I can
relish nothing but the choysest, and look on ought but what invites the
general and first eye, here a continual Spring and Harvest make but one
season, no scarsity does dwell but in their minds, and then I think my self
neglected with the best things.

Enter Courtier and passes by, half Reeling. Was not the fellow drunk?

Another something fat. Courtier passes by. Now they begin to muster up again,
here I stand like one that learnes to make his first honor.

Enter Mellissa and passes by. When comes the fourth? three of the Elements
have past by simple and unmixt, Water, Earth and Air, livelier expressed than in
a Masque: the fourth was in the Prince, he singd my face with a complement. I
am arrived among a stranger people, than ever I heard lyde of yet, at my
return I shall have undiscoverd story enough to fill a map, though the Land
be known, I have past some two degrees, and may lawfully extend my lines to
twenty, and fill the vacuity with monsters and Fish-heads.

Enter Comastes. Sir, by your favor, if your business call you not, pray let
me entreat your company awhile.


Com. Troth, an't like your Grace, I am in have, in very great have, the King
has sent for me, and I know he is thirsty till I come; I would your Grace were
as resolute, and as well armd this way as I He discovers a great Goblet. you would
be the wellcomst man -- He loves a royal Drunkard with admiration, he never
saw one yet but in a glass. Sir, have you any business with him? you need no
other Orator, than such as this, such a mouth, without a tongue, will persuade
any thing; yet this is o'th least, fit only for Phisicke-daies, when he would
not surfeit, a mere toy that troubles the waiters with often filling, but I
have one as high -- heeres nothing to measure it by; it was that made me so
inward with him. I always use to petition with it, it is bigger than any of his
own, and pleased him above measure; the first time he saw it, he commended
the largeness of my mind, and said it was a noble emulation in me: he has a
Daughter Sir, a beautiful Lady, my hopes, unless some neighbor Prince do
reele betwixt us, your Grace comes the right way, he hates a dry Inland
traveller, but that you kiss the cup, and have too much bounce, and down with
him in you, which were things he surseited on some fifteen years since, and
still the very names turn his Stomach, besides your Navy and attendants are
too great, he would have esteemed more on you, had they been fewer, enough only
to lean on, when you are oretaken, or if you had wanted those, and borrowed
his unto your chamber it had been better where he finds worth, the pomp
delights him not, your pardon Sir.


Exit Comastes. Clea. This is stranger than all, with what license this fellow
abuses his Master, or speaks truths altogether, as unpardonable; sure he has a
pattent for it: I see I shall want names for all the monsters.


Enter Aratus to him. Ara. Though your grace are here a Strangor, I may demand
of you where the King is?


Clea. If none know more than I, my Lord, you have lost your king.


Ara. Sure he is not well, I hope he is not, with a safe loyalty I may wish
he has a dangerous cause rather than none, to take him from a Prince the
first night of his arrival in Court.


Clea. My Lord, I have found much honor in you, one that knows to show more
civility to a Stranger than he can deserve, and only are unhappie at this
time in an unworthy choice, but if you still can continue this nobleness,
though the King frown, I shall gladly make some stay, at least till I have
satisfied a strangers curiosity, and may seem rather to have left the place,
than to have been thrust from it.


Ara. Believe me (my Lord) both your entertainment, and this necessity, that
you are drove to use so mean a service as mine, does shame me much. It Is not
the nature of this place to be thus uncivil, nor is tour custom, as it has
been this day, to coope our Ladies up as if the sight were dangerous, their
beauties will endure the Test: and we will put them to it; it was unkindly done,
I know one look of theirs would have given a welcome to a young man above the
greatest cost.


Clea. My Lord, you know to speak a pleasing language.


Ara. We have two Princesses Sir, few Kingdoms can show such Jewels, but
only one is oriental, the other's artificial, but an excellent Iemme too;
one of them, the true one, I doubt not but I have credit for to show you, but
it is not to be purchased, that happy opportunity is already past, and the now
owner esteems it above his wealth, his life, I, and his honor too. aside.


Clea. Yet my Lord bless me with the sight, I can rejoice at so much
excellence, though another do possess it, and no doubt as much of the owners
felicity lies in others admiration, as in his own possession.


Ara. All but jealous men think so, and they count themselves robbed of all
happiness in their wives another does receive, are as covetous of their
beauties as many husbands of their persons, think themselves cuckolded by a
woman's commendation. But, my Lord, I Will leave you, I was going to the Princess
before I met your grace. I know few words will gain so easy a request, to
morrow and daily I Will wait upon your Lordship.


Clea. Sir you have engaged Me your servant beyond my hope of freedom. Exeunt
omnes


Enter Hianthe and Ladies. Hian. Nay, you must bear it patiently, my dominion
extends no further than these rooms, and beyond them I grant nothing: how will
you endure the Strangers delays, that thus hardly brook his coming, the King
in complement will not admit the winds to servesooner than a month, were that
all his stay; but here must be Masks and triumphs before he goes, and the
Subject yet not known for the one, nor ornaments made for the other; perhaps a
league must be concluded, and then I would not live to be so old as to see the
end on it, the meanest persons will require a month to fit themselves, a Prince
cannot turn in less than a season.


1 Lady. May you not see the Garden, Madam?


Hian. No, nor the day, but through a window.


2 Lady. We Will petition to him under the title of distressed Damsells, that
must pass the flower of their age in imprisonment, unless he will travel to
his own, or some other Country, to gain 'em freedom.


Hian. Madam, he will think we are held by enchantment, that his absence, and
not his sword must gain our liberty. Faith wenches, what would you do with
such a servant that will lay commands on you, and be your Lord before Himen
has made him so?


1. Lady, Madam, I Would change him.


Hian. Leave him I would but change him's a harder matter, and will require
more consideration, I have not the faith that I can work so great a miracle as
to perswad mine, to any thing he has not a mind to, and yet he swears he
loves me, as he loves a Kingdom.


2. Lady, You may believe him, Madam, you are his best Title were the Sword
away.


Hian. Melissa broke loose, and gone to the show.


Enter Melissa. Mel. No Madam, she is returned.


Hian. Is she so, and what has she seen?


Mel. The scurviest entertainment, I did not think it possible so short a time
could have prepared one so ill, 'twas thought on before, and pains taken to
order it so much for the worse: This was the first day that e're me thoughts
the King and my Lord Timeus looked like the Father and the Sun, The King had
on his old council face, which all hope^ he had forgot and this was the only
time these many years he should not have worn it, they both embraced the
Stranger, as cold, and carelessely as if they had been to fight after, this
behavior in the great ones, was presently observed like a new fashion, and in
an instant the whole train was in, from the bravest to those which follow a
fashion only, when it is to leave off something, and then look not as if they
were hot: but wanting a cloak. Marry their wit's were not so changeable, as
their faces, and having but one Sure of Complement, and that now unfashonable,
they were feign to supply it with Legs, and Silence.


Hian. How looked the Prince on their behavior?


Mel. He looked much above it in my opinion, two foot higher then my Lord
Timeus though not altogether so tall, these sower looks were all the
without-dore show, which endeed in a solemn March, they returned all into the
Palace, Shows Papers. the Strangers seemed rather to follow with a silent
confent then an invitation; there the press shoock me off to find this out
for your graces mirth, and at my return, as I least expected, I found the
Prince all alone where any body might have seen him for nothing, the Grecian,
and the Trojan Captains in the hangings were all his company, with whom he
seemed well suited, had they been alive his looks were as challinging as
theirs, and standing so, bred much comparison.


Hian. Know you the reason of this behavior?


Mell. No Madam, yet if I would I might have learnt of many, indeed all could
give a reason, those which only from this occasion knew what belonged to any
the whole company were Polliticians, there was one Yeoman, Statesman informd
most about him, and left them to write his letters for certain news into the
Country.


Hian. Well, now turn your wit unto our mirth, we have more need of that,
what have you got there?


Mell. That which shall save my wit blameless that is unpractised it is a rare
piece of Poetry, which I have been Patroness of from the first nonsense in it,
that is, from the first line, there much mirth intended in it, and I doubt not,
but your grace will find it, the Author, himself is an Emblme of the first
Comedies, where one acted all, and will make you laugh though you saw him every
day, I have brought him along with me, he stays but without till his admittance
be granted.


Hian. No, prithee Melissa, 'twill be too much.


Mell. I beseech your grace, and do but smile upon his learning. Domine, Domine.


Enter a Poet rudely, and seeing the Princess and other Ladies stepps back as
rudely. Mel. Look, look, I told you what you would do, you are so forward.


Poet. I can presume most humble Lady.


Hian. Ladies ha, ha, ha.


They turn from him when they laugh and come up again. Mell. Hold your peace,
with your presuming, you should let the Princess speak. This is the author
Madam.


Hian. Ladies. ha, ha, ha,


Mell. What think you your Play will do when

One Scene of your self breeds all this mirth?


Poet. Ham.


Hian. Melissa?


Mel. Your Grace?


Hian. Prithee discharge him I am not able to look so much laughter in the
face and keep it in to save my Modesty.


Mel. So, it is well Sir, the Princess has taken notice of your worth, and
commanded me to reward your. Attend tomorrow and you shall receive it, and pray
see that her grace have all your labors (as you call 'em) and your fooling.
Exit Poet.


Hian. O it is well we dress us not, but was this a Poet, Mel. believe it Madam
but I hope his work will satisfy that Question here is rare stuff i will warrant
it.

She turns over the leaves and reads these entries. Enter Eugenia dieing as
she goes. Enter a Nymph, persued by a wild Bear. Will your grace examine it?

They all take several papers, and sit down, in the mean time ^learchus, and
Ha^mantus mistakes in upon them.
1 Waitor, Who were they past by?


2 Waitor, But certainly they know what they do They are so confident.


Clea. Where are we now?


Haim Certainly in no danger Sir.


First the Ladies spy them and Rise amazedly, and afterward the Princess.
Mel. The Prince.


The other Ladies whisper the Prince, the Prince. Clea. Madam, our bold mistake
has thrust us on too far, to retire without excuse, which we shall hardly
make unless, your favor meet us, we are Strangers that thus have er'd,
unfortunately I must not say, that were a sin great as our rudeness, yet we
ought to esteem a fault, though it is to us a blessed one, and has conferred
a happiness, our best deeds could not have deserved.


Exeunt. Clea. and Haim Mel. This entrance was something abrupt, and beyond the
intent of our Poet.


Hian. A strange accident, was it the Prince that spoke?


Mel. I Madam, but 'twas impropper here.


Hian. Art thou sure 'twas he?


Mel. I am Madam, does your grace incline, I see a Prince is too high a
personage and spoils a Commedy, shall not our Play go on?


Hian. We have had too much on it. She snatches it from her, and goes out.


Mel. Nay, Madam, take us along with you, we cannot maintain the Stage without
our parts. Exeunt. Ladies.


Enter Aratus, and Pallantus. Ara. Madam, a little of your company I beseech you.


Mel. My Lord Aratus, save you.


Ara. A good salutation for a fair Lady whose beauties so distructive.


Mell. Your Lordship's very conceited, on my conference it is the first left has
been made on that poor saying this thousand years. She^ looks at Pallantus
and he hinders her.


Ara. What do you look at? do you want a servant?


Mel. Bless me, my Lord, what pale man have you got there?


Ara. Why pray? because he is black; the sitter for a Lady.


Mel. For a Lady? I never saw such a Devils play-fellow.


Ara. He Is white within, all snow and milk.


Mel. They are put into an inke-bottle.


Ara. What, would you have one that spends more milk about his face than he
sucked in his childhood, that dresses himself in gloves as if one part were too
good to do service for the other, and dares not show his hands for shaming of
his Mistress, nor commend hers because his own are whiter, and when he is a
bed, none can distinguish whether he be the husband, nor hardly she herself.
This is one neglects his outside beyond a common cleanness, and bestows that
care upon his mind, there wastes his four hours of dressing, and what the
other does exceed in sprucenes he will make good in service, pay respects unto
his Ladies person, and not unto her muffe, and if at any time danger do
approach her, fearelesse he dares beat it back, or make it welcome by his
noble fall, himself in presence guards her, and his memory in his absence.
Come, pray spoil not his hopes among the Ladies he is a young Courtier and
wants a Mistress.


Mel. I am turned when I hear reason. I beseech, my Lord, let me be she.


Ara. I thought 'twould come to this, you make the furthest way about, the
nighest to your ends, love by discommending, pray let him salute you then.


Mel. Not unless you will* stand by me.


Ara. Well, I warrant you; my friend?


Pall. My Lord?


Ara. Pray draw near, heeres a fair Lady gladly would salute you, now you are
at Court you must lay by your warlike thoughts, and plot how you shall overcome
in complement and conquer in civility.


Pall. My Lord, I shall be a shamed to pretend so much unto the Soldier, as to
make my self incapable of so great an honor this Lady does me by her fair
salutation, though I am unworthy, I can be proud to be her Servant.


Ara. What think you?


Mel. I know not what to think of so much wonder, what rarities shall I be
mistress of, and none envy me.


Ara. Well, to leave you in that rapture, May I speak with the Princess?


Mel. Yes, she went hence but now.


Ara. May I adventure to go in?


Mel. You may, but call my servant along with you.


Ara. You are a longing again, but not a bit, it is sweet meat, not a bit.
Exeunt omnes.


Enter Clearchus. Clea. Why should I fear to entertain a guest
So honorable as love is, that fills
The mind with noble thoughts, and strengthens men
To act such deeds themselves style gods. Pallas
Mars and Mercury, are but the proper names
For virtues, loves effects, without some kind
Of which there could be no society,
The world is held up with Loves Deity,
But it appears most god-like, when beauty
Is its sphere. I will embrace thee therefore
Gentle spirit. Fools do profane thy fires
And call thee a Disease. Thou were the old
And first Religion, not taught, but borne
Within us, the only and first law, which
None that loved could err in, thou have too long
Been absent, and unkindly never would
Vouchsafe a Dart till now. Dwell in my breast
And teach me all thy laws. Let not thy shades
And flowery banks withdraw thee, when thou may
Inhabit here, make Paphies but thy refuge,
The heart's thy native soil, thy mothers lap's
A banishment to it. How well thou have
Already taught me, each Lover is thy Priest
And speaks thy Power, without thy aid
Beauty appears dead, and cold to all, as it has
Hitherto to me, nor sinkes it deeper than
the eye. Thou art the Organ that bears
The species inward.
When thou sitst multiply de in every part,
Thou make each limb as sensible as the Heart.

Enter Haimantus and waiters as attending him. Exeunt omnes. Enter Hianthe,
Aratus, Pallantus and Ladies. Ara. And Madam, I doubt not but shortly I shall
bring you news of greater joys, and see you in that height you were borne, a
Queeue, not to be approachd but by ceremony, and the humblest services.


Hian. My Lord, that happiness you wish me through my Lord Timeus will come
too soon upon me. But as I said before, my Lord, the Princes coming, if it
be known, will cause much jealousy and danger.


Ara. Madam, leave that to me, none but my self, and this Gentlemen (which I
beseech your Grace to know) shall be acquainted with it, and we will wait upon
him.


Pall. Amongst those many voices, and knees which daily do you honor. I gladly
would receive an humble place, and pay my duties at your feet too, you may
demand what they are. A heart and careless life to do you service just so,
what was Incence on an Alter to a Deity that had noe sent: or a Cake and Wine
to a power that had not Stomach? yet they harkened to those which offered such
trifles, and liked and approved the worship, with the same hopes I present my
flight but most devoted Services.


Hian. Sr. your Love is welcome.


Ara. We are both your humble creatures.


Exeunt Om. Cleander is discovered sleeping. A Song.
While Morpheus thus does gently lay
His powerful charge upon each part,
Making thy spirits even obey
The silver charms of his dull Art:
I thy good Angel from thy side,
As smoke does from the Alter rise,
Making no noise as it does glide
Will leave thee in this soft surprise.
And from the Clouds will fetch thee down
A holy vision to express,
Thy right unto an earthly Crown:
No power can make this Kingdom less.
But gently, gently least I bring
A start in sleep by sudden flight,
Playing a loose, and hovering,
Till I am lost unto the sight.
This is a motion still, and soft
So free from noise or cry,
That Jove himself who hears a thought
Knows not when we pass by.


Enter Achates. Acha. There he sits, and sleep has seized on him, which
seldom does so at a seasoned hour, but still he takes it when it comes, not
when it is due, when weariness and not the warnings of the night do prompt him
to it. He says to sleep because the day is gone, is to perform a duty not a
necessity, and to eat at a certain hour to satisfy the time, and not his
hunger. Nature is the Mistress of his faculties and no custom, which are rude
and stubborn and will admit not Laws but what themselves enact, nor stricktly
observe them neither. It Is a strange distraction for 16. years, a deeper
discontent possesses him then does the memories of those, which have run the
miseryes, and sins of a long life. This desolate happiness is all that he
enjoyes, and this I am commanded to break from him.


Cleander, what who Cleander. Clea. Why are you thus crewell in your care? did
you but know the felicityes you have wak't me from, you would have rockt my
sleep for ever, thought it a greater mercy to have killed, then thus to have
divor'st me, I was wrapped into the company of men, of gods, if compared with
those we here converse with, enjoyed the most excellent things, there more,
excellent, and glorified, was Crowned a King over all and with a traytorous
push you have deposed me. Alas how fading is my happiness, which a small noise
or motion can dissolve, nay turn to nothing.


Acha. Let that reason make you scorne'em, and aim at lasting ones.


Clean. Were their longest life but three minutes, and that time uncertain,
they were to be preferred before the reallest, and most continuing you could
think on, these are pure and celestial pleasures, to be fed on only by the
fantasy, I Will in and again invite them with a slumber. Exit.


Acha. I must forbear my remedies it is dangerous applying Physic in a fit.
Exit.


Enter Comastes at one door, Poliander Menetius at the other. Com. Poliander,
Menetius, well met; what have you seen the thing yet?


Men. What thing?


Com. The thing that haunts the Court, it has something like a man, and
pretends to be one, he comes among the Ladies like a Rough water Dog to a Flock
of Foul, and flutter as fast from him, scattering feathers as they pass, I
mean their Fanns and such movables, he has done noe hurt yet, the Guard dare
not mingle with him, he is too boisterous for their company, one glance of him
as he past by broke the Kings draught, which a cubit Cup could never do.

Enter Pallantus. See, see, here he comes, with as many patches and such like
properties as would furnish a whole casheer'd Company to beg with, sure he was
Scarr-bearer to some Army lett's observe it what it will do, look, look,
it is pleased with the hangings.


Poli. He cannot be thus by nature, nor by accident, he has studied to appear
horrid.


Men Danger is not so dreadful in it self as it appears in him.


Com. I cannot forbear, for curiosity sake, i will enter parley with it, what
rare things shall I know if I can get him speak, I Will inquire the fortune of
the Kingdom for the next thousand years, that is not worth the asking. I Will
inquire the age of the World and where her treasure lies, he cannot choose but
know the very heart of the earth. If I cannot perswad, I Will conjure something
from him.

He goes to Pallantus. Boe, boe, O Bull-begger! what art thou? who let thee
loose? where is any gold hid? my fears were just, nothing but a charm will do
it.

Anaell, Marfo, Rachimas, Thulnear, vemoby save an vernessa. Elty, Famelron,
dusculta et obtempora mandatis meis. This was not terrible enough.

Omallaharen, Madrason, Taporois, Iosaschan. Almonim, Fabelmarasim --, -- This
will not do it, it must be more tirrible yet, I adjure thee by those Boots, thy
Velvet eye, by all the Tailors work about thee --


Pall. Peace Fool --


Com. Oah.


Pall. The King will hear thee and thou will be whipped for balling. Exit.


Com. Prithee good devil something of the other World.


Men. Ha, ha, ha.


Poli. I hope he has satisfied your curiosity Comastes, Ha, ha, ha.


Com. Nay, I Will not leave him thus, be bafled by a Goblin? I Will follow it to
the place where it shakes the Chain, that certain. Exit.


Men. Ha, ha, ha, come let us see the end of the Conjuration.


Exeunt Om. Enter Clearchus, Haimantus in holy habits, Aratus. Ara. My Lord,
Cupid put his hood-winke on you that he used to aim with, and than you could
not miss the mark, I fear the second view will not be so delightful, the
most excellent things scarce please twice.


Clea. My Lord, think not so, for were the World dark about her, or I blind
to all things else, in her I could find variety enough, and so long as she were
not ecclipsed I could not envy him that were so placed, that he at once could
see the whole earth as in a Map.


Ara. These habits then my Lord will bring you thither, me thinks your Grace
becomes them really well, now you are a Person most Sacrosanct, twice holy,
made so by your Majesty and order. It Is time that you were goeing, the guide is
ready to attend you to the place from whence you must seem to come, I with a
private guard will wait you at the Princess lodgings for fear of any
sudden danger.


Clea. My Lord, I shall ever owe my life to you, as much as if you had saved
it, and that I lived wholly by your gift, but here can be no danger where she
wishes safety.


Exeunt Clea. Haim. Ara. When this is past, then for the great work, this is
but a flourish to recreate the Senses inrespect of that, it now grows toward an
end, and heavier like many things at first light in themselves, and hardly to
be caught for every air, being condensed and thickened to a bottom, do
press the shoulders and make the veins groan under.


As Aratus goes out, Phronimus and Eurilochus enters and calls after him. Phro.
Aratus?


Ara. How now friends, me thinks your looks are lively, how succeeds your
undertakings?


Phro. Too well to fail a minute of the time.


Eur. All the places we named, are sided with us, and those parts which
Pallantus heretofore commanded are ready to sacrifice their new Lords to any
that can but say he knew their old.


Ara. Why this is the life of every action, and makes it pleasant, when fortune
is no enemy to industry, nor turns her wisdom into folly, makes not that a
ruin which was a well ordered safety, when they both consent the burthen's
light, and labor but a serious sport.


Phro. The young Prince is come, but we have given command to keep him close,
least his face discover what his fortune is, a Gentleman at the first sight
started at him, and called him the Prince's Picture.


Ara. You must look to that. The time now grows precious, we must weigh each
dram, and till this be over, count all lost we spend in sleep or eating:
come, every man to his charge. I doubt not on the day, to have a Prince help
us to set the Crown upon our King. Exeunt omnes.


Enter the King and Timeus. King. But these are things for the following age,
we are hedged in beyond all fear, if loyalty may prove distructive, there is
yet some danger.


Tim. Because you see a calm enwrap all round
About ye, you conceive 'twillbe
As lasting as it is pleasing. Tempests, sir,
May contradict you even whiles you think so,
Evils are silent now, not done away,
They couch and lyein wait. Sedition walks
With claws bowd in, and a close mouth, which only
She keeps for opportunity of prey.
Your ruin yet appears not and you think
Because it lurkes, you are safe,
He that will be truly secure must found
A peace on the destruction of all things
That can impeach it: enemies reconcild
Are like wild beasts brought up to hand, they have
More advantage given them to be cruel.

King. Can the grave
Quicken her ashes into Soldiers? shall
Stench and corruption yield us enemies?
We are safe from those that live, they will not hurt,
And those that sleep in the forgotten dust
Cannot. There is nothing now remaining
To our care, but to give thanks we are safe
Enough, if that we can rejoice. Thou letst
Thy best days pass without receiving fruit
That should be cropped from them. I did expect
Thou should have urgd me to thy Nuptials,
Such cares befit thee best; how the Triumphs
Should be ordered, and Hymen's torch well lighted.

Tim. Pray Heaven no other flames break out
But such as mirth show forth, when treason laughes
Upon your sports you call it piety,
Cause it looks smoothly on your strength when it runs
Out in an idle pomp, suffering your vigor
To wast it self in triumph, and diminish
In a continued jollity, that so, Sir,
Ruin may be quiet, and you perish
Without disturbance, nor are all things yet
So free from our suspicion as you make 'em,
You do suppose that all close eyes must sleep,
When they are nere more watchful, than when thus
They counterfeit neglect. Severely prying
Into the depth of things, by seeming not
T'observe the face and outside; Treason does
Walk in a whisper yet, their hate is busy
And makes no noise; think not that it is their fear,
But their advice and council makes it silent.
Do you expect a Proclamation, or
A Herald from Sedition? it is too late
To say you were deceived, when that the Trumpet
Shall summon to your ruin, you do slumber,
Girt you, before the fire has gaind your Cabin,
And do not trust your preservation to
A Miracle, or a chance; you have an heir,
Yet he is none of yours, he that begot me
Did perish long ago. I was the child
Of Vigor, not of Luxury.
I must tell you, Sir,
A few flattering Lords gild ore the defects
And ruins of your State, they make you call
A Lethargy, Security; and that a Kingdom
Which, like to childrens houses on the sand,
Reard up in sport and toying, will become
A Prey unto the wave that first approaches,
They can perhaps judge well of meats and wines,
Good Table Statesmen, Soldiers at a banquet,
Strong, to overcome a Goblet, or a Charger:
But Kingdoms safeties are not owed unto
The Pallat, and the Stomach; if that these
Were State affairs, your Council were most found,
And every breast a Synod; if that Music could now
Raise Walls and Cities as of old,
Your Realm would be impregnable.

King. Have thou yet done?
Not all the Ghosts that I have made, have been
Thus cruel to me, nor, as yet, their graves
Have threated half these evils, thy mothers
Labor was a conception to these pains
Thou howerly bringst upon me.

Tim. Sir, I am sorry, 'twas my love, my love
That so did dictate to me, my desire
That your sports might follow one another,
And succeed so just that they may seem to
Bring the season on, and not the season,
Them, that thus they might continue ever,
But 'twas that they might continue, and not
Fall by treason. But Sir, I will no more,
I shall hereafter think it more piety
Hand in hand to fall in perils with you,
Then my self to bring them.

King. What would thou have?
The power I have is wholly thine, if that
I never did deny, was not thought given,
Now I do, take all the means thou can by
Law or Majesty to remove thy fears.

Time. Sir, I thank you, humbly thus low I thank you,
Nor will I in a complement return
It back again, till I have made you safe;
I shall go to work like a resolute,
But skillfull Surgeon, that dares feel and search
A wound, and if he find dead flesh dares cut
It off, or more corruption will not spare
A limb. Exeunt omnes.

Enter Hianthe, Aratus, Pallantus. Hian. May I hope to see such happiness?


Ara. To enjoy it howerly, and to the end, or I shall curse my self else.


Pall. It is the power of Princes for to change
The place the come in to a Court, but this
Lady bears such divinity about her,
That where she comes, she consecrates the place
A Temple, me thinks a sacred awe does
Fill the room resulting from her presence.
How happy were those times which saw a King
And Council of the same blessed temper,
Informd with souls like hers; that knew no vice
But what they punished, nor learnt it further
Than the law and common place instructed;
In that great Massaker (I may rathersay)
Of virtues than of men, all that fled not
To this holy Sanctuary were crushed to nothing.

Hian. Can I no way be a helper?


Ara. Only with your prayers, the men will overcome, and the Gods, who must
with piety be conquered, we will leave to your goodness, but madam you must yet
conceal your joys, and not speak them with a look.


Hian. This is the hardest task, the first is so just and righteous that in it
self it is both prayer and sacrifice.


Ara. There are but a few days now, as I may truly say, to crown our labors,
our greatest care is how we shall provide for your grace before the time, your
stay here may be dangerous.


Hian. Take no care for me, my Lord, which way so ere the fortune goes, I shall
be safe from all, but from my self.


Ara. Madam the Prince.


Enter Clearchus, Haimantus. Hian. So fell the cloud from off the Trojan Lord,
Not able to embrace such rays within,
But being piercd, turned all at once to air,
And left thin closd as dazzling as the Sun.

Clea. Sure I was rude and barbarous; before
This softer fire did touch my heart, and from
The wild inhabitants of the wood, differed
In passion only, and not reason; that
Without more respect, my dull eyes could gaze
Upon such brightness, and with a ready rudeness
Could excuse the fault committed.
The unhewne Clown not faultering with his tongue
Or in his looks abasht, could answer to
The Emperor of the world, when he that is
Better taught and nearer to the Majesty
That speaks, beats for a word, and answers but
With looks: although at other times his learned
Soul can dictate such as would be: if that the god of
Wit his Deity were called in question,
And forcd to show some excellent
Piece above all was ever writ, as the
Tenure by which he holds his Godhead:
Pardon that, like the assendants of the
Alter thus by degrees I come, and pause
At each step, and bend unto that neerenesse,
Rashness was my fault before, and brought me
Into shame. Though no adoration,
Yet there is a duty to be paid at
Your fair shrine.

Hian. Sir, It was not yours, but the rudeness of the Court that would leave
you to so unhappie a mistake.


Ara. If I would set a spectacle to the
World, it should be such a close, where beauty
Adored beauty and greatness bowd to greatness,
Me thinks the heavens do open, and the clouds
Are spun into a thread, to let down some
God unto this contract. Let us withdraw,
The Power is now descended, and all
Within is sacred and misterious,
And if we do pry into these secrets,
Our curiosity will be punishd.

Exeunt Aratus, Pallantus, Haimantus, Clea. This honorable admittance you have
granted me shall hereafter be my only glory, the sweet meditation that
accompanies my old age, nor shall the much envied youth, make me wish one day
back to be partaker of their lesser pleasures, when I shall call these
greater unto mind, what cordial will it be; when I can silently boast within
my self, my younger days were graced by a Princess, the fairest in the
world; so I may say.


Fian. O my Lord, when you talk thus, though I am loath, you do compel me to
turn my face away.


Clea. I humbly crave your pardon. It Is strange so much seriousenesse can
produce such follies, yet I have fair grounds for what I said, which most
excellently show themselves in every part.


Hian. They show but to the fantasy, there is no such beauty here, it is borrowed
from your speech and fair esteem, which thus I Will pay you back again; you
are all that you have said, and when I first saw you, so you did appear to me,
and I think to all the world, the first sight promises all virtues, and the
next performs 'em, nothing seemed then so low in you as this passion.


Clea. What honors you have laid upon me, I may bleed for, but cannot
purchase any like 'em; nor return such back again, there all must submit,
your gifts, as your beauties, are excelling. But away vain words, I will
endeavor to grow strong in those virtues, and not melt in the passion you have
named, I Will set new Laws to all noble Lovers, that shall make all their idle
passions appear as fond unto themselves as others, make them throw by their
Pen, and with their Sword to act those Fictions nor daring to name nor think
upon the Saint they worship, but when they have an offering some virtuous
increase to bring them near. Thus is a Love that is free to all, none is
injured by it Himens. Torch burns brighter by such flames, and Vestas fires
more lasting and more pure, who can complain the want of beauty, when any (any
that dares be good) may adore any, and she like her Picture though she truly
look one way may, seem to cast a gracious eye over all.


Hian. How his soul labors to soar above the pitch of honor.


Clea. How glad, how much greater should I grow, if I could promise to my
self, but one of those seeming looks from you.


Hian, My Lord, I have not heard you without admiration and wish I could bestow
favors rich, and lovely worthy your acceptance; but seeing that I cannot: I Will
strive to honor you, not with peevish and womanish commands, but such as shall
be worthy of your valor, and make you yet more a Prince. The bravery you have
shown has not raised a vain passion in me, but a confidence, a noble
confidence, that all those virtues were not nam d by you but spoke in you,
which thus i will show my Lord, my Lord, Aratus.

Enter Aratus. But I must leave you to an instructor, it is fit for your Sword,
and therefore above my power to utter, shame not, Sir, that I put a tutor to
you, you are but to ground with him, you may build to what height you please.
Come my Lord, you must lay off all Strangeness here, and receive a noble
helper whole bring both Strength, and honor to your Cause.


Ara. I may stand amazed at the nobleness
in you both, but not at this agreement
in you, I know virtues are still a kin
though the persons are strangers they are in.
Exeunt omnes Whiles this old Puppy thus does sleep
And does in vice, as age grow deep
Benumming all these Plants are nigh
Into a drowsy Let bargie,
Behold a nobler Branch appears,
As far from's manners as his years,

Chorus. O shed thou then thy influence,
And we will return fresh beauties thence.

The feircer sweetness of his face
Presents a rigor mixed with grace.
And though there were, a want of blood
His worth would make his Title good.
Virtues so grown in so few years
Make him even such, become their fears,

Chorus. On then, and make the Scepter be
Thought but reserud, not snatched from thee.

Actus Tertius: Scaena I.
Enter Aratus, Phronimus, Pallantus, Eurilochus, and others. ARa. Are all
things ready for the ceremony; the Crown, and robes?


Phro. They are, there is nothing wanting if the Prince were come.


Euri. He Is come now.


Enter Clearchus, Hiamantus. Ara. Your grace is welcome, but it may seem to a
Strange place and person; what think you my Lord, are not you fallen into the
company of so many traiterous and lost men.


Clea. Sir, say not so, you have not warrant, though you rank your self
within the number. The place, and persons rather appear to me, as if there
were some Religion toward.


Ara. My Lord, you understand it right, there is a Religion toward, and I may
truly say that this our private meeting and close Counsel is more just, and
glorious then the lowdest deed in Court, that all our public Acts, edicts,
and forms of Law, are dark and impious compared to it; nay, that this time
and place made holy by our purposes has the gods more manifest and present,
then the Sacrifice and Temples, long since made void and empty of a Deity, by
those which sue for favors and request for him, who justly hear deserves
their horridst vengeance, we are not met here to plot a general ruin for a
private injury, we know and teach the greatest Done by the King unto the
Subject, can not give him cause to throw off his faith. Kings are petty gods
and may tempt us, nor is it want or desire of Innovation that thus Stirs us,
we are in the best ill State already, nor ambition to Strike at that Laurel
which the Thunder spares, no we reverence it, and know that as men are the
works of nature, so Kings of Jove. But it is our oath the Sacrament we took,
which still holds us though our Lord be dead, until his successor do quit us
from it, by taking of a new one, we are not subjects, but slaves to him we now
obey, and therefore as slaves we ought to hate our Master; he was borne less
then we, and hides the private man under the public gown; the purple which
he wears was dipped deep in the blood of Innocents to collour't so. But I
vainly wast my self in words, here are no minds to be persuaded, nor ears to
be instructed; the sins we are to punish, we all know, and the gods remember,
our Strength then is all we are to speak of, which is the greatest half of
the Jsle 16. years undisturbed provision, so carelessly was that provided for
which was got by blood, there is but one Lordship, small in respect of others,
the Tyrants own possession that will stand strong for him, but they are so
besotted with their fortunes that their greatest aid will be but in their will
to do him service. They may offer up their lives, like so many Sacrifices for
his sake, but not like Soldiers, they are unworthy of that name: They may die
but never conquer, war is never talked of but in their banquets, nor dare they
fight beyond a Brawle.


Phro. And if we would count part of our Strength in their weakness, we have
no opposition. In the City where they and their vices are daily seen, nothing
is to contemptible; and in the remoter parts, where Majesty is no more
reverenced, being known only by the Power and laws, and where the name of
King hears like the name of God, even there those sons of the earth (as I
may so call them) dare minace at him, and pile hills on hills to set their
bodies equal to their hates.


Euri. Here we are three, can each of us raise such forces, which, though they
could not, yet could make the Kingdom fear a conquest.


Pall. You are a Soldier my Lord, and though but young perhaps have seen
already what others whole lives have not shown them, yet we will play a game we
dare invite you to, though you were accompanied with all the ancient Heroes,
who had they leave but in their airie shapes to sit on a Tribunal, spectators
of the war, this their second leaving of the earth, should be more grievous
to them than their former deaths, and they would wish this Kingdom might be
their Elysium.


Ara. You see, my Lord, how each can bring his forces in and prompt the other,
those which have none on earth can bring them down from heaven; in stead of
men bring manly spirits, words and looks confirming more than Armies.


Clea. If you have not yet done, I can hear you still, and with such lectures
be content to have my self persuaded to that thing, whose embraces I would
leap into; would I could lend aides equal to yours, but there is none so good,
yet if you can stay so long, I can command worthy helpers.


Ara. My Lord, it shall not need, all that we desire is to have you not our
enemy.


Phro. Are you ready for the Priest yet?


Ara. Yes, pray call him in. Though we need Exit. Phro. nothing to strengthen
our resolutions, yet we will take an oath, it is good to have the Gods along with
us, a Sacrament is the tie no less of loyalty than of treason.


Phronimus returns, and a Flamen to them, with the Images of some of the gods.
Ara. Here let us all before the sacred witness of faith and perjury, make a holy
vow of loyalty to our selves and cause, and as we draw near to so divine an
Essence, consider it is not gold or marble that we touch, but a modle of a
sensible and living Power, which has vouchsafd to be imbracd by one hand, when
the vastness of our thoughts could not comprehend it.


Here they all seem to take an oath by touching of the Image. Ara. Now we are
ready for the Prince, Eurilochus prithee do thou conduct him in. Exit.
Eurilochus


Ara. Your grace shall see a stronger perswation than any you have yet heard,
the lively image of her you so much serve, he knows not yet his fortunes, but
I dare warrant he will bear them bravely, he has read the lives of kings though
he never acted any, and you shall perceive he is princely borne, though not
bred in Court.


Enter Eurilochus and Cleander the young Prince. Euri. This way, Sir.


-at his entrance they all stand bare, and -after some pause, Aratus speaks to
him Ara. Royal Sir you are welcome. Start not at the name, it is your due,
you were borne to that title, and I doubt not, though you never heard it thus
applide before, it is not altogether a Stranger to you, there was a spark which
in the first womb after a special manner was insufd into you, and is as
another soul within you, as the one informs your body, so this informs that
soul, we may call it the difference of a King, that will tell you we are all
here your subjects, and this no strange Philosophy I teach, and though this
rich persume has hitherto been wrapped in this disguise of learning, and
defended from the air oath court, it is not decade, but grown stronger by such
keeping, which when it shall be opened will cast a fragrant smell ore all the
Kingdom, and cure the infections of the former age; to open it we are met, it
is a medicine we too long have languishd for. And Sir, though it be a short
warning to so great a matter, you must presently prepare to be a King; we
have no time now to instruct you in your right, and how you lost it, it was
years a doing, and will require years for to relate it. In the mean time,
let what you see persuade you, our serious looks, respects, and the presence
of these holy rights.


Clean. I need not excuse my want of answer to you, there is nothing fit for
me to say, which way so ever I open my mouth to this purpose will appear
foolish, whether I refuse, or grant both are alike ridiculous. I cannot turn
my self in this place, without committing shame, it is not with me as with
elder years they may deny such offers and be admired for their modesty, or
accept them and be honored for that Nobleness, I have nothing yet at my
dispose, obedience is my best part; here I am; you may use me as you please,
command me, even to wear a Crown, and make me submit unto the highest honors,
set me on the Throne you speak of, and when I have had it long enough, take it
again from me like other toys I play with, yet my Lords, I am not so young,
but that I know I am a subject, and that I have a King; that thus, though but a
sport, to use his titles is a fault, or for any to acknowledge such a spirit as
you my Lord have spoken, is no less a traitor then he which strikes the Crown
from off his head.


Ara. You have been heavenly taught, and shall be ever instructed in such
Lectures. But the treason which is committed is committed against your self,
your spirit is usurpt, and he that holds it is your servant as I am, or at
least should be so, please you to aslend. Sir yond place is provided for you.


Clean. My Lord, set me not such a spectacle of shame.


Eury. Phro. It must be so.


Ara. Submit now, and command ever. My Lord', will you honor us with your help.


Here they seat Cleander in the Throne, and after they take of his black
habit, and put on him a Scarlet Robe. Clearchus and the Flamen hold the Crown
over his head, and the rest stand before, and salute him saying, the gods
preserve the King. Omnes The gods preserve the King.


Ara. We have now performed the one half of our duty, which was to seat you
thus, the other is with our lives to keep you at this height.


Clean. If I may yet take confidence to speak, and it will become me to say
something of my self. I could tell you how this day has been familier to me,
and in a dream I have seen things so often, that did not these shoutes
confirm me, which were then Still the concluders of my happiness, I could not
yet believe but all that I have now suffered is only ayrie, and these shapes I
see, merely phantastique.


Fla. It was a good and prosperous Omen; which prefag'd your quiet here. The
gods would not suffer you to rest in a wrong place.


All. May it be so.


Here Aratus brings Clearchus to the King, and seems to inform him who he is,
he discends, and they embrace, making a mutual show of complement, in the
mean time Pallantus speaks. Pall. And shall I alone in such a glorious Action
walk unseene? and as a fault perform my duties in disguise? I rather will
proclaim it, here fall my mist away, now thou only barrest me from my joys,
to which I am not near enough unless I can embrace. Give me leave my Lords
that as my life, so I may throw my body at his feet; I have a share in him, I,
though a Stranger to you, it was my Fathers purchase, with his life, he bought
it, nor desire I to hold it by another pattent, may such be the noted end
successively of all our name, noe disease but our Mistress cause to die on. Here
let me kneel and pray all happiness and the best things may fall, and then
rise, and with my Sword procure those blessings I have praid for, know me my
Lords, I am Pallantus. --


Phro. Euri. Pallantus?


Ara. Pallantus! My dearest friend proved my dearest kinsman? could I be so
dull as to imagine such valor could be in a shape so low as thy outside
promised, or so common as to be met by chance. That I could love thee so, and
yet have noe interest in thee? where have thou been thus long dead? Sr. look
upon this man that turns our joys thus from you, your party is made strong by
his discovery, he has brought such unexpected aid within himself.


Clean. My Lord, I am yet as in a new World, and know no more then if I now
began to live, the most common things are wonders to me, you must excuse me
therefore if I know not how to entertain such accidents as these, yet I can
love, if you point me where I should, and being that I want art, and reason
I Will lay on the more.


Clear. Sir as I; new friend, let me embrace you, but this alteration shall not
give me leave to forget those former favors I am to serve you for, what I
receive in your disguise, I shall be ever ready to pay unto your self.


Ara. How it greeves me to see thy beauties thus blasted in thy youth, war
has been too rough a Mistrisse to thee, and set thy glories in too eminent a
place: had Venus been in the Camp she would have covered thee with Marses
Shield, although the god himself had wanted it, I can remember when the
lovelyest face compared with thine, could not have taken from thee, when in the
brightest ring of beauty thou appearst but well set, and had thou been
attired like one of them thou mighst have won the Prize of Fairness from a
Court of Ladies.


Pall. My Lord, they are well lost, both those which were the causers of it,
shall receive wounds as Deep though not so disfiguring, and afford their blood
to wash the scarres they have made.


Ara. They shall, and we will help to bath thee. It Is time that we broake up,
our longer stay my prove dangerous, Phronimus and Euril. you must post this
night to your command, your Majesty must bear them company, and now without
more delay show your selves, we will be ready here upon the first news, my
Lord, your Navy will require a Strickt watch and guard on the first motion that
will be attempted.


Clea. Haimantus you shall presently away, and take the whole charge upon your
self.


Ara. Pray do so my Lord, all we have to do is to mingle our selves in the
Court again, when these troubles are once over a perpetual ease will follow.


Clean. My Lord, I never enjoyed safety like these dangers.

Exeunt Om. Enter Timeus. My Lord,

Now to leave suspicions, I can write certain news of the conspiracy we have
a long time feared, the swarms are now flowne out, the Hives are grown too
narrow for their numbers, and they keep their murmurings abroad, every petty
Jnmate upon his Country grievance dares threaten a State-revenge, and what the
Law takes from him, will repay with ruin. Aratus, Phronimus, Eurildchus the
three great diseases --


Tim. But not incurable. I know which way
To handle them: there must be some sudden
Remedy applied, that will work strongly;
This night I Will send it. Be absent all ye
Lazy medicines that the Law does bring,
Ye are more treacherous than the villain
You examine, and where there was none, give
Time for to act mischife: the summons are
The traitors watchword, and drive him to take
That opportunity, which otherwise
His fears would have let slip; my self will be
The accuser and the Judge; when public
Means are dangerous, each Prince has the Courts
Of Justice in his breast.
Enter Pallantus. What fiend is this that causes such antipathy within me? the
midnight ghost take not shapes so horrid. I have not slept since first he crossed
me.


Pall. We are both alone, the Gods have given this time for my revenge.


Tim. What does he mutter to himself?


Pall. I Will not loose this opportunity.


When Pallantus thinks to draw, Tim. calls 2. of his guard, which makes him
forbear. Tim. Coracinus, Argestes?


Enter Argestes, Coracinus. Tim. Kill that Dog.


Co. My Lord?


Tim. Kill that Dog. cowardly They assault Pall. and have the worst on it. Tim.
draws, and they make him retire. Villains, it were a mercy to leave You to
the worrying. exeunt.


Voices are heard within, Treason, Treason, save the Prince, Treason. Timeus,
Coracinus, Argestes, return bloody, and others. Tim. He was a Devil, the
power of hell was in his arm, Night threw her shades about him to defend him:
he could not have escaped unless he had vanishd. Is he oretaken yet.


Enter a Servant. Ser. No my Lord, but it is impossible he should pass the
Court, sure he has taken covert in lodgings thereabout.


Tim. Let there be search made, and give command that when he appears
again, he that first meets him without more delay do kill him. Promise a
reward for him that brings his head.


Enter Clearchus and Aratus with their swords drawn. Clea. How do you, my
Lord?


Tim. Well.


Ara. Is your Grace hurt?


Tim. And may be again, if I look not warily, would your Lordships sword
were sheathed.


Ara. Sir, it was drawn in your defense, and if you are jealous, you wrong it,
and a ready hand to do you service.


Clea. Sir, is not the Traitor known that did it?


Tim. No doubt he is.


Clea. My Lord, you speak very doubtful. I hope you do not think but I am
sorry for the accident.


Time. I know not what to think, your disposition is as great a stranger to me
as your self.


Clea. I see my Lord, you know to bestow injuries, though no courtesies, to a
stranger.


Tim. Injuries are deserving to an intruding guest.


Clea. You are unworthy --

Timeus offers to draw, and they hold him. And though I am encompast with all
the dangers I may justly fear from so barbarous a place, which dares do any
thing it lusts unto, without regard of laws or hospitality, I Would tell you so,
and were you from the Dunghill that you stalk on (it is no better) I Would pull
down that unmanner'd pride within you.


Tim. Let me go, nothing shall privilege him to talk thus.


Clea. They hold you in your safety, nor is the distance twixt your life and
death longer than this space that parts us. If you dare, oretake me, I Will stay
you out a days sail at Sea. I challenge you to a princely combat, where come
with all your Power, that I may destroy so many brute beasts from of the
earth. Exit. Clearchus


Time. Shall I be tied while I am bayted? I Will send those that shall oretake
you, and cut you off before your shipping yet. Coracinus have unto the City
presently, and in my fathers name command them to raise all speedy Power to
stop the Prince, bid them fire his ships in the Haven.


Ara. O my Lord, consider a little more before you lay a scandal on the
Kingdom, which future ages cannot wipe off, no story can parallel such a fact;
your grace moved him much and gave him cause of choler.


Tim. Does he help your Lordship with ships, that thus you plead his cause?
shall I be tutord by a Traitor?


Ara. Sir, you are happy if you can find a Tutor, when you thus much need one,
and for your other language, if I understood it I Would give you an answer, in
the mean time it must return upon you.


Enter the King, Polyander, Menetius, Comastes, and attendants. Time. Well Sir,
I shall find other ways than words to answer you.


King. How now Timeus, what bloody?


Time. No more than you see Sir, the sword rather left it on me then drew it
out.


King. Who is the traitor that durst attempt such outrage?


Tim. He Is escaped unknown.


King. Unknown? that cannot be, when he has past thus far in the court some
must take notice of him. Can you describe him?


Time. He was habited like a Soldier, but his looks had more of Devil than
of man.


King. Upon my life I saw him: but it is some two days since, he must be known
in all this time, enquire who brought in any such man, or was seen with him.


Com. This can be no body but my Hobgoblin. An't please your grace, was he
not in a buffe Coat, and his face all to be dab'ld with patches?


Tim. Yes he was so.


Com. Then do I know him, he belongs to my Lord Aratus there, no body durst
speak to him but he, he showed his teeth at every body else, he had like to
have bit me once.


King. Aratus do you hear? they say he that committed this outrage belongs
to you.


Ara. To me Sir? he wrongs me that thinks so, I maintain none that dare
commit such insolence.


Poli. My Lord, I saw him with you.


Ara. Who? pray make me know the man.


Poly. A black stern Soldier that followed you.


Ara. I fear I understand you now, there is such a one does follow me, but I
never discoverd any disloyal spirit in him; his outside, it is true, was as you
discribe, not molded after the common frame of men, but threatened more than
any I have seen; yet it was but his outside that threatened so, within he was
gentle, all a Courtier, to be wound and turned by the smallest courtesy. I must
confess, if he were injurd, then he was proud, and Lordly storms rose within
his looks, and thunder was in his voice.


King. And you knowing this, how durst you turn such a wild beast loose into
the Court, whom had I met and chancd to have angered my fortune had been the
same. Lay hands upon him, you shall find that such a Spirit lodges in my breast
too, and when tisstird will raise Tempests as great; we shall find other
matters to examine you of. Through this seeming neglect we do put on, we can
observe all your actions, and with a half and sleeping eye see into your
darkest plots.


The King turns to go away. Ara. Then the Gods send their aid or all is lost,
yet Sir hear me speak, the jealousies you have on me, I shall not be able
to clear, but will leave them to the trial of my innocence and your favor:
Yet Sir, to show you in this last accident how much I am guiltless, I will
relate unto you how first I met the actour of it. It Was on that day I was
imploid on an honorable message from your Majesty, to the Stranger Prince, on
the shore I found him having lately escaped a Shipwreck, and as great a danger
on the Land, for he was assaulted by two Villains that were in the same voyage
with him, but the cause of their hate himself he could not tell, he had no
acquaintance with them but in the Ship, but as he had before the waves, so in
this Tempest too (as I may call it) he bore himself above and left them both
as calm as death upon the shore, In the instant when he was yet hot in his
anger and, their blood we came upon him --


Tim. Pray Sir, let me speak to you, there is a wonder discovered to me by his
relation, and under this Monster he has spoke of a greater does ly hid, one
that you would rather have in Chains, then all the list of Traitors I have
named, Sir commit the uncasing him to me, and suffer me to free Aratus, let it
suffice I am an eye upon him, and the rest, and will suddenly by their
destruction, distroy their Plot.


King. Take your way, I Will leave him to you.


Exeunt King, Poliander, Comastes, etc. Tim. My Lord, with the persuasion of
your innocence, I have procured your freedom of my father, and do desire in
requital of this kindness (if it be such) to let me see the face of this my
enemy once more: if your acquantance as appears by your words, be not too late
to know his aboade, My Lord, I shall receive him otherwise then you expect, the
relation you have made of him, and what my self was witness on, has turned
my hate into admiration, and if I can move his Love, as I have done his anger:
I shall be happy in his valor. It Is noe strange thing that the valor of
enemies have made them friends, and that wounder have been the first seal of
Love. I do consider how much (...) him, and that on such occasion, he could
not have don least, at first sight I called him dog, and without more
circumstance commanded for to kill him.


Ara. Now, Sir, I must kneel to you, you have the mercy of a Prince; he shall
submit for his offense, or suffer for it, and if you find not that noble spirit
in him, I have told you of in the most dangerous business you shall implory him.
Let him be punished for this his ill placed valor.


Time. My Lord, I Will take no other surety but your word, ever engage me thus.
Exit Timeus.


Ara. But my lord, though I can answer, I cannot give credit to your smooth
tongue, this last accident had like to have broke all, and had there not been
help above, there had been none beneath. I must be no more so venterous, our
Conspiracy begins to be discovered, and that we are suspected is the least
fear, we must not longer defer our breaking out; there is noe safety now but
in a public danger. Exit.


Enter Tymeus, Hianthe. Timeus, I am come to tell you, the infection.
That caused this your retyrement, is now
Vanished, and abroad you may easily bless
Us with your beauties. It shames me to say this
I can pronounce, you may do something that
May command all.
I ever as a servant did approach
You, but now as an offender, as one
That is guilty of a sin of so high
A nature as this your sadness is. Can
I do less then condemn my self that would
Have killed the man that would have don it? yet
I hope this my action has not made me
Appear, to throw of that honorable name
As servant to you, it is a title I am most
Ambitious of, and never did
Engage my self a more humble one
Then by my last command. Before I was
A votary to your beauty, now to
Your goodness, there is noe earthly thing I
So much reverence (if I may call that
Earthy that is so devine) I bend but at
Two places the Alter, and your virtues.

Enter Melissa. Hi. My Lord, though your complement be such, as to esteem this
my retirment for your sake so great a favor. I must not so account it, nor
think I have laid so deep ingagments on you, in granting that I voluntary,
and unask't perform: your respects may claim greater services, and your last
words had been requital to a Stranger.


Hianthe turns to Melissa, and Timeus goes aside. Mell. There Is a Gentleman
desires access unto your grace, from Prince Clearchus, and my Lord Aratus.


Hian. Prithee go stay him within, as soon as this troubles over, I will come
to him. Sure it is to warn me of their breaking out.

The time of their great birth is now complete.
The hours are finished. O let it not you
Which look down, which favorably look down
Upon this Isle, want your power which first
Did strengthen it, let the same hands that hid
Disclose it too, shame not at so glorious
An offspring, when it is heavenly, and does
Confess the father, when none but gods dare
Call it their's, nor without blasphemy can
Own it, you were kind fathers at the first,
Show your self still so, and breed the child you
Have gotten, where humane strength shall fail, there
Hold it up, and make that want the Strongest,
Yet when I look this way it does distract
My prayers, and makes me wish a conquest
Without destruction of the enemy.
O it is pity that so much nobleness
Should fall to earth, although noe love, I can
Afford him tears.

Enter the King, Comastes, Menetius, and attendants. King. Why, well said
Timeus, now I like thee, here thy ears and services are bent the right way
would I could see thee once look pale in these, but thou art so worldly that
thou appearst still as if thou were not in it. Can a young man when he may have
leave to breath in such a Paradise as this, draw a common air, an air of the
people? Madam, I don't think but you find him a rude servant, one that pays
his courtship as a business, and not as a delight, that has one eye upon the
door to be gone, when the other's fixed on you.


Hian. My Lord, I was never witness of any others courtship and therefore can
compare it only with what I can imagine: and it is above my highest fantasy.


King. Why do thou not answer? I am ashamed to see thee, O my conscience at
these years, I could ont woo thee my self; I think we had best change
business, neither will go forward else, i will court for thee, and thou shall
rule for me: thou wilt never get a wife without the help of a commission.


Tim. Though nothing is more just then a Noble
Love, yet nothing ought to be more secret,
None are to be admitted to the rights
Of it, but the god, and the two parties,
Sir, you are not acquainted with the laws,
Of a deviner love, that may imagine
The progress of it a teadious Pilgrimage,
And that they languish which do live in hope
The means is more delightful then the end,
Then is the bloome and spring of joy when it
Is green: as it grows riper, the blossom
Falls and turns to profit, the perfection
Is the first decay of love, there is a
Marriage of the Soul, preceeds the other
In time, and excellence, and is performed
By a Hymen of a more extracted
Deity, whose Torch is purer then the
Element of Fire, these are laws unknown
To your unfashioned Cupid, who perhaps
May wound a breast among those ruder Souls,
Who think they ought to exchange heart for heart,
And love only in requital, but here
A nobleness must tip the Shaft as well
As goodness, or else it peirces but to pity.

King. Ha, ha, ha, say thou so? thar't killed in a Philosophy, I thought thou
had never dreampt of, I am loath to put it out of thee with other thoughts:
but I think this business I am to tell thee of will confirm thee more: and
remove all thy jealousies. The suspicion thou had of a Treason was not in
vain, since it has broken out, but it is already cured, the two chief of
them are taken in their passage as they went to raise commotions. And I have
commanded that they be set so as they may have a full veiw of that earth they
were so ambitious of, and then to Strangle them at that height.


Time. Were there but two, Sr, flatter not your self, had they been thousands
they had yet left more behind, you account that a victory which they scorn to
account a loss, and think you are safe when they are not endangered. Is
Aratus, Phronimus or Eurylochus among them?


King. Noe, nor suspected by any but your self.

Enter Poliander. How now, what is the matter?


Poli. Sr, yonder are two fellows we have laid hold on, that call themselves
messengers from Aratus to your Majesty. But they have behaved themselves so
traitorously that we have used them accordingly, and clapped bolts upon 'em, till
they shall be further determined of, what their business is, they will declare
to none but to your self, and they have spoke those things which they are sure
would bring them thither. They answered when they were urged, they came to defy
the King, and us, and if they are not mad, they are the most desperate
villains I ere heard speak.


Time. These were the evils I was a Prophet of, I saw them when they were yet
disguised.


King. Where are they?


Poli. They are under guard here in the Court, there is a messenger too from the
Governor of the City, desires admittance to your Majesty, he says a broad are
many signs of tumults.


Time. Sr, this is noe time to delay, if we believe not yet, the next news
will be brought us home by the Traitors themselves, you may perceive their
Strength, and readynes in this, that they dare make such bold declarations and
in the open day produce their black Plotts. If we haste not to o're-take them
now; our greatest speed hereafter will not reach them.


King. Madam, we must entreat your pardon, that thus we have offended against
your quiet, and made you the first witness of our Troubles, that ought to have
known them last.


Hian. Sr, The trouble is too sad to be excused.


Exeunt Om. Whiles he that should be eye, and ear,
Through sloth does neither see nor hear,
Behold like Thunder comes a Sound,
Which does at once amaze and wound:
That dart sure hits what clouds did hide,
And safely kills, cause undiscride.
Chor. Where dangers urge, he that is slow,
Takes from himself and adds to's foe.
They Are come beyond a whisper now,
And boldly dare proclaim their vow,
When the prey's sure, to show the snare,
Begets not Council, but despair,
Like Lightning it awakes the sense,
Only to see, and grow blind thence.
Chor. It Is Love, not Faction, where the good
Conspire to spill usurping Blood.
Actus Quartus: Scaena I.
Enter Aratus and Pallantus, as in their Tent. Ara. OUr message you say, is
returned again upon us.


Pall. In a manner, the same words, accompanied only with a few threats more.


Ara. We expected no other, yet it was fit to neglect no part that belongs to
the justice of our cause, though it were but merely formal, we ought to
claim the right we had, before we use the means to conquer it; the same
circumstance is to be observed as well in the Court of war, as in the Courts
of Law, no trial till the demand be past.


Pall. There is but one of the messengers returned: the other for his stout
demanding of the Crown lost his head, there his fellow reports he delivered
those words you put into him, with such resolution, that he appeared not to
denounce, but bring those evils on him. The Tyrant grew pale, and seemed to
feel them in his threats, nor could he think himself safe encompast with
his friends and guard, till he had silenced that voice that so could wound him
through all their swords.


Ara. Alas poor man, yet he fell nobly, his sword might have purchased him a
higher name in war, but not in honor. In our days of triumph he shall not
be forgotten, nor his glory though he perceive it not, be defend behind those
that live.


Enter Clearchus to them. Clea. Do ye hear the news my Lord?


Ara. No, my Lord, what is it?


Clea. All Is lost.


Ara. Bless us, my Lord, how?


Clea. Yet it may be but a rumor and scattered by the enemy, Phronimus and
Eurilochus in their convoy with the young King are taken. The Camp is ready to
mutiny on the report.


Ara. There cannot be such an evil, it is a sin to give credit to it. Pray,
my Lord, relate some particulers of the report, was there any made mention of
the kings age?


Clea. No, The rumor goes that two Lords were taken on the way by a Troop of
horse of the adverse party, the young King being in his disguise, and not yet
known, past undiscovered as one of their followers.


Ara. O it is most likely.


Pall. Where are all our great words now? those
Mighty sounds that made a trembling in the air,
And causd no less a deafness with their fall,
Then if thunder, the voice of heaven were turned
Articulate, and spoke the threats of Jove
Unto the world? changed to as great a silence,
Such when a Tempest ceases is the calm
That follows, no noise is heard, as if the
Wind with blasts were breath less grown, and the Seas
Sat down, and after so much toil required ease.
Not able for to lift that from a Rock,
Whose Keele struck hell, and Mast the Clouds did knock,
Why had we not bodies equal to our minds?
That when we durst meet Perils, we might
Bear them too, and not with a fading trunk
Lose thoughts invincible: yet I will do
Something, and where the gods have given a will
We ought not in their service to sit still. Exit. Pallantus.

Clea. My Lord, raise your self, the news may be false, and all the danger
they are in may be by this your belief, give not your self cause to mourn
hereafter, that all perishd on a mistake, if that this the worst of evils be
befallen, it ought not to be the reason of your neglect, but greater care and
vigilance.


Ara. My Lord, I thank you, and will take your advice; Pardon me that I was
stupefied at the greatest amazement that could befall, and appeard dead when
that the life of all my action was taken from me; yet it was not a slumber I was
lost in, but a confusion of various thoughts, not knowing which to choose,
until you pointed me one out, we will do something presently, and not give
them leave to put their black intents in practice. hark.


A mutinous noise is heard. Clea. The Soldiers are in a mutiny.


As they are going out, Demophilus enters to them, and delivers Aratus a
letter. Ara. Demophilus, what news?


Aratus snatches the Letter greedily from him, and in reading shows signs of
joy. Clea. What news, my Lord?


Ara. Such as is not to be named without a Sacrifice. O see, my Lord, though we
have lost, we are not yet undone; there is a Relaps, but not a total ruin of
our fortunes; the King, Phronimus, and Eurilochus are all safe, and never were
in danger, this night they will be here with their full power, the occasion of
the mistake is now plain.


Clear. Till this fell out we had no sense of the happiness we were in. Pray
my Lord, what are they which are taken?


Ara. Two that stood strongly for our party, more besides their names here, and
that they were virtuous I am not to instruct you, you may perceive they which
have no such cause of joy as we have, do lament them much: we shall have a
time too to mourn their deaths, then, when we have leave to laugh at theirs
which slew them, in the mean time fare'em well; such a leave, were I in their
misfortune, I would have expected, they have only out-stript us in the payment
of a debt we all owe unto our Master, ours is due, though not yet called for.
And how fares the young King?


Demo. As one the gods take care on, his words and looks have gained many unto
his party, and put courage in all the rest.


Ara. And we will make use of it while it is yet hot, after this nights rest they
shall give battle to the enemy, hark the Muteny increases let us away, least
we loose all here,


A greater noise of Muteny is heard. Exeunt omnes. Enter the King, and Timeus.
Tim. Sr, though there are troubles in your affairs
Let none be in your countenance: your eyes
Should like those blessed twinne fires upon the Ship
Display a vigorous flame. A light of joy,
And comfort round about, that they which toil
In the rage and fury of this tempest
May from thence foresee a calm, and nourish
Hopes of safety. Thus you wrong your Kingdom
Distroying it your self cause others would.
The people groan just as you groan, their Pulses
Have the same motion, and their hearts do beat
Both hope or fear, according as yours does
Either dilate or else contract it else.
All omen comes from you, your Passion is not,
A single sadness, it is your Subjects too.
When you confess a fear, who dares bebold?
They do account it a disloyallty to have a
Thought that shall run cross to yours.
Your mirth were now discretion, and a face
Cheerful as at a Feast, were policy,
T'wouldbe one kind of succor.

King. Why Timeus, I thank thee, but these joys come
From above, are not to be taken
When we please, no man can resolve he will
Be happy, yet I will strugle with my
Thoughts, and endeavor to force that quiet
They have taken from me. But let not this thing
Discomfort you, it is but a course of humors
Perhapps a little Physic will remove it.

Time. Now Sir, you put a new life into me,
And I dare say we shall be victorious,
Nay, we will, no power does stand against us,
Now that is favorable which attends upon
Your person, to whose protection I will leave you,
And go see how the Camp fares.
Shall I bear any of your commands thither?

King. Only my love, the care of all things else do thou take upon thee, and
to morrow, if this fit leave me, before the battle I Will visit you. Exit. Timcus.

How every thing is irksome to me: clouds
And darkness are before mine eyes, all things
Dissenting one from the other yet conspire
In this, that they present death to my view,
I have that idle comfort only, that
He that dispaires of all, ought to fear nothing
When things cannot grow worse, all fortune then
Is on his side that suffers. But my injustice
Strengthened with murder, does forbid success,
A Kingdom got by blood, is built upon
A slippery foundation. I have been
Nourishd in peace thus long, that being grown
Specious and great, I may at last fall down
A Sacrifice worth slaughter. Thoughts urge thoughts,
Suspicion gets suspicion, Danger, danger;
I have not that small setlednesse of mind,
As to think one thing twice: were I but innocent,
I would provoke misfortune, call for Fate
With as undanted courage as the Lord
And ruler of it does --

An uprore is heard at the door, and Pallantus enters and wounds the King, and
the Guard follow on him. King. Stay.

What a nothing it is that I have thus much feared
And labored to escape, when it was my good:
Childishly dreading every thought of cure,
Then most offended when my health was near?
How well I Am after this little wound?
Quiet of mind and peace of Conscience,
Those blessed companions do possess me now,
I see nothing but blood can appease blood
In sacrifice, that to the guilty there is
No ease like death, no mercy like the cross.
Oh, oh. The King makes signs of weakness, and the guard make an offer to
kill Pallantus.
Hold in your rage, have you not already
Acted mischiefs enough by my command.
But thus you seek to pull more upon ye?
Ye are deceived, though I have been hitherto
A Tyrant, now I am merciful, and can
Command things that are just and innocent.

The King shows greater signs of weakness and the guard make another offer.
Guard. He faints the villain must not live.


King. I command you hold, my power is yet good
You are the villains, the first causers of
This my misery, and you should lay hands
Upon your selves; how ridiculous is this
Your rage? suppose I should give way to
Your desires, what were you the safer,
Or I the better? you would have one foe
The less, and I one sin more that am already
Laden. Does not this judgment affright you
Rather? I am not only guilty, your
Hands were dipped in the same blood and performed
Such things I often durst but wish: that you
Were commanded will not excuse you, your
Loyalty to me was but at best a
Broken faith unto another; and when
You observed it most, you were most periurd.
What can you expect? you see when that I
Was guarded by an host, needed not fear
What the power of earth, or men could do
Unto me, one man (as I may say) one
Handful of that earth broke through them all, and
With a single arm forced what a million
Could not keep, and when there was no means left,
Yet there was a miracle to conquer me.
The guard let fall their swords. To you I turn now, no more my ternor,
In return of this favor you have found,
Show the like to these, and others, that shall
Be guilty of that name, as friends to me,
Though you are nothing yet, this deed
Will make you powerful and you that have given them all
May demand so small a share: now you have been
So much my enemy change something
To a friend. How vainly I take care for
Lesser things neglecting my greatest charge.
O my Timeus! my poor Eudora!
here he is troubled again. Leave me not yet, my soul, thou can not mount
Until the load be taken from thy wing,
Thou could inhabit here when it was Hell,
Now it is Paradise, -- O stay -- and dwell --

Dies, the guard run and bear up his body. Pall. Though the fall be great it
cannot shake me
When I know it is just. The malefactors
Penitence, takes not the justice of his
Doom a way, though he be changed that remains
Unstaind, he may die with pity, but not
With innocence. They mind me not I Will endeavor
To escape while they are thus stupefied with grief,
I will not trust their obedience to a dead command. Exit.

Cap. Leave your sad embraces,
They Will bring no comfort to you, though you persisted in them till you were
such as thus you hold. Death, like a coy mistress, makes no return of love for
all that is bestowed, you may wast your selves but not your sorrows here. This
ground will afford a perpetual supply of moisture; which your eyes, like two
Suns, may draw up and power down for ever.

Let Us to the Prince, and to him
Offer up our lives and griefs together,
Th'ones the only medicine for the other.

1 Guard. The Traytor's escaped.


2 Guard. We were to soft to obey a dying speech.


Cap. His scape's as Strange as was his entrance
We had power to hinder neither. Exeunt. Om.

Enter Tymeus, and sees his father slain. Timeus. Give me a power mighty as my
rage,
That my revenge may reach unto the Clouds
And unthrone those gods that joynd hands with men
To commit so black a deed: it were but
Justice they should loose their diety that
So would throw it off. O my father! did
I unload thy shoulders of the Kindgome
That thou might fall under a less weight,
And bereft thee of all thy jealousies, to
Ruin thee with more assurance only?
Where are all those flattering tongues that when
There was noe need would in a complement
Howerly suffer for thee? not one to die
In thy defense, or by his fall to make
Thine more decent? how dismal is this place?
The graves where death inhabits are not so
Dreadful. I Will fly thee though I run amongst
The thickest of my foes, they can present
Noe dangers like this lonenesse the cries, the
Sword, the Trumpet in the battle strike not
So deep amazement, what ho, Clitus
Charisius, Erastus, Amanthes, Not one voice?
He goes out in Search, and returns again. I walk like Aeneus among the
shades.
All is hell about me: I see nothing
But what my Fantasy frames in horrid shapes,
O the vain fears of guilty men! all are
Unreasonable, but yours ridiculous,
When you have contemned the greatest powers
On earth, threatening with strength, and hatred,
You tremble at a ghost, a thing less then is
A man, and when the substance could not, the
Shadow frights you. There is noe way but this
To set me above my fears, when I am
Less I shall be equal to them --

Enter the Captain of the guard, and two more. Cap. O hold my Lord, offer not
up your self
A sacrifice when there are so many
That gladly would releeve you with their lives;
Let that thought prevail with you, hat you ought
To live for them, that so willingly would
Die for you, you are the prop of thousands, and
If you fall, you sink a Kingdom with you.
Take the Sword by the other end, and so
Holding it, seek to appease this Sacred
Ghost: such a will exceeds this performance
If you cannot confirm the Crown, yet confirm
Your memory by the loss of it. This
Object makes your grief a burden to your
Honor. Lean on me my Lord, I Will bear you
To the Camp. Exeunt Om.

Enter Poliander. Menetius, Comastes a Captain, and others as in their Tent. A
shout is heard from among the enemies. Poli. What shout is that among the
enemies?


Cap. It Is the acclamation of the Camp, at the receaving of their fellows,
this night they expected their other forces, and it seems they are now arrived.


Poli. I am glad on it, I hope we shall have command to try the fortune of the
Field to morrow, would the whole knot of them were there, that we might make
quick work; and like Alexander, unty it with a blow.


Com. I, and a wall round about 'em to keep them to the slaughter, that we may
not be troubled to kill a thousand in a thousand places: I don't like this
persuing it is the greatest evil next to the being persued, the wine near
tastes well when it is so jumbled. Give me a Standing Camp that florishes like a
peaceful City, and want's hoe necessaries, here stand your Engines, there your
beef, on this hand a Palesado defends you, on the other, a Baracado of
Porke-Tubs impregnable, before a Ditche is cut of some two hundred paces, and
the Soldiers tippling in it, behind a Coope runns out of the same length, and
the Poultry tippling in their Trenches, whose body are too dilicate and tender
for bare travel, here a man may even among the Tents forget to be a Soldier.


All. Ha, ha, ha,


Pol. O, my conscience Comastes thou art weary o'th Camp already.


Com. Yes, faith as your selves are, if you would confess the truth.


Poli. Why, me thinks there is noe pleasure to be compared with it, every man
has his delights here as if he took his leave on 'em: and if he chance to
return at night, like friends which parted in the morn two dangerous and
hopeless ways of ever seeing, they meet with a multiplied and unexpected joy,
these very wounds are pleasures, and Elysium comes faster on them then their
deaths.


Com. When honor is the prize, and wronged Justice
The cause that thrusts them on, they throw of one
That they may get a better life, a life
Of fame, which is eternal even on earth,
That they enjoyed before was fading
Sustained only by the infirmities
Of one weak body; now it is supported
By the memoryes of all, the charge of it
Is committed unto a world of men,
Nor is it extinguished before the fame o'th
Whole universe, none are so surviving
As the Sonns of glorious War. Jove gave
Life to Hercules, and Theseus; but Mars
Eternity, they breathed from one, but gained
Heaven by the other, these were the great thoughts
Which when I was yet young, and not able
To embrace them, did dwell in me: they did
Suggest unto my soul, that I ought to raise, my hand
Against the gods, if they slept.
At perjury and favored injustice.

Poli. Holloe. what aylst thou?


Mean. What meanst thou Comastes?


Com. To show you how easy a thing it is, to talk like a Soldier, and be as
brave a fellow as either of you.


All. Ha, ha, ha,.


Mean. Thou would make an excellent runne-away Soldier, such a speech on the
highway were greater violence than bidding stand a long staff, would not get
an alms so soon.


Poly. What will thou say now Comastes to a joviall round or two beyond the
Court healths, those at the Kings own Table?


Comast. I think I shall say more than you at this, as well as in the other.


Poly. Captain prithee command 'um to bring some wine in, Come let us sit in
the mean time, and take away these fearful things from Comastes. he bids
them remove the Armor off the Table.


Com. And why from me, me I pray?


Poly. Why they will fright thy mirth away, look, it gapes upon thee, but will not
bite.


Com. No more than your Lordships sword. Is this the terrible thing? I know not
what it may do in a dark night with a candle in it, but in the day, and your
Lordship looking through it, I shall never turn my back unless it be to
laugh. Pray God the enemy think of no such stratagem with a pitcher in the
Progenerall-ship, it may be as much as the Kings Army lies on.


Poly. Ha, ha.


Mean. Take this away too, is not this a Devils hand Comastes?


Coma. Yes, There Is a couple, pray remove 'em both, and his wit that is so
devilish, that we may fall a little to our business.

Enter with wine. if we must, let us to itstoutly, and like Soldiers, what say
ye? shall we drink a battle? the trial of to morrowes victory, I Will take the
Kings part against you all. I am the strongest, and when I have overcome, I Will
send him word of the good omen, it is worth a thousand of your paltry birds, and
ox entralls, it is a piece of service will gain the favor from you all.


Poly. Come, we will undertake you begin, that honor belongs to your side. one
brings Comastes a cup.


Com. Here Is -- how now, what is this? what does such a boy do in the war?
disroole him, I scorn to be Captain of such a youngster.


Poly. O whilst you live, begin with your light Armature, the Legionaries
follow.


Com. ^s that the trick on it? Here then for the King I throw the first reed,
this boy can manage no greater weapon.


He drinks, and they all pledge him. Com. I marry, there stands a rank of
lusty fellows, a man may rely upon such valors, their very looks will overcome
common stomachs. I long to see them buckle to it, this is too much sport.


Poly. Reach them down then.


They fill a great Goblet to Comastes. Com. Give it me, and found an assault?
Pallas and victory for the King -- why I, this was a tall fellow. I don't
think but Alexander had always a Guard of such attending on his Person; He
have a doozen of them, and call them my twelve Labors.

He perceives Menetius hard set. O for a shout, a little noise would gain the
conquest.


Mean. In good time, but not so easily.


Poly. You do but dream a victory yet.


Com. No? help me then old Soldier.


He drinks, and shows signs of faultring. Men. Hold up Comastes for the
greatness of your cause, hold up, you show signs of fainting, how now?


Com. Hah, goethy ways, nere a Goblet the King has ere got the honor to
struggle so long with me.


Poly. I fear we must lose in loyalty, you will nere overcome else.


Com. I warrant you, I retired but to an ambush. But who keeps the door all
this while? Say the enemies should come and cut all our throats. I can tell
you I have read such pretty stories.


Poly. How now Comastes, what words are these? does Wine breed fears in you?


Com. A pox on this War twill be my undoing, I shall come out with some such
roguish question or other at the Kings Table and have my bones broken by the
Guard.


Mean The Wine works not at all, Comastes you begin not fast enough.


Com. Fill another -- So now bring me the Armor again


Poli. What will you do with it?


Com. Bring it again I say, I Will put mirth into you all, pray let him help me
that has nothing to do.


One fetches it, and he arms himself with some of it. Men. Here will you take
this?


Com. Noe I shall have noe need of that.


Mean. O I had forgot, thy Face is always armed enough.


Com. Well Sr, when I return I Will pay you that.


As Comastes goes out, and they all sit in expectation what he will do, one
that was present at the Kings death enters. Guard O the King's killed!


All. The King! They all start up, and draw their Swords.


Poli. Thou look distractedly, speak it again.


Guard. He Is slain, my self was present at his fall.


Poli. By what accursed hand?


Guard. That devil that wounded the Prince, has murderd him, he was before
his terror, and was now his death.


Poli. O the heavy hand of Justice. Is the Prince safe?


Guard. Slain too, if report be true, but by what hand I know not, he left the
King just before his fall to come hither, and being that he is not here, we
have much cause to fear the worst.


Enter Six Soldiers. 1 Sol. Fear not now, you have past the greatest danger,
when we have made an end of these there is none left to punish us, the King and
Prince are killd, and those which remain, we do the business for, and will
reward us richly according to the service, and their great promises. We have no
other way to gain ought by this alteration, our pardons all that we can hope
for, if we still, let us on presently least some others do prevent us, follow
me, I Will give the first blow.


They walk up to the Captains, and when they look upon 'em, it dashes their
resolution. Poli. How now? what gaze you at? know you where you are? does your
feet lead you without the council of your head? get you to your quarter or
i will stretch you up in it.


The Soldiers retire, and go out. These Villains dare do any thing, Captain
follow 'em and see 'em punished. Exit Captain.


What shall we do? here we stand like so many trunkes of men, headles, and
livelesse, none to obey, nor able to command, there is noe way can present us
safety, but this we are now in is the most unworthy danger: So beasts when they
have been fed unto the slaughter, submit unto it, let us not stand still, but
resolve to turn our Swords upon our enemies, or bend them against our own
breasts; either ways a victory, and will bring us happiness and glory.

Mean. I am for the last, it is the safest way, and in our griefs the noblest.


Enter the Captain. Cap. Sr, These fellows came to kill us, one of the
weakest on 'em, when he saw himself laid hold on for his other fault,
suspecting he was discovered out of mere guiltines confessed, that unwillingly he
was brought into the plot, by the perswation of his fellows, who in hope of
preferment from the enemy had decreed on all our deaths, he says too that
himself, and many more were attempted by some of the adverse party with
promises, and threats to lay down their Arms, and that the Camp is full of
such commotors.


Poli. This then will confirm our former resolutions, come let us number up
our selves, and if we are equal each man set his sword against his fellows
breast, and with a friendly wound (in spite of Fate or Fortune, being our selves
Lords of a greater power) give happiness to either. Then these wild Beasts will
deplore the loss of that they so endeavor to throw away, and leap like
head-lesse bodies into flames, and ruin.


As they think to kill themselves* Timeus, enters to them; they run, and
kneel to him. Poli. O! my Lord, let us embrace you with such a love, as dead,
and revived friends would express to either, to us you were dead, and are
alive again. And have bestowed this life we now enjoy, we must not owe it to
another Parent. So is the Judge a Father to the guilty, your sentence was past
upon us, and the hand held up to put it into practice, when you, as if from
heaven you had fallen, set all right that was in such confusion, what trifles
will the greatest dangers appear to us.


Tim. Rise, you have noe less quickened me, that was as nigh my end as you
your selves were, but now I live, and again can think of life and vengance to
our enemies, which presently we will put in practice, and seeing that our spirits
are redoubled, our losses shall no longer fright us.


Poli. It Is time Sr, you showed your self unto the Army, there you are dead
still, and their faith on the belief little better, but your presence, will
enliven it again, and make them fight on hatred of their former fault, and
shame of their present desperation.


Timeus. Let us away.


Enter Cleander the young King, Aratus Eurylochus, and others. Ara. Never did
Justice appear so eminent this was a deed, as if her own hand had wrought it,
who can complain the want of providence, or say the guilty, and the innocent
make one heap, when this is told. A Tyrant in the height of all his glory
guarded with friends, and crewelty what either power or violence could make him
safe with, by a mortal hand Strengthened with Justice, was snatched from the
midst of all, the lightning melts not the enclosed gold with half that wonder:
leaving that is more combustible, nor does the plague in a multitude of men make
a choice so curious.


King. Where is the great worker, of it?


Ara. Again departed to perform greater things, If be possible, I did
prophecy, though not the nature of them, that he could act us wonders, we will
strive to second his first blow, and now the gods and he have done, play our
parts. I could almost give him divine honors, and say when he is in the Camp,
there is no need of any other power, Soldiers are but charge, and troubles
only.


Euri. It Is time, that my troops were gone, that we may reach the place of
ambush, ere the break of day.


Ara. It Is true you shall presently away, Phronimus is already gone with his
Forces to stop the passage between the enemy, and the City, we in front will
stand against them, so that in the morning when they rise it shall appear to
them as if they were inhabited with foes, not being able to turn away they
shall not loose their sight in our large number.


Enter Clearchus to them. Clea. Some of those which were sent to corrupt the
enemies are returned, and say their words were harkned to, beyond their
expectation: and if a present assault were given, there were no doubt of
victory, all is in such a tumult.


Ara. Such evils increase by delay, we will let 'em grow until the morning, and
then our sight will gain the conquest; if it be possible we will order't so,
that we may rather show 'um war than bring it on them, though they are given
into our hands we ought not to show our mercy, and not our power.


Exeunt omnes Enter Eudora, Rodia, and Ladies, frighted in by tumult. Ladies.
Oh, O!


Rodia. Madam they break in upon us.


Eudo. O my father! when thou art slain I cannot fear what after does befall
me, the same that was their cruelty to thee, will to me be pity. within --
Pallantus is heard without, spare no opposition, break the gates, add fire
unto your force. A noise is heard as if the gates were broken, and Pallantus, a
Captain, and Soldiers, rush in with their swords drawn, and seize upon the
Ladies, they give a shreeke, and --


Pall. Hold, I command you hold, he that takes a life shall pay one back
again. The Soldiers free the Ladies. My rage has blindly led me on to
violate a place, no less sacred then the Temples and rudely, ere I lookd
about, has thrust me on the Deity. Like those which being led to see some
glorious thing, eager, and longing, ask still as they pass, which is the
sight, and how near, until they are engaged within its splendor, which
opening suddenly upon them, makes them retire as fast again with reverence.


Eudo. What stays thee monster, and makes thee pant thusore the prey? here I
stand ready and do invite thy fury, come and save my hand a labor, if thou
art surfeited I Will whet thy thine appetite. Thou art a Murderer, a villain,
These name thee not, nor drawn in the same Table would express thee, such
offenders the Magistrates can punish, They are but diseases of the State, thou
the death, the Law comprehends them within her virge, thy giant faults do so
much oretop her, that justice cannot reach thee. And if there were no gods thou
then were innocent, and would stand safe because thou art so wicked. Thou
have killd thy King; O no, thou had no share in him, he was a King of men,
thou a beast, the bloodiest in the Forest, yet he was they Sovereign too, the
herds were under him, and the wildest knew no other Lord.


Pall. My revenge how false thy beauty was?


Eudo. How monstrous thou appearest, thou represenst unto me all ill I ever
heard of.


Pall. And thou all that ever I heard of good.


Eudo. Thou movest like so many living mischiefs, had the Priests beheld thee,
they might have divinde all these future evils so exactly in thy feature, that
what they told would rather seem a Story than a Prophecy, and saved us from
thee. Nature was never guilty of such a Work, some hellish power has given
the birth, and Spirit, and sent thee on earth to destroy all that is fair and
holy.


Cap. Sir, raise your self, can you endure such words as these? Soldiers on,
and make them feel those evils she has uttered.


Pall. Hold villains dare you make an offer to such a deed, and not in that
thought expect a bolt upon your breasts? he that heaves his hand shall know I
have that thunder here. Thou worse than she has named, unhallowed Traitor,
can thou command such Sacrilege? if that thy faults were told thee from
above, thou'ldst blaspheme the voice that spoke to thee. If shall dare to
speak such things as these, I Will make thy soul pass faster than thy words,
think not to wrong me with a seeming show. I Will not take your bitterness,
though gilded in the name of friendship, withdraw and show your love this way.


Cap. Sir, will you stay? there may be treachery in the place.


Pall. Still you iniure me with your kindness.


Exeunt Captain and Soldiers Eudo. What next intendst thou? what master-peace
of wickedness will thou glory in alone? know thou can not force me, here
within thy reach I am as safe as if an army all resolute to death divided us.
This hand something weaker than a woman's, can resist all thy strength, were in
as great mischief as thy will.


Pall. Though I seem all that you have named, and fouler yet, this is a sin
blacker than all; such as I dare not do. O think me not worse than you have
said already, and then I may again be happy. The beasts are noble, meek to
Chastity, and humbly lick the feet of Majesty. Judge me not by show, our eyes
deceive us, and as often persuade us to the wrong, as do the blind man's feet,
falsely do prompt us. All that is white is innocent, and all that is black is
sinful, without exception. Should those which look on you be led so by the
scence, they must kneel down before you, and adore you as some Deity, not
being able to fantasy so much god, as they do see in you; such forms their
power have given you, that you may become a rival in their worships.


Eudo. Why talkst thou thus? thy tongue has no more Power than has thy hands.


Pall. Neither intend violence, would you could entertain of me one thought of
goodness, as hopeless as you think me, I de undertake to make it good, and
better't daily.


Eudo. Why delayest thou? what would thou have?


Pall. Forgiveness, I dare not say love.


Eudo. Love? thy thoughts are more misshapen than thy self, even in thy hopes
thou art cruel. This base imagination has wronged me more than all thy
actions, before thou only soughtst my ruin, now the ruin of my name, that
thou intendst a rape it was a glory to me, and though I had lost it, would have
got me same, the honor of a ravished virgin. Did thou woe me with the
greatest services, as thou comst in my fathers blood, I could reward thee, but
could never yield thee love; I was too long a Princess, and lost the name too
late to entertain so low a thought.


Pall. The world of causes that part me and happiness.


Eudo. Love is soft, and full of courtesy a greater opposite to lust than
hate; the flames thou feelst are more preposterous than those which burn the
breasts of Satyrs, and of beasts, which kill the young and in that blood enjoy
the Damme. Think thou that any is so bold in lust to embrace such fears thy
love bring with it.


Pall. My youth and comeliness whither are you fled?


Eudo. My miseries have put a new nature in me, changed that calmness I had
wont to enjoy, into the looks and language of a fury: how ill does rage become
a virgins breast? I will suppress it, and if it must break forth, dissolve it
into tears. An age worn out in thought cannot present one comfort to me, I
am so wretched. Her grief and anger make her show signs of fainting.

Oh, my soul's more earthly than my body.
This war that is within me, will gain a victory ore me.
I find decays already.

Pall Accursed that I am, to be the Author of such misery, is there no way to
restore that peace which you have lost? if there be any, despair not of it,
though it be held in the jaws of death, I Will snatch it for you; though it were
lost in the darkest mass of things, my love would distinsh't in a Chaos: if it
have no being but what your thought gives life too, I Will wish it for you. So
strong my fantasy is to serve you; let it be any thing to be done I Will do it,
can I, the wretched cause removed bring ease unto you, here on my knee I yield
my life unto your taking, or if you had rather, I Will offer't up my self.


Eudo. No, and yet there is a way, and thou may do it.


Pall. Is there a way? O my joys, the gods are merciful, name it, name it to
me.


Eudo. If thou wilt vow to do it presently.


Pall. Need I an oath to confirm I would be happy? it is my own happiness I
thus eagerly pursue in yours, every sigh you give does make me breathless, and
every tear which you let fall does bow me nearer to the earth, than all the
years and wounds that I have suffered; yet I will swear by all things holy,
all that I fear and reverence, to refuse no labors, deaths, to gain your
ease --


Eudo. Then --


Pall. And restore joy unto your life again.


Eudo. Now thou can not, thy last words have rendered thee unable. The ease
was death, which yet I beg from thee.


Pall. From what a heaven of happiness am I fallen?


Eudo. Assist me all my Strength, the gods this way you have ordained I should
come to you, pardon that Fate then which your selves did give me.


Eudor a makes an offer to kill her self. La O my Lady.


Pall. Stay, O; stay that hand, let that goodness in you which would spare
things fair, and holy, preserve the fairest, and the holiest. The angels
would be proud to take such shape upon them when they visit earth, it is such as
your self ought to look with reverence on.


Eudo. There Is a weapon hid within my heart, which none can take away: it wounds
deeply. Now Death thou art a lover, and do court me mildly.


She faints. La. O my Lady, help, help, O my Lady.


Rodia. Give her more air.


Pall. She Is gone, my times noe longer, our lives were woven on the same web,
the destynies condemned me to see her death, and then to follow.


He wounds himself, and falls. Rodia. She breathes, stand off.


Eudo. My Brother, O my Father.


Rodia. How do you Madam?


Eudo. Too well, my Strength returns too fast upon me.


Pall. Were my Soul fled, that voice would call it back again, it self
would return: and choose this Paradise on earth, I Will not disturb her with my
longer stay.

He speaks to Rodia. If that your Lady shall need any thing, you may have it
with a thought, a long peace shall not present it with more care, and speed:
she shall not find less tenderness, and honor then if her Father still ruld
all.

The Guards at your command, and shall stay only for your safety. Exit
Pallanius.


Rodia. Soldier, thart noble, may the gods reward thy goodness, Madam, you
had best go in.


They lead of their Lady. Exeunt omnes. Enter Timeus, Polyander, Menetius
Comastes, and a Captain. Tim. Fortune, glory, Victory, all are fled
Unto their several habitations,
And have left Dishonor, Losses, Danger
In their Stead, not so much praise to all our
Dead Story, as that we lost one man to
Save a Kingdom, not bleed a drop for the
Whole bodies safety.

Poli. My Lord, let not the treachery of such Villains trouble you more then
your thought of safety, show your hate unto their false-hood by seeking to
revenge it, you have yet hopes left, if timely you put your former Resolution
into practice, when we have gained the Forte, there is means to escape the
I'sle, and seek foreign aid, you have many friends that you may trust too.
This our obscure flight will make our return more glorious, which shall be
in the face of the whole Kingdom, nor will we choose another way, but what
passes over Cities, Armies, and through a general ruin to our Revenge.


Exeunt Om. He who injustly swaid the State
Lives nowhere now, but in their Hate.
There Is nothing left of him but shame.
Which both preserues, and Clouds his name.
When civell Beasts fall, Let it be
Called slaughter, and not Victory.
Cho. When that he dies, that lived a shade
His sleeps continued then, not made.
Arise thou Star of honor there
And in his stead shine round our Sphere
Grace thou the Throne, and let us see
Thy father once more Reign in thee.
We Will now in naught but love conspire,
And noe breast burn, but with true fire.
Cho. While that such manners rule the Throne
Live all by his, he by his own.
Actus Quintus: Scaena I.
Enter Eudora, Rodia, and Ladies, Eudo. This quiet we enjoy does strike
amazement in me, sure they have slain the body with the head, which makes this
general calm.


Rod. Madam, it is more innocent, I had news brought by one I sent to learn
that did astonish me, that the people knew noe cause of grief or gladness,
but rose to their affairs as in a time when neither enemies, nor holidayes do
distract them from their labors. The Kings death was news this morning in the
City, such care the Victors took least, the many headed but unbrained
multitude, should pull a slaughter on them.


Eudo. Their piety is too late, nor will it satisfy the gods, when they have
spilt so much blood, that they will spill noe more.


Rod. The Soldiers, though their charge was gone, kept their Guard Still, they
of the party durst not disclose it for their own safety. Some there were which
whisperd it, but they seemed rather curious in the State, then those dull which
knew it not.


Eudo. Can a Kingdom fall, and the ruin not wake the people.


Rod. The messinger with this doubted what he had seen and heard; nor durst
he be confirmed least his question might seem Treason, the first opening of
it was by Proclamation, with such secresy the plot was carried, that now it was
a labor to discover it. After this Aratus, and the rest of the Conpirators
went into the Marketplace, where the people were commanded to attend by
public voice, and there to the assembly when they had declared the Justice of
their action, they produced the young Prince, which in the last alteration of
the State was lost. But by all supposed to have been murdered, which that he
was the Kings Son was confirmed by Aratus his conferring the Kingdom on him:
himself being the next heir unto the Crown, if the Kings Issue failed. The
Story of the Princes life bred much Love, and Pity, and his looks were able to
have led them to a civil War, had he been Counterfeit.


Eudo. This may be true, they who can believe there is a providence, may easily
give credit to this Justice, our sins were mightier then our sufferings, and
had we a greater debt then life, we ought to pay it, my Miseries are due to
me. I was a party, and enjoyed my Fathers violence.


Rod. Madam you are as Innocent, as at that time your age was, and only do
offend in your tears, and too much love, which on this occasion spent
excessively, is not to greeve but to repine, the King was old, and taking his
latest leave, and was hastened only a little sooner to show the Justice of the
gods; it is true, my Lord Timeus was young, yet had noe patent for his life, but
as all brothers, was an uncertain joy.


Eudo. How ill these words become thee, and me to hear, think thou my
Fathers faults can bring a comfort to me.


Rod. Madam, twould be noe glory to you that an unworthy grief should be your
death, your enemies noe doubt are noble, sure they chose the crewellest to
execute their business, and him though his churlish outside promised not, we
found more courteous, then they which do profess it, his words were the laws
of Complement. One that simpathizd in all your sufferings, and though his
manliness would not suffer him faint, he died together with you.


One knocks at the door. Eudo. See who it is disturbes us. Who is it? Rodia goes
out and returns.


Rod. Madam, I know not, nor did I ere see any like him, his beauties beyond
all similitude, he speaks like the Soldier we were talking of, but him it
cannot be, he was the terror, this the darling of mankind.


Eudo. Whether will thou loose thy self in commendation? in men beauties the
least part.


Rodia. Madam, it appears so in him, yet such features lay a necessity of
nobleness on the mind, he humbly craves admittance, nor would he take it
before that it were granted.


Eudo. Call him in, we must endure their pleasures, it will not become our
state to deny commands, much less when they entreat.


Rodia goes out, and returns with Pallantus. Pall. The Kingdom owes a
Sacrifice for your life, all will joy to hear it, which had it faild, would
have pulld more guilt upon us, than the sins of a whole age.


Eudo. It is my fault you tell me of, and a great share of my grief that thus
I stay to grieve.


Pall. My offensive tongue can utter nothing pleasing to you, so great are your
misfortunes, and your honor so tender to you, the wounds that I have given you
are beyond my cure.


Eudo. Thou art not he that gave 'um.


Pall. If my repentance can make me clear, I am not, otherways it is I that
partially hearing my own cause, believed and judged for it, that hastily
without examining what I did, decreed on all your woe.


Eudo. Thart strangely altered, if thou be he.


Pall. Nothing so strangely as my hopes are, at first they did appear in a
divine and holy form, beyond all that I can fantasy, such a mind though
ravishd with the beauty, could not express then, and promised all should be as
heavenly as their shape, called me the instrument of Justice, the saver of my
Country: set all the sins before me, I was to punish, told me there was no
heaven, but what their clouds did veil; thus they crept into me, and won me
with the most specious shows unto their service, on my bare resolution gave
me part of that happiness I was to aim at. Then they clothed me in a body,
foul as the Tragedy I was to act, and made me dote on those deformities which
all did loath, when they had bewitched me with these false, yet glittering
names, and I obeyed their black commands, in a moment they changd into
Repentance, a mournful figure: and sadly left me as they first did find me,
and as I now appear to you.


Eudo. Thou had no cause for all that thou have done, the faults were
general, and concernd not thee, but thou were ready, for all ill; as well as
goodness.


Pall. Yet, I had a cause (Pardon me that I say) and being that I saw not you
before I did it, a just one. I lost a Sovereign, as nere to me in blood, as
love; and if this cause may seem remote, I had a father murdered, whose death,
as it becomes you thus to mourn, so it did me for to revenge, my self was
banished, loyalty was both our faults, and when they had heapt these sorrows
on me, left me not one hope to lean on; they were not yet content with my
despair, but sought my life, which was so poor, it could not be distinguished
then from death; their injuries forcd a new one in me, and blew the spark
until the flame consumde 'um. But had I beheld you before their danger, it
would have turned my soul within me, changd me from a Foe unto their party.
I cannot now believe I had a Justice, that there could be any where you were
iniurd in it, so much my love does mount above my grief, that it makes me
think I have only lost your father. Why weep you thus? Could that recall
him, I Would bear you company, and break those stubborn gates, which from my
childe-hood to this present hour has kept them back, and spend my whole
store here. But nothing can redeem him, let that common remedy which all
apply, and helps all, give ease unto you, that nothing can redeem him. O
learn a strength of me (that is the worst name for it) to bear a fathers
loss. Let the innocence of mine excuse my violence to yours, we are the
wretchedst two alive, made so by our selves, and can be only happy in our
selves.


Eudo. Oh, O.


Pall. Look on this, it may bring you comfort, with making out of love with the
subject of your grief.


He delivers her that letter which he found in the villains pocket, to
murder him, written by her brother. She starts in the reading. Eudo. Ha?


Pall. Falls not my deformityes away?


Eudo. Pallantus? art thou Pallantus?


Pall. This is the first time I darde to be so.


Eudo. And to all this villainy is signd Tymeus, could thou be thus cruel,
thus basely cruel? unworthy brother. This has made a mercy of all that has
befallen thee, thou do deserve to have thy punishments outlive thee, to have
engraven on thy Tomb, Here lies the treacherous, bloody, and to make thee
monstrous, have thy age add to it, The young Timeus, that was subtle in his
youth, what remains for me? that happiness the most wretched do enjoy, is
taken from me, a worthy cause of grief. Now I can neither live, nor die,
without a stain.


Pall. Can you yet read a resemblance but of Justice in my Actions.


Eudo. I know not how to answer. The tongue must be as wicked as the will
that did commit 'em, that can defend such deeds, had equity pointed all your
Actions out, given you Rules to work by, told you how much, how far you must
have gone, you could not have done more justly, there wants not any thing to
crown your judgment but my death, the only issue of that sinful race. I
have a long time loathed my life, and now I loath my self too. I find I know
not how, a guiltiness within me, my fathers faults flow like his blood within
me.


Pall. You are not at all allide unto his vices. Profane not then your
goodness, it is a sin though you your self commit it; that you was a
Princess was not your ambition but obedience, you are only guilty in thinking
of your self so, why then do yue talk of death thus?


Eudo. Can any life be noble after such losses?


Pall. My self, and the many which have suffered them do think so, and are
received of all with pity, and with honor, can you expect to find less
humanity? you are not fallne so low, but the greatest Prince would be proud to
do you service. It Is vainenes to profess, all civility is your due.


Eudo. You reward me good for bad, before that I was certain of a cause, I
slandered your virtues with those names foul deeds deserve, or a worse nature
could invent, I falsely did apply to you that which was true in me.


Pall. You are a Judge too cruel to your self, I did deserve them at the
least from you, it was a noble passion, and owed unto your friends, had they
been worse, yet if you'de make amends, where there was no wrong, give one
comfort to your self, and I shall receive a million: ample and satisfactory.


Eudo. You have given me many, more than I did hope, or wish for, and removed
those killing doubts within me. I shall remember you no more the cause, but
mourner of my fathers death. O that name of father, how ever thou deserve,
thou do deserve these tears of me.


Pall. Fall not to a relapse again, I dare not leave you thus.


Eudo. You may there is no danger in it, they were but tears, and are already
wipt away.


Pall All about you does minister to your grief. The King would gladly comfort
you, can you admit his visit?


Eudo. I find hereafter that I may, yet it is too soon, Pray excuse me.


Pall. May peace and quiet return to their home, again to this place. Exeunt
omnes.


Enter the King, Aratus, Phronimus, Eunilochus, attendants. People Jove,
Neptune, Apollo, and the gods of Greece; preserve, and bless the King.

King. Through the happiness of my people, may I know no other joy or sadness,
but what passes you, still the middle way of blessings twixt the gods and me.


People The gods preserve your Majesty.


Ara. Sir, give us leave too, to ease our selves of that joy that does oppress
us, how has these your virtues rewarded all our travel, made our deed
honorable, and to our faith have joynd discretion, in showing your self thus
worthy of the place you are chose too, you have made it plain, as none ought,
so none but your self can rule: what praises will afterages give us for this
our loyalty? Had you been brought in with fire, with blood, with desolation,
as you, with wonder, are given a gift of peace in the height of war, yet your
endowments would have made all innocent, and like a year of good things made
the bad forgotten. Sir I hope you do not think I flatter.


King. My Lord, I do not, you that have so many virtues for to live by, need
no dishonest Arts, nor by such ways seek to endeare me, when you have
already so really engaged me, that I am not able to give you a thanks, much
less a return that is equal not to say if I could what I would do deserving
you, and if you cannot in some kind reward your self, it is not in my power to
do it: These praises you have given me, do tell, if not what I am, yet what I
should be, they shall not make me proud, but good, nor will I glory in them,
but make them still my aim. I Will first offer them to the gods, and humbly from
their hands pray for them again, and at the second gift account them mine.


Ara. These men wrought hard too for, you.


King. My Lord, I know it, and could I thank them in it, I Would stoop lower than
the place from whence they raised me.


Enter Clearchus, Hianthe, Haimantus, Melissa, Ladies, to them. Ara. See Sir,
what joys approach you, your royal Sister.


King. This way let me express a brothers love
Before I speak it -- O my Sister, you are
My Throne, my Scepter, and my Crown, or what
Is more dear and estimable with me,
The Grace, the Majesty that rises from them.
Pardon, if my much love make me a rude
Brother, and too credulously soon I
Proudly call my self by that honorable
Name, when so lately I had leave to do it:
Yet had it not been before declared
Unto me, I could not so easily
Consent to the belief; your face before
Did joy me, but then an Angel wore it,
And appeard more heavenly in your borrowed
Shape than in his own. I cannot blame the
Troubles of my former life, when I was
Barred from such felicities as these.

Hian. The gods were not so favorable to me
As in a Dream, faintly and a far off
To show the Blessings I was to hope, how
Gladly J would have changd my greatest joys
For such your troubles; This I may call my
Birthday, I walked, and breathed, and spoke before.
But lived not till this hour. I had a being
Then, but not a life till now.

King: It Is so to both of us. And we will ever celebrate it, as the first day
that we were borne Brother and Sister, before we were Strangers, now we are
twinns of love. My Lord, I understand the holy League betwixt you, and though I
lay my hand thus on it, I Intend not for to break it, nor make a divorse,
though thus I part you: pardon me that I seem covetous of so great a happiness;
and show a loathnes to part from it, before I have my self enjoyed it. She
must sit some time my Queen, before she be crowned yours.


Clear. It were a creuelty to wish it other, I will not be guilty of such
desires, if after a brother, I an humble servant shall be thought on, it is the
time and place I am ambitious off. I will withdraw Sir, and though there is noe
happiness, I can enjoy so great, as beholding yours, I will deny my self the
view.


King. O my Lord, say not so, though I am kind I am not fond, I Will give up my
interest, or any thing rather then you shall leave us; I spoke it as a means
to stay you make it not then a parting word: help me to persuade him.


Hian. My Lord.


Clear. It Is enough, I obey, my business is much below my love, and I will rather
distroy the one, then offend the other, yet now I have granted I Will entreat
again, as for a new favor. I may persuade, though deny nothing. My voyage was
bound to another place, before happily I was cast upon this shore, and though I
call my self a Prince, I am a servant to my employments, and obey the
Commission of a Father, the expense, and expectation of a Kingdom,


King. My Lord, if your employments are so great, we would not make you guilty
of a dishonorable Stay.


Cle. If with your leaves I shall depart, as a man that is pulled from his
delights, with a strong hand, being freed recoyles again to them, so speedy
shall be my return, and in my absence account al violence, that does detain
me, by that time too, your first troubles will be settled, and you more fit to
receive an idleman.


King. Our passion ought to give way unto your reason.


Phro. Aratus you are in a maze.


Ara. Hah, I must confess I am so. These Princes play their parts so rarely,
that there is nothing left for us, but wonder.


King. My Lord, shall we entreat you to bear us company unto the Temple:
thither we are a going; to give that perfection to our joys which yet is
wanting, and for unusual benefits offer unusual thanks.


Enter Pallantus, and kneeles, and kisses the Kings hand. Pall. Sr, I humbly
crave your pardon, that thus tardily after the people and your enemies, I
present my service to you, and wish you happiness.


King. I cannot be deceived, thou must be my Pallantus, there is none can speak,
or look like thee, thy least resemblance is above all men, it is noe wonder to
see thee Changed, thy deed has thus transformed thee, it sits upon thy brow
and Casts a glory round about thy face.


Ara. Me thinks the times had such a vizor on, and till this day showed not a
true face, Sr, you shall see him each day make new discoveries of virtues.


Pall. My Lord, you promise too highly for me.


Ara. Thou look sadly after all thy Honors.


King. So me thought, what can be the cause? A King they says the best
Physician for a discontent. If I cannot bring you comfort, I sacrifice in your
behalf.


Pall. Sr, I bow to you. But that which is my grief will be noe longer mine
alone, then while I do conceal it, all that hears't will also have their
share in it, it is a disease that good men catch merely by the fantasy. Justice
could never yet with all her care so carue out her punishment, but that the
Innocent were wounded with the blow, and felt the Judgment of another sin,
while with her Sword she cuts off the offending parent the child is made an
Orphan in the Cradle, and mournes hereafter because he had noe fault.


King. Whether does this sad beginning tend?


Pall. To this Sr, as we have slain withal religion a bloody tyrant, one that
was greater in his sins then in the Kingdom he purchased by them. So too we
have causeless slain the father of a Lady, that knew not so much guilt as to
satisfy her, why she lost him: for want of whose life she now contemnes her
own, a Jewel of inestimable value with all that does behold it but her self,
Sr, you cannot call her an enemy, though her goodness has stood against you,
and preserved her Father so many years in spite of all his sins, she ought
to resist all piety if it were an enemy to her own.


Hian. Her cause of grief is mighty, and if care be not taken, as their faults
have done the rest, her goodness will distroy her, we that beheld the past
deformities, can bear witness of her virtues, she was the only mine of honor,
and when we have been wearyed in seeking one grain, in her we could find a
treasure, nor wast a beauty set of only with the blemishes of others, or foild
by general vices, but a real, and a native excellence, which as it could not
be obscured with thickest darkness: so neither could it be outshind by other
lights.


King. Her grief concerns us all, and ought to be considered before our
joys, bear these tears to her, we wish the excess of ours may lessen here is,
and say that comfort which is left we will preserve, and carefully offer to
her. Her brother with many of her friends are fled unto the Fort, and are there
shut up -- would I could give them life, what say you my Lord? may I do this?
Is not mercy in this place folly?


Ara. Sir, it is so at no time; you may do this or any thing you have a mind
too, even in your fantasiy there is a secret council, and seeing that all your
actions, nay all your pleasures, are in some exercise of virtue, we will not
cross you, but make it our greater care to preserve you in them, and have a
more diligent eye least your pity may prove crewell to your self


King. You have given me resolution, have presently unto 'em (it was their desire
this morning to have conference with one of note) and if you find 'em fit for
mercy or to be made fit, offert to 'um. Exeunt Omnes.


Enter Tymeus, at one door. Menetius, Poliander, Comastes, a Captain at the
other Tim. Noe answer yet returned?


Mean. Not yet, Sir.


Tim. One Look out again. Exit Cap.

Polyander, I remember I heard thee once say, when I condemnd thee for thy
smiles, that if I had a cause thou would frown, why lookst thou sadly then?
our fortunes ought rather to stir our anger than our grief.


Poly. Were they Sir, my misfortunes alone, and not yours, I would not now fall
below my words, the greatest should not move any affection in me, unless it
were some glory.


Enter Captain. Cap. There Is now one arrived Sir, who certainly has brought
us news.


Tim. Let us seat our selves before he enters, that he may see on what
strength we do demand, every man put on a face of mirth, now we are at a
Banquet that will refresh us after all our toil.


There stands a Table, and a cup of poison on it, they all sit about. Enter
Pallantus, and a guard. Pall. Now retire, but on the least call be ready for
to enter.


Tim. Who Is this? do any of you know him?


Pol. Men. Not I my Lord.


Tim. Sir, you are welcome, but we invite you only to look on, these cates are
not easy of digestion; the gods give not life more certain than this gives
death, do you think you can endure the sight? would Aratus himself were
here, that once he might be satisfied with a spectacle of blood. You look
pale on us already, sure they have a plot upon you, and sent you hither to see
your death, had they none to send us to behold our resolutions but such a
trifle.


Pall. What shape can I put on, and thou not iniure me in it. I never yet
appeard to thee in any form, but that I suffered by thee, at first I was thy
fear, as all that were innocent did fright thee, because thou were guilty I
was banished, not to remove me, but my death, which with treachery thou
soughtst. And when I had, with wonder escapt thy intended mischiefs, by chance
thou would have slain me when thou had no cause of hatred, my disguise
wronged thee not, it was as much a stranger to thee, as an inhabitant of remotest
Africa --


Timeus and the rest start from their places, and draw. Timeus. I know thee
now, thou needs not further declare thy self, and thou art come past all my
wishes to satisfy my revenge.


Pallantus knockes, and the guard enters, and they run upon Timeus and the
rest. Pall. Hold, I came to bring peace and not destruction, do you yet
perceive how vain is all your malice?


Tim. If thou art that man thou would seem to be, and equally with me do
honor a dead father, yet (setting by these helpers) let us singly try our
hatred; the grant of this will please above all our demands, I had rather see
thee dead, or by this means not see thee live, then again be Master of the
fortunes I have lost, I am unfit for life. I shall but curse the givers of it.


Pall. If I thought so, I Would grant to your request, and kill you; I could do
it, I have strength, and justice enough to make me able, but you are not so
bad, as you suppose, these are dispairing, and not malicious thoughts; yet ere
I go one way or other I Will give you satisfaction, I came for that intent. Let
me see your Articles --

He seems to read them to himself, and speaks out the last. And if these
may not be granted, that thus accompanied, we may depart the Isle. How poor
are these requests? without more commission I dare grant you greater. Why,
these are demands within the compass of a subjects breast, deceive not your
selves, you were not so safe in your own reign, as in your enemies. The State
is not translated from one tyranny to another, but to a kingdom. A Prince
governes now, which is the name of mercy, as well as power, which he truly
knows, and in his first deeds desires to show on you; he does not think he is
then like Jove when he can thunder, but when he can hold it in, not when he is
the voice of death, but when he sits harmless, with the power of death about
him. Revenge, Torments, Executions, are not expressions of a king, but a
destruction, he rivalls not the immortal powers in Temples, statues,
adoration, but transcendent virtues, divine performances, these are the
additions by which he climbes heaven, and appears a god on earth.


Tim. Why should I be a stranger to these virtues, more than this man? I was
not borne for less things than he, certainly when nature made this frame, she
intended it for the noblest actions.


Pall. Have you yet resolved on any thing?


Tim. If you will go on, I can hear you still.


Pall. I will go on in mercy, it is my commission, and if you will not dam
against its streams, it may flow to you: yet the way is even; why look you
strangely at the word? it is no wonder to the sender of it, nor they which live
about him. Though the dangers may seem great, twere not worthy of the high
name of his mercy, if the offense were not such. This is but the least of his
expressions, that his enemies were courted for to live, but presently you
think it is not to save you, but to defer your death. A vain thought, when
can it be done more safely, and more justly, you are now as far from those to
help you, as to pity you. None but himself has any care of you. It Is true,
there is a Lady that had a share in you, but with your honor you threw her off,
nor can you claim an interest, when you have neglected her in all her
miseries; not in your flight, your articles, no, not in your thoughts providing
for her. And, had she not fallen into the hands of enemies that were servants
too, to honor; you had thrown away a Jewel that had a first thought, even
among the gods.


Tim. O Sir, you have underminde my pride, and removed me from that advantage
ground I stood on, to my own low height. These your last words comes near
unto me, and makes me with reverence believe all that you have spoken; before
your virtues only sturd my hate and envy, this deed first taught me to
admire, and cannot doubt there is a want of any nobleness, when you have
shown such passionate care in preserving a distressed Virgin, whom I durst not
think of, least I should think too, of her dishonor.


Pall. Sir, keep in your joy, we do not think our selves such high
deservers, in doing that which barbarous people would have done, they which
would have burnt the Temples, would have kneeld to her, and what duties they
neglected to the Altar, would have paid at her feet. Think you we could
desire to save such enemies as you, and not adore an enemy of her virtues.


Tim. Give me not scorn and honor in the same breath, you have made me leave
my self, hate me not now I am nothing.


Pall. Now I meet you: and first give me leave with this to throw away all
danger that does threaten you.

He spills the spoyson. Next my request is (if you dare trust me) to leave this
place, and presently go with me whether I shall lead you.


All but Comastes follow Pallantus. Com. I breath, am warm -- all alive -- The
Sun shines too, I have not heard of any of his rays in the other world. It Is
earth I tread on at least, if I am not mounted higher, and yet I hope I am not
in heaven, for let them say what they will, it is to be dead to be there; and I
like not the society, though they be Angels; what do I see? I begin to
mis-doubt, I do behold some such shapes here. Faces heavenly, and di --
Divine, or else my fantasy abuses me, if I be alive and on the earth, then
there was poison in that cup. A pox o my curiosity, He takes it, and tastes a
little of the bottom. what need I have cared whether I had been, so long as I
found my self well? I should have got fearful honor if I had drunk my
share. By this I see 'twas not a dream, nor swound I was in, but all true
story. I did not think before, it had been in the power of all the Kings in
the world to have given me life, when I was yet living; but these thoughts
shall pass. And now I Will look before me presently, I Will to the new Court, and
though the King be changed, not despair to be the same man.


exit. Enter Eudora. Eudo. My father, my brother, why do you fly me? your
welcome, and loved shapes. O my sad fantasy!


Enter Rodia. Rod. Madam, The King wishes you joy and comfort.


Eudo. The King, what King? oh.


Rod. And desires to visit you.


Eudo. Return all duty and service to the King.


Exit. Rodia Enter Pallantus. Pall. Joy attend you Madam.


Eudo. My Comforter.


Pall. Your unfortunate one, to see that little he had wrought with much care so
soon decayed again, yet I hope I shall this time be more happy in my cure,
before I brought but Physic for your grief, but now I bring you joy it
self, it makes me bold and assures me of my welcome, though thus without
leave I enter. He needs noe ceremony that can say your brother lives.


Eudo. My brother? O where? and how? alas it cannot be, why do ye mock my
sadness? thus such false hopes as these make more wretched.


Pall. I dare not play with holy things, nor would I deferr your hopes, much
less delu'd 'em; he came along with me, and stayed but till I had thus prepared
his way: I know to have given him you, as you immagine, had been twice only
to have taken him away, noe danger threatened him but his own discontent. The
King among his first cares provided for his safety: he shall himself confirm
my words.


Enter Rodia. Eudo. Pray stay, I do believe and ask you pardon, but now I am
certain of him. I would not at first show any signs of joy, I have thought a
way to entertain him, Rodia, fetch the paper that lies within upon the Table,
so: now Sr, you may admit him.


Rodia goes out, and brings the Letter written by Timeus, to kill Pallantus.
Pallantus goes out, and returns with Timeus. Tim. Here let me alone be happy,
without a covetous wish of what I have lost. O Eudora! wonder not at my
excessive passion, misery lays stronger bonds of love then nature, and they
are more one whom the same misfortune joynd together, then whom the same womb
gave life.


Eudo. But stay my brother, I knowledge that you say most true, and was noe
less surpised at first to hear of this your safety, for when I once believed
you dead that you were alive again, was a greater good then I could give
credit to. But when I consider the cause of my greese and gladness: and found
it was merely the name of brother, nay not so much the dishonor of our name
only, with tears I threw away, what with tears I sought for, look on this
unworthy man.

She gives him the Letter. Here you are discected, and see if I ought to
mourn for any part being lost, or rejoice for any that safe in the whole
Anotamy.


Pall. O be not too severe, but suddenly give that joy you have prepared for
him.


Eudo. Now I meet your love, pardon me my brother, I was to rejoice at this
your sadness, before I could share with you in another joy.


Enter a Lady. La. Madam, the King's hard by.


Pall. The King?


Eudo. Yes, he sent before that he would visit me, what will you do?


Tim. Not see him willingly at this time.


Pall. Sir, you need not, he understands the nature of, your losses, and will
not expect so suddenly to see you.


Eudo. Stay within till he be gone.


Exeunt Tim, Rodia, and Lady. Pallantus. Madam, I Will meet the King, and meet
upon him in.


Eudo. Did you say this was the King's mercy?


Pall. I did Madam.


Exit Pallantus. Enter the King, Pallantus as in talk with him, Clearchus
Hianthe, Haimantus, Aratus, Phronimus, Eurylochus, and Attendants King. And
does she know of it yet?


Pall. She lives only by the favor.


As the King draws near, Eudora offers to kneel. King. Madam, fall not so
low, we have already too much dejected you, and would our selves gladly submit
in recompense, you are still in the esteem of all, that which you have been,
not by the sins of others but by your own indowments, admired Princess, and
may a curse light, light on those, who shall dare to unthrone a Majesty which
the gods themselves have seated; we are come confident in these your virtues,
that you will not disdain when nobly we endeavor it, to have your grief
lessened by your enemies, Madam, though unpropper, yet we are willing
comforters, and have as true a sense of what you suffer as those, who in a
nearer name do share their losses with you.


Eudo. Sr, admit me to kneel before you, I ought not to stand an equal height
with Majesty, and virtue, so much above me, what undeserving name is due to me,
when you are pleased to call your self an enemy, if you are one, it is to your
self, in thus prefering your mercy before your safety, you have given my
brother life, to bring your own in danger, and removed my grief, which
hereafter may be the cause of it to your self. Sr, think me unworthy, but not
a scorner, of these favors, were my sorrows heaver. (Thus offered) twere but
religion to bow, and to receive 'em,


King. You make us all happy, and show a virtue above your sex, in being able
so much to love, and yet to loose a Father, if still you can resist this
passion, and rejoice with us, with you we will observe your days of mourning.
We are now going to pay some Funeral duties to our dead predecessor, for your
sake so we will ever call him. Spare these tears, and we will weep them for
you, mourn all as if we had lost a general parent.


Eudo. Sir, there is much joy in them, which the softness of your words, and
not my grief causes to flow from me.


Clear. Fame, thou spokst loudly of these Ladies, and yet thy voice was narrow
in their Praise.


Here they all present themselves to Eudora. Enter Comastes. Com. I have past
hitherto, and perceive noe great alteration, I thought the subversion of a
State would have made such a clatter among the houses, and there is no such
matter, it has not changed a suite of hangings here, yonder is our Princess
too, I am among friends, now fortune direct me, which is the King -- The least
change that ever I saw, nay then I perceive I may do even what I list. Aratus
spies him.


Ara. My Lord Comastes?


Com. Your servant my Lord, I hope you have forgot all those little unkindnesses
that past betwixt us, and will speak a noble word in my behalf unto the young
King.


Ara. Ha, ha, ha, would thou be fool again.


Com. No my Lord, you know I was never called so in the last reign.


Ara. Ha, ha, ha, why I tell thee the King's too serious, he never laughes nor
smiles, but very seldom, and then it is still at something excellent, he hates
a jest, look, twice he has cast his eye upon thee, and yet keeps his
countenance, despair of ever pleasing him, there is noe mirth that thou can
make, worthy to be compared with this thy misery.


King. My Lord, who is that?


Arat. One Sr, that was master of the dead King's mirth, he never laughed
without his allowance. It Was in his power to have jeasted any head off in the
whole Kingdom, but I think he was never guilty of any other sin, but Luxury.


King. What does he expect?


Arat. To hold the same place under you.


King. Sr, we understand you, and your desires, go leave the Court upon your
life, be not seen in it after this day, and look hereafter warily to your
actions, if you deserve a light judgment you shall feel the Heauyest


Ara. Stay my Lord, you have doomed him as if you had been witness of his
follyes, and if there were not hopes, that he might redeem hereafter what he
has so ill spent, he does deserve a greater punishment; I beseech you Sir, let
me entreat for him, he is yet young, and if he have leave, may be virtuous,
continue as you have begun, to change the men, and not destroy 'em: he thrust
himself with confidence on your mercy, let it not be said that was a Snare to
any, besides you have made this place a Sanctuary to all those who can claim
an interest in that excellent Lady.


King. My Lord, I would be ever taught thus by you. Sir, I recall what I have
said, and wish to see those virtues we see in you.


Com. I Will not despair to be Master of them: Com. kneeles 'Twas the desire of
favor with my King, that made me what I was before, and shame now for to
remember. But seeing I am to please another way, and make virtue my endeavor,
unwearied in those ragged ways, I Will toil to gain your smiles.


King. My Lord, do'e still intend to leave us so suddenly, as tomorrow. If I
durst presume so much of you^ ill entertainment, I would persuade you to a
longer stay.


Clea. Sir, I have found a royal welcome, such as cannot be betterd but by
your own wishes, which are the only things above your actions. Yet ere I go,
I have a request to you, but it is such as I must not receive, unless another
will be content to ask it for me, you are the man, my Lord, and your company
I desire, which if I can obtain, I dare promise to my self a victorious
enterprise.


Pall. Sir, you much honor me, and entreat me to that I am most ambitious of,
my will I freely offer, but the greater part is wholly devoted to your service
Sir, and none besides ought to dispose of it.


King. I thus give it with the rest, by this request, My Lord, I perceive you will
keep your word, and suddenly return, you would not else at once bereft us of
your self, and so near a servant.


Pall. How gladly I would think my self so much concernd, as to ask a leave
of you, but I have ever made my self a stranger to you or what is worse, a
known enemy, and can expect only ill wishes from you.


Eudo. Sir, I think not so, you have deserved better from me, and if I give
you not a leave, it is because I am loath to have you go, it was you confirmed my
life, when I thought it not in the power of Art, or heaven to have done it, and
that before I made not these large expressions, it was because they then became
me not, if I had owed less, I would have said more.


Pall. You have given me a happiness, which neither envy, malice, nor the
worst of fortune can take from me. I stand the only man above the stroke of
Fate, may I hope to see that joy dwell in your face again, which I was never
yet so blessed as to behold?


Eudo. You may.


Pall. And will you leave off these mourning Habits?


Eudo. I will: I will do that that is noble.


King. I hope I understand you, and that I may yet expect a happiness, equal
to the happiness of this day. Hitherto our Kingdom has been like the
Kingdom of the gods. Felicity upon felicity, joy crow'nd with joy; and though
this day concluded what it has begun. I have reigned a perfect reign, having
beheld in few hours the numerous changes of an age.


1. Flam. Sacred Peans to Mars sing
Notes of Triumph, not of woe,
Hence your Ewe, and Cypress fling,
Who adornes a Trophie so?
These are the spoils of our great Enemy,
Hang Garlands on them of the Laurel tree.

2. Flam. Hence impure and bloody voice,
Far be from our Mysteries,
Bidentalls are Joves proper choice,
Holier then the Sacrifice.
Each unskillfull hand, and rude,
At his Altar dares obtrude.

3. Flam. Touch not then with lips profane
What Heavens Fire has purifide,
Whose tears have washd away his stain,
Whose black deeds in his blood are died.
He for his sins has paid, with death and sorrow,
His Credits more that paies, than does not borrow.

Chorus. He for his sins, etc.

2. Flam. None hear after of thy faults,
But that thou ought's
To die, remembered be,
The rest shall sleep with thee.

1. Flam. Least our too partial favor this way bent,
Excuse the ill, and blame the innocent.

Chorus. Least our too partial favor, etc.

Epilogue.
GReat and good Powers,
That from your reared, and exalted Throne,
Have daign'd to visit your Creation,
And bless what once you fashioned; we know
That what you please to breath on, and bid grow,
Shall once prove fruitful, and its glory spread
To many branches, from one single bed;
Still teeming new, and Noble Families,
Great as the Stock from whence themselves did rise.
It Is true; but this is future, and far less
Then this their present richer happiness,
Which now they have enjoyed, by your long pains,
And mercy showed unto these humble strains.
And since their service and their thanks do please,
They Will count their joyfull'st issues such as these.
FINIS.

