LECTVRES UPON JONAS, DELIVERED AT YORK In the year of our Lord 1594. By
JOHN KING: Newly corrected and amended.

Printed at Oxford, by JOSEPH BARNES, and are to be sold in Paul's
Church-yarde at the sign of the Bible. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR THOMAS EGERTON, KNIGHT, LORD KEEPER OF THE GREAT
SEAL, MY very singular good Lord, such honor and happiness in this world, as
may undoubtedly be accompanied with the happiness, and honor of Saints in
the world to come.
RIGHT Honorable, in this prodigal and intemperate age of the world,
wherein every man writes more than need is, and chooses such patronage to
his writings, as his heart fancieth, If I have taken the like liberty to my
self, both of setting my labors openly in the eyes of men, and your Honors
eyes especially over my labors, I hope, because it is not my private fault,
your Lordshippe will either forget to epsy, or not narrowly examine it. The
number of books written in these days without number, I say not more then the
world can hold, (for it even emptieth it self of reason and moderation to
give place to this bookish folly, and serves under the vanity thereof) but
more than well use, the titles whereof but to have red or seen, were the
sufficient labor of our insufficient lives, did earnestly treat with me,
Vix tota vita indices.

Senec. O^erat discentem turba, non instruit. Jd. Eccles. Vl^.


to give some rest to the Reader, and not to devide him into more choice of
books, the plenty whereof has already rather hurt then furthered him, and
kept him barer of knowledge. For much reading is but a weariness to the flesh,
and there is no end of making or perusing many books. For mine own part, I
could have been well content not to have added more fullness to the sea, nor
to have trained the credulous Reader along with the hope of a new seeming
book, which in name, and edition, and fashion, because the file has a little
otherwise been drawn over it, may so be; but touching the substance, that of
the Preacher was long since true, and together with the growth of the world
receives daily more strength, Eccles. 1. Scribimus indocti doctique. Pers.
That that is, has been, and there is no new thing under the sun. But as we
all write, learned and unlearned, crow-poets and py-poetesses, though but our
own follies and ignoraunces, and to purchase the credit of writers, some as
mad as the sea, some out their own shame and incurable reproach, whose
dishonest treatises fitter for the fire then the books of Protagoras, presses
are daily oppressed with, the world burdened, and the patience of modest and
religious ears implacably offended: so the ambitious curiosity of readers for
their parts, calling forth books, as the hardness of the Jewish hearts
occasioned the libell of divorce, Poscimus indocti doctique. Act. 17.
and a kind of Athenian humor both in learned and unlearned of harkening after
the Mart, and asking of the Stationers, what new things? thereby threatening as
it were continually to give over reading, if there want variety to feed and
draw them on; made me the more willing to go with the stream of the time, and
to set them some later task, wherein, if their pleasure be, their idler hours
may be occupied.

My end and purpose therein, if charity interpret for me, will be found
nothing less than vain ostentation. Because I have spoken at times, and may
hereafter again, if God give leave and grace, the meditations of my heart, to
as many and as chosen ears almost as these books can distract them unto: and
these which I now publish were public enough before, if the best day of the
seven, frequent concourse of people, and the most intelligent auditory of the
place wherein I then lived, may gain them that credit. So as this further
promulgation of them is not much more, then (as the Gentiles besought Paul in
the Acts) the preaching of the same words an other sabbath day; Chap. 13.
and some testimony of my desire (if the will of God so be) to do a double
good with my single and simple labors, in that it grieveth me not, to write
and repeat the same things. And to adioine one reason more, I shall never be
unwilling to profess, that I even owed the everlasting fruit of these
unworthy travailes to my former auditors, who, when I first sowed this seed
amongst them, did the office of good and thankful ground, and received it
with much gladness. To whom since I went aside for a time far from the
native place both of my birth and breed, as Jonas went to Niniveh to preach
the preachinges of the Lord, or into the belly of the fish out of his proper
and natural element to make his song, so I to deliver these ordinary and
weekelie exercises amongst them; the providence of God not suffering me to
fasten the cords of mine often remooved tabernacle in those North-warde
parts, but sending me home again; let it receive favorable interpretation
with all sorts of men, that I send them back but that labor which they paid
for; and therein the presence of my spirit, pledge of mine heart, Soles
acceptior esse sermo vivus quam scriptus. Bernard. A mortua pelle ad hominem
vivum recurre Gregor. Laudare se, vani; vitu. perare, stulti. Aristot. apud
Valor. Max. Lib. 7. Ca. 2.
and an Epistle of that deserved love and affection which I iustlye bear
them. I trust no man shall take hurt hereby, either nearer or father of,
except my self, who have changed my tongue into a pen, and whereas I
spoke before with the gesture and countenance of a livinge man, have now
buried my self in a dead letter of less effectual persuasion. But of my
self nothing on either part. I have taken the counsel of the wise, neither
to praise nor dispraise mine own doings: The one, he says, is vanity, the
other folly. Thousands will be ready enough to ease me of that pains, the
uncertainty of whose judgment, I have now put my poor estimation upon, either
to stand or fall before them. Howbeit I will not spare to acknoweledge, Nihil
egi sine Theseis, and Nihil nostrum, and omnia.
that I have done little herein without good guides. And, as Iustus Lipsius
spoke of his Politic centons, in one sense all may be mine, in an other not
much more then nothing. For if ever I liked the waters of other men's welles, I
drank of them deeply; and what I added of mine own, either of reaching or
exhortation, I commend it to the good acceptance of the world, with none
other condition, then the Emperor commended his sons, sipromerebuntur, if it
shall deserve it.

Now the reasons which moved me to offer these my first fruits unto your
good Lordshippe, may soon be presumed, the eye that sees you, blesses you,
and all tongues give witness to your righteous dealing, should mine be
silent? yea, blessed be the God of heaven, that has placed you upon the seat
of justice to displace falsehood and wrong. The vine of our English Church milk
without silver, and bread without money, which not many other patrons do. In
this unprofitable generation of vt pueri Iunonis avem, and scholars wondering
more at men, Iuvenal.
that they do so little for them, learning never departs ashamed and
discontented from with you in compassion, and say in these days, Cantic. vlt.
soror est nobis parva, we have a little sister, and she has no breasts, or
rather has not succor to fill out her breasts, what shall we do for her?
How many common respects, to let private alone a while, have naturally borne
me to the center and point of your Honors only patronage?

I deny not, when at my coming from the North, it first came into my head to
divulgate these readings, my purpose was to have made the chief founders and
procurers thereof (my two deceased Lords) the chief patrones also: that as the
rivers run to the place from whence they come, so these tokens of my
grateful mind might return to the principal authors. Wherein the world
might justly have censured me with the words of the Prophet, what? from the
living to the dead? contrary to the use and fashion of all other men? But so I
mean; both to avoid the suspicion of a fault which the world labors of
(flattering of great personages) who was and am content that all mine
expectations in any respect from them or theirs, be laid in the same dust
wherein their bones lie; and to show that love is stronger then death, and
that the vnexorable bars of the grave cannot forbid a man to continue that
affection to the memory of the dead which he carried to the living. For which
cause, as others provided spices and balmes, and monuments of stone or brass
to preserve their bodies, so I intended a monument of paper, and such other
preservatiues as* I could, to keep their names in life, which the violence of
time cannot so quicklye iniurye, as the fatal ungratefulness of these latter
days.

But your Lordshippes most undeserved and unlooked for bounty toward me, has
altered that meaning. In whose countenance and speech evermore from the first
hour that I came into your honorable presence, there dwelt such plentiful
comfortes and encouragements to make me hope for better times, that I never
went a way, but with more fatness to my bones. And now the world can witness
with me, how largely you have opened your hand, and sealed up that care, in
freely bestowing upon me not Leah but Rahel, even the daughter of your
strength, the best that your Honor had to bestow, I say not for my service of
twice 7. years, but being yet to begin my first hours attendance. Which more
then credible benignity, my right hand were worthy to forgette her cunninge,
if she took not the first occasion to write and report with the best skill
she has.

Notwithstanding I have been bold thus far, after the trees shaken and the
vintage gathered to your Honors use, to leave as it were a berrye or two in
the utmost boughs to my former Lords; and by making some little mention of
their happy memories, both to testify mine ancient duty toward them, and to
deliver them, what I might, from the night of forgetfulness, who were the
shining lamps of the North in their life time. Such a Moses and such an Aaron,
such a Josuah to lead the people, and such a Priest to bear the Arc, such a
Zorobabel, and such a Jehozadak, such a Centurion in Capernaum to rule the
country, and such a Jairus to govern the Synagogue, when the Lord shall send
together again, I will then say he has restored his blessing amongst them.
To this purpose I have added two sermons more, to these Lectures upon Jonas,
the one preached at the funeralles of my former Lord the late Archbishop of
York; the other no way pertinent to the latter, the right noble Earl of
Huntingdon, except because he commanded it, and it was not many weeks before
his death, and the subject was so agreeable to his most faithful and vnsteined
heart. For if the sound of the tongue and applause of the hands may persuade
for him, he never beheld the light of heaven within this land, that more
honored the light of England. Long may it sparkle and flame amongst us
according to his hearty wishes. Let neither distempered humors within quench
it, nor all the waters of the sea betwixt Spain and us, bring rage and
hostility enough to put it out, but let the light of Gods own most blessed
countenance for ever and ever shine upon it.

It now remains, that in the humblest manner I can, I wholly resign my self
and the course of my life to your honorable both protection and disposition;
askinge pardon for my boldness, and defense for these my simple endeavors,
and beseeching the God of heaven and earth, to multiply his richest blessings,
upon your Honor, your Lady, and your Children whither within or without the
land.

Your Lordshippes most bounden and dutiful Chaplain JOHN KING.

THE FIRST LECTVRE.
Cap. 1. verse 1.2. The word of the Lord came also unto Jonah the son of
Amittai, saying, Arise and go to Niniveh, etc.
COmparisons betwixt scripture and scripture are both odious and dangerous. In
other sorts of things whatsoever is commendable, may either be matched or
preferred according to the worth of them. I will not make my self so skilful
in the orders of heaven, as to advance angel above angel, Quid sin^, dicant qui
possunt, du^modo quod dicunt probare valea^t. August. enchirid. cap. 38. 1.
Chro. 12. 1. Sam. 18.
but I am sure one star differs from another in glory, And God has given
the rule of the day to the sun, of the night to the moon, because they
differ in beauty. The captains of the sons of Gad, without offense might
bear an unequal report, One of the least could resist an hundred, and the
greatest a thousand; because their prowess and acts were not aequall. There
was no wrong done in the Antheme which the women song from all the cities of
Israel, Saul has slain his thousand, and David his ten thousand: The
unlike deserts of these two princes might justly admit an unlike
co^me^dation. Vnus Cato mihi pro ce^tum millibus.

Plato instar omnium. Luke 5. Aul. Gell. noct. Attic. 13.5.


One Cato may be of more price then hundredth thousands of vulgar men; and
Plato may stand for all. Our Savior in the gospel prefers old wine before
new: and Aristotle likes better of the wine of Lesbos, the^ the wine of
Rhodes; he affirms both to be good, but the Lesbian the more pleasant,
alluding under that parable to the successor of his school, and noting his
choice rather of Theophrastus borne at Lesbos, then Menedemus at Rhodes. But
the whole scripture is given by inspiration of God, neither in his great house
of written counsels is there any vessel more or less in honor then the
rest are. Moses is no better then Samuel, Samuel the^ David, David a king then
Amos an heardman, John Baptist more then a prophet, not more then a prophet in
this auctority, Peter or Andrewe the first that was chosen, not better then
Paul that was borne out of due time. Revel. 4.
The four beasts in the Revelation have eyes alike, before and behind, and
the Apostles names are euenly placed in the writings of the holy foundation.
Solomon the vvisest king that ever was in Jerusalem, Revel. 21.
perceived right well that wheresoever the uncreated wisdom of GOD spoke,
it spoke of excellent things, Proverb. 8.
even things seemly for Princes. David his princely father before him had
so high a conceit of these ordinances of the most high, that where he
defines any thing, he esteems them, for value, above great spoils, and
thousands of gold and silver, Psalm. 119.
yea all manner of riches; and for sweetness, above the honey, and the
honycombe: and where he leaves to define, he breaks of with admiration,
wonderful are thy testimonies; I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy
commandment is exceeding broad, meaning thereby, not less then infinite.

The Jews acknowledge the old testament, abhor the new; the Turks
disclaim; Julian, atheists and skorners deride; Grecians have stumbled at both
old and new; Papists enlarge the old with Apocryphal vvritings; some of
the ancient heretics renou^ced some prophets, others added to the number of
Evangelists: but as the disciples of Christ had but one Master or teacher in
heaven, and they were all brethren; Math. 23.
so one was the author of these holy vvrittes in heaven, and they are all
sisters and companions; and, with an impartial respect, have the children of
Christ's family from time to time received, reverenced, and embraced the whole
and entire volume of them. They know that one Lord was the original
fountain of them all, who being supremely good, wrought and spoke perfect
goodness. One word and wisdom of God revealed these words to the sons
of men, himself the subject and scope of them; one holy Ghost endited them,
Verba innumerabilia and vnum tantum verbum omnia: Hugo de arca. Noe.
one blood of the lamb sealed and confirmed the contents of them, one
measure of inspiration was given to the penmen and actuaries that set them
down, one spowse and beloved of Christ, as gages of his eternal love, has
received them all in keeping. And surely she has kept them as the apple of
her eye; and rather then any maime or rent should be made in their sacred
body, she has sent her children into heaven maimed in their own bodies, and
spoiled of their dearest blood they had, thinking it a crown of joy unto
them, to lay down their lives in the cause of truth. And therefore as
branches of the same vine that bare our predecessors, to whom by devolution
these sacred statutes are come, we esteem them all for Gods most royal and
celestial testament, the oracles of his heavenly sanctuary, the only keye
unto us of his revealed counselles, milk from his sacred breasts, the earnest
and pledge of his favor to his Church, the light of our feet, joy of our
hearts, breath of our nostrels, pillar of our faith, anchor of our hope,
ground of our love, evidences and deeds of our future blessedness: pronouncing
of the whole book, with every schedule and skrole therein contained, as he
did of a book that Sextius vvrote, but upon far better grounds, vivit,
viget, liber est, supra hominem est: Seneca.
It is a book of life, a book of liuelyhood, a book in deed, savouring of
more then the wit of man. Notwithstanding, as the parcelles of this book were
published and delivered by diverse notaries, the instruments of Gods own
lips, in diverse ages, diverse places, upon diverse occasions, and neither the
argument nor the style, nor the end and purpose the same in them all; Gregor.
(...).
some recounting things forepassed; some foreseeing things to come; some
singing of mercy; some of judgment; some shallowe for the lamb to wade in,
some deep enough to bear and drown the Elephant; some meat that must be
broken and chevved with painful exposition, Gregor in moral.
some drink that at the first sight may be supt and swallowed down;
somevvhat in some or other part that may please all humors, as the Jews
imagine of their Manna, Hieron.
that it rellishte not to all alike, but to every man seemed to taste
accordingly as his heart lusted; so though they were all written for our
learning and comfort, yet some may accord at times, and lend application
unto us for their matter and use, more then others. Of all the fowls of the
air, I mean the Prophets of the LORD, flying from heaven with the wings
of divine inspiration, I have chosen the Dove, (for so the name of Jonah
imports, and Jerome so rendereth it to Paulinus) to be the subject of my
labor and travel undertaken amongst you; who under the type of his
shipwreck and escape, figuringe the passion and resurrection of the son of
GOD, and coming from the sea of Tharsis, as that Dove of Noah's Arc came from
the waters of the floude, with an olive branch in his lips in sign of
peace, preaches to Niniveh, to the Gentiles, to the whole world, the
undeserved goodness of GOD toward repentant sinners. For if you will know
in brief, what the argument of this Prophet is, it is abridged in that
sentence of the Psalm, The argument of the prophecy. Psalm. 145.
The LORD is merciful and gracious, of long suffering, and of grette
goodness: He is merciful, in the first part of the prophecy, to the
Mariners; gracious, in the second, to Jonas; long suffering, in the third, to
the Ninivites; and of great goodness, in the fourth, in pleading the
rightfulnesse of his mercy, and yielding a reason of his fact to him which
had no reason to demand it. So from the four chapters of Jonas, as from the
four winds, is sent a comfortable breath and gale of most abundant mercies.
And as the four streams in paradise flowing from one head, were the same
water in four divisions; so the four chapters or sections of this treatise
are but quadruple mercy, or mercy in four parts. And so much the rather to
be harkened unto, as an action of mercy is more grateful unto us, then the
contemplation, the use then the knowledge, the example then the promise: and it
is sweeter to our taste being experienced by proof, then when it is but
taught and discoursed. You hear the principal matter of the prophecy. But if
you would know besides what riches it offers unto you, it is a spiritual
library, as Cassiodore noted of the Psalms, of most kinds of doctrine fit for
meditation; or as Isidore spoke of the Lords prayer and the Creed, Onmis
latitudo scriptura^um.
the whole breadth of scripture may hither be reduced. Here you have Genesis
in the sudden and miraculous creation of a gourd, Moses and the law in
denuntiation of judgment, Chronicle in the relation of an history, Prophecy in
prefiguring the resurrection of Christ, Psalmody in the song that Jonas
composed, and finally Gospel in the remission of sin mightily and effectually
demonstrated.

The duties of princes, pastors, people, all estates; the nature of fear,
force of prayer, wages of disobedience, fruit of repentance, are herein
comprised. And as the finers of silver and gold make use not only of the
wedge, Non tantum auri massas tollunt, ve^um and bracteolas par^as. Chrysostom. hom.
1. ad pop. Antio. Chap. 1. Praeco mittitur, missus contemnit, contemnens fugio.
fugi^^ dormis, etc. Jsidor. lib. de patrib. ve^. testamen. The text.
but even of the smallest foil or rays that their metal casts: so in this
little manuell which I have in hand, besides the plenty and store of the deeper
matters, there is not the least jot and title therein, but may minister grace
to attentive hearers.

The substance of the chapter presently to be handled and examined, spends it
self about two persons, Jonas and the Mariners. In the one opening his
commission, transgression, apprehension, execution; in the other their fear
and consequent behavior, which I leave to their order. The words already
proposed, offer unto us these particulars to be discussed. 1 First a warrant,
charge or commission, The word of the Lord also came. 2 Secondly the person
charged, to Jonas the son of Amittaie. 3 Thirdly the matter or contents of
his commission, Arise and go to Niniveh that great city.
In the commission I refer you to these few and short collections.

And
1 The particle of connection and or also; either it joins Jonas with other
prophets, or Niniveh with other countries, or the business here related with
other affairs incident to those times. It seems to begin a book without
beginning, and rather to continue a course of some precedent dealings: but
soothly it implies unto us, that he who is a and o in himself, is also first
and last to his Church, the author and finisher of his good works; who as he
sent his word to other prophets, so also to Jonas; and as for Israel, so also
for Niniveh; and as he furnished that age of the world with other memorable
occurrences, so with this also amongst the rest, that Jonas was sent to
Niniveh, and that thus it fell out.

2 The nature of the commission; It is verbum, a word; that is, The word.
a purpose, decree, determination, edict, advised, pronounced, ratified, and
not to be frustrated; according to the sentence of the Psalm, Thy word O Lord
endures for ever in heaven. Psalm. 119. Of the Lord. Luke 1.


3 The author is the Lord, the Ocean that filled all these earthly springs;
who spoke by the mouth of all the prophets which have been since the world
began.

4 The direction or suggestion thereof. It came: that is, it was not a
fantasy or invention of Jonas, Came.
but he had his motion and inspiration thereunto.

The first shows the continuance of Gods graces in his Church, how
everlasting they are, and without repentance, in that he sends line upon line
unto it, and prophets after prophets, ( for do the prophets live for ever?
Zach. 1.
) and spreads his saving health from the East to the West, and leaves no
generation of man empty and bare of profitable examples.

The second shows the stability of his ordinances. For with God neither does
his word disagree from his intention, because he is truth; nor his deed
from his word, because he is power: Nee verbum ab intention quia veritas, nec
factum a verbo quia virtus est. Bern. homil. 4. super Missus est. 2 Pet. 1.
Romans 11.
has he spoken and shall he not perform it?

The third shows the majesty and credit of the prophecies. For no prophecy
of old time came by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost.

The fourth declares his ordinary and necessary course in disclosing his
will, which is too excellent a knowledge for flesh and blood to attain unto,
without his revelation: for who has known the mind of the Lord, or who has
been his counselor at any time?

The commission in general is most requisite to be weighed, 1 The commission.
that we may discern the Priests of the sanctuary from Ieroboams Priests, of
whom we read that whosoever would, might consecrate himself: 1. King. 1^.
lawful ambassadors from erraticall and wandering messengers, such as run when
none has sent them; stars in the right hand of Christ, fixed in their
stations, from planets and planers of an uncertain motion; shepheardes from
hirelings, and thieves that steal in by the window; Revel. 2.
prophets from intruders, (for even the woman Iesabell calls her self a
prophetess;) seers from seducers, enforced to confess from a guilty
conscience, as their fore-ru^ner sometime did, of whom Zachary makes mention,
Zach. 13.
I am no prophet, I am an husbandman; Aaron from Abiram: Simon Peter from Simon
Magus; Paul a Doctor of the Gentiles, from Saul a persecutour of the
Christians; Cephas from Caiaphas; Jude from Judas; Christ from Antichrist;
Apostles from Apostataes, Revel. 2.
backsliders, revolters, who though they bear the name of Apostles, are found
liers; and finally, faithful dispensers from marchandisers of the word of God,
and purloiners of his mysteries. Who ever intruded himself, with impunity, and
without dangerous arrogance, into this function? The proceeding of God in this
case is excellently set down in the Epist. to the Romans wherein, Romans 10.
as the throne of Solomon was mounted unto, by six stairs; so the perfection
and consummation of man, arises by six degrees. The highest and happiest
staire is this: He that shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.
But how shall they call upon him, on whom they have not believed? Or how shall
they believe on him, of whom they have not heard? Or how shall they hear
without a preacher? Or how shall they preach, except they be sent?

A singular and compendious gradation. Wherein you have, 1. sending, 2.
preaching, 3. hearing, 4. believing, 5. invocating, 6. saving. For no man
takes this honor unto him, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. Heb. 5.
The Apostles rule is universal, and exempteth not the lawgiver himself. For
Christ took not this honor to himself, to be made the high Priest, but he
that said unto him, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee, gave it
him. The 1. question that God mooveth touching this ministration is, Esai. 6.
Whom shall I send? and who shall go for us? The Devil could easily epsy the
want of commission in the sons of Sceva, when they adjured him by the name of
Jesus who^ Paul preached: Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I know; but who are ye?
Acts. 19.
Your warrant is not good, your counterfeit charms are not strong enough to
remove me. There are no chains of authority, no links of iron, to bind the
nobles and princes of the earth, and to restrain Devils, but in those tongues
which God has armed from above, and enabled to his service.

1. King. 22.
What was the reason that Michaiah was so confident with Ahab king of Israel,
and Zidkiiah the kings prophet, or rather his parasite, who taunted him with
contumely, and smote him on the face, that yet notwithstanding he neither
spared the prophet, nor dissembled with the king, his final doom? Only this:
he had his commission sealed from the Lord, Zidkiiah had none. What other
reason made Elisha, a worm of the earth (in comparison,) so plain with
Iehoram? What have I to do with thee? get thee to the Prophets of thy father,
2 King. ^
and to the prophets of thy mother, etc. see his further protestation. Had he
nothing to do with the king, when the king had so much to do with him? did
he not fear the wrath of the Lion, who could have said to the basest minister
that ate the salt of his court, take his head from his shoulders, and he
would have taken it? But his commission was his brazen wall to secure him: and
that Iehoshaphat the King of Judah witnessed, saying, The word of the Lord is
with him*

This is the fortres and rock that Jeremy stands upon before the priests,
prophets, and people of Judah; If ye put me to death, Ier. 2^.
ye shall bring innocent blood upon your selves; for of a truth the Lord has
sent me unto you to speak all these words in your ears. Yea the princes and
people upon that ground made his apology, This man is not worthy to die, for
he has spoken unto us in the name of the Lord our God. To spare my pains in
examples; fearful are the woes, and not milder then wormewoode, and the water
of gall, (for under these terms, I find them shadowed, and but shadowed by
the prophets) which he denounces in the course of that prophecy against false
prophets, that spoke the visions of their own hearts, and said, The Lord said
thus and thus: that were not sent, yet ran; Ier. 23.
were not spoken unto, yet prophesied; that cried I have dreamed, I have
dreamed, when they were but dreams indeed. They are given to understand, that
their sweet tongues will bring them a sour reco^pense, and that the Lord will
come against them, for their lies, flatteries, chafe, stealth of his word,
(as they are termed) and other such impieties. Their cup is tempered by
Ezechiel with no less bitterness, for follovving their own spirits,
playing the foxes, seeing of vanity, Ezech. 1^*
divining of lies, building and daubing up wales with untempered mortar. The
head and foot of their curse are both full of unhappiness. Their first
entertainment is a vvoe, Vae prophetis: and their farevvell an Anathema, a
cursed excommunication; They shall not be accounted in the assembly of my
people, neither shall they be written in the writings of the house of Isarell.
To end this point; let their commission be well scanned that come from the
Seminaries of Rome and Rhemes, to sovve seeds in this field of ours,
whether, as Jonas had a word for Niniveh, so these for England and other
nations, yea or no? whether from the Lord (for that they pretend, as Ehud did
to Eglon,) or from Balaak of Rome, who has hired them to curse the people of
God? Iud. 3.
whether to cry openly against sin, or to lay their mouths in the dust, and
to murmr rebellion? whether of zeal to the God of the Hebrews, or to the
great idol of the Romans, as they to the great Diana of the Ephesians, to
continue their craft, as Demetrius there did, and lest their state should be
subverted? Acts 19.
whether to come like prophets with their open faces, Zeph. 1.
or in disguised attire, strange apparel (in regard of their profession) a
rough garment to deceive with, as the false prophet in Zachary? Zach. 13.
whether their sweet tongues have not the venime of Aspes under them, and in
their colorable and plausible notes of peace, peace, there be any peace,
either to the weal public, amidst their nefarious and bloody conspiracies,
or to the private conscience of any man, in his reconciliation to their
unreconciled church, formal and counterfeite absolution of sins, hearing, or
rather seeing histrionicall masses, visitinge the shrines and relics of the
dead, numbering of Pater nosters, invocation of saints, adoration of images,
and a thousand such forgeries? whether they build up the walls of GODS house
with the well tempered mortar of his written ordinances, or daube up the
wales of their Antichristian synagogue with the untempered mortar of
unwritten traditions? whether they come Ambassadors from GOD, and in steed
of Christ, seek a reconciliation beetweene GOD and us, and not rather to set
the mark of the beast in our foreheades, to make us their Proselytes, and the
children of error as deepelye as themselves? If this be the word they
bring, a dispensation from a foreign power, to resist the powers that GOD
has ordained, and in steed of planting faith and allegiance, to sovve
sedition, and not to convert our country to the truth, but to subvert the
pollycie and state hereof, to poison our souls, and to dig graves for our
bodies against their expected day, to invade the Dominions, alienate the
crowns, assault the lives of lavvefull and natural princes, to blow the
trumpet of Sheba in our land, ye have no part in David, nor inheritance in
the son of Ishai, no part in Elizabeth, 2. Sam. 20.
nor inheritance in the daughter of King Henrye, everye man to your tents O
England: let them reap the wages of false Prophets even to the death, Deuteronomy.
18.
as the law has designed; and let that eye want sight that pittieth them,
and that heart be destitute of comfortes, that cries at their downfall, Alas
for those men. Their bloody and peremptory practices call for greater torture
then they usually endure, and deserve that their flesh should be grated, and
their bones rent asunder with sawes, and harrowes of iron, 2. Sam. 12.
(as Rabbah was dealt with) for their traitorous and unnatural stratagemes. I
know they justify their cause and calling, as if innocence it self came to
the bar to plead her uprightness: and they are vvilling to make the world
believe, that they come amongst their own people and nation, not only
lambs amongst wolves, but lambs of the meekest spirit, amongst wolves of
the fiercest disposition, whose delighte is in bloudsheade; making us odious,
for more then Scythian cruelty, as far as our names are heard of, and
stretching the joints of our English persecutions, upon the rack of
excessive speech, more then ever they felt in the joints of their own
bodies. They remember not the meane-vvhile how much more iustlye they fill
the mouths of men with arguments against themselves, for raising a far
sorer persecution then they have cause to complain of. They persecute the
liberty of the Gospel amongst us, and labor to bring it into bonds again:
they persecute our peace and tranquillitye, which by a prescription of many
years we begin to challenge for our own: they persecute the WOMAN with
the crown upon her head, Revel. 12.
whom they have wished and watched to destroy, and long ago had they undone
her life, but that a cunning hand above has bound it up in the boundell of
life, and enclosed it in a maze of his mercyes past their finding out: whom
because they could not reach with their hand of mischief, they have sought
to overtake with floudes of waters, floudes of excommunications, floudes of
intestine rebellions, foreign invasions, practiced conspiracies, imprinted
defamatory libels, that one way or other they might do her harm. So long as
there shall be a Chronicler in the world to write the legende of the French
Iacobin, I shall ever have in jealousy the coming of these emissaries and
spies from their unholy fraternities into Princes courts. They persecute the
infant in his mothers belly, and the child yet unborn, whom they seek to
dispossess of their Fathers and Grandfathers ancient inheritaunces: how
gladlye vvoulde they see an universal alteration of things? Israel cast out,
and the Iebusite brought in; crying in our houses, complaining in our streets,
leading into captivity throughout all quarters, themselves as it were the
hands and members to this body, and yet playing the first unnatural part, and
studying to cut the throat of it. Now what comparison is there betwixt
quenching a sparcle of vvild-fire, here and there flying up and down to burn
our country, and quenching the light of Israel? betwixt the incision of a
vein, now and then to let out rank blood, and choking the breath of
Israel? betwixt destroying one and one at times, and destroying that unity
wherein the whole consists? for such is our persecution, and such are theirs.

2. The person charged.
The person to whom the commission was directed, is Jonas the son of Amittai:
wherein you have 1. his name, Jonas, 2. his parentage, the son of Amittai. 3.
you may add his country from the 9. ver. An Hebrew. 4. his dwelling place, 2
King. 14.
from the 2. Kings, Gath Hepher (for there was another Gath of the
Philistines.) 5. the time of his life and prophecy, from the same book, Under
the reign of Jeroboam the second, or not far of. 6. the tribe whereof he was,
namely a Zabulonite; for that Gath appertains to the tribe of Zabulon. you
have as much of the person as is neeedefull to be known. The opinion of the
Hebrews is, and some of our Christian expositours following the^r steps
affirm, that Jonas was son to the widow of Sarepta, and that he is called
the son of Amittai, not from a proper person, his father that begat him, but
from an event that happened. For after Elias had restored him to life, 1 King.
17.
the mother brake forth into this speech; Now I perceive that thou art the man
of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth is true: Therehence, they
say, he was named the son of Amittai; that is; the son of truth, by reason of
that miracle truly accomplished. Surely the word of the Lord that gave a
commission to Jonas to go to Niniveh, gives no commission to us to go to
such foreign and improper interpretations. So long as we hear it but in our
own country, (as the Queen of the South spoke,) of those that are flesh and
blood like our selves, and interpreters perhaps, not so much of the counsels of
God, as their own conjectures, we are at liberty to refuse them: where we
hear it from the mouth of Solomon, or Jonas, or one that is more then them
both, we are ready to give credit. Our bounds are set which we must not
pass; we may not turn to the right hand, nor to the left, and neither add
nor diminish, nor alter any thing of Gods testimonies. It is a zealous
contention that God makes in Jeremy, Ier. 44.
They shall know whose word shall stand, mine or theirs, Who has instructed
the spirit of the Lord? or was his counselor? or has taught him? Shall we
correct, or rather corrupt, Esai. 4^.
falsify and deprave the wisdom of God in speaking, who is far vviser
then men, who made the mouth and the tongue, opens the lips, and instilleth
grace and knowledge into them? Let it suffice us, that the spirit of truth, and
the very finger of God, in setting down his mind, has eased us of these
fruitles and godless troubles; and expressed this Prophet to be an Hebrew,
not a Gentile; his dwelling place to be Gath Hepher, in the possessions of
Zabulon, not Sarepta a City of Sidon. Luke. 4.
And as it is the manner of the scr^pture, where the Prophets are named, there
to reckon withal the names of their fathers, as Esaias the son of Amos, Jeremy
of Hilkiah, Ezekiell of Buzi, etc: so there is no likelihood to the contrary,
but the father of Jonas is meant, when he is called the son of Amittai. But
it is the manner of some to languish about words, and in seeking deeply after
nothing, to loose not only their time, travel, and thanks, but their wits
also. Such has been the sickness of all the Allegoristes, for the most
part, both of the former and later times, (I except not Origin their prince,
and original patron;) who not contenting themselves with the literal and
genuine sense of the scripture, but making some mystery of the plainest
history that ever was delivered, and darkening the evident purpose of the holy
Ghost with the busy fancies of their own heads, as if one should cast
clouds and smoke upon the sunbeames, have left the scripture in many places no
more like it self* then Michals image in the bed upon a pillowe of goats
hair, 1. Sam. 19.
was like David. How forward have our schoolmen been in this rancknesse of
wit? how have they doted, and even died upon superfluous questions? how have
they defaced the precious word of God, finer the^ the gold of Ophir, with the
dross of their own inventions? setting a pearl above value in lead, and
burying the richest treasure that the world knows, in their affected
obscurities. For, not to speak of their changing the style of the holy Ghost,
into such barbarous and desert terms, as that if the Apostles now lived, Jn
Moriae encomio.
(as Erasmus notes) they must speak with another spirit, and in another
language to encounter them; how many knots have they made in divinity
(subtilties without the circle and compass of the world, Subtilitates
plusquam Chrysippea et ultra-mu^danae. Id.
and such as Chrysippus never thought upon) to as little purpose, as if they
had thrown dust into the air, or hunted their shadows? they had done more
service to the Church of God, if they had laid their hands (a great number of
them) upon their mouths, and kept silence. Rupertus Gallus likeneth them to
one that carries manchet at his back, and feeds upon flint stones. For
these rejecting the bread of life, the simple word of God, and the power
thereof, macerate and starve themselves with frivolous sophistications.

Loc. Theol. 12.5.
One of their questions (for a taste) or rather (as Melchior Cane terms them)
their monsters and chimers, is, whether an ass may drink Baptism? It is not
unlike another in that kind, whether a mouse may eat the body of the Lord?
More tolerable a great d^ale were the questions which Albutius the mooter
proposed in a controversy; why, if a cup fell down, it brake; if a sponge, it
brake not? Cestius as scornfully censured him, To morrow he will declame, why
thrushes fly, and gourdes fly not? These are the mistes of Gods judgment
upon the hearts of such men, who having Manna from heaven, prefer a corns
before it; and leave the bread in their fathers house, to eat the husks of
beans; and cannot be satisfied with the pure and undefiled word of God,
converting their souls, but being called out of darkness into a marveilous
light, they call themselves out of light into a marveilous darkness again.
What is this but to feel for a wall at noone day, Job 5.
as Job speaks? that is, when the clearest light of the gospel of Christ
shines in the greatest brightness and perfection thereof, to wrap it up in
the darkness of such disputations as bring no profit. You see the occasion of my
speech; the indiscretion and abuse of those men, who take the scriptures as it
were by the neck, and writhe them from the aim and intention of the holy
ghost.

The substance of the commission follows. Arise, and go to Niniveh, 3 The
matter of the commission.
that great city etc. Every word in the charge is weighty and important.

Ier. 1. Ezech. 2.
1 Arise. In effect, the same commandment which was given to Jeremy, Trusse up
thy loins, arise, and speak to them; the same which to Ezekiel, Son of man,
stand upon thy feet, that is, set thy self in a readiness for a chargeable
service; sit not in thy chair, lie not upon thy couch, say not to thy soul,
take thine ease; Arise. It craves the preparation and forwardnes not only of
the body, but also of the mind and spirit of Jonas.

2 Go. When thou art up, keep not thy tabernacle, stand not in the market
place, nor in the gates of Jerusalem, nor in the courts of the Lords house,
but girde up thy reins, put thy sandales about thy feet, take thy staff in
thine hand, thou have a journey and voiadge to be undertaken; Go.

3 To Niniveh. Not to thine own country where thou wast borne and bredde, and
art familiarly acquainted, linked with thy kindred and friends, and have often
prophesied; but to a foreign nation, whose language will be ridles unto thee;
to the children of Assure, the rod and scourge of Israel; Go to Niniveh.

4 To Niniveh a city etc. No hamlet nor private village, but a place of
frequencie and concourse, proud of her walls and bulwarks, plentifully
flowing with wealth, her people mutiplied as the sands of the river; and the
more populous it is, the more to be feared and suspected, if thy message please
them not. Genes. 4.
The first that ever built a city, was Cain; and it is noted by some divines,
that his purpose therein was to in viron himself with humane strength, the
better to avoid the curse of God.

5 A great city. Large and spacious, which had multiplied her marchantes above
the stars of heaven, and her princes as grasshoppers; Nah. 3.
the Emperors court, the golden head of the picture, the lady of the earth,
the seat of the monarch, the mother city and head of the whole land.

6 Cry, When thou art come to Niniveh, keep not silence, smoother not the fire
within thy bones, make not thy head a fountain of tears to weep in secret
for the sins of that nation, write not the burden in tables, whisper not in
their ears, neither speak in thy usual and accustomed strength of speech,
but Cry; lift up thy voice like a trumpet, charm the deafest adder in
Niniveh, let thy voice be heard in their streets, and thy sound upon the
tops of their houses.

7 Against it. Thou might have thought it sufficient to have cried within
the city of Niniveh, it vvoulde have drawn the vvonder of the people upon
thee, to have seen a matter so insolent and seldom used: But thou must cry
against it, even denounce my vengeance, and preach fire and brimstone upon
their heads if they repent not.

8 For their wickedness etc. But the reason shall be handled in the proper
place thereof.

For brevities sake, I will reduce the whole unto three heads. 1 The place
which the prophet is sent unto. Arise and go to Niniveh. 2 What he is to do
in Niniveh. Cry against it. 3 For what cause. For their wickedness is come up
before me.
These two former words differing so^what in degree, Arise and go.
the one calling up Jonas, as it were from sleep, Arise, the other setting him
forward in his way, Go; and the one happily belonging to the inward, the other
to the outward man, as they import a dulnes and security in us, without Gods
instigation and furtherance: so they require a forwardnes and sedulity of every
servant he has, in his several calling. Our life is a warfare upon the
earth, Job. 7.
says Job, the condition whereof is still to be exercised. Jacob the
patriarch, after his long experience of an hundred and thirty wearisome
winters, Genesis 47.
called it a pilgrimage of few and evil days; therefore no rest to be taken
in it. They that accounte it a pastime, Wisd. 15.
show that their heart is ashes, and their hope more vile then the earth we
walk upon. We must awake from sleep, and stand up from the dead, (for
idleness is a very grave unto us) that Christ may give us light: we are called
into a vineyard, some one or other vocation of life (and christianity the
universal vineyard common to us all,) Shall we stand to see and to be seen,
as in a market place, and do nothing? Mat. 20.
Are we now to learn, that the penny of eternal bliss is reserved for
workmen? and the difference between the hiring of God and the devil is, that
God requires the labor before he pays the wages, Vulgo dictu^: precio ac
pecuniis datis, brachiae effracta sunt. Zach. 1.
the devil paieth the wages before hand, that so he may dull our edge unto
labor, and nurse us in idleness, for pains to come? When we hear the
messengers of God return with these unwelcome tidings unto him, we have gone
through the whole world, and behold, it sits still, and is at rest, can we
be ignorant what echo resoundes unto it? for when they shall say, peace and
safety, then shall come upon them sudden destruction, 1 These. 5.
as travel upon a woman with child; and they shall not escape. Have we not
red, that idleness and security was one of the sins that overthrewe Sodom
and her daughters? that allthough themselves slept and snorted in pleasure, yet
their damnation slept not? And what else is an idle man, but a city without
defense? which when the enemy of the soul has destroyed, he says, as that
other enemy in Ezechiel, I will go up to the land that has no walled towers, I
will go to them that are at rest, and dwell in safety, which dwell all without
walls, and have neither bars nor gates. The fodder, the whip, and the
burden belong to the ass; Ezech. 38.
meat, correction, and work unto thy servant: Send him to labor that he
grow not idle, for idleness brings much evil; Eccle. 33.
it is the counsel of the son of Syrach: happy is that man that orders his
servant according to that counsel, I mean, that says unto his flesh, arise,
and it arises, go, and it goes, As the Centurion in the gospel said to his
soldier, do this, and he did it.

Augustus the emperor hearing that a gentleman of Rome, notwithstanding a
great burden of debt wherewith he was oppressed, slept quietly, and took his
ease, desired to buy the pallet that he lodged upon; his servants marve^ling
thereat, he gave them this answer, that it seemed unto him some wonderful
bed, and worth the buying, whereon a man could sleep, that was so deeply
indebted. Surely if we consider with our selves the duty and debt we owe to
God and man, to our country, to our family, to homeborne, to strangers, that
is, both to Israel, and to Niniveh, and most especially to those of the
household of faith; that as it was the law of God before the law, that we
should eat our bread in the sweat of our face; Genesis 3. 2. These. 3.
so it is the law of the gospel also, that he that labors not, should not
eat; that the blessed son of God ate his bread, not only in the sweat, but
in the blood of his brows; rather he ate not, but it was his meat to do his
fathers will, and to finish his work; Ioh. 4.
that even in the state of innocence, Adam was put into the garden to dress
it; Genesis 2.
that albeit all laborers are not chosen, yet none are chosen but laborers;
that the fig tree was blasted by the breath of Gods own lips with an
everlasting curse, because it bare but leaves; and the axe of heavy displeasure
is laid unto the root of every tree that is barren of good fruits; and if it
be once dead in natural vegetation, it shall be twice dead in spiritual
malediction, and plucked up by the root: It would make us vow with our selves,
I will not suffer mine eie-liddes to slumber, nor the temples of my head to
take any rest, until I have finished that charge whereunto I am appointed.
Jacobs apology to Laban, may be a mirror to us all, not to neglect our
accountes to a higher master then ever Laban was: These twenty years have I
been in thy house; Genesis 3^.
I was in the day consumed with heat, and with frost in the night, and the
sleep departed from mine eyes. So industrious was Jacob, to discharge the
duties of his place, and careful to make his reckoning straight with his
master upon the earth. But I speak of an heavier reckoning, to an heavier
Lord, that will ask an account of every idle word, much more of an idle
habit: and therefore let them foresee that heat, and that frost to come,
those restless eyes, the hire of their forepassed drowsinesse, for days, for
nights, for everlasting generations, that are ever framing an excuse, It is
either hot or cold that I cannot work; Prou. 26.
there is a Lion in the street, or a Bear in the way, that I dare not go
forth; that being called to an office, and having their taskes laid forth unto
them, say not with Samuel at the call of the Lord, Speak Lord, thy servant
hears; but in a stubborn and perverse vein, 1. Sam. 3.
speak and command Lord, and appoint my order wherein I shall walk, but I
neither hear thy voice, neither shall my heart go after thy commandments.
Prove. 24.
I passed by the field of the sloathfull, says Solomon, and by the vineyard of
the man destitute of understanding, and lo it was all grown over with
thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof. Peruse the rest of that
scripture. The wise king beheld, and considered it well, and received
instruction by it, that a little sleep brought a great deal of poverty, and a
little slumber, a great deal of necessity. And surely as the field of the
slothful is covered with nettles and thorns, so shall his body be overgrowen
with infirmities, his mind with vices, his conscience shall want a good
testimony to it self, and his soul shall be empty of that hope hereafter which
might have reioiced it. I end this point.

Jonas his arise and go to Niniveh, gives a warning to us all: for we have
all a Niniveh to go unto. Magistrates, arise and go to the gate, to execute
Gods judgments; Ministers, arise and go to the gospel, to do the works of
Evangelists; people, arise and go to your trades, to eat the labors of your
hands; eye, to thy seeing, foot, to thy walking, Peter, to thy nets, Paul,
to thy tents, Merchant, to thy shipping, Smith, to thy anvile, Potter, to thy
wheel, women, to your whernes and spindles, let not your candle go out, that
your works may praise you in the gates. Your vocations of life are Gods
sanctions; he ordained them to mankind, he blesses them presently, at his
audite, he will crown them; if, when he calls for an account of your
forepassed stewardships, you be able to say in the vprightnes of your soul, I
have run my race; and as the master of the house assigned me, so by his
grace and assistance, I have fulfilled my office.

To Niniveh.
But why to Niniveh? Niniveh of the Gentiles, uncircumcised Niniveh, Niniveh of
the Assyrians, imperious, insolent, intolerable Niniveh, Niniveh swollen with
pride, and her eyes standing out of her head with fatness, Gualter in Ion. 2.
King. 19.
Niniveh settled upon her lees not less then a thousand three hundred years,
Niniveh infamous for idolatry with Nisroch her abomination. Niniveh with
idleness so unnaturally effeminated, Ar. Mont.
and her iointes dissolved under Sardanapalus, as some conceive their 38.
Monarch, who sat and spanne amongst women; that as it was the wonder and
byword of the earth, so the heavens above could not but abhor it.

1. Reason.
Four reasons are alleged, why Jonas was sent to Niniveh. First God will not
smite a city or town without warning; according to the rule of his own law,
that no city be destroyed, before peace has been offered unto it. Deuteronomy. 20.
The woman of Abell in her wisdom objected this law unto Ioab, when he had
cast up a mount against Abel, where she dwelt, They spoke in old time and
said, 2. Sam. 20.
They should ask of Abell, and thus have they continued: that is, first they
should call a parle and open their griefs, before they used hostility against
it. The sword of the Lord assuredly is ever drawn and burnished, his bow bent,
his arrows prepared, his instruments of death made ready, his cup mingled;
yet he seldom powers down his plagues, but there is a shower of mercy
before them, to make his people take heed. Pax domui huic, peace be unto this
house, Luke. 10*
was sounded to every door where the Apostles entered; but if that house
were not worthy of peace and benediction, it returned back unto them.
Virtues were vvroughte in Chorazin, and Bethsaida, before the vvoe took hold
upon them. Noah was sent to the old world, Lot to Sodom, Moses and Aaron to
the Egyptians, Prophets from time to time to the children of Israel, John
Baptist and Christ and the Apostles, together with signs in the host of
heaven, tokens in the elements, to Jerusalem, before it was destroyed.
Chrysostom upon the first to Timothy, Homil 15. Nisi gehenna intentata esset,
omnes in gehenna^ laberemur. Non ergo minus, quod semper dico, dei provide^tiam
gehenna commendat, quam promissio regni.

Homil. 5. ad pop. Antioch.


gives the reason hereof; that God by threatening plagues, shows us how to
avoid plagues, and fears us with hell before hand, that we may learn to
eschew it. And it was his usual speech (as he there confesses) that the
commination of hell fire does no less commend the providence of God toward
man, then the promise of his kingdom: the terror of the one, and sweetness
of the other, working together like oil and wine, to make man wise to his
salvation. Niniveh had not stood a longer time, if Jonas had not said before,
Niniveh shall be overthrown. The message of their overthrow overthrew the
message: the prophecy fell, and the city fell not, because her fall was
prophesied. O new and admirable thing! says he in a homily to the people of
Antioch: The denunciation of death has brought forth life, the sentence of
destruction has made a nullitie in the sentence, etc. It was a snare, it
became their fortress; it was their gulf, it became their tower of defense;
they heard that their houses should fall, and they forsook not their houses,
but themselves, and their ancient wicked ways.

Secondly he sends him to Niniveh, 2. Reason.
to make the co^versio^ thereof, as it were of his first fruits, a figure and
type of the co^version of other the Gentiles; and to show to the people a far
off (far from the seat of Judea, and farther from the covenant) that the days
drew on, wherein they should be called by the names of sons and daughters,
though they were now strangers: And as ten men in Niniveh took hold of the
skirt of one Jonas an Hebrew, and said, we will go with thee, for we now
hear that God is with you: Zach. 8.
so ten and ten millions of men, out of all languages, should join
themselves to the Jews in the worship of that Lord whom they adored. A
glimpse of this overspreading light had now and then opened it self in some
singular persons, aliens from the common wealth of Israel; as in Melchizedech
king of Sale^, Naaman the Syrian, Math. 1.
Job in the land of Vz, in Thamar, Rahab, and Ruth inserted into the pedigree
of Christ: to show, amongst other reasons, that as he came of the Gentiles, so
for the Gentiles to; and that the waters of life (as Zachary terms them)
should flow from Jerusalem, Zach. 14.
(farther then to the river of Tigris, vvhereon Niniveh stood) half of them
toward the East sea, and half of them toward the uttermost sea, that both
ends of the earth might be watered therewith.

3. Reason.
Thirdly, he sends him to Niniveh, as he sent Joseph into Egypt, to provide a
remedy against a mischief not far of: Joseph to prepare bread for his
fathers house, in the famine; Jonas to prepare a place for the Lords exiles in
the captivity. This carefulnes of their weldoing herein, appears unto us, in
a charge given to Moab in the prophecy of Esaias; Esai. 16.
Hide them that are chased out, bewray not him that is fled, let my banished
dwell with thee, Moab, be thou their covert from the face of the destroier. The
time was to come when the sons of Jacob should go captives into Assyria,
righteous and unrighteous, clean and unclean, those whom he tendered as the
apple of his own eye, with their ungrateful and ungracious brethren: yet
such was his provident foresight toward his little remnante, growing as
thin among the rest, as olive berries upon the tree after the vintage, a
berrie here and there in the outmost boughs, that though they bare their
part of thraldom in a strange land, yet they should meet with some of
mild and tractable spirits, whose hearts had been mollified before by the
preaching of Jonas.

Lastly, he sends him to Niniveh, (which I rather fasten upon) to provoke
his people of the Jews, 4 Reason.
with those that were not a people, to vpbraide their contempt, defy their
frovvardnesse, and to shevve that his soul loatheth, abhors, abhominateth
their incorrigible rebellions. Whom he had girt to himself, as a girdle to
ones raines, and married in everlasting kindness; to whom he had risen
early and stretched out his hand all the day long, and cried upon them all,
Harken O Israel, and I will protest unto thee, Thou shall be my people, and
I will be thy God; whom he had chidden, and not chidden, with so fatherly
a spirit, and such obtesting protestations, that they seem to be angry
without anger, As I live I would not your deaths; Why will ye die O house
of Israel? will thou not be made clean? When shall it once be? lastly, to
whom he had appealed, though men of unequal judgments, yet not so far
from aequalitie as to condemn his ways; wherein have I grieved thee?
testify against me: these he gives to understand, that, at the preaching
of one prophet, when they had precept upon precept; a stranger amongst
strangers, a man of an unknown tongue, the whole people of Niniveh, though
heathenish and idolatrous, should be won to repentance. Arise Jonas, go
to Niniveh: Sanctify a people unto me, where I had no people, fetch me
sons and daughters from far, let the barren bear children, and let the
married be barren. I have been served with the sins of Israel a long
time, I am weary of their backsliding, let them henceforth lie and rotte in
their iniquity, Go thou to Niniveh. Many the like angry and opprobrious
comparisons, has the mouth of the LORD uttered with much indignity in other
places: in the eighteenth of Jeremy, Ask now amongst the heathen, who has
heard such things? The Virgin of Israel has done very filthilie. Strumpets
and brothels had done but their kind; but in the virgin of Israel who would
have thought it? In the first of Hosea, Go, take thee a wife of fornication:
the meaning of the type is this; I will find more faithfulness in a land
inured to whoredoms, then one which I tenderly loved, as mine own wife.
Christ in the gospel justifies this collection against the evil and
adulterous generation of that time; Math. 12.
The men of Niniveh shall rise in judgment with this generation and condemn
it: For they repented at the preaching of Jonas, and behold a greater then
Jonas is here. And in the same Evangelist, he rateth them in parables, for
despising the doctrine of John, Publicanes and harlottes, Math. 21.
shall go before you into the kingdom of GOD: For they believed him; and ye,
though ye saw it, were not moved to repentance. The argument briefly
thus stands: The people of Niniveh shall condemn the people of Israel: For
they will repent at the preaching of one Jonas; the others repent not at the
preaching of many hundreds of Prophets.

It is a curse of all curses, the very bottom of the vial, Conclusion
and dregs of the vengeance of God, when prophets are willed to
relinquish their accustomed flocks, and their message is translated to
forrainers and strangers; the dust of whose feet but shaken against a city
or town, or the lap of their garment emptied, the least remembrance, I
mean, and vvatchvvorde in the world, betvveene GOD and his servauntes, that
here or there they have been, delivered their errande in his name, and were
not accepted, shall witness (with a witness) their disobedience in the day
of his visitation. So the disciples of CHRIST were willed to proclaim in
everye city of the earth, where they were not received, even in the streets
and thorough-fares thereof, Luke. 10.
The very dust of your city vvhih cleaves unto us, we wipe of against you:
Notwithstanding know this, that the kingdom of GOD was come near unto you.
You see the scourge of those places from which the Disciples are enforced to
go, for want of entertaynement; the kingdom of GOD goes with them: And if
that kingdom be once gone, their joy goes with it; all the Empires and
dominions in the world subdued, Act. 13.
all scepters and crowns heaped together, cannot bless them. Paul and
Barnabas observed the direction of their master to the Jews at Antioch, both
in gesture and speech; for they first shook of the dust of their feet against
those that despised them, and then went to Iconium, but they had told them
before their going (which, if they had any sense, was as the wounding of
penkniues and rasours unto their hearts) It was necessary that the word of God
should first have been spoken unto you, (because the law must come out of
Sion, and the gospel begin at Jerusalem) but seeing you put it from you, and
judge your selves unworthy everlasting life, behold, we turn to the
Gentiles. Gospel, and everlasting life, you hear, are joined together. And
therefore the judgment of God was sharper against them there pronounced, then
if they had brought them tydinges, Behold, the Romans are come to take away
your kingdom, to fire your towns, ruinate your houses, ravish your wives and
daughters, to dashe your infantes against the stones in the streets, to pull
your eyes from out your heads, and your bovvelles from out your bodies.
Behold, we turn to the Gentiles, vvilde, unnatural, and neglected
branches: and herein beeholde the full measure of your miseries, beeholde the
dispersion and dissipation of your persons upon the face of the earth, behold
the desolation and wast of your country, behold the detestation of your names,
the hissing and clapping at your downfall amongst all nations. The loss of the
word of God has lost you credit, liberty, peace, prosperity, salvation both
in your own days, and in the days of your childrens children. In the
eighteenth of the Acts, when the Jews at Corinth resisted and blasphemed the
doctrine of Paul, testifying unto them, that Jesus was that Christ, he shook
his raiment as before, and loosed his tongue with much boldness against them,
your blood be upon your own heads, I am clean, from henceforth I will go
to the Gentiles. As if he had said; I found you the children of death, and so I
leave you; grow in your filthiness and unrighteousness, till you have
fulfilled the measure of your forefathers: for mine own part, I wash my hands
in innocence, I can free my soul in the sight of God, I was careful to apply
my cure to the hurtes of Corinthe, but you were not healed.

Lastly at Rome, in the last of the Acts, he made an open proclamation to the
unbelieving Jews, Be it known unto you that the salvation of God is sent to
the Gentiles, and they shall hear it. And so be it known unto us (my
brethren) that the meaning of the holy Ghost in these terms of promulgation,
know and be it known, (...). Luc. 10. (...). Act. 20.
was to make these despisers of Antioch, Corinthe, and Rome, examples to all
posterity, especially to us, on whom the ends of the world are come, and
with the end of the world, an end of all goodness, that if we take not
vvarninge hereby, as we plough the like disobedience, so we shall reap the
like vvretchednesse.

If ever the like transgression be found in this land of ours, (I will sooner
wish it a wilderness for serpents and dragons to dvvell in) that as Jordan
went back and turned his course, so the gospel go back and turn his passage;
and as it was said to a prophet in Israel, Arise and go to Niniveh, so it be
said to the prophets in England, Arise and go into India, Turckie, or
Barbary, and there prophecy, and there eat your bread: I will then say that
judgment has both begun, and made an end with us, and that our case is
more desperate, then if the ground of this island had opened her ^awes, and in
one common grave buried all her inhabitants. If ever the like transgression
be found in this city of yours (I will sooner vvish it pooles of water,
and all the stones of your building thrown down into emptiness) that as the
brutish people of the Gadarenes esteemed of their swine, so you of the
pleasure of sin for a season, more then Christ Jesus, and even hunte him from
your coasts, as they did; and as it was said unto a prophet in Israel,
Arise, and go to Niniveh, so to the prophets amongst you, Arise, and go to the
borders, where theft and revenge are held for current law, and all the
streams of blood which Christ shed upon the tree, cannot beg redemption for
one injury done unto the^; go carry your tidings of peace to those
unpeaceable, uncivil, lavvles, and graceless persons: then were your honor
gone. And though the gravel of your river that brings in marcha^dise unto
you, were turned into pearls, and every shower of rain from the clouds above,
were a shower of silver and gold into your houses, yet then were you cast
from the favor of God, your sons and your daughters accursed, the sin of
their fathers not to be forgotten, nor the iniquity of the mothers to be done
away, whilst your name and memory should continue. The prophets are yet in
Israel, long may they prophecy in Israel; the pearl is yet in our field,
foreign Merchants have not bought it from us; the gospel is yet amongst us, O
always may it flourish, and spread like a palm tree, amidst our tabernacles;
the kingdom of God is now not far off, neither in heaven above, that we
need climb up, neither in the earth beneath, that we need dig low, neither
beyond the sea, that we need go over for it, neither in those mists and
obscurities, wherein former ages had involved it; we have the sound thereof
daily in our ears, the books in our houses and hands, the letter walking
through our lips, O that we wanted not the power of the gospel in our
consciences, the life and manifestation of it in our lives. The Lord make an
happy and an inseparable conjunction between all these, and grant that his
law and our obedience may always meet together, his gospel and our fruits
kiss each other, his truth and our righteousness, his blessings and our
thankefulnes never be found a sunder. Let him say of England even for ever and
ever, as Sometimes he said of Sion, Here will I dwell, I have chosen England
for my habitation: let him confirm that blessing of the Psalm upon us, Psalm.
68.
The Lord gave the word, great was the company of the preachers: And let him
make those preachers and hearers, hearers and doers, doers and perseverers,
good teachers, good learners, good livers, everlasting companions within our
borders. So shall our land be blessed with all both heavenly and earthly
increase, and God, even our own God shall never repent that he bestowed such
blessing upon us, Amen.

THE SECOND LECTVRE.
Cap. 1. verse. 2. Arise, and go to Niniveh that great city, cry against it:
for their wickedness is come up before me.
NOT to trouble you with longer repetition, we enquired in the former exercise
of these three points. 1. The place which Jonas was sent unto, 2. his business
there, 3. the cause. Touching the place, we proposed four reasons, why God
sent him to Niniveh. 1. To keep his manner and use of foretelling the plague
before he inflicteth it. 2. to set up a standard of hope to the rest of the
Gentiles, that they also should partake the goodness of God. 3. to prevent his
people with mercy, and to take up favor in Assyria for them before hand,
against the time of their banishmente. 4. to shame and confound the house of
Israel, with the singular repentance of a strange people. Niniveh is further
beautified in my text, by two epithets or additions; the one describing the
nature or kind of the place, A city: That great city.
the other the quantity or amplenes thereof, A great city. The inference from
both these must needs be this, that because it was a city, and a great city,
it was therefore stately for wealthines, glorious for buildings, well peopled,
tedious to be gone through; perilous to be threatened, where the prophet was
likely to find in all states of men, Princes, Counselors, Courtiers,
Merchants, Communers, mighty contradiction. The greatness of Niniveh is more
plentifully set down in the third of this prophecy, where it is termed a
great and an excellent city, of three days journey. It had an ancient
testimony long before in the book of Genesis: for thus Moses vvriteth, that
Asshur came from the land of Shinar, Chap. 1^.
and builte Niniveh and Rehoboth, and Calah and Resin between Niniveh and
Calah: at length he singleth out Niniveh from the rest, and sets a special
mark of pre-eminence upon it, This is a great city. Which honor, by the
judgment of the most learned, though standing in the last place, belongs to
the first of the four cities, namely to Niniveh. Others imagined, Anius upon
Berosus.
(but their conjecture is without ground) that the whole four cities were
closed up within the same wales and made but one of an unusual bigness.
Some ascribe the building of Niniveh, Raph. Vol^^^ter.
to Ninus the son of Belus, of whom it took the name, to be called either
Ninus, as we read in Pliny; 6. Nature. hist 13.
or, after the manner of the Hebrews, Niniveh. They conceive it thus, that,
when Nimrod had builte Babylon, Ninus, disdaining his government, went into
the fields of Ashur, and there erected a city after his own name, between
the rivers Lycus, and Tybris. Others suppose, that the affinitye betwixt these
names, Ninus and Niniveh, deceaved profane writers touching the author
thereof, and that it took to name Niniveh, Ar. Mont.
because it was beautiful or pleasant. Others hold opinion, that Ashur and
Ninus, are but one and the same person. And lastly, to conclude, the judgment
of some learned is, that neither Ashur, Iun. and Trii.
nor Ninus, but Nimrod himself, was the founder of it. But by the confession
of all, both sacred and Gentile historyes, the cit^e was very spacious,
having four hundred and eighty furlonges in circuit, Diodor. Si^. Strabo.
Paulus de Palatio upon Jonas.
when Babylon had fewer almost by an hundred: and as afterward it grew in
wealth and magnificence, so (they write) is was much more enlarged. Raphael
Volateranus affirms, that it was eight years in building, and not by fewer
at once then ten thousand workmen. There was no city since by the estimation
of Diodorus Siculus, that had like compass of ground, or statelines of
walls, the height whereof was not less the^ an 100 feet, the breadth
sufficiently capable to have received 3. carts on a row, and they were
furnished and adorned besides with a 1500 turrets. The holy Ghost, no doubt,
had a double purpose, in giving this glorious title of distinction unto
Niniveh; Two reasons why Niniveh is so commen^ded.
the one in respect of Jonas, the other of Niniveh it self.

1 In respect of Jonas it was the meaning of God to try and arm his prophet
before hand, with commemoration of the greatest difficulties; that by naming
the worst at the first unto him, he might prove his obedience, whether he
felt himself disposed to hold out, and so settle his thoughts in some sort,
in declaring the costs of the building before he undertook it, least
afterward, when he came and found the danger of the place beyond his
expectation, he might complain of God, Chap. 20.
as we read that Jeremy did; I am deceived O Lord, and thou have deceived me.
Thus he dealt with Abraham his servant in the 22. of Genesis, Affectum
inquirit non factum exigit. Ambros. de patriarch.
about the offering of his son, whose faith and obedience he sounded before,
by aggravating in his ears everye circumstance of the action, that Abraham
might forecast with himself whether the infirmity of his nature were able to
brook it: for it is written there, that God did prove Abraham. The proof was
thus; Abraham, take 1 thy son, 2 thine only son, 3 Isaac thy son, 4 whom
thou love; take him 5 thy self, take him 6 now presently; 7 get thee into
the land of Moriah; 8 there offer him, offer him 9 for a burnt offeringe upon
one of the mountains which I shall show thee. The weight of every word is
enough to bruise him in pieces, and make him since down under the burden of
that charge: 1. Take thy son, not thy bondsman, nor beast, nor any common
thing, that belongs unto thee: 2. thine only son, the only begotten of
the free woman: 3. not Ismaell, but Isaac thy son, to whom thy promises are
established: 4. Isaac whom thou love, as tender and dear unto thee, as the
bowelles of thine own breast: 5. take him in thine own person, even thou, the
father of the child, turn not over the execution to any other man: 6. take
him without delay, I give thee no time to deliberate, nor day nor hour to
confer with thy self. and to comfort thy broken heart about the loss of
thy beloved: 7. Get thee into the land of Moriah, which will ask the travel
of three days, so long will I hold and suspend thy soul in bitterness: 8.
leave not thy son in Moriah as an Orphan without his father, to soiourne in a
strange country, offer him in sacrifice, commit slaughter upon his flesh: 9.
lastly, when thou have slain him, thou shall burn him in the fire, and
consume him to ashes; thou shall not spare thy son for my sake, neither,
quick nor dead. So likewise when he sent Ezechiel to the rebels of Israel,
he gave him this provision: Son of man, I send thee to the children of
Israel. What are they? I will not dissemble with thee, Chap. 2.
they are a rebellious nation, they and their fathers before them unto this
day, children hard of face and stiff hearted: Thou shall say unto them, thus
says the Lord God; but surely they will not hear, neither will they cease,
for they are rebels and thorns and scorpions: I have now unfolded the
conditions of thy charge; If thou find thy courage sufficient: to endure the
gainsaying of rebels, the pricking and rending of thorns, tearinge the ears
with contumely, and the name of thy maker with blasphemous speech, the hissing
and stinging of pestilent scorpions; then go to the children of Israel: if
not, thou art unmeet for this business. As if a prophet of our days should be
sent to Constantinople, and have his instruction given him at his setting
forth, that it is a portlye and insolent city, the seat of the great Turk,
the heart of the Empire, a cage of all uncleanness, an enemy to the name of
Christians, warring continually against the saints, a scorner of our crucified
Redeemer, a worshipper of the false prophet Mahomet, with other such like
cold encouragements, feeling his pulses as it were, and examining his spirit,
whether it has a power to fight with these dangers. It was some comfort no
doubt, amongst the discomfortes to come, that our savior lessonned his
Disciples before their goinge abroad, Behold I send you as lambs among
Wolves. Math. 12.
They will deliver you up to the Councelles, and scourge you in their
synagogues, and you shall be brought to the governors and Kings for my sake,
in witness to them and to the Gentiles. In the 16. of John he plainly
professes his meaning, in these kinds of predictions: these things have I
said unto you, that ye should not be offended; They shall xcommunicate you,
yea the time shall come, that whosoever kills you shall think that he does
God service. But these things have I told you, that when the hour shall come,
you may remember that I told you of them. The foreknowledge of dangers ensuing,
gave invincible constancy and resolution to Paul, as appears in his excellent
oration made at Miletum: Act. 12.
behold I go bound in the spirit to Jerusalem, and know not what things shall
come unto me there, save that the holy Ghost witnesses in every city,
saying that bands and afflictions stay for me. Hereupon he composeth his
heart to patience, and calls all his forces home to himself, to resist those
afflictions: But I pass not at all, neither is my life dear unto me, etc. And
when Agabus at Caesarea had taken the girdle of Paul, Act. 21.
and bound his own hands and feet, saying from the mouth of the holy Ghost,
So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man, that owes this girdle; when his
friends would have held him back from going to Jerusalem, he answered boldly
and said, what do ye weeping and breaking mine heart? For I am ready not to
be bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.
Peter persuades the dispersed saints dwelling here and there to patience in
troubles, by an argument drawn from the knowledge and experience thereof
before had. Dearly beloved (says he) think it not strange concerning the
fiery trial, 1. Pet. 4.
which is amongst you to prove you, as though some new thing were come unto
you: as if he had said, this fire is ancient and well known, you have long
seen the smoke thereof, and therefore the breaking forth of the flames should
not so greatly astonish you. His own practice was not inferior to his advise.
For upon that praesage which his master gave in the last of John, when thou
art old, thou shall stretch forth thine hands, and an other shall girde thee
etc. he took his occasion to use more diligence in his calling, knowing (as
himself speaks) that the time was at hand, when he must lay down his
tabernacle even as the Lord Jesus Christ had showed him. Thus much on the
behalf of Jonas; 2. Pet. 1.
that if the greatness of the city were any terror unto him, he might not
complain that he was taken at unawares, suddenly called, and improvidently
thrust forth, but with alacrity of mind set his shoulder to the work, and
settle his confidence in the greatness of that God, from whom he was
commanded. It is a direction to us all, whatsoever our service be, wherein God
shall employ us, whether in Church, or in common wealth, whether we sit upon
the thrones of David for execution of judgment, or in the chair of Moses for
exposition of the law, which are the combersomst charges upon the earth, the
very heat and burden of the day (if I may so term them,) not to remit our
labors, and with the sons of Ephraim, being armed and bearing bows to
turn our backs in the day of battle; but though we be crossed with a
thousand afflictions, and have just cause to cry out, as Moses in his
government, why have thou vexed thy servant? Number. 1^.
yet to persist and go forward in our pains, addressing our souls to
contentment and quietness; this was I called unto, I cannot plead ignorance,
neither had I reason to expect less: travel, vexation, anguish of spirit,
were given me for my lot and my portion to drink, when I first entered into
these affairs.

2 Touching the place, when we hear it commended for a great city, shall
we infer heerevpon, Therefore privileged to carelessness, hautinesse,
oppression, wickedness, which are the worms and mothes for the most part,
that breed of greatness? therefore may Niniveh sin with impunity, and say I
am the Queen of the earth, who shall control me? therefore must sins set up
a monarchy also in Niniveh? must Prophets go to Bethel, and prophecy in
out-corners, because Niniveh is the Kings Court and cannot bear the words of
Prophets? can the mightines of her state, singularity of her government,
climing of her walls, aspiring of her towers, multitude of her people make her
secure against the wrath of the Lord of hosts? or can the bars of her
gates keep out his judgments? Alas, what is the greatness of Niniveh
compared with the greatness of the Lord? The lands of Alcibiades in the map
of the whole world, were less then a center, and small title, they could
not be espied; all the islandes of the sea are as a little dust, in the sight
of the almighty, and the nations as the drop of a well bucket, Esai. 40.
what is the number and the height of thy proud turrets? though they hold the
earth in awe, they cannot threaten heaven, and the closer they press to the
seat of God, the nearer they lie to his lightning. The challenge of God to the
self same city, is notably set down in the prophecy of Nahum: Art thou
better then No, Chap. 3.
which was full of people, that lay in the rivers and had the waters round
about it, whose ditch was the sea, and her wall was from the sea? Aethiopia,
and Egypt were her strength, and there was no end. Put, and Lubim were her
helpers, yet was she carried away, and went into captivity; her young
children were broken in pieces at the head of all the streets; and they cast
lots for her noble men, and all her mighty men were bound in chains. The
reason holds by equality: the strength and puissance of No was abased, and
thy might shall be cast down. It was afterward accomplished upon Niniveh, Ibid.
because she was full of blood, full of lies and robbery, a maistres of
witchcraftes, her multitude was slain, and the dead bodies were many, there
was no end of her carkases, and they even stumbled as they went, upon her
corpses. Mercurius Trismegistus sometime spoke to Asclepius of Egypt after
this sort; August. 8. d^ civi dei, 23.
Art thou ignorant, O Asclepius, that Egypt is the image of heaven? etc. And
if we shall speak more truly, our land is the temple of the whole world;
and yet the time shall come, when Egypt shall be forsaken, and that land which
was the seat of the Godhead, shall be deprived of religion, and left destitute
of the presence of the Gods.

It is written of Tyrus in the three and twentieth of Esaias that she was rich
with the seed of Nilus that brought her abundance, the harvest of the river
were her revenewes, and she was a mart of the nations etc. Yet the Lord
triumphs and makes disport at her overthrowe; Is this that glorious city of
yours, whose antiquity is of ancient days? etc: who has decreede this
against Tyrus? she that crowned men, whose merchants are princes, and her
chapmen the nobles of the world? the Lord of hosts has decreede it, to
stain the pride of all glory, and to bring to contempt all the honorable in
the earth. It is fallen, it is fallen (says the Angel in the Revelation)
Babylon the great city (having the same title of greatness that Niniveh has in
this place) and is become the habitation of divelles, Chap. 18.
and the hole of all foul spirits, and a cage of every unclean and hateful
bird, though she had said in her heart, I sit as a Queen, I am no widovv,
and shall see no mourning. Vrb^ aeterna.
That everlasting city of Rome, (as Ammianus Marcellinus called her) shall see
the day when the eternity of her name, and the immortality of her soul
wherewith she is quickened, I mean the supremacy of her prelates above
Emperors and princes, shall be taken from her; and as Babylon before mentioned,
has left her the inheritance of her name, so it shall leave her the
inheritance of her destruction also, and she shall become as other presumptuous
cities, a dwelling for hedghogs, an habitation for owls and vultures; thorns
shall grow in her palaces, and nettles in her strong holds. The lamentations
of Jeremy touching the ruin of Jerusalem, sometimes the perfection of beauty,
Lament. 2.
and the joy of the whole earth, as near unto God as the signet upon his right
hand, yet afterward destroyed as a lodge in a garden, that is made but for
one night, if they can pass by the ears of any man and leave not lamentation
and passion behind them, I will say that his heart is harder then the nether
millstone. How were her gates sunck to the ground, her bars broken, the stones
of her sanctuary scattered in the corners of every street, her mountain of
Syon so desolate, that the very foxes run upon it, whose strength was such
before, that the Kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world
would never have believed that the enemy should have entered into the gates
of Jerusalem? Ibid. 4.
I now conclude: Greatenesse of sins will shake the foundations of the
greatest cities upon the earth; if their heads stood amongst the stars,
iniquity would bring them down into dust and rubble. Multitude of offenses
will minish and consume multitudes of men, that although the streets were
sown with the seed of man, yet they shall be so scarce that a child may tell
them: yea the desolation shall be so great, that none shall remain to say to his
friend, Ierem. 49.
leave thy fatherless children behind thee, and I will preserve them alive,
and let thy widows trust in me.

The days can speak, and the multitude of years can teach vvisdome: ask
your fathers and they can report unto you, In their great plague.
that grass has grown in the streets of your cities for want of passengers,
and a man has been as precious as the gold of Ophir, as rare almost to be
found, as if the ground of your city had been the moors and wastes where no
man dwells. One would have wished a friend more then the treasures of the
East, to have kept him company, releeved his necessity, to have taken some
pains with his vviddowe and Orphans, to have closed his eyes at the time of
his death, to have seen him laid forth for burial, and his bones but brought
to the grave in peace. The arm of the Lord is not shortened, he that smote
you once, can smite you the second time; he can visit the sons as well as
the fathers; he is a God, both in the mountains and in the valleys, in the
former and later ages; he is able again to measure the ground of your city
with a line of vanity, pull down your houses into the dust of the earth, and
turn the glory of your dwellings into ploughed feilds: only the fear of his
name is your safest refuge, righteousness shall be a stronger bulwark unto you,
then if you were walled with bras, mercy, and judgment, and truth, and
sobriety, and sanctimony of life shall stand with your enemies in the gate, and
repel the venga^ce of God in the highest strength thereof. And so I come to the
2* general part, wherein we are to consider what Jonas was to do at Niniveh:
it is manifested in the words following, Cr^e against it: Lay not thine hand
upon thy mouth, 2 What Jonas is to do at Niniveh
neither draw in thy breath to thy self, when the cause of thy master must
be dealt in. Silence can never break the dead sleep of Niniveh: Softness of
voice cannot pearce her heavy ears: Ordinary speaking has no proportion with
extraordinary transgression: Speak, and speak to be heard, that when she
hears of her fall, she may be wounded with it. It was not now convenient
that Jonas should go to Niniveh, 1 King. 19.
as God came to Elias, in a still and soft voice, but rather as a mighty
strong wind rending the mountains, and breaking the rocks, abasing the
highest looks in Niniveh, and tearing the hardest heart in pieces; as an
earthquake and fire, consuming all her dross, and making her quake with the
fear of the judgments of God, as the trees of the forest. Jericho must be
overthrown with trumpets and a shout; and Niniveh will not yield, but to a
vehement outcry. A prophet must arm himself, I say not, with the spear, but
with the zeal of Phinees, when sin is impudent and cannot blush: God cannot
endure dallying and trifling in weighty matters. The gentle spirit of Eli, is
not sufficient to amend children past grace; and a prophet like Mitio, does but
bolster a sinner in his froward ways.

He charge his messenger otherwise in the prohecie of Esaias; Cry aloude,
spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, show my people their
transgressions and to the house of Jacob their sins. Chap. 58.
Much less can he abide flattery and guilefullnes in his business: Ier. 48
for cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently, or rather. as
the word imports, with deceit. Ezech. 13.
Woe unto them that sow pillowes under men's arme-holes, when it is more time
to prick them up with goades, that sell the cause of the Lord for handfulles
of barley, and pieces of bread, for favor, for fear, for lucre, or any the
like worldly respects; and when the people committed unto them, shall say unto
their seers see not, and to their prophets, Esaias. 30.
prophecy not right things, loquimini placentia, speak pleasinges and
leasinges unto us, prophecy errors, are easily drawn to betray the will of
their Lord and to satisfy their humors. God has disclosed his mind in this
treachery; Behold, I will come against the prophets that steal my word from
their neighbors: Ier. 23.
behold, I will come against the prophets that have sweet tongues, that cause
my people to err by their lies and flatteries. For then is the word of the
Lord stolen and purloined from our brethren, when we justify the wicked, and
give life to the souls that should not live; when we heal the hurtes of
Israel with sweet words; when we anoint the heads of sinners with precious
baulmes, whose hearts we should rather break with sharp corrosiues; when we
put honey into the sacrifice in steed of salt; when we should frame our song
of judgment, and we turn it into a song of mercy; when we should mourn to
make men lament, and we pipe to make them dance, putting the evil day far
from them, and hunting for their praise and acceptance of us with pleasing
discourses, affected eloquence, histrionicall jests, rather then grave and
divine sentences. Lachrymae auditorum, lauds tuae sint.

Toleramus illas and tremimus inter illas.


Hierome gave an other exhortation to Nepotian; Let the tears of thy auditors
be thy praises. And Augustine had a stranger opinion of these applauses and
acclamations of men; These praises of yours (says he to his hearers) do rather
offend and endaunger me; we suffer them indeed, but we tremble when we hear
them. We cannot promise you such deceitful handling and battering of the word
of God: for whether you hear or hear not the prophecy that is brought unto
you, yet you shall know that there have been prophets amongst you: we will not
suffer your sins to sleep quietly in your bosoms, as Jonas slept in the
sides of the ship, but we will rouse them up; if we see your pride, your
usury, your adulteries, your oppressions, we will not only cry them, but cry
against them, lest they cry against us; we will set up a banner in the name of
the Lord of Hosts, and proclaim them in your hearing: and if our cry will
not help, we will leave you to that cry at midnight, when your bodies that
sleep in the dust of the earth, and your sins that sleep with your bodies,
both shall be awaked, and receive their meede at Gods hands: we will charm
your deafenes with the greatest cunning we have; if our charming cannot move
you, we will send you to the judgment seat of God with this writing upon
your foreheads, Noluerunt incantari, They would not be charmed.

The reason of his crying against Niniveh, is this, The 3. general part.
For their wickedness is come up before me.

They that are skillful in the original, observe that the name of wickedness
here used, imports the greatest extremity that can be, and is not restrained
to this, or that sin, one of a thousand, but is a most absolute and
all-sufficient term, for three transgressions, and for four, (as it is in
Amos,) tha^ is, for seven, that is, for infinite corruption. Whatsoever
exceeds modesty, and is most contrary to the will of God, beyond all right
or reason, settled into dregs, frozen like y^e, given over, sold to the will
of Satan, is here meant; where every person in the common wealth is
degenerated: There is none good, no, not one: and every part in the body and
soul of man does his part to lift up the head of sin, Psalm. 14.
the throat an open sepulcher, the tongue used to deceit, the poison of Aspes
under the lips, the mouth full of cursing and bitterness, the feet swift to
shed blood, destruction and calamity in all their ways, no knowledge of the
way of peace, no fear of God before their eyes. And whether the word has that
power yea or no, it skilleth not much to dispute: for the words adioined in the
text make it plain without further amplification. First it is wickedmesse;
Secondly it ascends; Thirdly into the presence of God himself. Whereby you
may perceive, that the wickedness of Niniveh was not base and shamefast,
fearful to advance it self, but an high kind of wickedness, swelling like
Jordan above his banckes. It lay not close in the bottom of the sea, nor in
the holes of rocks, nor in the covert and secrecy of private chambers; it had
an whorish forhead, and could not be ashamed; they declared their sins as
Sodom, they hid them not, and as a fountain casts out waters, so they their
malice.

1 The phrase here used notes a great aggravation of the thing intended. So
in the sixth of Genesis it is said, that the earth was corrupt before the
Lord: and in the tenth of that book, Nimrod was a mighty hunter before the
Lord, that is, the corruptions of the world, and the violence of Nimrod were
so gross, that the Lord could not choose but take knowledge of them. So it is
here said, Their wickedness is come up before me; It knows no end, it
climbeth like the sun in the morning, and passes the bounds of all
moderation: it is not enough that the brute and fame thereof is blown into
the ears of men, but it has filled the earth, possesses the air, lifts it
self above the stars amongst the angels of God, offers her filthiness and
impurity before the throne of his majesty, and if there were farther to go
(such is her boldness and shamelessness) she would forbear no place. A doubt
answered.
What? are there seasons and times when the Lord beholds sin, and
wickedness, and when he beholds it not? he that made the eye does he not
see? does He slumber or sleep that keeps Israel? or has he not torches
and cresset light at all times to descrie the deeds of Babylon? or is he
subject to that scoff which Elias gave Baal, It may be he sleeps, and must
be awaked? or what else is the meaning of that phrase, 1. King. 18.
Their wickedness is come up before me? As if there were some wickedness
which came not to his notice. Surely, besides the increase and propagation of
their wickedness (for there is difference betwixt creeping and climbing) it
notes some order in the actions of God. He saw their sins in the book of
eternity, before their hearts did ever conceive them: he saw them in their
breasts, before their hands committed them: he saw their infancy and their full
strength, their thirst and drunkenness, their beginning and proceeding. But then
he saw them indeed and to purpose; when he saw them perfected and
fulfilled* and havinge vvincked as it were before, and in patience forborne
them, now beheld them with fiery eyes, and his heart vnremoueably bent to
take vengeance. The wild ass used to the wilderness, snuffeth up wind at
her pleasure. who can turn her back? they that seek after her, Ier. 2.
will not weary themselves, but will find her in her month, GOD sees and
observes at all times, the untamed madness of the wicked, wearying
themselves like the wild ass, or the dromedarye, in a race of abominations:
but he will take them in their month, and turn them back when their sins
are ripe and his wrath thoroughly incensed.

2 Their wickedness is come up before me. The phrase does minister a further
instruction unto us. Sin, in the eyes of some man seems not sin. Lactantius
writes of those who were not ashamed of their faults, but rather sought out
patronage and defense for them, that at the least they might seem to sin
honestly. Vt hones^^ peccare videantur. Chap. 6.
Jeremy speaks of the Jews in the same manner: were they ashamed when they
had committed abomination? nay they were not ashamed, neither could they have
shame. He smites them afterward in the 11. of his Prophecy, with a sharper
reproof, that when they did evil, they rejoiced at it. And it is the fashion
of us all, to bolster and bear out the vices of our friends, changing sower
into sweet, and evil into good, even for their friendships sake. Alceus took
a mole in the body, for a grace; yet was it a blemmish? One mule rubbeth
another; Naevus in articulo pu^ri.
an hypocrite likes an hypocrite because he is like unto him; a drunkarde, a
drunkarde; an usurer, him that is practiced in the same trade; he that
transformed himself into an Angel of light, being a fiende of darkness, has
taught an harlot to cloth her self like an honest matrone, and vices to
disguise themselves under the habit of virtues. But howsoever the the eyes of
men are blinded with partiality, yet the eye-liddes of the Lord shall try the
children of men; his righteous and flaming countenance shall soundelie examine
their actions, uncover the faces of their iniquities, and call them rightly and
truly by their proper names.

3 But whatsoever we find else in the riches and store of these words, this we
may gather from the nature of them, that there are some sins winged, of an
high elevation, ascending above the top of Carmel, aspiring and pressing
before the majesty of Gods own thro^e. The speech is but altered in other
scriptures, the substance and signification all one, where it is said that some
sins cry in the ears of God: that which is the wings or chariot unto them
in this place, to make them mount so high, is their cry in those others, I
mean, their outrage and enormity. Cains sin cried unto the Lord. Genesis 4. And
in the 18. of Genesis Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, (which is
expounded in the next words) and because their sin is exceeding grievous, I
will now go down, says the Lord, and see whether they have done altogether
according to that cry which is come up unto me. Behold the hire of the
laborers, which have reaped the fields which is of you kept back by fraud,
cries, and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the ears of
the Lord of hosts, Iam. 5.
in the Epistle of James. Aunswerable to that part of Job his Apology, which he
presents unto his judge, in the 31. of his book, If my land cry against
me, or if the furrows of my field complain, etc. Let thistles grow in
steed of wheat, and cockle in steed of barley. Oppression is threatened by
the like terms, in the second of Abacuck, The stone shall cry out of the
wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it, woe unto him that
builds a town with blood, and erecteth a city with iniquity. All which
sentences of scripture, expressing the loudness and vocality of sin, are of
the same force, as before I said, with those that declare the sublimity and
reach of it. God speaks to Senacharib in an other manner of speech, but the
matter and purpose is not different from this; Because thou ragest against me,
2. King. 19.
and thy tumult is come up to mine ears, I will put my hook in thy nostrels,
etc. Likewise the prophet tells the children of Israel in the second of
Chronicles, 2. Chro. 28.
that because the Lord God was wroth with Judah, he had delivered the^ into
the Israelits hands, and they had slain them in a rage, that reached up to
heaven. By these and the like conferences, a man may determine the nature, and
set down a catalogue in some sort of crying sins. Bloudeshedde is a crying
sin, (I say not all kind of bloudshedde,) for the speech of God to Cain,
has bloudes, not blood; which notes an insatiable appetite wherewith he was
so dry, that if his brother had possessed a 1000. times as much blood, he would
have spilt it all: and though he took away his life, yet he took not leave of
his own malicious thirst of blood. Blasphemy and rage against God, is a crying
sin, oppression, extortion, fraud, against poor laborers, against right
owners is a crying sin; and sin with outragiousnesse and impudency any way,
public, infamovs, enormous sin, Voluptatum monstra non species Cypr. in
prolog. de Cardin. open. Christi.
contemning the judgment of GOD and censures of men, committed with
greediness drawn, with cart-ropes, gloried in, where men even sell themselves
to work wickedness, is a crying sin. Which immoderate and proud humor
of viciousness, is notably expressed in the sixth of Genesis, where it is
alleged, that when the Lord saw the wickedness of man was great upon the
earth, and all the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart were only evil
continually, then it repented the Lord, that he had made man and he was sorry
in his heart. 1. It was wickedness; 2. great; 3. evident, for the Lord
saw it; 4. their hearts were evil; 5. every thought of their heart; 6. every
imagination of thought; 7. only evil; 8. continually, or day by day, there
was no hope of amendmente. Equal hereunto is that general and unbridled
corruption, which David sets down in the 14. Psalm, where they begin
with a most damnable principle of Atheism, the gate and highway into all
iniquity, The fool says in his heart, there is no God; Then is the sincke or
channel opened to all dissolution of life, They are corrupted and do
abhominably, there is none that does good. The Lord looked down from heaven
upon the children of men, to see if there were any that would understand and
seek after God, but they are all gone out of the way, etc. When this canker of
impiety has so overspred and eaten into the manners of people, then is
fulfilled that which Esaias pu^teth down for a sound position, Let mercy be
showed to the wicked, yet he will not learn rigtheousnesse: Chap. 26.
in the land of vprightenesse will he do wickedly, and will not behold the
majesty of the Lord. If neither the mercy nor the majesty of God, nor the
company of the righteous can reform him, then is his bettering despaired and
past hope. I need no farther examine this part.

The cause why Jonas cried against Niniveh, was the cry of their sins, their
regions were white to harvest, their iniquities ripe, and looked for a sickle
from heaven to cut them down. The sufficiency of which cause to derive
the judgments of GOD upon us, Jeremy lays down in his prophecy; Many
nations shall pass by the city, Ier. 22.
(meaning of Jerusalem) and shall say everye man to his neighbor; wherefore
has the LORD done this to this great city? then shall they answer. Because
they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord their GOD, etc. For the judgment
of the Lord, pronounced by David, shall stand longer then the stars in the
firmament, Him that loves iniquitye, Psalm. 2^.
does his soul hate. Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire, and
brimstone, and stormy tempests, this is the portion of their cup. And in
the first Psalm, it is a singular opposition that is made betvveene the just
and the wicked; Vt immobiliter credas, firmitatem negatimis iterando mo^strat.
Cassiod.
Non sic impij, non sic; the wicked are not so: that thou may immovably
believe, how immovably God is bent to deny the wicked his grace, he
strengthens the negative by doubling it. Therefore the wicked shall not stand
in judgment, for they are fallen before their judgment comes. What? shall
they not rise again? Surely yes; but not in judgment, says Jerome, for they
are already judged.

The wickedness of our land, what it is, and in what elevation of height,
whether modest or impudent, private or public, whether it speaks or
cries, stands or goes, lies like an aspe in her hole, or flies like a
fiery serpent into the presence of God, your selves be judges: write my
words in tables, that they may be monumentes for latter days; for when your
childrens children shall hear them hereafter, they will skarselye beeleeue
them. The year of the Lord 1593. and 1594.
The months of the year have not yet gone about, wherein the Lord has bowed
the heavens, and come down amongst us with more tokens and earnests of his
wrath intended, then the agedst man of our land is able to recount of so small
a time. For say, if ever the winds, since they blew one against the other,
have been more common, and more tempestuous, as if the four ends of heaven
had conspired to turn the foundations of the earth vpside down; thunders and
lightnings neither seasonable for the time, and withal most terrible, with
such effects brought forth, that the child unborn shall speak of it. The
anger of the clouds has been powered down upon our heads, both with
abundance and (saving to those that felt it) with incredible violence; the
air threatened our miseries with a blazing star; the pillars of the earth
tottered in many whole countries and tractes of our Island; the arrows of a
woeful pestilence have been cast abroad at large in all the quarters of our
realm, even to the emptying and dispeopling of some parts thereof; treasons
against our Queen and country we have known many and mighty, monstrous to
be imagined, from a number of Lions whelps, lurking in their dens and
watching their hour, to undo us; our expectation and comfort so failed us in
France, as if our right arms had been pulled from our shoulders. We have
not altered the color of the hair of our heads, nor added one inch to our
stature since all these things have been accomplished amongst us. Consider
then well, and think it the highest time to forsake your highest wickedness, I
call it highest wickedness: for if we knew how to add any thing in our
several veins and dispositions, to those idols of sin which we serve, some
to our covetousness, some to our pride, some to our unchasteness, some to our
malice, and such like, we would break our sleep, nay we would compass sea
and land to increase it. Yet howsoever it fares with the multitude, let there
be a seed and remnaunt among us left to entreat for peace. Ten righteous
persons would have saved Sodom; and it may so stand with the goodness of God,
that a few innocent fools, Job. 22.
shall preserve: the island, as Job speaks. Let us thankfully embrace the
long sufferance of our God forepast, leading us as by a hand of friendship to
repentance. and let us redeem with newness of life, our days and years
formerly misspent; least by impenitent transgressing against the law of our
maker, we fall upon his sentence of wrath, irrevocably past, and resolved by
him, I have thought it and will not repent, Ierem. 4.
neither will I turn back from it.

THE THIRD LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 3. But Jonas arose up to fly unto Tharsish from the presence of
the Lord: and he went down to Iapho, etc.
THe commission given to Jonas, we have already weighed: it follows that we
handle his recusancy and disobedience therein committed. This verse now in hand
delivers the whole body thereof, 1 He arose.

2 To fly.

3 Unto Tharsis.

4 From the presence, etc 5 He went down, etc. The disob^dience of Jonas.

(...). 2. These. 3. Non agit sed satagis.


with every member belonging unto it 1. his preparation is set down in that he
arose. 2. his speed, to fly. 3. the end and period of his journey, to Tharsis.
4. his end and purpose why to Tharsis, to escape the presence of the Lord. 5.
the opportunities, helps and furtherances to his travel, are exactly put
down. 1. he went down to Iapho an haven-towne. 2. he found a ship going to
Tharsis. 3. he paid the fare thereof. 4. he went down into it. 5. lastly his
reason of flying to Tharsis, is again specified, with a regression in the end
of the verse, that he might go from the presence of the Lord. A notable
pattern of man's disposition. 1. the Lord bids him arise, and he arises;
who if he had sitten still, till his flesh had clove^ to the pauement, or if he
had streched himself upon his bed, and folded his arms to sleep he had done
a service more acceptable to God 2. he is bidden to go, but not content with
going, he does more the^ so, he flies, he has the feet of an hind, and
the wings of a dove to do that he should not, who had reapt more thanks, if
he had crept but like a snaile in his right course. 3. He is bidden to go to
Niniveh, he goes to Iapho and Tharsis: Non nihil agit, sed male, sed aliud.
he is not idle, but he does ill, he does that which he was not charged with:
and like one of those Lords in Jeremy, Ier. 2,
who told God to his face, we are Lords, we will no more come at thee, so does
he flatly cross and overthwart that direction which God had set him. 4. He
hears of a great city, of a wearisome pera^bulation, asking the travel of 3.
whole days; but he saves the labor of his feet, goes into a little vessel,
and travelleth by sea, a far easier journey 5. He is bidden to cry, but he is
so far from making any noise, that all the clamor and noise of the mariners
could not awake him and stir him up. 6. He hears, that the wickedness of
Niniveh is come up before the presence of the Lord; notwithstanding he
fears not to mock and abuse the presence of the same Lord, neither
despaireth he to avoid it. There is nothing in all these, but stubbornes and
rebellion, which is as kindly to man, as the flesh and bones that he bears
about him. Amongst the other plants in the garden of Ede^, not far from the
goodliest trees of life and knowledge, grew the bitter root of disobedience,
which our forfathers no sooner had tasted, but it infected their blood, and the
corrupt nutriment thereof converted it self into the whole body of their
succeding lineage. The breasts of Eve gave no other milk then perverseness to
her children, and Adam left it for a patrimony and inheritance unto all his
posterity. Though God had precisely said, Of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil thou shall not eat, for in the day that t^ou eatest thereof thou shall
die the death; Genes. 2.
though there were no comparison between their maker and a murderer from the
beginning, the father of truth, and the father of lies, a God and a devil, and
the one had forbidden but one tree, and fenced it as it were with a double
hedge, of a twofold death: yet when the serpent came to the woman with a mere
contradiction to the voice of God, ye shall not die the death, how credulous
and forward was she to entertain his suggestion? Genes. 3.
Moses proved to the children of Israel in the 9. of Deuteronomy by a perfect
induction, that there was nothing but rebellion in them; Remember and forget
not, says he, how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to anger in the
wilderness, also in Horeb, afterward in Taberah and in Massah, and at the
graves of lust; likewise when the Lord sent you from Cadesh Barnea, etc. At
length he concludes, ye yaue been rebellious unto the Lord since the day
that I knevve you. And God pronounces of the same people in the fourth of Number.
that though they had seen his glory, and the miracles which he did in Egypt,
and in the wilderness, yet they had tempted him ten times, and had not obeyed
his voice. In the 17. of the same book, the Lord gave comma^deme^t unto Moses
that Aarons rod, which budded for the house of Levi when the other rods budded
not, should be kept in the arc for a monument of their murmurings and
rebellions forepassed. To forbear infinite other testimonies, the whole world
may be the arc to keep the monumentes of their and our disobedience; it is
so common to us both, when we are willed to ask for the old way, which is the
good way, to answer, we will not walk therein; when the watchmen cry unto
us, take heed to the sound of the trumpet, to answer, we will not take
heed; Ierem. 6.
when wisdom cries abroad and utters her voice in the streets, O ye
foolish, how long will ye learn foolishness, etc. to despise her counsel,
Prou. 1.
and to make a Skorne of her correction. What work of our hands bewrays not
this malice? what word of our mouths speaks not perverse things? almost,
what thought of our hearts kicketh not against the pricks of Gods sacred
commandments, and desperatelye adventureth her self upon the point of his
sharp curse? O that our ways were made so direct, that we might keep his
statutes! then should we never be confounded, whilst we had respect unto
all his commandments. It is a question made by some, (though I make no
question of it) whether this detraction and refusal of Jonas were a fault,
yea or no? Dionysius Carthusianus upon this place, does partly excuse it. I
think it far from excuse: fot doubtless, the voice of GOD is the first ru^e
and rudimentes of all Christian instruction, the first stone to be laid in
the whole building, that cloud by day, that pillar of fire by night, whereby
all our actions are to be guided. Paul in his marveilous conversion desired
no other light, and load-starre to be governed by, but the will and word
of his Savior, Lord what will thou have me do? The very Prophet of Moab
vvoulde not depart from this standarde: Acts. 9.
for when Balaac by his messengers sent him word that he would promote him,
and God did but keep him back from honor, he made this answer unto him, If
Balaac would give me this house full of silver and gold, I cannot pass the
commandment of the LORD, to do either good or badde of mine own mind;
Numb. 25.
what the Lord shall command, that same will I speak. He had said before
to the king in person, Lo i am come unto thee, and can I now say any thing
at all? the word that GOD puts in my mouth, that shall I speak. Numb. 2^.
The words of Samuel to Saul determine the doubt, and make it as plain as
the light at noone day, that the fact of Jonas here committed was an
inexcusable offense: Behold, says he, to obey is better then sacrifice; and
to harken is better then the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin of
witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and idolatry. It follows in the
next words, Because thou have cast away the word of the Lord* therefore he
has cast away thee from being King. You hear the nature of these two
contraries, Obedience, and Disobedience kindly disciphered? the one to be
better then sacrifice, for he that offers a sacrifice, offers the flesh of
a beast, but he that obeys, offers his own will as a quick and a
reasonable sacrifice (which is all in all) the other to be as witchcraft and
idolatry; for what is disobedience, but when the Lord has imposed some duty
upon us, we confer with our own hearts, as Saul consulted with the woman of
Endor, or Ahaziah King of Samaria with the God of Eckron Beelzebub, 1. Sam. 15.
1. Sam. 28.
whether the word of the Lord shall be harkened to, yea or no? Thus we set up an
idol within our own breasts against the God of heaven, and forsaking his
testimonies, we follow the voice and persuasion of our own devises. Bernard
alluding to this place before recited, writes thus; The children of
disobedience make their will their Idol. He adds for further explication,
Filij^ inobedientiae sua voluptas ido lum est, etc. tract. de praecept. and
dispens.
that it is one thing not to obey, an other thing to purpose and prepense
disobedience. Neither is it the simple transgression of Gods commandment, but
the proud wilful contempt of his will, which is reputed the sin of idolatry.
And surely I see no reason they have to conceal the infirmity of Jonas herein,
when Jonas himself (if I mistake not the meaning of the whole sentence) does
amply disclose it.

1. But Jonas. Jonas was the author and writer of this history, yet Jonas
reports the fault in himself, as if some stranger and person without his
skin, had committed it. He forgets as it were his own people and his
fathers house, and setting affection aside to his own credit, makes a simple
and plain declaration namely and singularly of the transgression of Jonas. A
wise man, by the rule of Solomon, in the beginning of his speech will accuse
himself: Prove. 18. in the vulgar.
so does Jonas, not shrowding his head, nor running into a bush, as Adam did,
but vvriting his fault in his brow, and pointing with his finger at the very
transgressor under his proper and individual name, he brings the accusation;
Then Jonas arose; the party not long since mentioned, even the son of Amittai,
he that immediately before received the word of the Lord to go to Niniveh, let
his name be registered, and his fault be published to the whole world: Jonas
arose.

2. Arose. Will you now see his readiness in an evil cause? no sooner called
but he arose forthwith. He might have excused himself, as Moses did in the 3.
and 4. chapters of Exodus, when he was called to his burdensome office, who am
I that I should go to Pharaoh and bring the children of Israel out of Egypt?
again, O Lord send by the hands of him whom thou should send. It has been
the use of Gods servants when they have found their ability unmeet to undergo
the duties of their provinces allotted them, in modesty and humility to
withdraw themselves: So did Gedeon in the 6. of Judges; For when the Lord had
encouraged him, Go in thy might, thou shall save Israel out of the hands of
the Midianites, he answered again, Ah my my Lord, whereby shall I save
Israel? Behold, my father is poor in Manasses, and I the least in my fathers
house. Likewise when Samuel asked Saul, On whom is all the desire of Israel
set? Is it not upon thee, 1. Sam. ^.
and all thy fathers house? he returned this answer unto him, Am not I the son
of Iemini, of the smallest tribe of Israel, etc. wherefore then speak thou
so to me? But Jonas has no such excuse, nor that he is the son of Amittai, nor
of the least tribe, nor of the poorest family, nor himself the unfittest of
all the rest to be sent to Niniveh, but at the first call and summons of the
Lord he arises up.

3. To fly, When he is up, he flies; his driving is as the driving of Iehu
the son of Nimshi (says the watchman in the second book of the Kings and
the ninth chap.) for he drives as if he were mad; So drives Jonas as if he
had received that postinge commission which the Apostles received, Salute no
man by the way: or rather as if he had vowed a fast with himself neither to
eat nor drink till he had frustrated Gods commandment. Cyprian wrote to
Cornelius of five Schismatickes that had taken shipping and sailed to Rome with
their mart of lies, Li. 1. epist 3 Quasi veritas post eos navigare non posse^.
as if the Lord of heaven who rides upon the Cherubins could not overtake them.

4. To Tharsis. If he had fled to the right place, the have he made, had added
much to the commendation of his painefulnes. God loves cheerefulnes and
alacrity in his work; excuses dislike him much. The delay that Elizeus made,
let me go kiss my father; and those shifts in the gospel, let me go bury
my father, or take my leave of my friends, are not admitted in his business.
Paul witnesses of himself in the 1. to the Galathians, that when he was
called by the grace of God to preach his son amongst the Gentiles, immediately
he communed not with flesh and blood, neither came he again to Jerusalem, but
went into Arabia, and so forwards, for the execution of that message. That
which he did: he did presently, and his have is praise worthy, because he
followed the will of the Lord, (...).
rather then the motions of flesh and blood. In this sense it is true that the
kingdom of heaven suffers violence, Psalm. 119.
and the violente catch it away. A man can never run too fast that runs in
these ways; I will run the ways of thy comma^dementes, Augustine.
says David, when thou have set my heart at liberty: Otherwise to run the way
of our own devises, is cursus celerrimus praeter viam, a swift race besides
the way. 1. Cor. 9.
So run, says the Apostle, that ye may obtain: run wisely, run aright, run by
the level and rule of Gods statutes. Philosophers hold, that if the inferior
spheres were not governed and stayed by the highest, the swiftness of their
motion would quickly fire the world: And if the affections of men were not
moderated by the guidance of Gods holy spirit, it could not be chosen, but this
little image of the world would soon be overthrovvne. Have in Jonas was not
amiss, (...).
but there was more have then good speed in his travel, because he went to
the wrong place. This is to go, I grant, but not with a right foot, as the
Apostle speaks in the second to the Galathians. The wicked have their ways,
but they are crooked and circular endless ways, as it is noted of them in the
12. Psalm, Impij in circuitu ambulant, they walk by compass, they walk not
toward the mark, the price that is set before them, and therefore loose both
their pains and their recompense; they follow their father the Devil in
these walks, who testifies of himself in the first of Job, that he had
compassed the whole earth. These crooked ways are ever applied by the judgment
of Cassiodore to evil manners. Tortuosae viae malis semper mori bus
applica^tur.

(...).


They shall never come to the rest of the eight day, that thus go wheeling
about, to no purpo^e; like the turning of Sampsons mill, which when it has
labored the whole day long, is found at night in the self same place, where
it first began. Thus the wicked have their compassing ways, and the devil has
his outwaies and bywaies; but happy is that man that orders his feet in the
paths of Gods commandments.

What Tharsis.
Now, whether the place here mentioned signify the sea, as the Chaldaik
paraphrast, and Jerome, and others, according to the Hebrew name so importing,
expound it; (whose reason is not much amiss, that being amazed, and at his
wits end, more confused in his mind then the winds and waves that drove him,
he cared not whether he went, so he walked not with God, as Henoch did;
taking his mark at large, and putting him self unto the sea to fall by
adventure upon any country:) or whether Tharsis were that famous haven-towne of
Afric, of which we read Ezech. 27. They of Tharsis were thy marchantes, for
the multitude of all riches, for silver, iron, tin, and lead which they
brought to the faires; the riches whereof may be esteemed by that report which
is made in the 2. of the Chronicles, that silver was nothing accounted of in
the days of Solomon; Chap. 9.
for the kings ships went to Tharsis, with the servants of Hiram, every three
years once came the ships of Tharsis, and brought gold and silver, yvorye,
apes, and peacockes: or whether it signify Carthage which Dido sometime
built, and is now called Tunes, which is the opinion of Theodoret, and others:
or whether Tartessus a town in Spain: or whether that city in Cilicia
nearer to Syria, whence Paul reports himself to have been, in the 21. of
the Acts, I am a citizen in Tharsis a famous city in Cilicia: or whether the
whole country of Cilicia, because in ancient times (if Josephus deceive us
not) all Cilicia was called Tharsis, by the name of the chief city: or
whether it name unto us any other place not yet agreed upon, partly by curious,
partly by industrious authors, it skilleth not greatly to discourse; I leave
you for your satisfaction therein, to more ample commentaries. But certain I
am, whether his mind bear him to land or to sea, to Asia, or Africa, cuntry
or city, nearer or farther of; at Niniveh he comes not, which was the place
of Gods apointment.

Many dispute many things, why Jonas forsook Niniveh, Why to Tharsis.
and fled to Tharsis. 1. The infirmity of the flesh, some say, was the cause,
pusillanimity of mind, want of courage, being terrified with Act. 10.
it was as uncouth unto him as when Peter was willed to arise, kill and eat
unclean beasts, and he answered in plain terms, not so Lord. 4. Or it
might be zeal to his country, Exodus 2.
and in the behalf of all Israel he afterward prayed unto the Lord against
his own soul, If thou will pardon their sin, thy mercy shall appear;
Exodus 3.
but if thou will not, I pray thee raze me out of the book of life which thou
have written: 5. Or it might be he was afraid to be accounted a false
prophet, if the sequel of his prophecy fell not out, which reason is afterward
expressed by him in the fourth chapter, I pray thee Lord, was not this my
saying when I was in mine own country? etc. As I said of the place before,
so of the reasons that moved him (for this present, till fitter occasions be
offered;) whatsoever it were that drew him away, whether weakness of
spirit, or despair of success, or insolency of charge, or jealousy over the
Israelites, or fear of discredit, sure I am that he comes not to Niniveh,
but resolves in his heart to reject a manifest commandment.

I make no quaestion but in every circumstance forehandled he vncovereth his
own nakedness, and lays himself open to the censure and crimination of all
men. As who would say; will you know the person without dissembling his name?
It was Jonas: his readiness without deliberation? he arises: his have without
intermission? he flies: the place far distant from the which God had
appointed? Tharsis. And if all these will not serve to prove the disobedience
of Jonas a a fault by his own confession, then harken unto the next word; if
other were but candels to discover it, this is a blazing lamp to lay it forth
to all men's sight.

5 From the presence of the Lord. He flies into Tharsis, from the presence of
the Lord: how can that be, if it be true which David wishes in the 27.
Psalm, Blessed be his glorious name for ever, and let all the earth be
filled with his glory? But in the hundredth thirty and eighth Psalm,
wonderful are the testimonies that the prophet there brings, to amplify
Gods illimited presence, O Lord thou have tried me, and known me, thou
know my sitting and my rising, thou understand my thoughts a far of,
etc. For not to stay your ears with commemoration of all those arguments;
this I gather in sum, that there is neither heaven nor hell, nor the
outtermost part of the sea, neither day nor night, light nor darkness, that
can hide us from his face. Our sitting, rising, lying down, the thoughts of
our hearts, words of our tongues, ways of our feet, nay our raines, our
bones, our mothers wombes, wherein we lay in our first informitye and
imperfection, are so well known unto him. If this were his purpose, to think
that the presence of God might be avoided, who sits upon the circle of
heaven, and beholds the inhabitants of the earth as grasse-hoppers, whose
throne is the heaven of heavens, and the earth his footestoole; and his ways
are in the great deep: I must then needs say with Jeremy, doubtless every
man is a beast by his own knowledge: Ierem. 10.
Prophet or no prophet, If the spirit of God instruct him not, he is a beast;
worse then Melitides that natural fool, of whom Histories speak, that he
could not define, whether his father or his mother brought him forth. But I
cannot suppose such palpable and gross ignorance in a prophet, who knowing
that God was well known in Jury, and his name great in Israel, could not
be ignorant, that God was the same God, and the presence of his Godhead no
less in Tharsis, and all other countries. What then is the meaning of this
phrase, He fled from the presence of the Lord? 1. Some expound it thus: what
nation is so great, unto whom their Gods come so near unto them as the Lord is
near unto us in all that we call upon him for? David's acclamation Psalm. 147.
goes hand in hand with it, He has not dealt so with other nations, neither
have the heathen knowledge of his judgments.

But I rather conceive it thus, (which makes much for the confirmation On a
day, when the children of God came and stood before the Lord, Satan came also
and stood amongst them. And Psalm. 123. Behold, as the eyes of servantes look
unto the hands of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hands
of her mistress; So our eyes wait upon the LORD our GOD, until he have
mercy upon us. In the 18. of Matthew, our Savior advises his disciples not to
despise one of those little ones: the reason is this, For I say unto you, that
in heaven, there Angels always behold the face of my father which is in
heaven. The like manner of speech did Elizaeus use to Naaman the Syria^ when he
offered him a reward: As the Lord lives before whom I stand, 2. King. 3.
a witness to my actions, the searcher of my heart, whose honor and service I
tender more then my game, I will not receive it. By these may we see what the
phrase intends, of fleeing from the presence of the Lord. It lets us
understand, that Jonas, as a fugitive and refractary servant, ran from the
Lord, as Onesimus from his master Philemo^ breaking his bonds of duty, and
making no conscience or care to do service unto him.

Some have presumed by conjecture upon his goinge to Tharsis, and fleeing from
the face of the Lord, that not only he reneged his obedience in this
particular action, but changed the whole trade of his life, and leaving the
office of a Prophet, became a Marchante adventurer. A worldly dangerous
profession, not only for the hazard of life, and for vvracke of goods, but for
vvracke of conscience also, which is the worst shipwreck: which wrackes
notwithstanding are taken not only in your ships abroad, but in your shoppes
and warehouses at home, when you fall either upon the Syrtes and quickesandes
of lying, which is a present and quick kind of sin, allwaies at the tongues
end; or upon the rocks of perjury which is a more obstinate and indurate
transgression. I will not be so strict in this point as Chrysostom was, who
councelled Christians to avoid marketting, that neither they suffered nor
offered guilefull dealing: Tu qui Christianus et, fuge forum, vt neque patiaris
neque faciat fraudem.
I know they are lawful and profitable callinges in common wealth, if
lawfully handled. The state of the world cannot stand without buying, selling,
traffic, transportation. Non omnis fert omnia tellus, No country yields all
kind of commodity. There must be a path from Egypt to Assure, and from Assure to
Egypt again to make a mutual supplye of their several wants. Mesech the
king of Moab was a Lord of sheep; Hiram had store of timber and workmen;
Ophir was famous for gold; Chittim for yvorie; Basan for oaks; Lebanon for
cedars; Saba for frankincense etc. But this I must tell you that live upon
buying and selling, you walk upon coals and carry fire in your bosoms: gain
is a busy tentation, and there is neither stone nor Ephah, measure nor
ballaunce you use, but Satan is at hand to do some office. It is naught, it
is naught, says the buyer, in the tvventith of the Proverbes, and when he is
gone aparte, he boasts. Now on the other side, It is good and very good,
says that seller, and when he has sold his wares, he boasts indeed,
because he has given dross for silver, and water for wine, Esaias. 1. I say no
more; but take heed that the treasures of wickedness be not found in your
houses, neither a scante measure, Mich. 6.
which is an abomination unto the Lord. Shall I justify, says God, the wicked
balances, and the bag of deceitful weightes? His meaning is, that they shall
never be justified; much less a wicked and deceitful conscience. I will not
enforce this collection upon you, because is is not plainly expressed in the
text, and without such foreign and unnecessary helps, if I may so term them,
the bare letter of the words does notoriously evict the disobedience of Jonas,
wherein he was so fixed and confirmed, that neither respite of time, neither
danger of voyage, nor expense of money could change his purpose. Examine the
particulars.

1. He goes down to Iapho, or Ioppe, (Iaffa, at this day) a city of
Palestine, an haven town and rode for shipping; it spent some travel and
time, no doubt, before he came to Iapho.

2. He finds a ship going to Tharsis: I am sure he was not presently
acquainted with the keye, neither did he find that ship without some inquiry.

3. He paieth the fare: what? incontinently? it is not unlikely but they staide
one tide at the least.

4. And it stands with the order of the text, that he paid the fare
aforehand, and in have, before he needed.

5 Some of the Rabbines add, that he paid the fare of the whole ship for the
rest of the passengers that were bound for Tharsis.

6. Lastly when he had paid, he goes down into the ship, not remembering the
danger he entered into, Quanta spissitudo navium? 4 digitoru^. Anach.
Neptunum procul a terra.
to put his life within 4. inches of death; and what safety it is, in
comparison, to see the raging of the waters form the sea banckes. Is was one
of the three things that Cato repented; travel by sea, when by land he might
have gone: and a charge that antigonus gave his sons, when they were tossed
with a tempest; Remember, my sons, and warn your posteritye of it, that they
never hazard themselves upon such adventures. What needed the recital of these
particular, and (one vvoulde think) trifling circumstances, as that he went
to the haven, found a ship, paid the fare, descended into it, which might
have been spoken at once, He went to Tharsis? But to express thus much; that
though there were many occurrences, that met and stopped him in the way of
disobedience, as the Angel met Balaam; many messengers, as it were sent from
God to call him back again; many spaces of ground, many interruptions of
time, many occasions of better advise and consultation: yet, as Agrippa came
into the world with his heels forward, so Jonas holds on his untoward
course, whether his feet would bear him, having little reason, and less
grace to direct him.

The conclusion.
The sum of all that has been spoken hitherto, (for I will leave a remnant
behind at the least to make a connection between this and the next sentence)
is, strong and incredible disobedience, I say not conceived alone, but brought
forth, perfited, persisted in, without remorse; not against father, mother,
magistrate, any superior, but against God himself; not in the tail of the
people (to use the words of a Prophet) but in the chiefest and honourablest
part. Esa. 42.
The complaint of God is now revived again, who so blind as my servant? or so
deaf, as he whom I have sent? Jonas a servant in the highest room, a
vessel of the greatest honor in the great house, a Prophet, one of a
principal spirit, and (as their usual name was, for unusual gifts) a man of
GOD, having received a mandate from his Lord, is blind, deaf, senseless to
perform it; or rather he goes, hastneth, flies, saileth with the wings of
the wind from the execution thereof. Paul vpbraideth the Jew Romans 2. on this
wise: Thou art called a Jew, and restest in the law, and gloryest in God, and
know his will, and allowest the things that are excellent, in that thou art
instructed in the law, and persuadest thy self that thou art a guide to the
blind, a light to them which are in darkness, an instructor of them which
lack discretion etc. Thou therefore which teach another, teach thou not
thy self? thou that preachest a man should not steal, dooest thou steal?
thou that say, a man should not commit adultery, dooest thou commit
adultery? thou that abhorrest idolles, committest thou sacrilege? thou that
gloriest in the law, through breaking the law dishonourest thou God? The
coals of this scripture may be heaped upon Jonas his head. Thou art a
Prophet, a familiar friend with God, thou have seen visions and dreamed
dreams, and always stand in the presence of the Lord to know his
counsels; thou art a seer to the blind, a teacher of the ignorant, a watchman
over those that are a sleep; thou therefore that teach Israel, teach
thou not thy self? thou that preachest obedience to Jeroboam, art thou
disobedient? thou that beginnest thy message, Hear the word of the Lord,
do thou reject it? What shall we say then, but that which Daniel yields
unto in the 9. of his Prophecy? O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee,
but unto us appertains open shame, to our Kings, to our Princes, to our
Fathers, (we may further say) to our Prophets, to our Priests, because we
have all sinned against thee. Romans 3.
There is no difference, says the Apostle (he means neither of Jew nor
Gentile) for all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God, and are
justified freely by his grace, thorough the redemption that is in Christ Jesus.
Galat. 3.
And the scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith in
Christ Jesus, Galat. 5.
should be given to those that believe. I show you your sin and the
propitiation, your sickness and the remedy to cure it; think not of the other
remedies. If you deem, that either Tharsis, or any other region beyond seas;
that a cabin in a ship, or a couch in a chamber; that the clouds of the day,
or darkness of the night; the top of the mountains, or the bottom of the sea;
a secret friend, or more secret conscience; heaven or hell, or any the like
evasion, can hide it from the eyes of God: you are deceived. His seven eyes
go through the whole world. Zach. 4. Augustine.
You may interpret them 7. thousand, thousand of eyes, for he is totus oculus:
altogether eye. Therefore let us not flatter our selves, with those that pluck
out the eyes of knowledge it self in the tenth Psalm, Tush, who sees us? God
has forgotten, he hides away his face and will never see; but rather, let
us acknowledge with Jacob, all places to be filled with the majesty of God, The
Lord was in this place, Genes. 2^.
and I was not aware of it: how fearful is this place? This is the house of
God, and the gate of heaven; this, and that, and the other within the compass
of the round world, all are alike. Let us reclaim our selves in time from
sinning, (which Jonas could not do) and in a serious cogitation, before we
go too far, ask one the other, what have we done? If we forget it in
Israel, let us remember it in Iapho. Let either house or field, land or sea,
youth or full strength, put us in mind of our duty neglected. Let us not
follow our sensuality too far, nor buy voluptuousnes with a price, but rather
say wirh the Athenian Orator, when we hear how chargeable pleasure is, Non
ema^ tanti poenitere, I will not buy my repentance at so high a rare. Or if we
have paid the fare of pleasure, let us withdraw our feet, before we descend
into the bottom and sink of it; let not the sides and entrals of the ship
bury us, nor a careless profounde sleep bereave us of all sense; Let not the
waters go over our heads; nor a floude of iniquity overwhelme us, least,
(that which is the wages of sin, and presently overtooke Jonas in his
transgression,) we endanger both body and soul to the justice of God.

THE FOVRTH LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 4. But the Lord sent out a great wind into the sea etc.
THe recusancie of Jonas was the abridgment of the whole third verse; whereof
1. he accuses himself by name; 2. he notes his readiness in arising; 3. his
speed in flying; 4. his perverseness, because to Tharsis; 5. open rebellion in
going from the face of the Lord to renounce his service; 6. his confirmation
therein, that having such stops and remembrances laid in his way, as namely,
1. to reach the haven not near at hand; 2. to find a ship not without
enquiry, and to stay the leisure thereof; 3. to be at charge; 4. therein to be
more liberal or more hasty then cause was; 5. to commit himself to so
manifest a danger, as the travel by the sea brings with it: yet he
swalloweth and digesteth all these hooks, and is not revoked by any means to
perform his obedience. For all this he did: to what end? That he might go to
Tharsis from the presence of the Lord. Once again he repeateth the cause,
and by a retire to his former speech, makes the publication of his crime both
a and o, the first and the last of the sentence: thus he begins, and thus he
ends, That he might flee etc.

With them. To this you may add, as the conclusion of all the rest, the
company he made choice of, that he might go with them. Who were they? by
accord of all opinions, men of sundry nations, languages, conditions, and, as
is evident in the fifth verse, idolatours. Thus he mingleth himself in the
exstasie of his wilfulnes, as fire and water, Hyena with dogs, an Israelite
with gentiles, the circumcised with the uncircumcised, a prophet with
prophaners of sound religion, and one that fears the God of the Hebrews with
those that worship stran he Gods. The parable in Matthew makes mention of a
man that had 2. sons; Chap. 21.
the one he bids go to his vineyarde, and he answered, I will not; yet
afterward repented himself, and went: the other said, I will go, yet went
not. The one is the image of the penitent, the other of the hypocrire: the one
a deed without show, the other a show without deed. Jonas may stand in a
third branche, who neither says that he will not and does, nor that he will
and does not; neither in truth, nor in color obedient, but having cleared and
dissolved all objections of travel, charge, peril, company, is shipped, as
you see, and under sail to go to Tharsis.

But the Lord sent out a great wind, etc. Fugiebat fugam, and Dei iram non
sagiebat. Chrysostom. homil. 5. ad pop.

Periclitatur navis quae periclita^tem exceperat. 2. Sam. 14.


Behold a pursivant dispatched from heaven to attach him, vengeance is shipped
in a whirlwind, and saileth alofte in the air, to overtake him. There is no
counsel (as Jerome here notes) against the Lord. In a calm comes a
tempest; the ship is endangered, which harbors a daungerfull passenger;
there is nothing peaceable, where the Lord is an enemy. Whom the voice of the
Lord could not move, a storm solliciteth him, (as when Absalom could not draw
Ioab unto him by entreatie, and fair means, he fi^eth his barley fields to
make him come;) and whom a still spirit could not charm, the turbulent spirit
of a raging wind, Severior Magister, a rougher instructour to deal withal,
enforces to harke^. Eccle. 39.
There be spirits (says the son of Syrach) that are created for vengeance,
which in their rigor lay on sure strokes: In the time of destruction they show
forth their power, and accomplish the wrath of him that made them. Fire, and
hail, and famine, and death, all these are created for vengeance: the teeth of
wild beasts, and the scorpions, and the serpents, and the sword execute
judgment for the destruction of the wicked: Nay the principal things for the
whole use of man's life, as water, fire, and iron, and salt, and meal, wheat
and honey, and milk, and the blood of the grape, and oil, and clothing, all
these things are for good to the godly, but to the sinners they are turned to
evil. To these you may add the wind, Anima (...).
which being a meteor whereby we live in some sort, (for our life is a breath) a
fan in the hands of God to purge the air that it be not corrupted, as the
lunges lie by the heart to do it good, is here converted to be a plague unto
them: that as David was afflicted by the son of his own bowelles, who should
have been the staff of his age; Sampson by the wife of his bosom who should
have been his helper; the children of Israel by Manna stinking and full of
worms, and by quails coming out of their nostrelles; and the children of the
prophets by a bitter herb in the pottage, which were appointed for their
sustenance and food: so these mariners for the sin of Jonas, are scourged
with a wind, a principal furtherance and benefit at other times required to
sailing.

Obedience has her praise both with God and men: the offspring of the
righteous is obedience and love. The Rechabites shall never want a testimony of
their obedience, unless the book of Jeremy the Prophet be again cut with a
penknife, and burnt upon an hearth, as in the days of Zedekias. Ionadab their
father commanded them to drink no wine, and they would not drink it for that
commandment sake, they, nor their wives, their sons, nor their daughters.
Christ prophecieth of himself, Esaias. 50. The Lord has opened mine ear, and
it was not rebellious; neither turned I back. Psalm. 40.
It was written of him in the book, that he should do the will of his father,
he was ready to do it. The law was in the midst of his bowels, and without
protracting the time, Phil. 2.
he offered himself, Lo I come. He was obedient unto death, even the death of
the cross. And though he were the son, Heb. 5. Bernard.
yet learned he obedience by the things he suffered: qui ne perderet
obedientiam, perdidit vitam: though he slept a woeful and heavy sleep to flesh
and blood, yet he slept in peace.

Disobedience, on the other side, has never escaped the hands of almighty God.
It cast Jonas out of the ship; and the angels, before Jonas, out of heaven;
Adam and Eve out of paradise; Lots wife out of her life and nature to; Saul
out of his kingdom; the children of Israel out of their native soil, and
further, their natural root that bare them. For no other reason is given but
this, Jeremy. 35. I spoke, and they would not hear; I cried, and they would
not answer. To leave foreign examples, the justice of God now presently
manifesting it self against disobedience comes in a storm, the vehemence
and fury whereof appears, 1. By the author, God sent it. Who although he be
the author of all winds and weathers, and brings them out of his treasures,
yet when it is singularly noted of God that he was the cause, it carries a
likelihood not of his general providence alone, but of some special and
extraordinary purpose. 2. By the instrument which is a wind, and neither
thunders nor raines to help it. 3. By the epithet and appositio^ of the
instrument, a great wind. 4. By the nature of the word here used: it was sent;
nay rather thrown and sent headlo^g, as the lightning is shot from heaven. It
was cast from God as the mariners cast their ladings into the sea, for the
same word is originally used in both places. A wind so sudden and furious, that
they could guess at other te^pests before they fell, they had no signs whereby
to prognosticate this. 5. By the place that receives it, the sea; a champian
and plain channel, an open flore where there was neither hill, nor forest,
nor any other impediment to break the force of it. 6. By the explication
added, there was a tempest upon it, eve^ a mighty tempest. 7. By the effects
that ensued in 4. and 5. verses, marveilouslie described.


1. The breaking of the ship, a strong and an able ship, by conjecture, because
so lately set forth to sea: and the danger is the more to be considered, that
it fell not upon rocks or shelues, but by the power of the only wind was
almost splitted. the Hebrew phrase is very significant, the ship thought to be
broken, as if it had soul and sense to feel the hazard it was in.

2 The fear that followed upon the whole company of the passengers.

3 The fear of the mariners, men accustomed and inured to the like
adventures; of whom it is truly spoken, ^llis robur and aes triplex, Horat.
etc. their hearts are of brass and oak to encounter dangers.

4 Their prayers, nay their vociferations and outcries upon their Gods, as the
priests of Baal cried upon their idol.

5 The casting out of their ladings, the necessary instruments and vtensiles
for their intended voyage.

Al which, and whatsoever besides is set down to the end of the 5. ver. may be
reduced to 3. persons, with their actions and administratio^s belonging unto
them: the 1. is the Lord; the 2. the mariners; the 3. Jonas.

Of the first it is said, that he sent out a great wind.

It was the error of the Paynims, 1 The Lord
to devide the world amongst sundry Gods, with every several region, city,
family, and almost chamber, and chimney therein; with heaven and hell, land and
sea, woods and rivers, wine and corn, fruits of the ground, al things
whatsoever. Amongst the rest, the winds in the air they ascribed to Aeolus,
who^e they imagined to have them closely mued up and housed in a lodge, and to
have sent the^ abroad either for calmes or te^pests at his discretion. Horace
commended Virgil his friend going toward Athens, to the mighty goddess of
Cyprus, and the two brethren of Helen, and the father of the winds, that is, to
Venus, and the two twins Castor and Pollux, Obstrictis alijs praeter Japyga.
and Aeolus; wishing for his better speed, that all the winds might be bound
up, besides Iapyx a quiet western wind; with many the like fables not
unknown to grammar schools. The blowing of the winds more or less we
impute not to Aeolus, nor any the like devised God of the gentiles: we honor
the Lord of hosts alone, in the power of this creature, who sits upon the
circle of heaven, and causes both the sun to shine, and the raines to fall,
and the winds to blow in their seasons, and at this time appointed this wind
to a singular service. It is he that flies upon the wings of the wind. Psalm.
18.
The channels of the waters have been seen, and the foundations of the earth
discovered at his rebuking, and at the blasting of the breath of his nostrels.
Chap. 37.
You see it is called the breath of the Lord, as also in the book of Job, not
that substantial breath of his, whereof we read in the 1. of Genesis the spirit of
God moved upon the waters; but a created breath, extracted, and engendered out
of other creatures. The wind that came from the wilderness and overthrew the
corners of the house wherein the children of Job were feasting, that saint
acknowledges to have come from heavenly disposition; Job. 1.
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away. Wind and fire and bands of robbers,
he assigns not to any idol of the heathen, nor to the malice of men, nor to
the hazard of fortune, which others made a gods; but to the almightines and
soverainty of him who rules al things. And as his dominion is undoubted in the
air, so does the sea submit it self likewise to his governance, who sits
upon the water-flouds, and is a king for evermore, Job. 38.
as the Psalm speaks. For who but he has shut up the sea with doors, when
it issued and came forth as out of the womb? who established his commandment
upon it, when he set bars and gates, and said, hitherto shall thou come and no
further; here will I stay the proud waves? Who else divided the red sea into two
parts, that the children of Israel passed through on dry foot? But as for
Pharaoh and his host, the horse and the rider, they were overthrown therein. Who
else turned the stream of Jordan the contrary way, whereof the Prophet
demands with admiration, what aileth thee O Iorda^ that thou wentest back?
who else turned the waters into blood? and dries up the rivers, that the fishes
rotte for want of moisture. Tell me his name, (to use the words of Job) if
thou know it; and what is his sons name? It is he and his son, who in the
gospel of Mark, Chap, 4.
rebuked the winds, and said unto the sea, peace and be still; and the wind
ceased, and there was a great calm, and they could not be satisfied about it,
but asked who it was that both the winds and the sea should thus obey him? All
kinds of vveather by land or sea, thunders and lightning, even the coals of
fire that were never blown haile-stones and stormy tempests, they come by his
assignement, who cleaves the rocks asunder with his voice, and shoots forth
his thunderbolts, Job. 38.
as arrows at a mark; who bids his lightnings walk, and they say, lo
here we are, and devideth the spouts in the air, to yield their moisture to
the ground, more or less, at the will of their maker. And we utterly renounce
herein, not only the palpable idolatry of the Gentiles, who gave the glory
of the most high to their base and inglorious abominations, but the foolish
ignorance of others nearer home, who in the vvorking of these creatures, never
look up to the seat of majesty, that orders all things; but whatsoever
befalls them by fall of fire, blast of wind, inundation of waters, or the
like, they term it chance. Alas, chance is nothing; for nothing is done in
the whole world, without an order from above: and it was wisely noted by a
learned man (...), nature brings forth that, Iul. Scal. Exerc. 188.
which we wrongfully call chance, because it comes unexpected

I read of a certain people in Afric, who being troubled with the
North Wind, driving heaps of sands upon their fields and dwelling places,
they gathered an army of men to fight against it; but with so evil success,
that themselves were also buried under hills of sands. Xerxes the Persian
Monarke, Herodo^.
having received a loss by the rage of Hellespontus, himself more mad then
the sea, caused fetters and manacles to be cast into the waters thereof, as if
he would make it his prisoner, and bind it with linkes of iron at his
pleasure. Some say. Cyrus.
Darius did the like upon the river Gynde, who, because it had drowned him a
white horse, threatened the river to devide it into so many streams, and so to
weaken the strength of it, that a woman great with child should go over it
dry-shod. It is not unlike the madness of our days, who must not be crossed
either with wet or dry, winds or raines, fair or foul, but we fall to
repining, murmuring, banning, blaspheming, and al kind of cursed either
speaking or wishing at least. But as God asks Senacherib, whom have thou
railed upon, or whom have thou blasphemed? 2. King. 19.
so I ask these me^, whom are you angry with? who has displeased you? are
you angry with the saw, or with him that lifts it? do the winds and seas
move your impatience? they are but servantes unto that Lord, who says unto
them, smite, and they do it; favor, and they are obedient. Rabsakeh speaks to
the nobles of Jerusalem, Esaias. 36. Am I come hither without the Lord? The Lord
said unto me, Go up against this land to destroy it. So it is in the force of
these creatures, when either they drown, or blast, or parch to much, it is not
done without the Lord; the Lord says unto them, do thus or otherwise.

Besides the impieties above named, it is an error of our times heathenish
enough, to give the honor of God in these and the like accidents, to witches
and co^iurers. For if ever tempest arise, more the^ common experience has
inured us unto, especially with the havoc and loss either of life or limme in
our selus, or of our cattle, or howsings, forthwith the judgment is given (as
if the God of heaven and earth were fallen a sleep, and minded nothing) there
is some coniuring. Be it so. August. 2. de doct. Christ.
What is coniuring? a pestilent commistion, conve^tio^, stipulation, betwixt
men and devils. Me^ and devils? what are they? look upon the sorcerers of
Egypt for the one; 3 de Trin. 7.
Magorum potestas (says Augustine) defecit in muscis, they cried in the
smallest plague that was sent, and past their cunning to remove, this is the
figure of the Lord; Exodus 8.
their power is limited therefore. Look upon the martyrings of Job for the
other: for though the circuit of Satan be very large (even to the co^passing
of the whole earth to and fro, Job. 1.
) yet he has his days assigned him to stand before the presence of the Lord
for the renewing of his commission: And besides, Oviculam vnam auferre non
potuit etc. he could not take one poor sheep from Job, till the Lord had
given him leave, put forth thine hand; nor enter into the heard of swine, Mat.
8. without Christ's permission. And so, to conclude; whether men or devilles be
ministerial workers in these actions, all comes from him, as from the higher
supreme cause, whose judgments executed thereby, no man can either fully
comprehend, or reprehend justly. God professes no less of himself, Esaias. 45.
I form the light, and create darkness, I make peace, and create evil, I the
Lord do all these things. And in the 54. of the same prophecy, Behold I have
created the smith that ^loweth the coals in the fire, and him that brings
fo^th an instrument for his work, and I have created the destroyer to destroy:
destruction comes from the instrument, the instrument from the smith, the
smith and all from God. In the 10* of the same book, Asshur is called the rod
of his wrath, and the staff in his hands was the Lords indignation. And the
prophet prays in the 17. Psalm to the same effect, up Lord, disapoint him,
cast him down, deliver my soul from the wicked, which is a sword of thine. We
need not farther instructions in this point, but whatsoever it is that
outwardly troubles us, let us larne to fear him therein, from whose secret
disposition it proceeds: who has a voice to alay the winds and the seas; a
finger to confound sorcerers and co^iurers; an hook for the nostrels of
Senacharib; and a chain for the devil himself, the prince of darkness.

In the 2. person, which were the mariners, we are directed by the hand of the
scripture, 2 The Mariners.
to consider three effects, which the horror of the tempest wrought upon them.
For 1. they were afraid; 2. they cried up on their Gods; 3. they cast out their
wares: the 1. an affection of nature; the 2. an action of religion; the 3. a
work of necessity. Some of the Rabbines held, that the mariners in this ship
had more cause to be astonished and perplexed, then all that travailed in these
seas besides: for when other ships were safe and had a prosperous voyage,
theirs only, as the mark whereat the vengance of God aimed, was endaungered.
But because it appears not in the book, I let this pass, with many other
vnwritte^ collections; as namely, that they were nere the shore, and labored
with all their force to tough their ships to land, but could not do it: which
happily may be true, and as likely otherwise, and therefore I leave it
indifferent, and am content to see no more the^ the eye of my text has
descried for me. But this I am sure of: Affliction begins to school the^,
August. de correctione Donatis.
and drive the^ to a better haven then they erst found. It evet works good
for the most part; and although the better sort of men are corrected by love,
yet the greater are directed by fear. As the wind the seas, so the fear of
the wrath of God, in this imminent danger of shipwreck appearing, shakes and
perturbeth their hearts, though they had hardened them by use against all
casualties by sea, like the hardest adamantes. All the works of the Lord to a
co^siderate mind are very wonderful: his mercy reaches to the heavens, and his
faithfulness is above the clouds; his wisdom goes from end to end; his
righteousness is as the highest mountains, and his judgments like a great
deep, and whatsoever proceeds from him, Habet iust^ veneratione^ quicquid
excellit. Tull. August. de Trin l. 3. c. 2* epist. ad Volus. Tull. Psalm. 139^
because that artificer excels, is must needs be excellent. But it is as
true a position; perseverantia consuetudinis amisit admiratione^; the assiduity
and continuance of things brings the^ into contempt. Qua^ multa vsitata
calca^ tur, quae co^siderata stupe^tur? how many things does custom make vile
which consideration would make admirable? because the nature of man is such, to
be carried away rather with new the^ with great things. The creation of man,
who makes account of, because it is common? But would we ponder in our hearts,
as David did, that we are wonderfully and fearfully made, and that our bones
were not hid from the Lord, though they were shaped in a secret place, and
fashioned beneath in the earth; that he possessed our raines in our generation,
and covered us in our mothers wombes; that his eyes did see us when we were yet
imperfect, and all things were written in his book, when before they were not;
it would enforce us to give acclamation to the workmanship of our maker, as
the sweet singer of Israel there did, marveilous are thy works, o Lord, and
that my soul knows right well. A tempest to mariners is nothing, because
they have seen, and felt, and overlived so many tempests. As David, because
he had killed a lion, and a bear at his fold, persuaded himself that he also
could kill Golias; So these having past already so many dreadefull occurrents,
begin to entertain a credulous persuasion of security, no evil shall approach
us. They make their hearts as fat as brawne, to withstand mishaps. It fares
with the^ as with soldiers beaten to the field: they have seen hundreds fall
at their right hand, and thousands at their left, and therefore are not moved;
and though they bear their lives in their hands, they fear not death:
whereupon grew that judgment of the world upon them; Armatis, divum nullus
pudor, Sil. Ita^^^.
soldiers (the greater part) fear not God himself.

Undoubtedly our seamen drink down and digest their dangers with as much
facility and felicity to, as some their wine in bowls; yet notwithstanding the
mariners here spoken of, even the master of the ship with the vulgar sort,
having such iron sinews in their breasts, gia^ts by sea, and (if I may term
them so) (...), men that fight with God, being in their proper element, the
region and ground where their art lies, having fought with the waves and
winds a thousand times before, they are all stricken with fear, and their
hearts fall asunder within them, like drops of water. David Psalm. 107. sets
down four kinds of men, which are most indebted to God, for deliveraunce
from perilles: the first of those that have escaped a dearth; the second,
prisoners enlarged; the third, such as are freed from a mortal sickness; the
last, seafaring men, of whom he writes thus; They that go down into the
sea in ships, and occupy their merchandise by great waters, they see the
work of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. For he commands and
raises up the stormy wind, and it lifts up the waves thereof, they mount
up to the heaven, and descend again to the deep, so that their soul melts
for trouble. They are tossed too and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and
all their cunning is gone. A lively image of their uncertain and variable
lives; and, if you hearken to the comparison, it is next to famine,
imprisonment, a deadly disease to be a seaman. Sailers and adventurors are
neither amongst the living, Navigantes neque inter vivos, neque inter mortuo^.
Pittac.
nor amongst the dead: they hang between both, ready to offer up their souls
to every flawe of wind, and billow of water where with they are assaulted. Yet
these are the men, and such the instruments and means whereby your wealth
comes in, that live by Merchandise; you eat, and drink, and wear upon
your backs, you traffic and spend the blood of your sons and servantes.
So David called the water of the well of Bethlehem, blood, because it was
brought through the army of the Philistines with the hazard of men's lives. 1.
Chro. 11.
You owe much unto God for the preservation of their lives, your ships and
commodities; and are bound to rehearse unto your souls day and night that
verse of thankesgiving which David repeateth in the Psalm before named, as the
burden and amoeb^um to those songs of deliverance. Let us therefore confess
before the Lord his loving kindness, and his wonderful works before the sons
of men: let us exalt him in the congregation of the people, and praise him in
the assembly of the elders. And as you fear his majesty your selves, who
turns the floods into a wilderness, and a wilderness into springes of water,
who breaks the ships of the sea with an East Wind; Psalm. 48.
so see that your factors beyond the seas, with all the officers and ministers
belonging to your company, be men of the like affection. It is not the
tallenes of your ships, nor their swiftness, manning, and munition, that can
protect them against Gods vengeance. You call them Lions, Leopards, Bears, and
skorning the names of beasts, you term the^ Angels, Archangelles: but
remember when all is done, that as Themistocles called the Navy of Athens
woodde^ walls, so yours are but wooden Beasts, and wooden Angels; And woe
be to him that says to a stone, thou art my father; and to a piece of wood,
thou art my helper. They have good fortune written upon their beakes, says
Plutarke, but many misfortunes in the success of their labors. Horace spoke to
as proud a ship (it should seem) as any those times knew; Though Pontus pines
thy frame, 1. Car. od* 14 Quamvis po^tica pinu^ Syluae filia nobilis etc.

A forest fair thy dame,
Proud be thy stock,
And worthless name:
The winds will mock,
To see thy shame. Take heed.


The navy of Tyrus (if the prophet describe it aright) was the noblest navy
that ever the seas were furrowed with; the builders thereof made it of
perfect beauty, the boordes of the fur trers of Shenir, Ezech. 27.
the mastes of the cedars of Lebanon, the oars of the Oaks of Basan, the
banks of the yvory of Chittim, the sails of the fine embrodered linen of
Egypt, the coveringes blew silk and purple of the Isles of Elisha; They of
Sidon and Arvad, were her mariners, the wisest in Tire her pilottes, the
ancients of Gebal her calkers, they of Persia, and Lud, and Phut, her
soldiers, the Gammadins were in her towers, and hung their shieldes upon the
walls round about, and the King of Tire said in the hautines of his heart, I
am a God, I sit in the seat of God in the midst of the sea: yet see the end
in the same place; her rowers brought her into great waters, and the eastwinde
brake her in the midst of the sea; her riches together with mariners,
pilottes, and calkers, marchantes, and men of war, all were overthrowen, and
came to a fearful ruin. The fear of the Lord will be in steed of all
these provisions; fear him, and both floudes and rocks shall fear you, and
all winds shall blow you happiness, and ship-wrackes shall avoid the place
where your foot treads, and as the apples of Gods own eyes, so shall they
reverence you, and not dare to approach the channel where your way lies:
hills shall fall down, and mountains shall be cast into the sea, but those
that fear the Lord shall never miscary: the fear of the Lord shall both la^d
your ships in an happy haven, and after your travels upon the earth, harbor
your souls in his everlasting kingdom.

They were afraid. I will not examine what kind of fear it was which
surprised these mariners. There is a fear that accompanies the nature of
man, and the son of God himself was not free from it: Marc. 14. It is written
of him that he began to be afraid; which fear of his, and other the like
unpleasant affections, he took upon him (our Divines say) as he took our
flesh, Non humanae conditionis necessita t^, sed miserationis volu^tare.
Sente^. 3 did. 15. (...).
and undertook death rather in pity, then of necessity. And Jerome upon the
place of the Evangelist before cited notes, that the fear of our blessed
savior was not a passion which overbare his mind, but a propassion, which he
seems to collect from the word it self; He began to be afraid.

2 There is besides a fond and superstitious fear, when men are afraid of
their shadows, as Pisander was afraid of meeting his own soul; and Antenor
would never go forth of the doors, but either in a coach closed upon al sides,
or with a target borne over his head, fearing (I guess) least the sky should
fall down upon it, according to that in the Psalm, Psalm. 13. Vulg.
They fear where no fear is. The disciples were abasht at the sight of their
master after his resurrection, supposing they had seen a spirit, when
neither had they seen a spirit at any time to move that conceit, neither is
it possible that a spiritual substance ca^ sensibly be perceived. We may
easily acquit this company from such foolish fear; it has so apparent a
reason to be grounded upon.

3 There is an other fear, the object whereof is only God; which, by the prayer
and cry that follows in the next words, seems to be the fear meant
(though ignorantly misplaced:) and this in some is a servile fear, full of
hatred, malice, contumely, reproach, if they durst bewray it, Epist. 87. ad Oger.
tristis, invtilis, crudelis, qui quia venia^ non quaerit, no^ consequitur,
says Bernard; it flies and abhors the Lord, because he is Deus percutiens,
a God of vengance: in other it is filial, such as the child honors his
father with, perfitly good, wherein there is nothing but love, Psalm. 51.
reverence, purity, ingenuitie, borne of a free spirit; the spirit of
bondage and slavery wholly abandoned; so near in affinity to love, that you can
hardly discern them: Gillibert. in Cant. 3. ser. 19.
Pene illa est, and pene non est; It is almost love, and almost not love; so
little difference is: it never beholds God, but in the gracious light of his
countenance; There is mercy with thee O Lord, therefore shall thou be feared,
howsoever the clouds of displeasure seem sometimes to hide that grace away.
The fear of these men I cannot decide, whether it were mixte with hope, or
altogether desperate, and it skilleth not greatly to enquire, because they
apply it not to the true and living GOD. But let this be observed as a matter,
(says the Psalm) of deep understanding, and one of the secrets within the
sanctuary of the Lord, that sea-beaten Mariners, barbarians by country, and
men as barberous for the most part for their conditions, fearing neither God
nor man, of sundry nations some, and most of sundry religions, it may be
Epicures, but, as my text bewraieth them, idolatours; they all know that there
is a God, whom they know not; they fear a supreme majesty, which they cannot
comprehend; they reverence, invocate, and cry upon a nature above the nature of
man and all inferior things; potent, benevolent, apt to help, whereof they
never attained unto any special revelation. This man adoreth the God of his
country, that man some other God, and Jonas is raised up to call upon his God;
but all have some one God or other, to whom they make supplication, and bemone
their danger.

If Jonas had preached the living and immortal God unto them, the God of the
Hebrews, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the holy one of Israel, I would
have imputed their devotion to the preaching of Jonas. Or had there been any
other soul in the ship, belonging to the covenant, and born within the house
(as the prophet speaks) that might have informed the^ in this behalf. There
was not one: who the^ instructs the^? Nature. Hieron.
Nautae intellexeru^t aliquid esse venerandu^ sub errore religionis; the
mariners understood even in the falshod of that religion which they held, that
something was to be worshipped.

It is not denied by any sort of divines, ancient or recent, but that by
nature it self, a man may conceive there is a God. Nulla est gens tam fera.
etc. Tul. Acts 17.
There is no nation so wild and barbarous, which is not seasoned with some
opinion touching God. The Athenians set up an alter Ignoto Deo, to an unknown
God. Act. 17. The Gentiles not having the law, do by nature the things
contained in the law, and are a law unto themselves, and show the effect of
the law written in their hearts, their conscience bearing witness, and their
thoughts accusing one another or excusing; the second to the Romans. For the
invisible things of him that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by
the creation of the world, being considered in his works, to the intent that
they should be without excuse. Romans 1. These are common impressions and notions
sealed up in the mind of every man, a remnant of integrity after the fall of
Adam, (...).
a substance or blessing in the dead Elm, sparkles of fire raked up under the
ashes, which cannot die whilst the soul lives. Nature within man, and nature
without man, which Jerome calls Naturam and facturam, nature and the
creature; our invisible consentes, and Gods visible works; an inward motion in
the one, and an outward motion of the other; if there were no further helps,
show, that there is a God, and leave us without excuse. Protagoras Abderites,
Tul. Acade^. quaest.
because he began his book with doubt, de dijs, neque vt sint, neque vt non
sint, habeo dicere, I have nothing to say of the Gods, either that they be, or
that they be not; by the commandment of the Athenians was banished their city
and country, and his books publicly and solemnly burnt to ashes. I may call
it a light that shines in darkness, (though the purity and beams thereof be
mightily defaced,) which some corrupt and abuse, and so become superstitious
and vanish away in their vain cogitations; and others extinguish, and so
become mere Atheists. For so it is, as if we took the lights in the house,
and put them out, to have the more liberty in the works of darkness. Thus do the
Atheists of our time: the light of the scripture principally, and the light of
the creature, and the light of nature they exinguish within the cha^bers of
their hearts, and with resolute, dissolute perswasio^s, threape upon their
souls against reason and conscience, that there is no God, least by the sight
of his justice, their race of impiety should be stopped. I trust I may safely
speak it, There are no Atheists amongst you, though many happily such as
Ag^ippa was, but almost christians; I would to God you were not only almost,
Acts. ^.6.
but altogether such as you seem to profess. But there are in our land that
trouble us, with virulent, pest^lent, miscreant positio^s; I would they were
cut of, the children of hell, by as proper right, as the devil himself; the
savor of whose madness stinketh, from the center of the earth to the highest
heavens. Let the^ be confuted with arguments drawn from out the skabberds of
Magistrates, arguments without reply, that may both stop the mouth, and choke
the breath of this execrable impiety: and as the angel cursed Meroz. 5. Judge.
so cursed be the man (and let the curse cleave to his children) that comes not
forth to help the Lord in this cause. It is fit to dispute by reason, whether
there be a God or no? which heaven, earth, angels, men and devils, al ages of
the world, all languages; and in the atheist himself (who binds a napkin to
the eyes of his knowledge,) shame, fear, and 1000. witnesses like gnawing
worms within his breast, did ever heretofore, and to the end of the world shall
acknowledge? Let us leave such questions, (...), incredible, inglorious,
infamous questions to the tribunal and trial of the highest judge, Aul. Gel.
if there be no throne upon the earth that will determine them; and for our own
safety, and the freeing of our souls, let us hate the very air that the
Atheist draws as John eschewed the bath wherein Cerinthus was* and let their
damned spitits having received damnation in themselves, (...).
ripen and be rotten to perdition: let them sleep their everlasting sleep in
filthiness not to be revoked: and when death has gnawne upon them like sheep
for a taste before hand, let them rise again from the sides of the pit, maugre
their stout gain saying, at the judgment of the great day to receive a deeper
portion.

As for our selves (my brethren) which know and profess that one and only God
for ever to be blessed, let us be zealous of good works, according to the
measure of our knowledge which we have received. Let us fear him (without
fear) as his adopted sons, and serve him without the spirit of bondage in
righteousness, all the days of our lives; that at the coming of the son of
God to judge the ends of the eatth, we may be found faithful fervants; and as
we have dealt truly in a little, we may be made rulers over much through the
riches of his grace, who has freely and formerly beloved us not for our own
sakes, but because himself is love, Amat quia amat. Bern.
and takes delight in his own goodness.

THE FIFTH LECTVRE.
Cap. 1. ver. 5. And cried every man upon his God, and cast the wares in the
ship into the sea to lighten it of them.
I showed before, that by the instinct of nature it self, the mariners might
conceive there was a God. Here it appears by the multitude they worship,
every man his God, that nature alone suffices not without further revelation.
Nature may teach that there is a God; but what in substance and propriety, and
how to be worshipped, must elsewhere be learned. Nature without grace is, Judge.
16.
as Sampson without his guide, when his eyes were out, without whose direction
he could not find the pillars of the house; nor the natural man any pillar or
principle of faith without the spirit of God guiding his steps unto it: or as
Barach without Deborah, who would not go against Sisera, unless the
prophetess went with him. Iud. 4.
Such is the faintness of nature, except it be stre^gthned with a better aid.
Vae soli: if nature be single, woe to it, she falls down, and there is not
another to help her up. Therefore our Savior makes a plain distinction
betwixt these two: Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and
blood has not revealed this unto thee; the affirmative part follows, Mat. 16.
but my father which is in heaven: when he made that notable and fundamental
confession. Afterward, Ibid.
when he had dehorted his master, with carnal persuasions, sir, pity thy
self, he biddith him avaunt, not by the name of Peter, nor the son of Jonas,
nor Cephas, but of Satan himself. Nature was then alone, and the heavenly
light had withdrawn her influence from him. No man living had ever greater
endovvments, and blessings of nature, then the Apostle Saint Paul. First he was
a man that was a Jew (as great a comfort unto him, Act. 22.
no doubt, as it was to Plato to be borne at Athens, rather then in Barbary;)
and although borne at Tarsus in Cilicia, yet brought up in the city of
Jerusalem at the feet of Gamaliell, and instructed according to the perfect
manner of the law of the fathers, and zealous toward God. You have his birth,
education, master, learning, and devotion already set down: we may add his
sect and profession, out of the same history; For after the strictest sect of
the Jewish religion, he lived a Pharisee. In his epistle to the Philippians,
he concludes from the whole heap of his prerogatives, Chap. 26. Chap. 3.
If any other man thinks that he has whereof to trust in the flesh, much
more I: circumcised the 8. day, of the kindred of Israel, of the tribe of
Benjamin, an Hebrewe of the Hebrews, by profession a Pharisee. Concerning
zeal, I persecute the church, touching righteousness in the law, I was
unrebukable; so he persecuted the church, you see out of that place: and he
verily thought in himself, that he ought to do many things contrary to the
name of Jesus of Nazareth, Act. 26.
which thing he also did in Jerusalem. Thus notwithstanding he had received
the sign of the covenant circumcision, not as the manner of proselytes was at
the time of their conversion, sometimes old, sometimes young; but 2. according
to the law, the eight day; and 3. his kindred and descent were from Israel, not
from Esau which lost the inheritance; 4. his tribe, such as never fell to
idolatry, but continued in the service of God; and 5. his antiquity in that
line not inferior to the auncientest, being as able to show his great, and
great grandfathers, from the first root of the Hebrews, as any man; besides
those personal advantages of profession, emulation, conversation; yet till
there shined a clearer light from heaven, not only upon his face, but upon his
heart, and he was thrown to the ground, both from his horse, and from his
confidence in the flesh, and heard a voice speaking unto him, Act. 9.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? and was instructed who it was that spoke
unto him, I am Jesus of Nazareth etc. and received direction for his life to
come, Arise and go to Damascus; Qualem no^ repperit unu^ etc.
all the knowledge he had before, was but dunge, and loss, and not worth the
rekoning. Socrates was a man excellent for humane wisdom the like to whom
could not be found among many thousands of men: of whom notwithstanding
Lactantius writes thus; vt aliorum argueret inscientiam, qui se aliquid tenere
arbitrabantur, De ira Dei*
ait se nihil scire, nisi vnum quod nihil sciret: to convince the ignorance of
others, who thought they knew something, he professed to know nothing but
this one, that he knew nothing. He further testified openly, and in a place of
judgment, that there was no wisdom of man; and the learning, whereof the
philosophers then gloried, he so conte^ned, scorned, renounced, Contempsit.
derisit, abi^cit.

Lact. de origin erroris. 2.


that he professed it his greatest learning, to have learned nothing. It is not
unknown what Cicero said: Vtinam tam facile vera inven^re possem, quam falsa
convincere: I would I were as able to find out truth, as to refute falsehood:
the most renowned orator that ever Rome, or the earth bare. Daniell saw more
in the secrets and counsels of God, than all the wisards of Babylon besides.
The enchanters and the Astrologians, and the sorcerers and Chaldeans, as they
are numbered in the second of Daniell, they confess plainly before the king,
concerning his dream, there is none other that can declare it before the king,
except God, whose dwelling is not with flesh; yet they are called in the same
prophecy, the kings wise men. But by the judgment of the Queen, Cap. 5.
wife of Balthazar, Daniell exceeds them all in wisdom; there is a man in
the kingdom, says she, in whom is the spirit of the holy Gods, and in the
days of thy father, light, and understanding, and wisdom like the wisdom
of the Gods, was found in him. Pharaoh made no less report of Joseph in the
ears of all his servauntes, Genesis the one and fortieth: Can we find such a
man as this, in whom is the spirit of God? It was wisdom in them, that they
were able in some sort to discern such spirits, and to give them their
proper names, though secretly condemning themselves thereby, to have but the
spirits of men or beasts, when Daniell and Joseph were inspired far
otherwise. (The little flock of Christ exempted only, to whom it is given to
know mysteries,) we may seek the whole world besides with cresset light,
and enquire as the Apostle did, Where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where
is the disputer of this world? Has not GOD made the wisdom of this world
foolishness? 1. Cor. 1.
To what other end is that confession or thankesgiving of our Savior in the
eleventh of Matthew? I give thee thanks O Father, Math. 1^.
Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise,
and men of understanding, and have opened them unto babes: wise, and yet
fools, men of understanding, yet they understand nothing? How are wisdom and
folly bound up together in one heart? or what agreement between light and
darkness in one eye? No marvel if we ask of it, for the Lord himself
calls it a marvelous work, Even a marveilous work, Esa. 19.
and a wonder. For the wisdom of the wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of the prudent men shall be hid. Before, he bad them stay
themselves and wonder, that men should be drunken but not with wine; and
stagger, but not with strong drink: The cause follows, the Lord had covered
them with a spirit of slumber, and shut their eyes.

There are many and mighty nations at this day; their soil most happy, their
air sweetly disposed; people, for flesh and blood, as towardly as the ground
carries, most provident to forecast most ingenious to invent, most able and
active to perform, of who^e you would say, if you tried them, Surely this is a
wise people, and of great understanding. To whom notwithstanding if Christ
should speak in person, as he spoke to Saul before his illumination, why
persecutest thou me? why do you stumble at my gospel, and are offended at my
name, and account the preaching of my cross foolishness? they would ask as
he did, who art thou? or what is thy gospel, name, and cross, that thou
tellest us of? So blind they are to behold our dayspring, so ignorant and
untaught touching Jesus of Nazareth. Or if we should ask them of the holy
ghost, Act. 19.
have you received the holy ghost since you believed? nay do you believe that
there is an holy ghost? they would answer as the Ephesians did to Paul, we
have not so much as heard whether there be an holy ghost, What new doctrine is
this? they seem to be setters forth of new Gods, and though they acknovvledge
some God, which nature it self obtrudeth unto their thoughts, yet they know
not the God of Sydrach, Misach, and Abednego, whom Nabuchodonosor with that
difference confessed, Dan. 3.
after his understanding was restored unto him; Dan. 6.
nor the God of Daniell, whom Darius by that name magnified, after he saw the
delivera^ce of his prophet from the lions den; nor the God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, to whom the promises were made; nor the Lord God of heaven, which
has made the sea and the dry land here specified.

Is it not a wonder, think you, that the people of the Turks, the hammer of
the world, (as sometimes Babylon) the rod of christendom, able to say (as the
Psalm spoke of Gilead and Manasses, etc.) Asia is mine, Afric is mine, over
Europe have I cast my shoe, a warlike, politic, stately, magnificent nation,
should more be carried away by the enchantmentes of their lewd Prophet
Mahomet, then by the celestial doctrine of the everlasting son of GOD, who
shed his blood, and gave his soul a ransom for the sin of mankind? what is
the reason hereof? want they nature? or an arm of flesh? are they not cut
from the same rock? are they not tempered of the same moulde? are not their
heads upward toward heaven, as the heads of other men? have they not
reasonable souls, capable and judicious? What want they then? It is rectus
spiritus, a right spirit, whereof they are destitute: Psalm. 51.
they have a spirit (I grant) to enliue their bodies, but not rectified,
sanctified, regenerated, renewed, to quicken their souls. They have an heart
to conceive, but it is a froward heart, a slow heart, a stony heart, a
vain and foolish heart, a skornefull, contemptuous, insolent, incredulous
heart, against him that framed it. Now if Egypt be so dark that the
darkness thereof may be felt, and it is a wonder in our eyes, to see such
mistes in other places; yet let Goshen rejoice that it stands illightned
still. And those that have seen an happy star in the East to lead them to
Christ, which Herod and his princes, the Turk and his Bassaws never saw, let
them come and worship, and bring presents unto the king of glory: not of
gold, mirrhe, and frankincense, but of the finest metal, purest odours,
frankest offering of thankful hearts: And let them not think, but where more
is received, more will be required; and that they must answer to the Lord
of these talentes, not only for nature, but for a special inspiration
besides, wherewith they are endued. And so to end this point; Blessed are your
eyes, for they see, and your ears* for they hear, (I will not say) that which
many Prophets and righteous men have desired; but to change the speech a
little, that which many mighty Empires and large Continentes, and not small
cantons or corners, but whole quarters of the world, never attained unto, and
will bitterly rue the time, and wish to redeem with the loss of both their
eyes, that they have not heard and seen as much as you have done.

To come now to my purpose; these mariners fear, 2. They cried every man upon
God.
but where no fear is; they fear nothing, because they fear but idols and
fancies, the suppositio^s of their own brains. And as they fear, so they
pray, which was the second action; and (their error therein being pardoned) a
natural, necessary service belonging to every mortal man: and their prayer is
consequent to their fear. For upon the reverence they carried toward their
imaginary Gods, they betook themselves to this submissiue and suppliant
service. Statius.
Primus in orb Deos fecit timor: Unless we feared, we could not think that
there were a God. But this actio^ of theirs, has something good in it,
something to be reproved.

1 In that they pray, it shows the debility and weakness of the nature of man,
if it be not helped: and commends the necessity and use of prayer in all
sorts of men.

2 In that they pray with crying and vehemence, it notes that their hearts were
fixed and earnestly lo^ged for that which their lips craved.

3 In that they cry to their Gods, it proves it a tribute due unto God alone
by the practice of heathen men.

4 In that they pray every man, as if in a common cause, (though they had not a
common religion) yet they had one soul, heart, and tongue common to them all,
it notes the communion and fellowship of mankind. Thus far the observations
hold good. Their praying shows the misery of mortal men: crying in prayer,
their earnest desire to obtain: praying to Gods, the majesty of the immortal
power: praying together, that bond of humanity and brotherhood, wherewith we
are coupled.

5 Their error is a part of their object, in the number of the Gods which they
invocate, that every person in the ship has a proper and peculiar God whom he
calls upon.

The Gods of the nations have been multiplied as the sands of the sea; Every
man upon his God.

Exigua thuris impe^sa. Curt. Romans 1.


what have they not deified? it cost but a little frankincense, to give the
godhead where it pleased them: they have turned the glory of the immortal
God into the similitude of the image of corruptible man, and of birds, and
four footed beasts, and of creeping things. Besides the sun and moon, and
the whole host of heaven, they have consecrated for Gods, the sons of men,
whose breath is a vapor in their nostrels, who shall be consumed before the
unprofitable mothes; of which foolish idolatry, one of their own sophists
sometime spoke in derision, Theocri^u^ in Cle. Alex protrep.
Bono estote animo, quando Dij moriuntur ante homines, Be of good courage,
since Gods die before men. And not only men have they thus hallowed, but their
qualities and virtues, Justice, Prudence, and the like: yea their affections
and perturbatio^s, Fear, Hope, Love, with the rest, whereof Lactantius writes,
Audax consilium Graeciae, De fall relig lib. 1. cap. 10
quod Cupidinem and Amorem consecrant, Greece was very bold in making Love a
God. Shall I add moreover, the defects and infirmities of men? Dea Muta, Ibid.
they had their dumb Goddess; by Lacta^tius a thing most ridiculously taxed
in them: Quid praestare colenti potest, quae loqui non potest? what good can
she do to her suitors, that cannot speak? They are not yet filthy enough,
unless they erect altars and shrines to these vices, to Impudency, and
Contumelye, Clem. Ale^ in protrep^
as Epimenides did at Athens; and to those plagues which their sins deserved,
as to Furies, and Fiends, Revenge, and the like mischiefs. Tullus Hostilius
put Fear and Palenes in the number of his Gods; It is pity (says Lactantius)
that ever his Gods should go from him. Pavorem, palloremque*
And the people of Rome held Rust, and the Ague in no less account. The
fruits of the ground as Corn and Wine, the very land marks in the fields,
Terminus. Stercutiu^.
rude and unshapen stones, were not debarred of this honor. They had their God
for dunging their land, and (the basest thing that could be imagined) a
goddess for their draught-houses. Cloacina, Bacchus. Venus. Lavern^.
And not to disquiet any longer Christian ears with their hethnish
absurdities; drunkards harlots and the eues, were not left without their
patrons. A Poet of their own inveighed against their multitude of Gods in a
Satyr long since, Nec turba deorum
Talis vt est hodie, contentaque sydera paucis
Numinibus, Iuvenal*
miserum vrgebant Atlanta minore
Pondere.


There were not wont to be so many Gods as now a days, the heavens were
content with a smaller number of them, and laid less burden upon the
shoulders of poor Atlas. We read in the history of the sacred book, that
Astaroth was the idol of Zidon, Melchon of Ammon, Chemosh of Moab, Beelzebub
of Ekron; and for every nation that came out of Asshur to inhabit Samaria, who
were therefore destroyed by lions, 2. King. 1^
( because they knew not that manner of worship which the God of the country
required,) a several God was found out; for the men of Babel, Succoth-Benoth;
for the men of Cuth, Nergal; for Hamath, Ashima; Nibhaz and Tirtak for the
Avims; for Shepharvaim, Adramelech and Anammelech, to which they burnt their
children in the fire.

Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum, So much mischief could their very
religion persuade unto them. Lactantius sets down the cause of this
vainenes, Jnstitut. (...). 3. cap. 10.
in the thoughts, and darkness in the hearts of men, that wherein they profess
themselves to be most wise, therein they become most fools. Men are therefore
deceived, because either they take upon them religion without wisdom, or
study wisdom without religion; so they fall to many religions, but
therefore false, because they have forsaken wisdom, which could teach them
that there cannot be many Gods: or they bestow their pains in wisdom, but
therefore false, because they have let slip the religion of the highest God,
which might instruct them in the knowledge of truth. To show the absurdities,
wherewith this opinion flows, of devising many Gods Cyprian proves that the
majesty and sublimity of the godhead cannot admit an equal. De vani^tate
idolorum. tract 4. Quando un. quam aut cum fide caepi^, aut sine ^ruore des^^?
Sic ^hebanorum gormanitas rup^a.
Let us borrow an example from the earth, says he: when did you ever know
society and communion in a kingdom, either begin with fidelity, or end without
bloodshed? Thus was germanity and brotherhood broken betwixt the Thebans,
(Eteocles and Polynices.) One kingdom could not hold those brethren of Rome
(Romulus and Remus) though the harbor of one womb contained the^. Pompey and
Caesar, though so nearly allied, yet they could not endure, Caesarve priorem.
Pompeiusve parem --
either Caesar his better, or Pompey his peer. Neither mervaile (sath he) to
see it thus in man, when all nature does consent therein. The bees have but one
king; flocks and herds but one leader; Rex unus est apibus etc.
much more has the world but one governor. That which was spoken to this
effect in general, (...)* That the kingdom of many governors is not good;
Caesar applied to his own name (...), in exception to the multitude of Caesar's
or Emperors. The college of Bishops in Rome answered Marcellus, when he would
have built but one temple both to Honor and virtue, Vna cella du obus diis non
recte dic^da Val Max*
One chapel or chancel cannot well be dedicated to two Gods. I often allege
Lactantius in these matters, a man that has notably deserved of the gospel of
Christ, against the vanities of Gentilitie, who being as it were a stream
issuing from the eloquence of Tully (as Jerome commanded him) converted all the
force o^ his eloquence to assault, Quasi qui dam fluvius eloquentiae Tullianae.
beat down, vanquish, triumph over the enemies of true religion. Thomas
Beacon a country man of ours in an epistle to D. Nowell (Cherubin to
Cherubin,) gives him this commendation to close up his appetite amongst many
others before uttered; Caelius Lactantius Firmianus.
I cannot but cry out. O Celius, a man truly celestial and divine: O
Lactantius, an author sweeter then any milk, and honey: O Firmianus, a
champion in defending Christian verity, most firm, faithful and constant:
Behold the man, etc. alluding to his happy names which he rightly fitted by
answerable good conditions. This Lactantius presses his arguments nearer to
the mark: De fals^elig lib. 1. cap. 3 Minut habebunt singuli ^er (...)*
If there be more Gods then one, then singlelie and apart they must needs
have less strength; for so much shall be wanting to every one, as the rest
have gleaned from him: and the nature of goodness cannot be perfitte and
absolute, but where the whole, not where a little portion of the whole is. It
they shall say, that as there are sundry offices to be looked unto, Virtutis
perfecta naturae etc

At officia multi parti. ta sunt.


so they are divided amongst many officers, all comes to the same end. For
their several jurisdictions cannot exceed their bounds, because they are
crossed and kept in by others, as two contrary winds cannot blow together in
one place. For if they have equal force, one hinders the other; if unequal,
the weaker of the two must perforce yield. Again, if offices be shared
amongst them, besides that the care of every God will go no farther then his
own charge and province, they must of necessity often fall out, as they did
in Homer, where the count is divided into two fact^ons, some alleging for
Troy, that it should be defended; otheir against it, that it should be sacked.
If in an army of men, there should be as many generals, as there are
regimentes, bands and companies, neither could they well array, nor easily
govern and hold in their soldiers. And to say that the world is ruled by
the disposition of many Gods, is such a kind of speech, as if a man should
affirm, there were many minds in one body, because the members thereof have
diverse ministeries, every sense to have a peculiar mind set over it; which who
so says, Ne ipsam quidem quae una est habere videatur.
proves himself destitute of that which is but one in every man. But amongst
the rest there is some one principal supereminent, as Antisthenes sometime
said that there were many Multi dit populares* unus naturalis.

(...). Nec opus est proprio vocabulo, nisi cum nomen exigit multitudo. S^^om.
5.

Non vt nome^ eius proferentes dicimus* sed propter rei in^ffa^ilis
ampli^^udine^ Exodus 3. Ego sum existens, se ipsum non existentibus opponem.


popular Gods, having tuition of the div^rs nations and people of the world
(perhaps he meant vulgar and trivial Gods;) and but one natural, by whom
the whole creature was formed; then are the rest not Gods, (Lactantius
infers) but servantes and attendantes. He adds to his former conf^tations,
the testimony of the Sibelles, that there is but one only God; and the reason
which Mercurius Trismegistus brings why God is without name, is because he
is but one, and one has no need of any name: for there is no use of a proper
name for distinction from the rest, but where there are more of the same kind
to enforce it. Clemens Alexandrinus frames the like discourse; that which is
one, is not subject to division: wherefore it is infinite and wants both
difference and name. For though we call him improperly sometimes, either one,
or good, or that that is, or father, or God, or maker, or Lord, we do not
this to declare his name, but to show the amplenesse of an inexplicable
substance. To conclude; God terms himself, Iam^, opposing his being and
existence to things that are not, as Iustine Martyr collecteth in his oration
to the Greeks: and as it appears by the same father, there was no
difference in describing the nature of the godhead betwixt Moses (if I may so
speak) a Plato amongst the Hebrews, and Plato a Moses amongst the Athenians,
but a little varying the article; for where the one writes he that is, the
other writes that that is, both tending to the same scope, (...).
that the everlasting being of one only God, might be averred. He furthermore
witnesses, that Plato took delight, and spent much contemplation in the
brevity of that speech, consisting but of one participle (we may say, particle)
as one perceiving therein, that, when God had a purpose to reveal his
eternitye to Moses, he chose to do it by a word; which being but one syllable
amongst the Greeks, does notwithstanding signify and contain 3. times, that
which is past, that which is present, and that which is to come: all which are
indistincte in God, because he is not changed, but is yesterday, today, and
the same for evermore. I have showed you the error of the Gentiles, together
with the vnprobabilitye and absurdity thereof, in forging to themselves, and
consequently fearing, adoring, honoring many Gods. In regard of our selves, I
grant, an impertinent speech; ( for though there be that are called Gods,
whether in heaven or in in earth, as there be Gods many, and Lords many, yet
to us there is but one God; and we know, that an idol is nothing in the
world;) but because everye man has not knowledge (as the Apostle continues
his speech,) and some men have not conscience; the infidel through ignorance,
on the one side, mistakinge; and the Atheist through malitiousnesse, on the
other side, denying and defying; and the papist in a third crewe, through
heresy, in manner deviding that one only God, by giving his glory as great
as himself, to angels and Saints, the works of his fingers; it is not
amiss to be stored with all kind of proofs on this behalf, that some may
be instructed, others convinced, silenced, utterly confounded.

3 And cast forth their wares.
The third action specified in these mariners, is the casting forth of their
wares to lighten their ship: which some ascribe in part to religion, as if
their intent were to make some satisfaction, and to pacify their Gods, if by
piracye, or other unlawful means they had taken ought before. Others impute
it to necessity alone, and, me thinks, the text speaks for them, To
lighten it. For it is no unusual practice in peril of shipwreck, to
disburthen the ship. So did Paul and his company in the 17. of the Acts,
by reason of that ieopardye wherein they stood: one day they cast out
vvares, the next day with their own hands, they cast away their
tacklings: for in such extremities they must conclude as the Philosopher once
did, I had perished if I had not perished, Perier^m nisi periisse^
we loose our lives, unless we loose our goods.

The order and proceeding they hold, is very good, and which the children of
the light need not scorn to imitate. First they try their Gods by
supplication; then they consult of their means, and likelyhoods, for the
preservation of themselves. Which order others pervert, using God but for a
shifte, and at second hand, if happily by other devise we are not able to
withstand a mischief: Ne^ Deus oratur, nisi dignus vindice nodus Inciderit;
we never use the aid of God, but when the knotte is so hard, that our selves
cannot vndooe it. We are all reasonable creatures, and God will use us for the
most part in matters apperteyning to our good, as living and reasonable
instruments. What else was the reason that Naaman the Syrian Lord, was willed
to go and wash himself seven times in Jordan, when there was a God in
Israel, 2. King. 5.
that could have restored his flesh, as he first formed it, with a word of his
mouth, as the Centurion spoke in the gospel, Say but the word Lord? Esa. 3^
and that they were bidden to take a lump of dry figs, and lay upon the
boil of Ezekias, and he should recover his sickness, when the Lord had
before told him, I have heard thy prayer, and seen thy tears; behold, I
will add unto thy days 15. years? John. 9.
and that the blind man in the gospel, was sent to wash his eyes in Siloam,
and he went, and returned seeing, when our savior had made a plaster of
spittle and clay, and applied to the part affected? what else is the meaning
hereof, but that we must not eschew such ordinary and honest helps as God
has designed? The sluggard lusts, Chap. 13.
as it is in the Proverbs, but his soul has nothing; Doubtless, because he
does but lust and will not follow it; Ibid. 19.
For he hides his hand in his bosom, and it grieveth him to put it to his
mouth. He that will feed such slow bellies, and slack hands, deserves to
want himself. The desires of the slothful slaie him, for his hands refuse
to work: Ibid. 21.
you hear the right properties of a sluggarde; he is vvholye made of desires,
lusts, appetites, wishings, longings, but it is death unto him to thrust forth
a finger, for the atchieuement of any thing. They had an evasion to the like
effect, to color their idleness withal, in ancient times, which the
Philosophers called the idle reason. For thus they disputed: (...).

Ignavaratio.


If it be thy destinye to recover of such a sickness, whether thou shall use
a Physician or not use him, thou shall recover etc. I would have such patrons
of idleness used, as Zeno used his servant, who being taken with theft and
alleging for himself that it was his destiny to steal, his master
answered, Eruson.
And thy destiny to be beaten; and accordingly rewarded him. If these mariners
had so disputed, or sitten upon the hatches of their ship, their arms folden
together, and their hearts only desiring to escape, their sorrows had there
presently been ended; but neither their hearts nor hands were unoccupied. And
therefore, as in the curing of bodily diseases, though of the most high
comes healing, Eccle. 38.
yet the physician must be honored with that honor that belongs unto him,
and the apothecary makes the confection: as in the wars of Israel against
M^dia, the sword of the Lord and of Gedeon went together, Iud. 7.
and the cry of the people was not left out; and, as in preventing this
ship-wracke, spirits and bodies, prayer and labor, heaven and earth (If I may
so say,) were conjoined: so in all the affairs and appertenaunces of our
lives, we must beware of tempting God. We must not lie in a ditch sullen, and
negligent of our selves, and look to be drawn out by others; nor think to
be fed as the young ravens, without sowing; neither to be clothed as lillies
of the field, without spinning and laboring: health comes not from the
clouds without seeking, nor wealth from the cloddes without digging. We must
cast our care upon God, that yet we be not careless, and dissolute in our
own salvation: O di homines ignava opera, philosopha sententia; I hate men
that happily have good and provident thoughts, Pacuvius.
but they will take no pains. That which Metellus sometime spoke by number, I
hold a truth in him that is without number, Vnus and (si dici debet,)
vnissimu^. Ber. ad Eugen.
Our one and one-most God: ijsdem deos propitios esse aequum est, qui sibi
adversarij non sunt: It is meet that God favor them, who are not enemies and
hinderers to themselves.

But to leave this point, there is a time, I perceive, when the riches of this
world are not worth the keeping, especially compared with the life of man.
Their wares, adventures and commodities, and not only the ballast of the ship,
but the necessary implements, furniture, (for the original word, though
signifying a vessel in particular, is a general name for all such requisite
provision,) their victual, munitions, and whatsoever was of burden besides,
are they conveied and landed by boat, or any way thought upon to be saved? nay,
they are thrown into the sea, to lighten their ship, without ever hope of
recovery. It ^s a proverb justified by truth, though the father of lies spoke
it, Job. 2.
Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life. And it is
a rule in nature allowed, Ephesians. 5.
No man ever hated his own flesh, nay rather he will nourish and cherish his
life, as the Lord his Church. Is not the life more worth then meat, and thy
body then raiment? Math. 6. Prover. 16. Tam vita vivit quam angelus.
will not a man give his riches for the ransom of his life? The poorest worm
in the earth, which has a life, (says Austin) as well as the Angel in
heaven, will not forgo that life without resisting. If either horns or
hoofes, or tuskes, or talentes, or beakes, or stinges of beasts, birds, flies,
unreasonable creatures may withstand, they will not spare to use their armor
and weapons of nature to defend themselves withal.

Is the life of the body (my beloved brethren) so dear, and is not the life
of the soul more precious? is the life present so tender, and the life to come
so much inferior? will you unload a ship to save it? will you burden and
surcharge a soul to destroy it? shall the necessary instruments of the one be
thrown out, and shall not the accessory ornaments, superfluous, sumptuous,
riotous delights of the other be departed with? or, are not souls better
then bodies? and incorruptible lives hereafter, better then these present,
subject to corruption? or, are not riches a burden to your souls? Ho, he
that increases that which is not his own, Abbac. 2.
and he that ladeth himself with thick clay: how long? Are not riches a
load? or what doubt you of? I know your answer, we increase but our own.
Your own? who intiteled you thereto? Is not the earth the Lords, and the
fullness thereof? are you Coloni or Domini; Lords of the earth, or tillers,
manurers, dressers, dispensers? Jerome vvriteth of Abraham, Senec.
and other rich patriarchs of former age, that they were rather to be
termed the bayliues of the Lord, then rich men. Dispensa^^res magi^ Dei quam
divites appellandi.
But were it your own; has the sea bars or doors to keep it in, and is
your appetite without all moderation? How long? is there no end of increasing?
The widow in the 2. of the Kings, that had her liberty given to borrow as many
vessels for oil to pay her debts, as her neighbors could spare her, had as
large a scope, I am sure, and with better authority then ever was proposed to
you: yet there was a time when she said to her son, give me yet a vessel, and
he answered, there are no more vessels; and the oil ceased* and I doubt not,
but with the oil, her desire ceased to. It may be, you have filled your
vessels with oil, your own and your neighbors, your garners, your coffers,
your bags, your warehouses, your fields, your farms, your children are full.
I ask again with the prophet; How long? do you ever think to fill your
hearts? The barren womb, unmerciful grave, insatiable death will sooner be
satisfied. It is a bottomless purse: the more it has the more it coveteth.
See an image hereof. Alcmaeon being willed by Croesus to go into his
treasure-house, and take as much gold as he could carry away with him, provided
for that business a long hanging garment, down to his ankles, and great boots,
and filled them both; nay he stuffed his mouth, and tied wedges of gold to the
locks of his head; I think, but for hurting his brain, he would have ferst
the skull of his head, and the bowels within his breast, if he could have
spared the^. Here is an heart set upon riches, and riches set upon an heart;
heaps of wealth like the hills that wants cast up: Cumuli, tumuli, every hill
is a grave, every heap a tomb to bury himself in. Is this to dispense? Is
this to exercise bayliwickes? Is this to show fidelity in your masters house?
In few words I exhort you, if the ship be too full, unlade it; cast your
goods into the sea, least they cast your selves; cast your bread upon the
waters, distribute your mercies to the needy, where you look for no
recompense. It is not certain, it is not likely, and so it may fall out, that
it is not possible for those that are rich, to enter into the kingdom of
heaven. You can dissolve that riddle, I know: our savior, you say, meant of
such as trust in riches: and do not you trust in them? Do you not say to the
wedge of gold, in the applause that your selves give to it, Thou art my
confidence? Do you not plant, build, purchase, add house to house, join
field to field, put to use, grind, eat, tear, rack, extort to the
outtermost? what means such costlines in your houses, delicacy at your
tables, stately habiliments upon your wives and daughters, insolent
neighborhood against your brethren, like the malignant aspect of unlucky
planets upon them, discountenancinges, disturbings, dispossessings of them, but
that you trust in riches? Where is your trust in the living God mean time,
richnes in good works, readiness to distribute and communicate, ^ Tim. 6.
which the Apostle preached to Timothy, and willed him to give in charge,
(because such hard doctrine must be driven in with hard hammers) to those that
are rich in this present world, least they be deprived of those incorruptible
riches which God has stored up? where are your morsels of bread to feed the
hungry, your fleeces of woll to warm the loins of the naked, hospitality in
your halles, bounty at your gates, liberality in your hands? I think, you
keep the rule of the gospel, that the right hand knows not what the left
does, because neither right nor left does any thing. I like the advice of an
heathen well: Concin^ (...), magis p^obo quam l^nga^.
Use thy wealth, as thou would use thy coat; let it be rather fit then too
long. A little may be a burden, but in too much there is no question, In the
land of Havilah there is good gold; In the land of the living, in the land of
promise, in the land of heavenly Jerusalem, there is good gold indeed, gold
tried in the fire, in the third of the revelation, where neither moth nor rust
can corrupt, nor thief purloine it: gold of more worth, than all the mines of
the earth can send up. O thirst after this gold, if you must needs thirst; be
covetous after durable riches: Lay up treasures for your selves in heaven, and
of your unrighteous Mammon, (neither well gained perhaps, and ill kept, and
worse laid out) make friends in time, that they may receive you into the
heavenly tabernacles: save your ships, if it may be, and save your lives; but
save your souls, though you lose your wares, your ships, and your lives to.

THE SIXTH LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 5. But Jonas was gonne down into the sides of the ship, and
he lay down, and was fast a sleep.
THE mariners had thrown out their wares, The third person Jonas.
but the greatest burden was behind, the sin of Jonas; for wickedness is as
a talent of lead, Zach. 5. the weight whereof cannot be expressed. Salt and
sand, Eccle. 32.
and a lump of iron is easier to bear, then an unwise, foolish, and ungodly
man. We see by the proof of this example, that the sin of one private person
is likely to sink a ship in the midst of the sea; and Peter thought it of
force to overturne more then one, Luke 5. For when the two ships were so
fraught with fish, that they were ready to sink, he fell down at the knees of
Jesus, and said, go from me Lord, for I am a sinful man; thinking that his
sin had so endaungered them. They say, Elementum in loco suo non po^derat.
no element is ponderous in the proper place of the element; we feel not the
weight of the air, though we live in the circle of it; the water of the sea,
as much as the whole cha^nel holds, if we lay in the nethermost bottom
thereof, would not offend us with burden, though annoy us otherwise: so is it
in the estimation of sin; it seems not a burden in the will of man, wherein
the region and elemente of sin is, because of that lust and appetite the will
has to commit sin: but bring it from the house and home where it dwells,
convent it before reason, examine it with judgment and understanding, consider
what an infinite majesty it offends, and what infinite plagues it brings
forth, then shall we know the weight of sin. No sooner had Jonas entered the
ship, but the sea, which was at rest before, feeling a burden more then
common, came forth like a bridegroom out of his chamber and channel, to ease
it self, and to shake his bones with an ague that troubled the quiet thereof:
Homil. 5. ad pop.
that we may learn, (says Chrysostom.) vbi peccatum, ibi procella, where sin
is, there will also be a storm; and if we will save our selves, we must
drown sin as they drowned* Jonas. The sleep of Jonas is as strange,
prodigious, and brutis^ kind of sleep, as ever I heard of. The winds rage,
the sea roareth, the ship tottereth and groaneth, the mariners fear, and
pray, and cry, every soul in the ship, so many persons upon so many Gods, (it
was as the howling of Baals Priests, or as the yelling of wolves) they run
to and fro, they ransacke all the corners of the ship, vnbowell her in most
celles, throw out commodities, rende and rape down tackles, sails, all
implementes; Jonas in the mean time, as a man possessed with the deaf Devil,
Mark 7. or as one that had lost his soul, as they write of Hermotimus, that
his soul would depart from the body at times and come home again, sleeps.
If a thief should come to rob, would he not steal till he had enough? If
grape-gatherers should come to a vine, would they not leave some grapes?
Obadiah 5. Behold, the customer of the life of man, who taxes half our days
to his own use, A^rocissimus vitae humanae publicanus, somnus.
comes upon Jonas, and is not content with ordinary, moderate fees, but
bereaveth him of all sense. And no orator in the world, could better have
described this drowsines, to the disgrace of Jonas, than Jonas himse^fe.

Jonas was gonne down.
1 He descended. He staid not upon the hatches, to visit the light of heaven,
to behold the waves of the sea, his persecutours, but removed as far from God
and his anger, as his heart could devise; showing that his works were evil,
because he buried himself in darkness. A sinner ever descends till he
comes to the lowest that may be; his affections are down-wardes, and, I am
sure, his inheritance and hope is not above; but as we bury dead flesh under
the ground, so it is not unlikely of dead souls; and as the heaviest bodies
draw to the center of the earth, so the saddest and heaviest spirits, which
the mercy of God has forsaken.

2 He descended not into the bosom and through fare of the ship, Into the
sides or thighs.
where the passage of the mariners up and down might have disturbed him, but
into the sides or thighs of it.

3 He descended into the sides of the keele, Of the keele, catinae.
the veriest bottom that the vessel had. I think, if there had been a vault
in the ship as deep as hell and destruction it self, he would have
entered thereinto.

4 He descended into the ship, He lay down.
not to bestow time in any serviceable employment, for the furtherance of the
voyage, but to lie down.

5 Not for the ease of his body alone to give it some short repose, And slept.
but to sleep.

6 Nay he slept and slept, Endimions sleep, Somno sopitus est, Was fast a
sleep.
it was an heavy, stupide, deadly sleep.

The best inducement to sleep, you know, where the body is aptly framed unto
it, is stillnesse and quietness; Ovid. 11. Metamor.
and therefore the Poet describes the place of sleep to be in a vault of the
earth, where the light of the sun never comes; a long gallery or porch
leading unto it to remove it from the assembly of people; no door to the
house, least the turning of the hinges should disquiet his ease; and neither
dog, nor cock, nor goose, nor any wakefull creature, to break silence, nor
tree to make a noise: thus is he lodged upon a bed of down, in a bedsteede of
ebony, free from the annoiance of any thing.

This was the reason that the Sybarites, a sleepie, lascivious, riotous nation
of men (who would lodge themselves for pleasure, in beds of violettes,) the
better to take their ease, banished cocks from their cities, and all kinds
of trades, wherein hammeringes or noise might be used. Jonas has nothing in
the world, neither without nor within to invite sleep: clamours, and
commotions, and cursitations one way; vexation and trouble of heart an other
way; these were his helps. Admit he were weary with travel from the city to
the haven, as Jacob was weary when he went to Haram, and lay down by the way,
and slept upon a pillow of stone: what? so weary that neither the voice of
men, nor God, nor conscience, nor the voice of the ship, which as before I
noted, yearned in her inward spirit, and thought to be rent, could awake him?
Genesis 2.
The sleep of Adam was an heavy sleep, so the text terms it, when God
took a rib from his side, and closed up the flesh again, and he felt it not:
But the reason is there given, God cast him into it; it was a matter devised
and composed before hand. The sleep of Sisera Judge. 4. was an heavy sleep,
when a nail was driven into the temples of his head: But he had run one
foot from the battle, and was wearied with hot pursuit. The sleep of
Isboseth 2. Sam. 4. an heavy sleep, when his two captains slew him at noone,
upon his bed: But the heat of the day procured that sleep. The sleep of
Sampson Judge. 16. an heavy sleep, when the 7. locks of his head were shaven
off: But the charms and enticements of Delilah caused him to sleep upon her
knees. The sleep of Eutyches, Act. 20, an heavy sleep, when he fell from the
third lofte, and was taken up dead: But the night, which was the time of rest,
was far spent; that reason Scipio gives, and it holds in nature, Quia ad
multam noctem vigilassem, arctior me somnus complexus est: Because I had
watched long til a great part of the night was spent, I fell into a deeper
sleep. It was a marveilous sleep which Lot was surprised with, when his two
daughters abused themselves with him, and he neither perceived when they lay
down, nor when they rose up: But the text notes their shameless policy,
They gave him wine to make him sleep. The seven sleepers in the time of
Decius the Emperor, (if the history deceive us not) slept in an hill, by a
miracle; Epimenides the Cretian slept fourscore years in a cave, (they that
say fewer, say enough,) beyond a miracle, and I nothing doubt but beyond the
truth. Surely the sleep of Jonas, though neither so fabulous as some, nor so
miraculous as others, and more improbable then the most, is, for the time, not
inferior to any before mentioned, and no right cause can be rendered of it.

could ye not watch with me one hour? and a second time in the same manner?
But they are there excused in part by the weakness of nature, For their eyes
were heavy: and surely the heaviness of their eyes came from the heaviness of
their spirits. to let out his fat, by reason of his grossness he felt them
not; so wound, and extimulate, and grieve this headstrong iniquity never so
much, it cares not, stoutly bearing it self against God and man; and as it
has no hope, so having in a manner no desperation. Such was the case of
Catiline, when he had fired the cittye of Rome with his conspiracies, he
had no better comfort then this, Incendium meum ruina extinguam: Salust.
I will quench the fire I have kindled with a final ruin; I will add worse
to evil, thirst to drunkenness, and leave the success of my mischievous and
ungracious actions, to the extremest adventures, Lib. ep. 22 (...). Nazian. Et
malit meis velute^ iam propriis and vernaculis adfavebam. Lib. 1.
Cyprian vvriteth of himself, who had sometime been a great persecutour, and
afterward proved a glorious Martyr, that being entangled in the errors of his
former life, past hope of getting out, he even gave over himself to his
adherent vices, and favored his sins as now become proper unto him, borne
as it were in his own home, and incorporate into his flesh and bones, by long
acquaintance. And Bernard in his books of consideration to Eugenius, does
notablye describe an hard heart: what it is? (says he) It is that which is not
cut with compunctio^, (a rasour will sooner cut a whetstone) not softened with
love, not moved with entreaty, yields not to threatenings, with scourges is
hardened, unthankful for benefits, unfaithful in counsels, unmerciful in
judgments, shameless in dishonesty, rechlesse in dangers, in things
appertaining to men, void of humanity; in matters concerning God, full of
temerity; unmindful of what is past, negligent of what is present,
improvident of what to come. This might be the cogitation of Jonas: I have
run too far in rebellion to return, I know the worst that can befall me;
but be it as it may, from henceforth sleep my soul, and take thy ease, bury
thy self in security, and digest thy sorrow with carelessness. Or was it a
spirit of slumber sent from God? was he brought into this drowsinesse for If
they lay them down, Job. 7.
they say, when shall I rise? they measure the hours of the night, they are
full of tossing to and fro, until the dawning of the day. When they say, my
couch shall relieve me, and my bed shall bring comfort in my meditation,
then are they feared with dreams, and astonished with visions. Ovid.
Therefore the Poet called one of the sons of sleep, Phobetor, a terrifier
of men, presenting himself unto their fantasy in the likeness of beasts, Fit
fera, fit volucris, sit toto corpere serpens.
of birds, of serpents, of any thing that may affright the wicked. I never
would have thought that conscience could have slept till this time: she is so
marked and observed by her own eye, though no other eye perceive her; so
followed and chased by her own foot, though nothing else in heaven or earth
pursue her. She flies when no man follows; and has a thousand vvitnesses
within her own breast, when she is free from the whole world besides. The
worm that ever gnaweth, the fire that ever burns, is the remembrance of her
forepassed iniquities. And though we escape the hands of the living God, we
shall find it fearful enough to fall into the hands of a living and yet
dying conscience. But nothing in the world, I think, save either a dullness of
sin incredible, and the next degree to a reprobate sense, or else a purpose of
God, to show the perfection of his power in the imperfection and weakness of
his prophet, could have wrought this effect.

The end of all is this. He neither slumbereth nor sleeps that keeps
Israel, he waketh in heaven that has an eye and care of Jonas in his profound
sleeping. Though smitten into the place of Dragons, or whales, and covered with
the shadow of death, he comes to light again; Psalm. 68.
though he lies amongst the pots, as an other Psalm speaks, in a filthy,
fuliginous corner, as one forgotten, forsaken, forlorn; he becomes as a
Dove, whose wings are of silver, and her feathers of yellow gold, purified as
it were by the finer of his soul, and restored to that beauty and perfection
wherewith before he shone. Though he dwells in the land of forgetfulness,
Psalm. 88.
and is laid in the lowest pit, and in the deep of displeasure, as a man
without strength, free among the dead, and exiled from the living, and as the
slain in the grave, whom God remembers no more, (for such was the cabin of
security which Jonas was entered into,) yet he is quickened with life, and
brought up to heaven, to be an example of mercy to those that were then
unborn. Of judgment and mercy may be our song; judgment in the revenge,
mercy in the deliveraunce of Jonas; judgment in his flight and running from
God, mercy in his retreat; judgment in his sleeping, mercy in his rising up.
If God had not watched to preserve Jonas, (as when we all sleep, Omnium
somnos illiu^ vigilanti^ defendit. Psalm. 76. Ier. 51.
he vvaketh for us all.) Jonas might have slept his sleep, (to use the phrase
of the Psalm) and (as Jeremy expounds it) his everlasting sleep; not that
sweet sleep of the body, wherewith nature is refreshed, but of the soul in
sin, and of the body and soul in immortal perdition. If God should have
said unto him touching the spirit of slumber now fallen upon the spirit of
Jonas, as our savior said to his disciples, touching the sleep of their
bodies, from henceforth sleep and take thy rest, till thy eyes sink into the
holes of thy head, I will neither come nor send to call thee up again; the
night had compassed him in with darkness, and the pit had shut her mouth upon
him for ever.

Look not my brethren for favor at the hands of God, so singular as Jonas
found; make not the watchfulnes of God an occasion to your sluggishnesse,
neither sleep you in sin, because he sleeps not in his providence and
protection. Look not that the sun shall stand still any more, as it did to
Iosuah; or go back again, as to Ezechias; or that Jordan shall flee from his
place, the sea devide it self, and stand up like wales, as to the children
of Israel; nor that a voice shall be heard from heaven, or a light seen,
besides the ordinary light of the firmament, as when Paul was converted. Do
ye complain that the arm of the Lord is shortened in your days, because
ye see not the like signs? or will ye not be saved without miracles? are your
eyes evil, because God has a larger hand toward other men? or is not his
hand full enoughe tovvarde us, if we knew our happiness? unless the course
of the world be altered for our sakes, the pillars of the earth moved, the
channels of the waters discovered, unless we see tokens in the sun and the
moon, and one rise from the dead, to give us warning, will we not be
warned? The Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom, we
preach Christ crucified: 1. Cor. 1.
and vvoe to the world, if the open face of the Gospel cannot move us
without a sign, nor the simplicity of Christ Jesus persuade us without
other wisdom. Jonas was suffered to run his race of disobedience, and
when he had vvearied and spente himself in perverse ways, mightily brought
back: thou say, why not I? I dispute not. God will measure his graces at
his pleasure; and though they run over to some, they are plentiful enoughe
to us all, as it is in the tenth to the Romans. He that is Lord oover all,
is rich unto all that call unto him. That answer which he gave to Paul in an
other case, Romans 10. 2. Cor. 12.
Sufficit tibi gratia mea, my grace suffices thee, may suffice all sutours.
But if they will not return to God, till they have tempted his justice, as
far as Jonas did; and be cast into a bed of sin, as Iesabell into a
bed of fornication; and rocked a sleep in the deepest security that can be
imagined, till they have lain like brandes in the fire wasted to the stumpe;
Zach. 3. Amos. 3.
or as a sheep in the mouth of the Lion, consumed to an ear or a leg, as
the prophets spoke: in this case, if God give them over also, and leave them
to perish in the fire, and in the lions mouth, and in that bed of rest which
their hearts have coveted, their destruction is of themselves, for putting
back that accepted time, were it more or less, which God had offered them.
But Jonas finds more favor with God, as appears by a message sent unto him.

So the ship-maister came unto him, and said unto him, what meanest thou O
sleeper? etc.

Verse 6. Text.
The ship-master, or the master of the cable, the cordage, and tackle, comes
unto Jonas, and bids him arise. I will not say what a shame it is to Jonas,
that he which was appointed a watchman unto others, Mayor est poena a damnato
damnari. Cypr. de sing. cler.
should himself be awaked; nor how much the greater reproach to be condemned by
an heathen, who himself was condemned by the sentence of the Hebrews, for an
uncircumcised common and unclean person. But me thinks I see an image in the
ship-master of a good governor, who is not content alone himself to take
pains, Chap. 3.
(which was the complainte of Nehemias, that the great men of the Tekoites put
not their neck to the work) but so orders the rest of his company, (as the
head and heart copartners in the kingdom, or one the king, the other the
viceroy, the members of the body) that there is not a man amongst them
suffered to sit at rest, and do nothing.

The care of a governor over his charge is no way better expressed, then by
the phrases which the scripture has used. For therefore is he said to go in
and out before the people, to note not only the priority of his place, but the
prudency of virtue every way, and to lead them as a shepherd his sheep, on
whom their dependence stands, both for the safeguard of their lives, and
estate, and their provision otherwise. To forbear other proofs herein; Moses
names both at once in that serious request of his, which, after the knowledge
of his death given, Number. 27.
he made to the Lord for substitution of some other in his room: Let the
Lord God of the spirits of all flesh, apointe a man over the congregation,
who may go in and out before them: and both lead them forth, and bring them
home again, and that the congregation of the Lord be not as sheep without a
shephearde. It appears by a former speech by him uttered, that he was not
only charged with them as a leader with his followers, or a shephearde
with his sheep, but as a father, mother, or nurse with his children and
sucking babes. Else, why did he ask his maker in terms of most natural
reference, have I conceaved all this people? Number. 11.
or have I begotten them? that thou should say unto me, carry them in thy
bosom, as a nurse bears her sucking child? Let masters and magistrates
learn by this speech, that when they are put in authority, they receive as it
were a role from the Lord, like the role of Ezechiell, wherein their duties
are abridged, and summed up in this short sentence, carry them in thy bosom.
For as a writing received immediately from the mouth of God, so does Moses set
it down, or as if there had past some interlocution betwixt God and him; as
much as to say; let them be tender and dear unto thine affection, let them
be under thine eye, and near thine heart, that they perish not; pity their
miseries, redress their wrongs, releive their wants, reform their errors,
prevent their mishaps, procure their welfare and peace by all good means. It
is an art of arts, and science of sciences, to rule man; Ar^ artium,
disciplina disciplinaru^ regere hominem. Nazianz.

Superiores sunt, qui superiores esse sciunt. Ber. ser. 23. in cant.

Civium non servitus trae dita sed (...) tela.

Nec resp. tu^ sed tu reip. Senec. de ^le, Strom. 5.2. de consid, ad Eugen.


and they are magistrates indeed which have the knowledge and skill that
belongs to magistrates; which have oculum cum sceptro, by which Emblem the
Egyptians figured their governments, a scepter for jurisdiction and power, an
eye for watchfulnes, and discretion. For if they interpret their callings
aright, they have not the bondage and service of the people, so much as the
tutage of them. Neither is the common wealth theirs to use as they list, but
they the common wealths. What meant Clem. Alexandrinus in his fiction that he
cites out of Plato, that the former of all things, has mingled gold with the
complexion and temperature of princes; of their subordinate helpers and
assessors, silver; but in the constitutions of husbandmen and artificers,
brass and iron; but that the excellentest roumes should be furnished with the
excellentest gifts, and as for meaner callings, they were sufficiently sped,
if they had common and ordinary qualities? Seeds prima and vita ima, says
Bernard, the highest place, and basest life agree not: and the ancient proverb
agrees here unto, Rex fatuus in solio, simia in tecto, a foolish king in a
throne, is an ape upon the house top, highly pearched, but absurdly
conditioned. The example of good governors (we know) is of great force to draw
the hearts of the people after them; Nec si^ inflectere sensus etc.
their proclamations and edicts are not so availeable to persuade, as their
ma^ners. Confessor papa, Confessor populus, says Cypria^ to Cornelius Bishop
of Rome: where the prelate or pastor is confessor of the name of Christ, his
people will confess it also. When Shemaiah councelled Nehemias to fly into
the temple, and shut the doors, because his enemies would that night come to
slay him, he drew an argument of courage and magnanimity from the pre-eminence
of his office, and withstood his persuasion; Should such a man as I slay?
Nehem. 6.
who is he, that being as I am, would go into the temple to live? I will not
go in. Where an heart leads the army, though it consist wholly of lions, he
makes them all h^artes: but where a lion is captain over hearts, he turns
them all into lions. The fear of Nehemias* being their prince and commander,
had been enough to have weakened the hands and hearts of all his flock: for
thus they vvoulde have reasoned against themselves: Our leader is discomforted,
under whose shadow we said, we shall be safe. What a mischief it is to
a common wealth, Lam. 4.
to be encumbred with a foolish, intemperate ruler, the wisest preacher of the
earth next the son of God, has soundly defined in these words, Eccle. 10.
Woe to thee O land, where thy king is a child, and thy princes eat in the
morning; when they have not wisdom to govern, and rather follow those
pleasures which accompanye the honor and royalty of Princes, then the pains
which their magistracy requires. Whereas on the other side, the government of
an honorable and temperate magistrate brings singular blessings with it;
Ibid.
Blessed art thou O land, when thy king is the son of Nobles, and thy princes
eat in time, for strength, and not for drunkenness. What are the stays and
strengthes of Jerusalem and Judah, cities and nations, all public and
politic bodies? Esaias. 3
Are not the strong man and the man of war, the Judge and the prophet, the
prudent and the aged, the captain over fifty, the honorable and the
counselor, and so forth? And are not their joints loosed, and their sinews
taken away, when that judgment of God is fulfilled upon them, I will apointe
children to be their princes, Ibid.
and babes shall rule over them? Amongst those dreadful curses which the
prophet calls from heaven, against his malicious, unthankful adversaries,
leaving no part unexamined, but running like oil into every ioynte, and bone
of them, smitinge themselves, vviues, children, posterity, goods, good names,
and memories that they leave behind them, the first that leads them all the
race, as Judas led that cursed band of soldiers, is this, set thou a wicked
man to be ruler over him. Psalm. 100.


I have hitherto commended the person of the shipmaster, and, under this
pattern or sampler, showed the duty of all magistrates, who in the proportion
and extent of their government, be it more or less, must care for the whole
body of their subjects, and show a part of their diligence herein, that none
of their company neglect the duties which to them appertain.

Now for the nature and use of government both by land and sea, The necessity
of government. De legib. 3.
in houses and cities, in regions, in all mankind, whole nature, and the
universal world (as the orator writes,) how necessary and requisite it is, I
also observe in this, that the Master of the ship, having authority in his
hands, rather then any of the inferiors, comes unto him to raise him up,
what meanest thou sleeper? Others might have asked him, Quid tibi est? what
meanest thou? and he have made answer again, Quid vobis est? what mean you
to trouble me? as they asked Moses, who made thee a man of authority and a
Judge over us? Exodus 1.
There must be a maistery and dominion in every order of men specially
designed, besides private persuasion or reproof, to say unto sleepers, why
sleep you? and to other offensive and disordered persons either in Church, or
in common wealth, why do ye thus?

Hoc puto non iustum est, illud male, rectius istud: Persius (...). 4.

Spiritu^ vitalis.


This is not right, that is evil, and the other is better. This is the band
whereby the common wealth hangs together, the life-breath which these many
thousand creatures draw, likely of themselves to prove nothing, save a
burden to themselves, Si men's illa imperii subtrahatur. Senec. Arist. 1. Pol.
and a booty to their enemies, if the spirit and soul of government be taken
from them. For to rule and to be ruled, is not only in number of things
necessary, but convenient and commodious also. I will invert it: besides the
commodiousnes it brings, it is of necessity; and cannot be missed. In the
beginning, when heaven and earth were first made, God established a superiority
and rule both in other creatures before, after their kinds, and afterward in
man, Genesis 1. He made two great lights, the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night. Not long after when he had created man,
he invested him presently into imperial authority, to subdue the earth, and to
rule over the fishes of the sea, and over the fowls of heaven, and over every
beast that mooveth upon the earth: and why is it called the host of heaven,
in the 2. of Genesis, but because there are orders and degrees therein, which
being withdrawn from an army, it has no good composition? And howsoever it
may be true, that the government of man over man came from sin, (for God gave
sovereignty to Adam over fishes and birds etc. not over reasonable creatures,
made to his own likeness: and the first righteous men we read of, were
rather shepheardes and heard-men over beasts, Pastore^ pecorum, ma^gis quam
reges ge^tium. Genes. 9. Li. 9. de civ. Dei. cap. 9.
then kings over nations: and the name of servant was never imposed in
scripture, till Noah bestowed it upon his accursed son; Cursed be Canaan,
servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren; whereupon Augustine
gathers, Nomen itaque illud culpa meruit, and non natura, That name was
purchased by transgression not by nature:) yet the nature of mandind standing
as it does, corrupted so far, that without the head of authority we could not
live and converse together, God has devised the means for the repressing of
our mutual violencies and injuries, which before we were subject unto. Irenee
in his fifth book against Heresies, gives the reason why God appointed
kingdoms; Because man forsaking God, was waxen so fierce, that he thought
those of his kind and blood to be his enemies, and in all restlesnesse,
murder, and covetousness, bare himself without fear; God put upon him the
fear of man, (for he knew not the fear of the Lord) that fearing humane Laws
they should not devour and consume one the other, Cuius iussu homines nas
(...), eius and iussu reges* constituuntur.

Rex instituitur a Deo, constituitur a populo.

Datur illi regn^ a Deo, traditur a populo.

Regnat rex a Deo. per et propter populum.

Eligitur rex a Deo, con^firmatur electus a populo. Vindic. tyran. qu. 3.


as the manner of fishes is. He adds; by whose commandment men are created,
by his commandment kings also are ordained, some for the profit and amendment
of their subjects, and the preservation of justice, some for fear, and
punishment, and reprofe, some for illusion, contumely, insolency, as those that
rather disgrace authority, despite their people, and shame themselves, then
otherwise. By this that has been alleged, we may easily confute the
maisterles and lawles Anabaptist, who strikes at the head of government in
general, and would frame a body of men, like the body of Polyphemus without
his eye; or like the confused Chaos of old time, when height and depth, light
and darkness were mingled together: As also those turbulent, either people or
states, who ^evell at magistrates in particular; allowing authority, I grant,
but such as pleases themselves; whose nice distinctions, like so many
paring-kniues, if we shall admit, that the king has his institution from God,
constitution from the people; and that his kingdom is given him from God,
delivered from the people; that he reigns from God through and for the
people; is elected of God, but his election confirmed by the people: by this
liberty which they take unto themselves, in the instalment of princes into
their states, you shall see them oftentimes, not only pruning away the
superfluous boughs of misgovernme^t and tyra^nie in their superiors, but
cutting up the very root of lawful and profitable government. Let them be
coupled with the Anabaptists and rebels before named, who taking the power of
two swords unto them before it be given, and bearing more crowns by three
upon their heads then they ought to do, cry in the church of Rome against
the Gods and Christ's of the earth, as they did sometimes amongst the heathen,
against Gods anointed son, Psalm. 2*
Let us break their bands a sunder, and cast their cords from us. For
assuming this to themselves, that Schismatical and erroneous princes may be
deposed by the Church, they will interpret ears to be horns, departure from
a church extremely corrupted, and corrupting others, schism the service of the
true God, and in a true manner, heresy lawful and lineall suceession in the
throne, both by blood and assent, without authorizement and confirmation from
them, unjustifiable intrusion. Of all these we may say, that as they are very
loose, luxate, Nullus est horum qui non conscensa iurri, semet in mar^
precipitaturus sit, s^ iussero. Plu^ar* Ios. 1.
and palsey-shaking members in the body that will not move by the apointment
and direction of the head, so the vnruliest and disorderliest people, that will
not submit their necks and souls to the yoke of their natural sovereigns:
whom I will not ^ende to learn obedience and subjection of the soldiers of
Scip^o, who had never a man in his army (by his own report) that would not
for a word of his mouth have gone up unto a tower, and cast himselefe headlong
into the sea; but to the children of Israel tendering their service to Iosuah
with more moderation; All that thou have commanded us, we will do; and
whethersoeuer thou sendest us we will go: as we obeyed Moses in all
things, so will we obey thee; And those that rebel against thy
commandment, let them die the death. The volume of the whole book, I am
sure, both the precepts and practices of all the servants of God, harpeth
upon this stringe. Yea the Master of the house by his own example, taught
those of his household how to behave themselves in this case. For as he
obeyed his father even unto the death of the cross, his parents in the flesh
in following their instructions, the law in following all righteousness; so
the Emperor of Rome to, though he a stranger, and himself freeborn, in
paying tribute unto him. Mat. 17.
Though we are defamed and slaundered, concerning the Emperors majesty, yet
Christians could never be found to be either Albinians, or Nigrians, or
Cassians, that is, rebels to their liege Lords and masters, as Tertullian,
in the name and cause of all christianity, wrote to Scapula; The Christian is
no man's enemy, much less the Emperors. Romans 13.
But the matter is safe enough. There is no power but of God, and he that
resists the powers, that be, resists Gods ordinances. And the Lord is
king, be the earth never so impatient. Promotion comes neither from the
east, nor from the west, nor from the south, but from the Lord of hosts. By
him are kingdoms disposed, princes inaugurated, crowns of gold set upon their
heads, scepters and states established, people mollified, and subdued; and by
him were Corah and his confederates swallowed quick into the earth, Zimry
burnt in his palace, Absalon hanged by his hairy scalpe, Achitophell in a
halter, for denying their feaulty to Gods lieutenants.

Conclusion.
As the master of the ship came to Jonas, and called him up, what meanest thou
sleeper? etc. So let masters and governors within this place, who sit at the
sternes of an other kind of shipping, and have rudders of city and country
in their hands, let them awake themselves, that they may awake and rowze up
other sleepers, all careless, dissolute, indisposed persons, who love the
thresholdes of their private doors upon the sabbathes of the Lord, and their
benches in ale-boothes, better then the courts of the Lords house; and
neither in calmes nor storms, when the ship groneth, the whole land
mourns, all the creatures sighe and lamente, will either fast, or pray, or
sorrow, or do any thing with the rest of their brethren. Awake these drowsy
christians, awake them with eager reprehension, what mean you? If
reprehension will not serve, prick them with the sword, and raise them up
with severe punishment. How long shall the drunkard sleep within your gates in
the puddle and sink of his bowzing, and lose both honesty and wit, without
controlment? the adulterer in chambering and wantonness upon his lascivious bed
of pleasure, decked with the laces and carpets of Egypt? the idolatour and
superstitious, upon the knees, and in the bosom of the whore of Babylon?
prophaners of our sanctified sabbathes, in the sabbath, and rest, and Iubilee
of their lewd pastimes? the usurer and oppressor of others, whose jaws are
as knives, and his teeth of iron, in his bed of mischief, as the Psalm
calls it, At mihi plaudo ipse domi, Horat.
and in the contemplation and solace of his ill gotten goods? the swearer, in
the habit and custom of abominable oaths (for these be the faults of your
city, as common as the stones in your streets?) how long shall they sleep
and snort herein without reprehension? it is your part to reform it, who are
the ministers of God, not only for wealth, but for wrath also, unless you
bear the sword in vain: you are the vocal laws of the land, and justice in
life to punish with rigor, where it is convenient. Leges loque^tes.

(...).


We also of the ministry, have a place of preferment in the ship, and owe a
duty to God, though in an other kind. We have a sword in our mouths too, as
you in your hands, whose edge is of more then steel, and cutteth deeper then
into flesh and blood: yet such are the earthly spirits of men, fallen a sleep
amongst us, that the sword of the spirit, without the sword of the magistrate,
cannot stir them up. How long have we called, and lifted up our voices on
high, to those that sleep in drunkenness, and lie in their vomit worse then
dogs; Awake drunkards, weep and howl, your wine shall be pulled from your
mouths; and they awoke not, but to follow drunkenness again, and to join the
morning and the eveninge together, till the wine have enflamed them? How long
to those that sleep in fornication; Awake adulterers and unclean persons, else
God shall throw you into a bed of shame, and uncover your nakedness, and make
you a reproach and scorn so far as your name is spread; yet they open not
their eyes but to awaite for the twilight, and to lie at their neighbors door
for wife or daughter? to those that are at rest, and nestled in idolatry in the
service of strange Gods; Awake idolatours, you that say to the wood and stone,
awake, help us; awake and rise up your selves, else God is a ielous God, and
will visit your sins with rods, and your offenses with scourges? to all
other sleepers in sin, sabbath breakers, swearers, liars, extortioners,
usurers, what mean you sleepers? It is now time that you should arise from
sleep, yea the time is almost past, Ephesians. 5*
Now is salvation nearer then when you first believed, and now is damnation
nearer then when you were first threatened. The night is past of blindness and
ignorance forepassed, the bright morning star has risen, Romans 13.
and hid himself again within the clouds of heaven. The glorious sun of
righteousness has illuminated the whole sphere of the world, from the east
to the west; and though his body be above, the light of his beams is still
amongst us, and we may truly say, the day is come, yea the day is well nigh
spent. The natural sun of the firmament runs his race with speed, like a
Giant refresht with wine, to make an end of his course; and to finish all
times. You are now brought to the eleventh hour of the day; there is but a
twelfth, a few minutes of time between you and judgment: what mean you
sleepers? Will you go away in a sleep, and shall your life pass from you
like a dream? Came you naked of goodness from your mothers womb, and will you
back naked? brought you nothing into the world with you of the best and
blessedst riches, and will you carry nothing out? Or do you tarry to be started
with the shrillest trumpet that ever blew, and the fearefullest voice to
sleepers that ever sounded, arise ye dead? what mean you sleepers? The night
is coming wherein no man can work: yea the day is coming wherein none shall
work Acceptable to God, profitable to man, behoofefull to himself, he
neither can nor shall work any thing. That working that is, shall be the
everlasting throbbings and throws of his heart for his endless miseri^s, the
eyes laboring for tears which shall ever run down, and the teeth grinding
one the other without ceasing.

THE SEVENTH LECTVRE.
Chap. 1, verse. 6. Arise, call upon thy God, etc.
BEfore, I have showed and commended the diligence of the ship-master, and
prooved that there must be some power and superiority, to restrain inferiors
by fear, to reprove sleepers and all kinds of offenders. The praise of this
governor farther appears, that he does not only reprehend Jonas, what
meanest thou sleeper? but urges and prosecuteth him, Arise; and instructs
him what he ought to do, Call upon thy God; and opens the uncertainty and
hazard wherinto they were fallen, If so be that God will think of us; and that
the imminent danger touches not their goods alone, but their lives also, as
appears by the end of his speech, That we perish not. Thus he is not content
to pull him as it were by the ear, with checking him, but he shakes him by the
arm to, to set him on his feet; he enters into his conscience, with wise
and godly advise, and pricketh the inwardest vein of his heart, with
commemoration of their danger, if God stay it not. He has laid his hand upon a
plough, and his eye goes not from it; he sticks not in the beginnings of his
calling, but grows onward by degrees, till he comes to the full stature of
a good magistrate. Give me a shepherd thus zealous of his flock, and I will
say he is better then seven other shepherds, and a man of principallity so
careful of this duty, more then eight principal men that neglect theirs. 1.
Sam. 2.
It was not enough for Eli, you know, to chide his sons, why do you such
things, for of all this people I hear evil reports of you, Do no more so, It
is not a good report that I hear of you; because he did no more but so, and
proceeded not in the chastisement and reformation of them, God charge him in
plain terms, that he honored his children above him and threatens to cut
of his arm, and the arm of his fathers house. Chap. 3.
Afterward he tells Samuel that he will do a thing in Israel, that
whosoever heard of, his two ears should tingle. He would judge the house of
Eli for ever, because his sons ran into slander, and he stayed them not;
And the wickedness of his house should not be purged with sacrifice, and with
offering whiles the world stood. And if you harken for the sequel of all this,
his two sons Hophni and Phinees died both in one day; and himself receiving
a tydinges worse then death, brake his neck. All this we hear of, fathers,
and masters, and magistrates, and ministers, and yet our ears tingle not; we
suffer our sons, our servantes, our people, our ^^ocks, to run into slander
themselves, to redouble that slander upon our own heads, to multiply it
against God, his gospel, his church, and we stay them not. The rest of our
tongues within their walls and wards, and the rust of the sword within the
skabbard, the admonition of the one winking with both the eyes, and the
correction of the other fast a sleep, show, how unworthy we are to be trusted
in our places, and how unlike the master of the ship here spoken of.
Behold I have sought one by one, to match this example of gentility, and I
have found one man of a thousand that may contend with him.

The government of Nehemias throughout the whole book, is a singular president
to all rulers.

1 In the building of the walls of Jerusalem, he would not be checked by
Sanballat and his mates, when they dispightfully asked him, what do you? will
you rebel against the king? He then answered, Nehem. ^*
The God of heaven will prosper us, and we will rise up and build: but as for
you, ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial in Jerusalem.

2 When they determined by conspiracy to fight against Jerusalem and slaie the
builders of the walls, he placed them with spears and bows, and gave them
this encouragement, Be not afraid of the^, Chap. 4*
but remember the great Lord and fearful, and fight for your brethren, your
sons, your daughters, your wives, and your houses. So they did the work of the
Lord with one hand, and held the sword with the other, wroughte by day, and
watched by night, yea they were so careful in their watch, he, and his
servantes, and his brethren, and the men of the ward which followed him, that
no man put of his clothes, save that they put them of for washing.

3 When the people were oppressed by their brethren, their lands, houses,
vineyards, gaged for corn, their sons and daughters brought to subjection,
Chap. 5.
he rebuked the princes and rulers; Ye lay burdens every one upon his
brethren, we have redeemed them from the heathen, and ye will sell them
again; that which ye do, is not good, restore them their lands, olives,
vineyards, houses, remit the hundredth part of the silver, corn, wine, oil,
that ye exact of them. Yea he called the Priests, and caused them to swear
to do it. Moreover he shook his lap, and said, Thus let the Lord shake out
every man that performs not his promise, even thus let him be shaken out and
emptied.

4 When the sabbath was profaned amongst them, (for some in Iudaea trod
wine-presses, and brought in sheaues, and laded asses with wine, grapes, and
figs, and other of Tire brought fish, and all wares, Chap. 13.
and sold them on the sabbathes in Jerusalem) he not only rebuked their rulers,
what evell is this that ye do? and showed them the danger, This did our
fathers, and God plagued the city; but he caused the gates of the city to
be shutt before the sabbath, and set servants of his at the gates, and the
chapmen remained without the walls at night, and he protested unto them, that
if they tarried again about the wall, he would lay hands upon them.

5 When some of the Jews married their wives, from Asdod, Ammon, and Moab, and
their children spoke half in the speech of Asdod, and could not speak in the
Jews language, first he reproved them; Ibid:
secondly, cursed them; thirdly, smote certain of them; fourthly, pulled of
their hair, for a further reproach unto them; and lastly, took an oath of them
by God, ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, neither shall ye
take of their daughters for yours sons nor for your selves.

6 Eliashib the Priest, kinsman to Tobiah in the absence of Nehemie from
Jerusalem, having the oversight of the chamber of the house of the Lord,
(where the offering and incense, vessels and tithes, for the provision of
Levites, singers, and porters, and the offerings of Priests were wont to be
laid) he made a chamber thereof for his kinsman, Tobias the Horonite. The
order that Nehemias took for the amendment of this abuse, is thoroughly
persued: 1. it grieved him sore: 2. he cast out the vessels of Tobiah out of
the chamber, and then caused the chambers to be cleansed, and the vessels of
the house of God to be brought thither again: 3. because the portions of the
Levites and singers had not been given to them, and every one was fled to his
land, he reproved the rulers, Why is the house of God forsaken? 4. he caused
the tithes to be restored, brought the Levites together to their place again,
and appointed faithful officers and treasurers to distribute unto them. The
petition that he makes unto the righteous Lord, who will not forget our
labors, at the foot of every of those services, is framed to this effect;
Remember me, O my God, in goodness, and wipe not out my kindness concerning
this, and pardon me according to thy great mercies. Thus Nehemias, you see* was
not unmindful of the Lord, that the Lord might be mindful of him again,
Neither in the building, nor in the warding of the walls of Jerusalem, nor in
releeving the burdens of his brethren, nor in sanctifying the sabbath, nor in
purging the people from commixtion with strangers, nor in replenishing the
chambers of Gods house, with maintenance for his ministers. All which he
zealously undertook, and constantly followed to the end, fastening his
reproves like nails that are driven in a sure place, and showing himself a
careful Magistrate both in war and peace, in civil and religious affairs,
toward the children of the land, and toward strangers that traffiqued
within the borders thereof.

Undoubtedly your charge is great whom the Lord has marked out to places of
government; and if ever you hope, as Nehemias wished, that God shall remember
you concerning this or that kindness showed in his business, remember you
whose image you carry, whose person you present, whose cause you undertake,
whose judgments you execute upon earth. And though ye are not troubled with
building and warding the walls of your country, because peace is the walls,
and the strength of God our bulwarks and fortresses; and mine eyes would fail
with expectation of that day, when the chambers of the Lords house, which
Tobiah the Horonite has seized into his hands, should be restored to their
ancient institution for the maintenance of Levites and singers: yet in the
oppressions of your brethren, whose vineyardes, fields, houses, liberty,
living are wrung from them, and their sons and daughters undone, if you do
not in all respects, as Nehemias did, lend them money and corn, Chap. 5*
he and his servauntes of their own, and bestow the fees of your places,
toward their relief, ( for he ate not the bread of the governor in
twelve years, and an hundred and fifty he mainetained daily at his boarde
with sufficient allowance) yet such as oppress too much, exhort' reprove,
cause them to respight, cause them to remit, tie them by promise to do it,
bind them by oath, and if that will not serve, (unless you be loath to throw
a stone against an adulterer, or to shake your lap against an oppressor,
because you are guilty in your hearts of the like trespasses) shake the lappes
of your garments against them, and with an unfeigned spirit beseech the just
judge, that such as will not restore, may so be shaken out and emptied from all
his mercies. Likewise for the sabbath of the Lord, the sanctified day of his
rest, help to bring it to rest, it is shamefully troubled and disquieted;
the common days in the week are happier in their seasons, then the Lords
sabbaths. Then are the manuary crafts exercised, every man in his shop
applying his honest and lawful business; the sabbath is reserved as the
vnprofitablest day of the seven* for idleness, sleeping, vvalking, rioting,
tippling, bowling, daunsing, and what not? I speak what I know; upon a
principal sabbath (for if the resurrection of Christ deserve to alter the
sabbath from day to day, I see no cause but the coming down of the holy ghost
should add honor and ornament unto it) I say, upon a principal sabbath, not
only those of Jerusalem and Judah sold their wares, but those of Tire also
which came from abroad, brought in their commodities, and neither your gates
shut, nor forreiners kept out, nor citizens reprooved, nor any thing done,
whereby Gods name and day might be honored. Go now and ask if you can for
blushing, as Nehemias did, O Lord remember us concerning this kindness.

It is not enough for you to bear the place of preeminence in the ship, but
you must reprove, as the master here did; nor enough barelie to reprove, but
you must go forwards in hunting security from her couche, by urging how hard
it is to appease the anger of God, if it be thoroughly enflamed, how dangerous
against the life and soul, if it be not prevented. It is the fervency of the
spirit, even of a double spirit, as Elizeus sometime wished, the spirit of
magistrates, which are more then single persons, perfect hatred to sin, crushing
both the egg and the cockatrice, courage in the cause of the Lord, zeal to
his house both kindling and consuming your hearts, a good beginning, and a
good ending, which the Lord requires. Will you saue-gard the ship in the
Ocean sea, and break her within a league of the haven? will you put your
hand to the plough of the best husbandry, and thriving in the world, and then
look back? will you lay the foundation of the house, rere up the wales,
and not seek to cover it? you know the parable, This man began to build. It
had been better not to have known the way of truth, then not to persist in
it, nor to have set your shoulders to the work of the Lord, unless ye hold
out. The leaf of a righteous man never fades: whereupon the gloss notes,
that the fall of the leaves, Psalm 1. Lapsus foliorum, mortificatio arborum.
is the dying and decaying of the trees. When it repents a man to have
begun well, it is a sinful repentance, and much to be repented of. The
fire upon the altar of the Lord must always burn, never go out, and the
sedulitie of Gods lieutenantes upon the earth must ever be working, never
wearied. All virtues run in the race, one only receives the garland, the
image of most happy eternity, happy continuance.

I told you before that nature directed the Mariners to the acknowledgement
of a God: it is here further ratified, Call upon thy God.
with many other principles of nature, if they were needful to be
examined; as 1. that God only is to be invocated and called upon; 1 Call upon
thy God.

2 If so be God etc.

3 Will shine upon us.

4 That we perish not.


Call upon thy God 2. the unity of the godhead is avowed. For the shipmaster
forgetting the multitude of Gods, names one singlie without other associates;
If so be God. 3. That the felicity of mankind, depends upon the serenity,
gracious and favorable aspect of God, as I gather by the phrase here used; if
God will shine upon us. 4. It is implied that our life and death are in Gods
hands; That we perish not. But let those pass a while. The matter we are now
to examine, is the liberty and freedom which the shipmaister gave unto Jonas,
to call upon his proper God, not tying him to that which himself adored.

We say, Rel^gio religat, Religion tieth every man to some one God, whom either
by heavenly revelation, or by their fantasy and conceit they have made choice
of. And therefore the Lord asks with admiration, Ier. 2. Has any nation
changed their Gods? which yet are no Gods. And Mal. 3. Will a man spoil his
gods? nay they are so fond and doting in affection upon the^, that they will
spare no cost to honor the^. If they worship but a golden calfe, they will
strippe their wives and daughters of their richest jewels, to show their
devotion. When Phidias told the Athenians, that it was better to make Minerva
of marble then ivorie, because the beauty thereof would longer continue,
Valor. Man. li. 1.
thus far they endured him; but when he added, And it is better cheap, they
enjoined him silence. Alexander was so frank in bestowing fra^kince^se upon
his Gods, that his officers blamed him for it. Micheas, Judge. 18. accounted the
loss of his Gods, which the children of Dan took from him, above all losses;
What had I more to loose? Iud. 18.
How did Senacherib and Rabsakeh deride all the Gods of the nations in
emulation to their own Gods, as appears by their insolent speeches? where is
the God of Hamath, Es^ 3^. and 37.
and of Arphad? where is the God of Sepharvaim? who is he amongst all the Gods
of these lands, that has delivered their countries out of my hands? Nay they
forbear not to speak blasphemy against the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,
which dwells between the Cherubins, and is very God alone over all the
kingdoms of the earth: Go say to Ezechias, let not thy God deceive thee whom
thou trustest. Therefore when Darius had conceived an opinion of the God of
heaven, he made a decree, that in all the dominions of his kingdom, men should
tremble and fear before the God of Daniel, for he is the living God, Dan. 6.
and remains for ever, and his kingdom shall not perish, and his dominion
shall be everlasting. Nabuchodonosor made the like decree before, when he saw
the deliveraunce of the three children, that whosoever spoke any blasphemy
against their God, Dan. 3.
should be drawn in pieces, and his house made a iakes, because there was no
God that could deliver after that sort. Hence came it, that David so much
disgraced and discountenaunced the Gods of the heathen; Psalm. 135.
I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is above all Gods, etc. As
for the idols of the heathen, they are but silver and gold even the work of
men's hands: they have a mouth and speak not, they have eyes and see not, they
have ears and hear not, neither is there any breath in their mouths. And for
the same cause did Elias scoff at Baal, 1. King. 18.
when he cried unto his prophets, cry alowde, for he is a God* either he
talks, or pursues his enemies, or is in his journey, or perhaps sleeps,
and must be awaked. When Ahaziah sent for help of his sickness to Beelzebub
the God of Eckron, an angel of the Lord met his messengers, 2. King. 1.
and said unto them, Is it not because there is no God in Israel, that ye go
to enquire of Beelzebub the God of Eckron? Thus all the servauntes of God,
Angels and men, are zealously and immovably bent for the advauncement of his
name above all other Gods, which idolatours hang upon. Which makes me the more
to marvel, that the master of the ship can permit Jonas to call upon his own
God.

Diversity of religions.
It has been a question sometimes disputed, whether diverse religions at once
may be borne with, in one kingdom. Which whether the remediless condition of
the time and place have enforced, or the negligence of the magistrate
dissembled, or the indifferent, lukewarm affection of a policy over-politique
suffered to steal in, I know not; but sure I am, that some countries and
commonweals of christendom, stand upon feet partly of iron, partly of clay,
that is, there are both Jews and Christians, Arrians and Anabaptists, Papists
and Protestants, and such a confusion of religions, as there was in Babel of
languages. To give you my judgment in few words, I wholly mislike it. For if in
our private houses, we would not endure a man that had his affection alienated
and estranged from our selves, our wives, our children, or any friend of ours;
shall we admit them in the common wealth, which bear a foreign and unnatural
conceit, touching the God we serve, the Prince we obey, the country we are
nursed in? The first of those ten words which God spoke in Sinai, standing at
the entrance of all his moral precepts, like the Cherubins at the gates of
paradise, cries unto the house of Israel, and all other people, thou shall
have none other Gods besides me. Those other prohibitions in the law, Thou
shall not sow thy field with mingled seed, Thou shall not plough with an Ox
and an Ass together; Levit. 19. Deuter. 22.
A garment of diverse stuffes as of linen and woollen, shall not come upon thee;
what do they intend? I may ask as the Apostle did of another sentence in the
law, Has God care of Oxen and Asses, garments, and grains? Haec ad literam
videntur esse ridicula.
And the Ordinary gloss upon Leviticus, says, that these things taken after
the letter, seem ridiculous. The abuses they strike at, is an heart, and an
heart, doubling in the worship of God, blending of Iudaisme, and christianity;
gospel, and ceremonies; sound, and heretical doctrines; truth, and falshoode
in our church. Such mes^en seed light upon that ground which I wish no
prosperity unto, and such medly garments sit upon the backs of our enemies. As
for this realm of ours, Rev. 2. and 3.
be it far and far from such corruption. For he that threatened Loadicaea,
because she was neither hot nor cold, to spewe her out of his mouth,
commended Ephesus for hating the Nicolaitans, reprooved Smyrna for maintaining
them, and the doctrine of Baalam, blamed Thyatira for suffering Iesabel to
teach and deceive his servantes, to make them commit fornication, and to eat
meat sacrificed to idolles; how can we think, that he will not as
strictly examine and search out the complexions of other lands, whether they
be hot or cold, zealous or remiss in his service? The gospel of Christ,
Gal. 4.
being planted in the Church of Galatia, might not abide, you know, the
copartnershippe of Jewish ceremonies, not their observation of days and
months; which being nothing in comparison of an adversary, shouldering
religion, are termed by one, who thought he had the spirit of God, impotent
and beggarly elements; yet they had been elements in their time, and God had
used them before as the first letters of the book, to school his people with.
But their office was ended. That fulness of time, which brought Christ into the
world, and fulness of knowledge and grace which Christ brought with him, was
their diminution. Therefore besides an Anathema again and again ingeminated
to those that preached otherwise, and foolishnes heaped upon their heads like
burning coals, that were bewitched with such preachings, he protests unto
them not hiding his face, nor dissembling his name, Behold, I Paul say unto
you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. If he could
not sustain a little leaven in the lump, (as there he calls it) what would
he have said of poison? I mean of an impious, blasphemous, sacrilegious manner
of worship, when this was rather curious, frivolous, and ceremonious? When
Moses and Christ together, were so offensive unto him, he would never have
heard of a reconciliation, between Christ and Belial, light and darkness,
righteousness and unrighteousness, believers and infidels, the temple of God and
idols, the cup of the Lord and the cup of Devils, the table of the Lord and the
table of Devils; in the communion whereof he notes an impossibility, in both
his epistles to the Corinthians. I will not stand to dispute how impossible it
is for any, either person or state, to serve two masters, the one not
subordinate to the other, but flatly repugnant; say for example, God and
Mammon, or Melchom, or Baal, or any the like abomination. Must they not use a
balance and a balla^ce, a conscience and a conscience, that do so? and go
after two ways? But what danger ensues upon such confected religions, and
halting consciences (as Elias named the^,) they may best learn both by word
and deed, from that zealous God, who has taken express order against strange
Gods, and executed his fierce wrath upon those that have offered but strange
fire, and ordained his law strictly to be kept, without declining to the right
hand or to the left, and himself will be served alone without corrivals of
his glory, with all our heart, Ephesians. 4.
soul, and strength, as he has often enjoined. There is but one Lord, one
mediator, one spirit, one baptism, one supper, one faith: al in unity. The
body and state is then strongest, when the multitude of believers have but one
heart, Acts. 4.
and one soul, amongst them all: and shall one people within the same land,
and under the same government, sunder and distract themselves into many
religions? In Monodia. Quos circa pl^res observant populi, vi centrum circulus
circumscriptus
Or can the Lord be at unity with that people, where immunity is given, to
deal in the manner or matter of his service, otherwise then he has
prescribed? Nazianzen writes, that many people lying round about the^, as a
circle about the ce^ter, did much observe and marvel at the Cappadocians, not
only for their sound faith, but for the gift of concord, which God bestowed
upon the^. For because they thought aright of the Trinity, and defended it
jointly (against the Arrians) they were defended by the Trinity themselves.
Multa bona eveniant Scytharum regi etc. J^ p^otreps.
Clemens Alexandrinus wishes much happiness to the king of the Scythians,
whosoever that Anachatsis were, who took a citizen of his, and for imitating
some Greekish effoeminate sacrifices offered to the mother of the Gods, hung
him up by the neck, and shot him through with arrows, because he had both
corrupted himself amongst the Grecians, and infected others with the like
disease. The counsel which Mecoenas gave to Augustus the Emperor, In Dion.
Cas.
is very sage, and the reasons by him alleged, such, as touch the quickest
v^ine of the question in hand. Put his words into the mouth of some other man,
whose lips an Angel has touched with a cole from the altar of the Lord, and
the holy ghost sanctified, they are then right worthy to be accounted of. Thus
he exhorts. The divine godhead see that thou reverence thy self, according
to the laws of thy country, (...) etc.

(...) etc.


and cause others to do the like. And those that change any thing in matters
appertaining thereunto, hate, and correct, not only in behalf of the Gods,
whom whosoever neglects, he will never regard ought else; but because such as
bring in new Gods, draw others also to alteration and change. And hence come
conspiracies, seditions, conventicles, things not expedient to a government.
Religion is the truest band betwixt man and man, the knot of al communion and
co^sociation. Now what conjunction of minds can there be? (...).

Plutar. advers. Colot.


what atonement of judgments, what inward peace, sincere charity, hearty
god-speed, in that disparity of religions, where one house has Jews, an other
Samaritans, some calling upon God, some upon Angels and Saints, creeping to
crosses, bowing to images; so burning in emulation for their several services,
as fire and water shall sooner agree, then their judgments and affections? Let
our laws be grounded upon the law of God, and it will be the greatest safety of
our land, to enact, as the Athenians sometimes did, that whosoever should speak
one word of their God, Joseph. cont. Ap. 2. (...).
beside their laws, should be punished unmercifully for it.

It has been a favorable compromission of men more partial then wise, that
the questions betwixt Rome and the reformed churches, might easily be accorded.
I find it not. And I will be bold to say, as Tully sometimes of the Stoickes
and Academickes, That the co^tentio^ between us, is not for bounds, Non de
terminis sed do tota possessione contentio. Academ. quaest*
but for the whole possession and inheritance, whether God, or man; grace, or
nature; the blood of Christ, or the merits of saints; written verity, or
unwritten vanities; the ordinance of the most high in authorizing princes, or
the Bulls of Popes in deposing them, shall take place. We have altar against
altar, liturgy against liturgy, prayers against prayers, doctrine against
doctrine, potentate against potentate, Pope against Prince, Religion against
Religion, subjection against subjection, faith against faith, so diametrally
opposed, as the Northern and Southern poles shall sooner meet together, then
our opinions (standing as they do) can be reconciled. Look upon France, and
nether Germany, for the proof hereof; The effusion of so much Christian blood,
the eversion and dissipation of so many noble houses, the commotions and
tumults of so many years, whence have they sprung? The reason or pretense at
least of those murders, massacres, wastes, tragedies, has been contrary
religions. If this be the fruit then, shall every subject in a realm be
privileged in his house, to have a God to himself? a priest to himself? a
worship to himself, as Micah had in Ephraim? shall he believe, and pray, and
obey, shall he both fear God, and honor his king, as himself lists? But
what will ye do in this case? Their minds are as free as the Emperors.
Every man is a king in his own house, as Telemachus said, Nihil tam voluntariu^
quam religio. L^ctant. Cala^us an Indian Philosopher to Alexander. Mon^do magis
quam minando, Aug. ^p. 65.

Fides suadenda non impo^enda Bern ser. 66. in cant.

Ad Vincen^ium.

Numquid ideo neglige^da est medicina quia nonnulloru^ est insanabilis
pestilen^ia. Lib. 9. cont. Crescou. c. 51


his conscience is his castle, and fortress; nothing is so voluntary as
religion, wherein if the mind be averse, it is now no religion. We may shifte
the bodies of men from place to place, we cannot change their minds. We
shall sooner enforce stocks and stones to speak unto us. Advise will do more
then threatening, and faith comes rather by persuasion, then by compulsion, I
grant it. Therefore first speak to the conscience by good counsel; but if
the ear of the conscience be stopped with wax, shake the whole house about her,
and raise her up, speak to the ears of the body, inheritance, liberty; let the
body tell the conscience, I am afflicted; the inheritance, I am diminished;
liberty, I am restrained for thy sake. These are arguments and persuasions that
have done good, as Augustine affirms of the Donatistes and Circumcellions in
Affricke, that being terrified by pains, they began to enter into
consideration with themselves, whether they suffered for justice, or for
obstinacy and presumption. But you will say that some men are not bettered
hereby. Shall we therefore, says Augustine reject the physic, because the
sickness of some is incurable? For of such it is written, I have smitten your
children in vain, they receive no correction. And for the better managing of
the whole cause, he adds this judgment; If they were terrified, and not
taught, it would seem tyranny; again if taught and not terrified, it would
harden them in an inveterate custom, and make the^ more sluggish to rec^iue
their salvation. As for that objection of liberty of conscience, he answers
it in an other place. It is in vain that thou say, leave me to my free
will; for why proclaimest thou not liberty in homicides, and whordomes as well?
GOD has given indeed free will unto man (free from coaction) but it was not
his will, mean time, Sed neque bonam esse v^luit infructuosa^, neque malam
impunitam. Adver. Gnostic.
that either the good will of man should be without fruit, or his evil will
without punishment. Tertullian is of the same mind with Augustine, that it is
meet, that heretics should be compelled to do their duty, not allured:
I say, compelled, if allurement will not serve, for they must not always be
prayed and entreated. He that has a frenzy, must be bound; and he that has
a lethargy, must be pricked up; and he that has strengthened himself in
heresy, whether he keep it privately to himself, or diffuse it amongst
others, must violently be pulled from it. These persons has Augustine
distinguished; Turbulent^ audacia. Vetusta socordia, seu veternosa consuetudo.
Ad Vincent. Conditores. Assectatoresde bapt. cont* Donat: l. 6. c. 44.

Haeretici, haeresiarchae. disseminatores. Erasmu^ declar. ad ce^s. Paris. tit.
23 Suffundere malis sangui^em, quam effunder^ Tertul. in apolog. Iud. 9.


For there are some heretics troublesomely audacious, others anciently
sluggish, and taken with a sleepy disease, neither of these may in wisdom be
forborne. There are some makers, others but followers, proselytes, disciples in
heresies, and these are either weak, or indurate. So then first counsel, and
afterward compel them, if that will not serve to bring them to the service
of God, according to that form, which the laws of our country have set down
(though I wish not one hair of their heads diminished, but when they strike
at our head; and had rather power blood into their veins, then let it out,
but when the atrocity of their acts can no longer be tolerated;) yet were I
worthy to give advise, I would have a writer go with his inckhorne from man to
man, and mark them in the foreheades that mourn for the vvelfare of our
realm, and as bondmen to their brethren they should hew wood and draw water
to the host of Israel, as Iosuah used the Gibeonites for their guile. Who will
pity the charmer that is stung by the serpent? because it was the folly of the
charmer to go to near; or who will favor that man that nourishes a gangrene
within his body, and seeks not help to remove it? We nurse up lions whelps
for our own overthrow, as Amilcar brought up his sons for the ruin of Rome;
we play too boldly at the holes of aspes; we embolden the faces, encourage the
hearts, strengthen the hands of them that keep an (...), a daily record of
all our actions, and have taken to use whatsoever has been spoken or done
against them these many Halcyon years of ours, meaning to exchange it, ten for
one, if ever they see the day of their long expected alteration. But the cause
is the Lords. Whatsoever they look for, let us vindicate his dishonor, who
has made this country of ours a sanctuary for true religion, a refuge and
shade in the heat of the day, for persecuted professors, who have been chased
like bees from their own hiues, a temple for himself to dwell in. Let us not
make that temple a stews, a common receipt for all co^mers; that both Atheists,
Papists, Anabaptists, and all sorts of sectaries may hold what conscience they
will, and serve such God as like themseles.

THE EIGHT LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. verse, 6. Call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us,
that we perish not.
I Have noted before out of these words, both the carfulness of the
Ship-master continued toward his charge, and the liberty, or rather license
he gave unto Jonas, to serve his peculiar God. Touching which indulgence of
his, I showed my opinion, whether it be expedient; that a governor should
tolerate a distraction of his subjects into diverse religions. Me thinks,
there are two things more employed in this member, Call upon thy God, carrying
the reasons why he called upon Jonas after this sort. Two reasons moved the
shipmaster to call upon Jonas.
For either he affected the person of Jonas, supposing perhaps that some
merit and grace in the man might more prevail by prayer, then the rest; or else
he affianced the God of Jonas, and as one weary or distrustful of his own,
hoped there might be an other God more able to deliver them. I will not enter
into conjectures too far; 1 Reason.
but surely it is likely enoughe, that either by the looks, or speech, or
attire, or behavior, or some forepassed devotion, or other the like notice,
the master conceaved a good opinion of Jonas. The forehead sometime shows
the man, as the widow of Shunem by the very usage, countenance, and speech of
Elizeus, was able to tell her husband, Behold, I know now that this is an holy
man of God, 2 King 4.
that passes by us continually. If this were his reason, it was not greatly
amiss, because there is great difference between man and man. For neither the
priority of birth, which Esau had of Jacob; Genesis 25. nor the height of stature,
which Eliab had of David; 1. Sam, 16. nor the pomp and honor of the world,
which Haman had of Mardochai; Esther 3. nor all the wisdom of Chaldea, which
the Astrologers had of Daniel; nor the antiquity of days, which many daughters
of Sion had of the blessed Virgin; nor the prerogative of calling, which the
Scribes and Pharisees had of poor fishermen; nor the country, which Annas and
Caiaphas had of Cornelius; nor eloquence of speech, which Tertullus had of
Paul; nor any the like respect, is able to commend a man in such sort, but
that his inferiors in that kind, for more virtuous conditions may be
magnified above him. It may be, the master of the ship was so persuaded of
Jonas, that though he were but one to a multitude, a stranger amongst
strangers, a scholar and puny amongst merchants, and soldiers, whose state
and carriage was every way beyond his; yet he might have a spirit, blessing,
and wisdom beyond all theirs, and therefore repaireth unto him, Arise, call
upon thy God. How only and incomparable was the favor which Abraham the
great father of many people found in the eyes of God, Genesis 18.
who being but dust and ashes, as himself confessed, pleaded with his maker
as one would reason with his neighbor in the behalf of Sodom, with six sundry
replies, from fifty to ten righteous persons, which number if it had been
found, Sodom had escaped? Genesis 19.
How dear was the soul of Lot, in that fearful destruction, on whom the
Lord bestowed his life, and the life of his wife and children, and the safety
of Zoar a little city not far of, because he had entreated for it? the Angel
plucked him into the house from the fury of the Sodomites, and not less the^
plucked him out of the city, (who made but slow have) bidding him flee to Zoar
to save his life, Genesis 6.
for he could do nothing till he was come thither. Noah and his little
familye, the remnant of the earth, as the son of Syrach terms them, the
only buddes of the world that were to seed seed for a new generation of
men, at the time of the flood were more precious unto the Lord, then all the
people under heaven besides, which had the breath of l^fe within them. How
often did he gratify Moses, the beloved of God and men, with the lives of the
children of Israel, when his anger was so hot, that he entreated his
servant to let him alone, Exodus 32.
that he might consume them: yet contented in the end, to be entreated by
him, and to pleasure him with their pardon, Numb. 14*
I have forgiven it according to thy request? O what a let is a righteous
man to the justice of GOD, and even as manacles upon his hands, that he
cannot smite, when he is driven to cry unto one, Let me alone; and to
another, till thou art gone, I can do nothing? And did he not grace the person
of Job more then his three friends, when he bad Eliphaz with the other two,
to go and offer a burnt offering for themselves, and his servant Job should
pray for them, Job. 4^*
and he would accept him? And is it not an argument past gaine-saying, that
Moses and Samuel were according to his own heart, when he reviveth their
names, as from their ashes, and blesses their memory to Jeremy his prophet,
Ier. 15.
with so favorable accounte? Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet
could not my affection be toward this people? The like whereof we find in
Ezechiel, Though these three men Noah, Ezech. 14.
Daniell, and Job; were amongst them, they should save neither sons nor
daughters, but deliver their own souls by their righteousness. Eden was
chosen to be the garden of the Lord, when all the ground of the earth besides,
was paled out; Noah's arc floted upon the waters, when all other ships and
boats of the sea were overwhelmed; Aarons rod budded, and brought forth
almondes, when all the rods for the other tribes remained dry and withered. One
sheafe has stood upright, and one star has sparkled, when eleven others
have lien upon the ground, and been obscured.

The apple of the eye is dearer unto a man then the whole frame and circle of
the eye about it; the signet upon the right hand in more regard, either for the
matter, or for the form, or for the use whereto it serves, then all his other
ornaments; a writing in the palms of his hands, more carefully preserved then
all his other papers and records. Doubtless there are some amongst the rest of
their brethen, whom God does tender as the apple of his eye, wear as a signet
upon his finger, engraue as a vvriting in the palms of his hands, and with
whom is the secret of the Lord, and his hidden treasures, though his open and
ordinary blessings be upon all flesh. Moses has asked meat in a famine,
and water in a drought, for the children of Israel, when their bowelles might
have piped within them like shalmes, and their tongues cloven to the roof of
their mouths, if he had not spoken. Elias has called for rain, when the
earth might have gasped for thirst, and discovered her lowest foundations, if
he had been silent. Phinees has stayed a plague, which would not have ceased,
till it had devoured man and beast, if such a man had not stood up. Paul, in
the 27. of the Acts, obtained by the mercy of God, the lives of all his
companions that sailed with him toward Rome, Eccle. 50.
in that desperate voyage. As a morning star in the midst of the cloud, and
as the moon when it is full; as the flower of the roses in the spring of the
year, and as lillies by the springes of waters, and as the branches of the
franckincense in the time of summer; as a vessel of massy gold, set with all
manner of precious stones, and as the fat that is taken from the peace
offerings: so is one Henoch that walks with God, when others walk from him;
one Rahab in Jericho; one Elias that boweth not his knees to Baal; one David in
Mesek; one Hester in Shushan; one Judith in Bethulia; one Joseph in the
council of the Jews; one Gamaliell in the council of the Pharisees; one
innocent and righteous man in the midst of a froward and crooked generation.
The prayer of the righteous avails much, if it be fervent, Iac. 5.
the prayer of faith shall save the sick, for the Lord shall raise him up:
and if he has committed sin, it shall be forgiven him. It may minister occasion
to the wicked, to reverence and embrace the righteous, even for policies sake;
For the innocent shall deliver the islande, Job. 22.
and it shall be preserved by the pureness of his hands. Many a time there may
be, when as stout a king, and as obstinate a sinner, as ever Pharaoh was,
shall call for Moses and Aaron, and beseech them, pray to the Lord for me. In
pestilences, dearthes and droughtes, wars, sicknesses, and ship-wrackes, or
any other calamities, it lies in the holiness of some few, the friends and
favorites of God, to stand in the gappe betwixt him and their brethren, to
entreat his majesty for the rest, and to turn a curse into a blessing, as
Joseph brought a blessing to all that Putiphar had, Genesis 39. This then may be
a reason of the speech here used, Call upon thy God; a likelihoode presumed by
the governor, that they might speed the better for Jonas his sake.

Another reason I take it, was, that he distrusted his own God, 2. Reason.
and the Gods of his whole society, and might be induced to hope better of that
God which Jonas served. For what taste is there in the white of an egg? or
what pleasure to a man, that comes to a river of water to quench his thirst,
and finds the channel dried up? What stay is there in a staff of reed, or
in a broken staff, the splinters whereof to recompense his hope, run into
the hands of a man and wound him? What trust in broken cesternes which can
hold no water? This comparison God himself makes with great indignity, in
the second of Jeremy, My people has committed two evilles: they have forsaken
me the fountain of living waters, and have dug them pittes even broken
pittes that can hold no water. The change is very unequal, worse then the
change of Glaucus, who gave his armor of gold for armor of brass; and the
loss unsupportable. For what aequalitie between a natural fountain, which
ever flows, because it is ever fed in the chambers of the earth, and
artificial cesternes, or pittes fashioned by the hands of man? cesternes that
are broken and cannot hold, I say not, water of life and perennity, but no
water at all? But when they saw their folly herein, as a thief is ashamed
(says God) when he is found, so was the house of Israel ashamed, they and
their kings, their Princes, their Priests, and their Prophets, because they
had said to a tree, Thou art my father, and to a stone, Thou have begotten me.
He yet proceeds against the^, They have turned their back to me, and not
their face, but in their time of trouble they will say, Arise, and help us.
You see the fits and pangs of idolatours. First they dig broken pits,
afterward they are ashamed; first they fly to the tree and stone for succor,
but when they are vexed, they seek after the help of the true God. Clemens
Alexandrinus marvelleth why Diagoras and Nicanor with others, should be
sir-named Atheists, who had a sharper sight in discerning the false Gods, the^
their fellows. Amongst whom, Jn protrept Qus errore^ hu^^ de diis falsi* acriu
ceteris perspe^erunt. Adora quod inceadisti. ince^de quod adorasti. Chap. 10.
Diagoras having something to boil, took his Hercules carved of wood, and
thus spoke unto him, It is now time O Hercules, that as thou have served
Euristheus in twelve labors, so thou should serve me in the thirteenth, and
so threw him into the fire as a piece of wood. A practice not unlike the
counsel, which I have read given to Clodoveus the French king. Worship that
which thou have burnt incense unto, and burn that which thou have worshipped.
The children of Israel in the book of Judges, finding their error and folly in
idolatry, made a reca^tation of it; for whilst they served the Lord, he
delivered them from the Egyptians, and Ammorites, and children of Ammo^, and
Philistines, Sidonians, Malachites, Mahonites; they cried unto the Lord, and he
saved them out of their hands. But when they worshipped strange Gods, they
were no more delivered, nay they were vexed, oppressed, and sore tormented?
the^ the Lord vpbraided them, Go and cry unto your Gods which you have chosen,
let them save you in the time of your tribulation. And to that exprobatio^ they
yielded, saying, we have sinned against thee, because we have forsaken our
own God, and have served Baalam: do thou unto us whatsoever pleases thee,
only deliver us this day. The like irrision he used before in Jeremy, to those
that honored stocks and stones; but where are thy Gods which thou have made
thee? let the^ arise, if they ca^ help thee in the time of thy misery. A
forcible admonition to those, whom a truth cannot draw from a doctrine of lies,
from the work of their own hands, and worship of their own pha^tasies: whom
Clemens Alexandrinus not unfitly matched with those Barbarian tyrants, who bound
the bodies of the living to the bodies of the dead, till they rotted together;
so these being living souls, are coupled and joined with dead images vanishing
in the blindness of their minds, and perishing in the inventions of their own
brains. And as the natural pigeons, were beguiled by the counterfeit, and
flewe unto pigeo^s that were shaped in the painters shop; so stones, says he,
flock unto stones, stocks unto stocks, men unto pictures, as sensles of heart,
as stocks and stones that are carved. But when they have tired themselves in
their supposed imaginary Gods, who^ do they worship? Praxiteles made Venus to
the likeness of Cratina, whom he loved. All the Painters of Thebes painted her
after the image of Phrine, a beautiful, but a notorious harlot. All the carvers
in Athens cut Mercury to the imitation of their Alcibiades. It may be, the
pictures of Christ, and the blessed Virgin, and the saints which they have
placed in their windows and upon the walls of their houses, and fastened to
their beds, and carry privily in their bosoms, as Rahel hid her fathers idols
in the camels straw, are but Pigmalions pictures, works of their own
devising, or draughts of their lovers and friends, as unlike the originals, as
Alcibiades was to Mercury, Phrine and Cratina to Venus. Lacta^tius scatters
the objections made for images in his times, and reneued in ours, like foam.
Lib. 2. de ^rig. error i^ adver. Gen^,
For when it was alleged that they worshipped not the images the^selus, but
those to whose likeness and similitude they were formed; I am sure, says he,
your reason is, because you think the^ to be in heaven, else they were not
Gods. Why then cast you not your eyes into heaven? why forgetting the feature
of your bodies which are made upright, that your minds may imitate them, and
not answering the reason of your name, (...).
pore ye down upon the earth, and bow your selves to inferior things as if it
repeted you, Non quadrupedes esse natos, that you were not borne four footed
beasts? Again, images were devised to be the memorials and represe^tatio^s,
either of the absent, or of the dead. Whether of these two do you think your
Gods? if dead, who so folish as to worship the^? if absent, as little they
deserve such honor, because they neither se our actions, nor hear the prayers
which we power before the^. When they further replied, that they afforded their
presence no where so sone, (or not at al) as at their images, he answers; it
is just as the common people deemeth, that the spirits and ghosts of the dead
walk at their graves and relics, and are most co^versant in churchyards. I
pass his further infectatio^, how senseles a thing it is, to fear that which
it self fears falling, firing, stealing away, which being in timber, was in
the power of a contemptible artificer to be made some thing or nothing;
when no man fears the workman himself, which must of force be greater then
his work; when the birds of the air are not afraid of them, because they
roust and build, and leave their filthiness upon them; and the figments
themselves, if they had any sense or motion, would run to thank and worship
the carver, who, when they were rude and unpolished stones, gave them their
being. When Saint Augustine heard them say in his days, that they took not
the idol for a God, ^er. 6. de ver (...)* apud. ^ath.
he asks them, what does the altar there, and the bowing of the knee, and
holding up the hands, and such like gesticulations? They seemed in their own
conceiptes, to be of a finer^ religion, (such are the pruners and purifiers of
popery, the cleanely Jesuits of these times, which were able to distinguish, I
worship not the corporal image, only I behold the portraiture of that which
I ought to worship,) but he stops their mouths with the Apostles sentence,
and shows what damnation will light upon them, which turn the truth of God
into a lie, and worship the creature more then the creator, which is to be
blessed for ever.

For, to return where I first began; besides the folly of the thing, the
mischief is behind: Go cry unto your Gods which you have chosen, and let them
deliver you in the time of your tribulation. What a woeful discharge and
dismission were this, to be left unto such Gods, whose heads the hands of a
carver has polished, and if their eyes be full of dust, and their clothes
eaten upon their backs with mothes, Ba^. 6.
they cannot help it? the beasts are in better case then they, for they can
ge^ them under a covert, or shadow, to do themselves good. Then they may cry as
the Apostles did upon the motion of the like departure, Lord? whether shall I
go? for as Christ there had the words, so has the blessed Trinity alone the
power and donation of eternal life. Ioh. 6.
When Senacherib and Rabsakeh bragged that both the kings, and the Gods of the
nations were destroyed by them, Ez^chias answered the objection, Truth it
is, Lord, that the kings of Assure have destoyed their nations, and their
lands, and have set fire on their Gods, for they were no Gods, but the work of
men's hands, even wood and stone; therefore they destroyed them: now therefore
O Lord our God, 2. King. 19.
save thou us out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know,
that thou O Lord art only God. This argument Moses tried upon the golden
calfe, whereof Israel had said, Behold thy Gods O Israel; Exodus 32.
to show that it was no God, he burnt it in the fire, ground it to powder;
strawed it upon the water, and then caused the people to drink it. To conclude
the point* It is most true which the Prophet rests upon, Psalm 86. Amongst
the Gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord, and there is none that can do
like thy works. And as there is but one truth, encountered with as many
falshods, as there were gobbets and shreddes of dismembered Pentheus: so is
there but one true God, opposed by as many false, as happily there are
falsehoods.

It may be the master of the ship finding a defect, and miscariage of their
former labors, that there was no succor to be had where they sought
comfort, that though they had all prayed, they are not released, stands in a
wavering touching the Gods which they called upon, and thinks there may be a
God of more might whom they know not: so as in effect, when he thus spoke
unto Jonas, he set up an altar, and tendered honor unto an unknown God. As if
he had said; I am ignorant whom thou seruest, but such a one he may be, as is
pronest to do us good, and best able to save our ship. For as an idol is
nothing in the world, and there is no time in the world, wherein that nothing
can do good: so there are many times, when idolaters, that most dote upon
them, as Jeremy speaks, are brought to perceive it. Esaias, in the second of
his prophecy, speaks of a day, when men shall not only relinquish, but
cast away their idols of silver and gold, which they have made to themselves
to worship, unto the mowles and battes, children of darkness, fitter for
those that are either bleare eied, or that have no eyes to see withal, then
for men of understanding; and go into the holes of the earth, and tops of
cragged rocks, from the fear of the Lord, and glory of his majesty, when he
shall arise to judge the earth. You see the fruit of idolaters, that as they
have loved darkness more then the light, so they leave their Gods to the
darkness, and themselves enter into darkness, a taste and assay before hand
of that everlasting and utter darkness that is provided for them.

If so be God will think upon us. Text.
Now that this was the mind of the master of the ship, to distrust his
Gods, I gather by this which follows, wherein the uncertainty of his faith
is bewraied, and his hope hangs (as the crow on the arc betwixt heaven and
earth, finding no rest) without resolution of any comfort. Si forte, if so be,
is not a phrase fit to proceed from the mouth of faith, Si forte.
it is meeter to come from Babylon, whereof the Prophet writes, Bring baulme
for her sore, si forte sanetur, if happily she may be healed; Ier. 51.
her wounds were so desperate and unlikely to be cured. It is meeter to be
applied to the sores of Simon Magus, whom Peter counseled to repent him of
his wickedness, and pray unto God, Acts 8.
Si forte remittatur, if so be the thought of his heart might be forgiven
him. The nature and language of faith is much different; it nesteth it self in
the wounds of Christ, as Doves in the cleftes of rocks that cannot be
assaulted; it stands as firm and steadfast as mount Sion that cannot be
removed; it casts an anchor in the knowledge of the true God; and because he
is a true God, it doubts not of might and mercy, or rather mercy and might
(as the heathens call their Jupiter, Optimus maximus, first by the name of his
goodness, and then of his greatness.) His mercies it doubts not of, because
they are passed by promise, indenture, covenant, oath, before immovable
vvitnesses, the best in heaven, and the best in earth. His promises are no
less assertained, because they are signed with the singer of the holy Ghost,
and sealed with the blood of his anointed and beloved. By faith ye stand,
says the Apostle to the Corinthians: it is the root that bears us, 2. Cor.
1.
the legs, and supporters, and strong men that hold us up. If we listen to
the prophet Abacuk, we may yet say more, Abba^. 2.
For by faith we live: it is the soul and spirit of the new man; we have a
name that we live, but indeed are dead to Godwarde, if we believe not. For if
any withdraw himself therehence, the soul of God will take no pleasure in
him. Woe unto him that has a double heart, and to the wicked lips, and
faint hands, and to the sinner that goes two manner of ways; Eccle. 2.
woe unto him that is faint hearted, for he believes not, therefore shall he
not be defended. It is not the manner of faith to be shaken, and waver like a
reed to and fro, nor of a faithful man, to be tossed of every wind, as a wave
of the sea that is ever rolling. (...). Heb. 4. (...). Heb. 10. Ibid.

(...). ^am. 1. (...). 1. Pet. 1. Job. 7. Ephesians. 6.


And therefore we are willed to come to the throne of grace, with boldness;
and to draw near with a true heart, in assurance of faith; and not to cast
away that confidence, which has great recompense of reward; and when we
ask, to ask in faith, without reasoning, or doubting; and to trust perfectly
in that grace which is brought unto us by the revelation of Jesus Christ. Our
life is a warfare upon earth; a tried and expert warrior, one that bare in his
body the skars of his faithful service, keeping the terms of his own art, so
named it: and we are not to wrestle against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, and powers, and vvorldly governors, the princes of the
darkness of this world, against spiritual vvickednesses which are in high
places. Our enemies, you see, are furnished as enemies should be, with strength
in their hands, and malice in their hearts, besides all other gainefull
advantages; as that they are spirit against flesh privy and secret, against
that, that is open high against that, that is low, and far beneath them. Now
in this combat of our souls, our faith is not only our prize, exercise, and
masteries which we are to prove, (as it is called) the good fight* of
faith, but a part of our armor which we are to wear, 1. Tim. 6.
our target to defend the place where the heart lies, Ephe. 6. our
breast plate, 1. These. 5. and more then so; 1. Ioh. 5.
For it is our victory and conquest against the world of enemies. So faith is
all in all unto us. Blessed be the Lord, for he has showed his marveilous
kindness toward us, in a strong city. He has set us in a fortress and
bulwark of faith, so impregnable for strength, that neither height, nor
depth, life nor death, things present nor things to come, nor all the gates,
and devils of hell, nor the whole kingdom of darkness can prevail against it.

I grant there are many times, when this bulwark is assaulted, Occupation.
and driven at with the fiery darts of the devil, when the conscience of our
own infirmity, is greater then the view of Gods mercy, when the eye of faith is
dim, and the eye of flesh and blood too much open, when the Lord seems to
stand far of, and to hide himself in the needful time of trouble, To be deaf
and not to answer a word, To hold his hand in his bosom, and not to pull it
out: when this may be the bitter moan that we make unto him; My God, my God,
why have thou forsaken me? and this our doleful song which we sing to our
souls in the night season; will the Lord absent himself for ever? and will he
show no more favor? is his mercy clean gone for ever? does his promise fail
for evermore? has God forgotten to be gracious? does he shut up his mercies
in displeasure? Lord, how long will thou hide thy self? Psalm. 89.
for ever? and shall thy wrath burn like fire? These be the dangerous
conflicts, which the captains of the Lords armies, and the most chosen
children of his right hand sometimes endure. The lions themselves sometimes
roar with such passions, how shall the lambs but tremble? if the souls of
the perfect, which have been fed with the marrowe of fatness, and drunk of
the fullness of the cup, have sometimes fainted in themselves for want of
such relief, much more imperfect and weak consciences, which have tasted but
in part how gracious the Lord is. I answer in a word. The faithful fear for
feet are almost gone, and their steps well near slipped, but not altogether;
they find in the sanctuary of the Lord, a proppe to keep them up; at length
they confess against themselves, This is my infirmity; they curb and reprove
themselves for their diffidence, and whatsoever they say in their haste, that
all men are liars, and perhaps God himself not true, yet by leisure they
repent it. 2. Cor. 4. Haesitantes, sed non pr^^sus haere^te^ Ar. M^nt.
The Apostle does pithily express my meaning, (...), staggering, but not
wholy sticking. Again, they fear the particular, they distrust not the
general; it may be victory on their sides, it may be overthrowe; it may be
shipwreck, it may be escape; it may be life, it may be death, whether of these
two, they know not, and for both they are somewhat used for his comfort, 2.
Sam. 16.
was this, It may be the Lord will look upon my tears, and do me good for
his cursing this day: As who would say, if otherwise, the care is taken, I
refer it to his wisdom. Amos has the like speech, It may be the Lord God
of Israel will be merciful to the remnante of Joseph; Amos 5. Si f^rte.
he means in preventing their captivity: But whether captivity or
deliveraunce, they are at peace, as persuading themselves, that if the mercy of
God fail them in one thing, it may embrace them otherwise; for they know that
all things work together for the best, Romans 8.
to them that love God, as the Apostle writes. Though such be the hope of
sons and daughters, yet the case of strangers is otherwise. For they are
secure neither in particular, nor in general; they measure all things by their
sense, and as the manner of brute beasts is, consider but that which is before
their feet, and having not faith, they want the evidence and demonstration of
things that are not. And therefore the master of the ship, as I conceive it,
knowing that life alone which belongs to the earthly man, and perhaps not
kenning the immortality of the soul, or if he thought it immortal by the
light of reason, in some sort, (as the blind man recovered, savve men like
trees, with a shadowed and mistie light) yet not knowing the state of the
blessed, sets all the adventure upon this one success, and makes it the
scope of all their prayers and pains, Ne percamus, That we perish not.

That we perish not.
For such is the condition of heathen men; they know not what death the
righteous die, as Balaam plainly distinguished it; they are not translated like
other men, nor dissolved, nor taken away, nor gathered to their fathers and
people, nor fallen a sleep, which are the mild phrases of scripture, whereby
the rigor of death is tempered; their life is not hid for a time, to be found
out again, but when they are dead in body, they are dead in body and soul
too; their death is a perishing indeed, they are lost and miscarried, they
come to nothing, Donati vitae non commodati. Senec. Jnte^igeres illum non
emori sed emigrare. Ad Heliod 3. Prof^ctic est quam putas mortem. De patien.
their life, their thoughts, their hope, all is gone: and when others depart
this life in peace, as Simeon did, and go as ripely, and readily from this vale
of miserye, as apples fall from the tree, with good contentation of heart, and
no way disquieted; these, as if they were given, not lent to their lives, must
be drawn and pulled away from them, as beasts from their dens with
violence. Hierome reports of Nepotians quiet and peaceable departure from his
life, Thou would think that he did not die, but walk forth. And
Tertullian has the like sentence; It is but the taking of a journey which thou
deemest to be death. Whereas the Emperor of Rome for want of better learning,
ignorant of the life to come, sang a lamentable farewell to his best beloved,
Aelius Adr^anus.
nor long before they were sundred: My fleeting fond poor darling,
Bodies ghest and equal, Animula vagula bla^ dula* etc.

Where now must be thy lodging?
Pale and stark and stripped of all,
And put from wonted sporting


Compare with these wretched creatures, some plainly denying the immortality
of their souls, others disputing, doubting, and knowing nothing to purpose,
til their knowledge comes to late, others obiecting themselves to death
rather in a vaineglorious ostentation, then upon sound reason; I say, compare
with them one the other side christian consciences, neither loving their lives
more than a good cause, and yet without good cause not leaving them, and ask
them what they think of this temporal life: they will answer both by speech
and action, that they regard not how long or how short it is, but how well
conditioned, (I borrow his words; Non quanta sed qualis, Senec.
of whom I may say concerning his precepts and judgments for moral life,
that he was a Gentile-christian, or as Paul to Agrippa, almost a christian) as
in the acting of a comedy it skilleth not what length it had, Non quam diu sed
qua^ been sit acta, refert. id. Esth. 4.
but how well it was plaide. Consider their magnanimous, but withal wise
resolutions, such I mean as should turn them to greater advantage. Esther
knew, that her service in hand, was honorable before God and man, and her hope
not vain, therefore makes her rekoning of the cost, before the work begun;
If I perish I perish: her meaning assuredly was, If I perish, I perish not;
though I loose my life, yet I shall save it. If there were not hope after
death, Job. 13.
Job would never have said* lo, though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. And
what avails it him to know that his redeemer lived, Job. 19.
but that he consequently knew the means whereby his life should be redeemed?
If the presence of God did not illighten darkness, and his life quicken death it
self, David would never have taken such heart unto him, Though I should walk
through the valley of the shadow of death, I would fear no evil, Psalm. 23.
for thou art with me, and thy rod, and thy staff comfort me. If his
shepheardes staff had failed him against the Lion and the Bear which he
slevve at the sheepe-foulde, or his sling against Golias, that he had fallen
into their hands; yet this staff and strength of the Lord could have restored
his losses. The sentence that all these bare in their mouths and hearts, and
kept as their watch-worde, was this; Death is mine advantage. Phil. 1. 2. Cor.
4.
The Apostle takes their persons upon him and speaks for them all, Therefore
we faint not, because we know, that if our outward man perish, yet the inward
man is renewed daily: God builds as fast as nature and violence can destroy.
2. Cor. 5.
We know again, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed,
we have a building given of God, that is, an house not made with hands, but
eternal in the heavens. Upon the assurance of this house, not made of lime and
sand, nor yet of flesh and blood, but of glory and immortality, he
desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, and by his rejoicing that
he has, be dies daily, though not in the passion of his body, yet in the
forwardness and propension of his mind; and and he received the sentence of
death in himself, as a man that cast the worst, before the judge pronounced
it. I may say for conclusion in some sort, as Socrates did; Non vivit, cui
nihil est in mente nisi vt vivat, He lives not, who minds nothing but this
life: or as the Roman orator well interprets it, cui nihil est in vita
iucundius vita, who holds nothing in his life dearer then life it self. For
is this a life? where the house is but clay the breath a vapor or smoke, the
body a body of death, our garment corruption, the moth and the worm our
portion, that as the womb of the earth bred us, so the womb of the earth must
again receive us; and as the Lord of our spirits said unto us, receive the
breath of life for a time, so he will say hereafter, return ye sons of
Adam, and go to destruction?

By this time you may make the connection of my text. The master of the ship
and his company, 1. worship and pray unto false call upon thy God: 3. because
in suspicion, they make question of their if so be: 4. because question of
better things to come, that we perish not. With us it fares otherwise.
Because our faith is steadfast, and cannot deceive us, in the corruption of our
bodies, vexation of our spirits, orbity of our vviues and children, casualty
of goods, wrack of ships and lives, we are not removed from our patience, we
leave it to the wisdom of God, to amend all our mishappes, we conclude with
Ioab to Abishai, The Lord do that which is good in his eyes; 2. Sam. 10.
honor and dishonor, good report and evil report, in one sense are alike
unto us: and though we be unknown, 2. Cor. 6.
yet we are known; though sorrowing, yet we rejoice; though having nothing,
yet we possess all things; though we be chastened, yet are we not killed;
nay, though we die, yet we live, and are not dead; we gather by scattering, we
win by losing, we live by dying, and we perish not by that which men call
perishing.

In this heavenly meditation, let me leave you for this time, of that blessed
inheritance in your fathers house, the penny, nay the pounds, the invaluable
weight and mass; of gold? 2. Cor. 4.
nay of glory after your labors ended in the vineyard, meat and drink at the
table of the Lord, sight of his excellent goodness face to face, pleasures at
his right hand, and fulness of joy in his presence for evermore. Let us then say
with the Psalmist, my soul is a thirst for the living God: oh when shall I
come to appear in the presence of our God? For what is a prison to a palace,
tents and boothes to an abiding city, the region of death to the land of the
living, the life of men to the life of angels, a body of humility to a body of
glory, the valley of tears to that holy and heavenly mount Sion whereon the
lamb stands, gathering his saints about him to the participation of those
ioies which himself enioieth, and by his holy intescession purchases for his
members?

THE NINTH LECTVRE.
Cap. 1. ver. 7. And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast
lottes, etc.
AS the manner of sick men is in an hot ague or the like disease, to pant
within themselves, and by groaning to testify their pangs to others, to throw
of their clothes, and to toss from side to side in the bed, for mitigation of
their pains; which whether they do, or do not, their sickness still remains,
till the nature thereof be more nearly examined; and albeit they change
their place, they change not their weakness: so do these Mariners, sick of the
anger of God, as the other of a fever, disquieted in all their affections and
fearing, as the other pant; praying, as the other groan; casting out their
wares, as the other of their clothes; and removing from action to actio^, from
fear to prayer, from prayer to eiection of their wares, from thence to the
excitation of Jonas; in all which they find no success, till they enquire
more narrowely into the cause of their miseries, and therefore they betake
themselves to a new devise of casting lottes. For when there is no other
remedy in all their fore passed means, they begin to suspect some higher
point of sacrilege against the majesty of the godhead, which cannot be
expiated and purged by their goods alone, but by some man's life amongst them.
Wherein you have another principle of nature to consider of, that sins are
the causes of our calamities, in that the tempest here raised, is imputed to
the wickedness of some in the ship, not to be quieted and stilled again,
unless the mouth of the waves may be stopped with that impious person that
has committed it. Go then and say with the Priests in Malachie, Mal. 2.
Every one that does evil, is good in the sight of the Lord, and he
delights in him: whereas nature it self, lying more close to a man, than the
marrow to his bones, informs the hearts of these mariners, that the mother
and original of al their woe, is some notorious wickedness. Let the censure of
an heathen philosopher be added hereunto; Hoc ipso primum sceleratus est.
What wicked man soever thinks he pleases God in his wickedness, he is
chiefly and notoriously wicked for that very opinion, because he esteems the
Gods either to be foolish, or unrighteous. The verse now in hand, opens
their means used for the detection of the transgressour, and lays before our
eyes in order these four points.

1 Their consultation, They said every man to his fellow, Come. 2 Their
resolution, Let us cast lots. 3 The reason of their counsel held and resolved,
That we mai^ know for whose cause this evil is done. 4 The issue or success
which their deliberation took, The lot fell upon Jonas.
1 Consultation.
In the consultation, by occasion of the phrase, Every one to his fellow, I
observe the unity and consent that was amongst them* for they proceed to their
business, Vir ad collegam. 1. Chron. 1. In cord non duplici. In cord perfecto.
In cord v* no. Lib. 8.
as the tribes of Israel brought David to Hebro^, with a single heart, with a
perfect heart, with one heart; yea they are joined and composed together as
Jerusalem was built; not like the foxes of Sampson* back to back, every man
fancying a course to himself; nor as the manner of a disordered army is, which
Curtius describes thus, Alius iungere ac^em, alius dividere, stare quida^; et
nonnulli circu^vehi, Some will have the army joined, others disioined, some will
stand, others ride about; but with such conjunction of souls, as if they grew
together upon one stock, they co^sult, resolve, execute the best means to help
themselves. One common cause, one common fear (which for the most part is the
master of disorder and disturbance) has so co^corporated and linked these men
together, though they are not the sons of one nation, that as the angels of the
mercy seat did turn face to face, so they applied and fitted invention to
invention, opinion to opinion, verdite to verdite, as if the blssing of God,
Ezec. 37. had lighted upon the^, the wood of Judah, and the wood of Joseph
shall be joined in one tree, and they shall be no more 2. peoples, nor divided
henceforth into 2 kingdoms. Application
These being strangers and forrainers one to the other, can hold agreement. We
in a common danger (say for example, A Spanish invasion) though we be threatened
before hand, as Benadad threatened Ahab, thy silver and thy gold is mine; 1.
King. ^0.
also thy women, and thy fair children are mine, etc. though our land, our
substance, our sons and daughters, our crown and kingdom, were to be
forfaited, alienated, passed unto strangers; though whips provided for our
torture, and knives for our slaughter; how do we consult? Vir ad amicum suu^?
or vir ad collega^? A man with his friend or companion? with mutual aspect in
our faces? or mutual assent in our hearts? Not so; But rather as if the curse of
the almighty were fallen amongst us, Zac. 11. I will break my staff of bands,
and dissolve brotherhood, a man with his rival, evil-willer, enemy, one
jealous and suspicious of the other, one seeking the peace of the land, another
wishing in his heart that it might be overrun. In such distraction and varia^ce
of minds, if our state were as strong as the kingdom of Satan, as it is but a
kingdom of flesh and blood, and of mortal men, it would fall to ruin. Our
Savior, you know, gives the rule in the gospel, and the devils keep it, as
the surest principle and maxim in their policy, not to sever their forces.
Seven could agree together in Mary Magdalene, a whole legion in an other man;
whereas amongst us, in one people, and in one family, there is not consent
between seven persons. There is a day, when Herod and Pilate are made friends,
and cleave together in their devises against Christ, as the skales of
Leviathan; (perhaps they fear the dissolution of their autorities and
dominions, if Christ be not overthrown.) Curtius writes in his history, of
certain barbarous people, Quo^ alias bellare inter se solitos, tu^c periculi
societas iunx^ erat. lib 9.
that though they were ever banding in arms before, and one provoking the
other, yet when Alexander the great came upon them, the equality of the danger,
wherein they were joined, joined also their hearts and forces together. If there
were nothing else to move our country men to the ensuing of peace; yet the
equality, me thinks, of the danger, common to both parts, should invite them
thereunto. For howsoever they discontent themselves with the government which
God has appointed, and cry with the children of Israel, Give us a king, Give us
a king; and not Samuel, nor all the Samuels in the world, can dissuade them
with the tyranny which the king shall practice upon them, their wives and
children, vineyards, fields, servantes, asses, sheep, but they still cry,
Nay, but there shall be a king over us; yet it may be, when they have their
wish, the fable will be moralized, and verified upon them; A storke was given
the^ and then they would see in how much better case they lived before, than
now under the king of the Persians, Quanto mitiore sort, quam sub rege
Persarum. Curt. 8. 2. King. 10.
as Alexander told his soldier. And though we are now divided into two
companies, like Labans sheep and goats, some black, and some speckled, some
Papists, some Protestants; it may be their goods will be taken for Protestants,
their houses and inheritance for Protestants, their heads for Protestants, and
both theirs and ours laid, as the heads of the sons of Ahab by Iehu, upon two
heaps.

Come, let us cast lottes. As many other things, so this fact of theirs does
express the force of a most unusual tempest: 2. Resolution.
for there had been tempests upon the sea, when there were no ships; and both
tempests and ships, when there were no lotts cast, a thousand times; and many a
ship perhaps upon the sea at this present, that felt the wrath of the storm,
and yet entered not into any the like co^sultation. But God, the disposer of all
things, having his fugitive Prophet in chase, puts it into the hearts of the
mariners, 1. that there is some man whose iniquity has brought their lives in
question, 2. that there must be some means for his deprehension. Now what
should they do in a matter of fact? there were no witnesses to detect, and
neither the conscience of the offender, nor happily his countenance, nor any
the like presumption to disclose it; and if an oath had been ministered, which
is the end of controversy, perchance it might have been falsified, Pu^ri
talis, viri sacramentis.
as Lysander sometimes spoke; Children must be deceaved by dice and blanckes,
men by oaths: therefore they put it to lottes, as indifferent vmpires and
arbitratours for all parts; as who would say, Because art fails, we will go
by chance, and in a matter of secrecy, Sort iri nihil est aliud quam spectare
temeritatem and casum, etc. 2. de divin. Li. 1. cap. 1*
let God be judge, and give sentence. For so does Tully define Sortition, that
it is nothing else but hap-hazard, where neither reason, nor counsel can take
place. It was a custom amongst the Gentiles to do many things by lottes.
Valerius Maximus writes of the Romans, that, by an ancient ordinance amongst
them, if they commended any thing to their Gods, it was by prayer; if they
desired or craved, it was by vow; if they rendered or repayed, by
thanksgiving; if they enquired, by the inward part of beasts, or lottes; if
they did any thing solemnly, by sacrifice. He further reports, that it
befell Lucius Paulus their Consul, by lotte to fight against Perses, king of
Macedon; and that going from the court to his own house, and finding Tertia
his young (...) very sad, Cap. 5.
he kissed her, and asked her what she ailed; she^ au^swered, that Persa (her
little whelpe,) was dead: which saying of ^ers, he took as a token of good
luck, (for the affinity of the names) to encourage him the rather against
Perses. The Greeks at the siege of Troy, cast lottes who should ^ight with
Hector, and the lotte fell upon Ajax, Sortemque meam vevistis.
as appears by a part of his own oration unto them. In the third of Joel, the
Lord complains against the nations, that they had cast lots upon his people:
in the prophecy of Obadiah, against Esau, that when strangers entered in the
gates, and cast lottes upon Jerusalem, he was as one of them: in the
Evangelist S. Matthew, the soldiers devide the garments of Christ by lo^s. But
without further testimony, it is here apparent, that it was in use amongst most
nations, because the whole company of the ship, being of diverse languages, all
agree upon the same course; Come, let us cast lots. 22. qu. 95. ar. 3.
Schedulae scriptae, vel non scriptae. Festucae inaequales. Taxillorum
proiectio. Libri apertio.

(...).

Glebulae, fabae, globuli


Aquinas sets down some forms of lots used amongst them; that either they
had tickets of paper, (some of which were written, some blancke,) wherein they
considered who had the one, who the other; or else festawes and cuts, wherein
they observed, who drew the greater, who the lesser; or they threw dice and
hucklebones, wherein he that threw most, was victorer; or else they opened a
book, and by that which a man first lighted upon, they decided the strife;
answerable whereunto are the tables and books of fortune, in our times. Others
allege more sorts of the^; as little stones, scores, and tales o^ wood, signed
with letters and characters, sta^ps of clay, beans, pellets, and many the like
varieties. In the using of all which instruments, their manner was, first to
hide the^ out of sight; as in Homer, they hid their lots in Agamemnons helmet;
then to shake them together confusedly, and afterward to draw them forth, and
to receive as their lottes specified. The Hebrews write, that when the land of
Canaan was divided amongst the children of Israel, they had 12. skroles of
paper, signed with the names of 12. tribes, and 12. other signed with 12.
portions of land: all which being put into a pitcher, and mingled together, the
Princes for their several tribes, drew two a piece, and together with their
names received their inheritances. It is a question amongst Divines, whether it
be lawful in christianity to use lottes, yea or no? Whither lawefull to use
lottes.
For the solution whereof, we must both distinguish the kinds, and set
limittes and bounds, which must not be exceeded. Touching the kinds, most of
the Schoolmen, Summistes, and other Divines do thus number them; that either
they are of consultation, The kinds of lottery.
wherein they enquire of somewhat that must be done; or of division, wherein
the question is, Consultoria, quaeri^ quid agendum. Divisoria, quid cuique
dividendu^. Divinato^ia. quid fu^urum. Levit. 16. Numb. 33. Ios. 7. 1. Sam. 10.
Acts 1. Comment. in act. Epist. 180.
what shall be shared to every man; or of divination, and prediction, wherein
they are curious to search out future accidents. Of the former two they make
no great scruple, because they are justified and approoved to us by many
examples of scriptures; as in choosing one goat for the sacrifice, the other
for the escape goat; in deviding the land of promise; in finding out Achan
with the accursed thing; in taking Saul to the kingdom; in preferring
Matthias to the Apostleship, (though Beda seeme^th to mislike the like
imitation in our times, because the election then held, was before Pentecost,
when they had not received such full measure of the holy ghost; which
afterward obtained, they chose the s^ven deacons not by lot, but by common
consent of all the Disciples.) August. in an epistle to Honoratus, puts this
case; that if in a time of persecution, the ministers of the gospel should
vary amongst them, who should abide the heat of the fire, that all fled not;
and who should fly, least if the whole brotherhood were made away, the
church might be forsaken: if otherwise they could not end their variance, he
holds it the best course to try by lot, who should remain behind, Quantum
mi^i videtur, qui mane^t and qui fugiant, sort legendi sunt.
who depart; and he adds for the proof of his opinion, the judgment of
Solomon, Prove. 18. The lotte causes contentions to cease: affirming moreover,
that in such doubts, God is able to judge better then men, whether it be his
pleasure, to call the better able unto their martyrdom, and to spare the
weaker; or to enable these weaker, for the endurance of troubles, and to
withdravve them from this life, who cannot by their lives be so profitable to
the Church of God, as the others. He proposes the like case in his books of
Christian learning, the question standing between two needy persons, whether
of the two shall be relieved, when both cannot. Lib. 1. c. 28^
I find many other cases, both observed by antiquitye, and some by the civil
laws allowed, wherein the use of lottes has been admitted; See Wolph upon the
9. of Nehem. comment. lib. 3.
As in creation of magistrates, in contracting marriages, in undertaking
provinces and lieutenantships, in leading colonies, that is, new inhabitants to
replenish foreign parts; in entering upon inheritances; and if in a suite of
law it cannot be agreed upon between the parties contending, who the
plaintiff, who the defendant is, Thence (...).

Vlpi^n.


both seeking for judgment; in the manumission and freeing of some few in a
multitude, when all crave the benefit; in singling out one of many heirs that
cannot agree for the keeping of the deeds and conveiances. But to bridle our
licentiousnes herein, who must live by laws, not by examples, and ought not to
turn particular factes into general practices, it shall not be amiss, (as
God set marks about the mount,) to propose a few conditions carefully to be
observed. First, we must never fall to lotterie, 6. Co^ditio^s in lottery.
but when necessity enforces us; all other lawful means first assaied, and
the wisdom of man unable to proceed, unless a more excellent wisdom Qui
sort eligitur, human^ iudicio non comprehenditur. (...). Cyprian.
must be past the comprehension of humane judgment, as Ambrose notes upon
the first of Luke, touching the ministry of Zachary in his course to burn
incense. Secondly, we must use great reverence and religiousnesse in the
action: Sancta sancte, holy things must be done in an holy manner. Beda
calls for this in his commentaries upon the first of the Acts, handling the
election of Matthias. If any Non nisi collecto frairu^ coetu, and precibu^a^
Deum ^usi^.
let them remember that the Apostles meddled not therewith, but the brethren
being first assembled, and their prayers powered forth unto God. Thirdly, we
must avoid impiety and idolatry therein, The lot is cast into the lap,
Prove. 16.
but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord. Fourthly, we must not
apply the oracles of God in his sacred Ad negoti^ saecularia and vitae huius
vanitatem* divina oracula convertere. Aug. ad inquisit. Ian. Epist. 119. cap.
20. see more there Scriptu^ est. Paul we know.
wherein they intolerably offend, that for every trifle stolen from them, or
casually gone, are strongly conceited, by reciting the verse of the Psalm,
when thou saweth a thief, thou rannest with him, and using an hollow key, or
by using a ^i^e and a pair of sheares, not without blasphemous invocation of
the names of some saints, to make themselves savers again. Doubtless the
devil, whom they gratify in this sorcery, who also produced scriptures, and
the names of Saints to as good purpose as they do, has sifted these men to
the bran, and left not a grain of good Christianity in them. Augustins
judgment (me seems) is over favorable unto them, who though he rather
wished they should take their lottes from the leaves of the gospel, then
run to enquire of divelles, yet he misliked that custom, that the oracles of
God should be converted to secular affairs, Tamen ista mihi displicet
consuetudo.
and the vanities of this life. We may justly control them from the same
Psalm, What have thou to do, to take my covenant within thy mouth, seeing
thou hate to be directed by it? thou give thy mind to evil, and with thy
tongue thou forgest deceit: thou sit and imaginest against thy brother,
and slaunderest thy mothers son. Thus indeed they do: for he is the thief
whom e^ther they in their jealousy think upon, or the devil and father of
lies in his malignitie How has Satan filled your hearts, that you should
lie unto the holy Ghost? Acts 5.
You have not lied unto men, but unto God: undoubtedly he has a girdle of
truth about his reins, that will heavily repay it. In Messenicis.
Therefore the fact of Temon the Priest recorded by Pausanias, can never be
pardoned amongst religious ears, who in a controversy for land between
Cresphon, and the issue of Aristodemus, to be tried by lottery, in favor of
Cresphon, who had bribed him, beguiled the right heirs. The lottes were of
claye, to be cast into a pot of water, wherein as they sooner or later
resolved, so the matter should be ended. But Cresphons being hardened in the
fire, the other but against the sun, it is not hard to say whether longer
endured. Within these borders must our lottes be held: Sors non est aliquid
mali, sed res in humana dubitatione divinam indicans voluntatem. Glos. in Psalm.
30: (...) August. Te facimus fortuna D^am, etc.
and then there is little question, but as in nature they are things
indifferent, so being bettered by such conditions, they may rightfully be borne
with. Concerning cards and dice, as usual pastimes to some, as the fields to
walk in, deviding to men the wager or stake pawned down betwixt them, if any
have pronounced with so much severity as to comprise them within the number and
train of unlawful lots, and utterly to abandon the^, for mine own part I
hinder them not, let them proceed to their judgments. Yet amongst sober and
discreet companions, who use them to no bad end, and neither are so gross on
the one side to make fortune their goddess, in assigning good or evil luck
unto her, nor so saucy on the other, to call the majesty of God from heaven to
determine their doubts, (for they look not so high in such frivolous and
gamesome quarrelles, but as they carelessly undertake them, so they further them
as lightly, and as merrily end them, with no other purpose of heart, save only
to pass the time, if not so well as they might, which scarcely any recreation
is so happy to challenge, yet not so ill as the most do, to exercise wit, to
cherish society, to refresh the mind for a space from serious occupations) I
think it, under correction, no great offense. Which temperate excuse of mine
notvvithstanding far be it of, that it should be rackt to the patronaging of
Temo's cosenage; Parvum est alea ludere. A^ no^ paruu^ ossuescere.
answered him, it is a small thing to play at dice; but the Philosopher
replied, it is no small fault to make it an habit.

The last thing that I mislike in them, is that, that Alexander the great,
both blamed and amerced in his friends* that when they played

The third sort of lottes serving to divination, Divinatory lottes.
the law of God in a thousand express prohibitions and comminatio^s, and the
laws of men both civil and canon mainly impugn, as by their edicts,
penances, anathemas has been puplished to the world. They had many sorts of
predictions, presensions, foreseeings, and none of the^ all, but either with
the manifest invocatio^ of devils, or with their secret insinuation at the
least. In co^iuring, and witchery, it is too open; but in their necroma^cy, and
such like prophecyings by signs and characters in the fire; are, water,
ground, entrales of beasts, flying, crying, feeding of birds, See. Aret. in
probl. loc. 6^.
lineaments of the hand, proper names, numbers, verses, lead, wax, ashes,
sage-leaues, and the rest, it is somewhat more secret, but no less certain.
The artificers and masters of which faculty, are most to be excused, that used
least earnest; Cato.
at whom a wise man marveiled, that they laughed not one upon the other when
they met, as being privy to themselves of enriching the ears of the world
with fables, Aures divicant alienas, sua^ ut auro locupletent domos.
to enrich their own houses with treasure. But how scrupulous and fearful
others were, how deeply enthralled to the collusions of Satan, is most
ridiculous to consider: as that Pub. Claudius should be condemned by full
parliament, because, in the first Carthaginian war, being in sight by sea,
and asking how the birds fared, to take his good speed there hence, upon
knowledge given him that they would not come out of their coope to feed, he
answered so irreligiouslye as it was taken, Quia esse nolu^t, biba^t and in
malum abeant. Val. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Behold, they will no^ eat, let them drink, and go with a mischief, and so
cast them all into the sea. Who would ever have thought that C. Marius being
condemned by the Senate of Rome, seeing an ass to forsake his provendour, and
go to the water to drink, should take occasion thereby, to forgo the land,
and betake himself to sea for safety of his life? Cap. 5.
Yet was the accident imputed both to the providence of his Gods that directed
him, and to the skill that himself had in interpreting religion. Augustine
writes, that one came to Cato, 2. De do^t* Christ. 19.
and told him in great sooth, that a ratte had gnawen his hose: Cato answered
him, it was no marve^le; but much more, if his hose had gnawen the rat. Fabius
Maximus refused his dictatorship, because he heard a ratte but squeake. If a
man should forsake but his meat, or bed for the squeaking of many rattes, or a
scholar his books, because a ratte had eaten the leaves thereof in our times,
who would not laugh at their folly? This was their misery and seruility, who
went from the living to the dead, from the mouth of the Lord, to the mouths
of enchanters, birds, beasts, devilles, from the law and the testimony to
those lawles, curious, idolatrous, pernicious, magical devises.

The manner of our charmers is not much behind these in impurity and
prophanenes. Wherein what reason can be given of applying holy writ to unholy
actions, of uttering vnsignificant words which carry no sense, of drawing
vnproportionate figures, of tying to folish and unnecessary conditions, but a
very secret operation, whereby the devil does infuse himself into such
workings? For curinge the toothache, or the like disease, a writing must be
red or kept, but great regard to be had, whether it be written in paper or
parchment, in sheep or in goat skin, with the right or the left hand
whether by a Virgin or common person. Sometimes Christ himself is abused and
his sacred word, with apocryphal, imaginarye, false allegations; as that Jesus
spoke to his wife, when he was never married, and such like blasphemies. You
will say, they use good prayers in their chambers. I answer with Augustine,
Si magicae, non vult tales; si licitae, non vult per tales. li. 8. de civ. Dei.
c. 19 Miracula no^ sacitis, quae si faceretis, tamen in vobis caveremus. li. 13.
they are either magical or lawful: If magical, God vvil none of such
prayers; if lawful, yet not by such orators. I deny not but a good event
has sometimes ensued, thy loss recovered, thy teeth cured: what then? do
thou not know the power of Satan, that he transformeth himself into an Angel
of light, works by strong delusions, lyinge wonders, that, if it were
possible, the very elect should be seduced? Augustine wrote to Faustus the
Manichee; you work no miracles, which if you did, yet in you we would beware
your very miracles. It is the deserved judgment of God upon those that have
recourse to these unlawful helps (wherein though they understand not
themselves sometimes, what they write or speak, the Devil understands well
enough) to leave them to the God of this world, the prince of darkness, who
rules in the children of disobedience, because they fly from the revealed
will of God, to prestigiatorie and fraudulent impieties. The Lord demands in
the 1. of Kings, who shall entice, Chap. 22.
that is, persuade and deceive Ahab, that he may go and fall at Ramoth in
Gilead? one said thus, an other thus: Then there came forth a spirit and said,
I will entice him: wherewith? I will go and be a false spirit in the mouth of
all his Prophets. Then the L. said, thou shall entice him, and shall prevail*
go forth and do so. Such is the counsel that the Lord holds in heaven, to
bring to confusion al those whom the load-star of his written word cannot
lead, but they will take to themselves crooked and perverse ways, which go
down to the chambers of death. I now conclude all these with that memorable
saying of Augustine, Talibus sacris mortem quaerat aeterna^.

That we may know for whose cause. Text.


He that desires neither to live happily hereafter, nor godly in this present
world, let him purchase eternal death by such rites. Thus much of the course
resolved upon, Come let us cast lottes.

The reason why they resolved upon lottery, was, that they might know for
whose sake the evil was upon the^. Who are they that enquire this? vir ad
amicu^ suu^, every one in the ship; no doubt Jonas amongst the rest, as quick
to dissemble his fault, as he that was most innocent. Look from the crown
of the head to the soul of the foot, from the master of the ship to the
ship-boy, they had all deserved this tempest; full of idolatry, impurity of
life, fitter, for their wickedness, whom the jaws of hell then the waves of
the sea should swallowe up. Yet as if they were free from stain, they will try
by lottes, for whose cause the evil is upon them. So is the nature of man
wedded to it self, leaving her eyes at home in a box, in discerning her own
infirmities, Pupula duplex fulmin^t, Ovid.
but in the faults of others, as quick sighted as eagles. Then every eye has
a double ball to see with, and they stand without the head (which is the worst
kind of eye) nearer to other men then to themselves. Jonas, I grant, was the
man, whom the anger of God, as an arrowe from a bow, levelled at; yet did not
the others know so much, and therefore had little reason to think, that there
was not matter enough each man in himself to deserve the punishment. This
translation of faults from our selves to others, was a lesson learned in
paradise, when the first rudimentes and catechism of all rebellions was
delivered to the children of men. For Adam being charged with the crime of
disobedience, he put it to the woman, the woman to the serpent, as if both
the former had not been touched. 1. Sam. 14.
When Saul caused lottes to be cast between him and Jonathan on the one side,
and all Israel on the other, to find out the man who, contrary to their
vow, had eaten any thing before night, he says not unto God, declare the
offender, which he should have done; but by an arrogant speech in favor of
his own integrity, Cedo integrum, show me the innocent person. Jonathan, I
confess, 2. Sam. 16.
was guilty in this one offense, if it were an offense; yet was the
innocence of Saul discredited in many others. Shemei a dead dog, as Abishai
termed him, forgets his own people, I mean, the sins of his own
bosom, and raileth at David with a tongue as virulent as aspes, Come forth,
Come forth, thou man of blood, thou man of Beliall; thou art taken in thy
wickedness, because thou art a murderer. How did the friends of Job break a
bruised reed, and add affliction to the afflicted, making their whole
conference with him an invectiue against his wickedness, and conveying in
vvithall a secret apology and purgation of their own justice? Luke 13.
It appears by our Saviors answer, in the gospel of Luke, that there
were some amongst the people, which supposed those Galilaeans, whose blood
Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices, greater sinners then the rest; and
those eighteen, upon whom the tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, sinners
above all men that dwelled in Jerusalem. Our Savior answers them by
occupation, I tell you, Nay; but except you amend your lives, you shall
likewise perish. When the Barbarians of Malta saw the viper hanging upon Paul's
hand, they inferred presently, (men more viperous and pestilent themselves)
this man surely is a murderer, Acts 28.
whom, though he has escaped the sea, yet vengeance does not suffer to
live. It was the usual manner of the Scribes and Pharisees, to sow pillowes of
selfe-liking under their own armeholes, and to take no knowledge of beams in
their own eyes, but evermore to except against their brethren* as men not
worthy the earth they trod upon: Why eats your master with Publicanes and
sinners? This man is a friend to sinners. Again, if this man were a Prophet,
he would surely have known, who, and what woman this is that touches him;
for she is a sinner: (when the woman with a box of spike-nard anointed his
feet.) Such doctrine preached the Pharisee that went into the temple to
justify himself, (a lying prophet against his own soul,) I thank God I am
not as other men, Luke 1^.
nor as this Publicane. He spoke like Caiaphas, truer then he was aware of:
he was not as the Publicane, in confession of his misdeedes; nor the
Publicane as he, in arrogation of justice. Thus Diogenes treads down the
pride of Plato, but with greater pride; and the Pharisee reproves the sin
of a Publicane, but with greater sin. Mala men's, malus animus; An evil
mind in it self is an evil mind toward all others. You see the disease of
mankind, worthy to be searched and seared with severe reprehension, how
strange we are to our own, how domestical and inward to other men's
offenses; how blind in our selves, how censorius and lynce-eied against our
brethren; how willing to smooth our own pates with the balm of assentation
and selfe-pleasing, how loath to acknowledge that which we brought from the
womb, I am a sinful man; 1. Tim. 1.
but to go further with Paul, Ego primus, I am chief, to be greatest in the
kingdom of heaven, we will scarsly do it. Well, it is a sentence of eternity,
hanging as in a table over the judgment seat of God, and his eyes are never
removed from it, He that commends himself is not allowed, 2. Cor. 10.
but he whom the Lord commends: and this other is not unlike unto it. He that
condemns another man, is not his judge, but God has appointed a judge both
for small and great. Who art thou, says James, Jacob. 4*
that iudgest another? If he be, alter, unto thee, an other from thy self, and
without thy skin, judge him not. He that judges his brother, judges the
law, (whose office it is to judge) and offers injury to the lawgiver
himself. For there is one lawgiver which is able to save, and to destroy.
Romans 14.
Who art thou that iudgest another man's servant? he stands or falls unto
his own master (not unto thee,) yea contrary to thy thought and will, he
shall be established, for God is able to make him stand. But why do thou judge
thy brother? he is not thy servant, but thy brother; your condition is alike.
We shall all appear before the judgment seat of Christ* Judge nothing
therefore before the time, 1. Cor. 4.
until the Lord come, who will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and
make the counsels of the heart manifest, and then shall every man have praise of
God. First then, because he is another, 2. because he serves his own Lord, 3.
because he is thy brother, 4. because the lawgiver has power of life and
death in his hands, and his law must judge, 5. because the time of judgment
is not yet come; for all these reasons and persuasions, Judge not another man.
Judge him by law, if thou be a magistrate; judge him by charity and
discretion, if a private christian; and be not only an eye to observe, and a
tongue to condemn, but an hand to support him: yet rather, if I may counsel
thee, judge thy self, J^r. 24. Vol^ vul^^^^rae iudica^us praesentari, non
iudicandus. 1. Cor. 11.
that thou be not judged with the world. Say with Bernarde upon the
Canticles, I will present my self before the countenance of Gods wrath
already judged, not to be judged. For if we would judge our selves, (the
Apostle tells us) we might escape judgment. Call thy soul to daily account
of thine own misdeeds, Thus did Sextius, when the day was ended and the night
come, wherein he should take his rest, he would ask his mind, what evil
have thou healed this day? Quod malu^ hodie sanasti^ Senec. de ira lib. 3. Ioh.
21. 1. Chr. 17. Luke 18.
what vice have thou stood against? in what part art thou bettered? Say not, as
Peter did of John, Hic autem quid? what shall he do? as one careful of other
men's estates; but, Domine, quis ego sum? Lord, who am I, that thou should
regard me with such favor? Domine, miserere mei peccatoris, O Lord, be
merciful unto me a sinner. Thus knock at the breast of thine own conscience,
break up those iron and heavy gates, which bar up thine own sins. Look
not into the coffers and corners of other men's infirmities. Otherwise thy
dissembled sins which thou hordest up within thy bones, and art afraid to
set before thine eyes, shall be written in the brow of thy face, brought to
light, and blown abroad with the sound of trumpets, that all the world may
say, Lo, this is the man that justified himself in his life time, and would
not confess his sin.

THE TENTH LECTVRE.
Cap. 1. ver. 7. And the lot fell upon Jonas.
OF the four parts before specified and collected out of this verse, the last
only remains to be examined, to wit, the success of the lottes; The
success of the lottes.
which the last member thereof does plainly open unto us. Let me once again
remember the proverb unto you: The lots are cast into the lap, but the whole
disposition thereof is of the Lord. In a matter merely casual, for ought the
wisdom of man can judge, (as Tullie sometimes said to a man who spoke rashly
and unadvisedly, 2. Acad. qu.
Hoc non est considerare, sed quasi sortiri quid loquare, this is not to speak
with discretion, but as it were by lot, and hap-hazard,) the trial standing
hereupon, who threw more, who less; who drew black, who white; and so forth;
the choice of the whole bunch lying before him, and his own hands, his carvers
and ministers in the action, each man faining that hope to him self for his
evasion, which the son of Sirach mentions: Eccle. 16.
In populo magno non agnoscar; quae est anima mea in ta^ immensa creatura? I
cannot be known in so great a multitude; and what is my one soul amongst a
100? yet does the finger of the lot directly and faithfully point him out, for
whose cause the storm was sent. The strong persuasion that these men had, that
their lot would not err in the verdit thereof, Voluntati^ propositum operatur
omnia.

1. de not. De.


gives a singular testimony and approbation to the providence of the godheade,
as being an universal, imperial art, which all the affairs in the world are
subject unto, that in the greatest and smallest things, in matters of both
choice and chance, as they seem to us, the wisdom and knowledge of God is at
hand to manage them, according to the Apostles speech, Ephe. 1. He works all
things after the counsel and purpose of his will: so first, he has a will;
secondly, a counsel to go before his will; thirdly, an effect and
accomplishment to succeed it; lastly, as general and patent a subject, as the
world has. There are Philosophers, and have been, which thought that the Gods
had no regard of humane affairs: whose opinion (says Tullie) if it be true,
what piety can there be, what sanctity, what religion? Others, though they went
not so far as to exempt al things, yet they withdrew the smaller from the
heavenly providence. For it was thought most injurious to bring down the
majesty of God so low, as Vsque ad apiu^ formicaru^que perfectione^.

2. Acad. qu. Minutorum operum fabricator. He made a chariot, that was covered
under the winge of a gnatte, and a ship under a bees wing.


to the husba^ding of bees and pismires, as if in the number of Gods there were
so^e Myrmecides to carue and procure the smaller works. Elsewhere he also
recites their improvident speeches to the same purpose: as, for the smaller
things, Neque agelios singulorum, nec viticulas persequuntur. 3. De not. De. Ea
cura quietor solicitas?
that Gods neglect them; they go not so far as to take view of every parcel of
ground, and little vine that every one has, neither if blasting or hail has
endamaged any man, does Jupiter observe it; nay they make a scorn, that those
who are quiet and at ease in heaven, should trouble themselves about petty
occasions. The Peripatetickes, an other sect and college of philosophers,
housed that providence above the moon, and thought it had no descent beneath
the circle thereof, to intend inferior businesses. What do the Epicures in
Job say less, Job. 22.
(Eliphas at least in their names?) How should God know? can he judge through
the dark clouds? the clouds hide him that he cannot see, and he walks in
the circle of heaven. A verroes surnamed the Commenter, a Spanish physician,
that he may seem to be mad with reason, by reason fortifieth the former
judgments. For he thinks that the knowledge and understanding of God would
become vile, Vilesceret Dei intellectus.
if it were abased to these inferior and infirmer obiectes. As if a glass
were deformed, because it presents deformities; or the beams of the sun
defiled, because they fall upon muddie places; or the providence of God
vilified, who though he has his dwelling on high, Psalm. 113.
yet he abaseth himself to behold things in heaven and in earth. As he spoke
the word and all things were created; so he sustaineth and bears up all
things by the power of his word. Hebr. 1.
His creation was as the mother to bring them forth, his providence the nurse
to bring them up; his creation a short providence, his providence a perpetual
creation; the one setting up the frame of the house, the other looking to the
standing and reparation thereof. I cannot determine this point in terms more
grave and significant, then Tully has used against the Atheists and Epicures
of that age. 1. De na. De
He is, Curiosus and plenus nego^ij Deus; a curious God, exquisite in all
things, full of business. He is not a rechles, careless, improvident God, or a
God to halfes, and in part, above and not beneath the moon, or, as the Syrians
deemed, upon the mountains, and not in the valleys, in the greater and not in
the lesser emploime^ts; he is very precise, and inquisitiue, having a thousand
eyes, and as many hands, yea all eye, all hand, both to observe, and to
dispatch withal; examining the least moments and titles in the world that can
be imagined, to an handful of meal, and a cruse of oil in a poor widows
house; the calving of hindes, the feeding of ^ong Lions and ravens, the f^lling
of sparrowes to the ground, clothing of lillies, and grass of the field,
numbering of hairs, and (to return to that from which I first digressed) the
success of lottes. I cannot conceive how the land of Canaan could be
divided, Numb. 26. and 33.
as it was, between many and few, (for so was the order by God set, that many
should have the more, and few the lesser inheritance) unless the hand of the
Lord had been in the lap to reach unto every tribe and family, what was
convenient and proportionate: otherwise, the fewer might have had the more, and
the more the less inheritance. And was it not much (think you) that when
Samuel had anointed Saul king over Israel, he would afterward go from his
right, leave a certainty, and put it to the hazard of lottes, whether Saul
should be king or no, but that he assured himself, 1. Sam. 10*
the providence of the Lord would never forsake his intendement? Therefore of
all the tribes of Israel, Benjamin; of all the families of Benjamin, Matri; of
all the kindred of Matri, the house of Cis; and of all the house of Cis, Saul
was chosen to the kingdom. In the book of Esther, the day and the month were
by lot appointed, when all the people of the Jews, old and young, women and
children, Chap. 3.
within the city of Shusan, and throughout all the provinces of the kingdom,
should be destroyed. But did the Almighty sleep at this wicked and bloody
designeme^t? or was his eye held and blind-folded that he could not see it? No:
that powerful and dreadful God, who holds the bal of the world in his hand,
and keeps a perfect calendar of all times and seasons, had so inverted the
course of things for his chosens sake, that the month and day before
prefined, became most dismal to those that intended mischief. Without further
allegations, this may suffice as touching the success of the lots, and
consequently, the providence of God in the moderation thereof.

It is now a question meet to be discussed, the offender being found, A
multitude punished for one man's offense. Prove 30.
whether it stand with the justice of God to scourge a multitude, because one
in the company has transgressed? For though I condemned their arrogance
before, in that, not knowing who the offender was, they wiped their mouths
(each man in the ship) with the harlot in the Proverbs, and asked in their
hearts, Is it I? yet when the oracle of God has now dissolved the doubt, and
set as it were his mark upon the trouble and plague of the whole ship, they
had some reason to think, that it was not a righteous part to lay the faults
of the guilty upon the harmless and innocent. This was the cause that they
complained of old, that the whole fleet of the Argiues was overthrown, Vnius
ob noxam and furias Aiacis Oilei, for one man's offense. Nay they were not
content there to rest, but they charged the justice of God with an accusation
of more weight, Plerunque nocen^es
Praeterit, examinatque indignos, inque nocentes, Lucr^^.

as though oftentimes he freed the nocent, and laid the burden of woes upon
such as deserved them not. It appears in Ezechiell, that the children of
Israel had taken up as ungracious a byword amongst them, Ezech. 18. Ier. 31.
the fathers have eaten the sower grape, and the childrens teeth are set on
edge: and they conclude therehence; the ways of God are not equal. It was an
exception that Bion took against the Gods, that the fathers smarte was
devolved to their posterity; and thus he scornefully matched it, Plut. de sera
number. vin.
as if a physician, for the grandfathers or fathers disease, should minister
physic to their sons or nephews. They spoke evil of Alexander the great,
for razing the city of the Branchides, because their auncestoures had pulled
down the temple of Miletum. They mocked the Thracians for beating their wives
at that day, because their foreru^ners had killed Orpheus. And Agathocles
escaped not blame for wasting the island Corcyra, because in ancienter times it
gave entertainment to Ulysses. Nay Abraham himself the father of the
faithful, heir of the promises, friend of God, disputes with the Lord about
Sodom, to the like effect: Genesis 18.
Will thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked? Again, Be it far from
thee for doing this thing, to slay the righteous with the unrighteous, and that
the just should be as the unjust, this be far from thee: shall not the judge of
all the world do right? Numb. 16.
In the book of Numbers, when God willed Moses and Aaron to separate
themselves from the congregation that he might at once destroy them, they fell
upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of every creature,
has not one man only sinned, and will thou be wroth with all the
congregation? ^. Chr. 21.
In the first of Chronicles, when for the offense of David in numbering his
people, the plague fell upon them, and slew seventy thousand of them, the king
with the elders fell down, and cried unto the Lord, Is it not I, that
commanded to number the people? It is even I that have sinned and committed
this evil: but these sheep what have they done? O Lord my God, I beseech
thee, let thine hand be upon me, and upon my fathers house, and not on thy
people for their destruction.

I answer this heinous crimination and grievance against the righteousness of
God, in few words, from the authorities of Ezechiel, and Jeremy, before
alleged: Behold, all souls are mine (says the Lord) both the soul of the
father, and also of the son are mine: the soul that sins, it shall die. O
ye house of Israel, is not my way equal? or are not your ways unequal? If it
were a truth which the poet sang to his friend, Hora^.
Delicta maiorum immeritus lues, Roman. thou shall bear the faults of thy
forefathers without thine own deservings, the question were more difficult.
But who is able to say, my heart is clean, though I came from an unclean
seed? though I were borne of a Morian, I have not his skin; though an
Ammorite were my father, and my mother an Hittite, I have not their nature; I
have touched pitch, and am not defiled; I can wash mine hands in innocence,
and say with a clear conscience, I have not sinned? But if this be the case of
us all, that there is not a soul in the whole cluster of mankind, that has
not offended, though not as principal touching the fact presently enquired of,
as Achan in taking the accursed thing, Corah in rebelling, David in numbering
the people, yet an accessory in consenting and co^cealing; if neither principal
nor accessory in that one sin, yet culpable in a thousand others, committed in
our life time, (perhaps not open to the world, but in the eyes of God as bright
as the sun in the firmament, for the scorpion has a stinge, though he has
not thrust it forth to wound us, and man has malice, though he has not
outwardly showed it;) it may be, some sins to come, which God foreseeth, and
some already past, which he recou^teth: shall we stand in argument with God, as
man would plead with man, and charge the judge of the quick and dead with
injurious exactions, I have paid the things that I never took, I have borne
the price of sin which I never committed? You hear the ground of mine
answer. We have al sinned, father and son, rush and branch, and deservedly are
to expect that wages, from the hands of God, which to our sin appertains: and
touching this present company, I nothing doubt but they might particularly be
touched for their proper and private iniquities, though they had missed of
Jonas. Bias to a like fare of passengers, shaken with an horrible tempest as
these were, and crying to their Gods for succor, answered not without some jest
in that earnest, hold your peace, Silete, nevo^ hac illi navigare sentiant.
Bri^son.
least the Gods hap to hear that you pass this way: noting their lewdness to
be such, as might justly draw down a greater vengeance.

Besides, it cannot be denied, but those things which we seyer and part in our
conceits, by reason that distance of time and place has sundred the^, some
being done of old, some of late, some in one quarter of the world, some in an
other; those does the God of knowledge unite, and veweth them at once, as if
they were done together. Say, that being young thou were riotous, gluttonous,
libidinous, given to drinking and surfeiting, giving thy strength to harlots;
shall not thine old age rue it? art thou not one and the sa^e person both in
thy younger and older years? in the waxing and in the waning of thy days? shall
the difference and change of times exempt thee from the gout, dropsy, and the
like distemperature? Thy grandfather, and 2. or 3. degrees beyond, thy father,
and thy self, Et natinatorum, and qui nascentur ab illis, thy childrens
children, and nephews to come, you are all but one house, (Aeacidae from
Aeacus) springing from one root, the head of the family, in his sight and
account, who esteems a 1000. generations but as one day. Plutarch himself
was wise enough to answer the argument. There is not the like comparison
betwixt father and son, as betwixt a workman and his work, neither can they
alike be separated: for that which is borne or begotten, Cumex ipso, non ab
ipso genitum est, velut pars quaedam. De ser. number. ^ind.
is not only from the father, but of him, as a part belonging unto him. The
Castilions blood in France spilt at the massacre, may rightfully be required of
the Guisian race, in the 4. or 5. generation to come. This is the cause that
David curses the wicked on both sides; both in their descent, let their
children be vagabondes and beg their bread; and in their ascent, let the
iniquity of his father be had in remembrance, and let not the sin of his
mother be done away. The like is daily practiced in the community and fellowship
of diverse parts within the same body; as in a matter of felony, the hand
only has taken and borne away, but the feet are clapped in iron, the belly
pinched with penury, the bones lie hard, and the best iointe is endangered for
it. Sundry parts, though distinguished both in place and office, feel the
punishment, which, they may fondly say, the hand only deserved. Yea, the eye
may be sore, and a vein pricked in the arm to cure it; the hoof tender and
weak, and the top of the ho^ne anointed for remedy thereof; eve^ so, in the
body of a city, the body of an army, the body of a church, the body of a ship,
though happily few offend, yet their iniquity is brought upon the head of a
whole multitude. The kings are mad, the Greeks are plagued; Hesiod.
(...), the whole city oftentimes reapeth the fruit of one wicked man
amongst them. What injury is done therein? is it more then one city? and is
not that citizen a member of their body? Is not Socrates one and the same man
at the head, and at the foot? is not England one and the same land, at
Barwicke, and at the Mount? is not London one and the same city, at Ludgate,
and at Aldgate? These may be the reasons, why the whole number of passengers is
plagued both in the loss of their wares, and in the hazard of their lives, for
the principal transgression of Jonas. 1. they were wicked themselves, because
they were idolatrous, and what other corruptions they had, the Lord knows: 2.
they were all but one body, under the same discipline and government, tied
together by orders and laws for sea, as by iointes, by reason they had
entertained, and consorted themselves with disobedient Jonas. Other causes
there may be secret unto God, which I dare not search out. Why should I climb
into paradise, or p^ie into the arc, to behold his counsels? when he has set
darkness and clouds about his pavilio^, why should I labor to remove the^? We
know not the reasons of many a thing belonging to our common life, how it
comes that our clothes are warm about our backs, when the earth is quiet
through the south-winde; Job. 37.
and shall we reach after hidden knowledge? A plague began in Aethiopia, filled
Athe^s, Plutar.
killed Pericles, vexed Thucy dides: or to match the example; a plague
begins in France, takes shipping at Newhave^, la^deth in England with
Englishmen, harbors it self in London, and never departs therehence
again. Will you know the reason hereof? It may be, that the works of God may be
made manifest, as Christ spoke of the blind man; Ioh. 9. or to show his power
that he has over his clay; to exercise his justice; to practice and prove our
patience, whether we will curse him to his face, as (it may be) the devil has
informed against us; or to apply the continual physic of affliction and
chastiseme^t unto us, that we ru^ not into desperate maladies. For there are 4.
kinds of me^ which by 4. kinds of means come to heaven: 1. some buy it at a
price, which bestow al their temporal goods for the better co^passing thereof:
2. so^e catch it by violence, they forsake fathers, mothers, land, living,
life, all that they have, for that kingdoms sake: Mercantur* Rapiunt. ^urantur.
Compelluntur. Bonavent* in Luc
3. some steal it, they do their good deeds secretly, and they are openly
rewarded: 4. others are enforced to take it, and by continual afflictions made
to fall into the liking thereof. Or whatsoever else be the cause, which the
sanctuary of heaven has reserved to it self, and buried in light that may not
be approached unto, this I am sure of, that the challe^ge of the Apostle shall
stand like a wall of brass against all the obiectio^s in the world, Nu^quid
iniquitas apud Deu^? Is there any unrighteousness with God? And so far was it
of, that these mariners received loss by their loss, Rom 9.
that it was their occasion to bring them to the knowledge and fear of the
true God, as hereafter shall appear unto you in the tendering of their vows,
and other the like religious duties.

Then said they unto him, tell us for whose cause this evil is upon us, etc.
Having presumed that the lots could not lie, The eight verse.

Then said they unto him, tell us for etc.


being governed and guided by the wisdo^e of God, they gather themselves
together like bees, and al make a common incursion upon Jonas. For, by
likelihood of their demands, (because they are many in number, and many to the
same effect, as some supposed) it is not improbable, that their whole troop
assaulted him, and each one had a pull after his fashion; and as they had sundry
heads and mouths, so they had sundry speeches to express one and the same
thing: and therefore one asked, vnde venis? whence co^mest thou? another, quae
terra tua? what is thy country? a third, ex quo populo? of what people art
thou? when his people, country, and dwelling place differ not in substance. And
certainly I cannot blame them, if in such peril of their lives, when the first
borne of death, the next and immediatest death to sight, was upon the^, they al
make an head, and open their mouths without order or course, against the
worker of their woes. When Achan was brought to the valley of Achor to be
executed, he, his sons, daughters, asses, sheep, the silver, garment, wedge of
gold, his tent, all that he had, there produced, Ios. 7.
it is said, that all Israel threw stones at him, and burnt them with fire,
and stoned them with stones, as being the very cause that Israel could not
stand against their enemies. In the conspiracy at Rome, against Julius Caesar,
there were not fewer (by report) then 24. daggers stabbed into his body,
because he was taken by the nobility of Rome to be the perturber of their
common wealth, and an enemy to the common liberty. An oath of association was
taken in many places of this land (I know not if in the whole) within these
few years, for the pursuit and extirpation of those persons, together with
their confederates and, as I remember, their families, who by treacherous
machination should violate the life and crown of our gracious Sovereign. Was
it not grounded upon this presumption, that the authors of common calamities,
and subverters of states, can never be persecuted with too much violence?
Traitors executed at Tyborne, of late, were sent, D. Lopu^ and his fellows.
I say not to their graves, but to their ends, such as they were, too too
merciful for traitors, with such a showte of the people, to s^ale their
affections and assentes, as if they had gained an harvest, or were deviding a
spoil; and I doubt not, but the Angels in heaven reio^ce, when they see such
deliverances.

Others distinguish the questions, and make them implie several things; Five
demaundes.
as if they enquired of five sundry matters. 1. his fact; Indica tell us, not
for whom, but for what, this evil is upon us? quae opera tua? vnde venis? 4.
his region; quae terra tua? 5. his dwelling ex quo populo? which last may be
referred to the notifying of his service and religion, whereof it was easy to
guess by the city he came from.

In the general course of all which particulars, we have a singular document
and instruction of justice, Just judgment.
from barbarous nations. Jonas had been detected by the suffrage of God
himself, speakinge in the lotte, and doubtless by these men, held and
reputed the principal malefactor in the ship. The lotte fell upon Jonas;
what needs more conviction? how should their eyes now spare, or their
hands longer forbear him? me thinks, they should now cry out against him,
as the men of Jobs tabernacle, Job. 31. Ier. 37.
who will give us his flesh to eat? or as the Priests and false prophets
against Jeremy, the judgment of death belongs to this man: Away with him,
away with him from the earth, he is not worthy to live. They do not thus; but
in the extremest peril of their lives, having no time to bethink themselves,
driven to take counsel without counsel, Consilium in arena.
as fensers in the sand, who defend themselves but as the blow falls out:
yet they deliberate in the cause, they evolue all circumstances for the
manifestation of his fact, and by a most exquisite inquisition they proceed in
judgment, what is thy fact? thy trade? thy travel? thy country? thy people?
Tullie affirms, that a kind of justice there is amongst robbers and pirates
in deviding their booties, and mainteining their fraternities: such a justice,
as Ananias the high priest was a judge, who sat to judge Paul according to
the law, Acts 23*
and caused him to be smitten contrary to the law: a painted judge, and a
painted justice. But it serves me thus far to collect, that even in the
tents of Mesech, in the societies of the most wicked, there is a counterfeite
justice, an image and imitation of that virtue, without the which, Jupiter
himself (says Plutarch) cannot reign in heaven; much less can amity be
maintained betwixt man and man. The empress wisely admonished her husband,
when sitting at play, and minding his game more then the prisoners, he
pronounced sentence upon them; The life of man is not as a game at tables,
where a wooden man is taken up by a blotte, and thrown aside, and the loss
is not great. Non est hominum vitae ludus talorum. Aelianu^.
And whether it be life or land, there is no great difference in the account
of God: for the bread of the poor man is his life, and he that oppresses the
poor, eats him like bread. Whether therefore it be in the life or in the
living of man, the office of justice is not to wade to the anckles, but up to
the chinne, to sound the bottom and depth of the cause, carefully to confer
all presumptions and inducements, prudently to deliberate, to enucleate all
difficulties, and though the case be dangerous, as this was, and great
preiudices against the examinate, yet by a curious indagation to have the
proof of the fact clearly laid forth. We have a president hereof in God
himself: Who though he be nearer to offenders, then the bark to the tree, by
the presence of his godhead, which fills heaven and earth, yet when the cry
of Sodom and Gomorre was great, (to leave an example of justice to the sons
of men, Genesis 18.
) I will now go down* (says he) and see, whether they have done altogether
according to that cry; and if not, that I may know. This descension of God to
see and to know, what is it else, but the delivery of his justice by rule, by
number, and by balance, that first he will weigh and ponder the cause,
afterward measure out his judgments? Now to the particulars.

1. Cuius causa.
In the first of these demaundes which is of the fact, (the other but
conjectures tending to the proof of it,) they are not content with the
sentence of the lot, but they require further the confession of his own mouth,
Indica nobis, Tell us for what cause. The like did Iosuah to Achan. My son
give the glory to God, and tell me what thou have done, hide it not. It is a
part of the glory of God, to justify him and his judgments, to yield to the
victory of truth, when he has put a spirit as it were into lottes and laws,
to guess aright, not to dissemble the force thereof. Now if any shall infer
hereupon, that, by the examples of Iosuah proceeding against Achan, the
mariners against Jonas, the tr^all of life, lands, good name should be
brought from the laws of the country, and put to the decision of lottes:
besides the rule of Jerome upon this place, Privilegia singulorum non faciunt
legem communem, that the privileges of singular men make not a common law; and
the general rule in all examples, that none is further to be followed the^ the
law abetteth and makes it good, Exempla conveniant cum lege communi. Cum
signa flagitantur, non ad salutem, sed ad experienti^m desiderata, Deus
te^tatur. Aug.
otherwise they are to be admired rather then imitated; and it is the te^pting
of God to seek signs when they are not for profit, but only for experience;
and we ought to be very circumspect in executing judgment, and to leave no
lawful means unattempted, least we justify the wicked, and condemn the
innocent; I say, besides al these reasons it appears from both the examples
before specified, that neither Iosuah, nor the mariners rested in the
designation of the lottes, but desired further to be asserteined from their
own confessions, Tell us. Whereunto we may add, that the lottery against
Achan was both occasioned by an unexpected overthrow taken at Ai, and by the
direction of God himself in the whole manner thereof prescribed; and as for
Jonas, he was a figure of Christ, whose vesture was to be parted by lots, and
therefore the deprehension of his offense not to be brought into ordinary
practice.

2. Quae opera tua?
What is thine occupation? If Jonas had confessed and opened his fact, other
likelihoodes and helps to find it out, had been needless; but it seems
that before he could shape his answer to the 1. question, they thrust an other
upon him, and without intermission a third, and yet more* like a peale of
ordinance thundering about his ears, that by the united strength of so many
probabilities, wound together like a foure-folde cord, Jonas may be entangled.

This first of the four probabilities is of great moment to skan the life of
man. What is thine occupation? thy art? thy calling? for 1. some

Those that have no art, are errand, vagabond, wandering persons, as the
planets in the Zodiac, never keeping a fixed place, 1. No art^
and rather using their feet then their hands; or whether they slitt abroad or
gad at home, their calling and art is idleness: for Otium negotium, Idleness is a
business. They are more troubled, I doubt not, how to spend the day, then these
that have a trade wherein to be exercised: they live by the sweat of other men's
brows, and will not disquiet the temples of their own heads. Let me freely
speak without the offense of governors; there are a number in this city,
numerus tantu^, a number only, very artificial in this idle art (those that
can plead their age, impotencie, and necessary necessities, I am their
advocate. I speak of pure and voluntary beggars,) who if they would work and
have it not, it is pity that you have your wealth, that your talent is not
taken from you, and give^ to others who would better use it to Gods behoof:
(they should be Ditis examen domu^, the bees that swarm in rich men's houses,
much more in opulent and wealthy cities; Horat.
many inferior towns are superior unto you in the provision thereof:) but if
they have work, and will not undergo it, why are they suffered? spontanea
lassitudo, a willing and proffered lazines in the body of a man, is an
introduction and argument of greater diseases; and these willing or wilful
rogues are not unapt, if ever occasion be ministered, to pilfer your goods, cut
your throtes, and fire your city, for their better advantage of maintenance.
When Iephtah was cast out of the house by his brethren, because he was the
son of a strange woman, he fled and dwelte in the land of Tob: and there
gathered idle fellows unto him, and they went out with him. Ind. 11. Acts 17.
(...).
The unbelieving Jews, in the Acts, took unto the^ a company of wa^dring
companions, such as stand idle in the market place, wicked men, and gathered a
multitude, and made an uproar in the whole city, and came to the house of
Jason to fetch out Paul and Silas. You see, how ready they are to serve such
turn, to raise a tumult, to make a conspiracy or rebellion, to associate
themselves to any that will but lead them. It were your wisest part to deal
with such lewd and inordinate vvalkers, standers, sitters in the ways of
idleness, as Philippe of Macedon dealt with 2. of his subjects, Alterum e
Macedonia fugere, alteru^ perse^ ^ iussit.
in whom there was little hope of grace: he made one of them run out of the
country, and the other drive him. So his people was rid of both.

Now there be other arts utterly unlawful to be followed; the very naming
whereof does condemn them, 2. Unlawful arts. Mendici, mi mae. etc.
as Coniurers, charmers, moone-prophets, tellers of fortune, (our english
Egyptians) robbers by land, pirates by sea, cosenours, harlottes, bawdes,
usurers, which presently censure a man, as soon as they are but heard of, to
be wickedly disposed.

3. Slippery arts.
There are many besides, which though they have use lawful enough in a common
wealth, yet there is but a narrow path betwixt fire and water, as Esdras
speaks, and one may easily miss to do his duty there. You look perhaps,
that I should rehearse them. Though some are become more odious by reason of
grosser abuses in them, yet I will cover their face, and keep them from the
light (as they covered the face of Haman to keep him from the eyes of men)
because there is too much abuse to be espied in all our arts. Monye has
marred them all: they are all set to sale, as Iugurthe spoke of Rome, and want
but a chap-man. Divines sell the liberty of a good conscience, for favor and
preferment: Lawiers sell not only their labors, but the laws and justice it
self: Physicians sell ignorance, unskillfulness, words, insufficient
drugges: All men of all kinds of trades for the most part, sell honesty,
truth, conscience, oaths, souls for money. Our arts are arts indeed, that
is, cosenages, impostures, frauds, circumventions. Our English tongue does
well express the nature of the word: we call them crafts, and those that
profess them craftes-men; we may as well term them foxes, as Christ
termed Herod; they are so bent to deceit. Others not content with so vulgar
a name, call them mysteries: indeed the mystery of iniquity is in them:
misty, obscure, dark handling, which God shall bring to light in due time.
Call we these callings? sure they are such, whereof the sentence shall be
verified, Many are called unto them, but few elected, to partake the mercies of
God. O harken to the counsel which the Apostle gives, that ye may justify
and warrant your vocations before God and man. Let every one abide in the same
calling, wherein he was called; and to make it significant, 1. Cor. 7.
let every one, wherein he was called, therein abide with God. Let him not stay
l^ke a passenger for a night, but continue and hold himself not only in the
name, but in the nature and use of his calling, that is, let him walk worthy
of it, as in the sight of God, who is a witness and judge to all his
proceedinges. Let him not add unto the challinges and constitutions of God,
the callinges of the Devil, as simony, bribery, forgery, hypocrisy,
periuries, (for these are the Devilles challinges;) and let not those arts and
professions, which were given for the ornaments and helps of our life, be
turned into snares and ginnes to entrappe our brethren. In the audite of our
Lord and master, so far shall we be from giving the accountes of
faithful servauntes, Lord, thy piece has gained other ten, Luke 19. M^na
tua, etc.
(which we have so falsified and defaced with the sleights of Satan;) that we
cannot discharge our selves as the unfaithful reprobate servant did, Behold,
thou have thine own: Mat. 25.
Our lawful and honest vocations, wherein we were first placed, we have so
disguised with our own corrupt additions.

THE XI. LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. verse 8. Whence come thou? which is thy country, and of what
people art thou?
THese three questions now rehearsed, though in seeming not much different, yet
I distinguished a part; making the first to enquire of his journey and
travail, (for confirmation whereof, some a little change the style, quo vadis?
whither go thou? askinge not the place from which he set forth, but to
which he was bound,) or of the society wherewith he had combined himself;
the second of his native country; the third of his dwelling place. For the
country and city may differ; in the one we may be borne, and live in the
other; as for example, a man may be borne in Scotland, dwell in England, or
borne at Bristow, dwell at York. Vnam naturae, alteram civitatis. Alteram loci
patriam, alteram iuris. Whence come thou? Whither go thou.
Wherein that of Tully in his books of laws takes place, I verily think
that both Cato and all free denisens have two countries, the one of nativity,
the other of habitation: as Cato being borne at Tusculum, was received into the
people of the city of Rome. Therefore being a Tusculan by birth, by city a
Roman, he had one country by place, another by law. For we term that our
country, where we were borne, and whereinto we are admitted. So there is some
odds between the two latter questions. There was great reason to demand
both from whence he came, and whither he would* because the travelles of men
are not always to good ends. For the Scribes and Pharisees travail far, if
not by their bodily pases, yet by the affections of their hearts they
compass sea and land; to an evil purpose, to make proselytes, children of
death worse then themselves. As the Pope and the king of Spain send into
India, (they pretend to save souls) indeed to destroy the breed of that
people, as Pharaoh the males of the Hebrews, and to wast their countries. They
walk that walk in the counsel of the ungodly, and in the ways of sinners;
but destruction and unhappiness is in all their ways. They walk that walk
in the ways of an harlot, Prove. 2.
but her house tends to death, and her paths to the dead; they that go
unto her, return not again, neither take hold of the ways of life. Thieves
have their ranges and walks: Surgunt de nocte latrones, they rise in the
night time, they go or ride far from home, that they may be far from
suspicion, but their feet are swifte to shed blood, and they bestow their
pains to work a mischief. Alexander iournied so far in the conquest of the
world, that a Caenu^ in Curt. 9.
soldier told him, we have done as much as mortality was capable of: thou
preparest to go into an other world, and thou seek for an India, unknown
to the Indians themselves, that thou may illustrate more regions by thy
conquest, then the sun ever saw. To what other end I know not, but to feed
his ambition, to enlarge his desire as hell, and to add more titles to his
tomb. Titulum sepulchr^.
They have their travailes and peregrinations, that walk on their bare feet,
with a staff in their hand, and a scrip about their neck, to Saint James of
Compostella, our Lady of Loretto, the dust of the holy land. What to do? the
dead to visit the dead; to honor stocks, and to come home stocks; to
change the air, and to retain their former behavior; to do penance for
sin, and to return laden with a greater sin of most irreligious
superstition, meeter to be repented, if they knew their sin. Of such I may
say, as Socrates sometime answered one, who marveiled that he reaped so little
profit by his travel: Thou art well enough served, says he, because thou
did travel by thy self; for it is not mountains and seas, but the
conference of wisemen that gives wisdom: neither can monumentes and graves,
but the spirit of the Lord, which goes not with those gadders, put holiness
into them. They have their walks and excursions which go from their native
country to Rome, (the first time to see naught, the second to be naught, the
third to die naught; was the old proverb.) The first and last now a days are
not much different: they go to learn naught, they drink up poison there like
a restoratiue, which they keep in their stomachs along Italy, France, other
nations, not minding to disgordge it, till they come to their mothers house,
where they seek to unlade it in her bosom, and to end her happy days. Jonas,
for ought these knew, might have come from his country, a robber, murderer,
traitor, or any the like transgressor, and therefore have ran from thence, as
Onesimus from his master Philemo^, to escape justice; whereupon they ask him,
whence come thou? that they may learn both the occasion and scope of his
journey. And if you observe it well, there is not one question here moved,
(though questions only co^iecturall) but sets his conscience upon the rack,
and wounds him at the heart by every circumstance, whereby his crime might be
aggravated. Such is the wisdom that God inspireth into the hearts of men, for
the trial of his truth, and in the honor of justice, to fit their demands to
the conscience of the transgressors in such sort, that they shall even feel
themselves to be touched, and so closely rounded in the ear, as they cannot
deny their offense. There are diverse administrations yet but one spirit:
Warriors have a spirit of courage to fight, counselors to direct and prevent,
magistrates to govern, judges to discern, examine, convince, and to do right
unto all people. For the questions here propounded, were in effect as if they
had told him, thou dishonourest thy calling, thou breakest thy commission, thou
shamest thy country, thou condemnest thy people, in that thou have committed
this evil.

They ask him first, What is thine art? that bethinking himself to master in
Israel, set over kingdoms and Empires, to build and pull down, plant and
root up, he might remember himself, and call his soul to account, Wretched
man that I am, how ingloriously have I neglected my vocation? They ask him
next, whence co^mest thou? that it might be country; that he people; a
people that had al things but flexible and fleshy hearts; the law, promises,
covenant, service of God, temple of Solomon, chair of Moses, thrones of David,
Patriarks, Prophets, Messiah yet one of this people, in the midst of such
prerogatives, as a cedar-tree amidst her branches, has lived so long amongst
them, that a barbarous tongue is set to accuse him.

What is thy country, and of what people art thou?

Terra bona, gens mala. Ar. Mont.


These two questions following, (that I may join the^ both together,) seem to
enquire, the one more generally, the other more in particular; the one of the
place, the other of the people and inhabitants. There may be a good country
and an evil people, or contrariwise, an evil country and a good people.
Touching the place I will not dispute, whether they thought that the anger of
their Gods, as they reputed them, did principally persecute and infest some
certain countries; that albeit he committed no harm for his own part, yet he
should suffer for the cuntries sake, and bear the smart of that inveterate
hatred, wherewith the place it self was maligned. This I know, that both in
the dwelling place where a man reposeth himself, in regard of the influence
of heaven; and in the inhabitants, for the disposition of their minds, there
is as great diversitie', as betwixt North and South for change of weathers.
Erasmus in the preface to S. Augustines epistles, gives this judgment of that
learned father; that if it had been his lot to have been borne, Rudis era^
Africa, voluptatum avida, studiorum inimica, etc.
or but to have lived in Italy, or France, that wit would have yielded more
abundant fruits unto us. But Afric was rude, greedy of pleasure, an enemy
to study, desirous of curious devises. Plato reioiced that he was borne at
Athens, rather than in another place. Themistocles was vpbraided by one of
Seriphus, that the commendation and fame he gate, was for his countries sake,
because he was borne an Athenian: though Themistocles answered, that neither
had himself been worse, if he had been borne in Seriphus, Quis tumidum
guttur etc.
nor the other better, if he at Athens. Who marveileth to see swellings in the
throat, in cold places where the snow continually lies? It is the nature and
site of the place that brings them. They made small reckoning heretofore to
lie in Crete, to forswear in Carthage, to gormandize and surfeit in Capua or
Semiplacentia, to lust unnaturally in Sodom, and to be proud at this day in
Spain, to poison in Italy, to over-drinke in Germany; it is, they say, the
custom and fashion of those countries: and the^ is easily verified that which
Seneca wrote; we thrust one another into vices, Epist. 82. Esse inter nocentes
innoxium crimen est. Cypr. epist. 2.
and how then can they be reclaimed to good, whom no man staieth, and the whole
people drives forward? In such places it is a fault to be innocent and
honest amongst offenders. Seneca gives the reason, Necesse est aut imiteris,
aut oderis; one of the 2* must needs be done, either thou must imitate or
hate; Epist. 7.
both which are to be avoided, least either thou become like the evil, because
they are many; or an enemy to many, because they are unlike thee. Can thou
walk upon coals, or take fire in thy bosom and not burn? can thou be a
brother to dragons, and a companion to ostriges, without savouring of their
wildnes? live with the froward, and not learn frowardness? dwell amongst
thieves, and not run with the^? converse with idolatours, and not eat of such
things as please the^? The daughters of me^ marred the sons of God: and the
daughters of Heth brought much woe to Rebecca, no doubt, for the lewdness of
their behavior. When the disciple in the gospel asked leave of his master to
go and bury his father, it was denied him: some give the reason, least his
unbelieving kindred, which were likely enough to be at the funeral, as eagles
flock to the carkas, should contaminate him again; therefore he was answered,
let the dead bury the dead, do thou follow me, because I am life, tarry and
live with me, and let the dead alone, least happily thou die with the^. Though
there were many wicked kings in Israel, yet there was none like Ahab, 1. King.
21.
who did sell himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord. Why? the
reason is there give^. Iezebel his wife provoked him. For it was a light thing
for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam, except he took Iezebel the daughter
of Ethbaal king of Zidon to wife, 1. King. 16.
by whom he was brought to idolatry. No marvel if Iehoram king of Judah did
afterward evil in the sight of the Lord; for the daughter of Ahab was his
wife: 2. King. 8. Ibid.
and Ahaziah after him no better; for he was the son in law of the house of
Ahab. All these were in an error: they looked to gather grapes of thorns, and
figs of thistles, whereas on the other side, Amicitiae pares aut faciunt aut
quaerunt, Friendship either makes or seeks like in conditions. And so is the
nature of things, that when a good man is joined with a bad, Rerum natura sic
est, vt quoties bonus mal^ coniungitur, non ex bono malus melioretur, sed ex
malo bonus contam^ netur. Chrysostom.

Text. Verse 9.


the evil is not bettered by the good, but the good corrupted by the evil.

Thus far of the demaundes: the answer is annexed in the ninth verse, I am
an Hebrew, and I fear the Lord God of heaven, which has made the sea and the
dry land. What is this to the matter? was it a fault to be an Hebrew, and to
fear the Lord God of heaven? Not so. but it appears in the next verse by a
clause thereof, that he confessed the whole crime, because he had told them.
He might yet have concealed his fault, and covered his iniquity with some
defense, as Ada^ his nakedness with fig-leaues, and amongst bushes, by pleading
the unlawfulness of his accusers, the uncertainty of lots, as governed rather by
chance then by divine providence: he does it not; but makes an immediate
confession of his sin, so inexcusably against himself, that if malice it self
had spoken against him, it could not have added much to the accusation. For it
was the least part of his ingenuity, simply to relate the rebellion, (which is
but named in the verse following, as it were at the second hand, and brought in
by a parenthesis;) but his art to be observed indeed, are those ornaments and
garnishes of speech, which he brings against himself, to discipher his
disobedience.

I am an Hebrew: if a Cilician, or of any country in the earth besides, I
fear, reverence, stand in awe of, 3. the Lord: 4. who though he sits in
heaven, as in his palace of greatest state, where he is best glorified by his
creatures, and his best creatures shall be glorified by him; yet is he not
housed within the circles of heaven: For the sea and the land also are his by
creation; the sea wherein the dry land from whence I flitted.

I am an Hebrewe. I fear. Of heaven.
1 My country is not heathnish, rude, and barbarous, I am an Hebrew. 2. My
religion not loose and dissolute, I fear, and bear a reverent estimation: 3.
I am not carried away to dumb idols, I fear the Lord God: 4. who is not a
God in heaven alone, as your Jupiter; nor in the sea alone, as your Neptune;
nor alone in the earth, as your Pluto; but alone is the God of heaven: Who has
made.
and does not hold by tenure, but 5. himself has made the sea and the dry
land; not only the land of Israel, wherein he principally dwells, and which I
relinquished, but the land of Tharsis also, and the continent, and dry ground
belonging to the whole world: and not the land alone, The dry land. The sea.
but all the waters of the maine sea, which I took for my refuge and sanctuary.

I am an Hebrew. From the beginning of the world to the time of Christ,
Hebraeus sum.
are numbered four propagations or generations: the first from Adam to Noe; the
second from Noe to Abraham; the third from Abraham to David; Carol. Sigon. de
rep. Hebr.
the fourth from David to Christ. In the second generation was the name of the
Hebrews received: in the third, of the Israelites, from Jacob, surnamed
Israel, whose grandfather Abraham was: in the fourth, of the Jews, after that
Judah and Benjamin (which for the unity of minds were as it were one tribe,
following Rehoboam the son of Solomon of the tribe of Judah) made the kingdom
of Judah; the other ten betaking them to Jeroboam of the tribe of Ephraim, set
up the kingdom of the Ephraimites, or of Israel. One and the same people
thrice changed their names.

Touching the first of these names, there are sundry opinions brought, whence
it arose. Aug. l. 1. qu. super Genesis
1. Some think they were called Hebrews of Abraham, with the alteration of a
few letters; Hebraei quasi Abrahaei: 2. some derive them from Heber, Hieron.
in Genes. and Aug. 2. retract. and 16. de civ. De. 3. Aret. in ep. ad Hebr.
who was the fourth from Noah. 3. the gra^marians fetch the^ from an Hebrew
word which signifies over or beyond, because the posterity of Se^ went over
the river Tigris, and abode in Caldaea. This surname you shall first find
given to Abraham, Genesis 14. where it is said, that he which brought news that
Lot was carried out of Sodom with the rest of the booty, told it to Abraham
the Hebrew; because forsaking Vr of the Chaldees, and passing over Euphrates,
he came into the land of Canaan, therefore was he named of that country people
Ibreus, that is, one that past over. So there is no doubt made but of Abraham
they are called Hebrews, because he harkned to the word of the Lord, and went
beyond Euphrates. Some have gathered here-hence, that in calling himself an
Hebrew, he makes confession of his fault: that as the children of Sem, and
Abraham past over rivers, so (by a borrowed speech) he had past over the
commandment of the Lord. For what is sin but transgression? transitio
linearum, Tull.
the going beyond those lines and limits that are prefined us? Other observe
that he implies the condition of man's life herein, as having no abiding
city, but a travail upon the face of the earth to pass from place to place,
as it is written of Israel in the Psalm, they went from nation to nation,
Psalm. 105.
and from one kingdom to an other people: and David confesses no less; I am
a stranger and soiourner upon the earth, as all my fathers were. Non dixit,
Iudaeus, nomen ex dicissione regni factum; sed Hebraeus i. (...), transitor.
Hierome vvoulde have us note, that he terms not himself a Jew, which name
came from the re^ding of the kingdom: but an Hebrew, that is, a passenger. I
take the letter of the text without deeper constructions, that his purpose
simply was to answer their last question, which was yet fresh in his ears,
touching the people from whence he came; and by naming his nation, to make an
argument against himself of higher amplification; that lying in that corner of
the world, which was the diamond of the ring, and as it were the apple of the
eye, heart of the body; being sprung of that root whereof it was said, Deuteronomy.
4.
Only this people is wise, and of understanding, and a great nation; (for
what nation is so great to whom the Gods come so near, as the Lord is
near unto us in all that we call unto him for? or what nation so great that
has ordinances and laws so righteous as we have?) it might be his greater
offense, to be sown good and come up evil, to be richly planted in the
goodlyest vine, and baselie degenerated into a sower grape. As it were a
greater shame not to be knit indissolublie to the worship of God in
England, than any other country almost, it lying in Europe, as Gedeons fleece
in the flore, exempted from the plagues of her neighbors, and specially
signed with the favor of GOD: Hungary and Boheme busied with the Turks,
Italy poisoned with the local seat of Antichrist, Spain held in awe with a
bloody Inquisition, nether Germany disquieted with a foreign foe, France
molested with an intestine enemy, Ireland troubled with the incivility of the
place, Scotland with her fatal infelicity, England amongst all the rest having
peaceable days and nights, and not knowing any other bane but too much
quietness, which she has taken from God with the left hand, and used as the
fountain of all her licentiousnes.

I fear.
After his country he places his religion. I fear the Lord God of heaven,
which is here put for the general worship and service that belongs to God.
For that which God says, Esaias 29. their fear is taught by the precepts of
men; Christ interprets, Math* 15. by the name of worship, In vain do they
worship me, teaching for doctrines the precepts of men* Fear and worship in
these scriptures are both one. Come children, (says the Psalmist) hearken unto
me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. And it is a notable phrase that
the Hebrews use to this purpose; as in the speech of Jacob to Laban, Genesis 31.
Except the God of my father, the God of Abr^ham, and the ^eare of Isaac had
been with me, surely thou had sent me away empty: Abstractum pro
concreto and subiecto.
where it is further to be marked, that when Laban swear by the God of Abraham
and the God of Nahor, Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac, that is, by
that God which his father feared, that is, worshipped and served. It implies
thus much; that the strength of Israel is a dreadful God, clothed with
unspeakable majesty as with a garment, and the glory of his face shining
brighter than all the lights of heaven in their beauty, yea the beholding of his
countenance to a mortal man present death; the Angels tremble, the heavens
melt, the mountains smoke, the sea slieth back, the rivers are dried up, the
fish rot, the earth faints at the sight thereof: and therefore we ought not
approach his ground with our shoes on our feet, with sensual and base
cogitations; nor sit at his feast, when the bread of his fearful word is
broken, without our wedding garment; nor enter his house of prayer with the
sacrifice of fools; nor come to his holy mysteries with unwashed hands or
hearts, not discerning the body and blood of the Lord; nor offer the calves of
our lips with lips unsanctified; nor tender any duty unto him, without
falling low upon our faces, and bowing the knees of our hearts, in token of our
reverence.

It is a question moved, how Jonas could truly say, I fear the Lord; being
so stubborn and refractary against his express commandment. How Jonas feared
God.
For answer whereof, we must fly to that city of refuge which David had
recourse unto, I mean, the riches of Gods mercy: If thou shall mark, Lord,
what is done amiss, Lord, who shall stand? Psalm. 130*
but there is pardon with thee that thou may be feared. If the abundant
goodness of God did not gloriously interpret our service, and fit by his
justice, as the steward in the gospel sat at his accountes, when the debt is
an hundredth, to set down but fifty, to cancel a thousand bills of our
trespasses, to remove our sins, in multitude as the sand upon the sea shore,
from the presence of our maker, as far as the east is from the west, to
drown the^ by heaps and bundels in the bottom of the sea, to die purple and
skarlet into white, that is, to turn sin into no sin, and even to justify the
wicked, and, in a word, to draw the books, and blot out our offenses as if
they were not: if all the life of Jonas unto this day had been as free from sin
as the first fruits of Ada^; yet this were enough, this only one
transgression, to have stained his former innocence, to have razed out the
memory of all his forepassed fear toward God, and made him guilty of the
whole law. It fares with a faithful man oftentimes, as it did with Eurychus.
Act. 20. of whom Paul said, Trouble not your selves, for his life is in him,
though he seemed dead: there is a substance in an elm or in an oak, when
they have cast their leaves, Esaias 6. when we would think by the bareness of
the boughs, and drines of the bark, they are quite withered. There is wine
found in an unlikely cluster, and one says, destroy it not, for there is a
blessing in it, Esaias 65. such are the trances and sownings of faith at some
times, drawing the breath of life so inwardly to it self, that no man can
perceive it; and unless the goodness of God did embrace it, as Paul embraced
Eutychus, it could never recover strength again. David lay in such a trance of
adultery, Solomon in the trance of idolatry, Peter in the trance of apostasy,
and Jonas in the tra^ce of recusancie for the season, when they past over their
transgressions as in a sleep, and never felt the^. Doubtless God has a purpose
herein, profitable both to those, who are taken with such spiritual apoplexies,
and to others also. As August* wrote of Cyprian, erring in the doctrine of
rebaptisation; There was something which he saw not, Proptere^ non vidit a.
liquid, vt a. liquid super* eminentius videret. 1. de bapt. con. Donat. 18.
Iren. lib 4. cap. 45.
that he might see somewhat more excellent. But in respect of us there are 3.
reasons given by Irenee, why the infirmities of the saints are chronicled in
the book of God. 1. To let us understand that both they and we have one God,
who was ever offended with sin, how great and glorious soever the person were
that wrought it. 2. To teach us to abstain from sin: for if the ancient
Patriarks who went before us both in time and in the graces of God, and for
who^ the son of God had not yet suffered, bare such reproach among their
posterity, by reason their corruptions are registered, the world, and have
continued beyond the coming of the Lord Jesus? 3. To give us warning and
instruction, that for the^ there was a cure behind, the sacrifice of the La^be
which was not the^ slain; but for such as now shall sin, Christ dies no more,
but his next coming shall be in the glory of his father. Aug. upon the 51.
Psalm. handling the fall of David, makes this enarration upon it; Co^missu^
atque conscriptu^ est, It is done and written: for thine imitatio^? no: that
were an argument of too much violence, to draw on sin with the cart-ropes of
examples, and to take advantage at the ruins of Gods saints: David committed
murder and adultery, I may do the like; it were a mark of a far more
unrighteous soul, the^ that which thou seek to imitate: Inde anima
iniquior, quae cum propterea fecerit, quia David fecit, ideo peius qua^ David
fecit, Thence becomes the soul more unrighteous, which taking occasion to do
evil, because David did so, does therefore worse then David did: but to
inform thee thus much, that if thou take the wings of the morning, and
sliest from one end of the earth to the other, thou can not find a soul so
pure, which has not sinned; and if thou will make the^ thy preside^ts, thou
must follow the steps not of their falling down, but of their rising again by
repentance.

Jehovah.
Whom did Jonas fear? Jehovah; the honourablest title that he could bestow
upon him, to make a difference betwixt him and idolles: Nomen (...), a name
but of four letters, in the Hebrew tongue, but some of the Jews were so
superstitious therein, that they called it (...), a name which might not be
pronounced, neither durst they assume it into their mouths. And howsoever the
word be articulate enough, and every syllable and letter therein easy to be
sounded, yet the nature which it contains, is beyond all co^prehension. Quod
ad electionem spectat, salus; quod ad se, ipse novit. lib* 5. Psalm. 11.
What is God? (says Bernard in his books of consideration to Eugenius:)
concerning his election, he is saving health; but concerning himself, he best
knows. The Rabbines observe, that all the letters in the name, are literae
quiescentes, letters of rest; and they gather ther-out a mystery, that the
rest, repose, and tra^quillity of all the creatures in the world, is in God
alone. The prophet signifies as much; In the Lord put I my trust, how say ye
then unto my soul, that she should fly as a bird etc? having built her nest
and habitation in the bosom of rest it self. I will not much contend for this
inventio^ of theirs; but sure there is some secret in this name, which many
have eagerly spent their labor upon, as is plain in Exodus 6. where God
himself says, that he appeared unto Abrahaam, Isaac, and Jacob, by the name
of a strong God, omnipotent: but by his name Jehovah, he was not known unto
them. It imports, first the eternity of Gods essence in himself, that he is
yesterdaie, to day, and the same for evermore; which was, which is, and which
is to come: and next, the existence and perfection of all things in him, as
from whom all other creatures in the world, have their life, motion, and being.
I may say, that God is the being of all other creatures, Sane esse omnium
dixerim deum^ non quod illae sunt quod est i^^e, sed quia ex ipso etc. Bern. in
ca^^. ser. 4.
not that they are the same that he is, but because, of him, and by him, and
in him are all things. Undoubtedly it was the purpose of Jonas to weigh his
words, and to powder the whole speech delivered, with as much honor toward
the Lord, as his heart could devise. I fear, 1. Jehovah, a God in essence and
being; yours in supposition: 2. the God of heaven; yours not the Gods of the
poorest ha^lets in the earth: 3. which has made the sea and the dry land, as a
little monument of his surpassing art and strength; yours not the garments of
their own backs. The prophet keeps the order of nature; placing 1. the
heaven, then the sea, afterward the dry land, as the principal parts whereof
the whole consists: for heaven is in nature and positio^ above the sea, the
sea above the dry land, heaven as the roof of that beautiful house wherein man
was placed, the sea and the dry land as the two floores or foundations unto it.
But did not God make the heavens as well as the sea, and the dry land? doubtless
yes. It is plainly expressed Genesis 2. In the beginning God made heaven and
earth. The beginning of the world is from the beginning of al things:
Principium a principio rerum omnium. Basil. Nomen authoris and sigillum
imponitur.
whereto the name of the author is first set as the seal, God; and under the
names of the two extremities and borders, heaven and earth, all the rest is
comprised, quicquid medium, cum ipsis finibus exortum est, whatsoever lies
middle betwixt the ends, with the ends themselves. Neither did the Lord only
cause and ordeine these creatures to be formed, but as the potter shapeth his
vessels, so he fashioned and wrought them with his own hands: Totum coelum,
totamque tellurem, ipsam (inquam) essentiam, materia^ simul cu^ forma: non enim
figuraru^ inventor est Deus* sed ipsius naturae creator; the whole heaven and
the whole earth, I say, the matter with the form: for God is not the deviser
of shapes and features alone, but the maker of nature it self. And that God
that has made the heaven, can fold it up like a book again, and role it
together like a skin of parchment: he that has made the sea, and at this time
set the waves thereof in a rage, and caused it to boil like a pot of ointment,
can say to the floods, be ye dried up: he that made the dry land, can cover
it with waters as with a breast plate, or rock it to and fro upon her
fou^dations, as a drunke^ man reeleth from place to place. He can clothe the
sun and the moon in sackcloth, and command the stars to fall down to the
earth, and the mountains of the land to remove into the sea, and it shall be
fulfilled. They all shall perish, but the Lord their maker shall endure: they
all shall wax old as does a garment, Psalm 102.
as a vesture shall he change them, and they shall be changed; but he is the
same God for ever and ever, and his years shall not fail.

The scope of the whole confession is briefly this, the more to dilate his
fall, Conclusion.
by how much the less he was able to plead ignorance; as having the help of
religion, the knowledge of the true subsistent God, and able to give a
reckoning of every parcel of his creation. Excusatio omnis tollitur vbi
ma^datum non ignoratur. Acts 3.
Al excuse is taken away, where the commandment is not unknown. Peter lent
the buckler of ignorance to the Jews, therewith in part to defend themselves
against the weapons of Gods wrath, even in the bloudiest fact that ever the
sun saw attempted: I know that through ignorance you did it, (that is killed
the Lord of life) as did also your governors. But least they should lean upon
the staff of ignorance too much, he bids them repent and reverte, that
their sins might be done away. This was the cloak that Paul cast over his
blasphemies, his tyrannies* his unmerciful persequutions of the Church; 1.
Tim. 1.
I was received to mercy, because I did it ignorantly through unbelief: So as
ignorance in that place, you see, has need of mercy to forgive it. And if
ignorance have a tongue to plead her own innocence, why did the blood of
Christ cry to the father upon the cross, father, forgive them, they know not
what they do. Luke 23.
Is ignorance of the will of God sure to be beaten with rods? and shall not
contempt of his will, a careless unprofitable knowledge of his hestes and
ordinances, be scourged with scorpions? Shall Tire and Syd on burn like stubble
in hell fire, and the smoke of their tormente ascend for evermore, wherein
there was never virtue done that might have reclaimed them? and shall Corazin
and Bethsaida go quit, and not drink down the dregs of destruction it self,
whose streets have been sown with the miracles of Christ, and fatted with
his doctrine? Barbary shall wring her hands, that she has known so little; and
Christendom rend her heart, that she has known so much to no better purpose.
It is no marvel to see the wilderness lie wast and deserte: but if a ground
well husba^ded and manured yield not profit, it deserves cursing. Lactantius
says, that all the learning of philosophers, was without an head, because
they knew not God: therefore when they see, they are blind; De vero cultu.

Omnis doctrina philosophorum sine capite etc.


and when they hear, they are deaf; and when they speak, they are speechles;
the sensens are in the head, the eyes, ears, and tongue. We want not an head
for senses because when we see, we perceive; and when we hear, we understand;
and when we speak, we can give a reason; we want a heart only for obedience.
And as our Savior spoke of the Scribes and Pharisees;; dicunt and non faciunt,
they say and do not: so it is true in us, we see, and hear, and say, and
know, but do not; as idle and idol Christians, as those idol Gods in the
Psalm, to our greater both shame and condemnation. So the Apostle enforces it
against the Galathians; Now seeing you know God, or rather are known of God,
Galat. 4.
how turn you again to impotente and beggarly rudimentes? To the like
effect he schooleth the Ephesians, ye have not so learned Christ. Ephesians. 4.
The nurture and discipline of this school is not like the institution of
Gentility, with whom it is usual to walk in the vanity of their minds,
and in dark cogitations, to be strangers from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them, and being past feeling, to give over themselves
unto wantonness to work all uncleanness, even with greediness. But if ye
have heard Christ, and if ye have been taught by him, as the truth is in
Jesus, (not corrupting the text with cursed glosses, nor perverting the
scriptures to your own overthrow) then with your new learning you must leave
your old conversation, as the eagle casts her bill; and know, that the
kingdom of God comes not by observation, but by practice; nor that practice
is availeable with ease, but with violence, and that the hottest and most
laborious spirit is fittest to catch it away. 2 Peter. 2.
It had been better for us, never to have known the way of righteousness,
then after we have known it, to turn from the holy commandment given unto
us. For where as the end is the perfection of every thing, the end of the
relapsed Christians is worse then their beginning. There is scientia
contristans, a sorrowful and woeful knowledge, Bern. ser. 36, in Cantic.
as Bernarde gathered out of the first of Ecclesiastes, He that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow. It is truest in this sense, when we are able and
willing to say with the Pharisee, are we also blind? and yet with our eyes
open we run into destruction. The time shall come, when many shall say
(that you may know it is the case of a multitude to be svvallovved into this
gulf,) Lord, we have heard thee in our streets etc. and yet their
knowledge of Christ shall not gain his knowledge of them, but as strangers
and reprobates they shall be sent from him. Our knowledge shall then be
weighed to the smallest grain; but if our holiness of life, put in the other
plate of the balance, be found to light, and unanswerable unto it, our
sorrows shall make it up. Therefore unless we be still sick of Adames
disease, that we had rather eat of the tree of knowledge, then of the tree
of life, let us be careful of knowledge, not only to sobriety, but with
profitte also, that the fruit of a good life, bringing eternity of days to
come, may wait upon it. Blessed are those souls, wherein the tree of sincere
knowledge is rooted, and the worm of security or contempt has not eaten up
the fruit; the Lord shall water them with the dew of heaven in this life, and
translate them hereafter, as glorious renowned plants into his heavenly garden.

THE XII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 10. Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him,
why have thou done this? (For the men knew, that he had fled from the presence
of the Lord, because he had told them)
BEcause the confession in the ninth verse, is not so absolute, as to answer
all the questions which were propounded, therefore the supply and perfection
thereof must be brought from this tenth: wherein we understand, that the
whole order and sum of his disobedience was related, albeit not described at
large; that being a prophet, and sent with a message to Niniveh, he fled from
the presence of the Lord, that is, cast his commandments behind his back.

The connection then betwixt these two verses, is this; I am an Hebrew, of the
happiest people and country under heaven; I am not ignorant of true religion,
For I fear the Lord etc. All which is by way of preface, for amplifications
sake, the more to extend the fault mentioned in the words following; yet am I
fled from the presence of the Lord, I have taken a froward and unadvised
course to frustrate his business. With this addition you may shape an answer
directly to every question, 1. What is thine office? shunning the face of God,
running from his presence, contempt of his voice; 2. What is thine occupation?
not manuary and illiberall, not fraudulent and deceitful, but a calling
immediate from God; I stand in his sight as the Angels of heaven do, to hear
my charge, and when he gives me an errande, my office is to perform it; 3.
Whence come thou? from the presence of the Lord, from whose lips I received
my late commission; 4. What is thy country? I am an Hebrew; Ingeniosa
simplicitas ^ille tergiversationibus cautior.
5. Of what people? the most scient and skillful in the service of God. Thus
have you his whole confession. Now he begins to be wise, and with a prudent
simplicity more worth then a thousand tergiversations, to return unto him, by
confessing his fault, from whom he was fled by disobedience; to recover his
lost justice, by accusing himself; to cast forth the impostumated matter of a
dissembling conscience, which being concealed, had been present death; to
honor the righteous Lord, whom he had grossly dishonored; and by opening
his lips into an humble confession, to shut the mouth of hell, which began to
open upon him. My son, Ios. 7*
(says Iosuah to Achan) I beseech thee give glory to the Lord God of Israel,
and make confession unto him, and show me now what thou have done, hide it
not from me. It is a part of the glory of God, to shame our selves, I mean,
to confess our sins, (which in modesty and shamefastnes we strive to keep
close,) not only unto God, against whom only we have sinned, and to whom
only it appertains to say, I have pardoned, Job 34.
I will not destroy; but unto men also: either to the magistrate, who has
authority to examine; either to the minister, who has power to bind and
loose; either to our brethren generally, that the common rule of charity, one
in supporting the others infirmities, may be kept in practice. And it is, on
the other side, an injury to God, not to justify his judgments, nor to
acknowledge the conquest of his truth, when it has prevailed, but in a fullen
and melancholy passion to strangle it within our bones, and never to yield
the victory thereunto, till, as the sun from out the clouds, so truth has
made her a way by maine force from out our dissimulations. The first degree of
felicity is, not to offend; the second, Cyprian. Somnium narrare, vigilantis
est* and vitia confiteri, sanitatis indicit^. Senec.

Vulnera clausa plus cruciant. Gregor. Si non confessus lates, inconfessus
damnaberis, August. Text.

For the me^ knew.


to know and acknowledge offenses. And as men dream in their sleep, but tell
their dreams waking: so howsoever we may sin by carelesnes, yet it is an
argument of health and recovery, to confess our sins. For what shall we
gain by dissembling them? Wounds, the closer they are kept, the greater
torture they bring; and sins, not confessed, will bring condemnation upon us
without confession.

What follows? When Jonas had confessed his fault, 1. They knew it, for his
own mouth has condemned him. They had a presumptuous knowledge before, by the
eviction of the lottes, but now they are out of doubt by his own declaration.
So the text speaks; The men knew, that he had fled from the presence of the
Lord, because he had told them. 2. Their knowledge wrought a fear in them;
Then were the men exceedingly afraid. 3. Their fear brake forth, either into
an increpation, or a wonder at the least, They said, why have thou done this?


Their knowledge was consequent (of force) to his confession, they could not
but be privy thereunto, because he powered not his speech into the air, but
into their ears, that they might apprehend it. But this knowledge of theirs
was not a curious and idle knowledge, such as those men have, Quidam scire
volunt vt sciant. Bern.
who know only to know; but a pragmaticall knowledge, full of labor and
business: it went from their ears to their hearts, and made as great a
tempest in their consciences, as the wind in the seas; it mingled and
confounded all their cogitations, it kindled a fear within them, that sundered
their souls and spirits. And though their fear before was vehement enough in
the fifth verse, when neither their tongues were at rest for crying, nor their
wares had peace from being cast out, yet this was a fear beyond that, Reasons
of their fear.
as may appear by the epithet, Timnerunt timore magno, They were exceedingly
afraid.

Jntelligunt sanctum and sanctae gentis virum^ Non audent ^radere, coelare non
possunt.

Magnus est qui fugit, sed mayor qui quaerit.


knowing what he was, not knowing how to release him. They understand him to
be an holy man, and of an holy nation, therefore were they brought into
streightes; they have not heart to deliver him, they have not means to
conceal him: he is great that flies, he is greater that seeks after him.
That is Hieromes conjecture upon their fear. It may be in regard of their
sins. For if a prophet of God, and a righteous soul (to theirs) were so
persecuted; they could not for their own parts but fear a much sorer
punishment. For if judgment began at the house of God, what shall be the end
of them which obey not the gospel 1. Pet. 4.
The Apostle makes the comparison, but it is as sensible and easy to the eye
of nature to see so much, as the high way is ready to the passenger. God
speaks to the heathen nations with a zealous and disdainful contention
betwixt them and his people, Ier. 25.
Lo, I begin to plague the city, wherein my name was called upon:? It may
be the majesty of Gods name did astonish them, and bruise them as a maule of
iron, having been used but to puppets and skar-crowes before, Grandes pupae.
in comparison. They were not acquainted with Gods of that nature and power
till this time; they never had dreamed that there was a Lord, whose name was
Jehovah, whose throne was the heaven of heavens, and the sea his floor to
walk in, and the earth his foote-stoole to tread upon, who has a chair in
the conscience, and sits in the heart of man, possessing his secret reins,
dividing betwixt his skin and his flesh, and shaking his inmost powers, as
the thunder shakes the wilderness of Cades. It is a testimony to that which I
say, that when the Arc was brought into the camp of Israel, and the people
gave a shoute, the Philistines were afraid at it, and said, God is come into
the host; therefore they cried, woe, woe unto us, for it has not been so
heretofore, 1. Sam. 4.
woe be unto us: who shall deliver us out of the hands of these mighty Gods?
These are the Gods which smote the Egyptians with all the plagues in the
wilderness. Wherein it is a wonderful thing to consider, that the sight of the
tempest drinking up their substance before their eyes, and opening as it were a
throat to swallow their lives up, did not so much astonishe them, as to hear
but the Majesty of God delivered by relation. Alas, what did they hear to that
which he is indeed? It was the least part of his ways, to hear of his
creation of heaven, and the sea, and the dry land; he is infinite, and
incomprehensible besides; Quid est Deus? totum hoc quod vides, and totu^ hoc
quod non vides. Senec.
all that thou see, and all that thou see not, that, in some sort, God is.
And it is not a thing to be omitted, that the speech of the prophet made a
deeper penetration and entrance into them, than if a number besides, not having
the tongue of the learned, had spent their words. For consider the case. The
winds were murmuring about their ears, 2. Cor. 10.
The weapons of their warfare wherewith they fight, are not carnal, but mighty
through God, to cast down holds and munitions, and destroying imaginations,
disceptations, reasonings, and every sublimity that is exalted against the
knowledge of God, and captivating every thought to the obedience of Christ. So
there is neither munition for strength, nor disputation for subtility, nor
height for superiority, nor thought in the mind for secrecy, that can hold
their estate against the armor of Gods prophets. Have they not chains in
their tongues for the kings of the earth? and fetters of iron for their
nobles? did not Pharaoh often entreat Moses and Aaron, to pray to the Lord for
him? did not the charm of Elias so sink into the ears of Ahab, that he rent
his clothes, and put sacke-cloth upon his flesh, fasted, and lay in
sacke-cloath, and went softly? Did not John Baptist so hew the ears of the
Jews, with the axe of Gods judgments, that they asked him, as the physician
of their diseased souls, by several companies, and in their several
callings; the people, though as brutish for the most part as the beasts of the
field, What shall we do then? Luke 3. Publicani, publici peccatores.
the publicanes, though the hatred of the world, and public notorious
sinners, And what shall we do? the soldiers, though they had the law in
their swords points, And what shall we do? Has not Peter preached at
Jerusalem, to an audience of every nation under heaven, (of what number, you
may guess in part, when those that were gained to the Church of Christ, were
not fewer then three thousand souls,) and was not the point of his sword so
deeply impressed into them, that they were pricked in their hearts, and asked
(as John Baptists auditors before) Viri fratres, quid faciemus? Acts 2.
men and brethren, what shall we do? It is not a word alone, the vehemence
and sound whereof comes from the loins and sides, that is able to do this;
but a puissant and powerful word, strengthened with the arm of God, a word
with authority, as they witnessed of Christ, a word with evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit, smiting upon the conscience, more then the hammers
of the smith upon his stithie, a word that drove a fear into Herodes heart,
(for he feared John Baptist both alive and dead,) that bet the breath of
Ananias and Saphira from out their bodies, stroke Elymas' the sorcerer into a
blindness, and sent an extraordinary terror into the hearts of these mariners.
So then, the reason of their fear, as I suppose, was a narration of the
majesty of God, so much the more increased, because it was handled by the
tongue of a prophet, who has a special grace to quicken and enliue his
speech, whose soul was as a well of understanding; and every sentence that
sprang from thence, as a quick stream to beat them down.

And that this was the reason of their fear, I rather persuade my self,
because it is said for the further confirmation of this judgment, The men
feared.
that the men feared, and the men knew that he fled from the presence of the
Lord, who in the whole course of the scripture unto this place, were not
termed by the name of men, but Mariners. For when is a better time for man to
be laid forth in the colors of his infirmity and frailty, the^ when God has
been declared in the brightness of his glory? whether it be viri or homines,
the sex or the generation, men, as they are distinguished from women, or men,
as they are distinguished from other creatures, we need not curiously
enquire. The original word lies to both. Viri.
The former of these two names, whereby the male kind is notified, Lactantius
thus deduceth: Vir itaque nominatus est, quod mayor in eo vis est, quam in
foemina: and hinc virtus nomen accepit, The man is called Vir in the Latin,
because there is greater strength in him, than in the woman: and herehence
virtue or virilitie took the name. Whereas the woman on the other side, by
Varroes interpretation, is called Mulier quasi mollier, a mollitie.
of niceness and tenderness, one letter being changed, another taken away.
But what is the stoutest courage of man, mascula virtus, the manliest prowess
upon the earth, when it has girded up her loins with strength, and decked it
self with greatest glory, where the fortitude of God is set against it? How is
it possible, that pitchers should not break and fall asunder, being fashioned
of clay, if ever they come to encounter the brass of his unspeakable majesty?
Amos. 3.
The lion has roared; (says the Prophet) shall not the beasts of the forest
be afraid? The Lord has thundered in the height, the fame of his vvonderfull
works has sounded abroad, shall not man hide himself? if the latter name be
meant by the word, the whole kind and generation including male and female
both; Hominis.
then is the glory of man much more stained, and his aspiring affections
brought down to the dust of the earth. For as the same Lactantius deriveth it,
Homo nuncupatus est, quod sit factus ex humo; he is therefore called man with
the Latins, because the ground under his feet, was his foundation: According
to the sentence of the Psalm, He knows whereof we be made, he remembers
that we are but dust. The scriptures, acquainted with the pride and hautines of
mandinde, hang even talents of lead at the heels thereof, to hold it down,
least it should climb into the sides of the North, and set a throne by the
most high God. In the eighth Psalm (which is a circular Psalm, ending as it
did begin, O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the world?
that whithersoever we turn our eyes, vpwardes, or downewardes, we may see our
selves beset with his glory round about) how does the prophet abase, and
discountenance the nature and whole race of man; As may appear by his
disdeignefull, and derogatory interrogation, what is man that thou art
mindful of him, and the son of man that thou regardest him? In the ninth
Psalm, Rise Lord, let not man have the upper hand, let the nations be judged
in thy sight, put them in fear O Lord, that the heathen may know themselves
to be but men. Further in the tenth Psalm, Thou iudgest the fatherless, and
the poor, that the man of the earth do no more violence.

The Psalms as they go in order, so, me thinks, they grow in strength, and
each has a weightier force, to throw down our presumption: 1. we are men, and
the sons of men, to show our descent and propagation; 2. men in our own
knowledge, to show, that conscience and experience of infirmity does convict
us; 3. men of the earth, to show our original matter, whereof we are framed in
the 22. Psalm. he adds more disgrace: for either in his own name, regarding
the misery and contempt wherein he was held; or in the person of Christ, whose
figure he was, as if it were a robbery for him, to take upon him the nature of
man, he falls he falls to a lower style, At ^go sum vermis, and non vir*
But I am a worm, and no man. For as corruption is the father of all flesh, so
are the worms his brethren and sisters; according to the old verse, Post
homine^ vermis etc. Petr. de soto
First man, next worms, then stinch and lothsomnes:
Thus man, to no man alter's by chandges.
Abraham the father of the faithful, Genesis 18. sifteth himself into the
coursest branne that can be, and resolves his nature into the elements,
whereof it first rose; Behold, I have begun to speak to my Lord, being dust
and ashes. And if any of the children of Abraham, who succeed him in the
faith, or any of the children of Adam, who succeed him in the flesh, thinks
otherwise; let him know, that there is a three-folde cord, twisted by the
finger of God, that shall tie him to his first original, though he contend
till his heart break. O earth, Ier. 2 2.
earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord; that is, earth by creation, earth
by continuance, earth by resolution. Thou came earth, thou remaynest earth,
and to earth thou must return. Thus they are rightly matched (I mean not for
equality, but for opposition,) the eternity of God, and the mutabilitie of man;
the terror of God, and the fearfulness of man; the name of God, and the name
of man; having at no other time so just an occasion to remember himself to be
but man, as when the honor of the most high is laid before him. The warning
serves for us all, to consider what we are both by name and nature; unable
to resist God; For who will set the briers and the thorns in contention against
him? Who ever hardened himself against the Lord, and has prospered? Bernard
in his books of consideration to Eugenius, advises him to consider no less;
Away with thy mantles and coverings, Toll perizomata etc. and nudum nude
consideres etc. ^ib. 2.
pull of thy apron of figleaues, wipe out the parget of thy flitting honors,
and take a naked view of thy naked self, how naked thou came from thy
mothers womb. Which was in effect that which Simonides sang to Pausanias, and
a page every morning to Philip of Macedon (...) (...), remember that thou art a
man; For in remembering this, thou remembrest all wretchedness.

And they said unto him, why have thou done this? Text.
Jerome thinks it no increpation, but a simple interrogation, of men desirous
to know, 1. Non increpant sed interroga^^ etc.
why a servant would attempt to run from his Lord, a man from God. What is
the mystery of this dealing? what sense had thou to forsake thine own
country, and seek foreign nations? Others take it to be rather an
admiration, than an interrogation, 2. Admirant^^ oration mag^s quam
interroga^ti^.
that such a man as Jonas, knowing that God is omnipotent, all eye to behold
him, all foot to follow him, all hand to smite him in all places, should offer
notwithstanding to fly from his presence. Others are out of doubt, that it is
a reproof and reprehension; Why have thou transgressed, and not obeyed the
voice of the Lord whom thou acknowledgest? A recompense worthy of his
disobedience, that as he ploughed contumacie, and sowed rebellion, so he
might reap shame. As if God had set the mark of Cain upon him, the mark of a
fugitive and vagabond, and written his fault in his brows, that the basest
persons of the earth might control him, why have thou done this? Thus justice
proclaims from above, Art thou not subject to God? thou shall be subject to
men. Do thou contemn the Lord? servantes shall contemn thee; their eyes shall
observe thy ways, and their tongues shall walk through thy actions; children
in the street shall cry after thee, There, there; passengers shall wag their
heads and say, Fie upon thee, fie upon thee, Et declamatio fies, and thou shall
be made the byword of as many as meet thee.

Reprehension of men, for their offenses committed, is of 2. sorts. 2. kinds
of reprehension.
The former has no other end, but to reprehende, to fasten a tooth upon every
occasion that is offered; borne of the cursed seed of Cha^, delighting in
nothing so much as to uncover the nakedness of fathers, Diabolus, an accuser,
because he accuses the brethren day and night. He that reprooveth in this
sort, and he that approves and fostereth such reproves, the one has the
Devil in his tongue, the other in his ears. Non corrector sed tra^ditor. Aug.
de ver. dom. in Math. 8. Non correptores sed corrosores. Ber* epist* 78*
Augustine and Bernarde fit them with their proper names, that such are not
correctors, but traitors, willing to lay open the offenses of other men; not
reprovers, but gnawers, because they had rather bite, than amend ought amiss.
There is no mercy, nor compassion in this kind of reprehenders. If the flax
smoke, they will quench it; if the reed be bruised, they will break it
quite; if a soul be falling, they will thrust at it, and if it be fallen, they
will tread upon it. The mercy and kindness of their lips, is, as if aspes
should vomit, That which perishes let it perish. Plautus.
Istic thesaurus stultis est in lingua situs, this is all the treasure and
goodness, that they bear in their tongues; contumelies, slanders, defamations,
opprobrious detractions, discourteous vpbraidings, supercilious, in^olent,
uncharitable accusations rather to verit their malice, which would burst their
hearts within them, then to reform the defectes of their brethren. Such an one
was Philocles, who had to name, choler and brine; and Diogenes, called the
dog, Bilis and salsugo.

Canis and tuba convitiorum.

Flagellum AEneidos. Inter Divos nullos non carpit Mo^us etc.


and the trumpet of reproaches; Carpilius Pictor, who put forth a libell termed
the scourge of Virgils works; Herennius who collected together his faults,
Faustinus his theftes. The epigramme does well beseem them, which Cornelius
Agrippa wrote of himself, (I think not seriously purposing to undertake it)
Momus, amongst the Gods, carpeth all things; amongst the worthies, Hercules
plagueth all monsters; amongst the devils of hell, Pluto is angry with all the
ghostes; amongst Philosophers, Democritus laugheth at all; Heraclitus
contrariwise vveepeth for all; Pirrhias is ignorant of all; Aristotle thinks
he knows all; and Diogenes contemns all: Agrippa in this book, spares not
any, be contemns, knows, knows not, bewaileth, laugheth at, is offended
with, pursues, carpeth al things, himself a Philosopher, a devil, a worthy,
a God, and al things. The best is, we may answer al such uncharitable
reprehe^ders, as S. August. answered Petili^n, who had accused him to be a
Manichee, speaking from the conscience and information of other men: I say
(says Augustine) I am no Manichee, speaking of mine own knowledge, Li. 3. de
bapt cont. Donat. cap. 10.
eligite cu^ credatis, choose whether of the two ye will believe. He adds
afterward, I am a man appertaining to the floor of Christ, if evil, then am
I chafe; ^f good, good corn; Petilians tongue is not the fan of this
floor; Non est hu^u^ areae ve^^ilabrum lingua Peti liani. ca. 12.
the more he accuses my fault (do it with what mind he will) the more I
commend my physician that has healed it. There is an other kind of
reprehension, that handles the sores of other men, as if they were their own,
with christian and ^postolicke compassion, (such as we read of, who is weak
and I burn not?) bringing S^imu^ quia similis paena facientes manet and
consentientes. ser. in nata^al. lo. Bapt.
not to reprove our brother falling into trespass, as not to forgive him, when
he asks forgiveness* for he that said unto thee, if thy brother trespass
against thee, forgive him; said before, if he trespass against thee, reprove
him. We know, says Bernard, that the same punishment abides both the
co^mitters of sin, and co^senters unto it: therefore let no man smooth sins,
let no man disse^ble offenses, let no man say of his brother, what? am I his
keeper? The words of the wise, are called goads, and nails. Greg. in his
homilies upon the gospels gives this reason, For that they neglect not the
faults of transgressors, but prick the^. All which agrees with that wise
and wary distinction, which Bernard makes in the handling of offenses: There
must be the oil of admonition, and the wine of co^punction; the oil of
meekenes, Quiaculpas delinquentium nesciunt calcare sed pungere. Oleum
monitorum, vinum compu^ctionis.

Oleum mansuetudinis, vinum Zel^. ser. 44 in Cantic. Galat. 6.


and the wine of zeal and earnestnes: And with the Apostles rule, Brethren, if
a man be preoccupate with a fault, (that is, first taken and snared, when your
selves are not,) you that are spiritual, instruct him in the spirit of
gentleness, considering thy self, least thou also be tempted: 1. the very
insinuation he does use, were enough to persuade them, because we are all
brethren: 2. there is no difference between the^ and us, but in time; they may
prevent us offending, but we shall follow the^: 3. because flesh and blood is
hauty and insolent, therefore the Apostle distinctly makes choice of the
persons exhorted; you that are spiritual, that have been softened with the
vnctio^ of the spirit of God: 4. the medicine is set down, which we must
apply; Instruct him, show him the nature and measure of his fault, and how to
amend it: 5. the ingredients of the reeeite are prescribed; instruct him with
the spirit of meekenes: 6. we are bound thereunto by equality of condition;
considering: 7. it is worth the noting, that where he spoke before to a
multitude thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Such a construction Ille hodie,
and ego cras, He has fallen this day, and I Thus much of the kinds of
reprehension, Bern. de resurrect. dom. sermon. 2.


Now touching the person of Jonas himself, what a discredit was it unto him,
that babarous men should reprove an Hebrew; idolaters, one that feared God;
those that worshipped the host of heaven, and creatures both in the sea, and in
the la^d, a man that ascribed the creation of all these to the true substantial
God; infidels, a child of Abraham; bondmen and strangers, one that was borne in
the free woman's house? But this is a part of the judgments of God, the mean
time, to cloth us with our shame as with a garment, when we commit such
follies, as the barbarous themselves are ashamed of. For what greater confusion
before men, than that an infidel should say to an Israelite, a Turk or a
Moore to a Christian, a babe to an aged man, an idiot to a prophet, the
ignorant to him that should instruct him, Why have thou done this? That
which our Savior spoke of the Centurion in the Gospel, is much to the praise
of the captain, (...).
and no less to the shame of Israel, I have not found so great faith, no not
in Israel. And what meant he in the tenth of Luke, by the parable of the man
wounded, betwixt Hiericho and Jerusalem, but, under the person of a
Samaritane, to condemn a priest and a Levite, men of more knowledge then the
other had? yet though they served and lived at the altar, they had not an
offering of mercy to bestow upon the poor man, when there was nothing but
mercy found in the Samaritane. Why are the dogs mentioned at the gates of
the rich man, but that, for licking the sores of Lazarus, and giving an alms
in their kind, they are made to condemn the unmerciful bowelles of their
master, who extended no compassion? Luke 16.
Our Savior wondereth in the sevententh of the same Evangelist, that, when ten
lepers were cleansed, one only returned to give him thanks, and he was a
stranger. So he had but the tithe, and that from a person of whom he least
expected it. Balaam was reprooved by his ass, as the rich man before by his
dogs, Numb. 22.
and as he proceeded in frowardness, so the ass proceeded in reprehensions:
1. she went aside, 2. dashed his foot, 3. lay down with him, 4. opened her
mouth, and asked him, why he (...) smitten her? Israel, in the first of Esaias,
a reasonable and royal people, is more ignorant of their Lord, than the Ox of
his owner, the Ass of his masters cribbe. The complaint is afterward renewed
again, though the terms somewhat varied: Even the storke in the air knows
her appointed time, and the turtle, and the crane, and the swallowe observe the
season of their coming; Ier. 8.
but my people know not the judgment of the Lord. The confession of Saint
Augustine, unless we be shameless and senseless, cannot be denied of our
vnproficient days: Surgu^t indocti and rapiunt coelu^ etc 8. Confess.
The unlearned arise and catch heaven, and we with our learning, behold we
wallowe in flesh and blood. We are made to judge the Angels, but Angels and
men, infidels, barbarians publicanes, harlots, nay beasts, and stones shall
be our judges; because when we ask in our daily prayers, that the will of
God may be done in earth, as it is in heaven, we are so far off from matching
that proportion, that there is not the poorest creature in the air, in the
earth, in the deep, but in their kinds and generations go beyond us. Of
beasts and unreasonable creatures, Ser. 35. in Cantic. Qua^do quae prius
bestiis aequabatur, nunc and postponitur.
Bernard gives a sage admonition. Let the reasonable soul know, that though
it has the beasts her companions in enjoying the fruits of the earth, they
shall not accompany her in suffering the torments of hell: therefore her end
shall be worse then her first beginning, because, wherein she matched them
before, she now comes behind them. To this purpose, with some little
inversion of the words, he brings the sentence which Christ pronounced of
Judas, Id had been good for that m^n, if he had never been borne: Not if he
had not been borne at al, Non vtique si natus non fuisset omn^no, sed si nae.
tui non fuisset homo, sed aut pecu^ etc.
but if he had not been borne a man, but either a beast, or some meaner
creature, which, because they have not judgment, come not to judgment, and
therefore not to punishment. But amongst reasonable souls there must be a
difference kept. As the ground is mo^e, or less manured, so it must yield in
fruit accordingly, some an hundred, some thirty, some sixty fold. Five
talentes must gain other five, two must return two, and one shall satisfy
with a less proportion. A child may think, and do, and speak as befitteth
a child; a man must think, and do, and speak as becomes a man; an Hebrew
must live as an Hebrew, not as an Egyptian; a prophet as a prophet, not as an
husbandman; a believer as a believer, not as an infidel; a professor of the
gospel of Christ, as a professor, not as an atheist, Epicure, Libertine,
Anabaptist, Papist, or any the like, either hell-hounde, or heretic; least we
fall, and be bruised to pieces at that fearful sentence, The first shall be
last, that whom we went before in knowledge and other graces, those we are
brought behind in the hope of our recompense. It shall little avail us at the
retribution of just men, to plead with our Judge, as it is exemplified unto us
in the seventh of Matthew, Lord Lord, have we not prophesied by thy name?
unless we have prophesied to our selves, and lived like Prophets: or that by
the name we have cast out devils out of others; if we have kept and retained
Devils within our own breasts: or that we have eaten and drunken in thy
presence, and thou have taught in our streets; when neither the example of his
life, nor the doctrine of his lips has any way amended us.

THE XIII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 11. Then said they unto him, what shall we do unto thee, that
the sea may be calm unto us? (For the sea wroughte, and was troublous.)
YOu have before heard, first the conviction of Jonas by lotte, which was in
effect by the oracle and answer of God himself: therewith they are not
content, but they will secondly know his fault, what have thou done? and his
trade, Clavis sapientiae, frequens interrogati^.
what is thine occupation? etc. Wherein I observed their justice and vprightnes
in judicial proceeding against him. They have thirdly, con^itentem reum, the
confession of his own lips against himself, so as there needed no more to
do; as David spoke to the young men that brought news of the death of Saul, Os
tuum contra te loquutum est, thine own mouth has spoken against thee; and the
rulers, of the son of God, What need we any more witnesses? for we have
heard it of his own moutb. They are not yet satisfied, but fourthly, insteede
of resolution, they are exceedingly afraid, they punish and afflict themselves
more than they punish Jonas, and in steed of execution they begin to
expostulate with him, why have thou done this? and though they have not time
to breath almost, yet they find a time to hear a long narration and tale of
all his diobedience. Is there yet an end? No: but fiftlie, in a matter
already judged, they go to deliberate, nay, against the order and course of
all justice, he that is judged must judge, and the transgressour determine,
what shall be done unto him. Put it to a murderer, a thief, or any the like
malefactor, when the fact is notorious, convicted, and confessed, to make
choice for himself, what shall we do unto thee? what were he likely to
answer, but to this effect, let me live?

I have a further conjecture of their meaning at this time. For Jonas presented
unto them a double person: a sinner, a fugitive servaunt, a rebel against the
Lord; but vvithall, a prophet, one that is seen and skilled in the counsels
of the Almighty. They know themselves ignorant and barbarous men: for
howsoever they might be otherwise learned in the wisdom of Egypt and other
Gentile knowledge, yet they wanted that knowledge whereof the prophet
speaks, they shall all be taught of God: and they plainly perceaved by that
unaccustomed narration that Jonas delivered, of a most sovereign and dreadful
Lord, that there was some more excellent way, which they were not acquainted
with. Upon the persuasion hereof, they refer themselves to the wisdom
and integrity of Jonas. Much like as the captains of the host dealte with
Jeremy: The Lord be a witness of truth and faithfulness betwixt us, if
we do not accordingly to all things, Ier. 42.
for which the Lord thy GOD shall send thee unto us: whether it be good or
evil, we will obey thy voice.

What shall we do unto thee? Exposuisti causam morbi, indica sanitatis;
Hiero^ Interfici^mus? Culto^ Dei es. Servabimus^ Deum fugi^ Id.
thou have showed the cause of thy malady, show the means to cure it: what
shall we do unto thee? shall we kill thee? thou fear God; shall we save
thee? thou flyest from God; shall we set thee to land again? shall we make
supplications? shall we offer sacrifice? we apoint thee our leader and guide
in the whole disposition of this business. And surely it is an admirable
moderation of mind in a people so immoderate, whom neither their country could
soften, because they were barbarous; and the seas could not choose but harden,
because they were mariners; and the imminent danger had reason to indurate
and congeale more than both these: yet notwithstanding in an actio^ so
perplexe, and, howsoever it fall out, likely to prove perilous, they like to
do nothing with tumulte, with popular confusion, with raging and heady
affections, swelling in choler, and boiling in rancour against the author of
their miseries, but they will know from the mouth of the prophet, what the
mind and pleasure of the Lord is. In ancient times God gave his answer for
decision of doubts, and difficulties, after diverse manners. He answered
Moses face to face, others by aungelles, some by lottes, some by VRIM and
THVMMIM, others by visions and dreams, and the event of their matters has
been happy and prosperous, where the mouth of the Lord was harkened unto.
What was the reason that they erred so much in receaving the Gibeonites to
mercy, pretending a far country, old bottles, old brea^e, old garments,
old shoes? but because they accepted their tale concerning their vittailes,
Ios. 9.
and counseled not with the mouth of the Lord. In the prophecy of Esaie, God
pronounces a peremptory vvoe against his rebellious, stubborn children, that
take counsel, but not at him; and seek the protection and defense, but not of
his spirit; Es. 30*
and make have to go into Egypt to strengthen themselves with the strength of
Pharaoh, but have not asked at his mouth. It is noted of the religion of the
Turks, that it is a false, but a well ordered religion. Falsa sed ordinata
Turcarum religio etc.
A professor of their law proclaims, before they attempt any thing, that
nothing be done against religion. All the lawgivers of the nations, famous in
their lives and generations, bare their people in hand, that they received
their instructions from some Godhead. Numa in Rome alleged conference with
AEgeria, Solon in Athens with Minerva, Lycurgus in Lacedaemon with Apollo,
Minos in Crete with Jupiter, Charondas in Carthage with Saturn, Osiris in
Egypt with Mercury, Zamolxis in Scythia with Vesta: their wisdom and
policy therein was this, that they knew their people would sooner yield to
the voice of God than man. Moses in truth and verity received tables of
ordinances upon the Mount, written with the finger of God, and he presumed
thereupon that all the people about them would think, surely this is a great
nation etc. We are taught here-hence, that in our weightiest affairs, either
of war or peace, religion or policy, whether we take to mercy, as Joshua
did; or enter league with forreiners, as the Jews with the Egyptians; either
of life or death, as is specified in that question touching Jonas; we decree
nothing without the mouth of the Lord, or at the least without the mouths that
speak from that mouth, such as Moses had, I will be with thy mouth; and the
disciples of Christ, It is not you that speak, but the spirit of my father
within you: these must inform us by the lantern and light of his holy word,
what way is best to be followed. It is a testimony, without any exception to
be made unto it, and a confident assurance to our souls, when we are able to
say Adlegem and testimonium ivimus, We went to the law and testimony of
Almightye GOD, and these we chose to conduct us.

There is yet a further matter to be considered, which both the order of
things precedent, and the circumstaunces of the text now in hand, move me to
observe. For there are distinct persons here named. First the person of Jonas,
what shall we do veto thee? secondly of the mariners, that the sea may be
calm unto us; thirdly of the sea, for the sea went, and was troublous. 1.
Jonas is guilty, 2. the mariners are in ieopardy, 3. the sea is angry. And
both the anger of the sea, and their own instant dangers, are mighty and
impulsive arguments to incense them against Jonas. A proverb they have in
friendship, that the thigh is nearer to a man than his knee: no man dearer to
any man than himself; or, at the most, (...), friendship is no more than an
equality; and if a friend be alter idem, a second self, it is as much as in
reason he can look for. We are not bound either by the law of nature,
written in the heart, or by the law of God, written in tables, to love an
other more than our selves. Bernarde makes a note upon the order of our
Saviors words to the women of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but for your
selves and your children: 1. for your selves; 2. for your children. And though
in friendship they set a law of community, (...), al things must be parted
amongst friends, yet to depart from the life, is no common thing. Romans 5.
A man will skarcely die for the righteous; but for a good man, and one that is
profitable, (...): See how warily the Apostle treads in this sentence,
peradventure some man dares die; so it may be, when it is not; and he dares,
though he will not do it; and but some one perhaps amongst a thousand.
Life to a natural man, who thinks he lives but whilst he lives, is sweet
upon any conditions, as may appear in the example of the Gibeonites before
produced, who did that they did, for fear of their lives. And though they were
cursed for their wily dealinge, and none of them ever afterward freed from
being a bondsman, but made hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the
congregation of the Lord for ever, yet they were content to escape with their
lives, and to endure any thing, so the people might not slay them; Behold, we
are now in thine hands, do as it seems good in thine eyes to do unto us.
So true it is, De falsa sapien. 12.
which Lactantius writes of this transitory life, that although it be full of
vexations, yet is it desired and wished for, of all men: Old and Young*
Kings and mean persons, wise and foolish desire it alike. He adds the
sentence of Anaxagoras, Tanti est contemplatio coeli ac lucis ipsius, vt
quascunque miserias libeat sustinere, The very beholding of heaven and the
light it self, is so much worth, that we are content to endure any
wretchedness for it. Now these mariners having an eye to their private
estates, to pacify the anger of God, Hoc nempe ab homine exigitur, vt prosit
hominibus, si fieri p^test, multis; si minus, paucis; si minus, proximis; si
minus sibi. Senec. de vita Beat^^*
and quiet the sea for their own deliverie, standing upon the loss and
miscariage, not now of their substance, which was already gone, and might in
time be supplied, but of their lives, which never could be raunsomed, I marvel
that they make delays, and take not the speediest way for the ridding of
Jonas, and safegarding of their endaungered lives. There is no more required of
man but this, to do good to men, if it may be, to many; if not, to few; if
not, to those that are nearest him, if not, to himself: and therefore, the
saying of Jonas being plainly despaired, me thinks the care of their own
welfare should presently and eagerly have been intended.

The other argument to spur them forwards, was the impatience sea wrought, nay
the sea went, and was tempestuous, An excellent phrase of speech. The sea went,
it had a charge for Jonas, as Jonas had for Niniveh; The sea went.
for as God said to the one, Arise, go to Niniveh, so to the other, Arise, go
after Jonas. Does the sea sit still (as Elias sat under the Juniper tree, and
cried, it is enough?) or settle her waters upon her slime and gravel, and not
fulfill the commandment of him that made it? No: but as a Giant refresht with
wine, so it renueth and redoubleth her wonted force, feels not the labor
imposed, but does the work of the Lord with all possible diligence. The Lord
says, go, and it goes, and it goes with a witness, as Iehu marched, of whom
the watchman gave warning, he marches like a mad man: so does the sea go
furiously, with an unquiet, hasty, turbulent spirit, full of impatience and
zeal, till God have avenged himself against his disobedient servaunt. Thus
all the creatures in the world have arms and legs as it were, and all the
members of living things, and a spirit of life in some sort to quicken them,
and activitie to use them, and courage with wisdom to direct them aright, and
convert them to the overthrow of those, that with contemptuous security depart
from Gods ways. Do we then think that the will of God can ever be frustrated?
The Lord of hosts has (worn; surely as I have purposed, so shall it come to
pass; and as I have consulted, so shall it stand, Who can make straight that
which he has made crooked? Es. 14. Eccle. 7. Prove. 21.
There is no wisdom, no understanding, no counsel against the Lord. He has
determined; who shall disanull it? his hand is stretched out, and who shall
turn it away? See an experiment hereof. Whilst the mariners were knitting
and devising a chain of delays, adding protraction to protraction, wherewith
to spend the time, desirous either to save or to reprieue the guilty person,
and with a number of shifts laboring to evade that counsel which God had
enacted, how vain and unprofitable are all their consultations? If all the
Senates and sessions in the world had joined their wisdom together, to acquit
the offend our, it had been as bootelesse, as to have run their heads
against a wall of brass to cast it down. Unless they ca^ see and corrupt the
heave^s with all that therein is, the earth with all that therein is, the sea
with all that therein is, to keep silence, to wink at the faults of men, and
to favor their devises, it cannot be. For whilst these men are in counsel
and conference, the sea is in action; they are backewarde to punish, the sea
goes forward with his service; they loose time, and the sea will admit no
dilatio^: and to teach them more wit and obedience, the sea is in arms against
the mariners themselves, and persecuteth them, as consenters and abetters to
the sin, because the Lord had elected them ministers of his judgments, and they
neglect their office. The will of God must either be done by us, or upon us; as
it befell Jerusalem, Aut a nobis aut de nobis.
How often would I etc. thou would not: Because it was not done by
Jerusalem, It was done upon Jerusalem. They would have said afterward in
Jerusalem, when the blessings were all gonne, and whole rivers of tears could
not have regained them, Vae oppositi^ voluntatibus etc. Quid tam poenale qua^
semper vell^ quod nunquam erit, and semper nolle quod nunquam non erit^ in
aeternum no^ obtinebi^ quod vult, and quod non vu^t in aeternum s^stinebit.
Deuteronomy. 32.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. And therefore I conclude
with Bernard; Woe to all crossing and thwarting wills, gaining nothing but
punishment for their gainesaying. What is so miserable, as ever to intend that
which never shall be, and ever to be against that, which shall never but be?
they shall never attain what they would, and evermore sustain what they would
not.

And take this for a further warning out of this phrase, the sea went, and was
troublous, whereby is declared the travel and pains it took to take
vengeance; that when the anger of the Lord is once thoroughly fired, all the
waters in the South cannot quench it. It lies happily in a smother and smoke a
long time before it breaks out, but when it is once ascended, and has gotten
height, inca^descit eundo, it increases by going, and gathers more strength.
It burns to the bottom of hell, before it gives over, consuming the earth
with her increase, and setting on fire the foundations of the mountains. It
follows in the same scripture, I lift up mine hand to heaven, and say, I live
for ever: (a solemn and venerable protestation:) If I whet my glittering
sword, and my hand take hold on vengeance, I will execute my judgment upon
mine enemies, and reward them thae hate me. Mine arrows shall be drunk with
their blood, and my sword shall eat their flesh. There is a time, I perceive,
when his sword is dull, and rusteth in the skabberd of his long sufferance, and
his hands are so fraught with mercy, that judgment is laid aside, and has not
room to be spa^ned in them. But if he once whet his glittering sword, and his
hand take hold of judgment, then will he do it. The justice of God goes
slowlye and orderly, (...).

Tarditatem supplicij gravitate compensat^


but for the most part it recompenceth the slacknesse of judgment, with the
heavines thereof. It is long before he comes, but but when he comes, he
comes indeed, he comes in the clouds, he comes in a chariot of
whirlwind, swifter then the flight of an eagle, he comes to begin and to
make an end, he comes not to give a second wound, for he will fasten the
first so sure, that there shall be no need of a latter punishment. There
never lived unrighteous man upon the face of the whole earth, that had a sin
in his breast, but he had vengeance attending at his back, waiting perhaps
by leisure, and following with woollen feet, but smiting with an arm of iron,
when the sin was ripe. It was not enough for God to bring Jonas into reproach
with strangers, and to make him subject to the check of uncircumcised lips,
wondering and howting at him, as at a bird of diverse colors, but his justice
yet cries, give, give, and will not be satisfied with the morsel before
thrown* but Jonas himself must also be cast out. The Lord would never have
said in the book of Leviticus, that the land should spew out her
inhabitants, but that the wicked, are as it were the oppression of nature, the
surcharge and surfeit of the stomach; without the avoidaunce of whom, she
shall never be eased. I come now to the purpose of my speech.

The danger was imminent, and called upon the mariners, Yield Jonas, or yield
your selves; the sea importunate, and would not be answered. Two irrefragable
arguments: the one fighting against the nature and being of man, with whom
it is no easy thing to forgo his interest of life, before he needs must;
the other expressing the justice above to be vnexorable, unless it be
satisfied. They have these arguments before their eyes, they ponder and peruse
them in their hearts; yet behold their compassion, their tender regard to
the life of man: they are not so hasty as the sea, but put it to his
conscience, What shall we do with thee? it stands not with nature and
humanity, to make thee away. Their commendation briefly is; that the life of a
stranger to them all, a stranger of that land which was most hateful unto
them, the life of an open and convicted malefactor, the only matter of their
woe, is so precious unto them. Surely man was made unto man, as Moses was to
Aaron, in some sense, a God (for succor and comfort) according to the
ancient exiled proverb, Homo homini Deus, Man unto man is, or should be a
God. It is now varied, Homo homini lupus, Man unto man is a wolf. The first
that was created after Adam (which was the woman) was given him for his
helper, because the life and welfare of man cannot consist without
association; Epist. 52. Homo sum, humani nihil a m^ alienum puto. Ita omnium
affectum naturaliter attigit.
but the next that ever was borne by natural and kindly generation, both of
father and mother became a destroyer. Saint Augustine reports of that sentence
in the comoedie, I am a man, I think no part of humanity impertinent unto
me, that the whole theater being full of idiotes, and vulgar persons, gave
applause unto it, it did so naturally touch the affections of them all. When
Vedius Pollio a Roman, at a supper provided for Augustus the Emperor, would
have thrown his servant into his fish-ponde where he kept his lampryes,
because he had broken a cup of crystal, the Emperor withhelde, and
controlled him with these words* A man of what condition soever he be, Homo
^uius^unque conditionis. Plut.
if for no other cause, yet because he is a man, is more to be valued than
all the cups and fish-pooles in the world. How is mankind become so
degenerate and wild, in that which nature shaped it unto? how is our gold
become so dim, our blood so stained? for now we may rightly complain, with
that noble and virtuous Frenchman, Phil. Mo^^* de ver. ch^. reli^. cap. 16
whom double honor waits upon, What is more rare amongst men, than to find
a man? that is, as he interprets it, amongst men, how many beasts are there,
for want of using reason; and for not using it well, how many Devilles? Lions
fight not against lions: serpents bite not serpents: Pliny.
but soothly the most mischief that man sustaineth, comes from man. Thou art
deceaved, says Seneca, if thou give credit to the looks of those that meet
thee: they have the faces of men, the minds of wild beasts. Surely we have
justified the madness of the most savage and intractable beasts, and steeled
our affections with more cruelty and barbarity, than ever lions and serpents
could learn in the wilderness. And therefore I blame not David, who having his
choice of plagues presented unto him, made a present exception to his own
nature and kind, let me not fall into the hands of man. 1. Chr. 2^.
Barbarous and uncivil Christendom (we may say) in comparison of these
barbarous men, (many whole regions and tractes thereof, but singular persons in
her best composed parts, without number) whose hearts are so bound and
confirmed with sinews of iron, that they are no more moved with the life of a
man, than if a dog had fallen before them. Why should they think that the
life of an other as fearful made, as ever their own was, as dearly
redeemed, as tenderlye cherished by the providence of God, as serviceably
framed for Church or common wealth, as carefully nursed in the mothers womb,
and by father and mother as painefully brought up and maintained many years
together, now to be spilt and ruinated in a minute of time; why should they
think that it bears not as high a price both with God and man, as their own
lives? Yet such is the nature of some, so fallen from their kind, as if rocks
had fathered them, and they had sucked the dragons in the desert, rather than
the daughters of men; their delight is in nothing so much, as in the slaughter
of their brethren, and the style of that ancient murderer, whose children
they show themselves to be, is ever in their mouths, Ure, seca, occide,
burn, cut, kill, poison, crucify, take no pity; strangers, known persons,
old, young, men, women, brethren, sisters, whosoever does but cross them
with a mistaken word, or wrye countenance, non in compendium, sed occidendi
causa occidunt, Senec. 2. de clem.
they will murder upon every occasion, and though they gain not by their
death, yet they will kill, because they take pleasure in killing: whereas the
care and charge, I say not of Christian, but of civil and well natured people
should be, parce ^ivium sanguini, spare the blood of citizens, or rather spare
the blood of men, because they are all kinsmen and brethren in the flesh. I am
amazed to think how wanton and luxurious we are in destroying the life one of
an other, not content alone to wish the death of an enemy, as they cried in
the Psalm, When shall he die, and his name perish? but we will be actours
with our own hands, and approovers with our own eyes and hearts, deserving
thereby a more bloud-red commendation, Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap. 11
than he in the history, bis parricida, consilio prius, iterum spectaculo,
twice a murderer, first in counselling, afterward in beholding the fact: for
we are thrice murderers, 1. for invention and devise, afterward for act,
lastly for taking pleasure either to view or to record the same. Murder with
the favorablest terms (unless it be plentifully washed away with a floude of
tears, from a bleeding and broken heart, and died into an other color, by the
blood of Christ) is likely to have ruth enough. There is not a drop of blood
spilt upon the earth, from the days of righteous Abell to this present hour,
but swelling as big as the Ocean sea in the eyes of God: and neither heat of
the sun, nor drought of the ground shall ever drink it up, till it be
revenged. But murder with pride, delight, triumph, with affectation of glory
thereby, as if it were manhood and credit to have been in the field and
slain a man, to make it an occupation as some do, when they have once
committed it, to be so far from remorse, that they are the readier to commit
it again, till blood touches blood; Woe worth it: it is the vnnaturalest
nature under the heavens, I would term it by a name, if there were any to
express it. Caligula the Roman Emperor, whom for his filthy and sanguinary
conditions, I may term as they termed his predecessor, Lutum sanguine
maceratum.
dirt soken with blood, wished, that the people of Rome had all but one neck,
that at one blow he might cut them of. Who would ever imagine, that a man of
one heart, should so much multiply his cruelties by conceit against a
multitude? Seneca writes, that Messala Proconsull of Asia beeheaded three
hundred in one day, and when he had made an end of his tyranny, as if he had
done some noble exploite, walked with his arms behind him, and cried, O
royal act. Lucius Sylla, at one p^oscription having slain 4700. men, caused
it be entered of record, ne memoria tam praeclarae rei dilueretur, Lib. 9.
cap. ^*
least the memory of so honorable a thing should be worn away. Valerius
setting down the rest of his truculent murders, confesses against himself,
I am scarsely persuaded that I write probably: he killed a gentleman of Rome
without stirring of his foot, for not enduring the sight of one murdered
before his face: Novus punitor misericordiae, never was it seen before, that
pity it self should be punished; and that it should be held as capital an
offense, to behold a murder with grief, as if himself had done it.
Notvvithstanding, says he, the envy of Marius did mitigate the cruelties of
Sylla: whose name shall be striked with the blackest cole of infamy in all
the ages of the world, when they shall but hear that an innocent citize^
drank a draught of burning coals, to escape his tyrannous tortures.
Sabellicus thinks, Lib 9* cap. ^*
that the factious cities of Italy, in his and his forefathers days, were
stored with more pregnant examples of cruelty than all these. When the
princes of the factions falling into the hands of their enemies, some were
burnte alive, their children killed in their crad^lles, the mothers with
child their bellies ripped up, themselves and their fruit both destroyed, some
thrown down headlong, some had their garbish pulled out, their hearts to
their further disgrace hung up and beaten with stripes. You may easily guess
(says he) what butcherie there was, when hanging and beheading were
accounted clemency. Endless are the histories which report the cruelties
that have been committed by man upon man. But of all that ever I red or
heard, the most incredible to mine ears, are those that were practiced by
the Spanish nation upon the West Indians: of whom it fs thought, they have
slain at times, more millions of men, than all the countries of the East are
able to furnish again. You may judge of the Lion by his claws. In one of
their Islandes called Hispaniola, of tvventye hundredth thousands, when the
people stood untouched, Benzo in his Indi^ story.
the author did not think at the penning of his history, that there were an
hundred and fifty souls left. He had reason to exclame as he did, O quot
Nerones, quot Domitiani, quot Commod^, quot Bassiani, quot immites Dyonisij eas
terras p^ragravere? O how many Neroes, how many Domitians, with other the like
egregious, infamous tyrauntes, have harrowed those countries? Iustus Lipsius
justifies the complainte: Lib. 2. de constant. ca. 22. The marginal note is,
Indorum strages, imo excidium.
that no age in the world could match some examples by him alleged, but
only our own, howbeit in an other world. A few Spanish (says he) about
fourscore years since, sailing into these west and new found lands, (good
God) what murders and slaughters committed they? I reason not of the causes or
right of their war, but only of the eventes. I see that huge space of
ground, which to have seen, (I say not to have vanquished) had been a
great matter, overrunne by twenty or thirty soldiers and those naked
flocks every where laid alonge, as corn by a sickle. What is become of
thee, O Cuba, the greatest of Islandes? of thee, Hayti? of you, the Iukatans?
which sometimes stored and environed with five or six hundredth thousands of
men, have scarcely retained fifteen in some places, to raise up issue again?
Stand forth thou region of Peru, a little show thy self; and thou of Mexico.
O vvonderfull and lamentable face of things. That unmeasurable tracte, and in
truth, another world, is wasted and worn away, as if it had perished by
fire from heaven. One of their kings in the province of Iukatan spoke to
Montegius the Lieuetenaunt governor, Benzo.
after this manner. I remember, when I was young, we had a plague or
mortality amongst us, so sore and unaccustomed, that infinite numbers of
worms issued out of our bodies. Moreover we had two battles with the
inhabitauntes of Mexico, wherein were slain an hundredth and fiftye thousand
men. But these things are trifles, in comparison of those intolerable examples
of crueltye and oppression, which thou and thy company have used amongst us.
They had named themselves for credit and authority, the sons of God: but
when the people saw their vile behavior, they gave this judgment upon them;
Qualis, malum, Deus iste est, qu^ tam impuros ex se filios and sceleratos
genuit? si pater filiorum similis, minime profecto bonum esse oportet; What
kind of GOD, with a mischief, is this, that has begotten such impure and
wicked sons? if the fathers be like the children, there can be no goodness
in him. Extremities of tyranny practiced in such measure, that nothing could
be added thereunto by the wit of man, vvrunge out great liberty and and a
city of speech from them. For when Didacus the deputye told the Cacique of
Veragua, that, if he brought not in gold enough, he would cast his flesh
to the dogs, the infidel made him this answer; I marvel how the earth
can foster and sustain such savage beasts. Indeed their impotente outrages
were such, as the wretched souls vvoulde sooner die, than endure them.
Therefore they chose rather to sterue, and drown, and hang themselves, if they
vvanted halters, by the hairs of the head, and one to swinge the other upon a
tree, till their breath were expelled; they cut and mangled their own flesh,
for want of knives, with sharp flint-stones; the women with child, destroyed
their babes in their wombes, because they vvoulde not bear slaves to the
Spaniardes* many times they vvoulde fire their houses, and kill their children,
using this persuasion unto themselves, that it were better to die once, than
miserably to spend their days under tyrauntes. The carrying of their silly
vassalles by companies, linked and fettered together, like heardes of beasts,
from the continent land wherein they dwelte, to the mines in the Islandes,
together with branding a letter of slaverye in their arms and faces, are not
cruelties but mercies in them; for thus long they lived, though they dearelye
boughte their lives. They had not their fill of blood, unless they slew them
in sport, to exercise their arms, and to try vvagers, and threw their
carcasses to their dogs; unless they put them to draw their carriages from
place to place; and if they failed by the way, (which how could they hinder,
except their strength had been as the strength of stones?) pulled out their
eyes, cut of their noses, struck of their heads; unless they lodged them
like brute beasts under the plankes of their ships, where all the filth and
ordure was bestowed, till their flesh rotted from their backs. The poor
Nigrite their slave, after his toil the whole day undergone, in steed of his
meal at night, if he came short in any parcel of his task enjoined, they
stripte of all his clothing, bound him hand and foot, tied him cross to a
post, bet him with wyre and whippe cord, till his body distilled with gore
blood, they powered either molten pitch or scalding oil into his sores to
supple them, washed him with pepper and salt, and so left him upon a board
till he might recover himself again: this, they said, was their law of
Baion. If tigers should make laws, could they exceed these men in
savagenesse? I now wonder the less of the people of Caribana, and others
thereabout, being accustomed to eat the flesh of man, would notwithstanding
refrain the flesh of a Spaniard, when they had caught one, fearing least such
pestilent nutriment would breed some contagion within the^. If I do them
injury by repetition of their furiousnes against the life of man, let them
blame the history, not me. I was very well content to note thus much unto you,
under the warrant and protection of mine author, both the matter of my text
leading me to a commendation of humanity, even toward a stranger, (the
praise whereof these are as far from, as a shee-beare robbed of her whelps)
and because they are the men, whom some of our own nation have desired to
be Lords and rulers over them. But if ever they make trial of their
temperate government, they will find the least finger of their hands
heavier unto them, than an others loins, whom they would cast off: and how
much happier it had been for them still to have felt the sweetness of the
olive, or fig tree, under which they have sitten, and shaddovved themselves,
than that the prickles of a bryer should have torn them. For, least they
should err in their ground of such a change, the cause of religion pretended,
is the least thing regarded by them: and that, these barbarous people right
well perceived, having bought their knowledge with a long and lasting
experience, of many their houses, cities, count^ies, sacked, ransacked, turned
vpside down, and the dust of all their ground most narrowly sifted and
searched; that a wedge of gold was Deus Christianorum, the God of the
Christians; and this they would hold alofte, and make proclamation amongst
themselves, En Deus Christianorum, Behold the God of the Christians; propter
hoc e Castella in terras nostras venere, for this they came from Castile into
our land, (not to convert infidels;) for this they spoil us, and are at war
within themselves; this is the cause of their dicing, cursing, blaspheming,
^avishing one the others wives, and committing all kind of abominations.
Insomuch that a king of Nicaragua asked Benzo himself, the penner of this
story, Christian, quid enim sunt Christians? Christian, what are Christians?
and thus he answered himself by defining them; They desire spice, honey, silk,
a Spanishe Cape, an Indian woman to lie with, gold and silver they seek for:
Christians will not work, they are scoffers, dicers, blasphemers,
slaunderers, fighters, and finally, to conclude, Omnes mali sunt, they are all
naught. Thus was the honor of God, the name of Christianity by their lewd
behavior derided, defamed, reproched, by those that were without, infidelles
and Paynims. I say no more for determining this unsavory discourse touching
that uncivil, ungentle nation, but, Happy are we, if other men's harms can
make us beware, if, when we have seen the firing of their houses, by these
incendiaries and robbers, we look carefully to our own, and make our
fortunate examples of their unfortunate and vnrecoverable subversions.

When some smart, (says Cyprian) all are admonished, Magna providentiae
co^penaia. de s^ng. cl^ri^* The Assizes.
and God in his providence has taken an easy course, by the terror of a few,
to deliver a multitude from the like mischief.

What shall we do unto thee? The time is near at hand when inquisition must
be made for blood. You that are magistrates, and sit in the seat of God, let
not your eyes or hearts pity that man that has spilt blood. Quanto non
nasci melius fuit, Seneca.
quam numerari inter publico malo natos? how much better were it not to be
borne, than to be borne to do hurt? we cannot prevent the birth of such,
but it is not amiss to hinder and shorten their life, that they work not
more mischiefs. If you bear once, you must bear perhaps a second time. GOD
has pronounced against Mount Se^^ long since, I will prepare thee to blood,
Ezech. ^^*
and blood shall pursue thee; unless thou do hate blood, blood shall pursue
thee: and although Mount Seir be long since desolated, yet the judgment of
that righteous judge shall stand like Mount Sion, and never be altered. They
that commit, Qui n^ vetat peccatu^ etc.

Tot occidimus quot ad mortem ire quotidie tepi^i and tacente^ videmus. Gre^.
super Ezech Clementia and misericordia Sen. Misericordia and miseratio. Lips.


and they that conceal murder, they that love to shed blood, and they that
hate it not, principals, accessaries, abettours, favorers, patrons of
bloudshedde, they are all in fearful case. You will say, I am cruel my
self, and forgette to apply my text, whilst I speak against cruelty.
Nothing less. I would not that justice should thrust mercy out of place; but
mercy and pity differ as much, as religion and superstition: the one
honors, the other dishonors God; the one is an ornament to man, the other
reprocheth him. Be compassionate to the life of man, and spare it, as
discretion shall require, but rather be compassionate to the life of the common
wealth: for be ye assured, that the punishment of bloud-shedde is, not to
shed but to save more blood. Melius est vt pereat vnus quam vnitas, It is
better that one should die by law, then numbers without law. The dog that
lives in the shambles, has commonly a bloody mouth* and he that has been
flesht upon the blood of man, will not easily leave it.

I leave the answer of Jonas to the next place. ^et v^ beseech our merciful
God, the preserver of m^n, as Job calls him, that he would vouchsafe to
preserve unto us, this virtue of humanity, without which we are not men;
putting softnes and tenderness in them that are cruel, justice into those that
must bridle the rage of cruelty, kindness and compassion into us all, that,
whatsoever we are to deal in with any sort of men, we may carefully cast
before ^ande, as these mariners did, what we should do unto them; setting
their rule of friendship and brotherhood before our eyes, not to do wrong or
violence, in oppressing the state or life, either of brethren or strangers, but
to measure unto them all such duties of nature and charity, as we wish should
be measured again to our own souls.

THE XIIII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. verse 12. And he said unto them, Take me, and cast me into the
sea, so shall the sea be calm unto you: For I know that for my sake etc.
THE order I kept in the verse going before, was this. Three persons were
proposed unto you* 1. the person of Jonas, standing upon his delivery; 2. the
person of the mariners, being in ieopardy; 3. the person of the sea,
continuing troublesome and unquiet unto them. The two latter whereof, the
furiousnes of the waters, and their own peril, were mighty arguments to
incense them against Jonas. In this verse he answers their whole demand: 1.
touching my self, you ask, what you shall do unto me? Take me, cast me into
the sea. By this means, 2. the sea shall be quieted, 3. toward you, against
whom it is now enraged. This for the order and coherence. Now for the matter
it self, it is divided into three branches: 1. the resolution, decree and
sentence of Jonas upon himself, Take me, cast me into the sea; 2. the end, and
it may be, the motive to harten them, So shall the sea be quiet unto you; 3.
the reason, warrant, or justification of their fact, For I know that for my
sake etc. The verse rises by degrees. You ask, what you shall do with me?
Cast me into the sea. What is that for our safety? Yes, the sea shall be quiet
unto you. But how may we purchase our peace with so vniustifieable an action?
Right well: For I know that for my sake the tempest is upon you.

1. The decree.
Rabbi ^zra, and some of our later expositors following his opinion, think,
that he makes this offer unto them, upon an obstinate, obfirmed mind against
the commandment of God, that rather than he would be held in life to go to
Niniveh, to gain a foreign uncircumcised nation, he would die the death. And
they guess moreover, that he would never have given that liberty unto them
against his life, but that he heard them say, unless he went to Niniveh, they
would cast him forth. There is not a syllable in the text, to justify this
judgment. For Jonas had made a reverent confession of God; a singular
testimony of a mind recalling it self. And as for the mariners, what kindness
they showed him, both before, and after, the letter of the scripture plainly
demonstrateth. I rather take it to be a doom of most prophetical and resolute
magnanimity, wrestling with the terrors of death, as Israel with God, and
prevailing against them. As if he had said, you shall not lose an hair of
your heads for mine offense, I will not add murder to rebellion, and the
wrack of so many souls to my former disobedience, Take me. Take me.
Not as if you feared to touch me; ^ollite me, take me on high* take me with
force and validity of arms, take me with violence, lift and hoise me up: when
you have so done, use no gentleness toward me, let me not down with ropes,
neither suffer me to ^ake my choice, how, or where I may pitch, Cast me, at
adventures, as you threw forth your wares. Cast me.
And though the sea has no mercy at all, threatening both heaven and hell with
the billows thereof at this ti^e, and bearing a countenance of nothing but
destruction, and it had been a blessing unto me, to have died one the land in
some better sort, or to have gained the favor of a more merciful death, yet
cast me into the sea, In to the sea.
and let the barbarous creature glut it self. Jonas might have stood longer
upon terms. I have committed a fault, I am descried by the lots, I confess
my misdeed, the sea is in wrath, your lives in hazard, what then? will it work
your peace to destroy me? Say, I were gone, and perished; is your deliverance
nearer than before it was? But without cunctation and stay, possessing his
soul in patience, and as quiet in the midst of the sea, as if he beheld it on
firm ground, making no difference between life and death, animated with a
valiant and invincible spirit, triumphing over dread and danger, charitable
toward his companions, faithful and bold as a Lion within himself, and
yielding to nothing in the world, save God alone; he gives not only leave and
permission unto them, do what you will, I can not resist a multitude, you may
try a conclusion by the loss of a man; but with a confident intention, as
willing to leave his life, as ever he was to keep it, and as ready to go
from the presence of men, as before he went from the presence of GOD, First
he puts them in right and possession of his person, Take me; Secondly he
prescribes them the manner and form of handling him, Cast me into the sea;
Thirdly drives them by agreements thereunto, not of conjecture and
probability, It may be thus, and thus, but of certain event, the sea shall
be calm unto you; and of undoubted persuasion, I known that for my sake etc.

Whether a man may offer violence to himself?
It is a question not unmeet to be considered in this place, (which many have
handled from the first age of the world, not only with their tongues, but with
their hands, and insteede of sharpness of wit, have used the sharpnes of
knives, and other bloody instruments to decide it) whether a man may use
violence in any case against himself? Noluit Deus vt sese proijceret, sed id
nau^arum ministerio fieri voluit. Hier 2. Sam. 1.
I find it noted upon these words; God vvoulde not let Jonas cast forth
himself, but would have it done by the ministry of the mariners. But the
odds is not great in effect, if you observe what is mentioned. For Jonas
sets on the mariners, and not only counsels, but in a sort compels
them to cast him forth. Saul was not dead by the wounds which he gave
himself, till an An alekite came and dispatched him: yet was Saul an homicide
against his own person, and the other that made an end of him, filius mortis,
the child of death. Surely GOD has given a commandment in express terms
against this horrible practice, August. 1. de civ* Dei, 20.
Non occides, Thou shall not kill; praesertim, quia non addidit, Proximum tuum,
especially, because he added not, Thy neighbor, thou may the rarher
understand thy self: as in the other commandment, when he forb^d false
witness, he said, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
Although if the law had spoken more fullye, Thou shall not kill thy
neighbor, thou had not been freed thereby, quomam regulam diligendi
proximum a semetipso delector accipit, because he that loves, Ibid.
takes the rule of loving his neighbor, first from himself. And the
conclusion holds good: Non occides; non alterum, ergo nec te: Nec enim qui se
occidit, altum quam hominem occidit, Thou shall not kill; no other man,
therefore not thy self: for he that kills himself, kills no other but a
man. I will require your blood (says the Lord,) at the hands of beasts, at
the hands of man himself, Genes. 9.
at the hands of every brother will I require it. Will he require blood at
the hands of beasts, in whom there is no understanding, and at the hands of
every brother (which conjunction of brotherhood is the effectual cause why we
should spare one the others life,) and will he be slack to require it at
thine own hands, who art nearer to thy self than thy brother is? Tho.
Aquinas gives three reasons to condemn the unlawfulness of these bloody
designments: 1. They are evil in nature, because repugnant to that charity,
wherewith a man should love himself. And death, we all know, is an enemy in
nature, and life is a blessing of God, in the fifth commandment. 2. Each man
is a part of the communion and fellowship of mankind, and therefore he does
injury to the common wealth, that takes away a subject and member thereof. 3.
Life is the gift of God, and to his only power subdued, who has said, I kill
and I give life. Therefore Jerome writing to Marcell of Blesillaes death, in
the person of God abandoneth such souls, Non recipio tales animas, quae, me
nolente, exierunt e corpore, I receive not such souls, which, against my will,
have gone out of their bodies. And he calls the Philosophers that so dyed,
Martyrs stultae philosophiae, Martyrs of foolish philosophy.

There were two vile kinds of deaths, wherewith of old (it seems) they
were wont to finish their unhappy days, Laqueus and praecipitium: either they
hung themselves, August. co^^liter. Petili. any, l. 2. c. 49
or brake their necks from some steep place. Petilian, an enemy to the
catholic church, had thus reproachfully spoken against the sound belevers,
The traitor Judas died by an halter, and the halter he bequeathed to such as
himself was (meaning the orthodoxe Christians) No, says Augustine, this
belongs not to us, for we do not honor those by the name of Martyrs, who
halter their own necks. How much more do we say against you, Quid enim^
nisi inimici Christi, amici Diaboli* discipuli seductoris, ^o^discipuli
traditoris? spontaneas enim mor^e^ ab vno magistro utrique didicerunt* ille
laqueu^, isti praecipitium.

Lib. 1. de ciu Dei cap. 17. Licet propter scelu^ suum, alio scelere suo
occisus es^.


that the Devil the master of that traitor, would have persuaded Christ to
have fallen down from the pinnacle of the temple, and took repulse? then
what are they to be termed, whom he has both counseled so to do, and
prevailed with? truly what else, but the enemies of Christ, the friends of
the Devil, the disciples of the seducer, fellow disciples with the traitor?
for both from one master have learned voluntary deaths, the one by strangling
himself, the other by falling down headlong. The same father brings these
murderers into streightes, and holds them in so closely on both sides, that
there is no escapinge from them: When thou killest thy self, either thou
killest an innocente, whereby thou becommest guiltye of innocente blood; or an
offendour, which is as unlawful to do, because thou art neither thine own
Judge, and thou cuttest of space of repentance. Judas when he slew himself,
he slew a wicked man; notvvithstanding he is culpable, both for the blood
of Christ, and for his own blood, because though for his wickedness, yet was
he slain by an other wickedness.

Some have offered themselves unto these voluntary deaths, to leave a
testimony of courage and undaunted resolution behind them: Animi magnitudine
for ^asse mira^di, non sapien tiae sanitate laudandi sunt. lib 1. cap. 22.

Qui vitam aerumnosam magis potest far quam fugere.


of whom Saint Augustine speaks; Perhaps they are to be admired for
stoutnesse of mind, but not to be commended for soundness of wisdom.
Albeit, if reason may be judge, we cannot rightly call it magnanimity, for it
is a far greater mind, which can rather endure than eschew a miserable life. I
am sure the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles never did thus: and though
they were p^nched in their reins, and their souls heavy unto the death, as
Christ's was, insomuch that they cried out, take my life from me, my soul
chooses to be strangled, oh that my spirit were stifled within my bones, and
wretch that I am, who shall deliver me? yet they never paid their debte of
nature, till their creditour called upon them: which time they would never have
stayed, if, in a moment of an hour, the service of their own hands It was
rather a great then a good act. Magne potiu^ factum quam been.
Plato would have done so himself, or at least have advised it, but that in
that learning, wherewith he saw the immortality of the soul, he also saw
such means to attain it, utterly unlawful. Some, to avoid a mischief to
come, Non inquinatur corpus, nisi de consensu mentis, The body is not defiled,
Aquin. 2 a. 2 ae. quae. 64. ar. 5.

Nonne satius est incertum de futuro adulterium, quam certum de praesenti
homicidium^ l. 1. de civ. De cap. 25* 2. Mac. 14.


but when the mind agrees* If they consent, yet let them live too, that they
may repent it. Whether is better, adultery to come, yet not certain; or a
certain murder, presently wrought? Is it not better to commit an offense,
which may be healed by repentance, than such a sin, wherein no place is left
for contrition? O rather let them live, who sin, that they may recover
themselves before they go^ hence, and be no more seen. It is a reason
sufficient to raze the history of the Machabees out of the canon of the
scriptures, that the author thereof commends the fact of Razis; who being
beset by Nicanor ^ounde about; and having no means to escape, fell on his
own sword, and missing his stroke, ran to a wall to break his neck; and
yet his life being whole within him, ran through the people, and gate to the
top of a rock, and when his blood was spent, (gushing out from him like a
founteine) he took out his bowels with both his hands, and threw them upon
the people, calling upon the Lord of life and spirit, that he would restore
them again unto him, and so he died. This the story commends for a manfull
and valiant act. Aquinas thinks otherwise. There are some, says he, that
have killed themselves to avoid troubles and vexations; Mala poenalia.
Estimantes se fortiter agere. Quaedam mollities animi.
(of which number was Razis) thinking they do manfully; which notwithstanding
is not true fortitude, but rather a certain effo^minatenesse of mind not able
to endure their crosses. I will pronounce nothing rashlye. The mercy of God may
come, inter pontem and fontem, as the proverb is, between the bridge and the
brook, inter gladium and iugulum, between the sword and a man's throat; and
the last words of Razis testify his petion to the father of life and spirit,
that his bowelles might be restored him. But, excepting that conclusion, what
difference, I pray you, between him and Cato? Lib. 3. ep. 24
of whom Seneca writes at large, that the last night he lived, he red Plato
his books, (as Cleombrotus did,) and taking his sword in his hand, said;
fortune, thou have done nothing in withstanding all my endeavors, I have not
hitherto fought for mine own liberty, but for the liberty of my country,
neither have I dealt so immovably, to live free my self, Non vt liber sed
inter Liberos.
but that I might live amongst free men; now, because the affairs of mankind
are irrecoverable, let Cato be horn to rest; so he stabbed his body, and when
his wound was bound up by the physicians, having less blood, Minus sanguinis
idem animi.
less strength than before, yet the same courage, and now not angry against
Caesar alone, but against his own person, he tumbleth his hands in his
wound, and sends not forth by leisure so properly, as by violence eiecteth
his generous spirit, skorning and disdeigning that any higher power should
command him. Both these, you hear, betake themselves to a desperate refuge,
the point of the sword; Razis to avoid Nicanor, Cato Caesar: both allege
the good of their country, not their private estates; both are impatient of
the misery to come, the reproach and disgrace that captivity might bring upon
them; both miss their fatal strokes; both are implacably bent to proceed in
their voluntary homicides; both toss and embrue their hands in their own
bowelles; and as the one reposeth himself upon Gods goodness, so the other
was not without hope of rest, when he cried, Cato deducatur in tutum, let Cato
go to a quiet place; both are commended for their valiant death. But it is
certain that Cato died through impatience of mind, Occidit enim se, ne
diceretur, Caesar me servavit, For he killed himself, that it might not be
said, Caesar has saved me and Seneca affirms as much, that it might not be
happy to any other man, either to kill or to preserve Cato. Valerius Maximus
reports the words of Caesar when he found him dead; Cato, I envy thy
glory, for thou enviedst mine. It was a candle before the dead, and as messes
of meat set upon a grave, but a truth, which an other told him, thou
should have red and understood Plato otherwise. Scripta Platonis, No^ ita
era^t animo perci pienda tuo. Maiori supplicio afficiendus desertor vitae, quam
desertor militiae. Ludov. Viv. in lib. 1. de civ. Dei, cap. 22.
If thou had well considered what Plato vvrote, thou might have found
reasons sufficient to have stayed so unnatural a fact, 1. that God is angry
with such, as a Lord with his bondmen that slay themselves; 2. that the
relinquisher of his own life is more to be punished, then a reneger of his
service in war. And therefore there is no doubt, but the fact of Razis also
must have very favorable interpretation, if it be any way excused. Albeit
Seneca in the place before alleged, commended the dying of Cato in some
sort, yet it is not amiss to consider, with what golden sentences he ends
that Epistle; It is a ridiculous thing, through wearisomenesse of life, to
run to death, when by the kind of life thou have so handled the matter, that
thou art driven to run unto it. Again, so great is the folly, or rather the
madness of men, that some, for the fear of death, are enforced to death. He
adds singular precepts; A wise and a valiant man must not fly, Timore
mortis coguntur ad mortem. Non fugere debet e vita sed exire. Libido mori endi.

Non cum procursu capiendus est impetus.


but go from life; and above all things that affection must be shunned,
which has taken hold upon many, a longing and lustfulnesse of dying. He
vvoulde have us prepared both ways, neither to love, nor to hate this life too
much, and some times to finish it, when reason calls us forth, but not with
a fease, and impotent forwardness. His counsel certainelye agrees with
divinity. For our Savior exhorted his disciples, If they persecute you in one
city, fly into another. Notvvithstanding he had warned them; whosoever
will find his life, and not forsake it when the time and cause require him to
lay it down, that man should lose it.

Which law and precept of Christ, by the judgment of Gregory Nazianzene, In
Monod.
compels no man to offer himself vvilfullye to death, or to yield his
throat to him that seeks it, least through a desire we have to please GOD,
in povvring forth our blood, we either compel our neighbor to break that
commandment, Thou shall not kill; or seek to purchase and procure our own
deaths: but when the time calls us to the combat, then we must
cheerfully stand forth, So says Jerome upon these words of Jonas: Non
est nostrum mortem arripere, sed illatam ab alijs libenter excipere, It is not
for us to catch after death, but, when it is offered by others, then willingly
to receive it.

Seneca in his eighth book of controversies, sets down a law against
fellones of themselves, and debateth it both ways. The law is, whosoever
murthereth himself, Homicida in se, insepultus abiiciatur.

The like was in Athens, forbidding burial in agr^ Attic^ Irascere
interfectori, miserere interfecti.

Non vt gloriosum, sed vt tutum sit mori.


let him be cast forth without burial. The declaration on the one side, in
defense of the felon, is made to say something for fashion sake; Be angry with
the murderer, but pity him that is murdered: I ask not that it may be
honor for him thus to die, but that no danger. They are as cruel, that
hinder those that are willing to die, as others that kill them, when they are
willing to live. But on the other part, what vehemence and eagerness does
he use? It is a shameful part that any hands should be found to bury
him, whom his own hands have slain. He vvoulde have attempted any thing,
that could find in his heart to kill himself. No doubt he had great
crimes in his conscience, that drove him so speedily to his end: and this
amongst the rest is one, that we cannot proceed against him (as against
other malefactors) by course of judgment. But order is taken against such
offenders, that, because they fear not death, they should fear something
after death. So said the Poet, who saw no further into these things, than the
glass of nature gave him light, They that have wrought themselves a causeles
death, Qui sibi lethum Jnsonter peperere man^^ etc.

And hating light above, thrown out their breath;
How would they joy to be alive again,
Though put to penury and bitter'st pain?


And me thinks the reason of that law, to debar them from honest burial,
can never be disproved. Qui sibijpsi non parcit, quomodo parcet alijs? He that
spares not his own person, h^vve will he spare other men? There is but one
example in the whole book of God, wherein there is any color of patronage for
this prodigious and treacherour sin against their own bodies: Spiritus
latenter hoc iusserat.
The example of Sampson burying himself, and the Philistines with the fall of
an house, which is not otherwise excused by ^^^ustine, but that a secret
spirit willed him so to do. For it appears in the book of Judges, where
the history is written, that his strength was renewed, and he called upon the
Lord at the instante of his death. And in the eleventh to the Hebrews, he is
well reported of, in that cloud of righteous men, by the spirit of God.

I have held you long in disputing this question, which many a one has
disputed to himself without reply, when the malignaunt spirit has once
but vvhispered it into his cares, easily drawn to make a conclusion against
body and soul, without longer deliberation. Such have been the direful
tragoedies which often have been presented upon the face of the ^arth, carrying
always a note of a most distrustful mind, either suspecting it self, that
it is unable to bear the burdens of calamitye imminent, or hating and
abhorring it self for some iniquity committed. Now what shall we think the
affection of Jonas was in this case, giving, and not less then thrusting upon
them, full power of his person? Take me, and cast me into the sea. Judas, we
know, upon the stinge of his guilty conscience, hunge himself upon an
alder-tree, and burst in the midst. Achitophell did the like, because his
counselles were defeated. Saul fell upon his sword, that he might not come
into the hands of the Philistines. Domitius Nero, fearing the approach of
Galba, and hearing that a sentence of the Senate was passed against him, to
stand in the pillorie, and to be beaten with rods to death, for his
outrageous both tyrannies and impurities of life, finding no man to strike him,
and exclaming against them all; what? have I neither friend nor foe? I have
lived dishonourably, let me dye shamefullye; struck himself through with his
own sword, his trembling hand directed thereunto by a beastlye Eunuch. Others
through other impatience, angry with heaven and earth, GOD and man, have
desperately departed, with Ajax in the tragoedie, It does me good to have
vanquished heaven, the GODS, the lightening, Iuv^^ vi^isse coelum etc.
the sea, all oppositions. Thus in effect did Cato triumph, Nihil egist^,
fortuna, fortune, thou haste not sped. Thus might Jonas cast with himself: Is
there a God in heaven? winds in the air? and waves in the sea that cross my
intent? I will have my will, though I die for it; Sic, sic iuvat ire sub vmbras,
So, even so it eases my stomach to take my leave of this life. But never
shall it enter into my heart, thus to conceive of a righteous and repentaunt
prophet, who rat^^^ ^umbleth his soul under the hands of GOD, framinge these,
of the like persuasions to himself: I see the purpose of the most High cannot
be changed, I kick against the pricks, heaven has proclaimed me a
traitor, the winds and the seas have heard it, and whiles there is breath in
the one, and water in the other, I shall not go unpunished: the word of the
Lord is good that he has spoken, the wisdom of the Lord is vviser than
the foolishness of men, and the strength of the Lord stronger than the
weakness of man; the Lord do that that is good in his sight. Cast me
therefore into the sea; throw me into the mouth of justice, let the hunger and
thirst of it be satisfied, for I have deserved no less. Surely there is not
a word in this whole speech, but full of virtuous, charitable, and
mystical obedience.

We are now come to the end of his resolution. Wherein we have two things
to bear away: 2. The end. So shall the sea be calm.
first his charity to his companions, wherewith he tendered the safegarde of
their lives; secondly the figure he bare: For he was a type of that
undefiled Lamb, by whom the nations of the world should be redeemed. His
charity appears in plain terms, that the sea may be calm unto you. His
chari^^
It is no pleasure unto him, to have the lives of others brought in question
for his sake, he is not of the nature of some men, neither profitable in their
life time, and, at their deaths, of most ungracious, desolatory, hateful
affections, who make it their ease and comfort in some sort, to have their
miseries accompanied; and, so they be not alone in destruction, they are less
grieved. The Poets express the vncompassionate style of these Catilinarie
dispositions; (...).

Vt specimen Troiae arde^tis videret.


When I am dead (says one of them) let the earth be mixed with fire. Medaea
cries in the tragoedy; It were the only felicity to see all things
ruinated, when I go my self. Domitius Nero, of whom I spoke before, caused
Rome to be fired in twelve places togitheir, that he might see a pattern
how Troy burnte, himself the mean while singing verses out of Homer.

What were their prizes and combats in the theater of Rome, Pium principem
oportet non tantum regnare sed etiam spectare clementer.
but the slaughteringes of men, to move pleasure and delight? When the people
desired Theodosius the Emperor to grant them those sportes, he answered
them; A mild prince must temper himself both from cruel governemente, and
from cruel spectacles. The same matter falling into debate at Athens, Demonax
gave judgment, that if they will publickely receive so great atroci^ye, and
cruelty amongst them, they should first overthrowe the altar of mercy: His
meaning was, that mercy has no place, where there is admission of such
heathenish cruelties. Cyprian in his second book of Epistles, making mention
of this custom, shows their manner thereof, Epist. 2. Carius. Clarius.
Charius. Peritia est, vsus est, ars est.

Scelu^ non tantum geritt^r, sed docetur.


that their bodies were fed before hand, and dieted with strong meats to
fill them with juice and blood, that being fatted to punishment, they might
dye with more cost, (it may be, glory) but with less contentation. He
much inveigheth against it, that man should be killed to delighte man, and
that an art, science, or skill thereof, should be practiced; and not only
wickedness vvroughte, but taught by precept. They had a custom besides, to
enter combat with wild beasts; men of a sound age, lusty, able,
vvell-favoured persons, well apparelled, went to a voluntary death, and
fought with the beasts, not for any offense committed, No^ crimine, sed
furore. Id. ibid.
but in a mad mood. And as the actours themselves gloried in their miseries,
so their parents were well pleased to behold their sons: the brother was
within the railes or bars, the sister near at hand, the mother present at
her sorrows; and though beholding such ungodly sportes, they never thought,
that at the least for looking on, Oculis pari^idae.
they were paricides. You see the humors and affections that some men have,
how lightly they are conceipted of the life of their brethren, whereas
brother-hoode indeed requires at their hands, Vtinam possem multos ab
inferis excitare.
that they should rather wish with Marcus Antonius, to raise up many from the
dead, than to destroy more; or with Moses in the sacred volume, rather himself
to be razed from the book of life, than that his people should perish*

2. The figure.
This former reason is expressed in my text; the latter is employed and
conceaved, that he made this poffer unto them, as being the figure and type of
the most loving son of God. The explication whereof, though it stand chiefly
in the article of his resurrection, whereof himself speaks in the gospel,
they seek a sign, but there shall no sign be given them, but the sign of
the prophet Jonas; yet there Prophetam Jonas was sent upon a message unto
Niniveh; and Christ was Angelus magni consilij, The angel of the great
counsel of God, Legatus foederis, The ambassador Much enquiry was made of
Jonas; whence art thou? what is thy calling, country, people? why have thou
done thus? Much questioning with, and about Christ; Art thou the king of the
Jews? Art thou the son of the living God? Who is this that the winds and
the seas obey him? Is not this the Carpenters son? Whence has he this
wisdom? Jonas was taunted and checked by the master What meanest thou
sleeper? Christ by the masters of Israel, the rulers of the people and
synagogues, as a Samaritane, as one that had a Devil, and by the finger of
Beelzebub cast out Devilles, a glutton, a vvine-bibber, a blasphemer of the
law of Moses. Both came the sea shall be quiet unto you; Christ answers
him, If ye seek me, let these depart: and of those that thou gave unto
me, have I not lost one. The one says, Tollite me, Take The other says,
when the son of man is lift up, he shall draw all things to himself.
Finally both are sacrificed, the one in the water, the other in the air; both
are buried, who is able to reprove me of any sin? Jonas made no doubt,
but for that his latest misdeede of flying from the presence of the Lord, he
was cast out. Christ had done many good works amongst them, and none but
good; and therefore asked upon confidence of his innocence, For which of
these works do ye stone me? Our innocent Abell persecuted by cruel Cain;
(I am deceived, for as his blood speaks better things than the blood of
Abell, so it is blood of better and purer substance:) our innocente Jacob
hunted by unmerciful Laban, although he might truly say, Genesis the one and
twentieth. What have I trespassed? Genesis 31.
how have I offended that thou have pursued after me? I might add, our
innocente Joseph, sold and betrayed by his despightfull brethren, and little
less than murdered, though he went from his father, and vvandered the
fields gladly to seek and see how they did; our innocente David chased by
unrighteous Saul, though by Ionathans just apology, wherefore should he
die? what had he done? or who so faithful amongst all the servauntes of
Saul, as David was? or if from the state of innocencye to this present hour,
I should reckon all the innocents of the earth, and put in Angels of
heaven, yet all not innocente and holy enough to be weighed with him; and
therefore to call him by his own names, our sun of righteousness, branch
of righteousness, the LORD our righteousness; he that was borne of a
Virgin, that holy thing, Luke 1. the undefiled lamb, our holy, harmless,
blameless high priest, separate from sinners, our Jesus the just; he that had
the shape of a serpent in the wilderness, but not the poison, the similitude
of sinful flesh in the world, but not the corruption; he that knew no
sin, (and much less was borne sin:) yet was made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him; he had the wages of sin,
though he never deserved it, Esaias 53.
and made his grave with the wicked, though he had done no wickedness,
neither was their any deceit in his mouth: he was vvounded for our
transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, and the chastisemente of our
peace was upon his shoulders: all we, like sheep, had gone astray, and the
LORD his father has laid upon him the iniquities of us all. But was he
compelled thereunto? that were to go from the figure, and to show less
humanity to mankind, than Jonas to his companions. For what hand could cut
this stone from those heavenly mountains? The Apostle tells us otherwise,
Philippians the second, (...), he emptied himself, and took the form of a
servant: (...), he humbled himself, and bec^me obedient unto death, even
the death of the cross: Hebrews the ninth, he offered himself to purge our
consciences from dead works: (...). Esaias. 53.
Galatians the second. He gave himself. The Prophet tells us otherwise,
Oblatus est, quia ipse voluit, He was offered, because he vvoulde himself;
and he has povvred out his soul unto death, which notes a liberal and
voluntary dispensation. When sacrifice and oblation God would not have, and
somewhat must be had, what says the scripture of him? Hugo Card. Jd.
Then said I: Dixi facto, quod annunciaveram per prophetas, I said it
indeed, for I had past my word before in the prophets, Behold I come:
venio voluntary, non coactus adducor, I come of mine own accord, I am not
brought by coaction. It is written in the book that I should do thy will:
I am content to do it, O my God* it is as deepelye written in mine own will,
and thy law is in the midst, not in a corner of my heart. Non in angulo,
sed in medio cordis.
You see his willingness: being called, he answered; being sent, went; with
as cheerful a spirit, as every any servaunt the Centurion kept: his ear
was opened with attention, as it were with the avvle of the law; his
desires accommodated no other way; and not an angle, but the heart of his
heart, and the inmost concavity, Exodus 21.
which, they say, is made to contain vital breath, was filled up with
subjection to his fathers pleasure. Incredulous soldiers, if ye believe not
this, open his side with a spear, and pearce his heart to the center of it,
and tell me, if he vvrote not with streams of blood, as sometimes he
vvrote in the dust, perfitte obedience toward his father, incredible loving
kindness toward our ungrateful generation. Look into the Arc, ye curious
Bethshemites, examine the secrets of it, and tell me what ye find. Bring
hither your fingers, and thrust your nails into the printes of his wounds,
and sound the bottom, if you can, of his vvilling and hearty disposition.
Was he not dumb before the shearer? or did he ever (abuse?) nay, open his
mouth before the slaughterer? though they took both fleece and flesh from him,
his cloak and his coat to, did he ever repine? was his voice heard in the
streets, though the very stones in the streets could have found in their
hearts to have spoken and cried in his cause? Augustine applies to his
passion, the words of the Psalm, I will lay me down in peace, and take
my rest. Ego, cum pondere pronunciandum est, Psalm 4.
we must pronounce (I) with vveighte; to shevve that he suffered death with
his free assent. And Bernarde notes upon the second of the Canticles,
Behold, hec comes leaping by the mountains, and skipping over the hills;
Ser. 54.
that being nimble of spirit, fervent in love, zealous in piety, he overcame
all others, in the alacrity of his ministration, as he whom GOD had
anointed with the oil of gladness above all his fellows; he outleapte
Gabriell the Archangell, says he, and came to the Virgin before him, by the
testimony of the Angel himself, Hail Marie full of grace, Dominus tecum, The
Lord is with thee. Behold thou leftest him in heaven, and find him in the
womb. How can this be? volavit, and praevolavit, super pennas ventorum, He
flevve and overflevve thee upon the wings of the vvinde, and he that sent
thee before, is come before thee. If you will know his other leapes, Gregory
sets them down, that as he leapte from heaven into the womb, so from the
womb into the manger, from the manger to the cross, from the cross to the
grave, from the grave into heaven again, and thence we look for his second
coming.

I know, that for my sake this great tempest is upon you. 3. The warrant.
Jonas knew the cause of their danger, partly by prophetical revelation,
(which manner of knowledge was private to Jonas with but few other men;)
partly by touch of conscience, which, he lives not upon the earth, that can
escape. Tempests you have had in your days, without number: but first,
grandis tempest as haec, This great and vnvvoonted tempest, which is not only
come upon me, but secondly, super vos, 1. This great tempest.

2. Upon you.

3. I know.

4. Is for my sake.


upon you also; thirdly, I know, and am without doubt, that it is raised,
fourthly, for my sake. Though it mingle the nocent and innocent, unrighteous
and righteous together, as the nets in the gospel mingle the good and badde
fish, yet am I the spring of it, and thereof I am as certain, as that I
know my right hand. I know that for my sake. Jonas was very forwards
before, in Confession; he told them the whole progress of his disobedience,
but never proceeded thus far. For yet he might have pleaded; I grant I am
a sinner, it may be, you as deeply as my self; but when he sees the siege
of the anger of God lie so hot and close to the walls of his conscience, that
it will not be remooved, then, Novi quia propter me, I know that it is for my
sake.

Many are strangers to themselves for a space, and will seem to be
ignoraunte of their own doings: charge them with sin, they will say, and
swear, and bind it with cursing, I know it not; in the same terms that
Peter denied his master, Non novi hominem, I know not the man. But when Christ
looks back, I mean, when they find themselves narrowly eied, and
remembered, then I know that for my sake it is, that he looks back. When
our savior toulde his people as he sat at supper with them, One of you shall
betray me, do you think the traitor would bewray himself? no, though they
were all sorrowful, Math. 26.
and asked one after one, Is it I? yet is he as forward as the rest to ask
that question also, Is it I, master? albeit he knew it as perfitly as his own
name. Being but one amongst twelve, and eleven more in company to bear a part
of the burden, he thought he was safe enough. Seneca by his own confession
and preface to his tale, Rem incredibilem narro, sed v^ra^.
reports a strange but a true thing, of Harpastes a fool, and, and, with
age, a blind beldame. She knows not that she is blind, and often
entreats her guide to go forth of doors, because the house is dark:
Neither is there any, says he, amongst us, that knows his faults. Every
man flattereth himself, Non ego ambitiosus sum, I am not ambitious, 2. Sam. 12.
nor covetous, nor luxurious, nor given to this or that vice. David knew not
the man, that Nathan spoke of; he pronounced of a person unknown unto him,
The man that has done this, is the child of death. This is but mufling of the
conscience for a time (as Thamar mufled her face to take a short pleasure:) but
Thamar shall be discovered, and all hearts shall be opened; the cockatrice,
that has lien in her hole, will come to warm her self against the heat of
the sun; Adam will be brought from his bushes, and Sarah from behind the
door, and a man shall say to his consci^nce, as Ahab said to Elias, Plutar. de
ser. number. vindict.
Haste thou found me, O mine enemy? The Delphians made no scruple, to
murder Aesope amongst them; but when they were plagued with death and
mortality thereupon, they walked up and down in all the public assemblies of
Greece, and caused it to be proclaimed by noise of criers, that whosoever
would, should be avenged upon them for the death of Aesope; they knew that
for their sakes the plagues came. The accusers of the adulteress in the
Gospel, how skillful and busy were they, in detecting and following her
fact? 1. they had taken her; 2. in the act; 3. they set her in the midst; 4.
they urged the law, Moses commanded that she should be stoned. Ioh. 8.
How ignorant were they, and forgetful of themselves, till Christ
advertised them? Then they went out (says the gospel) one by one, from the
eldest to the last, being accused by their own conscience; then there was none
left to give evidence against her, but our Savior asked, woman, where be thy
accusers? or rather, their own accusers? they knew that for their sakes Christ
spoke, and they found that writing which he drew in the dust, engraven so
deep in their own hearts with a pen of iron, that it could not be
dissembled. This is the case of al those that cover their sins, Quorum si
mentes recludantur, Tacitu^.
possint adspici laniatus and ictus, Whose minds, if they could be opened,
we should see their rentes and stripes within. Sins may be without danger
for a time, Tuta esse scelera, secura non possunt.

Fructus and vtilitas sciendi in mod^ sciendi. Ber*


but never without fear. Happy are they that know as they should know: (for
this Novi, whereof I speak, belongs to us all) whose knowledge is not
contristans scientia, a sad, unpeaceable, sorrowing knowledge, (the knowledge
of devils, who know there is an hell for them, and albeit they know much, yet
they know not the way to salvation:) but fruitful, comfortable, joyful
knowledge, who know to amendment of life, who know to run to the remedy of
their sins, to lay a plaster of the blood and wounds of Christ to the
wounds and hurtes of their soul, who know that their Redeemer lives, as
Job did, know Christ crucified not only for the world, but for themselves
also, Philip. 3. 1. Cor. 1. 1. Cor. 13.
and account all things but loss and dunge in comparison of that excellent
knowledge. This is to be rich in knowledge, as the Apostle speaks, and
without this, if we knew all sorts, and all knowledge besides, we might be
poor, beggarly, miserable, ignoraunte, reprobate, as bad as devilles.

THE XV. LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 13. Nevertheless the men rovved to bring it to land, but
could not, etc.
IN the former verse there are pregnant causes laid down, why the Mariners
should have eased themselves of Jonas: 1. the liberty and leave he gave them to
cast him forth: 2. the good that should ensue by the pacification of the sea:
3. their warrant; 1. the tempest was upon them, 2. a tempest for his sake, 3.
himself upon knowledge avowed it.

Nevertheless, though they see the danger, and the causes of the danger, and
the remedy thereof plainly and assuredly demonstrated, they row to bring it
to land. It seems very strange unto me, that they take not the first
occasion and offer, to unwind themselves from the peril they were in: and
that neither the master of the ship in his wisdom, nor the multitude of the
mariners in their tumultuous and heady violence, nor any one person amongst
them, forward for the common cause, takes the benefit of al these
opportunities, to save themselves. It gives us a memorable instruction, that
in singular and extraordinary facts, Sibi solu^ pereat.

Sufficit malo malitia ipsius.


which either the law of God, or the law of nature repugneth, and is plainly
against, we be not too eager and quick in expedition thereof, until it be out
of doubt by some special warrant from heaven, that they may be attempted.
Touching this present enterprise, there is no question, but though they had not
learned the letter of the law of God. Thou shall not kill, yet the law of
nature tied them by secret bonds to deal with Jonas, as they wished to be
dealt with, themselves. Then why should they drown him? because the lots had
convinced him? the lottes might err at a time: or, if they spoke a truth, must
these men be his judges? or if judges, of his life and death? there might some
lesser punishment be devised. Again, what though he offered himself to be
thrown into the sea, for their safety? must they take him at his first word?
Can not their hurtes be cured, but by so desperate a medicine, as nature cannot
brook? When Constantine the Emperor (if the history be true) heard that
there was no means to cure his leprosy, but by bathing his body in the blood
of infantes, his heart abhorred it, Malo semper aegrotare, quam tali remedio
convalesce^e. I had rather be sick whilst I have my being, than recover by
such a medicine. Again, the warrant he gave them, I know that for my sake,
might perhaps be without warrant. A man might speak in the bitterness of his
soul, what else he would not; weary of his life, not able to bear his
crosses, and therefore, as the manner of many distressed is, seeking for death
more than for treasures. Whatsoever they did or might conceive, this I am sure
of, they had great reason to be very circumspect and scrupulous, to bear
their heart in their hands, to walk with advise and chariness, before they
did any thing in an action so unusual, and that which nature it self forbad
them. Cap. 2^.
Augustine in the first book of the city of God, handling Abraham's paricide
intended upon his own son, (a fact both against nature, for no man ever
hated his own flesh, and against the written precepte, Sed non ide^ sin^
sceler^ facit etc.
I will require the blood of man,) speaks thus; It does not excuse another
from impiety, that shall purpose to offer his son, because Abraham did so,
even with commendation. For a soldier also, when, for obedience sake to that
power under which he is lawfully ordained he shall kill a man, Jmo nisi
fece^it, reus est imperij deserti.

Itaque und^ punitur si fecerit iniussus, inde punitur nisi fecerit iussus.


he is not chargeable with murder by any law of the city, nay, he shall be
guilty of contempt to his governor, if he do it not; which had he
committed by his own accord and authority, he had fallen into question of
spilling man's blood: therefore by what reason he is punished, if he shall
do it without commandment, by the same he is punished, if being
commanded, he do it not. Quod si ita est, iubente imperatore, quanto magis
iubente creatore? If it be thus for the bidding of the Emperor, much rather
for the bidding of the creator. He adioyneth the example of certain virgins
(Pelagia with her mother and sisters) who threw themselves into a river,
rather than they would be defiled by a villainous soldier. In excuse of
whom he demands: what if they did it, not deceived by humane persuasion,
but commanded by GOD? not of error, but through obedience? as in Sampsons
departure from his life, it is not lawful for us to think otherwise. Only
let him beware that kills himself, or his child, and fully be satisfied,
Tantummodo videat vtrum divinae iussio nullo nu^et incerto.
that the commandment of God has no uncertainty in it. It is the judgment
of sound divinity, that some factes which the scripture records, are
singular, and dyed with the persons that did them, enforcing no imitation at
our hands, without the like special direction and dispensation from
almighty GOD that he gave to them, as namely Abraham's obedience in offering
his son, Phinees his zeal in killing the adulterers, Sampsons magnanimity in
destroying himself, and the Philistines with the fall of the house, the
Israelites policy in spoiling the Egyptians of their iewelles and ornaments.
All which and the like singularities, Cum Deus iubet, seque iubere sine vllis
ambagibus intimat, quis obedientiam in crimen vocet? Aug. ibid*
When God commands them, and makes it a clear case, without any
perplexities, that so his pleasure is, who can accuse thy obedience? But
before be assured in thy conscience, that God has commanded them; tie and
untie a thousand knottes, and both make and remove as many objections as thy
heart can devise. Ioh. Sleidan. in comment.
The Anabaptists in Germany framed and fained an imagination to themselves,
that by the will of God, the ancient magistracy must be quite rooted from
the earth; they said (and happily believed) that they had speech with God, and
that he enjoined them to kill all the wicked in the land, and to constitute a
new world, consisting only of the innocent. Who persuaded them? he that spoke
with GOD, concerning Ahab, I will be a lying spirit in the mouths of all his
Prophets, to deceive Ahab; a spirit of error and falshoode, a spirit borne
and bread within their own brain. The conceipte was extraordinarye, that
private men by violence and force of arms should not only displace, but
destroy their rulers and magistrates. What slaughter and havocke it caused,
what profusion of blood between the nobles and the commons, Germany then
felt and smarted for; histories and monuments of time will relate to all
posterity, and the president thereof, may make the world take heed, how they
be drawn by fanaticall spirits into these or such like unaccustomed and
improbable courses. What disputing and skanning was there of late within this
realm of ours, by conference in private, by broakers and coursers up and
down, by books and balle^s in print, whether there were not in these days
extraordinarye callings? Upon the persuasion hereof, what hasty, headlong,
heathenish endeavors to reform a church, to dissolve government, to vniointe
order, to compel a prince, and not to tarry her leisure, if she presently
agreed not? each man having a forge in his own hand, to make and mar, to
turn square into round, white into black, church into no church, ministry
into no ministry, sacraments into no sacraments, this man coining himself a
prophet, that man a Christ, others they knew not what? thus travailing and
toyling themselves in the fire of their own fancies, till they lost
themselves, their wits, their grace, and some their lives? What shall we say
hereof? but that it was a singular enterprise, proceeding from the singular
spirits of singular persons, and, if GOD had not wrought for us in mercy, the
sequel must needs have been singular unhappiness. My conclusion is, that by
the example of these mariners, fearful and nice to deal in so dangerous a
matter, we follow the common rule (as the kings beaten way) which the law
of nature engraffed, and of the will of God revealed, has prescribed unto us:
and if ever we meet with actions, which have not agreement with these two,
to examine al ambiguities therein, and to be certain of the will of God,
before we enterprise any thing.

That this was the purpose of the mariners, They rowed.
is plainelye to be gathered both by the whole contexte and body of the
history hitherto continued, (when, though they had many provocations to free
themselves and their ship, they with-helde their hands,) and by a phrase of
their further pains most effectually significant, wherein, as they contended
with their ores to bring their ship to land, so writers have contended with
their wits, how to express their labors. Our English has simply, and in
a word, the men rowed, truly, but not sufficiently. The latin says no more
but remigabant, which is as much as our English. The 70. Interpretours (...),
they offered violence to the sea: and Jerome with an excellent circumlocution,
rerum naturam vincere cupiebant, they desired to exceed nature, and to do
more than they could do. The original tongue says, they dug, and delved,
Foderun^ remis.
and furrowed the sea with their ores, as a man the ground with culters and
shares, and aquae fundum investigabant, they searched and sounded the bottom
of the waters, as men that would turn them vpside down, rather then miss
the success of their charitable intention. Solon could do no more for Athens
than he did, when Pisistratus had taken it: he afterward hunge up his
spear and target at the court gates, with this protestation; O my country,
O patria tibi and dictis and factis opitulatus sum, Quic quid mortalitas capere
poterat, implevimus.
I have aided thee both with word and deed; so betaking himself to his own
house to take his rest. Alexanders soldiers told him, when (as they thought)
he prepared to go into an other world, and to seek an India, unknown to
the Indians themselves, we have done as much as men might undergo. These
men here mentioned, to their uttermost power stood and fought for Jonas,
against the rage of the tempest. Qui amat, aut non laborat, aut ipsum amat
laborem; He that loves, either labors not, or at least he loves and
takes pleasure in his labors, (As the pains of hunters, hawkers, and fishers
seem not grievous unto them:) and it is the property of love, to transform
and alter a man into that he loves. Amor transanimat in re^ amatam.
These men think of Jonas (I take it) as of themselves, make it their own
case, thus speaking in themselves; why should we cast away a man, if there be
any means to deliver him? See what a bond they plotte of reciprocal
kindness one to the other: Jonas to the mariners in the former verse, willing
to forgo his life for preservation of theirs, Take me and cast me into the
sea, that it may be quiet to you; and these as earnestly laboring with
hazard of themselves, if it be possible, to save Jonas. It is such an image (me
thinks) of that sociable and mutual amity, that turning and winding, and
retaling of courtesy, which ought to pass between man and man, as is worthy
to leave behind it an heedefull observation. For what were the life of man,
without this harmony and consent of friendship? where there is not date and
dabitur, Givinge and taking, lending and borrowing, gratifying and
regratifying, (as it were light for light) changing of offices and good turns,
what were it, but the life of beasts, which as they are sundry in kinds, so
there is no communion betwixt them in fellow-like duties? Nolo nunc in hominis
inhumani^atem declamare. Id vnum quod omnes sciant non tam dicam quam mihi
habeam etc. Jul. Scalig. ^xerc. 33.
I will not now declame against the inhumanitye of men: that one thing
which all men know, I will not so much utter to others, as hold to my
self; that by the biting of a serpent we loose our lives, but by the biting,
barking, breathing of a man, together with life, all that we have, perishes.
The Prophet once cried, O ye heavens drop down righteousness, when
righteousness was taken up into the clouds, and the earth void of it: we may
cry for lack of love amongst us, O ye heavens drop down kindness and
charity into our times, that the discourteous and churlish Nabals of this present
generation, which are not vvilling to redeem the lives of their brethren
(shall I say with the hazard of their own lives?) no, nor with the loss of
their shoe-latchets, with the hazard I mean of transitory and fading
commodities, which never are touched with the afflictions of Joseph, and,
though a number be grieved and pinched, as if they belonged to a foreign
body, never vouchsafe to partake the smart with them, with whom it is a
common speech, Zach. 11.
that, that dies, let it die; that they may know at length, they were not
borne to singe or say, laugh or joy to themselves, not to eat and drink,
thrive or live to their private families, but that others, which stand in
need, by very prerogative of mankind, have also an interest in their succor
and service. I noted the humanity of the mariners by occasion of some
circumstances before past, and I would now have spared you in the repetition
of the same argument, but that my text spares you not. I were worthy of
much blame, if, when my guide showed me the way, I would purposedly forsake
it; neither ca^ I justly make mine excuse, if, when the scripture takes me by
the hand, and bids me commend humanity once again, I then neglect it.

You may perceive how well they affected Jonas, both by the continuance, and
by the excess of their pains. I make it a further proof, that it is said in
the text, The men rovved: The men rowed.
as if he had said; they were mere strangers unto me; I cannot say, they
are Grecians, or Cilicians, I know not their countries or dwelling places, I
know not their private generations and kindreds, much less their proper names
and conditions. I know them no more then to be men, after the name commonly
belonging to all mankind. It is an usual manner amongst us, when we know not
men by their other differences and proprieties, to term them by that general
appellation which apperteineth equally to us all. When Paul was disposed to
conceal his person, as touching the visions and revelations which were sent
unto him, I know, says he, a man in Christ, 2* Cor. 12*
whether in the body or out of the body etc. I say not, that he was an
Hebrewe, I name no Apostle, I name not Paul, I know a man, of such a man I
will rejoice, of my self I will not, except it be of mine infirmities.
They asked the young man whose sight was restored, John 6. How his eyes
were opened? who because he knew not Christ in the propriety either of his
nature or office, to be the son of God, or the Messiah that should come, he
answered thus for himself; The man that is called Jesus, made clay, and
anointed mine eyes. Concerning whom he afterward bevvraieth his ignorance;
whether a sinner or no, I cannot tell; but one thing I know, that I was blind,
and now I see.

Is it not, think you, a vvonderfull blemish and maime to Christianity, that
those who were but men, even strangers unto Jonas, aliens in country, aliens
in religion, (but that they began a little to be seasoned with the knowledge
of the true God) should thus be minded unto him: we that are joined and
builte together, not only in the frame of our common kind, but in a new
building that came from heaven, we that are men, and more than men, men of an
other birth than we took from Adam, men of a better family than our fathers
house, regenerate, sanctified, sealed by the spirit of God against the day of
redemption, men that are concorporate under one head Jesus Christ, knitte and
united by nature, grace, by flesh, faith, humanity, Christianity, should be
estranged in affection, Christians toward Christians, protestants toward
protestants, more than ever were Jews and Samaritanes, of whom we read in the
gospel, that they might not converse?

Doubtless there are many things that have an attractiue virtue to win and
gain the opinions of men unto them. The inestimable wisdom of Solomon,
drew a woman, a Queen, from a far country, that she might but hear,
and question with him. The admirable learning of Origin caused ungracious and
wicked Porphyrie to go from his native land ^o the city of Alexandria, to see
him, and Mammaea the Empress to send for him into her presence. Vinc^. Lirin.
It never wants honor, that is excellent. The voice of friendship, where it
is firmly plight, Offic. 3.
is this, as Ambrose observes in his offices, Tuus sum totus, I am wholly
thine. What difference was there betwixt Alexander and Hephestion? Marriage,
by the ordinance of God, knows no other method but composition: of two it
makes one, as God of one before made two by resolution. The first day of
marriage sole^nized amongst the heathens, the bride challenged of the
bridegroom, Vbi tu Caius, ego Caia, Plutarc.
where you are master, I will be mistress. But the only lodestone and
attractiue upon the earth, to draw heaven and earth, men and angels, East and
West, Jews and Barbarians, sea and land, lands and Islandes together, and to
make one of two, of thousands, of all, is religion: by which they are coupled
and compacted under the government of one Lord, tied and conglutinate by the
sinews of one faith, washed from their sins by the same la^er of new birth,
nourished by the milk of the same word, feasted at the supper of the same
Lamb, and assumed by the same spirit of adoption, to the undoubted inheritance
of one and the same kingdom. And I cannot mislike their judgment, who think
that the little knowledge of God, and but elementary learning which Jonas
preached, when he made his grave confession of the true God, laid the
foundation of all this kindness, which proceeded from these mariners.

How has religion bin a band unto Christendom? the discordes and dissensions
whereof, (like a fire in the midst of the house, consuming both timber and
stones) have laid more countries to the dition of the Turk, than ever his bow
and shield could have purchased. We may truly say, as they in Athens
sometimes, we of Athens our selves have amplified and strengthened Philip our
enemy. Auximu^ Philippum nos ipsi Athenienses.
It was prude^tly espied by Cortugal one of the Turkish princes, in his oration
perswasiue to his Lord to besiege Rhodes; Christianus occasus discordijs
intestinis corroboratur, the fall of Christendom is set forward by civil
disagreeme^t. In the days of Mahomet the second, they had gleaned out of
Christendom (I mean those polluted Saracens) like scattered ears of corn
neglected by the owners, 200. cities, 12. kingdoms, and 2. empires. What an
harvest they have reaped since that time, or rather we reaped for them, who
knows not? and yet the canker runs on, fretting and eating into
Christendom, because the whole neglects the parts, and seeks not to
preserve them. Who is not moved with that lamentable description which AEneas
Silvius makes of Greece, in his oration against the Turks, for the composing
and attoneing of Christened kingdoms? O noble Greece, behold now thine end,
thou art dead and buried. If we seek for thy walls, we find but rubbell;
nay we find not the ground wherein thy walls have stood, we look for
Greece in Greece: we search for her cities, and find nothing save their
carcasses, and ruinated fragmentes. It is a paradoxe in common reason, hardly
to be prooved, but that experience finds it true; Brethren, kinsmen, or
friends, when they fall to enmity, their hatred is greater than betwixt
mortal foes; according to the prophecy of Christ, Inimici viri domestici
eius, a man's enemies indeed, and to purpose, to work him most harm, shall
be they of his own house. Of all the vialles of the wrath of God powered
down upon sinners, it is one of the sorest, Es. 49.
when a man is fed with his own flesh, and drunken with his own blood, as
with sweet wine, that is, takes pleasure in nothing more than in the
overthrow and extirpation of his own seed: Non nisi quaesitum cognata caede
cruorem,
Illicitumque bibit;
cares not for any blood, Annal. ^.
but that which is drawn from the sides of his brethren and kinsmen. Tacitus
notes no less than I speak of, between Segestes and Ariminius; the one the
father, the other the son in law, both hatefully and hostilely bent. That
which bound them together in love, Quae apud concordes vincula charitatis,
incitamenta irarum apud infe^so^ sunt.
whilst they were at concord, put them further at variance, being once
enemies. What more eager and bitter contention has ever been between
Christian and Saracen, than between Christian and Christian? we are brethren,
I confess, one to the other, fratres vterini, brethren from the womb, (...),
having one father in heaven, and one mother upon earth: but it is fallen out
upon us, which Jacob pronounced upon Simeon and Levi, we are brethren in
evil: they in their wrath slew a man, and in their self-will dug down a
wall, and therefore their rage was accursed. Can we escape a curse, that have
slain a man and a man, dug down a wall and a wall, betrayed a kingdom and
a kingdom, laid open the vineyard for the wild boar, give^ the soul of the
turtle to the beast, resigned up many sanctified dominions, wherein the scepter
of Christ was acknowledged, to capital and deadly enemies, by our mutual
intestine seditions? I can better show you the malignity of the disease, than
prescribe the remedy. But where brethren, kinsmen, confederates contend
together, what part gayneth? Victi victoresque in lachrymas ^usi*
the vanquished and the victorers may both beshrewe themselves. They may
fight, and embrue their hands in blood, Bella geri placuit, nul^os habitura
triumphos. Cadmaea victoria.

Frangenda ^^alma est.


and get the honor of the day, but they will have little list to triumph at
night. Iocasta told her two sons (rather her firebrands, as Hecuba foresaw of
Paris) agreeing together like fire and water, that whosoever conquered the
other, he would neither make show, nor bear sign of the conquest. O pray for
the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper, and speed right happily, that
wish her prosperity. Pray not for the peace of Edom, whilst it is Edom; pray
not for the peace of Babylon, whilst it continues Babylon; so long as they cry
against Sion, down with it, down with it, even to the ground, the Lord
return it seven-folde into their bosom. But pray to the prince of peace,
whose blessing and gift peace is, that, if ever we fight by moving either hand
or pen, we may fight against Edom, and Babylon, Ammon, and Aram, (as Ioab and
Abisai did) those that are without, but evermore desire, procure, and ensue the
peace of Jerusalem. Thus far of the kindness showed by the mariners unto Jonas;
who though they were but men, strange and unknown unto him, yet upon that
knowledge of God, which he had instilled into their minds by his preaching,
they endeavored what they could, to save his life. How sped their labors?

They could not.
But they could not, for the sea wrought etc. I remit you for instruction
her-hence, to the 11. ver. where you have most of these very words. It shall
stand more durable than the firmament of heaven, which the king of Babylon
testified of God, Daniel 4. According to his will he works in the army of
heaven, and in the inhabitants of the earth, and no man can stay his hand, or
say unto him, what do thou? he pronou^ceth as much of himself, Esaias 46. My
counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will. The earnestnes, and
improbity of man's labor, nothing avails, if God be against it. It is but the
labor of Sisyphus, laboring in the fire, and ploughing upon the rocks, (as
the mouth of God speaks) according to his word in Malachy, They shall build,
but I will pull down. The vigor of the words once again gives this counsel
unto us, (...), not to conte^d or wrestle with the power of God, which is, as
if a fly should oppose her force against a bulwark. They preach doctrine of
sufferance and patience at the will of God; Quod ferendu^ est, feras, that
which thou must bear of necessity, Malus est miles qui imperatore^ gemens
sequitur. Seen.
bear with good contentment of mind. He is an unmeet soldier that
follows his general with groaning. Thou can not strive with thy maker,
thou can not add to the stature of thy body, nor change one hair of thy
head from the color which God gave it. It is not thy rising early, that can
make thee rich; nor barring the gates of thy city, that can make thee safe:
much less can thou ransom thy life, nor the life of thy brother from the
hand of God, thou must perforce let that alone for ever. A league with all the
elements of the world, with the beasts of the field, stones in the street,
with death and hell themselves, is unable to secure thee. Therefore whatsoever
befall thee in thy body, goods, children, or beasts, enter into thy chamber,
be secret and still, and let the right hand of the Lord of hosts have the
pre-eminence.

This was the reason, I conceive, that after those last words, cast me into the
sea, though the men strove with their ores, and cried to the Lord in the next
verse, yet there is no mention made either of deed, or word, added by Jonas.
For what should he do, when the countenance of the Lord was against him, but
run the race set before his eyes with patience, and fall to another meditation,
than before he had, that, although he were thrown into the sea, yet God was
the Lord both of the la^d and the waters, and whether he sunk or swam, lived
or died, he was that Lords? Impatientiae natales in ipso diabolo deprehendo, I
find that impatience was borne of the devil, says Tertullian: to him let us
leave this plant, which the hand of the Lord never planted, and to his
mal-contented impes, with who^e there is nothing so rife, as banning,
blaspheming, bitter and swelling speech against the highest power of heaven, if
ever they be crossed or wrung with the least tribulation. They never learned how
the linkes of that heavenly chain are fastened one to the other: that
tribulation brings patience, patience experience, experience hope, and hope
will never suffer them to be ashamed or dismaide. They break the chain at the
first link; troubled they are against their wills, but, that which is
voluntary, as patience, experience, hope, they will not add, that both in body
and soul they may be confounded. We on the other side hang upon the chain,
and trust to climb to heaven by it (through the merits of Christ's death and
passion) whereof the last link consists; and we suffer none of those
comfortable persuasions to fall to the ground, without use, that if we suffer
with him, we shall also reign with him; and through many tribulations we must
enter into the kingdom of heaven: we regard not so much, Non quam poenam in
flagello, sed quem locum in testamento. August.
what part we have in the whip, but what place in the testament: we know, who
has sequestered for us, (to use the word of Tertullian) Idoneus patientiae
sequester Deus, God will truly account for all our sufferings: If we commit
our wrongs unto him, he will revenge them; our losses, he will restore them;
our lives, he will raise them up again.

THE XV. LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 14. Then they cried unto the Lord, and said, we beseech thee O
Lord, we beseech thee.
THE sea is angry, you have heard, for the Lord of hosts sake, and will
have a sacrifice. They gave it space and respite enough to see if time could
make it forgette the injury that was offered: they entered consultation with
Jonas himself of some milder handlinge him: they spared not their painfullest
contention of arms and ores, to reduce him to land again. But when delay
wrought no better success, and neither the prophet himself could by advise
prescribe, nor they effect by labor and strength, the release of GODS
vengeance, what should they do, but make ready the sacrifice, and bind it to
the horns of the altar, bestovvinge a fevve words of blessing and dedication
(if I speak rightly) before the offering thereof? Jonas is sacrificed in the
next verse, So they took up Jonas; But the consecration and hallowing of the
sacrifice goes before in these words, wherefore they cried etc. It is the
catastrophe of the whole act, now it draws to an issue and
accomplishment; their fear, prayer, proiection of their vvares, sortilege,
examination of Jonas, consultation, and other machinations and assaies
whatsoever, were but prefaces and introductions to this that follows. The sea
has made a vow, and will surely perform it; I will not give my waters any
rest, nor lie down upon my couch, till Jonas be cast forth.

Wherefore or then. It implies an illation from the former speeches. When
neither head nor hands, counsel nor force could provide a remedy, they
make it their last refuge to commend both themselves and Jonas to God, by
supplication t Jonas, by a touch, and in secret, in that they call his blood
innocent blood, as who would say, he never did us hurt; themselves, of
purpose, and by profession, that having to deal in a matter so ambiguous, the
mercy and pardon of God might be their surest fortress. The substance and
soul of the whole sentence is prayer: a late, but a safe experiment, and if
the worst should fall out, that there were imperfection or blame in their
action now intended, prayer the soveraignest restoratiue under heaven to make
it sound again. For thus in effect they think. It may be we shall be guilty
of the life of a Prophet, we address our selves to the effusion of harm
less blood, we must adventure the fact, and whether we be right or wrong, we
know not; but whatsoever betide, we beg remission at thine hands, be
gracious and merciful unto our ignorances, require not soul for soul, blood
for blood, neither lay our iniquities unto our charge. Prayer has asked
pardon, and prayer (I doubt not) has obtained pardon for some of that bloody
generation which slew the very son and heir of the kingdom; which offered an
unrighteous sacrifice of a more righteous soul, than ever Jonas was. Else, why
did he open his mouth at his death, and power forth his gronings for those that
opened his side and powered forth his blood, father forgive them?

Before, they had handled the ores of their trade and occupation, but prevailed
not; ( for bodily exercise profits nothing:) now they betake them to the
ores of the spirit, invocations, intercessions to the ever-liuing God, that,
if the banks of the land, which they hoped to recover, should fail them,
they might be received to an harbor and rode of the mercies of God. These are
the ores (my brethren) which shall row the ship through all the storms and
insurrections of the waves of the seas, I mean the Arc of Gods Church
universal, and these vessels of ours, our bodies and souls in particular,
through all the dangers of the world, and land them in the haven of eternal
redemption. This world is a sea, as I find it compared, swelling with pride;
and vaineglory the wind to heave it up; blew and livide with envy, boiling
with wrath, deep with covetousnes, foming with luxuriousness, swallowing and
drinking in all by oppression, dangerfull for the rocks of presumption and
desperation, rising with the waves of passions and perturbations, ebbing and
flowing with inconstancy, brinish and salt with iniquity, and finally Mare
amarum, a bitter and unsavory sea with all kind of misery. What should we
do then in such a sea of temptations, where the arm of flesh is too weak to
bear us out, and if our strength were brass, it could not help us; where we
have reason to carry a suspicion of all our ways, and he that is most
righteous in the cluster of mankind, falls in his happiest day seven times,
and though we were privy to nothing in our selves, yet were we not justified
thereby, but had need to crave, Cleanse us, O Lord, from our secret faults;
where we are taught to say, father forgive our debts: and if the sum of our
sins at our lives end be ten thousand talents, then whether we speak or
think, wake or sleep, or whatsoever we do, we add a debt; when all offend in
many things, and many in all, and he that offends in one jot of the law,
breaks the whole: what should we do, I say, but as the Apostles
exhortation is pray continually, 1. These. 5.
and think neither place, nor time, nor business unmeet to so holy and
necessary an exercise? that whether we begin the day, we may say with
Abraham's servaunt, O Lord send me good speed this day: Genes. 24.
or vvhither we be covered with the shadows of the night, we may beg with
that sweet singer of Israel, Psalm. 13.
Lighten mine eyes that I sleep not in death: or whatsoever we attempt in
either of these two seasons, we may prevent it with the blessing of that
other Psalm, Psalm. 90. Hieron.
Prosper the work of our hands upon us, oh prosper thou our handy works.
Egredientes de hospitio armet oration, regredientibus de plataea occurrat
oration, when thou go out of thine house, let prayer arm thee; when thou
come home to thine house, let prayer meet thee. Receive not thy meat
without thanksgiving, take not thy cup without blessing, pray for the sin
of thine own soul, and offer a sacrifice for thy sons and daughters: when
thou lie down, couch thy self in the mercies of GOD; when thou arisest up,
walk with the staff of his providence. 1. They.
In this prayer of the Mariners, there are many notable specialities: First,
it is common; the work of the whole multitude. In the fifte verse there was
mention of prayers, I grant, but there it is said, Invocarunt quisque Deum
suum, though all prayed, yet all aparte, 2. Cried.
to their proper Gods. Secondly, fervent; they cried in their prayer. It is not
a formal service; the sound of their lips, and the sighs of their souls
are sent with an earnest message to the ears of God. 3. Unto the Lord.
Thirdly, discreet; they pray not to their idols, as before, but to the Lord
of hosts. Fourthly, vocal and public; there was a form and tenor of
supplication which their lips pronounced, 4. And said.
they said. 5. We beseech thee.
Fifthly* humble; they come with the term and phrase of obsecration, we
beseech thee O Lord. Sixthly, importunate; as appears by their ingemination,
6. We beseech thee, we beseech thee.
we beseech thee, we beseech thee. Seventhly, seasonable and pertinent;
applied to the thing then in hand to be executed, bring not upon us innocent
blood. Eighthly reasonable and just, standing upon a good ground, 7. Let us not
perish.
fitted to the will and pleasure of the Almighty, for thou Lord have done as it
pleased thee.

8. For thou have done etc.
We are willed Matthew the sixth, to enter into our chambers, and shut the
doors, and pray to our father in secret; and our father that sees in secret,
shall openly reward it; because it was the fashion of hypocrites, to stand
and pray in the synagogues, 1. Common.
and in the corners of the streets, to be seen of men. Our Savior never
meant thereby to condemn prayers in synagogues, either standing or kneeling, or
prayers in the corners of the streets, or in the height of the market places,
or upon the house tops, in the sight both of men and Angels, but only to
exclude the affected ostentation of men-pleasing hypocrites, who prayed to a
wicked end, not to obtain, but only to be seen of men. Enter into thy
chamber and pray, go into the temple and pray, commune with thine own heart,
commune with the multitude, both are good. And that we may know that we are not
stinted in our prayers, only to our selves and our private families (as the
Athenians would offer sacrifice but only for their own city and the^r
neighbors of Chios) our Savior has taught us the contrary, in that absolute
form of his, vvilling us to say, Our father which art in heaeuen: as if we al
came from one womb, and whosoever spoke, pleaded the cause of the rest of his
brethren. Not that we may not say a sunder and in private, My father, as Thomas
said, my God and my Lord; but as there is a time for the one, so we must not
omit the other in due season. It is a principle both of nature and policy,
Vis vnita fo^tior, Strength united receives more strength: it holds likewise
in divinity. If the prayer of one righteous person avails much, the prayer of
many righteous shall avail more. If the Syrophoenician obtained for her
daughter the suit she made, much more shall the Church and congregation of
Christ obtain for her children. If, where two or three be gathered together
in his name, he is in the midst of them, much rather in the midst of a people,
in the midst of thousands, in whom there is anima vna, cor vnum, one soul,
one heart, one tongue, as if they were all but one man. Lord heal the sores of
our land in this point: and as it is thy work alone, that those who dwell
together in one house, shall be of one mind, so magnify this work amongst
us, that the children of this Realm which fly from our Churches and
oratories, as John from the bathe wherein Cerinthus was, rending and tearing
the soul of this country into two pieces, dividing the voice and language
thereof in their prayers to GOD, Elias and his company praying in one place,
and with one style, O Lord GOD of Abraham, and they in an other O Baal hear
us, (for so they do in effect, when they pray to such as hear them not;) some
calling for fire to consume the sacrifice, and some for water to consume the
fire; some praying for the life of Deborah the Queen of this land, and some
for the life of Iabin the king of Spain; thus mingling and confounding the
ears of the Lord with opposite petitions, from crossing and contrary
affections; that at length they may consider from whence they are fallen and
severed, both from the unity of this public body of ours, wherein they have
their maintenance, and, if they take not heed, of that mystical body of their
Lord and Redeemer, Christ Jesus.

2. Fervent.
2. They cried. It is a condition which James requires, the prayer of the just,
if it be fervent. Else even the prayers of the just, if they be perfunctory and
cold, rather of custom than of devotion and piety, they profit not, but to
condemnation. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligentlie:
prayer is a work of his. The LORD is near unto all them that call upon him
faithfully, not formally. He gives both aquam and sitim, the benefit, and the
grace to desire and thirste after it. Gregor.
We hear not our own prayers (I mean not for want of sound, and much
babbling, but for want of inward desire,) the voice of our spirit is soft
and submisse, Chrysostom.
and dies in the air before it ascends into the presence of GOD; and shall
we think that GOD will hear us? Our bodies happily in the Church, our
minds without; our tongue utters prayers, our heart thinks on vsuries:
we bow the knees of our flesh, but not the knees of our hearts. He that
knew in his soul, that prayer from feinedlippes and a fase heart vvoulde
return empty into his bosom that sent it up, but a broken and contrite
spirit the Lord vvoulde not despise, never preassed into the courts of his
GOD, but the inwardest and deepest affections of his mind were given in
sacrifice. Every night vvasht he his bed, and watered his couch with tears:
he in the night time, when others slepte and took their natural recreation;
yea there was not a night that escaped without task; and it washed not his
plants alone, but the very p^llet and couch which he lodged upon. So richly
was his soul watered with the dew of heaven, that it ministered continually
both fountains to his eyes, and a fluent expedition to his tongue to commend
his prayers. We may learn to be zealous in our prayers, even of those wooden
priests, 1. King. 18. of whom it is written that they called upon the name of
Baal from morning till noone, and when they had no answer, they cried loud,
nay, they cut themselves with knives and launcers, till the blood flowed out:
so they prayed not only in tears, but in blood, that they might be heard. I
would the children of the light were as zealous in their generations. But
rather let them receive their light and directions for the framing of this
holy exercise, from the sun of righteousness, of whom the Apostle
witnesses, that in the days of his flesh, he offered up prayers and
supplications with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5.
unto him that was able to help him. And the gospel further declares, not
only that he kneeled (at the naming of whose name all knees have bowed, both in
heaven and earth, and under the earth) but that he fell upon the ground, the
foote-stoole of his own majesty, and lay upon his face, which never Angel
beheld without reverence, and when he had prayed before, he prayed more
earnestly (as the scripture records,) he once prayed, and departed; and a
second time, and departed; and yet a third time, and departed; evermore using
the same petition: his prayer ascended by degrees, like incense and perfume,
and not only his lips went, but his agony and contention within was so
vehement, that an angel was sent from heaven to comfort him: and whereas the
Priests of Baal used art to make them bleed, cutting their flesh with
launcers and knives to that purpose, he with the trouble of his soul swet a
natural or rather unnatural sweat, like d^oppes of blood trickling down to
the earth. We, when we go to prayer, as if our souls and tongues were
strangers, the one not weeting what the other does, the lips babbling
without, and the heart not pricked with any inward compunction, honoring GOD
with our mouths, and our spirits far from him, deserve to be answered as
he answered the Jews, Esaias 1. When you stretch forth your hands, I will
hide mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers, I will not hear
you. The reason is there, your h^ndes are full of blood: the reason to us may
be, your hearts bleed not: you call me Lord Lord, but mean it not: the alter
is without fire, prayer without heat, words without intention, gesture of the
body without the consent of the inward man.

They cried unto the Lord. It is not less then a miracle, 3. Discree^^
that men so newely endued with the knowledge of God, can so presently renounce
their ancient idolles which they had ever served, and within but few minutes of
time most religiously adored: they call upon Jehovah; that hidden and fearful
name, which erst they had not known: and neither the accustomed manner of
their countries, nor color of antiquity, nor want of experience in another
Lord, nor the simple narration of one singular prophet, nor any the like
motions can hold them in awe of their former imaginary GODS, and keep them
from invocation of the Lord of hosts. No reason can be yielded but this, The
wind blows where it lifts, and the spirit breaths where it will, and
the mercy of God softneth where his pleasure is. It is a gift from him alone,
who gives the new heart, and puts the new spirit within a man; Ezech. 3*
who takes the stony heart from him, and gives him an heart of flesh in
steed thereof; who of the stones by the banks of Jordan (says John Baptist)
is able to raise up children to Abraham, and daily does raise up children to
himself, to do him worship and service, of those that were hardened in idolatry
before, like flintes in the streets. Turn us, O Lord, and we shall be turned;
wash us with clean water, and we shall be cleansed; renew us (as the eagle her
days) and we shall be renewed; gather thy chosen flock from the mountains and
deserts whe^n they stray, to fulfill thy fold, and we shall be gathered; say,
thou will sweep thy house, and find thy groat, and we shall be found. Nature
cannot make a new birth: entering into our mothers womb again, is unable to
work it: the gold of Sheba and Seba cannot purchase it. No man comes to the
son, unless the father draw him, and if the father have once given him into
his hands, all the devils in hell cannot pull him out again. I make it the
wisdom of him that prays, to level his heart and affections at the very
right center and mark of prayer, which is God alone; he is the sanctuary, to
whom we must fly; the periode and scope in whom our requests must end.
Prayer and faith (if the Apostle deceive us not) must kiss each other; Romans
10. Psalm. 116.
how shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? faith is the
ground of prayer: First we believe, and then speak; so was the order of David.
Do we (my brethren) believe in Angels? for that is the Apostles phrase, how
shall they call on him, (...), in whom, or upon whom they have not believed?
We believe that there are Angels, Angelos.
which the Sadduces denied. And if an Angel should come from heaven unto us
with a message from God, Angelis. In Angelos.
as he came to Mary and others, we would believe Angels, that is, give credence
unto them, as they did. But if we believe in Angels, we forget their place of
ministration which they are appointed unto* and make them our Gods. Much less
believe we in the sons of men, which are less than Angels. Therefore the
gleaning of these Mariners is more worth than the whole vintage of Rome, who
in a moment of time have gathered more knowledge how to inform their prayers
aright, than they in the decourse of many continued generations. These pray to
Jehovah, the true subsisting God; they not only to God, but to Angels, and men,
and stocks, and stones, and metalles, and papers, and I know not what.

It may be a challenge sufficient unto them all (to say no more) that in so
many prayers of both ancient and righteous patriarchs, prophets, Judges,
kings, registered in the book of GOD, and in an hundredth and fifty Psalms, an
hundredth whereof at least are prayers and supplications, and in all the devout
requests that the Apostles of Christ, and other his disciples sent into
heaven, (if they take the pen of a writer, and note from the beginning of
Genesis to the end of the Revelation) they cannot find one directed to Cherub
or Seraphin, Gabriel or Raphael, Abraham or Moses, or John Baptist after his
death, or any other creature in heaven or earth* save only to the Lord and his
anointed. Have these all erred? Even so will we; and more sweet shall our
error be unto us, with these, of whom we make no question, but that they are
bound up in the bundell of life with the congregation of firstborn, than a
new and recent devise of prayer, obtruded unto us by those, who falsely suppose
themselves to be the pillars and stays of Gods militant church. The 86. Psalm.
(to give you a little portion of food to ruminate upon) as some conceive, was
not a Psalm composed for any particular use, but left to the church of God,
as a general rule and prescription to fit the condition of every man. Wherein
there are first some reasons in our own behalf, wherewith we insinuate our
selves into the favor of God, that he may hear us. 1. Bow down thine ^are
unto me, O Lord. Why? I am poor and needy: the exigence of my distressfull
affairs requires thy help. 2. Preserve thou my soul. Why? I am merciful: I
ask not mercy at thy throne, but as I show mercy again to my brethren. 3.
Save thou thy servant, my God. Why? because he puts his trust in thee; he
has no other rock to cleave unto. 4. Be merciful unto me, O Lord. Why? I
cry upon thee continually: I have constantly decreed with my self not to give
over the hope of thy comfort. 5. Rejoice the soul of thy servant. Why? for to
thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul: the best and chosenest member I have,
shall do thee service. His misery, mercy, faithfulness, constancy, syncerity,
speak for audience. Now on behalf of God there are other inducementes recited
from the 5. verse, why we resort to the wings of his favor, when we are
distressed. 1. from his mercy and kindness to all that call upon him; for thou,
Lord, art good and gracious, and of great compassion: therefore give ear to my
prayer, and harken unto the voice of my supplication. 2. from experience and
trial; In the day of my trouble will I call upon thee, for thou hear me. 3.
from comparison and greatness of his works; Amongst the Gods there is none
like unto thee, and who can do like thy works? 4. from consent of the world;
All nations whom thou have made, shall come and worship before thee, O Lord,
and shall glorify thy name. 5. from the solenesse and singularity of his
godheade, which is the chief; for thou art great and do wondrous things,
and art God alone. 1. His general exhibition of mercy to all, 2. particular
and personal application to some, 3. the rareness and majesty of his works,
4. the consent of nature and nations, 5. the singularity of godheade, these are
motions and persuasions to call forth our prayers; and these, if they can be
verified either of Angels or men, I refuse not to give them a part with God in
this our sacred oblation.

4* Vocal.
They cried and said. Their prayers were also vocal and expressed. The gronings
of the spirit undoubtedly, though Z^chary be dumb and cannot speak a word,
shall never be re^used. He made the heart and the tongue, that understands
the language of both alike, he is as near to our reins, as to our lips; and
the voice of the one is not more audible to him that hears without ears,
than the others intention. Bernard.
In Dei auribus desiderium vehemens clamor magnus est; remissa intentio, vox
submissa, In the ears of God a vehement desire is a great cry, a remiss and
careless intention is a submisse and still voice. Anna, ^. Sam. 1.
a type of the church, spoke in her heart, her lips did only move, and her
voice was not heard. Yea the gestures of her body through the grief of her
soul were such, that ^^li reprooved her of drunkenness. Indeed she was
drunk, not with the wine of grapes, but with the wine of devotion, which
ran from the wine press of a troubled spirit, and the Lord remembered her
petition, though she prayed with her heart alone, and her tongue stirred not.
What then? has the tongue immunity thereby from doing that homage unto the Lord
which he has enjoined it? shall not the calves of our lips be required,
because we have tendered the calves of our hearts? must not both the heart
believe, and the mouth make confession? and as the one is the cistetne within
thy self to contain the honor of God, so must not the other be the pipe to
convey it to thy brethren? surely yes. Ask both body and soul, and every part
of them both, whose image and inscription they bear? they will tell thee,
Gods: then pay the tribute of both, and glorify God with thy body and spirit,
for both are his. And as thou liftest up thy soul with David in the 86. Psalm.
so lift up thy hands also with Moses, lift up thine eyes with Steven, lift up
thy voice with Deborah, and with all the children of God, whose pleasure and
joy it is to hear God praised in the great congregation. If there be priests
to pray for the people, which must weep between the porch and the altar, even
in the body and navell of the church, where the sound of his voice may best
be heard, and say, Joel. 2.
spare thy people O Lord etc. if there be temples and churches which the
prophet has termed, and Christ ratified to be the houses of prayer; if there
be seldom and set times appointed for these duties to be done in; if there be
forms and patterns devised even from the son of God, how our prayers should
be conceived; then is there no question, but we must open our lips in the
service of God, and our mouths must be willing to show forth his praise.

We beseech thee O Lord. 5. Humble.
They use the properest terms of submission that may be. They come not to
brag, we are worthy O Lord, whom thou should do for, (as the princes of
the people spoke for the Centurion in the gospel;) they come not to indent and
bargain If thou will be our God etc. they know they stand upon grace, not
desert, and that the Lord must be entreated, or they cannot live. Humility is
both a grace it self, and a vessel to comprehend other graces; and this is
the nature of it, the more it receaveth of the blessings of God, the more it
may. For it ever emptieth it self, by a modest estimation of her own gifts,
that God may always fill it; it wrastle^h and striveth with God, according to
the policy of Jacob, that is, wins by yielding; and the lower it stoupeth
toward the ground, the more advantage it gets to obtain the blessing.
August in confess.
O quam excelsus es, domine, and humiles cord sunt domus tuae; O Lord, how
high and sovereign art thou, and the humble of heart are thine houses to dwell
in? where is that house that ye will build unto me, and where is that place
of my rest? Esaias. 6^.
To him will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contri^e spirit, and
trembles at my words. Plutarke writes of some who sailed to Athens for
philosophy sake, that first they were called sophistae, wise men; afterward,
Philosophi, but lovers of wisdom; next; rhetores, only reasoners and
discoursers; last of all, idiotae, simple, unlettered men. The more they
profited in learning, the less they acknowledged it. Thus in spiritual graces
we should study to be great, but not know it; as the stars in the
firmament, though they be bigger than the earth, yet they seem much less. In
alto non altum sapere* not to be highminded in high deserts, is the way to
preferment. Dav^d asks, Quis ego sum, domine, O Lord who am I? He was taken
from that lowlines of conceit to be the king of Israel. Jacob protests,
Minor sum, I am less than the least of thy mercies; he was preferred before
his elder brother, and made the father of the twelve tribes. Peter cries, exi
a me domine, homo peccator sum, Go out from me, Lord, I am a sinful man; he
heard, fear not, I will henceforth make thee a fisher of men* John Baptist
sounds, Non sum diguus, I am not worthy to loose the latchet of his shoe; he
was found worthy to lay his hands upon the head of Christ. The Centurion
treads in the same footesteps Non sum dignus, I am not worthy, under the
roof of whose house thou should come; his commendation was rare, I have not
found so great faith, no not in Israel. Paul departs not from the same
words, Non sum dignus, I am not worthy to be called an apostle; he obtained
mercy to the example of those that were afterward to come. The blessed Virgin
in her answer to the Angel shows, that the salutation no way lifted up her
heart, ecce ancilla Domini, behold the hande-maide of the LORD; she
obtains that, for which all the generations of the world should call her
blessed. This base and inglorious style of the most glorious Saints of God,
Non sum dignus, and the like, shall get us the honor of Saints, shall raise
us from the dust, and set us upon thrones, take us from amongst beasts, and
place us with Angels. What was it in the blessed Virgin, the mother of Gods
firstborn, the glory and flower of women-kinde, that God regarded so much?
She tells you in her song of thanksgiving, He has regarded the lowliness
of his hand-maide; yea the blood and juice of that whole song is in praise of
humility: He has scattered the proud in the imaginations of their heart,
he has put down the mighty from their seat, and has exalted the humble and
meek. O that the women of our age could singe Magnificat with that humbleness
of spirit, that Marye did, My soul does magnify the Lord: that recompense
would be theirs which follows; he that is mighty has magnified me
again, and holy is his name. But they magnify themselves too much with
pedlers ware (what shall I term it?) unprofitable garments, which the moth
shall fret, and time it self rotte upon their backs, but they never think in
their hearts, how God may be magnified. It is not without some mystery, that
the Angels told the shepherds, Luke 2. this shall be a sign unto you, you
shall find the infant wrapped in swaddling clothes. Bern ser. de verb. Angel.
In signum positi sunt panni tui, O bone Jesus, sed in signum (...), A sign
that is spoken against, a sign that is done against; we cannot abide thy
clowtes, thy rags (O Lord Jesus) nor any part of thy humility. His nativity
was by his ordinance first preached to shepheardes; he contended with his
forerunner, who should be the lowlier of the two; he took fishermen to
be his disciples, embraced young children, paid tribute to his inferiors,
fled away that he might not be made a king, washed the feet of his apostles,
charged the leper not to tell any man, rode upon an ass, sought his fathers
glory, not his own, to whom he was obedient to the death, even to the death
of the cross. In all which he does not less than proclaim unto us, learn
of me to be humble and meek, and you shall find rest for your souls. I say
but this. The master is worthy your hearing, the lesson your learning, the
recompense your receaving. In this be^ of humility let me rest your souls for
this time, and let us beseech the God of majesty, who is higher than the
highest in the earth, who will resist the proud, and give his graces to the
humble and meek; that whether we ask, we may ask in humility; or whether
we have received, we may use it without vaineglory; that all our words and
works may be powdered with that salt in the Psalm, which shall eat out all
ostentation, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the
honor and praise. Amen.

THE XVII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 14. We beseech thee, O Lord, we beseech thee, let us not
perish for this man's life.
THe prayer of the mariners begins not, till you come to these words: the
other were the words of the history, reporting what they did; these now
propounded, are their own, or at least the sum and effect of them. We may
reduce them to two heads: first a Petition; and therein a preface, We beseech
thee, O Lord, we beseech thee, comprising the manner and form of praying;
and the matter or substance of the petition, let us not perish for this man's
life etc. 2. the reason, For thou, Lord, have done as it pleased thee. So as
in the words of the history, signifying how they behaved themselves, together
with the pitition, and the reason of the same, we find eight conditions
requisite to the nature of prayer. Five whereof we have already dealt in: the
sixte we are to proceed unto* The Importunity they use, implied in the
doubling and iterating of their suppliant terms, We beseech thee, O Lord,
6. Importunate.
we beseech thee. Woe be to him that is alone, who when he has spoken once,
speaks no more, as if he were weary of well-doing, and repented himself that
he had begun. If his former request be weak and infirm, fainting in the way
to the mercy of God, he has not a friend to help it, nor a brother to say
unto it, Be strong. This double supplication of theirs, falls as the showers
of the first and latter rain: if the one fails of watering the earth
sufficiently, the other fulfilleth the appetite and thirst thereof. So should
our prayers be bent; that as the kine of the Philistines, which bare the Arc,
though they were milche, and had calves at home, 1. Sam. ^.
yet they kept the straight way to ^ethshemesh, and held one path, and lowed as
they went, and turned neither to the right hand nor the left, neither ever
stood still, till they came into the field of Iosuah, where he was reaping his
harvest: so the affection of our souls bearing the Arc and coffer of our
suites, though it has worldly allurements to draw it back, as the kine had
calves, yet keeps on the way to the house of God, as they to Bethshemesh,
holding one path of perseverance, lowing with zeal, turning neither to the
right nor to the left hand with wandering cogitations, till it comes into the
field and garden of God, where her harvest grows.

We beseech thee, we beseech thee. This ingemination of speech notes an
immovable and constant affection to the thing we affect, as if the tongue and
heart were willing to dwell thereupon. O Absalon, O my son Absalon, O
Absalon my son, my son, was the mourning of David, when he heard of the
death of Absalon, as if his soul had been tied to the name and memory of his
son, and his tongue had forgotten all other speech save only to pronounce
Absalon. It shows what love our Savior bare to the holy city, in that he
repeated his sorrows over it, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, as if he had made a
vow with David, If I forget Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning,
or rather my tongue her moving. I cannot leave thee at the first naming, thou
art deeper in my heart, therefore I say, Jerusalem, and again Jerusalem, I ever
regarded thy welfare with undoubted compassion. The mar^iners import no less,
in repeating their request, we beseech thee O Lord, and once again, we beseech
thee, pardon our importunate outcries, our hearts are fixed, yea our hearts
are fixed, our souls are athirst for thy loving kindness, we will give thee no
rest, till thou receivest our prayers. The longer Abraham talked with God, Genesis
18. the more he gained. He brought him from the whole number to fifty, and
from fifty to ten, before he left him. Behold I have begun to speak unto
my Lord, and am but dust and ashes; let not my Lord be angry, and I will
speak again: and once more, I have begun to speak; and once more, let not my
Lord be offended. Once more, and again, you see, are able to send away clouds
of fire and brimstone. And so far was it of, that God was angry with his
instant request, that he gave him both a patient ear, and a gracious answer,
If ten be found there, I will not destroy it. It pleases the ears of his
majesty right well, to be long entreated, his nature is never so truly aimed
at, as when we persuade our selves, that our impatience in prayer can never
offend his patience He that has twice and ten times together ingeminated the
riches of his mercy, as Exodus 34. The Lord, the Lord, is merciful, gracious,
slow to anger, abundant in goodness, and truth, reserving mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, and sin, and transgressio^; What did he mean thereby, but
that twice and ten times together we should cry for his mercy?

We beseech thee, O Lord, we beseech thee. A woman of Canaan in the
gospel, calls upon our Savior, Have mercy upon me, O Lord, Math. 15.
thou son of David, my daughter is miserably vexed with a devil; he
answered her not one word. It appears that she called still, because his
disciples said, Send her away, for she cries after us: Then, he was not
sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: yet she came and
worshipped him, saying, Lord help me: he answers, It is not meet to
take the childrens bread and cast it to vvhelpes: She replied upon him,
Truth, Lord, but the vvhelpes eat of the crummes, that fall from their
masters table. Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy
faith. She fastened upon Christ with her prayers, as the woman of Shunem upon
Elisha with her hands. She caught him by the feet, and said unto him, As
the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, 2. King 4.
I will not leave thee. Consider what discouragements her poor soul
digested, 1. she was not answered by Christ, 2. she had backe-friends of his
disciples, 3. she was none of the lost sheep, 4. she was a whelpe; yet in the
end she obtained both a cure for her daughters infirmity, and a commendation
for her own faith. She wrought a miracle by the force of her prayers, she
made both the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak, she cried to the ears
and tongue of her redeemer, Ephata, Be ye opened, hear and answer my
petition, fulfill my request. August. de verb. Apost.
Non importunus nec impudenses* etc. It is not a saucy nor shameless part in
thee, to ask remission of thy sins at Gods hands, without ceasing; thou
give him occasion to do a memorable act, conveniente to his nature,
glorious to his holy name. That which man gives, he loses, and
dispossesseth himself of, it is not so with God; thou art not the better, God
the worse, thou the richer, God the poorer, for his gifts: Open thy mouth
wide, and he will fill it, enlarge thy belly, Non tu accipiendo proficis, and
Deus in dando deficit.
and he will satisfy thee. Fons vincit Sitientem, The fountain and source of
his goodness is above the desire and thirst of thy necessities. If you observed
it in the last history, The disciples of christ thought it an impudent part,
that the Syrophoenissian cried after them, Send her away. Did Christ so
accounte it, or would he dismiss her? Doubtless it ioyed his heart, to
suspende her des^res in expectation, and consequentlye to extend them, to
hold her long in his company; he said to himself, I am well pleased that
she cries after me, it delighted his ears to hear her redoubled
obsecrations, more than the instruments of David could have done, it gave him
matter to work upon, it tried a faith, it vvanne a soul, it occasioned a
miracle. Bernard to this purpose notes of the spouse in the Canticles,
beginning her suite, and woing of Christ so rudely as she does, let him kiss
me with the kisses of his mouth; Ser^^ 7. in Cantic.
though to entreat a great favor of a great Lord, she uses no flattery
unto him, she seeks no means, she goes not about by driftes and
circumlocutions, she makes no preamble, she works no benevolence, but from
the abundance of her heart suddenly breaks forth, Nude frontesque satis,
Barelie, and boldly enough, let him kiss me with a kiss of his lips.
The parables in Saint Luke, Luke 11. and 18.
the one of a friend called up at midnight, the other of a wicked judge,
instruct us thus much, that unless we hold a meaner opinion of God, than of
a common, vulgar friend, which were too base to conceive, or a more unrighteous
judgment of him, than of the most unrighteous judge, (than which, what can be
thought more blasphemous?) we should not distrust the success of our
prayers, (...).
but that improbitie and importunity at the least would draw him to audience.
It was midnight with these mariners* when they called at the gates of God, (
the friend and lover of the souls of men) the vnseasonablest and deadest
time, in the judgment of humane reason: They called for more than loaves, the
relief and succor of their lives, more dear unto them than any sustenaunce:
Their friend? Nay their enemy was at hand, and the last enemy of mankind:
The gates seemed to be shut, all hope of deliverance well nigh past; the
children were in bed a sleep, vain was the help of man, their arm was
weak, and their ores unprofitable, Angels and Saints could not help them:
yet they knocked at the gates of their friend once, We beseech thee O Lord;
and, because he denied them the first time, they knocked again, We beseech
thee O Lord, and I doubt not but they continued knocking, till in the end he
arose, and granted them their hearts requests.

The next condition of their prayer, was, that it was properly and
pertinentlie applied to their present fear; 7. Co^venient* seasonable.
Let us not perish for this man's life etc. It was written in their hearts,
which others might have red in the Psalms of David. Touch not mine anointed,
and do my prophets no harm. They thought that Prophets were iewelles and
pearls unto God, and that the marring of one such, would severely be
required. Hence come their tears, this is the thorn that pricketh them, fear
to offend in hurting an harmless man, together with that stinge and venime,
which sin leaves behind it; they know it will call for vengeance, and
though it pass the hand, and the eye, speeding it self in the seeming of him
that does it, into the land of forgetfulness, as it should never be
thought upon, yet the Lord will fetch it back again, and set it before the
face of the sinner, and lay it as freshly to his charge, Let not v^ Perish.

Lay not to our charge.


as if he were then in the act and perpetration thereof. These be the sores
wherevvith they smarte, danger of their own lives, if they assault the life
of Jonas; and watchfulness of the justice of GOD, in taking account of
forepassed sins. To these they apply the medicines. We know the order of
thy Court and judgment seat, to exact life for life, therefore let not us
perish for this man's life: we know that no sin can escape thy dreadful
hand, therefore if we hap to offend in spilling innocente blood, lay not
our iniquity upon us, blotte it out of thy book, let it pass as a morning
dew before the sun, and not be imputed. In disposing our prayers to God, we
must, as the Scribe in the gospel, bring forth of our treasures, things old
and nevve. For the blessings of God in general, there may be general
thankes-givings; for sins in general, general confessions; ancient and
usual forms of prayer, for ancient and usual occurrences. We may take unto
us words, (as the Prophet speaks) and say unto the Lord (at all times) Take
away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, Hosee 14.
so will we render the calves of our lips. But as the matter of Gods
judgments, and our dangers, is varied, so must we accordingly vary our prayers.
In the time of a plague, we must make of our prayers a particular M^thridate
against the plague, acknowledging the hand of God, that inflicted it, knowing
that the cause and original thereof is not so much infection in the air, as
rottenesse and corruption within our own bones, beseeching his majesty, as
Phinees did, that the plague may cease, and that he will visit no longer
with that kind of judgment. If the land be smitten with leanenesse, and
skarcity, so that the children thereof cry for bread, and sown as they go in
the streets, for want of food, we must pray in another style, that the LORD
will vouchsafe to hear the heavens again, Hosee 2.
the heavens may hear the earth, the earth the corn, the vine, and the oil,
and these Israel, or other his distressed people, and that he will visit no
longer with this kind of judgment. If the enemy shall say against us, Come,
we will devour, we will devour, the name of Sion shall be no more had in
remembrance, we must turn unto the Lord with another form of supplication;
Spare thy people O Lord, and give not thine heritage into reproache, that the
heathen should rule over them: Joel ^*
wherefore should they say amongst the people, where is now their God? O
cease to visit thy servants with this kind of judgment. If the heavens be
brass above us, and drop no moisture upon our fruits, or if the spoutes,
which God has divided in the air, power down too much upon our heads,
(sometime he roareth so fearfully with his voice of thunders, as who may
abide it? his lightnings give shine to the earth, and our eyes are daseled
thereat, he raineth down tempests and storms upon us, haile-stones and
coals of fire, this is our portion sometimes to drink:) still as his plagues
are new, so let us come before him with new songs, new intercessions,
meekely kneeling before the Lord our maker, and falling low at his
foote-stoole, that his hand may be turned back in these kinds of judgments.
Thus did Solomon dedicate and bless the temple, 2. Chro. 6.
beseeching the Lord, that when the people should pray unto him, according
to their sundry needs, whether they were troubled with the assault of their
enemy, or with want of rain, with famine, or mildewe, or with captivity, he
would then hear them in heaven, and be merciful unto them. The sickness
which these mariners suspecte, is an issue of blood, which being once opened,
will ever run, and keep a course, if it be not stanched with the mercy of
God, and therefore they call upon him, as that present occasion enforces them,
O let us not perish for this man's life, and bring not upon us innocent blood.
Besides which purpose of theirs, in laying their finger upon the sore, that is,
in suiting of their prayer with the present danger, for the fuller explication
of the words themselves, it may please you to take knowledge of two things.
1. The proceeding of God in the case of bloudshead, life for life, delivered in
the former clause; Let us not perish for the soul of this man. 2. How the
blood of Jonas in the latter may be called innocent blood.

The law is general touching the former, Exodus 21. life for life, eye for
eye, 1. Blood for blood.
tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for burning, wound
for wound, stripe for stripe. It is added Leviticus 24. Breath for breath,
blemish for blemish. Genesis 9. I will require your bold wherein your lives are;
(that is one reason:) in the next words, who so sheadeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed, for in the image of God has he made man; That is
an other reason. Our Savior recites the law in the gospel Math. 26. who
so takes the svvorde, shall perish with the sword, And that we may know
this law was never repealed, we find it in the last book, Revelation. 13.
If any lead into captivity, he shall go into captivity; if any man kill
with a sword, he must be killed with a a sword. Here is the patience and
the faith of Saints, that is, this they believe, and this they verily expect
to be performed upon their enemies. So the ordinary rule, without question,
is this; He that takes away the life of man, himself shall likewise perish.
Notvvithstanding the maker of the law may, and does sometimes, dispense with
his own law. Many a one, I confess, has killed his neighbor, himself not
ending his days in the like manner. Be it so; yet shall cast a boule of blood
in his face, Plutarke.
all the cogitations and thoughts of his heart shall overflow with the
remembrance of that blood which he has effused. Again, if he that has
killed a man, dies in his bed, or otherwise of the great day, where the
sword of eternal damnation, the double and triple edge whereof can never be
rebated, shall feed upon his flesh, and be drunken with his blood without
ceasing. Or lastly, if

Secondly, we enquired, how the blood of Jonas, Innocent blood.
might be termed innocente; a man that fled from the face of God, whom the
winds and the sea hated with a perfect hatred, even unto death, an an whom
the Mariners themselves rebuked, and now by the instant voice of God are
ready to cast forth, how is he innocent? I answer, In part, not wholly; with
respect, not absolutely; innocent toward these men, whom he never iniuried,
not with relation to God, whom he had hainouslye offended. The Pelagians of
our time, magnifying the arm of flesh, and the nature of mankind, more than
reason admits, by a sophistical and deceitful conclusion, have sought to
obscure the truth, and to over^reach the world in this point* For, because
they find in the scriptures often mention of the innocence, justice,
perfection of the children of God, they dissembling, or not wisely weighing
the drifte of the place, simply infer thereupon, that the law of GOD may be
kept and fulfilled in this life. Their paralogisme is easily discovered and
disprooued by the rule of Augustine; Cum dicitur cuiusque perfectio, quain re
dicatur videndu^ est. 2. de pe. mer. and rem. 15. Perfectus ^a pientiae audi
^or, non perf. doctor etc.
When the perfection of any man is named, we must consider wherein it is
named. A man may be a perfect hearer of wisdom, not a perfect teacher:
(Thus is he perfect and imperfect) a perfect knovver of righteousness, not a
perfect doer, perfect in this that he loves all men, and yet imperfect in the
love it self. It were absurdly concluded, Jonas was innocent toward the
Mariners, therefore innocent toward the Israelites; innocent toward man,
therefore innocent toward God; innocent in this present behavior, therefore
innocent in the whole conversation of his life. As it has no just consecution,
David was innocent toward Saul, therefore innocent toward Vrias. A man may
be righteous, Optimus ille est.

Qui mini. mis vrgetur. Horat.

Qua mayor pars vitae atque iugenii stetit. Asin. Pollio.

Secundu^ in. ^entione^ non secundu^ per. ventionem. In Psalm. 38. Aliter hic
non po^es esse perfectus, nisi scias hic te non esse posse perfectum.

Secundum istius vitae modum ^o^t. epist. Parm.


both in comparison of others, for he is the best, which has the fewest
faults; and in comparison of himself, for we must judge of a man by that,
whereto the greater part of his life and disposition has been inclined. And
because there was no father in the church, who had greater reason to ventilate
this argument unto the bottom, than Augustine had, himself in that ambitious
age being sifted and proved by so many adversaries to the grace and
righteousness of God, I will give you a short taste of his aunswers and
satisfactions to the question, as I find them in his writings.

Touching perfection, he vvriteth thus by occasion of the Apostles words,
Philippians the third: Let us, as many as be perfi^^e, be thus minded. Yet
in the twelfth verse before it is contraried, Not as though I had already
attained it, or that I were already perfect. How may these stand together?
Perfect, and imperfect. If we take perfection in intention and purpose, not in
pervention, and obtaining the purpose, in contention, endeavor, inchoation,
that is, in imperfection, and not otherwise; thou can not otherwise be
perfect in this life, unless thou know, that in this life thou can not be
perfect. There is a certain perfection according to the measure and proportion
of this life, and to that perfection this is also deputed, If a man know that
yet he is not perfect. So as it is not the least part of our perfection, to
know and confess our imperfections. Bernarde upon the former words to the
Philippians, Sermon. 49. in Cant.

Perfecti viatores. perfecti possessores. 2. de pec. mer. and remis. 13. Per
prolepsin.

Quid est hoc, sumus and non sumus? nisi quia sumu^ inspe, and erim^s in re.
Pro consortio societati^ humanae. Pro huius. vitae capacitate.

Pro sta^^^ viatoris. Pro huius vitae modulo. Ad Boni l. 3. Omnium in carne
iustorum imperfecta perfectio.

(...) Epist. 95. Heb. 5.

De great. chr. cont. Pelag. and Coelest. 1*48.

Secundum quandam inter homines probabilem conversationem. atque laudabilem.
Absoluta sententia, expositore non indiget.


(that I may inserte his judgment also by the way) beats down the
arrogancy of all high minded flesh; Magnum electionis vas, profectum abnuit,
perfectum fatetur. The great vessel of election denies perfection to
himself, confesses his profection and goinge forward; I endeavor my self to
that which is before. I proceed with Augustine: We may be perfect
travelers in righteousness before, hereafter we shall ^ee perfect owners
and possessours of righteousness; we may be perfect by anticipation,
carrying the name of the thing, before we have attained unto it, as we are
said already to be glorified, though our glorification shall be consummate
in time to come. We are the sons of God, says the Apostle, and yet it
appears not what we shall be. What means this, we are and we shall
be? but that we are in hope, and shall be indeed? Finally, he allows a
certain perfection sufficient to converse and hold society with mankind, a
perfection for the model and capacity of this life, for the state of
passengers and way faring men, and whatsoever he allows more in this kind,
I am sure he concludes, that the perfection of all righteous men, while they
are in the flesh, is imperfect. This of perfection.

Of righteousness and justice thus he affirms in other places. The
Evangelist Saint Luke reports of Zachary and Elizabeth his wife, that they
were both righteous before God, that is, without hypocrisy, vvalking in the
commandments of God, (Now because they vvalked, it is an argument, that they
were not yet come to the mark) (...), in all the commauddementes and
iustifications of the Lord. The testimony is already very large, but yet
he adds more, They vvalked in them all without reproof. How without
reproof? Augustine interprets it to Innocentius; Sine querela, non sine
peccato, Not without sin, but without grievance, quarrel, just complainte,
or exception to be made against them. Nay, he proves out of the same
scripture, that because Zachary was a Priest, therefore a sinner, for he was
bound to offer for sins, as well for his own part, as for the peoples. In
another place speaking of their righteousness, he limiteth it thus; They were
righteous after a probable and laudable conversation amongst men. He often
distinguishes between these two, Peccatum, and querela, Peccatum and cri^^en;
the one, sin in general, which no man is freed from, (for it is an absolute
sentence, and needs no exposition, if we say that we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, we are but blown bladders;) the other, some great
offenses, (as David calls it) malicious wickedness, Sanctorum hominu^ vitam
inueniri posse dicimu^ sine crimine. ca. 13. Non quali^^^c^que vox ^lla sed
vere sanctorum. l. 14. cap. 9. (...). S^tis been vivitur, si sine crimine^ Non
id agit (...) pecatum non habeat, sed ut venia^ no^ acespiat. Fo^asse secundu^
quoddam peccatu^ dixit, non secundum omne peccatu^. Cert^^ quoddam peccatum.
trac. 5. Qua^vis inquantum ex Deonati sumus no^ peccemus, in est ^ame^ adhuc
etiam quod ex Ada^nati sumus. lib. 2. cap. 7.

Ceneratio coelestis servat eum, id est, eterna praedestinatio.

Pulchrequidem pulchra^ non omnimode, sed inter mulieres dicit. Bern. ser. 38.
Inter mulieres, id est, animas carnales, non angelicas perfectiones. Ibid.


some heinous, notorious, scandalous sin, culpable in the eyes of men, and
worthy of censure and crimination. We say, (in his Enchiridion to
Laurentius) that the life of holy men may be found, though not without
fault, yet without an offensive fault. Again in his books of the city of
God, It is not the speech of vulgar and common men, but of those that are
rightly Saints, If we say that we sin not, etc. then shall this liberty
and immunity from passions be, when there shall be no sin in men; now
we live well enough, if without scandal; but he that thinks he lives
without sin, he does not thereby free himself from sinninge, but from
receiving remission of sins. In the first epistle of John, the third
chapter, the Apostle seems to favor the opinion of absolute righteousness
in man; He that is borne of GOD, sins not. Peradventure, says Augustine,
he means some certain sin, not all sin. Understand hereby a definite
special sin, which he that is borne of GOD, cannot commit. It may be the
want of love, Dilectionis carentia, It may be the great sin of
infidelity, which our Savior notes in the Jews, John the fifteenth; If I
had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin. the sin
wherein all other sins are held, the sin unto death, the sin not to be
repented of, and therefore not to be pardoned. Against Parmenian he answers
it thus; Although we sin not so far forth as we are borne of GOD, yet
there remains in us some part of our birth from Adam. Bernarde upon the
Canticles, gives the reason why he sins not; The heavenly generation
preserves him, that is, the everlasting predestination. Which reason the
Apostle himself seems to accord unto; for his ^eede remains in him.
Surely there is no man that sins not; Solomon preciselie affirms it, in
the dedication of the temple. GOD has concluded all under sin; Omnes odit
qui malos odit, He that hates evil men, hates all men; because there is
none that does good, no not one. Noah may be a righteous man in his time and
generation, compared with those amongst whom he lived; Thamar may be more
righteous than Iud^h, yet Thamar sinful enough; the Publican may go to his
house more justified than the Pharisee, yet not simply justified thereby; The
spouse in the Canticles, may be fair amongst women, yet her beautye not
such, but that she iustlye complains of her blackenesse. Though she
exceeds the souls of men, whilst they live in the body, yet she is short
of angelical perfection. Jnter nato^mulierum, non autem inter choros
caelestium spirit^^m. Ibid.

En^hir. cap. 71.

De sanct. virgini^ ca. 50.

Jn Ps. 12^. Mendici iustitiae.

Iustitia in hac vita ta^ta est, ut potius consict remissione peccatorum, qua^
perfectione virtutu^. Li. 19. de ci^ Dei, cap. 26. 1 Cor 6. Romans 10


John Baptist had not a greater amongst the sons of women, but whosoever
was least in the kingdom of GOD, and all the celestial spirits are far
beyond him. The best that live upon the earth, have brevia, leviaque peccata,
short and light sins, yet sins; quamvis pauca, quamvis parva, non tamen
nulla, Though fevve in number, small in measure, yet sins in nature.
Therefore we may conclude with the same father, whose shield I have hitherto
used against the enemies to the grace of God, Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after righteousness. We must know our poverty, and become su^ters
and b^ggers for justice, if we mean to speed. Our righteousness in this
life is such, as ^ather consists in the remission of our sins, than in the
perfection of our virtues. And to speak the truth, in the whole question of
justification betwixt the Papists and us, our justice is not justice in
proper and direct terms, but mercy. For that righteousness that we have, is
merely of mercy, not active, but passive, not that which we work our selves,
but GOD works it for us. Abluta estis, iustificati estis, you have washed or
justified your selves? No, you are vvashed and justified. And therefore it is
called the righteousness of GOD, because it comes from abroad, not inherent
in our selves, but from God derived, and by him imputed. And 1. Corinthians 1.
Christ is made unto us of God, wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption. First, wisdom in preaching and instruction;
Secondly, righteousness in the forgiveness of our sins; Thirdly,
sanctification in the holiness of our lives; Fourthly, redemption in his
mighty deliverance from all our enemies; that as it is written, he that
rejoices may rejoice in the Lord, and know, that neither of all these is of
himself. God objected to the king of Tyrus, in derision, Ezechiell the twenty
eighth, Thou art vviser then Daniell; I ask of the children of Babylon, what
they think of themselves; whether they go beyond Daniell, in holiness and
integrity of life. He in the ninth of his prophecy confesses sin and
iniquity, and rebellion in all the men of Judah, and inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and the whole people of Israel, far, or near, kings, princes,
fathers, and that righteousness is with GOD alone, and with them confusion
of face; he utterly disclaimeth their own justice, we come not to pray before
thee for any righteousness in our selves; and appealeth unto the
righteousness of the Lord, O Lord according unto all thy righteousness, let
thine anger be turned away, ver. 16. For the Lords sake, that is, thy Christ,
thine anointed, verse 17. For thy great tender mercies, verse 18. Finally,
for thine own sake, ver. 19. This was the spirit of Daniell; and they that
come in the confidence of their own pure spirits, neither shall their own
prayers avail, and the prayers of Daniel, and Noah, and all the righteous
saints in heaven, which they hang upon shall not help them. You see our
innocence, justice and perfection; not that our sins are not, but that they are
remitted, but that they are covered by the mercy of God, but that they are not
imputed, which is the chief blessedness of man, as we read in the 32. Psalm.
I could have noted so much unto you by a phrase, which my text affords. Lay
not upon us innocent blood. For then are we clear in the sight of God, when
the sins, whereof we are guilty, are not laid to our charges, nor remembered.
Blessed are all those who are thus discharged of their unsupportable souls
burden, that though they have many sins, they are bound up in a bundle, and
drawn into a narrow room; though insolent, climbing, aspiring sins, yet
they are cast into the bottom of the sea; though they are as red as crimson
and scarlet, yet their hue is changed, they are made as white as wool, or
snow, by the blood of Christ; though they fill all the corners of heaven, from
the rising of the sun to the going down thereof, yet they are driven from the
face of God, as far as the East and West are sundred; lastly, though they are
libelled and entered into his court, by the accusation of the devil, and by his
most righteous justice registered, yet the books are defaced, and all those
writings against us, na^e^ to the cross of Christ, by whom we are redeemed.

THE XVIII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 14. Lay not unto our charge innocent blood, for thou Lord have
done as it pleased thee.
THe prayer of the Mariners, without longer repetition, was common, fervent,
discreet, vocal, humble, importunate, pertinent to the time and occasion, well
grounded. ^n the 7th. of these, wherein I observed how rightly they applied
themselves to the deprecation of their present dangers, I examined, besides
their general intent in asking pardon for bloodshed, 2. particulars arising
naturally from the words: 1. the proceeding of God in case of murder, life for
life: 2. in what respect the blood of Jonas might be termed innocent; not
that the life of Jonas could no way be touched with sin, but that it was freed
in his present and particular behavior toward this company with whom he
sailed. I would further have demanded, but that the time intercepted me, how
Jonas could be held innocent toward the Mariners, whom he had actually
wronged in the loss of their temporal commodities, (for he only was the
cause of that general detriment,) and the hazard was as great, that he might
have eased them of their better treasure, I mean their lives, if God had not
stayed it: these, though having sense of the one, fear of the other, yet call
his blood innocent blood. The answer briefly is. They wrote that in the
waters, which others write in marble, Injuries. Though their voyage were lost
by this means, their business disapointed, the season of their mart diverted,
their merchandise wrackt, their provision wasted, (it may be) to some, their
wives and children undone, their estate sunk by it, yet they forgive and
forget the damages, and with a mantel of charity cover al his wrongs. The
persuasion holds by comparison, that if nature so newly reformed, having
tasted but the milk of the knowledge of God, have so quick a digestio^ of
forepassed wrongs, much more is required of us, who have been dieted with the
strongest meat, and to whom the precepts of charity have in most ample manner
been revealed. The commendatio^ shall ever live which Ambrose gives to
Theodosius the Emperor being dead; Theodosius of happy memory, thought he
received a benefit, as often as he was entreated to forgive: Beneficium se
p^^^abat accepisse augustae memoriae Theodosius* quoti^^ rogabat, ignosce
optabatur in eo, quod timebatur in aliis ^ut iras. ceretur. De obitu Theo.
Sermon. 6 in vigil. natal. Dom. Phil. 3^ Math. 18. De verb. Dom ser. 15.
that was wished in him, which in others was feared, that he would be angry.
Tully reports the like of a far unlike Emperor, that Caesar forgot nothing
but injuries. There is a learned, skillful, and virtuous kind of forgetfulness.
It is good to forget some things. All Manasses went not over ^orde^, part
stayed behind. Now Manasses had his name of forgetfulness, and Bernard illuding
thereunto says, It is good to forget Babylon, to remember Jerusalem; to forget
the fleshpots and (...) of Egypt, to remember the milk and honey of Canaan;
to forget our own (...) and our fathers house, and to remember heaven and
heavenly things. So Paul forgot that which was behind; his former defects and
delinquishments: and it shall be happy for us all to do the like, not in the
mercies either of God, or man, but in the crosses and grievances which we have
sustained. Peter asked his master in the gospel, how of the should forgive his
brother offending against him, whether to 7. times? It is added, Luke 17. how
often in a day? our Savior tells him, unto 70. times 7. times, that is, as
Jerome accounts it, 490. times; so often in a day, as is not possible for thy
brother oftener to trespass against thee. Augustine in effect has the same
note; Why does our Savior say seventie times seven times, and not an hundredth
times eight times? he aunsvvereth; from Adam to Christ were seventy
generations; therefore as Christ forgave all the transgressions of whole
mankind, parted and diffused into so many generations; so also we should
re^itte as many offenses, as in the term and compass of our life are
committed against us.

Examine (shall I say, one day?) nay all the days of our life, if all might
go for one, have we forgiven? have we forborne? that were one degree less:
have we not persecuted? Turks, Infidelles, vessels of dishonor? nay, our own
brethren: 7. yea, and 70. times 7. times, without number or measure, the sun
rising and the sun going down upon our wrath, our ways being the ways of
destruction, our beds the beds of mischief, as the Psalm calls them,
days and nights, openly, privately, meditating, talking, practicing how to
avenge our selves of the least discontentmentes. It were as ^are a matter in
our age, as to see the sun go back, to hear of any amongst us patient of
injuries, as that patriarch sometimes of Jerusalem was, of whom the proverb
of those times went, Nihil vtilius quam Alexandro malefacere, Nothing can
more profit a man, than to hurt Alexander. Yet he kept but that rule, which
they that kept not, are no part of the Israel of God, Not to resist evil,
To give cheek after cheek, cloak after coat, to take all that was offered,
whether upon or without the body, as that precept implies: nay rather to
return good for evil, Veterem ferendo iniuriam invitas novam Multis minatur
qui uni sacit iniuriam.
Romans 12, love for enmity, blessing for cursing, good deeds for hatred,
prayers for persecutions, Math. 5. We rather embrace the instigations of
gentilitye, and such as the nature of man easilye propendeth unto, bear one
iniurye and bear more; he that wrongeth one, threatens all; and such like
pro^ocations* I will end with the exhortation of our Lord, Luke 6. so give and
you shalbe^ forgiven Or rather with that which Mat. 6. is more peremptory, If
you forgive him not you shall not be forgiven. He indenteth for that by
mercy* which he might exact of duetye and equ^tie* and he that shall be
our judge* almost against the nature and right of his office, shows us the
way to escape his judgments. The conditions betwixt God and man in this
exchange are very unequal* 1. thine enemy was created by God, as thy self
were; God has an enemy of thee, whom he has created 2. thou pardonest thy
fellow servant; God, merely his servant. 3 thou pardonest and stand in need
of pardon again; God has no need to be pardoned. 4. thou forgiuest a
definite sum; God an infinite debt, requiring the proscription of thy self,
wife, and children, and all that thou have, body and soul, if thou should
defray it. Chrysostom.
Incredibili me sericordia nos ad certam veniam vocat, By incredible compassion
he draws us to a limited and bounded pity: the extention whereof makes us
the children of our father which is in heaven; but the streightning of our
bowels of compassion, as it takes from us the name and privilege of sons, so
it marketh us for servantes of the worst condition, naughty and ungracious
servants, for whom is justly reserved the wages of Balaam, I mean, the
repayment and stipende of everlasting destruction.

The last commendation in the prayer of the mariners is, 8. Reasonable,
rightly grounded.
their grou^ding thereof upon the pleasure of God, for thou Lord have done as it
pleased thee; which sounds thus. We ask thy favor in this respect, that we
have not departed from the rule of thy will, but followed as near as we could,
the verdit and answer of thy heavenly oracle. The lot has informed us, the
mouth of the prophet himself confirmed unto us, the constant indignation of
the sea makes it past question, that thou in thy counsel have decreed, that
Jonas shall be cast forth. It was a sanctified judgment in the^, both to
acknowledge the finger of God in so casual an accident, thou Lord have done
it; and withal to assent in secret, that the will and pleasure of God is the
exactest rule of equity that can be imagined, as it pleased thee. They gather
thus in effect; we do but the will of the Lord, therefore more justly to be
pardoned. The wisdom of God it self, in who^ the deity dwelt bodily, was
content to forsake his wisdom and to be ordered and rectified by this squire
of his fathers will, father, not my will, but thine be fulfilled. I know the
measure of thy will is straight; shall I be crooked and perverse in my ways? I
will not. Bernard dema^deth upon that submission of Christ. O Lord, the will
whereof thou speak* ( Not my will be done) if it were not a good will, how was
it thine? if good, why relinquished and forsaken? he answers, Non oportebat
propria prae^^d^care communibus, Private affairs must not hinder public: 't
was both the will of Christ, and it was a good will, whereby he said If it be
possible let this cup pass; but that whereby he spoke otherwise, thy will
^e do^e* was better, because it was common not only to the father which gave
his son, Communis erat non solum patris, sed and Christi and nostrae. Ser. 3.
de res. Dom.
but to the son himself, who was offered because he would* and to us who
heartily desired it. The will of a righteous man may miss o^ the will of God
sometimes, and yet be justified and approved before God. A child may wish the
life of his father, whom God has visited with sicknesse^* and minds not to
spare* Here have you the will of a man against the will of God in some sort.
Does he offend herein? nay rather should he not offend, if, nature and duty
forgotten, he wished otherwise? for whatsoever the secret will of God has
decreed, yet by his open and revealed will, parents must be honored, and
their life and vvell-doinge by prayer commended to the goodness of God. It is
the will of GOD permanent and unchangeable, that Jonas be cast forth; It is
the will of the mariners to save Jonas, if it may be. Do they displease God
hereby? rather they should displease, if layinge aparte humanity, they bare
not compassion to the life of Jonas. For howsoever his secret will has
determined, yet by his open and revealed will, the life of man must be
tendered. Who has ascended into heaven to know the counselles of the Lord?
Therefore it is ever safe, to cast the ankers of all our purposes, and to stay
our vvilles upon the will of God, before we see the event of things, to say
as our Savior willed us, Thy will be done; and when it is clearly decided
what his pleasure was, to join with these mariners, thou Lord haste done as
it pleased thee: we acknowledge thy supreme authority, thou sit upon the
circles of heaven, thou hold the scepter and ball of the world in thy right
hand, thou art the king and commander of the ear^h be it never so unquiet,
the hearts of kings and subjects are in thine hand. Thou vvoundest, healest,
killest, quickenest, where thou think good, and whatsoever man purposes,
thou disposest as thy pleasure is.

Others confess no less of the will of GOD, than these mariners do, Thou
Lord haste done as it has pleased thee; but with another construction. For
as they confess the efficacy and power thereof, so they deny the equity; as
if he held a tyranny, and governed the world not by law but by lust,
drawing it to obedience not by reason and justice, but by the violent chain of
his unchangeable purpose, so making his will in the moderating of the world,
as immoderate, as the vvilles of inordinate princes, who having the raines of
dominion given into their hands, if they proclaim not outright with Nero, My
authority gives me license to do all things; He is a fool that knovveth
not what he may do; Fortuna nosira cuncta permitti^ mihi.

Iner^is est nescire quid licea^ sibi. Dan. 3.


yet they say to themselves, I am a king, who dares call me to accounte, and
ask me, what do thou? yea what is that God that can deliver out of my
hands? This kind of impetuous and maisterlesse will, the servantes of the
servauntes of God (mistearmed) have challenged to their chair at Rome. For
howsoever they behaved themselves, no man might say unto them, Cur ita facis?
why do thou so? whatsoever they enacted, Sic volo sic iubeo, their will
and commandment was warrant enough. Franciscus Zabarella complains of those
that drew them into such arrogant error; They have persuaded the Popes that
they can do all things, even whatsoever pleased them, things unlawful too,
and that they are more than God. Silvester the first, Plus quam Deus.

Quia scriptum est, non est (...) etc. Lib. 2. de bapt. cont. Dona^. c. 10*


in the first council of Rome prooved it by scripture; The highest bishop is
not judged of any, because it written, the disciple is not above his master.
And shall the saw boast it self against him that mooveth it? Esaias the tenth.
Therefore let no man judge the Po^e. So was the speech of the Donatistes (as
Augustine remembers it,) when they had nothing to answer, sic volumus. Why?
For who are thou that iudgest another man's servant? The Pope gives another
reason. Thou art a servaunt, a disciple, who art thou that iudgest thy Lord?
Saint Augustines answer shall fit them both, both the Donatistes of Afric,
and the great Donatist of Rome; what else do all flagitious and lewd men,
riotous, drunkards, adulterers, shameless and dishonest persons, thieves,
extortioners, murderers, robbers, sorcerers, idolaters, what else do they
answer the word of truth and rig^teousnesse, when it reprooveth them, but
this, hoc volo, hoc me delectat, thus I will do, this delights me? Now it is
most true that the will of God is an absolute, praedominant, sovereign will:
where he will he takes mercy, and where he will, he hardens. The
ground of their complainte is good, though they miss-applie it, Romans 9.
who has resisted his will? and if we go to far to enquire and examine, we
are met in the way, and willed as it were to stand back, O homo, tu quis es
qui disputas? O man, who art thou that disputest? and preassest so boldly
into the secrets of God? But it is as true which the Apostle demands on the
behalf of the Lord, Is there any iniquity with God? far be it. Therefore they
sin a sin, which the darkest darkness in hell is too easy to requite,
who, when they have spilte the blood of the innocent, like water upon the
ground, defiled their neighbors bed, troubled the earth, and provoked heaven,
with many pernicious, infamous mischiefs, rapes, robberies, proditions,
burninges, spoylings, depopulations etc. spewe out a blasphemy against
righteousness it self, countenauncing their sins by authority of him who
hates sin, and pleading that they have done but the will of God in doing
such outrages. I know that the will of God, though they had staves of iron in
their hands, and hearts to resist, shall be done. Ungracious, unwilling, and
vnbeleevinge instruments shall do that service to God which they dream not
of. When God says, kill not, and they contradict, we will kill, even then,
though they violate the law of God, yet is his will accomplished. He has
hooks for the nostrelles, and bridles for the chawes of the wicked, which
they suppose not. I will add more; Judge ye what I say, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things. He has spurs for their flanks and sides,
which they never imagined. Senacharib found a bridle to stay him, and an hook
to turn him back; Pharaoh had a spur to drive him forward, I will harden
the heart of Pharaoh, Exodus 4. and in many other places. Let him alone, let him
take his pleasure and pastime, Exodus 8.
but when he has hardened his own heart by malice, then will I also harden
it by justice.

Thus the will of God is one way renounced, and as sure as he lives and
reigns in heaven, shall at the same time, and in the same action some other
way be performed. And yet are the men wicked, though they do that which God
would, and God most holy and just, though he would that which the wicked do.
They beguile themselves herein by a fallacy, they are taken in their own
nets, which they lay for an other purpose. For thus they presume. He that does
the will of God sins not; true: keep the commandments, honor God, obey
the Prince, love thy neighbor as thy self, this is voluntas signi, his will
recorded in holy writ, published abroad, signified to all flesh, and as it
were proclaimed at a standard, by precept, threatenings, promises, terror,
reward, earnestly and openly required. Now the murderer assumeth upon the
former ground, I do the will of God; For had it not stood with his will, my
power had failed, my heart had not been able to conceive a thought within me,
and my hand had withered and shrunk together, before I had given the stroke;
true likewise. But this i^ an other will, a secret will of God, his will at the
second hand, if I may so call is, and by an accident, a will against a will,
that because he did not that which God had publicly enjoined, he should do
another thing which he had privately deter^ined. De corrept and great. cap. 14.

Miro and ineffabili modo no^ fit praeter ^ius voluntatem, quod etiam fit
co^^ra eius voluntatem. Enchirid. ca. 109.

Caetera quidem nescio illud sci^, quod odere curiosos.


Augustine delivers it in wise and pithy terms; De hijs qui faciunt quae
non vult, facit ipse quae vult, Of those which do what God would not, he
does what he would: and by a marveilous vneffable means it comes to pass,
that it is not done without (or besides) his will, which is even done against
his will. Euclide to one that never rested to enquire of the Gods, answered
deservedly: Other things I know not, this I know, that they hate curious and
busy inquisitours, Adam was driven out of paradise, for affecting too much
knowledge. Israel had died the death Exodus 19. if they had past their bounds,
to climb up unto the mount, and to gaze upon the Lord. The men of
Bethshemesh were slain to the number of fifty thousand, for prying into the
Arc, 1. Sam. 6. The question is as high as the highest heavens, and dwells
in light as unsearchable as God himself, covered with a curtain of sacred
secrecy, which shall never be drawn aside till that day come, wherein we
shall know as we are known, and then but in measure and proportion. Who
is able to decide, that dwells with mortal flesh, how far the counsel of
the Lord goes in ordering and disposing sinful actions? This I am bold to
say, because I am loath to lead you farther into a bottomeles sea, than where
the lamb may wade without danger of miscarying, and if there be ought behind
which is not opened unto you, let this be your comfort, Deus revelabit, GOD
will one day reveal it; but in this present question, there is an error (I
suppose) in two extremities, either to think that God is the author of sin,
which sensual and phantasticke Libertines, rubbing their filthiness upon his
purity, have imputed unto him; or that GOD does only but suffer and permit
sin, sitting in heaven to behold the stratagemes of the wicked, without
intermedling, as if his Godhead were bound like Sampsons arms, half of his
power and liberty restrained, a greater part of the world and the manners
thereof running upon wheels, and the cursed children of Beliall hasting like
dromedaries to fulfill the lusts of their own godless hearts, without the
government and moderation of the highest Lord. Either of these opinions (me
thinks) denies the Godhead. For howsoever in words both may admit it, they
deny it in opinion. They receive it at the gates, and exclude it at the
posterne. The one destroys the justice and goodness of the deity, in that
they charge GOD to be the author of sin; the other his omnipotency and
providence, in that they bereave him of a great part of his business. The
latter of these two positions (that God does permit sin,) is sound and
catholic enough, if more be added unto it, (for God does more than permit;)
the former is filled to the brimme, with most monstrous impiety. God not the
author of sin.
If the devilles in hell may be heard to speak for themselves and against
God, what could they say to deprave him more than this, Indeed we have
sinned and forsaken our faith, but God caused us? It is a most damnable and
reprobate thought, Plat. in Th* Quae causa diis benefaciendi? Natura. Nec
accipere iniu riam queunt nec fac^re. Hii nec habent nec da^t malu^*
that any vessel of clay should so conceive of his former, who in the
creation of all things made al things good, and past not a work from his
fingers, without the approbation of his most prudent judgment, Behold it was
good, very good, and God saw it. Ask but the masters of humane wisdom, they
will inform you in this behalf; (...); God by no means is unjust, but as
righteous as possible maybe. Seneca asks the cause, why the Gods do good?
he answers, their nature is the cause. They can neither take nor do
wrong, they neither give nor have mischief in them. You have the same
doctrine, James 1. Let no man when he is tempted, say that he is tempted by
God: for God is not tempted with evil, and he himself tempts no man.

Therefore I blame not Edmunde Campian, if he hold it in his eighth reason of
his pamphlet cast forth, a paradoxe, that is, an insolent, unwonted,
incredible position, to make God the author of sin. But to charge our
reformed churches with the conception and birth of so vile a monster, is as
unrighteous a calumniation against us, as God, whose justice we mainetaine,
is most righteous. Duo maledici essemus. Lib. 3. cap. 1.
If I should answer slander by slander, we should prove two slanderers; as
Augustine sometimes answered Petilian. These are Convicta convicia, ancient
reproaches, dead and rotten long since. We never said it. Our church has
been justified by her children a thousand times in this point. This we have
said, that in a sinful action there are two things; the act, and the
defecte; essence and privation; the material and the formal part; the
substance and the quality. The latter whereof, is that deformity or
irregularity, as they call it, unlawfulness, transgression, pravity, that in
every such action is contained. 1, 2 ae. quae. 71. art. 6. conclus. Lib. 2. c.
27. Vnum ad substantiam actus, alterii ad rationem mali. Quaest. 79. artic. 2.
co^cl.
Aquinas observes it in the definition of sin, which Augustine gave against
Faustus the Manichee; Sin is any thing spoken, coveted, or done against the
everlasting law. One thing (says he) in this defin^oion belongs to the
substance of the act, the other to the nature of the evil that is therein.
God is the author of the act, because all motion comes from him, but not of
the act as it has defect in it. He brings the example of a lame leg,
wherein are two qualities, ability to go, but inability to go vprighte. The
going and stirring it has, is from the virtue that moves it, (as when a
rider drives his horse;) the lamenesse and debility belongs to an other
cause, distortion, or crookedness, or some other impotency in the leg it
self. The like is, in the striking of a iarring and untuned harp, Just. Lips.
d^ Con* l 1. c. 20.
the fingeringe is thine, the iarringe and discord is in the instrument. The
earth gives fatness and juice to all kind of plants; some of those plants
yield pestilent and noisome fruits: where is the fault? in the nourishment
of the ground, or in the nature of the herbs, which by their native
corruption, decoct the goodness of the ground into venime and poison? The
goodness and moisture is from the earth, the venime from the herb; the
soundinge from the hand, the iarring from the instrumente; the motion from the
rider, the lamenesse from the leg; so the action or motion is from God, the
evil in the action, from the impure fountain of thine own heart. How could
the mind of Caine ever have thought of the death of Abell, his eyes have seen
any offensive thing in his accepted sacrifice, his heart have prosecuted with
desire, and his hand executed with power, so unnatural a fact, more than a
stone in the wall, which if it be not stirred, forsakes not his place, if God
had not given him strength and activity, to have used the service of al these
faculties? To think, to see, to desire, to move the parts of the body, were
the good creatures of God, (therein consists the action:) but to turn these
gifts of God to so vile a purpose, was the sin of Cain, the fault of the
action, proper and singular to his own person.

It is skarse credible to report how Campian goes forward against us, that
as the calling of Paul, so the adultery of David, and the treason of Judas, by
our doctrine, were the proper works of God, all alike: as if we mingled iron
and clay together, and the spirit of God had given us no wisdom to discern
things, in nature and quality most repugnant. I again borrowe Saint
Augustines words; Petilianus dicit, ego nego, eligite cui credatis, Petilian
affirms it, Lib. 3. con^. tit. Petil, ca, 10*
I deny it, choose whether you will believe. The conversion of Paul, was the
regeneration and new birth of one that was a stranger to the covenauntes of
God; the adultery of David, the fall and escape of a Saint; the treason of
Judas, the damned apostasy of a reprobate. The conversion of Paul was the
proper work of God, whom Satan had held in darkness and in the shadow of
death whilst the world had stood, if God had not cast him into a trance,
blindinge the eyes, and killinge the senses of his body for a time, but
illuminatinge his mind, changing his heart, creating a new spirit within him,
and speaking both to his ears and conscience with an effectual calling.
Finally he found no will in him fit for his mercies, but wrought both the
will and the work to. In the adultery of David, and the treason of Judas, he
found the will eagerly prepared to iniquity; God does but use that will: they
run of themselves, God staieth not behind, but runs with them, though to
an other end; they to the satisfaction of their naughty lusts, God to the
declaration of his righteous and wise judgments. And although he loves not
their sins, yet he loves and is delighted with the execution of his
admirable justice hanging thereupon. And albeit neither the adultery of David,
nor the treason of Judas be his proper works; yet God has his proper working
in both their works. For as from dishonest actions may come good creatures;
Anselm. de caesu Diab. cap. 91.
(as when a child is borne in adultery, the commixtion of adulterers is
wicked, the creature good:) so from the lewdest and corruptest wills, God can
produce good effects. Not unlike the wisdom of Physicians in using the
poison of serpents; for how harmefull a nature soever the poison has, the
Physician tempereth it by degree, and heals his patient thereby: the poison it
self notwithstanding hurtful, the skill of the Physician commendable, the
effect profitable.

Thus we have ever distinguished, not only the works which we know are
indifferent, but in one and the same action the diversity of agentes, and
dealers, both in this manner of working, and in their ends. In the afflicting
of Job (for example sake) Satan has leave to lay his hand upon Job: his
servauntes are slain, his oxen, asses, and camelles taken and driven away by
Sabaeans and Chaldaeans. Slaughter and spoil without mercy. For if a
grape-gatherer should come to a vine, would he not leave some grapes? here
neither camel nor beast is left, nor any servant, save one alone to bring
news. Yet Job confesses after all this; The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken. Here are three sundry agents. A man might imagine, that either
Satan and the Sabaeans shall be excused, for having society in this action with
God; or God brought into question, for having society with them. Neither of
both: The difference of their intentions sets them as far asunder, as
heaven is from the earth at her lowest center. God has a purpose to try the
patience and constancy of Job, to reform the opinion of his own innocence,
to make him know that he was but man, and to find an occasion of pouring
greater blessings upon him; Satan to show his envy, and malice to mankind, to
drive him to desperation; the Sabaeans to store up treasures of wickedness,
and to show that stolen bread is sweet unto them. The envy and malignity of
Satan, whence is it? of God? No. God borrows and uses his service, I
grant, but Satan first proffered it: so the malice is his own, who was a
murderer from the beginning, he only add^ng government and moderation
thereunto. The furious and bloody rapines of the other, whence are they? from
God? no. They lay in the cisternes of their own hearts, Satan drew them
forth by ins^igation, themselves let loose the stream, and when it was once on
flote, the Lord directed and disposed the course by his wisdom.

For this present I end. God is of pure eyes, and can behold no wickedness,
Conclusion.
he has (...) righteousness to the rule, and weighed his justice in a
balance, his soul hates and abhors sin, I have served with your
iniquities. It is a labor, service and thraldom unto him, more than Israel
endured under their grievous taskmasters; his law to this day curses and
condemns sin, his hands have smitten and scrouged sin, he has thrown down
angels, plagued men, overturned cities, ruinated nations, and not spared his
own bowels whilst he appeared in the similitude of sinful flesh; he has
drowned the world with a flood of waters, and shall burn the world with a
flood of fire, because of sin. The sentence shall stand immovable, as long as
heaven and earth endures, tribulation and anguish upon every soul that does
evil, Jew or Gentile. All adulterers, murderers, idolaters, sacrilegious,
blasphemous, covetous wretches, liers, swearers, forswearers, and whom the
Apostle calls dogs, barking at the justice of God, and making a causeless
complaint against him, as if he were cause of their sins, shall one day see the
folly, and feel the price of their unrighteous in^ectation. Let God therefore
be true, and let all men be liers; let God be just, and all men sinners; let
God be justified in all his judgments, and let all his accusers vanish and
consume in the madness of their hearts, as the foam upon the waters.

THE XIX. LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 14. For thou, Lord, have done as it pleased thee.
THe Mariners in this reason of their petition, acknowledge 2. things directly:
1. the work Thou, Lord, have done it: 2. the ground of his works, as it
pleased thee. A third thing is acknowledged by implication, the equity and for
thou Lord, etc.) their meaning is not therein, either to charge him with a
tyra^nous will, quod libet licet, as the manner of grievous princes is to
think that lawful whatsoever pleases them; either to insimulate and accuse
him of injustice, to make him actor or patron of any their sins, who deals
in the actions of me^, sometimes with open, sometimes with secret, but always
with a righteous judgment. Therefore I noted their corruption, who think
themselves excused in their most enormous and execrable sins, because they
fulfill the will of God in one sense, not that open and revealed will, which he
has given in tables, published by sound of a trumpet, specified by blessings,
cursings, promises, threatenings, exhortations, dehortations, and such like,
whereunto they stand strictly bound, but a secret and hidden will, written in
another book, wrapped up in the couns^iles of his own breast, which neither
they intended when they did their misdeedes, neither were they ever charged
therewith from Gods lips. Deuteronomy 29. August. en. chir. c. 100.
Secreta Domino, revelata nobis and filijs nostris; Secret things belong to
the Lord, revealed to us and our children. 1. Quantum ad ipsos, fecerunt quod
Deus noluit; touching their own purpose and intendment, they have done that
which God would not, they have transgressed his law with contentation of
heart, perhaps with gladness, it may be, with greediness, taking a solace and
pleasure therein, and not wishing to have done otherwise; they have pursued it
to the third and fourth generation, from the first assault or motion of sin to
consent, from consent to delight, from delight to custom, and yet not giving
over till they come to a spirit of slumber, or rather a death in sin. 2.
Quantum ad omnipotentiam Dei, nullo modo id efficere valuerunt; touching the
omnipotency of God, they were never ab^e to do it; he sits in heaven that
laugheth them to scorn, he besieges them round about, and his hand is upon
them. They are not able to depart from his will, more than if a ship were going
from Ioppe to Tharsis (as this ship was) from West to East, and one by walking
upon the hatches a contrary course, as if he would go from East to West, from
Tharsis toward Ioppe again, might stay the motion or flight of the ship;
he does his endeavor to hinder it, by bending both his face and his pace
backewarde, but the ship is too well winged, and of too huge a burden to be
resisted: so those others show their will, to frustrate and fail the will of
God by committing sin prohibited, but yet they shall do a will of his, or
rather his will shall be done upon them, maugre their malicious and sworn
contradictions. De hijs qui faciunt quae non vult, facit ipse quae vult, Of
those that do what he would not, he does what he would; and as he commanded
light to shine out of darkness, so he can command good out of evil, treasure
from out the midst of dross, and commodity from the very heart of deepest
wickedness: at least he will execute his justice upon offenders, as he
professes. Exodus 14. I will get me honor upon Pharaoh and all his host: for
this cause he set him up, to show his power in him, and that his name might be
declared to the whole earth, Exodus 9.

To reduce a diffused, but a dangerous and intricate question (wherein as I then
protested the wariness of my proceeding, so now I again protest the
subjection of my spirit to the spirits of prophets; God forbid that I should
not be readier to learn than to teach,) I say, ^
to reduce it to heads, I proposed unto you the errors of some in 2. (...) of
extremities: some going too far, in that they make God the (...) of sin; others
coming a^ short, that God does only permit (...). The former an error (...)
for devils than men* the latter an error of humanity, offending of simplicity
rather then malice, speaking* truth of God, when they acknowledge his
permission of sin, but (...) whole truth, because they think God only
permits it both deny the godhead in effect, the one destroying the goodness
and (...), the other impairing the omnipotency, providence, government thereof,
in that they restrain it from some things.

The former of these two opinions, that God is the author of sin, most
prodigious to co^ceive, though engendered in the brain, I know not whether of
men or devils, yet is taken by Ed. Campion our charitable countriman, and laid
at the doors of our Church, yea brought into the streets of our Universities,
as if we were the fathers and patrons of it. We never said it I say once
again) and to redeem a thousand deaths, if more were due to our sins, we
would not affirm it. This we say, whatsoever has substance, and being, and
perfection in the action of sin, God is the author of it, because it is good;
Ipsum quantumcunque esse, bonum est; the least essence in the world is good:
Aug. de ver* rel. cap 34. Inquam^u^ sunt, intantu^ bona sun^ Id. ^n qu^st,
83.21.

Jd ad artic. (...)* impos* ad 5.


but not of the fault and defection therein. I must once more repeat; sin has
a positive and privative part, a subject and the quality of the subject, nature
and corruption: Prorsus ab illo est, quicquid pertinet ad naturam, and prorsus
ab illo non est, quicquid est contrae naturam; Whatsoever belongs to nature,
is wholly from him, and whtsoeve^ is against nature, is in no respect from him.
Now death, and whatsoever belongs to the train of death, sin, and the like,
are against nature. In him we live and moove, and have our being* there is the
pillar of our truth; a Poet of the Gentiles delivered it, but an Apostle
sanctified and ratified it, and every creature in heaven, in earth, in the
deep, cries Amen to it. And as that gentility and heathnishnesse of that
unbelieving Poet could not mar Gods truth, so the corruption and depravation
in the quality either of man or action, cannot hurt the substance. Life is his,
whether we live to him, as we ought to do, or to the lusts of our own flesh,
or after the pleasure of the God of this world, the prince of darkness. Motion
is his, whether we lift up our hands to prayer, or whether to murder. 1.
Neque (...) institutione prima naturae.
Essence is his: the nature, being, and substance of men, of serpents, of
reprobate Angels, are from him, and his good creatures. He made not death, he
gave charge to the waters and earth to bring forth creatures that had the soul
of life in them, 2. Neque secu^d^^ causam. id est, peccatum.
and when he made man he breathed in his face the breath of life* and made him
a living soul: he made not darkness, he created the light; neither was the
author of sterilitie and barrenness, 3. Non fecit, non acc^rsivit, no^ enim
nobis.
he made the bud of the earth which should seed seed, and the fruitful
tree. And to speak a truth in proper terms, these privations, corruptions,
and defectes in nature, as death, darkness, sterility, blindness, silence, and
the like, have rather deficient than efficient causes. For, by the remooving of
the things themselves which these destroy, they of their own accord succeed
and take their places. Abandon the light of the sun whereby our air is
brightened and illuminated, you need not carefully enquire or painefully
labor how to come by darkness, the deficiencie and failing of the light, is a
cause sufficient to bring in darkness. If the instrument of sight be
decayed, the stringes and spirits which serve for the eye, inwardely wasted
and corrupted, there is no more to be done, to purchase blindness to the eye;
the very orbity and want of seeing, puts blindness forthwith in
possession. If there were no speech, or noise in this church, what would there
be but silence and stillness? will you ask me the cause hereof? It has
rightly none. I can render the cause of speech, there are instruments in man
to form it, and there is an air to receive it from his mouth, and bear it to
their ears that should partake it: upon the ceasing whereof, silence has a
course to supply, without the service and aid of any creature in the world
to produce it. And these things we know, and are acquainted with, not by the
use of them, (for who can use that which is nothing?) We know what light is, by
the use thereof, because we behold it; but who ever saw darkness? if the
apples of his eye were as broad as the circle of the sun and the moon,
waking and wide open, how could he see darkness? We know what speech is,
by the use thereof, because we receive it by the ear; but who ever heard
silence? Only we know them, not by fruition of themselves, but by want of
their opposites, which erst we enioy^ed and now are deprived of. I speak the
more that I might speak plainly. We were to enquire the efficient cause of
sin; it has none properly: it has a deficient cause. Adam and Eve forsook
as it were the guide of their youth, the word of God and his grace forsook
them. Nature is now corrupted, the soundness, integrity of all the faculties
therein diseased, the image of God wholly defaced. Upon the decay and departure
whereof, sin like a strong man enters the house, the body and soul are
taken up with a mass of injustice, the understanding is filled with
darkness, the will with frowardness, the senses with vanities, Corpu^ (...)
hilominu^ Deus fecit* morbum no^ fecit, and an^mum similiter fecit, no^ aute^
peccatu^ Nimis indoctus est qu^ vitium naturae no^ discernit ab a^thore
naturae. Artic. 3. ad artic. falso imp.

Sicut naturarum bonarum optimu^ creator est, (...) malaru^^ volun^atu^^
iustiss imu^ ordinator. Ve cum male illae utun^^^ naturis bonis, ipse ben^
utatur etia^ volu^tatibu^ malis. De correp. and great. cap. 14. Lips. lib. 2.
de. Consta^^, cap 20.

Sciente and sinente: quadam etia^ sententia, vclen^e* In marg.

God does more than permit sin


and every part both of outward and inward man becomes a servaunt to
unrighteousness. Basil in a sermon upon this argument now in hand, wills
those that enquire of the author of sin, likewise to answer, whence
sickness and orbities in the body come: for they are not (says he) the
work of God. Living creatures were at the first well created, having a
proportion convenient to them: but they fell into diseases and distemperatures,
when they fell from healthinesse, either by evil diet, or by some other
cause; notwithstanding, GOD made the body, he made not sickness, and he
likewise made the soul, but not the sinfulness thereof. Jerome upon the
second of Abacuk, gives the like judgment; Et si anima vitio suo efficitur
hospitium Ch^ldaeorum, natura tamen sua est tabernaculum Dei: though the soul
by her own fault is made an habitation or lodge for the Chaldaeans,
strangers to dwell in, yet by hernature she is the tabernacle of God.
Therefore he should show himself too ignorante, that could not discern
between the corruption of nature and the author of nature. And because we
further were charged, that we made the conversion of Paul, the adultery of
David, and the treason of Judas, the one the vprising of a sinner, the other
the falling down of a saint, the last final revolt of a reprobate, the
works, and the proper works of God, all alike; I prooved the contrary. The
first I acknowledged his proper and entire work, he opened the understanding,
changed the will, did all therein. In the other two he took the wrll as he
found it, and without alteration thereof, applied it to some ends which he
had secretly purposed* and though neither the adultery of David, nor the
improbity of Judas, were his proper works, yet God had his proper works in
them both. for as he is a most holy creator of good natures, so he is a most
rightuous disposer of evil wills: that whereas those evil wills do ill use
good natures, he on the other side may well use the evil wills themselves.

To conclude; he is (...) a worker in the works of all sorts of men.
Communiter author, (fateor) sed non nisi boni fautor; Commonly and
indifferently (I grant) an author in a common and large signification, but a
favourer only of good. Do thou address thy self to virtue? it is done
both by the privitie and assistaunce of GOD. To vice? with his privitie and
permission (not with his help) some think (says Lipsius) with his will
too. It is most true that GOD does suffer sin: there is nothing visiblie and
sensibly done, which is not either commanded or tolerated, from that
invisible, intelligible court of the highest Emperor. August. 58. senten. for
it could not be done if God did not suffer it. Nec utique no len^ (...) sed
vole^^

Nec sineret bonus fieri male, nisi om nipotens etiam de malo facer^ posset
been. Cap. 15


In his Enchirid to Laurent. 100. it follows: and truly he does not suffer
it against, but with his will: and being good, as he is* he would never suffer
any thing to be ill done, but that being also almighty, he can do well of that
which is evil. Undoubtedly he does not suffer against his will, for that
would be with grief, and must needs argue a power greater than himself:
then if he willingly suffer, Permissio est quoddam genus voluntatis, his
sufferance is a certain kind of will. In his book of predestination and
grace, he compares Nabuchodonosor and Pharaoh together, both which had the
same plaster of chastisement laid unto them; though converted in the one to
his souls health, in the other to his destruction. Touching nature, they were
both men; for honor, both kings; concerning the cause of correction, both
held the people of GOD in captivity; and lastly for their punishment, both
were admonished by the scourges of GOD. Yet the ends of their punishment were
diverse; for the one fought against God, the other by repentance obtained
mercy. Now what objections soever a man may frame-here hence against the equity
of God, Intelligat ista tame^ vel adiuvante Domino perfici, vel deserente
permitt^, vt noverit tamen nolente Domino nihil prorsus admitti: Let him
understand that all these things are either brought to pass, God aiding
them; or suffered, God forsaking them; so that he know withal, that nothing
in the world can be done, An objection answered.
if God be unwilling. If then I sin by the will of God, how can I help it?
and why does he yet complain? as Paul obiecteth, Romans the ninth. I will
remove this stone of offense, and then return to my purpose. My will, I say,
is borne by a stream of the will of GOD, or it is my destiny to sin, the
stars have fore-signed my going awry, Mars committed the murder, Venus the
adultery, thus was I borne and marked, the fault is not mine, I sin by
compulsion. I put them all together, because it is the fashion of some to set
up a judgment seat in their erroneous fantasies, and thereat to arraigne God
of injustice, sive per transennam, sive per cannam longam, sive per proximum,
either by the caseme^t, or through a long cane, obliquely, or farther of, and
some hard at hand and directly, some by destiny, some by stars ohers reaching
immediately at God himself, Deus hoc voluit, and si nollet Deus, non facerem,
God would have it thus, if God would not, I could not have done it. One in a
monastery being reprooved, that he did some things not to be done, and omitted
others which he should have done, answered those that rebuked him; what kind
of man soever now I am, Qualiscu^ que nunc sim, talis ero, quale^ me deus
praescivis esse futurii. Qui profecto and veru^ dicebat, and hoc vero non
proficiebat in bonum. Aug. 2. de ^ono persever. 15.

E^odius objected the like. 3. de lib. arbit. 3. Non vide^ quomodo sibi non
adversentur haec duo, praescientia, and leberias arbitrii. Augustine answered;
Deus est praescius voluntatis nostrae, and cuius est praescius, ipsa ^rit.

Praedestinatio vel est. Al ligationis and pote^tiae. vel Conditioni^ and
iustitiae This later is with God, even in evil actions.

Non vule malum, vul^ hoc ipsum, ^ieri malum. Zanch. Deus quasdam voluntates
sua^ utique bonas, implet per malor^^ hominum voluntates mala^. Aug. enchir. c.
101.


I shall be such as God has foreseen I should be. Who therein (says Augustine)
both spoke a truth, and yet was no whit bettered to amendment of life by that
truth. O damned absurdity, rooting her wickedness in heaven, as if the
prescience and will of God were the cause of our sinning, whereas his
prescience is but the antecedent to our sins going before them, (for, because
we sin, therefore they are foreknowne; not, because they are foreknowne,
therefore we sin:) and his will is but the consequent, following upon them. I
say again, God has a will and purpose in the sins of unrighteous men; not
that he likes the sins, but he orders and governs the^ in wise manner, and
turns them to some end that well pleases him. And though he wills not the
evil it self, yet the doing of the evil does in some respects content him.
And that will in God is consequent to our will. For albeit it were before ours
in time (because his will is as ancient as himself, even from everlasting) yet
in order and course of things, it comes behind it, and he that fulfilleth
the will of God, in this manner (or rather the will of God is fulfilled upon
him) shall hang in hell for his service; so little thanks is he likely to
reap at Gods hands. For there is no question, but God does fulfill good
purposes of his own, by the ill purposes of ill men. Judas was not yet formed,
nor any member of his body set together or fashioned, when they were all
written in the book of God. He saw his treason in the glass of his
foreknowledge, and understood his thoughts a far off. There was not a word in
his tongue but God was long since acquainted with it. He knew that his will was
bent to mischief, from before the world was established. Now God has a will
upon and after the will of Judas, and thus he bethinketh himself. Judas has a
will to betray his master, I will not stop his will, but co^vert it to some
good use* I will draw a preservative against poison from the very poison of a
serpent, I will declare my power and skill thereby. The world shall know that of
the vnnaturallest treason that ever the sun beheld, I ca^ work a good effect.
I will show my judgments amongst all nations upon Judas and his accomplices; and
by the fruits of that bitter root, the vilest treachery that ever hell cast
up, I will save mankind. Judas himself never intended therein either to
magnify the power of God, or to manifest his justice, or to deliver any of his
brethren, who, I dare say, never conceived therein how his own singular soul
might be saved. So then, Judas committed a treason, and God foresawe a treason,
whose knowledge is as great as himself, and the works of a thousand
generations to come as present unto him as that which is done at the present
time. Aug. lib. 6. hypognost. (...). Dam.
What of that? praescivit, non praedestinavit vel fecit; he only foreknewe
it, he neither predestined it nor committed it. For this is the rule: Mala
tantum praescit, and non praedestinat; bona vero and praescit and praedestinat:
Evil things he only foreknoweth, good he both foreknoweth and
praedestinateth, that is, apointeth and takes order for them before hand. He
also foretold the infidelity, malice, mischievousnesse of the Jews in
complottinge the same villainy against the son of God. Aug tract. 53. in Joan
Feceru^t peccatum Judaei, quod eos no^ compulit facere, cui peccatum no^
place^, sed facturos esse praedixit, quem nihil latet. Jbid. ^. de co^st. 20.
What of that? praedixit, non fecit; he only foretold and not wrought it.
Ipsorum praescivit peccata, non sua; He foresawe their sins, not his own.
The Jews committed a sin which he compelled them not to do, who is
displeased with sin, but only foretold that they would do it, because
nothing is hid from him. Iustus Lipsius as acutely as any man; vidit ab
aeterno; sed vidit non coegit; scivit non sanxit; praedixit non praescripsit:
he saw it from all eternitye, but he saw it, enforced it not; knew it,
decreed it not; foretold it, prescribed, ordained it not. For tell me, ye
adulterers, murderers, usurers, drunkardes, traitors, and the rest of this
accursed seed, when you committ such things whereof you are now ashamed, and
seek unlawful helps to be rid of them, whether you do them against your
wills, whether you find any force offered unto you, whether you are drawn
unto them with, lines, or rather draw not them unto you with cart-ropes? when
the devil prompteth and suggesteth iniquity unto you, whether you yield not
your necks to his yoke with easines; if the least object of pleasure allure
not, pull not your senses after it; if ever your meat and drink were sweeter
to your palate and throat, than these sins to your souls; if there be any
christian resistance in you, Quod nolo malum, hoc facio, that evil which I
would not, that do I; if you set not windows and doors open, that the strong
man, who carries the minds of men captive, may enter in? Have you not will in
all these? or is it a possible thing that will can be constrained? It is as
proper to will to keep a liberty, I mean from coaction, as for fire to
burn. Else it were not voluntas, but noluntas as, not will, but no will, if
violence could be offered unto it. I desire to open my meaning. The
foreknowledge of God is unto him (if shallowe and deep may be compared
together) as memory is to us: as memory presents unto us things that are
past, so prescience unto God things which are to come. Memory is our book
wherein we read the one, and prescience his book wherein he reads the
other: and as memory in us is not the cause why things past were done, but
only recounteth; so Gods prescience is not the cause why future things shall be
done, but only foreknoweth them: and as we remember some things which we do,
but do not al things which we remember; so God foreseeth al things whereof he is
author, but is not author of al things which he foreseeth: lastly, we
remember and God foreseeth the doing of every thing in the nature and kind
thereof: we remember a stone thrown wherewith a man was slain; by violence?
no, by chance; so God foresawe it: we remember since a vineyard was planted, Jn
Psalm 32. Si peccavi, ego peccavi, non fatu^, no^ fortuna, non Diabolus.
Adversus me pronunc^ abo non adversus Dom^num. Bern. ser. 76. in Cantic. in
illud Psalm. 117. Impulsus sum u^ caderem. Quaeris, quis ille impulsor? non est
unu^. Impulsor Diabolus, impulsor mundus, impulsor homo* quis ist^ homosit,
quae ris? quisque sui* Vsque adeo homo impulsor sibi est, and suime^
precipitator, ut non sit quod ab altero impulsor^ formides, si ipse a te
proprias contineas manus.
and the trees thereof brought forth grapes; by violence? no, by nature; so God
foresaw it: we remember a thief which lay in wait for blood, and committed a
murder by the high way side; by violence? no, by will; so God foresaw it. Thus
al things are done according to the foreknowledge and will of almighty God;
necessary things of necessity, contingent by contingency and hap, as we call
it, natural by kindly course, voluntary with election and choice, their
natures neither changed, nor any way enforced by the foresaid means. I
conclude with Saint Augustine, God created me with free will (he speaks of
freedom from coaction,) If I have sinned, It was I that sinned; it was neither
destiny, nor fortune, nor the devil. I will pronounce against my self, not
against the Lord. I know I sin of necessity in one sense, because the
corruption of nature has remooved that original integrity wherein man was
first created; but I sin not violently, because mine own will is reserved unto
me. For, as it was true of man in the state of innocence, Potest non peccare,
he may, if he will, not sin, because God left him in the hand of his own
counselles, and gave him liberty both ways; so it is now as true in the state
of corruption, Non potest non peccare, he cannot choose but sin, the whole
lump of his nature being sowred with that ancient leaven; neither shall he
ever be delivered from the corruption whereunto he is subject, till he attain
to the state of glorification, wherein it shall as certainly be verified, non
potest peccare, he cannot sin though he would, corruption having put on
incorruption both in body and spirit. Which necessity of sinning the mean time
is not in any external cause, either creator or creatures, but in the decayed
nature of man, upon the fall whereof comes vanity in the mind, and a
frowardnes in the will to depart from the living God. Now I return to my
former assertion, that nothing is done without the will of God, and yet the will
of man thereby no way corrupted or compelled. And surely the very tenor and
sound of the scripture phrase, bewraieth a degree of some forwarder disposition
from God in the actions of unrighteous men, than his bare toleration. For, why
was it said, not only in the 3. of Exodus: I know that the king of Egypt will
not let you go but by strong hand, which is referred to the prescience of God,
foreseeing what would come to pass; and in the 7. chapter, the heart of
Pharaoh was heavy and dull, which is referred to his own obstinate hardening
of it; but I will harden the heart of Pharaoh, and he shall not let the people
go, Exodus 4. and Pharaoh shall not harken unto you? Exodus 7. For when Pharaoh
hardened his own heart, both against the people of Israel, give them no
straw, get you to your burdens, Exodus 5. and in the same chapter against the
Lord himself, who is the Lord that I should hear his voice? then did God
permit all this to be done, and held his peace, as the Psalm speaks, gave
him the hearing and the looking on: but afterward when he puts as it were
iron to iron, adamant to adamant, I will harden his heart, it cannot reasonably
be supposed, but that besides his sufferance, there was an accession of some
work of his. When the sons of Zerviah would have taken Shemei his head
from him, because he railed at the king, throwing stones at him, and calling
him a murderer, the son of Beliall etc. 2. Sam. 16.
David stayed them with strange and unexpected speech, what have I to do with
you, ye sons of Zerviah? for he curses me, because the Lord has bidden
him curse David. And further, as if the rayler were safe under the wings of
Gods authority, who then dare say, wherefore have thou done so? and once more,
suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden him. Nathan the prophet had
told him before, that for his murder and adultery the Lord had thus decreed
aginst him: Chap. 12.
I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house, and will take thy
wives before thy face, and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie with
thy wives on the sight of the sun; for thou did it secretly, but I will
do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun. Micheas told Ahab,
The Lord has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all thy prophets, ^. king. 22.
and the Lord has appointed evil against thee. Jeremy to the face of GOD
charge him, Ier. 4.
Surely thou have deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, you shall have
peac^, and behold a sword. And the Lord in plainer terms takes it upon
him, Ezech. 14. If the prophet be deceived when he has spoken a thing, I the
Lord have deceived him. God gave the Gentiles up (Romans 1.) to the desires of
their hearts, to uncleanness, to defile their bodies between themselves
etc. into vile affections, (affections of dishonor, dishonesty, contumely,
shame,) to do against nature it self, into a reprobate mind. Julian
interpreted al these speeches by Permittere, as if then God did it, when he
suffered it to be done: (so did many ancient writers, by words of the like
importance, Passus est, (...):) Augustine answered him, that God does not only
permit then, but declare his wrath and power therein. Julian replied, that they
were phrases hyperbolicall, that is, in some sort exceeding truth. Augustine
answered, they were proper. Julian replied, what needed God deliver them to
these lusts wherein they were before? it was sufficient to let them stick fast
therein. Augustine answered, Aliud est haebere, aliud tradi: tradu^tur impii
no^ modo ut habeant, sed u^ ab iis habeantur.
It is one thing to have them, an other to be given over unto them the wicked
are given over to their lusts, not only to have them, but to be had, that is,
held and possessed of them. We have the like specified, 2 Thessalonians. 2. God shall
send them operation of deceit, that they may believe lies. I omit a hundredth
places of no less significance. Can there be mightier sins committed, nay
conceaved, and comprehended in the mind of man, than those I have named? than
hardness of heart, the only rock to build all iniquity upon, when one
neither is nor can be ashamed? than cursed and slanderous speech, railing at
the Gods of the earth, than adulteries, constuprations, open, shameless, even
in the sight of the sun, lying, deceaving, sins of Sodom, unnatural lusts
in men, women, not to be spoken of, reprobate sense, mighty illusions, and
such like? All which notwithstanding, the spirit of the counselles of GOD, of
whom it is most true that wisdom shall live and die with him, who neither
deceaveth any man, neither can be deceaved, has not forborne largely to
speak of, and to derive them in some sort from the throne of GOD, where
justice it self is seated; GOD did thus and thus.

To turn this night into day, and to make it appear unto you, how God shall be
just still, and yet both nature and the workers of such things abhorred, and
abominated before him to the bottom of hell, consider, I beseech you,
attentively these two things. First that in all the scriptures to-fore
alleged, 1 August. ad artic falso impos. ad 14 Deus induravit per iustum
iudiciu^ Pharaonem, and ipse se Pharao per liberum arbitrium. A^. de great. and^
arbit 23.
there is mention made of some precedent iniquity, in those ungracious persons
whom God so deals with, deserving and procuring the hand of God thus heavily
upon them. Recessurum non deserit antequam deserat; God never forsakes a man
that will depart from him, before he forsakes God: and plerumque facit ne
deserat; and often times he works so that he shall not forsake him. Has God
hardened Pharaoh? Pharaoh hardened himself before. God hardened Pharaoh by his
just judgment, Pharaoh himself by his free will. Bad he Shemei curse David?
gave he his wives to be defiled by his own son? David had deserved both,
for touching both the wife and life of Vriah. Willed he a lying spirit to
seduce Ahab? Ahab would not give credit to the right spirit, and he had sold
himself to work all manner of wickedness in the sight of the Lord. Did he
seduce both people and prophets the leaders of the people? they had before set
up idolles in their hearts, and put a stumbling block of iniquity before
their faces. Did he give over nations, to lusts, uncleanness, dishonest
affections, actions against nature, Romans 1.
reprobate senses? the Apostle answers in Gods behalf; it was (...), a
recompense of their former errors, because they changed the truth of God into a
lie, and worshipped the creature more than the creator, and turned the glory of
an incorruptible God, into the image of corruptible me^, birds, four-footed
beasts, creeping things. And wherefore were they misled with strong illusions,
^. Thessalonians. ^.
but because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved?
Now where sin is plagued with sin, as in the policy of God wherewith he
governs the world, you shall find it 1000. times, then is not peccatum,
peccatum, but iudiciu^, though sin in nature, yet in respect of God not sin but
judgment: it changes the name, comes in another nature, presents it self
with another face and countenance; sin of it self, I must confess, but as it
comes from God, justice: for it is the repaiment and retaliatio^ of some
former sin: Iussisti Domine, and vere sic est, vt omne peccatum sit poena
peccantis, O Lord, Iustiu^ invidia nihil est.
thou have commanded, and indeed so it is, that all sin shall be a punishment
to him that commits it. Envy has much justice in it, though a malicious,
unjust quality in it self: for it eats up the heart and marrow of her master,
as he desires to eat up another. When David gave charge for Shemei, let him
alone, was it to justify Shemei in his wickedness? No. He acknowledged the
scourge of God for his sins in the tongue of Shemei, bound together not of
whip-chord, but of the venomous reproaches which Shemei cast forth. He looked to
the judge from whom it was justice, not to the instrument and rod in the hand
of the judge from whom it was malice, and therefore said; It may be the Lord
will look upon my tears, and do me good for his cursing this day, knowing
that by the wisdom of God these bitter waters could easily be made sweet.
Things that are evil in nature, Po^est Deu^ prav^ non prave face^e.
God can handle not in evil manner. Hemlocke of it self is a pestilent and
noxious herb. Yet the magistrates of Athens pronounce in judgment, that
Socrates shall drink a boule of hemlocke. What? is judgment turned into
wormwood, justice in to hemlocke? is there poisoning and destroying of men at
a judgment seat? yea, and good enough. An action evil simply in it self may
be good by a circumstance; the poison is in the herb, not in the magistrate;
he comma^deth it to be drunken, though as a bane to the malefactor, to shorte^
his life, yet a preservative of the common wealth, and for the terror of
others, a punishment to him that has poisoned and annoied the welfare thereof:
and as it proceeds from the magistrate, so leaves it as it were the name and
nature of poiso^, and is called judgment.

The next thing which I wish to be harkened unto, is this, 2.
that whatsoever God does in the hardening of Pharaohs heart, or irrogating any
the like judgment, that he does, non impartiendo malitiam, not by infusing any
wickedness, as the magistrate puts no venime into the herb; sed non
impartiendo misericordia^, but by not imparting his mercy, or auferendo
spiritum, by withdrawing his holy spirit: as when ye withdraw the pillars
or proppes of the house, which Sampson did, the house falls to ruin, with
the very weight of the building that is laid thereupon; or if a country he
waste and unpeopled, it becomes a desert of it self, and, for lack of
better inhabitants, it is covered with nettles and briers, and satyrs,
shrich-owles and hedg-hogs take it up: so when the aid and assistance of Gods
grace forsakes a man, whose body and soul were appointed to have been the
temples of the Lord of hosts to dwell in, presently wildnes and barbarousnes
succeeds, and that which by the mercies of God might have been as his garden
and pleasant paradise, through the absence thereof becomes an habitatio^ for
foul and unclean spirits. Causa deficiens, sive removens.
For as the removing of the sun from these upper parts of the earth where we
live, into the other hemisphere, brings darkness upon us, not that the body of
the sun is not altogether lightsome, and his natural office to lighten, but
because he is gone and departed further of: so the departure of God, himself
most righteous, from an unrighteous soul, by the only remove of his gracious
presence, leaves it to it self in an habit of injustice never to be
recovered. Wherein notwithstanding the case is not so hard against God, as
some imagine it; that it is all one to thrust an old man down, and to take
away his staff, the only stay to keep his feet from falling, for his help
being gone, he ca^ no longer stand, as if in God, the withdrawing of his grace,
(which is his rod or staff to sustain us) were effectually no less than
to thrust us into wickedness: for thus they should rather propose it; that as
when an old man wilfully casts away his staff, and no man restores it to
him again, he falls through his own folly, not by another instigation; so
when the wicked despisers of the world, not only neglect, but contemn and
defy, that saving grace whereby they stand, through their own stubbornnes and
perversity they run a werisome race of wre^chednes, the Lord not lending them
his helping hand to bring the^ back again. And therefore, as they that
purposedly abando^ the light of the sun, to go into a darkesome cave of the
ground, where the sun never shone, have no reason to complain that the
sun would not follow them: so they that wittingly and stiffly renounce the
acceptable visitation of God, whereby he would have led them into the ways of
peace, let them blame their own impenitency, that they are not afterward
attended upon by the like compassion. Or, to match these incomparable things
with Irenee; Lib. 4. cont* haeres. c 49.
as the sun which is the creature of God, blinds the eyes of such as for
the infirmity of sight cannot behold his beams; so God the creator of the
sun, hardens the hearts of such, as for the hardness of belief will not
receave his goodness. For whom he fore* saw undisposed to believe, those he
delivered to their infidelity, and turned away his face from them,
Relinquens eos in ^ene bris, quas sibi elegerunt. August. de great and prae.
dest. 8.

Non vult emollire* the former negative.

The latter affirmative


leaving them in darkness which they chose to themselves. What is it then to
harden the heart of Pharaoh, and others? nolle emollire; this, that he will
not soften it. What is it to make blind? this, that he will not illuminate:
what to reject, or to cast of? this, that he will not call; (which is meant
not of his general calling, but of that which is effectual, and belongs to
the chosen:) and yet, me thinks, there is more ^n it. For not only he is
vnvvillinge to soften, illuminate, call the impenitent, but he has further a
will, not to do it. For there is great difference betwixt these two
speeches, he will not, and he has a will not do it: the former arguinge but
an indifferent and milder alienation of the mind, and rather a careless
neglect, than a purposed and prounded hatred; the latter a bent and resolved
decree. As when a poor man asks an alms, some are unwilling to relieve him,
not weighing his necessity, and bidding him go in peace etc. others have a
will not to relieve him, it is determined in their hearts not to afforde him
comfort, either because they are unmerciful toward all the poor, or for
that they are out of likinge with the manners or person of this man. Augustine
in three words decideth this whole question against Faustus the Manichee, Lib.
1. ad Simplician. quaest 2. Sed cum facit, per mise ricordiam facit; cum autem
non facit* per iudicium non facit, Enchi* cap. 97.
touching the hardening of hearts, and the like judgments: Diabolus suggerit,
homo consentit, Deus deserit; The devil works it by suggestion, man by
consenting, GOD by forsaking, by suffering an hard heart to wax as fat as
brawne, by giving success to ^ll purposes which he could have stopped, by not
communicating the help of his blessed spirit; vt non ab illo irr^getur
aliquid, quo sit homo deterior, sed tantum, quo sit melior, non erogetur. God
were able, I confess, to soften the hardest heart, open the blindest eyes,
when, and in whom, and where he listed; But when he does so, he does it by
mercy; and when he does it not, he does it not by judgment. Meane-while let
this be held for a constant and infallible rule, that although there be many
whom God lifts not up, Ad ^rtic. fall. imp^art. 14. Multi, ne laberentur,
de^en^i; mulli, vt laberentur, impul^i.
yet there is none whom properly he throws down. Ab illo est quod statur,
non est ab illo quod ruitur, From him it comes that we all stand, but not
from him that any falls: and many have been held that they fell not, no man
pushed at to cause him to fall. Only he casts them down by a consequence,
because he gives not his grace which might have sustained them: as if a nurse
lend not her hand to support her child, the child will fall, I grant, but
the cause of the falling is the weakness and debility of the child, the
nurse no further the cause thereof, then that she did not hinder it. Which
though it be a fault amongst us, because we are members one of the other, and
tied together by the bond of charity, yet it is no fault in God, who having
power over his clay, may work at his pleasure either in judgment, to make it
a vessel of dishonor, or of honor in mercy. For manifestation of this latter
point, that God instilleth not malice into the offenders, in this execution of
his judgments by punishing sin by sin, but finding these vessels of
iniquity full fraught of themselves, leaves them with the season of their own
licour, and only applies the^ by his wisdom to some good service of his;
though I were able to open it unto you in all the examples before alleged,
yet I will rest, in the seducement and fall of Ahab. Wherein it may seem, that
God does not only permit the false spirit, 1. King. 22.
Thou shall seduce Ahab, but gives encouragement also, thou shall prevail,
and adds a commandment, go forth, and allows of the form of dealing in
the matter, do so. Now that you may know how innocent the Lord is in an
action of such prejudice, observe the circumstances of the place well. 1. The
thing intended is, that Ahab Which purpose of God once set, is so unchangeable,
that if heaven and earth were confederate, they can not save the life of Ahab.
God shall send forth a spirit, the spirit deceave prophets, prophets entice
Ahab, Ahab change his apparel, and though Iehoshaphat be the fairer mark,
yet Iehoshaphat shall escape, and one shall draw an arrowe by chance, and smite
Ahab betwixt his brigandine, and he shall dye at evening; he did so.
Therefore touching the end of this business, it is no injustice in God, to
execute judgment and wrath upon a famous adversary. 2. Concerning the means,
enquiry was made who should entice Ahab, evil spirit, De propriis loquitur.
of his ba^d and retinew, who stood before God 1. Job. 5. The spirit comes
furnished of his own, for when one said thus, another they had dreamed* when
they had not, and the Lord has said, when he never said it. So there is
both malice in the spirit, and falsehood in the prophets, before God sets
either hand or heart to the business. Therefore what does the Lord therein? he
fitteth upon the throne as the judge and moderator of the whole action, he
comma^deth the attendance of all the army of heaven on the right hand and on
the left, clean and unclean spirits are in subjection to him, he gives
leave to them who without his leave are unable to do any thing, thou shall
entice; he gives the success, which all the kingdom of darkness could not
effect, if he would hinder it, thou shall prevail; he bids go, and they
go, run, and they run, to show that all the creatures of the world serve
him; he disposes the course, Do so, that is, do so and no more than so; as
much as to say, Since thou have malice to bestow, extend it upon Ahab rather
than Iehoshaphat; and falsehood to infuse, power it forth upon the 400. prophets
of Ahab rather than upon Michaeas or any prophet of mine; and let the fall of
Ahab be at Ramoth Gilead rather than in another place, and in this battle
with the king of Aram, rather than at another time. Thus when the matter is
their own, God gives the fashioning and ordering thereof in some sort,
touching the persons, time, place, and other the like particulars. But why is
it further said, that God Instrumentu^ animatum.
having both life, and will to do hurt, not by himself: 3. he did it in this
sense, that he stayed not the wicked purpose, by interposing the aid of his
good spirit.

By this time, I think, it appears, that in the actions and passions of
unrighteous men, there is more to be deemed of God than his bare permission.
For doubtless he has his will therein, neither in alluring, neither in
counselling, and much less in compellinge thereunto, but in ordering and
governing them, in applying them to better ends than the oftendours are aware
of, and in ordeining his just judgments consequently thereupon. Therefore when
I say he has his will therein, mistake me not. He has not a will in such sort
as if he approved sin, chose or desired sin, as if he bare appetite and liking
thereto. It is rather voluntas than volitio, if I may so speak, a will than a
willingness; it is his will by obliquity, a side-will, improper, Zanch.
indirect, and in respect not to the sin it self, but some other good
adjoined unto it: as when a man is put to have his arm or leg cut off for a
further benefit, he bears, and bears it with his will, not that he likes
of the dismembring of his body, or loosing of a ioynte, but that he desires
some other good, which he foreseeth may ensue thereby. Thus he permitted,
and (more) he decreed the treason of Judas, and iniquity of the Jews against
his anointed son, as you have it confessed by the Apostles, Acts the
fourth; that Herod and Pilate with the Gentiles and people of Israel gathered
themselves together against the holy son of GOD Jesus, to do whatsoever his
hand and his counsel had determined before to be done. God had determined it
before, not in the favor of their sin, but of our redemption. Origin. in
Number. 22.
Take away the wickedness of the prodition of Judas, thou shall also take away
the cross and passion of Christ; if the death of Christ had not been, then
neither his resurrection, nor any first begotten from the dead, nor any hope
of our resurrection. Take away the malice of the brethren of Joseph, Toll
malitiam fra^u^ Josephi, simul perimes dispensationem Dei.
thou shall together kill the dispensation of GOD; a fault never to be excused,
the more unnatural because it came from brethren, the more unreasonable
because of envy without just cause, the more insufferable because they added
lying, and bound two sins together, and it was, in likelihoode, the hastening
of their fathers death. Yet Joseph told his brethren when they came into
Egypt, Genesis 45.
Grieve not your selves that ye sold me hither, for God sent me hither for
your preservation (this they never foresaw, neither was it the end of their
dispightfull dealing:) you sent me not hither but God, who has made me a
father to Pharao, and Lord of his house, and ruler throughout all Egypt, when
you repined that I was a brother amongst you, and left me no footing in mine
own fathers house. Afterward when his brethren fell down at his feet, and
confessed their sin, he answered them, fear not, am I in steed of God, set
to execute judgment? When you thought evil against me, God disposed it to
good, that he might work, as it is come to pass this day, and save much
people alive. All the wits in the world cannot better set down the state of
the question. They thought evil, God disposed it to good* they to vngorge
themselves of that venomous malice which the prosperity of Joseph conceived
from his dreams, instilled into their hearts; God, to preserve them in a
famine to come, and to save much people alive: they sent him away to remoove
their eie-sore; God, to be a steward both for Egypt and Israel. Nay God sent
him thither, and they sent him not: the incomprehensible reaches of God were so
far above theirs, and his wisdom in the good handling of a bad cause does so
much obscure and discountenance their malice, that it seems not to be at all,
and the ministers in the action as it were cast aside, the highest dispenser
and moderatour thereof only is remembered, you sent me not hither but God; the
purposes of your hearts were nothing in comparison of that everlasting decree,
which the immortal and only wise God made to himself.

See what a race and pedigree of blessings Origin brings down from the
rotten stock of that ungracious practice. If Joseph he not sold, Pharaos
dreams are not expounded, none makes provision of corn, Egypt and the
country about Egypt, and Israel sterveth in the time of dearth, the seed of
Israel goes not into Egypt to seek bread, neither returns out of Egypt
with miracles, no wonders are wrought by Moses and Aaron, no passing through
the red sea, no Manna from heaven, no water from the rock, no law from Sinai,
no going into the land of Canaan, etc. These are the blessings and commodities
which the envy of the Patriarchs brings forth by Gods most mighty and wise
dispensation. So that we may truly say, Particular mischiefs are common
commodities. The life of the Lion is maintained by the death of the Lamb,
Privatae mala, publica bona.

Sanguis Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae.

Ench. c. 27.


the cruelty of tyrants gives Martyrs their glory and crown, And the blood
of Martyrs becomes the seed and propagation of the church. If any demand
whether this good might not better have been procured by good means, I
answer with Augustine, Melius iudicavit Deus de malis benefacere, quam mala
nulla esse permittere; It seemed better to the wisdom of God, to work good
out of evil, than to suffer no evil at all.

Conclusion.
I now conclude the point. As in the statutes and laws of our common wealth,
there are many things contained more than the laws either commit or allow, as
treasons, felonies, heresies, and the like, which notwithstanding the laws
order and dispose of; so in the will of God, within the compass and pale of
his arbitrament, much more is contained, than either by action or autorizement
from him could ever be defended, and yet is that will of his, judge and
disposer of al those particulars. And whether Joseph be sold into Egypt, or
Jonas thrown into the sea, or the son of God himself nailed upon a cross, we
may safely and universally say with the Mariners in this prophecy, Thou, Lord,
haste done as it pleased thee. Surely there is not an evil in the city, nor
upon the face of the earth but God has some use of it. Those sins within our
land that take al from men, as coveteousnesse, extortion, oppression, usury,
they take not that from God which his wisdom makes of them, I mean the
profit and use of most unnatural vices. Happily they take the substance of
their brethren, and by taking such snares away, save their souls; or, if they
take their lives, they ease and unlade them of a great burden of their sins
to come. The drunkard drinks himself a sleep, not God, and brings his
own senses and wits into a trance, but provokes and quickneth the righteous
Lord to do a work of justice. The adulterer wrappeth himself within the
arms of his harlot, and thinks he is safe, and not perceived, but never shall
be able to vnwrappe himself from the arms of Gods government. The murderer
that spoileth the life of his mortal brethren, if every wish of his heart
were a two edged sword, shall never kill the life of Gods immortal
providence. He shall say to the hardest heart, at which the preaching of
prophets and denunciation of judgments has often recoiled, open thy doors
that I may enter into thee to declare my justice; and to the reprobatest mind
that ever has been dulled and benumbed with sin, though thou feel not my
grace, thou shall feel my vengeance. Envy cannot hinder his benignity, nor
the hotest malice under heaven dry up this spring of his goodness. What shall
we say then? Because God makes use of thy sins, art thou excused? Is not
thine evil, evil, because he picketh good out of it? deceive not thy self
therein. When thou have done such service to thy master and maker, though
seven and seven years, as Jacob did to Laban, thou shall loose thy wages, and
thy thanks to. O well were thou if thou did but loose, for thou shall also
gain a sorrowful adva^tage. It is unprofitable, nay miserable service which
thou have thus bestowed. Babylon shall be the hammer of the Lord a long time
to bruise the nations, himself afterward bruised. Assure his rod to scourge
his people, but Assure shall be more scourged. These hammers, rods, axes,
sawes, other instruments, when they have done their offices, which they never
meant, shall be thrown themselves into the fire, and burnt to ashes. Satan did
service to God, it cannot be denied, in the afflicting of Job, winnowing of
Peter, buffeting of Paul, executing of Judas, and God did a work in all these,
either to prove patience, or to confirm faith, or to try strength, or to
commend justice; yet is Satan reserved in chains, under darkness, to the
retribution of the great day. Judas did service to God, in getting honor to
his blessed name for the redemption of mankind, whilst the world endures: Yet
was his wages an alder-tree to hang himself upon, and, which is worse, he
hangs in hell for eternal generations. He had his wages, and lost his wages.
That which the priest gave him, he lost, and lost his Apostleshippe, but gained
the recompense of everlasting unhappiness, and lies in the lowest lake, for
the worm and death to gnaw upon without ceasing. Will you hear the end of
all? Fear God, and keep his commandments, For this is the whole duty of
man. This is the will of God, wherewith we are highly charged, and he will
strictly require it. The book that is clasped up, let us leave to the Lamb
and to the blessed Trinity. Those of Moses, the Prophets, the Psalms, of
Christ and his blessed Apostles, wherein we may run and read the ordinances of
the most High, belong to us, and our seed after us. These let us carefully
search, and meditate in them day and night; let them wake and sleep, walk and
rest, live and die with us: and whatsoever he has secretly decreed, whether by
our weakness or strength, sickness or health, falling or standing, which in
his hidden counselles is locked up, and cannot be opened, but by the key of
David, let us beseech him for Christ's sake, to turn it to our good, that his
name may be glorified, his arm made known, his wisdom, justice, and mercy
more and more magnified, and our sinful souls by the abundant riches of his
grace finally saved. Amen.

THE XX. LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 15. So they took up Jonas, and cast him into the sea, and the
sea ceased form her raging. ver. 16. Then the men feared the Lord, etc.
IN the former verse, was the dedication of the sacrifice, wherein they
sanctified themselves by prayer, and commended their action to Gods good favor;
in this is the offering of the sacrifice: before the atte^pting whereof, being
their final doom, and animadversio^ upon the life of Jonas, a judgment
without redemption, they observe the charitablest and wariest principle in
exercising discipline, that may be held; that is, not to try an extremity,
till they have tried all means, and then, if the wound be incurable and past
hope, Cuncta prius tentanda.
to apply the fire or the sword to it. They dealte with Jonas in this course,
as a skillful surgian with his patient, a part of whose body being putrified,
and eating on by degrees, threatens the loss of the whole, if it be not
stayed, as the transgression of Jonas being but a member in the ship, went
forward like a canker, and was at hand to have invaded the whole company. The
professor will first enquire the cause of the malady, how comes it? what
has thy diet, thine exercise been? as these ask Jonas, what haste thou
done? what is thine occupation? etc. and when he is answered by his patient, I
have eaten and drank intemperately, exceeded the strength of my body,
incontinently lived, (as Jonas reported how far he had disobeyed,)
perhaps he may chide him, as these chide Jonas, Why haste thou done this? a
man of thy years, education, discretion? as these implie to Jonas, a man of
thy knowledge, calling, and commission? yet he will do more than expostulate,
(for that were to afflict the afflicted, and to heap grief upon grief) he
will advise with the patient himself, as these with Jonas, who best knows
the state of his body, as Jonas the counselles of God, What shall we do unto
thee? And though he be answered, there is no help but one, mine arm must be
cut, or my leg sawed of, and then the rest of my body may be saved, as Jonas
answered, Cast me into the sea, and the sea shall be calm unto you: yet he
will prove his skill otherwise, as they their endeavors by rowing, to save the
joint, if possibly it may be done. But when there is no other help, the sore
retayning his anger, as the sea her impatience, both fretting on still, and
crying for a desperate remedy, then will the one use his corrosiues, and
sharpest instruments, commending the success of the cure unto God, as these,
after prayer, took up Jonas, and cast him forth. In the two next verses
ensuing we may observe, 1. their proceeding (as it were by steps) to the
action; They took up 2. the accomplishment thereof; They cast him into sea: 3.
the The sea ceased from her raging: 4. the demeanor of the mariners, after
their release, both in their inward affection, Then they feared; and in the
open testification thereof, 1. by sacrifices, witnesses of their present
thankfulness; and 2. vows, pledges, and earnests of their duty to come.

Eleazar, an ancient interpreter of the Bible, 1. They took up.
thinks that the sentence is here perfited, They took up Jonas, and by a
period or full point severed from that which follows, They cast him into
the sea. Thereupon he collecteth, that the Mariners assaied five experime^ts,
to acquit themselves from danger. 1. The private invocation of every man upon
his own God; 2. the throwing forth of their wares; 3. their casting of lottes;
4. their common supplication; 5. their letting down of Jonas into the sea, up
to the neck, and pulling him back again, that it might appear unto them,
that Jonas was the Man, whom the sea desired, because whilst his body was in
the waters, the sea stood; when taken back, it boiled again. There is no
warrant in my text for this opinion, therefore I charge you not with it. For as
there is no reason, to loose one word of the writings of God (not the least
fragment of the broken meat,) so on the other side, to add unto them, is an
injury, and a plague will follow it. Only this I observe as the complement of
all their former humanity, specified in many particulars before, that though
they could not cast him forth, but they must first take him up amongst them,
yet seeing the history might have concluded both in one, the latter implying
the former, and rather does it by noting the order and distinction of two
sundry actions, and by making a space between the^* First they took him up,
etc. then they cast him forth; it argues a treatable, deliberate, gentle
proceeding in the^, that, that which they did, they did by leisure, and without
violent or turbulent invasio^. Hierome, with others, comment upon the words,
Tulerunt, non arripuerunt, no^ invaseru^t, They took him, they haled him not,
they caught him not up in a rage, they set not hastily upon him, but bare him
in their arms, Quasi cum obsequio portantes.
as it were with honor and due estimation. Because it was the funerals and
exequies of a prophet of the Lord, their last service unto him, they did it
with reverence. And in truth there needed no invasion or force to be used
against him. He was brought to his end, tanqua^ ovis (which was the Emblem of
the son of God) as a lamb that is dumb before the shearer, so opened he
not his mouth. Tulerunt non repugnantem, They took him without resistance. For
what should resistance have done? Prudent.
Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem traehunt; (I will not say, The destinies, as
the Poet does) but the will and power of God (for these are the right
destinies, and he that so understands them with Saint Augustine, Lib. 5. de
civ. Dei* cap. 1.
Teneat sententiam, corriga^ linguam, Let him keep the opinion, only amending
his tongue:) But the will and power of God lead him that is willing to go,
and pull him that is unwilling. I never red, that Moses opposed himself by the
least thought of his heart, to the ordinance of God, when he said unto him,
Behold, the days are come that thou must die, though Moses might have lived
many years. For in the last of Deuteronomy, his eyes were not dim, nor his
natural force abated* Rather he spoke unto the people with cheerfulness and
alacrity of heart, embracing the tidings of his death, I am an hundred and
twenty years old this day, I can no more go out and in, also the Lord has
said unto me, Thou shall not go over this Jordan. Young men amongst us think
they are privileged, because they are in their full strength; old men though
they have a foot in the grave, think they may be long old: There is none so
stricken in years, Nemo est (...) senex qui no^ annu^ se putet posse ^ivere.
but thinks he may live a year more. Be we young, or old, if ever the
message of God be sent unto us, as to Ezechias, Put thy house in order,
dispatch thy worldly affairs, for thou must die, and not live, though we turn
our faces to the wall, and pray, and weep, and mourn like a dove, and beg for
life, as he did, yet if the purpose of God be fixed, let us patiently
entertain it. Cur quod necesse est, non voluntas occupat? Prudentius a
Christian and prudent Poet spoke it, That that must be, shall be; blessed be the
name of God, let us not refuse it. Let a beast be pulled from his den by force,
but let a Christian be taken from his life with patience. For it is not
inheritance but debt, and he that is the Lord of the spirits of all flesh,
will as gloriously restore, as he will certainly require it.

Jonas is now at length executed; if this had been done before, 2. They cast
forth Jonas.
the sea had been quiet: but the Lord loves to hold and suspend an actio^,
for he has many works in one, and this amongst the rest, that man may know,
that howsoever he be favored by the intercession and respite of time, and by
other helps, he cannot strive with a mightier, nor go to law with his maker,
but his reckonings and accounts must be made when all is done. Adam may run
into thickets, and spend the time a while, and cover himself with leaves, and
think to beguile Gods eye, but Adam shall be called forth of his bushes, and
stripped of his garments as thin as spiders webbes, and cast out of paradise,
and have a sentence of death pronounced, and performed to upon him, and his
whole lineage. Does Sisera think by running away, to run from the judgments
of the Lord? though there be peace between Iabin his master, and the house of
Heber the Kenite, yet that peace shall be turned into war, he shall come into
the tent of Iahell the wife of Heber, and find the hand of the Lord as ready
to encounter him there, as if he had fallen upon the host of Barake; a draught
of milk, which he beggeth for his comfort, shall be his last and deadliest
draught, and instead of rest to the temples of his head, a nail shall be
driven into his temples to dispatch his life. The Jews may say in the Prophet,
they will ride upon horses, they will fly away upon the swiftest, but their
persecutours shall be swifter than they. Others may go to the mountains and
rocks, and say they will lie in the closest, but mountains shall be made as
valleys, and rocks shall yield at the pleasure of God, as wax before the sun,
to open and disclose his enemies. Jonas shall have his leave to run away on
foot with Sisera, to ride upon the swiftest with the Jews, to ship himself in
a vessel, and lie as close in the shrouds thereof, as the ribs will give him
leave, he shall one while sleep, another draw lots, a third discourse, now be
chid, and the^ examined, and afterward consulted with, and fairelie entreated;
he shall see the loss of all their wares, and think his life may be saved by
that loss, and behold millians of waves broken against the side of the ship,
and hope that millians more shall pass, and not touch him; he shall have what
friendship and help the whole company of mariners may afford him, either by
their prayers, or by their advise, or by the ha^dling of their ores, yet the
end shall be, Jonas must be cast forth. This is the wages of sin, and this is the
way of all sinful flesh. When we have stood long, and fought with the dangers
of the world, both by land and sea; when thousands have fallen at our right
hand* and te^ thousands at our left, and we have not fallen; when we are
compassed with friends so far forth, that we may say with the woman of Shune^,
I need not speaking for me, either to the king, or to the captain of the
host, ^. King. 4.
I dwell amongst mine own people, where I may command; when we have walked in
the light of the sun, our prosperity, I mean, waxen so great, that we have
wanted nothing; when we think that we are in league with death, and in
covenant with the grave, and promise our selves, that we shall multiply our
days as the sands by the sea side, even when we have sails and ores at
pleasure, that we may say with Antiochus, (I will not sail in the sea with
Jonas) but I will sail upon the mountains, and walk upon the seas as upon
dry land; yet there must be a time, when all these helps shall be frustrated,
and Jonas shall be cast forth. Though we escape the pit, we shall be taken in the
snare, Ierom. 48. we shall fly from a Lion, and a bear shall meet us, or
lean our hand upon a wall, and a serpent shall bite us, Amos 5. we may be
delivered in six troubles, and the seventh shall dispatch us; him that
escapes from the sword of Haz^ell, shall Iehuslaie, and him that escapes
from the sword of Iehu, shall Elisa slaie, 1. Kings 19. As one that shoots at
a mark, sometimes is gone, and sometimes is short, sometimes lights on the
right hand, sometimes on the left, at length hitteth the mark; so death
shoots at noble me^ beyond us, at mean men short of us, on the right hand at
our friends, at our enemies on the left, at length hitteth our selves; and the
longer her hand is practiced, the more certain it is. She was aiming at Adam
900. and 30. years, at last smote him; at Methusaleh 969. years, in the end
overthrew him; now she strikes within the compass of threescore years or
threescore and ten, or fourscore at the most, and sometimes at the first
stroke, even in the day of our birth. C^st them out of my sight (says God to
his prophets) and let them depart, some to captivity, some to the sword, Ier.
1^.
some to pestilence, some to the water, as Pharaoh, and the Princes of Egypt;
so^e to the fire, as the king of Edom, whose bones were burnt to lime; so^e to
the bowelles and ^awes of the earth, as the congregation of Abira, Haman to the
gallous, Iesabel to the dogs, Herod to worms, the disobedient Prophet to a
lion, the sons and daughters of Job to the fall of an house, the mothers and
infantes of Jerusalem to a famine; some to a plague, some to the edge of the
sword, some to a sickness by the hand of God; one cries my head, my head, as
the Sunamites son; another, my bowels my bowels, as Antiochus; another, my
feet, my feet, as Asa; one complains of a palsy, another of a burning
fever, a third of an issue of blood: but whatsoever the means be, the
ordinance of God in the end is this, Jonas must be cast forth, the ship eased,
the world emptied by degrees, and new generatio^s successively take place. If
this were remembered by us, that as Jonas slept in the sids of the ship, and we
in security, so we must both sleep in the dust of the earth; and as the lot fell
upon Jonas in his time, so the lot must fall upon us in ours; and as neither
counsel, nor strength could deliver Jonas, so neither counsel nor strength can
deliver us; and as it was the will of God to drown Jonas, so it is the will of
God some way or other to dissolve us; and whether the time is limited, within
10. or 100. or 1000. years, there is no defense against the hand of the grave;
the very remembrance hereof would be as comfortable, and as fortunate a staff
unto us, to walk the pilgrimage of our few and evil days, as the staff that
Jacob had to go over Iorda^ with. O look unto your end, as the wise men looked
unto the star, which stood over Bethlehe^; it shall happily guide you to heaven,
as that guided the^ to Bethlehe^, where the king of the Jews now sits and
reigns at his fathers right hand; it shall lead you from the East to the West,
as that led them from the rising of the sun, I mean the state and time where
your life began, to the going down of the same. But it is a death unto us, to
remember death. I will say with the son of Sirach, whilst we are able but to
receive meat, Eccle. 43.
whilst there is any strength and livelihood in us and but appetite to our food,
it is a death to remember death; and though we dwell in ruinous and rotten
houses, built vpo^n sand and ashes, which the wind and rain of infinite daily
casualties shake about our ears, yet we walk in this brittle and
earthe^house, as Nabuchodonosor in his galleries, and ask, Is not this great
Babell? Is not this my house a strong house? is not my body in good plight?
have I not blood in my veins? fatness in my bones? health in my iointes? am I
not likelye to live these many years, and see the succession of my sons and
nephews? what will be the end of all this? Ducunt in bonis dies sues, and in
puncto descendunt in infernum, They pass their days with pleasure, and in an
instant of time go down into hell. Therefore they are deceived, which think
it an easy matter, speedily to return unto God, when they have long been
straying from him; that are gone with the prodigal child, in longin quam
regionem, into a far country, far from the thought of death, and
consequently far from the fear of God, yet promise themselves a quick
return again. Do they not know, that it will ask as long a time (if not a
longer) to find God, as to loose God? Joseph and Mary left their son at
Jerusalem, and went but one days journey from him, but they sought up and down
three whole days before they could find him; these goinge from the ways of
the Lord, a journey of forty or fifty years, hope in a moment of time to
recover his mercies. I would never wish so desperate an adventure to be made
by any man, that the sins of his soul, and the end of his life should come
so near together, as the trespass of Jonas, and his casting forth. For think
with your selves how fearful his thoughts were, being at the best, to be
rockte and tossed to and fro in a dangerfull ship, the bones whereof aked with
the violence of every surge that assailed it, the anchors, cables, and rudders,
either thrown away, or torn in pieces; having more friendship proffered him,
than he had hap to make use of; at length to be cast into the sea, a
merciless and unplacable sea, roaring for the life and carkase of Jonas, more
than ever the lion roared for his pray, the bottom whereof seemed as low unto
him as the bottomless destruction, and no hope left to escape either by
ship boat, or by a broken piece of board, or to be cast to land; and
besides all these, the anger of GOD burning against his sins like a whole
river of brimstone. This is the case of us all in any extreme and peremptory
sickness, or to speak more largely, in the whole course of our lives, for
our lives are nothing but uncertainty, as Ezechias sange in his song, Esa.
38.
From day to night thou will make an end of me. We are tumbled and tossed in
a vessel as frail as the ship was, which every stream of calamity is ready
to break in shivers, where neither anchor nor rudder is left, neither head,
nor hand, nor stomach is in case to give us comfort, where though we have
the kindness of wife and friends, the duty of children, the advice and
pains of the Physicians to wish us well, we cannot use their service; where
we have a grave before our eyes, greedy, inexorable, reaching to the gates of
hell, opening her mouth to receive us, and shutting her mouth when she has
received us, never to return us back again, till the worms and creepers of
the earth have devoured us. There is terror enough in these things to the
strongest man; Etiam (...) m^tu percelleris, sicu^ vulgus?
Aristippus fears death as well as the common people. But if the anger of God
for our former iniquities accompany them, thrice woe unto us; our heavy and
melancholicke cogitations will exclude al thought of mercy, and our souls
shall sleep in death, clogged with a burden of sins, which were never
repented of. Therefore if we desire to die the death of the righteous, as
Balaam wished, let us first live the life of the righteous; and as we girde
our harness about us before the battle is joined, so let us think of
repentance before death comes, and the ordinance of God be fully
accomplished, that we must be cast forth.

And the sea ceased from her raging. As the rising of the sea was miraculous,
so it is not a less miracle, 3. The event.
that her impatience was so suddenly pacified. Heat but a pot with thorns,
and withdraw the fire from it, can you appease the boiling thereof at your
pleasure? Here the huge body, and heap of waters raised by a mighty wind in
the air, or rather the wind and breath of Gods anger, (what shall I say?)
remitteth it the force of her rage by degrees? falls it by number and
measure? gives it but tokens and hope of deliverance unto them? nay at the
first sinking of Jonas, it stands as immovable as a stone, as dead as the
dead sea, having fretted it self before with the greatest indignation and
wrath that might be conceaved; as if he that bounded the sea at the first
creation, Hitherto shall thou come, and no further, had spoken unto it at this
time, Thus long shall thou rage, and no longer. Let me observe unto you thus
much from the phrase. If the commotion of the sea, Ab indignatione.
even in the greatest and vehementest pangues thereof, (as greater than these
could not be) by a translation of speech, for likeness of natures, be termed
her indignation and rage; then by as good a reason on the contrary side, the
anger of man thoroughly kindled, may be matched with the commotion of the most
unquiet sea. And how unseemly a thing it is, that the heart of man should
reake with any passion, as that vast and untamed element fometh with rage,
your selves be judges. I have found this perturbation diversely compared: by
Chrysostom, though not to the sea, yet to that confused noise which seamen
sometimes make, when their heads are most busied, with whom there is nothing
but tumult, much running too and fro, large and liberal outcries, but no
place left for philosophy, that is, wisdom and reason have no leave to
speak, Fr^tus similis navi d^currenti in mare, and damonem hab^nti
gubernatorem. Non sic acu^a

Ingemina^t Corybantes era.

De ira Dei* cap. 5.


or to give their judgment; By Evagrius, to a ship sent into the sea, where
the devil is pilote; By the Poets, to a troubled spring, wherein if you
look, and think to behold the image of a man, you see no part of his right
composition; or to that clamorous and disordered behavior, which the Priests of
Cybele used in Creete, ringing their basins, and playing upon timbrels all the
day long, and by incomposed gestures in the open streets showing themselves to
be nothing less than reasonable creatures.

When anger, says Lactantius, is fallen into the mind of man, like a sore
tempest, it raises such waves, that it changes the very state of the mind,
the eyes wax fiery, the mouth trembles, the tongue faltereth, the teeth
gnash, and the whole countenance is by course stained, sometimes with rednes,
sometimes with palenes. But it was never more rightly fitted than by the
spirit of God in this place, where it is likened to the fury and rage of the
sea. I may speak it to the shame of men, In the rage and fury of the sea there
is more mercy. The sea is contented and pacified, when Jonas is cast forth;
we in the lightest displeasure done unto us, never satisfied with the
punishment, the damage, the dishonor, no nor the death of our adversaries,
hate the quick, pursue the dead, as if we had made that unchristian and
heathnish vow, Nec more mihi finiet iras etc.
Mine anger with my body shall not die;
But with thy ghost my ghost shall battle try.
Whereas the rule of Lactantius rather should moderate us, Ira mortalium debet
esse mortalis, The anger of mortal men, should be mortal like themselves.
Valerius Maximus reports Sylla to have been such a one, Jbid. ca. 21. Lib.
9. cap. 3. Jn dubio est Syllane prior, an iracu^. dia Syllae si^ extincta.
of whom it was doubted, whether himself or his anger were first
extinguished. These turbulent perturbations of anger, hatred, and malice, as
they are never without the tormente of him that uses the^, they boil his heart
into brine, and eat the moisture out of his flesh so there is great
presu^ptio^, that the spirit of God rests not in a soul possessed therewith.
When God appeared to Elias, 1. King. 19. lying in the cave of mount Horeb,
first there passed by him a mighty strong wind, which rent the mountains,
and tare the rocks, but the Lord was not in the wind; after the wind came an
earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earthquake; after the earthquake
came fire, but the Lord was not in the fire; after the fire came a still and
soft voice, therein the Lord was, and spoke, and Elias came forth and answered.
Think with your selves, that these winds, earthquakes, and fires, are our
boisterous affections which the presence and favor of God avoideth, better
beseeming brute beasts, in who^e there is no understanding, and the
insensible sea, which God has restrained with bars and doors, the^ the
children of me^ endued with reason.

Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly. I noted in this verse, 4. Their
be^haviour.
the behavior of the mariners toward God, occasioned by the event that fell
out. Surely the rightest use of Gods mighty wonders, is, when we take them for
wonders; when we tremble at the sight of them, and fear that almighty God,
whose hands have wrought them. Such are the acclamations in the Psalms, This
is the Lords doing, and it is marveilous in our eyes. The gracious Lord has
made his wonderful works to be had in remembrance. O Lord, how gracious are
thy works, and thy thoughts are very deep? an unwise man knows it not, and
a fool does not under stand this. God does not miracula propter miracula,
miracles for their own sakes, but for ours; not caring so much himself to do
them, as that we should consider and bear them away. Wherein I will show our
negligence by a familiar example of our latest days. Samuel bids the people
stand and see a great thing which the Lord would do before their eyes. Is it
not now wheat harvest? I will call unto the Lord, 1. Sam. 12.
and he shall send thunder and rain, that ye may perceive and see, how that
your wickedness is great which you have done in the sight of the Lord, in asking
a king. The thunder and rain were sent, and all the people feared the Lord,
and Samuel exceedingly. Apply this scripture to your selves. Is it not now
wheat harvest? has not the Lord sent thunder and rain amongst you? so
unseasonable a season, that the fruits of the earth wherewith your fields
were so fair before, that they laughed and sang, mourning upon the ground that
bare them, and the husba^dma^ was ashamed, and sighed to himself to see his
hope so deceaved? was not every cloud in the air, a cloud of wrath upon your
fields to destroy your labors? were ye not near the curse of the prophecy,
you have sown much, and bring in little? What was the reason of so suddeine an
alteration, Hagg. 1.
but that our wickedness was great, as theirs was? and what other end of this
work, but that we might say in our hearts let us fear the Lord our God, which
gives us rain both early and late in due season, and reserveth unto us the
appointed weeks of the harvest* Ier. 5.
thus the mariners applied this extraordinary work of God, and the inference
of the text speaks no less.

Then they feared. The dutiful behavior of the mariners consists 1. in their
inward affection, They feared; and ^. in outward obserua^ces, They sacrifised
and made vows. Their inward affection is explicated by many stances. 1. They
feared.
1. By the nature and kind of the passion, They feared. Others have seen the
signs and wonders of God, rather to admire them, than to be touched with them;
as it is often noted of the Jews in the gospel, when they beheld the works of
Christ, they were astonished, and said amongst themselves, We never saw it
on this wise, The like was never done in Israel. Thus Herod was desirous to
have seen Christ, hoping that some miracle might have been done by him. But
this was more than admiration and astonishment, for they are afraid, 2. They
feared and feared.
when they see the waters stilled. 2. By doubling their passion, which in the
use of the Hebrewe tongue, does increase the signification, Timuerunt timore,
They feared, and feared. 3. By the attribute, 3. Exceedingly.
Timore magno, Their fear was not ordinary, but a great and exceeding fear.
4. By the object or matter of the fear, They feared Jehovah. 4. The Lord.
If ye will learn the effects of fear, when it is great indeed, where can
you better learn them than at the sacking of Niniveh, in the second of Nahum?
For there the heart melts, (that is, the leader and the captain fails,)
the knees smite together, sorrow is in the loins, and the face gathers
blackness. But I leave to discuss the nature of fear, because I have handled
it twice before. This only I observe in the mariners, out of these words,
that they go from strength to strength; the longer the leaven lies in the
meal, the more it leaveneth, and the longer they retain in their hearts the
knowledge of the true God, the more they increase in knowledge. If you compare
the 5. and 10. and this 16. verses together, you shall find, that in the
first, they only feared; in the second, they feared exceedingly; in the third,
they feared the Lord exceedingly. The first declares no more than the
affection; the second adds the measure; the third the object. The first was
the fear of nature; the second of grace, in the prime and first sprowting
thereof; the third of grace, in a further perfection. At the first they fear
as men, next as novices, lastly as co^verts. First they see a tempest, and
because it threatens destruction unto them, they are afraid, which is
incident to all men; secondly they hear a confession of the true Lord, a
relation of an offense done, a declaration of the justice of God, then they are
afraid more than before; now lastly they see the event and proof of all
things the truth of a Prophets words, the importunity of judgment, the
excecution of vengeance, at this they fear as much as before, but their
idolles wholly relinquished, they fear whom they should fear, the dreadful
Lord of hosts, and, to publish that fear to the whole world, they offer
sacrifices and make vows. Thus is the kingdom of God described, Math. 13. it
is as a grain of mustard seed at the first, the least of all seeds; but when
a man has sown it in his field, it becomes first an herb, secondly the
greatest of herbs, thirdly a tree, fourthly the birds make arbours and shades
in the boughs thereof: So do the mariners pass from one fear as the seed,
to an other fear as the herb, and to a great fear as a great herb, and
yet to a greater fear, the fear of the Lord as to a tree, and the boughs
thereof are so large, that birds may build nests in them, that is, their
works and fruits so apparent, that others may be drawn by the sight and
example of them. 1. (...), 2. (...), 3. (...), 4. (...), 5. (...). Math. 13.
There is small hope and comfort to be had of that man, who though he hear
the word of God, and receives it, and forthwith receives it, and furthermore
with joy, yet serves but the time, applying his religion and conscience to the
present condition of things. Examine your selves by these notes, whether you
are sown in the field of the Lord, to take root, and to grow to
perfection, yea, or no; whether ye hear the law, to keep the law; whether
you hold that which you have, as Philadelphia is counseled; and not only hold
at a stay, but strengthen and confirm the remnant (that which is left, Revel.
3.
) that your works may be fulfilled before the Lord, as Sardi is wished to do;
whether you run not only to pace the ground, to make up the number of
runners, to weary your bodies, to spend your breathes, but to obtain also,
for that is the Apostles exhortation, So run, that ye may obtain. There is
no time of standing in this life, we must still forwards, 1. Cor. 9.
and think that every blessing of God bestowed upon us, is a further calling
and provocation of God, as were his callings upon Elias; when he found him a
days journey in the wilderness sitting and sleeping under a juniper tree, he
calls upon him, up, and eat; and when he found him a second time, up, thou
have a great journey to go; and when he had travailed forty days, and was
lodged in a cave, what do thou here, Elias? and when he had brought him
forth to the mount, what do thou hear, Elias? Go and return unto the
wilderness by Damascus, and do thus, and thus. So whether we be entered into
our way, or have proceeded in it, whether we be babes in Christ, or strong men,
whether carnal, or spiritual, we must up, and eat, and strengthen our
selves, first with milk, and then with stronger meat; we have still a greater
journey to go, we must walk from grace to grace, from virtue to virtue, from
knowledge to knowledge, and allwaies think that we hear a voice that calls
us forward, Thou have yet a greater journey to go, what do thou hear,
Elias? Our Savior tells his disciples, John 14 that in his fathers house are
the mansions, they are not in the wilderness, nor in Horeb, not upon the mount
where Peter would have had the tabernacles builte, nor in any part of this
life; therefore let no man singe a requiem to his soul, Anima quiesce, Soul
take thy ease, or, body take thy rest, till he comes to that place where his
rest is. Christ observed this course himself, (...). Revel. 2.
Luke 13. Go tell that fox, Behold I cast out devilles; and do cures, this
day, and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfited. The church of
Thyatira in the Revelation, is thus commended, I know thy works, and thy
love, and thy faith, etc. and that thy last works are more than the first. And
the conclusion or posie of the Epistle written to that church, and of all the
other Epistles is this, (...), Not he that draws his sword, nor he that
fights the battelles of the Lord, nor he that spends his blood, much
less he that faints or flies, but he that overcommeth, shall eat of the
tree of life, and receive those other blessings. To conclude; It is a grave and
serious exhortation, which the Apostle makes to the Hebrews; leaving the
doctrine of the beginning of Christ, Hebr. 6.
let us be led forward to perfection, not laying again the foundation of
repentance from dead works, and faith toward God, etc. The earth which
drinks in the rain which comes often upon it, and brings forth herbs
meet for them by whom it is dressed, receaveth blessing of God: but that which
bears thorns and briers, is reprooved, and is near unto cursing, whose end
is to be burned. You see how the plagues arise, 1. reproof, 2. a curse, 3.
burning; and therefore it is as requisite that we increase in our
fruitfulness. He adds a modest and kind qualification of his former
speech; But we are persuaded better things of you, and such as are ^eere to
salvation, though we thus speak. If we should thus speak of our corrupt
and unprofitable times, we are persuaded better things. our persuasion must be
stronger then our proof and experience. For our ground has drunk this
rain, whereof he wrote, and often drank it, not distilled from the clouds of
the air, but from an higher region of Gods most gracious favor. Where are the
herbs fit for the use of the husbandman that dressed it? I see but briers
and thorns; or if there be any herbs, they are buried and choked with
weeds, that no man can see them. There are a number within these walls, to
whom if a man would say, I will walk in the spirit of falsehood and
flattery another while, I will lie unto you, I will leave this sour and
vnplausible vein of reprehension, and call you to the tabret and harp, and put
you in mind of Sabothes and new moons, and festival days, I will prophecy
unto you of wine and strong drink, oh, this were a prophet fit for this
people, Mich. 2.
they are the words of Micheas. But I rather say, for my part, as Samuel to
the people of Israel, God forbid, that I should sin against the Lord, and
cease praying for you, but I will show you the good and the right way: That is;
1. Sam. 1*
He that hears, let him hear, and he that leaves of, let him leave of,
Ezech. 3. He that is unrighteous, let him be more unrighteous, and he that is
filthy, let him be more filthy: but he that is righteous, let him be righteous
still, and he that is holy, let him be holy still, Revel. 22. For that was the
purpose of my note, that as God has continued a chain of his graces, 1. by
predestinating, 2. by calling, 3. by justifying, 4. by glorifying us; so we
should continue a chain of our graces toward him, that there may be grace
for grace, by giving all diligence to join virtue with faith, and with virtue
knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and not to leave joining the other
linkes of the chain there added, till our own bodies and souls come to be
disioyned.

THE XXI. LECTVRE.
Chap. 1. ver. 16. Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered
asacrifice to the Lord, and made vows.
Upon the event of their fact, in casting Jonas forth, I mean the stilnes of
the sea, I noted before, the behavior of the mariners, first in their inward
affection, (the nature whereof was fear; the measure, great fear; the matter or
object, the Lord of hosts;) then in the outward declaration of their minds,
partly by sacrifices, in agnition of their present service, partly by vows, as
an obligation of duty for time to come. The beginning to the rest is fear.
For, as Lactantius wisely reasons, without it, there can be no religion.
That, De ira dei. ca. 8 11.23. Quod non metuitur, co^temnitur, quod
conte^nitur, utique non colitur. Malac. 1.
that is not feared, is contemned; if contemned, it cannot be worshipped. For
which cause it comes to pass, that religion, majesty, and honor must
needs consist by fear. For even the kingdoms of the earth would be
dissolved, unless this proppe held them up. Therefore the zealous Lord calls
for his tribute and due, belonging to his excellency: If I be amaister, where
is my fear? But of this heretofore.

They offered a sacrifice.
The first Mercury or messenger to publish a broad their fear, is their
offering of a sacrifice. Which whither they presently did at the sea, of the
remainder of such things, as were left unto them; or whither upon their
landing; R. Ab. Ezra.
or whither their purpose and promise to offer a sacrifice, were taken for a
performance, according to the mind of the Caldaieke paraphrast and others, who
interpret the words thus; They offered a sacrifice, that, is they had an
intent, and gave their word to do it; Dixerunt se sacrificium ^acturos.
or whither be meant an inward and spiritual sacrifice, of praise, and
thankesgiving, and a contrite heart, as Jerome coniectureth; it is unnecessary
to dispute, seeing the text defines it not. Again, what were the profit of my
labor to go about Sion, and to tell her turrers; to enter the large field of
sacrifices, and to number all the kinds of them, Which either the book of
God, or other authors have put down? it were to compel the scripture, when it
offers her company a mile, to go twain with me, and to stretch it beyond
the line which the holy ghost has laid forth. If any desire to know the
causes of sacrifices, and to call them by their names, Lib. 4. ca. 2
let him resort to Carolus Sigonius, in his Hebrewe common wealth, who from the
authority of Philo the Jew, handles this matter at large.

The material points indeed to be considered in this worship of Curt. lib. 8.
craved no more of his fellows, but exiguam thuris impensa^, the bestowing of
a little frankincense, as an essential mark to notify his Godhead. Chap. 12.
The angel bad Manoah in the book of Judges, when he requested him to stay
the dressing of a kidde, if he purposed therewith to make a burnt offering, to
offer it to the Lord: where it is added immediately, that Manoah knew not
that it was an angel of the Lord; a person (was meant) of meaner condition,
than to whom a sacrifice belonged. 2.2ae. q. 85. (...). 1. ad 1.
Aquinas resolves us thus, that howsoever the determination of the kinds of
sacrifices, together with the circumstances of persons, time, and place, be by
the positive law; yet the common received acknowledgement, that sacrifice must
be offered, is by the law of nature For what reason can be given of so uniform
a consent of sacrificing in so many sundry languages and manners of men, but
that everye one grows after the seed which nature has sowed in him? Naturae
se^ quitur semina quisque suae.
And therefore in effect they say with the headstrong kings in the Psalm, Let
us break the cords of nature a sunder, and cast her yoke from us, who, as if
the service of GOD were inventum humanum, the devise of man, when they could
not avail by reason, Vt quos ra^^^ non posset, eos ad officium religi^
duceret. Tull.

Atheists*


to master them by religion, think it as cheap an offense to contemn the
majesty of God, as humane authority, and to deny the rightes of the godhead,
(which they vainly imagine, is but imagined) as their fealty and allegiance to
earthly princes. Tell such of the judgments of God, and the torments of hell,
you tell them a tale of Cocytus and Phlegeton, and other fabulous inventions of
licentious poets. Vrdge the^ with the verdicte of the scriptures; you may
better vrdge the history of Herodotus, or Lucians true narrations. A degenerate
generation of men, monstrously misshapen in the powers of the soul, and
transformed from the use of reason; whose judgment is already past, John 3.
because they believe not, or rather, because they root up those maxims and
principles of reason, which the hand of nature it self had planted in the^. I
take but a little piece of their garment at this time (as David caught from
Saul) only for a token, and note them as I pass by the way, who, if they
were kindly used, should be pronounced by the priest, and by the prince
proclaimed, the vncleanest lepers that ever sore ran upon; not only to be
excluded the host, and to have their habitation alone, but to be exiled the
land, and extermined nature it self, which they so unnaturally strive to
adnihilate. Their usage of parricides in Rome, were over favorable for the^,
whom they sowed into a male of lether, and threw into the sea, that yet the
water of the sea could not soke through, nor other element of nature, earth,
air, or fire approach unto them. (...): Her^^*
Atheism is the maine disease of the soul; not only of that private man in
whom it is harbored, but of the whole land, wherein permitted. For which
opprobrious and contagious disease, till other remedy were found, I would they
might be marked the mean time, that are sick of it, as the leper was, that
the people might be wise to eschew the^. Levit. 13*
As the one had his clothes rent, his head bare, his lips covered, and was
enjoined to cry, where he past, I am unclean, I am unclean: so I would the
other had either a rent, or a writing upon their clothes, and a bra^d in their
forheades, that all that beheld them might say, an Atheist, an Atheist.

2 The second collection in offering a sacrifice, is, that the sensible and
ceremonial handling thereof, Nunquam in odoribus sacrificiori^^ delectatus est
dominu^, nisi in fide and desiderio offerentis. August.
without the inward oblation of the heart, which the other does but signify,
was never approoved. I might repeat the proofs hereof, from the elements and
beginnings of the world, the sacrifices of Abel and Caine, the first that ever
I find to have been made; (although I make no question of Adam himself, who
nurtured his sons in religious discipline:) from thence I might come down
through all the complaints, that even the soul of the Lord, grieved with
abuse and mockery, has plentifully sent forth against his people of the
Jews; showing therein, that not only he refused, Es. 1.
but heartily condemned, lothed, abhorred their offerings, and denying with
pertinacy, that ever he required them, whereas in truth they were the
ordinances of his own lips. But when he ordained them, he made male and
female, and joined two in one, he created a body and a soul, an outward and
an inward part, the aspectable sign and the invisible affection: for want of
which latter (the better of the two) he renounceth the other, as that which he
never appointed. In the first of Esaias, forgetting his people to be the children
of Jacob, because they forgot his sacrifices to be the sacrifices of a God,
whom they rather used like a skar-crow in the garden of cucumbers, than the
Lord of knowledge, he calls them princes of Sodom, and people of Gomorah,
asking them in jealousy as hot as fire, What have I to do with the multitude
of your sacrifices? I am full of burnt offeringes of rams, and the fattte of
fed beasts, I desire not the blood of bullockes, nor of lambs, nor of
goats. When you come to appear before me, Who required it at his hands?
Bring no more oblations in vain, incense is an abomination unto me. I
cannot suffer your new moons, and Sabbaths, my soul hates your appointed
feasts, they are a burden unto me, and I am weary to bear them. Of the
outward countenance, and lineaments of their sacrificing, you hear more than
enough: Rams, and fed beasts, bullockes, lambs, and goats, incense,
sabbathes, new moons, festival days, solemn assemblies, together with
stretching out the hands, M^ns cuius. (...) is est qu^s^u^.
and making of many prayers. But I may say, that, as the mind of a man is the
man, so the mind and intention of the sacrifice, is the sacrifice; which the
searcher of the heart and reins looking for, and finding a carkeise of religion
without a quickening spirit, protests, that he has nothing to do with them;
that he is full and overfull, and that they are an hatred, burden, and
abomination unto him. If they will redeem his grace, with a sweet smelling
sacrifice, they must cease to do evil, and learn to do well, seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed, With such like. Chap. 66.
The beginning and ending of the prophecy is in one tune. For afterward it
is denounced in the name of the Lord: he that kills a bullock, is as if he
slew a man; he that sacrifices a sheep, as if he ^atte of a dogs neck;
he that offers an oblation, as if he offered swines blood; he that
remembers incense, as if he blessed an idol; the reason of this misconstrued
devotion of theirs is; They have chosen their own ways, and their soul
(which should have been the principal agent) delights in their
abominations. The correction of that error and the erection both of the temple
and the sacrifices, which the Lord chooses, are in the next words before; To
him will I look, Os. 5.
even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my
words. If this wine be wanting to those bottles, this substance to those
shadows, we shall go with our bullockes and sheep (as it is in Osee) to seek
the Lord, but shall not find him; because we go with these alone. Nay, these
we may leave behind us, as unprofitable carriage, in comparison of the
others, so we want not those. Psalm. 50.
I will not reprove thee (says God) for thy sacrifices, and because of thy
burnt offerings, that they are not commonly before me. I will take no bullock
out of thine house, nor goats out of thy foldes; for all the cattle of the
forest are mine, and the beasts upon a thousand mountains. I know all the
fowls upon the hills, and all the wild beasts of the field are mine. If I
be hungry, I will not tell thee, for the world is mine and all that therein is.
Think thou that I will eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of
goats? Thus the external part, and as it were the letter of the sacrifice,
is not much less than cancelled and abrogated, that the spririt may take
place: offer unto God praise, and pay thy vows to the most high, and call
upon me in the day of trouble, so will I deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. This was it, that Samuel answered Saul, 1. Sam. 1^
when he pretended the saving of oxen and sheep, and the best of the spoil to
offer to the Lord in Gilgal: has the Lord as great pleasure in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as when his voice is obeyed? to obey i^ better tha^
sacrifice, and to harken is better than the fat of rams. This did our
Savior implie to the Scribes and Pha^ises, who did so invvardlye stick to the
outward keeping of the Sabbath, Math. 12
Go learn what this means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. This did the
learned Scribe (whose praise is in the gospel, Mar. 12.
that he answered discreetely, and was not far from the kingdom of GOD)
reioine to the son of GOD, when he instructed him in the greatest and the
next commandments; Well, master, thou have said the truth, that there is one
God, and there is none but he, and to love him with all the heart, etc. and his
neighbor as himself, is more then all burnt offerings and sacrifices. And so
far is it of, that the slaying of unreasonable beasts, were they in number
equal to those millions of bullocks and sheep, which Solomon offered at the
dedication of the temple, 2. Chro. 7 Mich. 6. Jbid.

Sacrificium and oblatione^ noluisti. Ps 40. Intelli gendum est non qu^d noluit
simpliciter, se^ secundario. No^ ^olui^ ut res* sed vt signa Jtem noa voluit
ipsa sacrificia sed voluit devotionem offerentium. Hieron.

Pers. sat. 2. Jn templo quid facit aurum? Compositum ius fasque animi etc. Hoc
cedo ut admoveam templis, and far litabo. Dii magis curant tacitam horum
obtestatione^, non ambitiosam, quam vestram po^ pam.

1. De vero cultu, ca. 24. Hominis ac vitae


and adding a millian of rivers of oil, to glad the altars of GOD, shall be
acceptable unto him; that the giving of our firstborn for our transgression,
and the fruit of our bodies for the sin of our souls, shall be an
unfruitful present, without serious, hearty obedience to his counselles. He
that showed thee, O man what is good, and what he requires of thee: Surely to
do justly, and to love mercy, to humble thy self, and to walk with thy God.

The ends of the Jewish sacrifices, if I mistake not, were these. First, to
acknowledge therein, that death is the stipende of sin, which though it were
due to him and those that sacrificed, yet was it translated and laid upon the
beast that offended not. Secondly, to figure before hand, the killing of the
lamb of God, which all the faithful expected. Thirdly, to testify the
submissio^ of the heart, which in these visible samplers, shone as a light
before the whole world. So spoiling the sacrifice of the last of these ends,
they make it in manner a lying sign, and leave it as void of life and breath,
as the beasts which they immolate. The Poet complains in his satyr, of the
costlines used in their churches, and asks the priests, what gold did there?
willing the^ rather, to bring that, which Messalas ungracious son, from all his
superfluities could not bring, to wit, justice, piety, holy cogitations, an
honest heart: Grant me but these, says he, and I will sacrifice with salt and
meal only. It agrees with the answer which Jupiter Ha^mon gave to the
Athenians, enquiring the cause of their often unprosperous successes in
battle against the Lacedaemonians, seeing they offered the choicest things
they could get which their enemies did not; The Gods are better pleased with
their inward supplication, lacking ambition, than with all your pomp.
Lactantius handling the true worship of God against the Gentiles, gives them
their lesson in few and sententious words: that God desires not the sacrifice
either of a dumb beast, or of death and bloudshead, but the sacrifice of man,
and life: wherein there is no need either of garlandes of vervin, or of
fillets of beasts, or of soddes of the earth, but such things alone as
proceed from the inward man. The alter for such offeringes, he makes the
heart, whereon righteousness, patience, faith, innocence, chastity,
abstinence, must be laid and tendered to the Lord. For then is GOD truly
worshipped by man, when he takes the pledges of his heart, and puts them
upon the altar of God. The sacrifices evangelicall, Pignoram^tis. Jn epit. ca 9.
which the giver of the new law requires of us, are a broken spirit,
obedience to his word, love toward God and man, judgment, justice, mercy,
prayer, and praise, which are the calves of the lips, Hebr. 13. Romans 12.
alms deeds to the poor (for with such sacrifices is the Lord pleased) our
bodies and souls, not to be slain upon the altar, for it must be a quick
sacrifice; not to be macerated and brought under even to death, for it must be
our reasonable service; and finally our lives, if need be, Phil. 2.
for the testimony of the truth. All which sacrifices of Christianity, without
a faithful heart, which is their Iosuah and captain to go in and out before
them, (to speak but lightly with Origin in the like case) are nutus tantum and
opus mutum, a bare ceremony, and a dumb show; In Luc. Acts 8.
but I may call them sorceries of Simon Magus, whose heart was not right in the
sight of God; and not sacrifices but sacrileges, with Lactant^us, robbing God
of the better part; and as Jeremy named those idle repetitions of the Jews,
the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, Ier. 7.
this is the temple of the Lord, verba mendacij, lying words, so these opera
mendacij, lying works, so fraudulently handled, that, if it were possible, God
himself should be deceived. O how has Satan filled their hearts that they
should lie unto the holy Ghost? in making a show that they bring the whole
price of their possession, Acts 5.
and lay it down at the feet of God, when they withhelde the dearer part from
him. They have not ^ied unto men (though that were fault enough) but unto God,
who will truly require the least untruths between man and man; but falsehoods
and fallacies committed between the porch and the altar, within the courts of
his own house, and in the professions of his proper service, by casting up the
eyes or hands, bowing the knee, knocking upon the breast or thigh, making sad
the countenance, mooving the lips, uncovering, or hanging down the head
like a bul-rush, grovelling upon the earth, sighing, sobbing, praying, fasting,
communicating, distributing, crying LORD, LORD, seeking to abuse the fleshly
eyes of men, and the fiery eyes of omniscience it self, he will right sorely
revenge, as a dishonor immediately and directly done to his own sacred
person. Galienus the Emperor, gave this judgment of one who sold his wife
glass for pearls; imposturam fecit and passus est, he couzened and was
couzened. But this for the good of the couzener. For when he was brought upon
the stage, and a Lion expected by the people to have torn him peece-meale, a
capon was sent up to assault him. The same sentence stands firm in heaven,
against the deceitful marchandizers of true religion, who offer to the
highest emperor clothed with essential maistye, as the other with purple,
and to his spouse the church, glass for pearls, copper for gold, coals for
treasure, shows for substances, seeming for being, fancy for conscience;
Imposturam faciunt and patientur, They mock and they shall be mocked; but in an
other kind than the former was: for whereas they look for the thanks and
recompense of their forepassed labors, lo, they are like the dreamer in the
Prophet, who eats by imagination in the night time, and when he awaketh
from sleep, his soul has nothing.

Vows.
And made vows. The matter of their vows is as vnceraine as of their
sacrifices. What it was they promised to the Lord, and by obligation bound
themselves to perform, neither ancient nor recent, Jewish nor Christian
expositour is able to determine. By coniectural presumption, they leave us to
the choice of these four specialties.



The conditions of a lawefull vow are principallye these two. Two conditions
of a law full vow.
First that the matter thereof be consonant to the word and will of God;
otherwise (as Jerome notes upon the 11. of ^udges) it is follye to plight, and
impiety to perform it: secondly, the end must be to witness our
thankfulness to our maker and protector. Jn vovenilo stultus. in reddendo
impius.
For albeit we are bought with a price, and both our bodies and spirits are
the Lords, not our own to dispose of, and we ought to do that vnvowed,
which our vow has tied us unto, because we have no better gift than our
selves (as he sometimes said to Socrates his master) to give even our selves
to our bounteous God, and, as it were by bargain and sale, to mancipate our
wills to his obedience; yet the making of a vow, and entering into bonds
with God, to pay him some special debte, is a more open mark, and professed
badge of a thankeful soul. Besides, it confirms the mind of a man in
virtue, and sets a tutour and overseer over his will, to keep it within the
bounds of promised dutifulness. Epist 45. Faelix necessitas est quae in
meliora compellit.
Whereupon Saint Augustine writes in his epistle to Armentarius and Paulina, It
is an happy necessity, that compels a man to do better than he vvoulde
do. And surely if we well regard it, the mother cause of a vow, is an
engraffed opinion in the minds of most men, of returning kindness for
kindness, which is the readiest way both to conciliate and preserve
friendship, according to that old proverb (...): frendshippe, and the life
of man, Epicharmus.
and nature it self, consists in taking and giving. And although God has no
need of our gifts (for can our goodness extend to him, who has the riches
of all goodness? psalm. 16.
or can he increase by less than a drop of rain, who is more than the maine
sea of all abundance?) yet it gives him to understand, that at least his
glory is sought, though not his vtilitye and of that a man has, not of that he
has not, there is a purpose and desire to do him worship. Benignus exactor
est and non egenus, and qui non crescat ex reditis, sed in se cres cere faciat
redditores. Quod ^i rectditur, redde^ti additur* Chap. 29.
The sum is this; the honor is Gods, the profitte ours. He is our liberal
creditour, (says Augustine in the same epistle) and has not want of our
paiusent. Neither grows he greater by repaying, but the pay-maisters by him.
And whatsoever is restored or recompensed in lieu of any his benefits, is
added to him that returned it Thence it comes, that David and the princes
give thanks unto the LORD, in the first of Chronicles, when they had offered
unto him silver, gold, brass, iron, precious stones, after this manner* Now
therefore our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name. But who am I,
and what is my people, that we should be able to offer vvillinglye in this
sort? for all things come of thee, and of thine own hand we have given
thee. It is said before, that the people rejoiced when they offered
willingly, and David the king also rejoiced with great joy. To return to
the head of my speech, the vows of these mariners, in any of the four
kinds, before aimed at, are iustificable by both the properties of a vow. For
of their end I make no doubt, the snares of destruction being so nevvelye
broken before their eyes, and they escaped: and what fault can we find in
the matter? whither their purpose were to leave their own countries, and to
go to the city of God, for better instructions in his law, as the Queen of
the South came from her native dominion, to hear the wisdom of Solomon, such
pilgrimage is not amiss: or to adorn the temple of Jerusalem, where the
honor of God dwelt, with voluntary gifts and presents, as David, and his
nobles before, and as the wisemen of the East, carried the gold, frankincense,
and mirrhe to the son of God; or to distribute their goods to the needy, as
Zacheus did, and to cast their bread upon the waters for the Lords sake, where
they look to receive again neither thanks nor recompense; or lastly to devote
themselves to the redeemer of their lives, and with an indissoluble covenant,
to become his faithful servants: the last of which is indeed the substance and
center of all vows. There are two things (says Lactantius) that must be
offered unto God, De cultu dei, cap. 25.
donum and sacrificium, a gift and a sacrifice, the one perpetual, the other
temporal. The one, as silver, and gold, and purple, and silk, the other a
beast slain, or whatsoever is burnt upon the altar. But God has use of
neither of these, because himself is incorrupt, Quia and ipse incoruptus, and
illud ^otum corruptibile. Virumque incorporale of fe^endu^ est. Sermon. 7. de
Tempore. Hoc quod redemit ipsum offer.
and they subject to corruption. Therefore we must offer both, in a spiritual
and vnbodilie manner, that God may have use of them. Our gift must be the
vprightnes of mind; our sacrifice, praise and thankesgiving. Some vow one
thing, and some an other (says the author of those sermons of the time) some
oil, some abstinence from wine, some fasting: This is not the best, nor the
perfitest kind of vowing. I show you a more excellent way; God cares not for
thine oil, nor thy fastes, but that, that the Lord has redeemed, that offer,
I mean thy soul. And if thou demaundest, how my soul? I answer, by holy
manners, chaste cogitations, fruitful works. I will not strictly examine upon
this occasion, the vows prescribed and practiced in the church of Rome,
somewhat to the imitation of these, that are presumed of the mariners. Romish
Vows.
These vowed perhaps a voyage to Jerusalem, they to Compostella or
Walsingham* these to beautify the temple of the Lord, they the monuments and
shrines of Saints; these to bestow their goods upon the poor, they to
profess wilful beggerye; these to be proselytes, and to cleave to the
service of God, they to renounce the world, to abandon the society of men, to
ab^ure the company of women, and to bury themselves in monasteries and
cloisters, for their better opportunity thereunto. Shall I say in a word? the
matter of all their vows vnneedefull, in some unlawful, in some impossible,
in others, idolatrous, impious, diabolical: and the end for the most part, not
to be thankful to God, but to arrogate a kind of perfection, and to build
merit thereupon.

But tell me ye sons of Balaam, you that exalt your synagogue so much by
reason of your vows, if in any part of the world there be more slothful and
sinful desidiousnesse, than in the resty cloisters and dormitories of that
church, wherein such wearisome peregrinations, and tyring of the legs is
enjoined. If in any part of the world, such royal, Pontifical, Persian
magnificence, as in your prestes and Nazarites, the votaries of that churhe,
where povertye is pretended. If in any part of the world, such adulterous,
incestuous, Sodomiticall defiling of women, men, children, not only by
stea^th, but in the sight of the sun, in brothell-houses and stews, erected,
maintained, rented, justified, as in the streets of that mother-citie, where
chastity is imposed? So the harlott alleges for her self in the Proverbes*
I have paid my vows, yet she calls a young man to dalliance and filthiness.
In an epistle they wrote to the Lords of the counsel (from their Cacus den,)
prefixed before the libell of Persecution in England, they plead for the
vows of their church, as a custom standing with good policy, and making for
the establishment of commonweals. They fetch it in by consequence: that
because a vow made unto God must be fulfilled, therefore our promise to our
neighbor, which is also a kind of vow, must not be violated. We (they say)
on the other side, by affirming that vows may be broken to God, make no
doubt of our breach with man; whereupon it ensues, that there is no trust nor
faithfulness in our dealing. Philo, me thinks, De' confusio^ne lingu.
(...)* Cap. 17. Cap. 18. 1. Cor. 10. (...)* Indies difici^ in agris agri cola,
etc. Cypr contra Demetr. 2. Tim. 3.
rightly expressed the qualities of these Saturnine, solleine, discontented
men; They are always complaining of the policy of their country, and
framing an indictment against the laws of it. With as much right as the
vagabondes in the Acts, complained of Jason and the brethren in his house.
These are they which have subverted the state of the whole world, and here
they are. Surely I confess, there is a decay and declination, as of the state
and strength of the world, so of all goodness. The refuse and dross of
mankind, we are, on whom not the end, but the ends, nor of the world, but
of the worlds and ages forepassed, are not only come, but met together by
conjunction. The alacrity and vigor of the whole creature is worn away.
Justice draws her breath faintly. The charity of many is waxen cold, and
when the son of man comes, though he burn cresset-light shall he find faith?
There is a daily defection of the husbandman in the fields, the mariner at
the sea, innocence in the court, justice in judgment, concord in
friendship, workemanshippe in arts, discipline in manners. How should the
scriptures else be true, that in the latter days there should be perilous
times, such as the golden age never knew: that men should be lovers of
themselves, covetous* boasters, unnatural, truce breakers etc. which they
might find, if they would clear their eyes with the eie-salve of plain
dealing quocunque sub axe, amongst Papists as much as protestants, without
whetting their tongue or pen against our innocent religion. But when I hear
them hunting for the praise of God and man, by such means, I call to mind an
ancient history of vows vied and revied between the citizens of Croto,
Alexan. ab Alex. lib. 3. cap. 22.
and Loc^us or great Greece in Italy. They were at hot strife, and ready to
discern their variance by dinte of sword. And the former vowed unto their
Gods, to give the^ the tenth part of the spoil, if they wan the field; the
others (to go a foot before them) promised the ninth, so they might obtain
the conquest. Let these admirers of Italy, follow the steps of their Italian
predecessors. Notwithstanding I doubt not, for all their ambitious
ostentation, but though they go before us in making vows, we shall not come
behind them in keeping promises: Quid dignum ta^to feret hic ^romissor hi^tu?
what need they gape so wide in telling of their vows and performances, when
it is not unknown as far as the world is christened, that they have verified
the old proverb, in straining at gnats, and swallowing down camm^lles? Admit
their keeping of promise for mint and anise seed, and the smaller things of the
law; Read the story of John Hus. Hebr. 6.
yet they will break a promise in a matter more capital touching the life of
a man, though in a general Council, and in the face of Christendom plighted
unto him. And whereas an oath for confirmation, is the end of strife, and it is
not only a shameful thing to be justly charged, as only of the kings seed
in Ezechiell, he has despised the oath, Chap. 17.
and broken the covenant, yet lo, eee had given his hand; but it evermore
pulls down the judgment of God, for, as I live, says the Lord, I will
surely bring mine oath which he has despised, and my covenant which he has
broken, upon his own head: yet will these men take an oath, not to the king of
Babell, a stranger, as he did, but to their sovereign lady the Queen of
England, At the tak^^g of their deg^ees etc.
to be true to her crown and dominions, even with ceremony and solemnity; and
as Abraham's servant put his hand under his masters thigh, taking an oath by him
who should come from the thighs of Abraham so these lay their hand upon
their masters book, wishing a curse ^o their own souls, in the sight of God
and angels above, and a whole University beneath, if they perform not
fidelity; yet they will break that sacrament, with as easy a dispensation, or
rather (as Bernard terms it) a dissipation granted by themselves, as if
they had but tied a knotte in a ^ushe, to be undone again at their pleasures.
I may truly say with the Apostle Saint John, That which I have heard, and
seen, and mine eyes have looked upon, and I have handled with mine hands,
that declare I unto you. These be their holy sanctions, their politic and
religious vndevoute vows, this the event, these the fruits of them. In the
number whereof, I might inserte an other accursed vow, not unlike to that of
the Jews against Paul, Acts 23.
that they would neither eat, nor drink, till they had killed him. Surely
they have taken an oath, these runnagates of Ephraim, which run from the
chosen of the Lord to Saules son, and fly to a foreign neste after the
partriche has bred them, to do a mischief with Herod, and to accomplish as
much as the Herodias of Rome shall require of them. Whereto they have bound
themselves, not to the half of a kingdom, which they have not, but to the
loss of their heads, which thy daily come in question of. If nothing will
please Herodias, but the head of John Baptist, the greatest amongst the sons of
women, it shall be given her; if nothing this other strumpet, but the head of a
Queen, the greatest amongst the daughters of men, they will do their best
endeavor to make it good.

When I first began to handle this prophecy, I told you, that the argument of
it was nothing more than mercy: Conclu^^*
and that from the whole contents thereof, knitt up in four chapters, as the
sheet of Peter at the four corners, proceeded a most lively demonstration of
the gracious favor of God, 1. toward the Mariners, 2. toward Jonas, 3.
toward the Ninivites, lastly in generality, not so much by personal and
practical experience, as by strife and contention of argument, to justify his
goodness which Jonas murmured against. The first corner of the sheet has
been untied unto you, (for some make an end of the first chapter, where I now
left) that is, the mercy of God, embracing the mariners in their extremity of
danger, has been opened, after that little portion of grace, which the spirit
of God has divided unto me. This mercy is evident in two singular, and almost
despaired deliverances first of their bodies from a raging and roaring sea; a
benefit not to be contemned, for even the Apostles of Christ^ cried in the
like kind of distress upon the waters, help Lord, we perish: secondlye of
their souls, from that idolatrous blindness wherein they were drowned and
stifled; a destruction equal to the former, and indeed far exceeding. The
horror of this destruction was never more faithfully laid out in colors, than
in the eighth of Amos. Where, after repetition of sorrows enough (if they were
not burnt with hot irons, past sense) as that the songs of the temple should
be turned into howlinges, feasts into mourning, laughter into lamentation,
that there should be many dead bodies in every place, even the number so great
that they should cast them forth in silence (without obsequies) the sun going
down at noone, and the earth darkened in the clear day, that is, their
greatest woe in the greatest prosperity: yet he threatens a scourge beyond al
these. Behold, says the Lord, (I have not yet made your eyes dazell, nor your
ears tingle with my judgments, though your eyes have beheld sufficient misery
to make them fail, yet behold more) The days come, (I give you warning of
vnhappier times, the plagues you have endured already, are but the beginnings
of sorrow) the days come, that I will send a famine in the land: if the mouth
of the Lord had here stayed, famem immittam, I will send a famine, had it not
sufficed? Can a greater cross, think you, be imagined, than when a woeful
mother of her woeful children, 1. King. 17.
shall be driven to say, As the Lord lives, I have but a little meal left in
a barrel, and a little oil in a cruise, and behold, I am gathering two
sticks to go in and dress it for me and my son, 2. King. 6.
that we may eat and die? and much rather, if it come to that extremity, that
an other mother felt, when she cried unto the king, Help, my Lord, O King:
This woman said unto me, give thy son that we may eat him to day, and we
will eat my son to morrow: so we sodde my son, and did eat him etc. yet
he adds to the former by a correction, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst
of water, but of hearing the word of God: and they shall wonder (not as the
sons of Jacob, who went but out of Israel into Egypt,) but from sea to sea,
and from the North to the East, shall they run to and fro, to seek the word
of the Lord, and shall not find it. This was the case of these men, before a
prophet spoke unto them, and the wonders of the law were showed amongst them.
And this was the case of our country, when either it fared with us, as with
the church of Jerusalem, signa non videmus, non est amplius propheta, Psalm.
74. Chap. 22.
we see no tokens, there is no prophet left; or if we had prophets, they were
such as Ezechiell names, they saw vanities, and divined lies; and the book of
the law of the Lord, though it were not hid in a corner, as in the reign of
Josias, nor cut with a penknife, and cast into the fire, 2 King 22. Ierem. 36.
as in the days of Iehoiakim, yet the comfortable use of it was interdicted
the people of God, when either they could not read, because it was sealed up
in an unknown tongue, or under the pain of a curse they might not: and such
as hungered and thirsted after the righteousness of Jesus Christ, were driven
into Germany, and other countries of Europe, to enquire after it. But blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, for he has long since visited and redeemed us his
people. If our many deliverances besides, either by sea, from the invasion of
the grande pirate of Christendom, or from other rebellions and conspiracies by
land, had been in nu^mber as the dust of our ground, this one deliverance of
our souls, from the kingdom and power of darkness, the very shadow and
borders of death, wherein we sat before the sending of prophets amongst us, to
prophecy right things, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, and the
tidings of salvation, had far surpassed them. Let us therefore with these
mariners, sing a song of thanksgiving, not only with our spirits, ( My soul,
bless thou the Lord, and all that is within me, Psa. 103.
praise his holy name) but with sacrifices and vows also, as audible sermons
and proclamations to the world, let us make it known, that great is the mercy
of Jehovah to our little nation.

THE XXII. LECTVRE.
The last verse of the 1. Chap. Or, after some, the first of the second Now the
Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonas, and Jonas was in the
bellye of the fish three days and three nights.
WE are now come to the second section of the prophecy, wherein the mercy of
God toward Jonas is illustrated. It begins at my text, and parts it
self into three members. 1. The absorption or burial, 2. the song, 3. the
delivery of the Prophet. Isiodore in three words summeth the contents of it:
De patrib. vet. tesiam.
Cetus obiectum, voratum, orantem revomuit: The whale cast up Jonas, first cast
forth, then devoured, afterward making his move to God. Jonas is swallowed in
this present sentence.

The justice and mercy of God run together in this history, as those that
run for the maisterie in a race. And it is hard a long time for Jonas to
discern, Genesis 25.
whither his justice will overcome his mercy, or his mercy triumph over
justice. They labor in contention, as the twins in Rebecca's womb. And
although Esau be first borne, red, and hairy all over like a rough garment,
yet Jacob holds him by the heel, and is not far behind him. I mean,
though the judgment of God against Jonas, bearing a rigorous and bloody
countenance, and satiate with nothing (in likelyhode) but his death, and that
most strange and unaccustomed, seems to have the first place, yet mercy
speedeth her self to the rescue; and in the end is fulfilled that which God
prophesied of the other pair, The elder shall serve the younger. For when
justice had her course, and borne the preeminence a great space, mercy at
lengh puts in, and gets the upper hand. To us that have seen and
perused the history, who have as it were the table of it before our eyes, and
know both the first and the last of it, it is apparent that I say; that
although he were tossed in the ship, and cast forth into the sea, and devoured,
yet God had a purpose prevised herein, to work the glory of his name, and the
others miraculous preservation. But Jonas himself, who all the while was the
patient, and set as a mark, for the arrows of heavenlye displeasure to be
spent at, and knew no more what the end would be, than a child his right hand
from the left, what could he th^^ke, but that heaven and earth, land and sea,
life and death, and all (...) in the world had sworn and conspired his
immortal misery? First he was driven to forgo his native country, the land
of his fathers sepulchers, and take the sea. When he had shipped himself, the
vessel that bare him, stackered like a drunken man to and fro, and never was
at rest till she had cast forth her burden. Being cast forth, the sea, that
did a kind of favor to Pharaoh and his host, in giving them a speedy death,
is but in manner of a iaylour to Jonas, to deliver him up to a further torture.
Thus from his mothers house, and lap, wherein he dwelt in safety, to a ship,
to seek a foreign country* from the ship into the sea; and from the sea into
a monsters belly* ( incomposi^um navigium, an incomposed, misshapen ship;)
therein, shall I say, to his death? Chrysostom.
that had been his happiness: he would have wished for death, as others wished for
treasure. Job* 3.
There are the prisoners at rest, and hear not the voice of the oppressor;
there are the small and the great, and the servaunt is free from his master.
So then, there is a comfort in death to a comfortless soul, if he could
atchieve it. But Jonas cannot die; the sea that swalloweth down volumes of
slime and sands, is not grave enough to bury him; he may rather persuade
himself, that he is reserved for a thousand deaths, whom the waters of the
Ocean refuse to drown, giving over their pray to an other creature. My
thoughts are not your thoughts, (says the LORD by his prophet Esaye)
neither are your ways my ways. ^sa. 55.
For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your
ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts. It is most true. When we think
one thing, GOD thinks an other: he safety, and deliverance, when, in the
reason of man, there is inevitable destruction. We must not therefore judge the
actions of the Lord, till we see the last act of them. We must not say in
our have, all men are liers; Psalm. 11^
the pen of the scribes is vain; the books false, the promises uncertain;
Moses, and Samuel, prophets and apostles, are like rivers dried up, and have
deceived us. We must tarry the end, and know that the vision is for an appointed
time, Abac. 2.
but at the last it shall speak (according to the wishes of our own hearts)
and shall not lie. Though our souls faint for his salvation, yet must, Ps. 119.
Verse ^1.
we wait for his word. Though our eyes fail for his promise, saying, O, when
will thou comfort us? and we are as bottels in the smoke (the sap of our hope
dried up) yet we must not forget his statutes. When we see the fortunate
succeeding of things, we shall sing with the righteous prophet, We know, O
Lord, that thy judgments are right, (though deep and secret) and that thou of
very faithfulness have caused v^ to be tried: that howsoever our troubles seemed
to be without either number or end, yet thy faithfulness higher than the
highest heavens, failed us not.

To set come order in the sentence propounded, The divi^^on.
I commend these circumstances unto you. First, the disposer and ruler of the
action, the Lord. Secondly, the manner of doing it, he provided or prepared,
Thirdly, the instrument, a fish, together with the praise and exornation of the
instrument, a great fish Fourthly, the end, to swallow up Jonas. Lastly, the
state of Jonas, and how it fared with him after he was swallowed up.

And first, 1* The author.
that you may see the difference betwixt inspired spirits, and the conceiptes
of profane men, who, as if the nature of things bare them to their end
without further disposition, as when the cloud is full (they say) it gives
her rain, and going no higher than to second and subordinate causes, never
consider that high hand that wrought them; it may please you to observe, that
thorough the whole body of this prophecy, whatsoever befell Jonas, rare and
infrequent, is lifted above the spheres of inferior things, and ascribed to
the Lord himself. A great wind was sent into the sea, to raise a tempest. It
is not disputed there, what the wind is by nature (a dry exhalation drawn up
from the earth, and carried between it and the middle region of the air
aslant, fit to engender a tempest,) but the LORD sent it. Jonas was
afterward cast into the sea. It is not then considered so much, who took
him in their arms, and were the ministers of that execution, but thou, LORD,
have done as it pleased thee. Jonas is here devoured by a fish. It is not
related that the greediness and appetite of the fish brought him to his pray,
but the LORD prepared him. Jonas again is delivered from the belly of the
fish. It might be alleged in reason perhaps, that the fish was not able
to concoct him; but it is said, the Lord spoke to the fish, and it cast him
up. Toward the end of the prophecy, Jonas makes him a booth abroad, and
sits under the shadow of a gourde; the Lord provided it. A worm came, and
consumed the gourde that it perished; the Lord provided it. The sun arose,
and a fervent east-winde bet upon the head of Jonas? the Lord also provided
it. Lament. 3.
Who is he then that says, and it comes to pass, if the Lord command it
not? Out of the mouth of the most high comes there not evil and good? Jbid.
Thus whenever we find in any of the creatures of God, either man or beast,
from the greatest whale to the smallest worm, or in the insensible things, the
sun, the winds, the waters, the plants of the earth, either pleasure or hurt
to us, the Lord is the worker and disposer of both these conditions.

^. The manner.
The Lord prepared. That ye may know it came not by chance, brought thither
by the tide of the sea, but by especial providence. For it is not said, that
God created, but that he ordained and provided the fish for such a purpose.
There is nothing in the works of God, but admirable art and skilfulnesse.
Psalm. 104.
O Lord (says David) how manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made
them all. Solomon gives a rule well beseeming the rashness and vnadvisednesse
of man, who without deliberate forecast enters upon actions, first to prepare
the work without, Prove. 24.
and to make all things ready in the field, and after to build the house. God
keeps the order himself, having his spirit of counsel and provision
always at hand to prepare, as it were, the way before his face, to make his
paths straight, and to remove all impedimentes, to level mountains, to
exalt valleys, to turn waters into dry ground, and dry ground into
water-pooles, and to change the whole nature of things, rather than any work
of his shall be interrupted. He had a purpose in his heart not to destroy Jonas;
yet Jonas was thrown into the mouth of destruction. A man would have thought,
that the counsel of God (if ever) should now have been frustrated, and that
salvation it self could not have saved Jonas: Put from the succor of the ship,
from the frie^dship of his associats, having no rock to cleave unto, far from
the shore, and neither able perhaps, nor desirous to escape by swimming,
yielding himself to death, and to a living grave, with as mortified an
affection, as if lumps of lead had been cast down; yet God had prepared a
means to preserve the life of Jonas. Eve^ the bowels of a cruel fish, are as a
chariot unto him to bear him in safety through those unsearchable depthes. O
how many wonders in how^ few words? how many riddles and dark speeches to the
reason of man? he will scarcely believe, when they shall be told unto him. 1.
That so huge a fish should be so ready to answer at the call of the Lord,
and to save his prophet. 2. So able to devour a man at a morsel, without
comminutio^ or bruise offered to any one bone of his. 3. That a man could live
the space of 3. days and nights in a fishes belly. But so it was. The Lord
does but use a preamble to finish his work intended. He suffers not the
ship to carry him forth-right to the city, but so orders the matter, that the
Mariners deliver him to the sea, Chrysostom. Homi. 5. ad pop. Antioch.
the sea to the whale, the whale to the Lord, and the Lord to Niniveh. That
we may learn thereby, when our sins hang fast upon us, the harbor of a
warm ship cannot be beneficial: but when we have shaken them of, the sea
shall make a truce, and the vngentlest beasts be in league with us. The
demand of the earthly man in these improbable works, has ever been,
(...), how can this be? Though an angel from heaven shall tell Sarah of a
son, after has ceased to be with her after the manner of women, she will
(...) within her self, and say: What? after I am waxen old, Genesis 1^.
and my Lord (...) But what says the Angel unto her? Shall any thing be
hard to the ^orde? When the children of Israel wanted flesh to eat, and
cried in the ears of the Lord, quis dabit? Number. 11*
Who shall give us flesh to eat? God promised it for a month together, until
it should come out of their nostrels: And Moses said, six hundredth thousand
footmen are there among the people, of whom I am, and thou say, I will give
them flesh to eat a month long. Shall the sheep and the beeves be slain for
them to find them, either shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together
for them to suffice them? But the Lord answered him, is the Lords hand
shortened? Thou shall see now whether my word shall come to pass unto thee, or
no. Elizeus prophesied in that woeful famine of Samaria, when they bought an
Asses head, and Doves dunge, at an unreasonable rate, 2* King. ^.
To morrow by this time, a measure of fine flower shall be sold for a
shekell, etc. Then a prince, on whose hand the king leaned, answered the man
of GOD, Though the Lord would make windows in heaven, can this thing come
to pass? the prophet answered him, Behold, thou shall see it with thine
eyes, but shall not eat thereof. Tota rati^ facti* potentia facienti^.
Considera authorem, toll dubi^^tionem*
Saint Augustine in his third epistle to Volvsian, and elsewhere, gives the
rules to satisfy these distrustful reasonings. We must grant that GOD is
able to do some thing, which we are not able to find out in such works:
the whole reason of the doing, is the power of the doer. It is GOD that has
done them. Consider the author, and all doubts will cease. Therefore if Marie
receiving a message of unexpected and unwonted conception, shall say at the
first, how shall this thing be? yet, when the angel shall say unto her, that it
is the work of the holy ghost, and the might of the most high, and that her
co^zen Elizabeth has also conceived in her old age, though she had purchased
the name of barren by her barrenness, because with God, says the angel, Luke
1.
nothing is impossible, then let Marie lay her hand upon her heart, and say,
Behold the hand-maide of the Lord, that is, without further disceptation I
submit my self to the power of God. But if that former reason of his
all-sufficient might, be not of strength enough to resolve either pagans
abroad, or atheistes at home, touching the likelihoode and probability of such
unlikely acts, but the innocence of the sacred Scriptures wherein they are
written, must be arraigned, and condemned by their carnal reason, and our
whole religion derided, because we justify them; I will say no more unto
them, but as Augustine does in his books of the city of God, Quicquid mirabile
fit, Lib. 10. c. 11.
in hoc mundo, profecto minus est quam totus hic mundus; The very creation of
the world, (which being the book of nature they run and read, and can deny
no part of it, though they deny and deprave the book of scripture,) shows
them a greater miracle in the world it self, than whatsoever in these or the
like singularities seems most incredible.

The instrument
A great fish. Some of the rabbines think, that the fish was created at that
moment when Jonas was to be swallowed. Others, that he had lasted from the sixth
day of the world. A third sort, that it was a whale that first devoured
Jonas, and that afterward the Lord beckened unto him, and then he cast him
into the mouth of a female which was full of young, where being straightened of
his wonted room, he fell to prayer. Fabulous inve^tions, and fruit according to
the trees that bare it. Whither the fish were created at that instant or
before, sooner or later, I list not enquire. Neither will I further engage my
self herein, tha^ the spirit of God gives me direction. Only, that which the
prophet sets down in 2. words, by a circumlocution, a great fish, it shall
not be amiss to note, that the eva^gelists abridge, and name more distinctly
in one, showing the kind of the fish: therefore Matthew calls it the belly
of a whale. Math. 12. (...).
So do the 70. interpretours, from whom it is not unlikely, the expositour of
Matthew took his warrant.

I never found any mention of this goodly cre^ture, but the wisdo^e of God the
creator was willing to comme^d it in some sort. In the first of Genes. God
said, Let the waters bring forth in abundance every creeping thing that has
the soul of life: howbeit in all that abundaunce there is nothing specified
but the whale, as being the prince of the rest, and, to use the speech of Job,
the king of all the children of pride, Job 41.
wherein the workemanshippe of the maker is most admired: for so it is said,
Then God created the whales: and not singlie whales, Genes. 1.
but with the same additament that this prophet uses, the great whales. So
does the Poet term them also immania caete, the huge whales, as being the
stateliest creature that mooveth in the waters. Likewise in the Psalm: The
earth is full of thy riches, so is the great and vvide sea, wherein are
things creeping innumerable both small and great beasts. Psalm. 10^
There go the ships, (the artificiallest wonder that ever was framed) and
there goes that Leviathan (the wonder of that nature) whom thou have made to
play therein. In the book of Job, Chap. 40. and 4^*
two arguments are produced to amplify the incomparable power of God; Behemoth
by land, Leviathan by sea: and for the power and persuasion of words, I do not
think that ever more was used, than where the power of those 2. creatures is
expressed. Of the latter of these it is professed in open terms: I will not
keep silence concerning his parts, nor his power, nor his comely proportion.
Indeed they are all worthily described, Job 41.
by the tongue of the learned, eve^ the learned tongue that the holy ghost
had. Never were there rivers and floods of eloquence, neither in the orators of
Athe^s and Rome, nor in the Seraphins of heaven, equal to those that are powered
forth in that narratio^. Augustine some-where notes, that al men marvailed at
Tullies tongue, but not his inve^tion. Tulli linguam omne^ mirantur* pec^us non
aeque. Aristotelis pectus omnes* linguam non ^que. Plato. uis pectus and
lingua^ aque* Ep. ad Pau^n. Annare insulas pute^ etc.

Plin. lib. 9. cap. 2.

In mari ta^ lu^ supine


At Aristotle's inve^tio^ all men, but not his tongue. At Platoes invention and
tongue both. But for a tongue and wisdom to, not to be uttered by the tongue,
nor to be comprehended by the wisdo^e of mortal man, I remit you to those
chapters. Jerome writes of the whole book, Singulain eo verba plena sunt
sensibus, Every word of it is very sententious. But no where through the whole,
more sense, more substance, grace, and majesty spent, than where the meaning
and intent was, that the majesty of the most high God should fully be
illustrated. To cast mine eyes back again from whence I am digressed, it is
written of the whale, that when he swimmeth and shows himself upon the
floods, you would think that ila^ds swam toward you, and that very high hills
did aspire to heaven it self with their tops. Pliny gives the reason, why
many beasts in the sea are bigger the^ those upon land: Causa evidens, humoris
luxuria; The evide^t cause, says he, is superfluity of moisture. Howbeit, it
holds not in birds (whose offspring is from the waters to) quibus vita
pendentibus, because they live ha^ging, as it were, and hovering or wanting in
the air. But in the open champian sea, being of a soft and fruitful increase,
semperque pariente natura, and of a nature that is ever breeding and bringing
forth, monsters are often engendered. Cap 3.
He writes of Balae^a, the whirle-poole, or we may english i^ also a whale,
(so does Tremelius interpret the name of Leviathan in Job and the Psalm:) that
in the Indian sea, there are some found, to the largenes of four acres of
ground, Quaternum inge^um Cap. 6.
and that they are laden and surcharged with their own weight. Likewise he
reports of other beasts in the sea, that the doors of houses were made of
their jaws, and the rafters of their bones, some of which bones were 40.
cubits in length, and that the skins of some were broad enough to cover
habitable houses. Superficies. Quicquid nascitur in part naturae uila, and in
mari esse, praeterque mul^a quae nusquam a. libi. Plin. Suasor. 2. Quod grandia
omnia probaret nihil volebat nisi gra^des dicere. Servos habere nolebat nisi
grande, argentea vasa non nisi Grandia, calceos maiores sumpfit etc.

Galerius Pontifex Max.

Thebaiicus Max.

Sarmaticus Max.

Quinquies Parsarum Max etc. Psalm. 29. Genes. 30. Psalm 36 Io^. 3.


So true is the opinion of the people commonly received, that whatsoever is
bred in any part of nature* is in the sea, and many creatures besides, which
are no where else. And therefore the less marvel may it seem, eve^ to a
natural man, by the course of nature it self his lady and mistress, that God
should prepare a fish great enough to swallow up Jonas. For the attribute is
not adjoined for naught, A great fish. Seneca the philosopher writes of one
Senetio surnamed Grandio: (others have been called Magni for the greatness of
their virtues, Alexander in Greece, Pompey in Rome, Arsaces in Parthia, Charles
amongst the Emperors the great, and Gregory the great amongst the Popes: but
Senetio had to name the grand, or the great, for his great vanity.) He liked of
nothing that was not great. He would not speak but what was great. He kept no
servants but great. Used no plate but great. The shoes he ware, were over
great. The figs he ate, were great outla^dish figs And he had a wife besides of
a great stature. But whosoever is greatest upon the face of the earth, though
his style be as great as that emperors, of who^ Eusebius writes, whose titles
were su^med together in a long catalogue, The greatest bishop, greatest in
Thebes, greatest in Sarmatia, in Persia five times the greatest, greatest in
Germany, greatest in Egypt, yet I will say unto him, as the Psalm to the
princes of that time, Give unto the Lord ye sons of the mighty, give unto the
Lord glory and strength, give unto the Lord the honor due unto his name. That
greatness belongs unto the Lord alone, we are taught by an excellent phrase
of speech proper to the Hebrews. The striving of Ra^ell with her sister Leah,
about the bearing of children, because it was very great, is called the
wrestling of God. The mountains of the earth wherewith the righteousness of
God is compared, because they were very great, are called the mountains of God
The city of Niniveh, because very great, and of 3. days journey, is called the
city of God. In all which singular idiotismes, the letter it self directs
us rightly, where to bestow all greatness. Undoubtedly it was the great God of
heaven and earth, that prepared great lights in the firmament, great fishes in
the sea, great men, great beasts upon the dry land, and magnitudinis eius non
est finis, and there is no end, Psalm. 105.
no limits of his greatness.

To swallowe up Jonas. They have an history in profane reading, 4. The end*
that Arion the Lesbian, a famous musician, being embarked with some, who for
the gain of his money would have cast him into the sea, he craved a little
respite of them before his casting forth; and taking his harp in hand, and
playing a while thereon, at length himself leapt into the waters, and was
carried upon the back of a dolphin to the landing place intended, before the
Mariners could possibly ariue there. In Herodotus the father of history, says
Tully, Apud Heredotum pa^r^ historiae innumerabiles fabulaes.
there are innumerable fables; and happily this amongst the rest. But I
allege it to this end, that if God had prepared a whale to have borne Jonas
upon his back, and to have held him above the waters, where he might have
beheld the light of heaven, and drawn the comfort of the air, as other living
souls, there had been no fear of miscariage. It is quite contrary: for the
Lord prepared a fish to swallow up Jonas. Whereof one spoke, Res inaudita.
Ve^ter Cetes domicilu^ hominis.
a thing not heard of before; the belly of a fish, is the habitation of a man.
If of a man disme^bred and dissolved piece-meale, I would never have doubted.
The crocodiles of Nilus in Egypt, Gangs in India, and other rivers of Mexico
and Peru, will devour not only men, but whole herds of cattle. P. Plancius A
beast With a woman's face, and horse^ feet.
And a physician of our latter times has written (Calvin not sparing to
testify the seem) that in the bowels of a Lamia, has been found a whole
armed man. But Jonas is taken in alive, through ranges and armies of teeth on
both sides, without the collision or crushing of any limme in his body; and
enters the streights of his throat where he had greater reason to cry, tha^
the children in the prophet, the place is to narrow for me; and lives in the
entralles of the fish, a prison or cave of extreme darkness, where he found
nothing but horror, and stinch, and loathsome excrementes. What shall we say
hereunto, but as Jerome did upon the place; Vbi putabaetur in^^ritus ibi
custodiae.
where there was nothing looked for but death, there was a custody, in a
double sense, first to imprison, and yet withal to preserve Jonas.

Thus far you have heard, first that a fish, and for his exornation great
fish, secondly was prepared, thirdly by the Lord, fourthly to swallow up his
prophet. Now lastly if you will learn what tidings of Jonas, after his entering
in the monsters mawe, 5. His state in the fish
it is published in the next words, And Jonas was in the belly of the fish,
three days and three nights.

Therein I distinguish these particularities. First the person, Jonas; the
bovvelles of the fish, as Jeremy was in the bottom of the dungeon where there
was no water, where what nutriment he had amiddest those purgamentes and
superfluities, the Lord knows; but man lives not by bread alone: or what
respiration and breathing, being out of his elemente, amongst those stiflinge
evaporations which the bellye of the whale reaked forth: but we may as truly
say, man lives not by breath alone. Thirdly, the time, how long he
continued there, three days and: when, if the course of nature were examined,
it is not possible to be conceived, that a man could live so one moment of
time, and his spirit not be strangled within him. Physicians give advise,
Levin. Lem. lib. 2. cap. 3.
that such as are troubled with apoplexies, and falling sicknesses, or the like
diseases, should not be buried till the expiration of 72. hours, that is,
three days and three nights: In which space of time, they say, the humors
begin to stop and give over their motion, by reason the moon has gone through
a sign the more in the Zodiake. For this cause it was that our Savior
undertook not the raisinge of Lazarus from the dead, till he had lien 4.
days in the grave, least the Jews might have slaundered the miracle, if he
had done it in have, and said, that Lazarus had but swooned. The like he
experienced in himself, (besides the opening of his heart) that if falshoode
would open her mouth into slander, it might be her greater sin, because he
was fully dead. Who would ever have supposed, that Jonas fulfilling this time
in so deadly and pestilent a grave, should have revived again? But the
foundation of the Lord stands sure, and this sentence he has written for
the generations to come, My strength is per^ited in infirmity, when the
danger is most felt, then is my helping arm most welcome. We on the one side,
when our case seems distresseful, are very importunate with God, crying upon
him for help; It is time that the Lord have mercy upon Sion, yea the time is
come: and if in the instant he answer not our cry, Psalm. 102. Periit spes
nostra.
we are ready to reply against him, The time is past, and our hope clean
withered. But he sits above, in his provident watch-towre, who is far wiser
than men, and thinks with himself, you are deceived, the time is not yet
come. They meet the ruler of the synagogue in the 5. of Mark, and tell him,
thy daughter is dead, why diseasest thou thy master any further? As Soon as
Jesus heard that word (a word that he lingered and waited for) he said unto
the ruler of the Synagogue, be not afraid, only believe. And as Alexander the
great, solaced and cheered himself with the greatness of his peril in India,
when he was to fight both with men and beasts, their huge Elephantes, at length
I see a danger aunswerable to my mind; Tandem (...) animo meo periculu^ vide*
so fares it with our absolute and true monarch of the world, who has a
bridle for the lips of every disease, and an hook for the nostrels of death,
to turn them back the same way they came; it is the joy of his heart to
protract the time a while, till he sees the height and maturity of the
danger, that so he may get him the more honor. Martha tells him in the 11.
of John, when her brother had been long dead, and lien in the grave till he
stanke, past hope of recovery, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had
not been dead. And what if absent? was he not the same God? Yet he told his
disciples not long before, Lazarus is dead, and I am glad for your sakes,
that I was not there, that you might believe. You see the difference. Martha
is sorry, and Christ is glad that he was not rhere. Chap. 1^*
Martha thinks the cure comes to late, and Christ thinks the sore was
never ripe till now. In the book of Exodus, when Israel had pitched their
tents by the red sea, Pharaoh and host marching apace, and ready to surprise
them, they were sore afraid, and cried unto the Lord, and murmured against
Moses; have thou brought us, to die in the wilderness, because there were no
graves in Egypt? wherefore have thou served us thus, to carry us out of Egypt?
etc. Moses, the meekest man upon the earth, quieted them thus, Fear ye not,
stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord which he will show to you
this day. For the Egyptians whom ye have seen this day, ye shall never see
them again. The Lord shall fight for you, therefore hold you your peace.
Neither did Moses feed them with wind, and prophecy the surmises of his own
brain: for the Lord made it good* as follows in the next verse, wherefore
cryest thou unto me? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go
forward. Thus, when the wound was most desperate, and they might have pledged
even their souls upon it, we cannot escape; when their legs trembled under
them that they could not stand still, and their hearts fainted that they could
not hope, the waters roaring before their face, and the wheels of the enemy
rattling behind their backs, they are willed to stand still, not on their
legs alone, but in their disturbed passions, to settle their shivering
spirits, to pacify their unquiet tongues, and to go forwards, though every
step they trod, seemed to bear them into the mouth of death.

The state of the danger you see. Jonas is in the belly of the fish, three
days and three nights. Long enough to have altered his nature, to have boiled
him into nourishmente, and to have incorporated his flesh into an other
substance. Yet Jonas lives. But if the LORD had not been on my side, (might
Jonas now say) if the LORD had not been on my side, when the beast rose up
against me, he had swallowed me up quick, when his wrath was so sore
enflamed. But praised be the LORD which has not given me over a pray to
his teeth. Psalm. 124.
My saul is escaped, even as a bird out of the snare of the fowler. The snare
is broken, and I am delivered. Let all those whom the LORD has redeemed from
the hand of the oppressor, from fire, or water, or from the peril of death,
take that songue of thankesgiving into their lips, and singe it to his
blessed name in remembrance of his holiness. O thou the hope of all the ends
of the earth, Psalm. 65.
(says that other Psalm) and of them that are far of in the sea, shevve us
but the light of thy countenance, and we shall be safe: give us but the
comfort of thy mercies, and we will not fear, though the earth be moved,
and the mountains fall down into the mids of the sea, and the sea, and the
waters thereof rage fearfully, though Leviathan open his mouth, we will not
quake at it, yea though the Leviathan of the bottomless pit, open the throat
of hell never so vvide to devour us, we will not be disquieted. We know
that there is mercy with the LORD, and that with him there is plentiful
redemption, I mean redemption a thousand ways, by nature and against nature,
by hope and against hope, by things that are and things that are not. He
that has saved his people, by gathering the waters in heaps like wales,
and making a path in the red sea; he that has kept his children in the
midst of a fiery oven, when, if art could add any thing to the nature of
fire, they should have been burnt seven times for one, because it was seven
times hot; and delivered his prophet in a den of lions, though dieted and
prepared for their pray before hand, yet shuttinge their mouths so close, and
restrayninge their appetite, that they forbear their appointed food; and
committed this servaunt of his to the belly of a fish, as if he had committed
him to his mothers womb, to be kept from harm; he is the same GOD both in
might and mercy to preserve us, no time unseasonable, no place unmeet, no
danger uncouth and unaccustomed to his strong designementes. Our only help
therefore, psalm. 124.
stands in the name of the LORD that has made heaven and earth; blessed,
and thrice blessed be that name of the Lord, from this time forth for
evermore. Amen.

THE XXIII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 2. verse. 1. Then Jonas prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fishes
belly, and said.
THIS second section or division of the prophecy, Orantis locus, modus exitus,
wherein the mercy of God toward Jonas is expressed, I parted before into
three branches. 1. That he was devoured, 2. prayed, 3. was delivered. The
terms that Lyra gives, are these, the place, the manner, the success of his
prayer. The marvailes that I have already noted unto you, were, 1. that so huge
a creature, was suddeinely provided by the providence of God: 2. that a whole
man passed thorough his throat: 3. that he lived in his bowels, three days
and three nights. Now whither he fulfilled that time exactly, yea or no, three
natural days complete, consisting of twenty four hours, neither can I
affirm, neither is it material over-busily to examine. Our Savior, you know,
in the gospel, applies this figure of Jonas to his burial. As Jonas was in
the belly of the whale, three days and three nights, so shall the son of man
be in the heart of the narth. Math. 12.
But if you confer the shadow and the body together, you shall find in all
the evangelistes, Math 27. Mark 16.
that the Lord of life was crucified the 6. hour of the preparation of the
sabbath, and the ninth gave up the ghost; that late in the eveninge, his body
was taken down from the cross, and buried, that he rested in the grave the
night that belongs to the sabbath, together with the day, and night next
ensuinge after it; and that in the morning of the first day of the week, he
rose again. So as indeed the body of Christ was not in the heart of the earth
more than 36. hours, to weete two nights and a day, which is but the half
space of 72. hours. Some, to supply this defect of time, account the light
before the passion of Christ, and the darkness till the 9. hour, one day and
a night, because, they say, there was both light and darkness. Lyr^.
And then the light that followed from the 9. hour, and the succeeding night,
a second day and night, likewise the third, til the time he rose again. (...).
Others expound it by a mystery thus: 36. hours, they say, to 72. which is the
absolute measure of 3. days and 3. nights, is but simplum ad duplu^, one to
two, or the half of the whole. Now ours was a double death, both in soul by
sin, and in body by pain; Christ's was but single, only in the body, because
concerning his soul he was free from sin; therefore they infer, that the moity
of time might suffice him. Hugo Cardin. has an other conceit, that from the
creation of the world till the resurrection of Christ, the day was evermore
numbered before the night, both in the literal and in the mystical
understanding; first there was light, then darkness: but from the resurrection
of Christ forwards, the night is first reckoned: (for which cause he thought,
the vigiles were appointed for sabbathes and other festival days, that we
might be prepared with more devotio^ to solemnize them:) herehe^ce he
concludes, that the night which followed the sabbath of the Jews, was the
angular night (and must twice be repeated, Angularis est.
as the corner of a square serves indifferently for either side which it lies
betwixt:) for both it belonged (says he) to the sabbath praeceding, and must
be ascribed again unto the Christian sabbath, or Lords day, whereon the son of
God rose from death. And he thinks there is great reason of his invention: Et
merito: quia Christus simpla nocte sua duplam nostram abstutis.

Divinatores and vates, no^ interpretes. Senec. Tull. in Aca.


because Christ by one night of his, took away two of ours. So they are not
content to be sober interpretours of the mind of God, but they will guess and
divine at that which he never meant. They think their cunning abased, if they
go not beyond the moon to fetch an exposition. What needs such curious
learning, to apoint every egg to the right hen that laid it, as some did in
Delos, so these to think their labor unprofitable in the church of God, unless
they can make the devises of their own heads reach home to the letter of the
book in all respects? Our soundest divines agree, that the triduan rest of
Christ in the grave, must be understood by the figure synecdoche, a part put
for the whole. And thus they make their account: the first day of his passion
and enterrement (which was the preparation of the Jewish sabbath) must have the
former night set to it. The second was fully and exactly run out. The third had
the night complete, and only a piece of the first day of the week, which by
the figure before named, is to be helped and supplied. Now I go forwards to
explicate the behavior of Jonas in the belly of the fish. Therein we are to
consider, 1. what the history speaks of Jonas, 2. what he speaks himself.
The words of the history testifying his demeanor, are those in the head of the
chapter, which you have already heard,

Then Jonas prayed unto the LORD his GOD out of the belly of the fish, and
said. Wherein, besides the person of Jonas, needelesse to be recited any
more, we are stored with a cluster of many singular meditations. 1. The
connection or consequution after his former misery; or, if you will, you may
note it under the circumstance of time; Then. 2. What he did, Then. He prayed
how he exercised and bestowed himself; He prayed. 3. To whom he prayed
and tendered his moan; To the Lord. 4. Upon what right, interest, To the L.
His God. Out of etc. And said.
or acquaintance with that Lord; because he was his God. 5. From whence he
directed his supplications; Out of the belly of the fish. 6. The tenor or
manner of the song and request he offered unto him; And said. Thus far the
history uses her own tongue: the words that follow, Jonas himself endited.

Many things have been mentioned before, 1. Then.
whereof we may use the speech of Moses: Enquire of the ancient days which
are before thee, since the day that God created man upon the earth, and from
one end of heaven to the other, if ever there were the like thing done: as
that a man should breath and live so long a time, not only in the bowels of
the waters (for there Jonas also was) but in the bowels of a fish within those
waters; a prison with a double ward, deeper than the prison of Jeremy,
wherein, by his own pitiful relation, he stacke fast in mire, Ier. 38.
and was ready to perish thorough hunger, and when he was pluckte from thence,
it was the labor of thirty men to draw him up with ropes, putting rags
under his arms between the ropes and his flesh, Acts 12.
for fear of hurtinge him: closer then the prison of Peter, who was committed
to four quaternions of soldiers to be kept, and the night before his death
intended, slept betwixt two soldiers, bound with two chains, and the
keepers before the door: yea stricter then the prison of Daniell, the mouth
whereof was closed with a stone, Dan ^.
and sealed with the signet of the king, and the signet of his princes, and the
keepers of the ward, by nature harder to be entreated than ten times 4.
quaternions of soldiers. Name me a prison under heaven, except that lake of
fire and brimstone, which is the second death, comparable unto this wherein
Jonas was concluded. Yet Jonas there lives not for a moment of time, but for
that continuance of days, which the great shepherd of Israel afterward
took, and thought a term sufficient whereby the certain and undoubted
evictio^ of his death might be published to the whole world. But this is the
wonder of wonders, that not only the body of Jonas is preserved in life and
liuelyhood (where if he received any food, it was more loathsome to nature than
the gall of aspes, or if he drew any air for breath, it was more unpleasant
than the vapors of sulphur) but his soul also and inward man was not
destroyed, and stifled under the pressure of so unspeakable a tribulation. For
so it is: he lies in the belly of the fish, as if he had entered into his
bedchamber, and cast himself upon his couch, recounting his former sins,
present miseries, praying, believing, hoping, preaching unto himself the
deliveraunces of God, with as free a spirit as ever he preached to the
children of Israel upon dry land. Vigilat in ceto, qui stertebat in navi.
Mira res. Zeno ep. Veronens. lib. 2. ser. 38. 2. Cor. 1. (...).
He is awake in the whale, that snorted in the ship. What a strange thing
was this? O the exceeding riches of the goodness of God, the height and depth
whereof can never be measured, that in the distresses of this kind (to use the
apostles phrases,) above measure and beyond the strength of man, wherein we
doubt whether we live or no, and receive the sentence of death within our
selves, that if you should ask our own opinion, we cannot say but that in
nature and reason we are dead men: yet God leaves not only a soul to the
body, whereby it mooveth, but a soul to the soul, whereby it pondereth and
meditateth within it self Gods everlasting compassions. Doubtless there are
some afflictions that are a very death; else the Apostle in the place
aforesaid, would never have spoken as he did: Ibid.
We trust in God who raises up the dead, and has delivered us from so great
a death, and does deliver us, and in him we hope that yet he will deliver
us. Harken to this, ye faint spirits, (...).
and lend a patient ear to a thrice most happy deliveraunce, be strengthened
ye weak hands, and feeble knees receive comfort: he has, he does, and yet
he will deliver us, not only from the death of our bodies, when worms and
rottenness have made their long and last pray upon them, but from the death of
our minds too, when the spirit is buried under sorrows, and there is no
creature found in heaven or earth to give it comfort.

The next thing we are to enquire, is, what Jonas did. He prayed All things
pass, ^ He prayed.

Nihil novi video, nihil novi facio. lib. 3. ep. 2.4. Eccles. 3.


says Seneca, to return again. I see no nevve thing, I do no new. A wise
man of our own to the same effect: That that has been, is, and that that
shall be, has been. I have before handled the nature and use of prayer, with
as many requisite conditions to commend it, as there were chosen souls in the
arc of Noah. You will now ask me, quousque eadem? how often shall we hear the
same matter? I would there were no need of repetition. But it is true which
Elihu speaks in Job, Chap. 33. Eccle. 22.
God speaks once and twice, and man sees it not. There is much seed sown
that miscarieth, some by the highway side, some amongst thorns, some
otherwise; many exhortations spent as upon men that are a sleep, and when the
tale is told, they ask what is the matter? Therefore I answer your
demand, Jgnoscant scientes, (...) offendant^^ nescientes. Satius est enim
offerre habenti, quae differ non habentens. 2. de. bapt. ^^ Donat. 1.
as Augustine sometimes the Donatistes, when he was enforced to some
iteration. Let those that know it already pardon me, least I offend those
that are ignorant. For it is better to give him that has, than to turn him
away that has not. And if it were truth of Homer, or may be truth of any man
that is formed of clay, Vnus Homerus satietatem omnium effugit, One Homer never
cloyed any man that red him, much more it is truth, that one and only Jesus
Christ, the precepts and ordinances of his law, his mysteries of faith, have
been often preached, often heard, and yet never wearied, never satisfied those
that hungered and thirsted after his saving health. I go back to my purpose.
Jonas, you hear, prayed. This is the life of the soul which before I spoke
of: when being perplexed with such grief of heart, as neither wine, (according
to the advice of Solomon) nor strong drink could bring ease unto; her tongue
cleaving to the roof of her mouth, and her spirit melting like wax in the
midst of her bowels; when it is day, calling for the night again, and when
it is night, saying to her self, when shall it be morning? finding no comfort
at all^, either in light or darkness, kinsfolks or friends, pleasures or
riches, and wishing as often as she opens her lips, and draws in her
breath unto her, if God were so hasty to hear those wishes, Job 1^
Oh that thou would hide me in the grave, and keep me secret, until thy
wrath were past: yet then she takes unto her the wings of a dove, the motion
and agility* I mean) of the spirit of God, she flies by the strength of her
prayers into the bosom of Gods mercies, and there is at rest. Is any afflicted
amongst you? Let him pray. Afflicted or not afflicted, (under correction of
apostolic judgment) let him pray. For what shall he else do? Shall he
follow the ways of the wicked, which the prophet describes? the wicked is so
proud that he seeks not after God; Psalm. 10
he says evermore in his heart, there is no God; he boasts of his own
hearts desires, he blesses himself and contemns the Lord; the judgments
of God are high above his sight, therefore he snuffeth at his enemies, and
says to himself, I shall never be moved, nor come in danger? I can name you
a man that in his prosperity said even as they did; I shall never be moved:
Psa. 30.
thou Lord of thy goodness have made my hill so strong. But see the change.
Thou did but hide thy face, and I was troubled. Then cried I unto Lord,
and prayed unto my God, saying, what profit is there in my blood etc. Or shall
he with those unrighteous priests in Malachie, use big words against the
LORD, It is in vain that I have served him, Mal. 3.
and what profit is it that I have kept his commandments, and vvalked in
humility before him? Ioh 21.
O, the counsel of the wicked be far from me, says Job: their candell
shall often be put out, and the sorrow of the fathers shall be laid up for
their children, and they shall even drink the wrath of the Almighty. And all
such as fear the Lord speak otherwise every one to his neighbor, Malach. 3.
and the Lord harkeneth and hears it, and a book of remembrance is written
for them that fear him, and think upon his name. Or shall he on the other
side, when his sorrows are multiplied upon him, say, as it is in the Psalm,
who will show me any good thing? Let him answer the distrust of his mind
in the next words: Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon
me. Psalm. 4.
Thou shall put more joy thereby into mine heart, than the plentifullest
en^rease of corn, wine, and oil can bring to others. Or lastly, what shall
he do? shall he add grief unto grief, and welcome his woes unto him? shall
he drink down pensiveness, as Behemoth drinks down Jordan into his mouth?
shall he bury himself alive, and drown his soul in a gulf of desperation?
shall he live the life of Cain, or die the death of Judas? shall he spend his
wretched time in bannings and execrations, cursing the night that kept
counsel to his conception, cursing the day that brought tidings of his
bringing forth, cursing the earth that bears him, the air that inspireth
him, the light that shines upon him? shall he curse God and die, or
perhaps, curse God and not die? or shall he keep his anguish to himself,
and let his heart burst like new bottelles that are full of wine, for want of
venting? or shall he howl and yell into the air, like the wolves in the
wilderness, and as the manner of the heathen is* not knowing where or how to
make their moan, feeling a wound, but not knowing how to cure it? or what
shall he do when he finds himself in misery, his ways hedged up with
thorns, that he^ cannot stir to deliver himself there-hence, Jn fine sent.
what should he do but pray? Bernard, under a fiction, proposes a table well
worthy our beholding; therein the Kings of Babylon and Jerusalem, signifying
the state of the world and the church, always warring together. In which
encounter, at length it fell out, that one of the soldiers of Jerusalem was
fled to the castle of Justice. Siege laid to the castle, and a multitude of
enemies intrencht round about it. Fear gave over all hope, but prudence
ministered her comfort. Do thou not know, says she, that our king is the
king of glory? the Lord strong and mighty, even the Lord mighty in battle?
let us therefore dispatch a messenger, that may inform him of our necessities.
Fear replyeth, but who is able to break thorough? Darkness is upon the face of
the earth, and our walls are begirte with a watchful troop of armed men, and
we utterly vnexperte of the way into so far a country* where upon Justice
is consulted. Be of good cheer, says Justice; I have a messenger of especial
trust, well known to the king and his court, Prayer by name, who knows to
address her self by ways unknown, in the stillest silence of the night,
till she comes to the secrets and chamber of the king him self. Forthwith
she goes and finding the gates shut, knocks amain, Open ye gates of
righteousness, and be ye opened ye everlasting doors, that I may come in and
tell the king of Jerusalem how our case stands. Doubtless the trustiest and
efectuallest messenger we have to send, is Prayer. If we send up merits, the
stars in heaven will disdeine it, that we which dwell at the footestoole of God
dare to presume so far, when the purest creatures in heaven are impure in his
sight. If we send up fear and distrustfulnes, the length of the way will tire
them out. They are as heavy and lumpish as gaddes of iron, they will sink to
the ground, before they come half way to the throne of salvation. If we send
up blasphemies and curses, all the creatures betwixt heaven and earth will band
themselves against us. The sun and the moon will rain down blood, the fire
hot burning coals, the air thunderboltes upon our heads. Prayer, I say
again, is the surest ambassador which neither the tediousness of the way,
nor difficulties of the passage can hinder from her Purpose; quick of speed,
faithful for trustiness, happy for success, able to mount above the eagles
of the sky, into the heaven of heavens, and as a chariote of fire bearing us
aloft into the presence of God, to seek his assistance.

And Jonas prayed unto the Lord. I handled also this point before more largely
then at this present I intend. 3. Unto the Lord.
I noted therein their wisdom and choice, who take their mark aright, and
direct their petions to their true and proper periode. I will briefly say, Non
minus est Deum fingere quam negare. Hill in ps. 1. Psalm. 11.
It is as great an offense, to make a new, as to deny the true GOD. in the
Lord put I my trust, bow then say ye unto my soul (ye seducers of souls)
that she should fly unto the mountains as a bird; to seek unnecessary and
foreign helps, as if the LORD alone were not sufficient? The LORD is my
rock, and my fortress, Psalm. 18.
and he that delivers me, my GOD, and my strengh; in him will I trust: my
shield, the horn also of my salvation, and my refuge: I will call upon the
Lord which is vvorthie to be praised, so shall I be safe from mine enemies;
whom have I in heaven but thee, amongst those thousands of angels and
Saints, what Michaell or Gabriell, what Moses or Samuel, what Peter what
Paul? Psalm. 146.
and there is none in earth that I desire in comparison of thee. Put not your
trust in Princes (which are the ablest upon the earth) nor in the son of man
for there is no help in him. His breath departs, and he returns to his
earth, and then all his thoughts perish. But blessed is the man that has the
GOD of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the LORD his GOD. In that
lamentable siege and famine of Samaria, a woman cry^d to the king as he passed
by, help my Lord O king. 2. King. 6.
The king answered, seeing the Lord does not succor thee, how should I
help thee with the barn or the wine press? The king concluded soundly, that
if the LORD withdraw his helping hand it lies not in any prince of the earth
to afforde it, GOD has spoken once, Psalm. 62.
and I have heard it twice, that power belongs unto GOD, and thine O LORD
is salvation; even thine alone. As much as to say, God is very constant in the
asseveration of this doctrine. Semel and bis. i. non semel. saepius,
aeternali^ter. penitus, inconcusse.
To drive it into our conceiptes he has spoken it once and twice, that is not
once, but many times, he has spoken it eternally, immovably, effectually,
without retractation. Once in the law and a second time in the gospel. Both
the breasts of the church give this milk. Moses and Christ, prophets and
Evangelistes run upon this point. Surely they forsake their first and better
husband, and go after lovers, whose company they will dearly repent, Osea 2.
(for they will see an alteration, and be driven to confess, It was better
with me at that time, then now) which think that their bread and water,
woole, and flax, and oil, and drink are not the blessi^gs of God, much more
the gifts and virtues of the soul, inward and spiritual graces; that cry for
deliveraunce where there is none, that lay out their silver and not for bread,
Es. 55.
bestow their labor and are not satisfied, spend and consume their prayers
and are not heard. Or (as Irenee makes the comparison) they are not unlike
Aesopes dog, Lib. 2. ca. 12.
who having meat in his mouth, caught at the shaddowe which he saw in the
waters, and lost the substance. Is not the gleaning of Ephraim of more worth
then all the vintage of Abiathar? Is not the staff of the Lord of more
strength (whereof David spoke) thy staff and thy rod comforted me; then all
the staves of Assure and Egypt, staves of reeds, staves of flesh and blood? is
not the least finger of his right hand of more puissance then the whole arm
either of flesh, or any spirit besides, yea then the whole loins, whole
bodies, whole substances of angels, men, silver, gold, silk, purple, al other
creatures? Olympias the mother of Alexander the great, wrote to her son, when
he called himself the son of Jupiter, not to do it; for sear of procuring
unto her the envy and displeasure of Juno. The angels and Saints in heaven,
are much displeased, I dare affirm, to have such dangerous honor thrust upon
them, that brings them into emulation with their fearful Lord, whose
presence they tremble at: and if it were possible for them to hear such
unlawful prayers of men, they would, I doubt not, with a contrary sound of
words, labor to purge themselves before the Lord of hoasts. Not unto us, Lord,
not unto us: it belongs not to thy servants to receive such sacrifice. They
that refused a far smaller offer upon the earth, the only bowing of the knee
unto them, See thou do it not, when the knees of the heart shall stoop, and
prayers be powered unto them, they will much more be discontented. I conclude
out of Saint Bernard, Sperent in alijs alij; Let others put their trust in
other things. Some in the knowledge of letters, some in the wilines of this
world. Some in nobility, some in preferment, or in any the like vanity, and let
him that lists trust in uncertain riches. But it is good for me to hold me
fast by the Lord, and to put my hope in God. Who ever hoped in the Lord and
was confounded? The Lions lack and suffer hurger, but they that fear the
Lord, shall want no manner of thing that good is.

The specialtie whereupon he took encouragement to pray unto the Lord; 4. His
God.
he had a particular feeling of the love of God toward him, and knew him to be
his God. He had not only heard and seen in others, but tasted in himself
how sweet the LORD was: some little experience of deliveraunce he had
already made, because the waters chokte him not, and albeit he were swallowed
into the belly of the fish, yet his life remained in him, and there is no other
likelyhoode but he lived in hope of a far greater salvation. The former
circumstaunce, is as the alablaster box of spikenarde, that contained precious
ointmente in it, but kept it close and vncommunicated: this latter breaks the
box and povvreth out the ointmente, that the savor of the perfume may fill the
whole house, and comfort both the body and soul of him that will use it. The
former at large delivers the arguments of the might and mercy of God,
tells us* there is a Lord above, whom all the ends of the world have a
portion in, whose name is Jehovah, and his aid most requisite to be sought
unto.

This latter brings him home as it were, under the roof of our private
houses, and gives him entertainemente in our particular consciences. The
former gives counsel, and shows the way, the latter puts in
execution; Dicit fides, parata sunt bona inexplicabilia etc.

Dicit spes, mihi illa servantur. Na^ charitas etc. Bern ser. 10. super qui
habitat.

Nempe germana fidei speique cognatio est. Vtque illa futurum credit, haec sibi
incipiat sperare futurum.

Super inane. Cap. 8.

See Mart. Luther upon the 5. to the Galathians.

Aliquid creditur quod no^ speratur, nihil speratur quod non creditur. Fides
est malarum reru^ and bonarum, and praeteritaru^, and praesenti^m and
futuraru^, and su^rum rerum and alienaru^. Spes est bonarum reru^ ^antu^ and
su^^rarum and nostrarum. ^. Paedag 6.


the one teaches knowledge the other application; the one what to believe, the
other what to hope, the one to pray unto the Lord, the other to pray unto the
Lord our God. Dicit fides, parata sunt bona, etc. faith says, there are good
things, which cannot be told, prepared for believers; hope says, they are
kept for me. Charity, which is the third sister, says, I run and endeavor
to attain unto them. Before he had said, that there was a near affinity
between faith and hope. For that which the one believes shall be, the other
begins to hope shall be for her. The prophet breaks not the order of
these two virtues: first he believes, then hops. For faith is the substance
of things hoped for: and no more can a man hope after that, which he believes
not, then a painter paint in the air or upon emptines. Augustine in his
enchiridion to Laurentius, alleges many differences betwixt faith and hope.
Namely these, that more is believed then is hoped for; as the pains of hell;
but nothing is hoped, which is not believed. Again, faith apprehends both
good and evil; reward and punishmente; things past, things present, and
things to come, as the death of Christ for the first, for the second his
sitting at the right hand of God, for the last, his coming to judgment.
Moreover faith has to do in matters both concerning our selves and others; for
we also believe that, that appertains to Angels. But hope is the expectation
only of good things, and such as are to come, and are proper to our selves. So
faith is evermore ampler then hope, and hope is in a manner a contracted and
abridged faith. Clem. Alex. faith, that hope is the blood of faith. And when
hope has given up the ghost, it is as if the blood of faith had flowed out,
and all her vital power were exhausted. The devils both know and obey God. Job
1. and they acknowledge his son Jesus Christ, not only in the substance of his
deity to be the son of God, but in his office of mediation, Thou art that
Christ, Marc. 1. and they profess and publish that knowledge of theirs, for
Christ rebukes them for it, Luc. 4. neither are they ignorant of his
commission, that al power is granted unto him both in heaven and earth. And
that he is ordained the judge of the quick and the dead. Therefore they ask,
why art thou come to vex us before the time? Math. 8. Yea they fall down and
worship him, Mark. 5. they fear and tremble and believe 2. Iac. and they pray
unto him. For the Legion instantly besought him 4. Mark* not to send them away
out of the coasts of the Gadaren^. ^o there is in the devils, you see, 1.
knowledge, and that very deep and profound, 2. confession, 3. worship, 4.
fear, 5. belief, 6. prayer and supplication; what want they? that which if
christians want, they have a name that they live, but indeed are dead. They
want a particular confident faith, the application of mercy, which is the life
of Christians, and the defect whereof makes devils. For not to believe
assuredly that God is rich in mercy to all that call upon him in faithfulness
and truth, to have his loving kindness in jealousy, to distrust his promises
which are yea and Amen, to falsify his word more stable the^ the pillars of
the earth, to make him a lier what in us lies, and to evacuate the testimony
of his spirit speaking to our spirits that we are the sons of God, and as it
were to pull off the seal whereby we are sealed against the redemption of the
just, is that damnable and desperate infidelity which turns men into devils,
and of the household of faith makes them a family for the prince of darkness.
And not to speak more of this beautiful damsel, as highly favored of the
king of kings as ever was Esther of the king of the Medes and Persians, not
co^tenting her self to stay without at the gate, Ester. 4.
but with an humble presumption approaching into the inner court, and finding
the golden scepter of favor ever ready to be held out unto her; be ye assured
in your souls, and write it in the tables of your hearts with the point of a
Diamond, with the persuasion of Gods holy spirit, that the writings of
adversaries may never raze it out again, that if you err not in the nature of
a true faith, if you take not shadows of mountains for men, a fancy and
shadow of faith for the body it self, if it be sound and substa^tial, rightly
informed, properly qualified, you may say unto it, go in peace; it shall walk
through life and death without controlement. Iud. 9.
If it find angels, principalities, powers, things present, things to come,
any other creature in the world, stopping her passage, and rebuking her
forwardnes, she shall clear her way notwithstanding with the strength of her
hope, and climb into the presence of her God; where if she crave to sit at
his right or left hand in his everlasting kingdom, her suite shall be granted.

He prayed unto the Lord his God out of the belly of the fish; 5. The place.
where he had as little comfort of life, as blind Tobias had: what joy can I
have, said he, that sit in darkness and behold not the light of heaven? Tob. 5.
Jonas might truly say in a double sense de profundis clamavi, and abyssus
abyssu^ invocat, out of the deep have I cried, and one depth calls upon an
other, who lay both in the bottom of a mo^ster, and in the lowest gulf of
affliction that ever soul was plunged in. Might he have had the liberty of the
sons of God, to have entered into the house of the Lord, the house of prayer, as
the prophet calls it, the place where his honor dwelt, there to have humbled
himself and powered out his soul to him that made it, I would less have
marvailed to hear this duty performed. Anna the daughter of Phanuell has
spent her days in the temple of God, serving the Lord with fastings and
prayers night and day, Luc. 2.
and she departed not thence. David desired but one thing of the Lord, and
that he would require, that he might dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of his life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, Psalm. 72.
and to visit his temple. But in the belly of the fish there was no beauty to
invite unto devotion; in this darkesome and deserte house, no company or
fellowshippe to draw him on, Ibimus in domum domini, Psalm. 122.
Come we will go into the house of Lord: Our feet shall stand in thy gates
O Jerusalem. No, not so much as swallows and sparrowes, which David envied,
because they had leave to build their nestes by the altars of God; yea, if
vultures and shrich-owles had but dwelte thereby, it had been some comfort.
Yet in this desolate and solitary house, voider of haunte then the ransackte
sanctuary of Jerusalem, the paths whereof foxes for want of passengers ran up
and down upon, wherein he lay as forlorn in a manner, as he that made his
abode amongst the tombs of the dead and frequented the company neither of men
nor beasts, Marc. 5.
even in this hateful cage of filth and uncleanness, he sets himself on
work, humbling his soul in prayer lower then his body was humbled in the
water, talking with God on high, mourning and lamenting his wretchedness, not in
a cave of Horeb as Elias did, not in a cave of Adullam as David, but in the
ougliest, vncomfortablest vaulte (setting hell aparte) that ever was entered. O
Lord, where shall thy spirit forsake thy chosen ones? if we climb into
heaven, there it is as apparent to the world as the sun in his brightness.
If we be driven into the wilderness, there it will attend on us. If we lie
down in the bottom of the sea, if in the bowels of a whale within that
bottom of the sea, there will it also embrace us.

To conclude all in one for this time, there was never contemplation or study
in the world so holy and heavenly in the sight of God, so faithful and
sociable to him that uses it, Peregrinatur, perno^tat.
as prayer is. It travaileth by day it awaketh by night with us; it forsakes
us not by land, by water, in weal, in woe, living nor dying. It is our last
friend an^ indissolublest companion: therefore we must pray. There was never
name so worthy to be called upon, in heaven or earth, so mighty for
deliverance, so sure for protection, so gainefull for success, so compendious
to cut of unnecessary labors, as the name of Jehovah our merciful father,
and the image of his countenance, Jesus Christ. Therefore to the Lord. There
was never city of refuge so free for transgressors, never holes in the rocks
so open for doves; never lap of the mother so open to her babes, as the
bowels of Gods compassions are open to believers. Therefore we must pray in
that style of propriety which Thomas used, when he looked upon Christ, my Lord
and my God. Lastly there was never affliction so great, but the hand of the
Lord has been able to master it: therefore if we walk in the shadow of
death (as where was the shadow of death if these bowels of the whale were not?)
we must not take discomforte at it. The Lord sits above the water floods;
the Lord commands the sea and all that therein is. He that has hidden Jonas
in the belly of a fish, as a chosen shafte in the quiver of his merciful
providence, and made destruction it self a tabernacle and hiding place to
preserve him from destruction, blessed be his holy name, and let the might of
his majesty receive honor for evermore) he will never forsake his sons and
daughters, neither in health nor sickness, light nor darkness, in the land
of the living, nor in the land of forgetfulness. And therefore as David
cursed the mountains of Gilboah, 2. Sam. 1.
that neither dew nor rain might fall upon them, because the shield of the
mighty was there cast down; so cursed be all faithless and faint hearted
passions, that throw away the shield of faith, and open the way for the
fiery darts of the devil to work their purpose. But blessed be the
mountains of Armenia, for there the (...) found rest. Blessed be the power and
mercy of our God, for these are the mountains whereupon the arc rests:
these are the holy hills whereon the Sion and church of the Lord has her
everlasting foundations. The Lord lives, and blessed be our strength, even
the God of our salvation for ever and ever be exalted. Amen.

THE XXIIII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 2. ver. 2. And said, I eryed in mine affliction to the Lord and he
heard me, out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardst my voice.
IN the words of the history, before we come to Jonas speaking from his own
person, I noted 1. his action during the time of his imprisonment, prayer, 2.
the object of his prayer, the Lord, 3. the application, his God, 4. his house
of prayer, the belly of the fish, and 5. the specification of it, he said;
which particle only remains to be adjoined to the former, before we
proceed to to prayer it self.

And said.
It bears one sense thus: I will not only acquaint you that Jonas prayed, but
I will also express unto you what that prayer was; this was the sum and
substance of it: the matter he framed and compiled to his God, was to this
effect. He prayed and said, that is, these were the very words, this was the
tenor and text of his song indicted. But if the word be better looked into,
it may yield a further construction. For in the three principal tongues
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, there has ever been held a difference between
speaking and saying: Aul Gel. 1. noct. At. 15. Satis loque^ ^lae, sapientiae
parum. Salui.
the former being more general and imperfect, belonging to as many as use the
instruments of speech. Thersites spoke though he spoke like a Iay, and they
speak of whom the proverb is verified, little wisdom, much prating.
Eupolis noted them in the greek verse,

(...), they are excellent to talk, but very unable to say. The later is more
special, and notes a wise and deliberated speech, grave and sententious,
weighed in the balance as it is in the words of Syrach, and uttered to good
purpose. Tully in his rhetorickes gives the difference, Eccle. 21.
in that he ascribes saying to orators alone, Solius est oratoris dicere,
loqui autem communis vulgi.
speaking to the common people; and that the one comes from nature, the other
from art. Such was the handling of that argument in the 45. Psalm, whereof the
author witnesses before hand, My heart is inditing a good matter; and his
tongue was but the pen of a ready writer. It was sermo natus in pectore, a
matter bred in the breast not at the tongues end. And such was the song of
Jonas in this place. It was drawn as deep as the water from the well of
Jacob, the sentences whereof were advisedly penned and the words themselves set
upon feet, and placed in equal proportions. A skillful and artificial song,
as if it should have fitted an instrument, composed in number and measure, to
the honor of his name who gives the argument of a song in the night season:
Job. 35.
who in the heaviest and solitariest times, when nature calls for rest,
quickens up the spirit of a man, and gives him wisdo^e and grace to meditate
within himself his unspeakable mercies. I do not think that the prayer of
Jonas was thus metrically digested within the belly of the fish as now it
stands. But such were the thoughts and cogitations, wherein his soul was
occupied, which after his landing again, perhaps he repolished, and brought
into order and fashion* as a memorial and monument of the goodness of God that
had enlarged him. It ministers this instruction unto us al, that when we
sing or say any thing unto the Lord we keep the rule of the Psalm, Sing ye
praises with understanding: Psalm. 47.
that as John Baptist went before Christ to prepare his ways, so our hearts
may ever go before our tongues to prepare their speeches; that first we
speak within our selves as the woman with the bloody issue did ((...) for she
said within her self, Math. 9.
if I may but touch the hemme of his garment) afterward to others; first in
our hearts with David in the Psalm, Psalm. 39.
Dix^ Custodiam etc. I said, I will keep my ways, then with our lips; that
first we hew the stones and make them fit for the building of the temple before
we place them in the walls, least by our hammering and confusion at the
present time we disorder al things; finally that whither we pray or preach, we
come not wildly and unadvisedly to those sacred works, beating the air with
empty words, and seeking our matter up and down as Saul his fathers asses, but
furnished and prepared to our business with sufficient meditation. I never shall
persuade my self that the exactest industry which either tongue or pen can
take in the handling of his works can displease God. And they that think the
contrary, seek but a cloak for themselves (the greater part) to cover their
ignorance withal, as it was noted of Honorius the third, when he forbade the
clergy the study of both laws, the fox dispraiseth the grapes which himself
cannot reach. Exodus 31.
When the Tabernacle should be made with the arc of testimonye, and the
mercy seat, and all other instruments belonging thereunto, GOD called
Bezeleel by name, and filled him with his spirit, in wisdom, and in
understanding, in knowledge, and in all workemanshippe, and joined Aholiab
with him, and as many as were wise of heart besides, God put cunning into
them. As Bezeleel and his fellows were fitter for these works, then others
unfurnished, so had they been very unworthy of these graces of God, if being
bestowed to such an end, they had not used the^ to the uttermost. I ask in the
like manner. Who made the mouth and the heart of man? whose are learning and
arts, invention and eloquence? what womb has engendered them? are they not
Gods blessings? shall we dissemble the author? shall we obscure the gifts?
shall we wrap them up in a napkin, and hide them in the ground, and not
express them to the honor of his name by whom they were given? Erasmus in his
preface upon the works of Cyprian, gives this testimony and applause to that
glorious martyr of Christ. Talem ecclesiae doctorem etc. such a doctor of the
church, such a cha^pian of Christian religion, did the school of rhetoricians
bring forth unto us; Ne quis sibi stolide placeat, quod nihil rhetorices atti*
^^^rit*
least any man foolishlie should flatter himself, that he never m^dled with
rhetoric. It is not unknown to all that peruse the holy vvritte that Moses
was learned in all the wisdom of Aegypte, Daniell of Chaldee, Job not
inexpert in astronomy, Jeremy in the common laws of his time, David in
music, Paul in Poetry, and in all the knowledge both of Jews and Gentiles;
and those that delight in the histories of the church, shall find Cyprian,
Optatus, Hilarie, Lactantius and others, laden out of Egypt with the
treasures and spoils of the Egyptians, instructed for the better service of
GOD with the helps of profane writers. Sero. 1. et 5. ^polog. c. 45.
They require but their own, for these other were but thieves (says Clem.
Alex.) and robbed Moses and the prophets; and likewise in the judgment of
Tertullian harping upon the same string, what poet or sophister has there
ever been, that drank not at the well of the prophets? or if there be any
thing in them besides, let them be enforced to confess with Julian, proprijs
pennis consigimur, we are stricken thorough with our own ^uilles, Si turpe
est bonas literas colere, malle^ agnoscere culpam qua^ deprecari. The words of
Jonas himself.
that is vvounded and disadvantaged, by our own learning. And therefore I end
with the saying of Picus Mirandula, if it be an opprobrious thing to embrace
good letters, I had rather acknowledge my fault then ask pardon for it.

Hitherto went the words of the history, now let us see what Jonas himself
says. I cried in mine affliction unto the Lord, etc. I remember what Eschines
spoke of Demosthenes at Rhodes, when he red the defense that Demosthenes had
framed to his accusation, the people wondering at the strength and validity of
it, quid si ipsum audissetis? what would ye have thought, if you had heard him
pronouncing with his own mouth? I think no less betwixt Jonas and Jonas,
when I find what odds there is betwixt him and himself, as he speaks in
the name of the history which he vvriteth, and as in his own person. His pen
wrote nothing so effectually as his heart felt, and being the scribe and
orator only, he is not so fluent and copious, as when he is the patient.
Job demands in the sixth of his book; will ye give the words of him that is
afflicted to the wind? as if he had said, when affliction it self and the
inmost sorrows of my heart tell my tale, will you not regard it? Job. 16.
Oh that your souls were in my souls steed, that you felt as much as I am
grieved with: I could then keep your company, and could shake mine head at
you. Job. 7.
Loquor in angustia mea, queror in amaritudine animae meae; I speak that that
I speak from a world of trouble, I make my complaint in the bitterness of my
soul. So Jerusalem cries in the Lamentations of the prophet, Chap. 1.
O all ye that pass by, stay and consider if ever there were sorrow like unto
that wherewith the Lord has afflicted me. For they that past by, considered it
not, but Jerusalem felt it at the heart. The style of the history before if you
observed it, was simple and plain, in as usual, naked, and vulgar terms as
might be: Jonas prayed unto the Lord his God out of the belly of the fish:
what one word therein lofty and magnificent, and lifted above the common
course of speech? But the style of Jonas himself speaking from a sense and
impression of his vvoes, is full of ornament and majesty, full of translated
and varied phrases, as if a sentence of ordinarye terms were not sufficient
to express his miseries. It is not now said that he prayed, but that he
cried, praying is turned into crying, not from the belly of the fish, but from
the belly of hell, a marveilous transformatio^; and the trouble he speaks of
is not properly trouble, but narrownes and streights, and the hearing of the
Lord is not naturally hearing, but aunswering, a degree beyond. Again the
style of the historye was single and brief, and not a word bestowed therein
more then was needful to explane the matter intended. Clamavi* vociferatu^
sum.

Exaudivit, exaudivisti, Angustia, venture inferni.

Aul. Gel. 13.23. Jbid. (...) and (...).


But the style of Jonas himself in every part is doubled and iterated. For
where it was said before at once, Jonas prayed, now, he cried and cried. And
the Lord heard and heard. And the belly of the fish there mentioned, is now,
both pressure and tribulation, and the belly of hell to. Euripides charged
Eschylus in the comedy for unnecessary repetition of words.

(...)
(...),
(...).
Wise Eschylus has one thing twice repeated
In that, I come, and come, again is used,
When coming, there, and coming is not changed.
But in the two members of this present verse, though there be near affinity,
and they seem to importe but the same meaning, yet we may not take the^ for an
idle repetit^o^: the later of the two rising in degree in some sort, and giving
elucidation to that which went before it. And as nature in the body of man has
doubled his eyes, his ears and other parts, that if the one should fail in
his office and charge, the other might supply the defecte; so in the body of
this sentence the wisdom of the prophet has doubled every word, that if
those of the former rank, fail in their office and message whereunto they are
sent, the other in the later might help them out. For thus me thinks they
found. Is any man desirous to understand my case? I was in affliction: and that
affliction so great, as if I had been pinched and thronged in some narrow
room; Ex angustias. Lam. 3.
as if the Lord had hedged about me that I should not get forth, and mured
me up within hewn stone, they are the words of Jeremy, to show the nature of
extreme tribulation. Clamavi.
If you will know my refuge, I went unto the Lord, not with a cold and
careless devotio^, nor with a du^be spirit, but with as earnest and impatient
a voice as the affections of my heart could send forth. Exaudivit.
If you will also learn the success, what comfort and speed my crying had,
the Lord gave ear and answer unto it. Now in the second clause of my text,
Eventre inferni.
though neither the order of the parts, nor the substance of the words
disagreeth, yet their virtue and power is much more significant. For that which
he called before tribulation and anguish is now the belly of hell. Vociferatus
sum.
And the cry that he used before is now vociferation, an other kind of cry.
And whereas he said before, the Lord has heard me, as one that were farther
removed from him, now by changing the person, Tu Domine.
he comes nearer to his throne of grace, and delivers his tale as it were
in the ears, and under the eyes of the author of his deliverance; Thou Lord
have answered me. From this difference of styles, that when he speaks from
himself, he uses greater force of words, the^ when the history speaks of
him, I make this brief collection: that Jonas interpreted aright, the
afflictions sent of God, and mistook not the end why he was chastened. For
what was the cause of them, but to put a sensible and lively feeling into the
soul of Jonas, that he might see and say in himself, I am sick indeed, and
that his soul refusing all other comfort, he might run to the succors of God
there to be refreshed. God did justly complain against Israel in the second of
Jeremy. I have smitten their children in vain, they received no correction.
The prophet in the 5. chap. finds the same fault, Thou have stricken them, but
they have not sorrowed: thou have consumed them, but they refuse to be
corrected: they have made their faces harder then a stone and refuse to
return. But what will be the end of this stupidity and blockishnes in
apprehe^ding the chastisements of God? the same which is spoken of Ezec. 16.
recessit zelus meus a te, Solo auditu contremisco. Vides quia tunc magis
irascitur Deus cum no^ irascitur. Misericordiam, hanc ego nolo. Super omnem
iram miseratio ista. Ser. 42. super Cant.
my wrath is departed from thee, and I will cease, and be no more angry.
Whereupon sweet S. Barnard. I tremble at the very hearing of it. Now thou
perceivest that God is then more angry, when he is not angry. God keep me from
such mercy: this pity is beyond all wrath. Let the^ consider this well that
take the afflictions of God brought upon the^ as an horse or mule takes the
bra^ding of an hot iron which they presently forge^: who when they are smitten
with sorrow, sickness, infamy, losses or such like temptations, are no more
moved therewith, the^ when they see the wether or wind in the air changed. O
Lord, they will not behold thine high hand, but they shall see it. If they will
not apply it to amendmente of life, they shall receive it to their further
judgment.

The parts severally to be handled in the present words are these* Division of
the text.
1. the gravity of his afflictions declared by two metaphors, straightnes, and
the belly of hell, and what effect those afflictions drew from him, prayer, 2.
the vehemence of that prayer* expressed both by the ingemination and increment
of 2. words, crying and vociferation or out^crying. 3. the success of his
prayer, in two other words laid down and amplified by changing the person, he
heard and thou heardest.

The first metaphor or translation bewraying his misery unto us, Out of my
anguish.
is angustia, narrownes, strictnes of room, and as it were, a little-ease,
whence I suppose, we derive our english name anguish. The reason of this
metaphor in afflictions, is because the heart and countenance at such times
endure a kind of co^pression and coartation, a shrinking together, and are
drawn as it were into a lesser room, the spirits not diffusing themselves so
freely, as when there is occasion of mirth and cherefulnes. For it is not
unknown in common experience, that laughter dilateth and spreads the face
abroad, which sorrow contracteth; therefore God promises in the 60. of Esaias,
that the heart of the church shallbe enlarged, Dilatabitur cor ecclesiae.
that is, filled with joy. Or this may be an other cause, that in a narrow and
close room (say for example the prison of John Baptist, or the grate wherein
Ta^berlaine kept the great Turk) there is not that scope and freedom of
passage, there is not that plenty and variety of necessary helps, as in a
larger place. Therefore David gives thanks in the Psalm at his first coming
to the kingdom, Psalm. 18.
that after he had been chased like a fly from cuntry to cuntry, first to
Samuel in Ramah, then to Abimelech in Nob, afterward to Achis in Gath,
sometimes into a cave, sometimes into a wilderness, at lengh the Lord had
delivered him and set his feet in a large room. The afflictions of Job, you
all know, how vehme^t they were, and he never more kindly expressed the^ then
by this transla^io^, in the 7. of his book. Am I a sea, or a whale fish that
thou keep me in ward? afterward he expounds his meaning: that God did
try him every moment, that he would never depart from him, nor let him alone
till he might swallow his spittle down, such were the straightes he was hemd
in. The like manner of speech he used in the 11. Ex angustia mihi.
He has put my feet in the stocks and looks narrowly to al my ways.
There were enough in this former borrowed term to show the affliction of
Jonas, which by the grace that is used in the words, seems to have sitten as
close to his soul as a garment to his skin, or as the entrals of the fish lay
to his body, wherein as the spaces of gro^d which he used to walk were stinted
and abridged him, so the pleasure and feeedome of his mind, solace of his
frinds, and comfort of the light of heaven were taken from him: Out of the
belly of hell.
but the other without comparison, let the world be sought through from the
utmost circle to the center of it, is the absolutest pattern of misery that
ever sanke into humane invention. For as nothing is more direful and
insufferable then hell, so nothing more fit in the nature of things, whereunto
the hugest tribulation may be compared. The word in the Hebrew carries it
self indifferently either for hell or the grave, for they are both alvvaies
craving Bring in; and thence they have their name, the grave is never satisfied
with the corpses of the dead, nor hell with the souls of the damned that
descend into it. I rather take it to signify hell in this place, one says
because of the horror, an other for the darkness, some for the depth, some
for the hugeness of the belly of the fish^ Hieron.
Venture inferni alvus caeti, tanti magnitudini^ vt instar obtineat inferni: The
belly of hell is the belly of the fish, so large and capable that it may go
insteeede of hell. The belly of the fish, says an other, alter mihi infernus
erat, was an other hell unto me. Mercer.
David uses the same phrase with Jonas, the pains of hell compassed me
about, and the snares of death over-tooke me. But in an other Psalm more
distinctly. Thou have delivered my soul from the ^^thermost hell. What? did
Jonas or David ever descend into that f^ery lake, to know the torments
thereof? Or as Pythagoras ghest at the stature and pitch of Hercules by the
length of his foot, which was but one part of his body, so by a taste of
bitterness incident to this present life, have these conceived what sorrow and
vexation is reserved to the wicked for times to come? Undoubtedly the grief of
heart has been infinite, and as much as mortality could ever admit. The
mournings of Hannah, Job, David, Jeremy, Jerusalem such, as his heart must
needs be harder then the stithy which the smith beats upon, that reads
the catalogues of their woes and is not moved at them. But if all those
foresaid agonies, and as many besides as ever wrunge and wrested the spirit
of man, since the breath of life was breathed into him, were put together to
part the torments of hell among them, part after part, as if they would
empty the storehouses, and break the stream of it, yet has the hand of hell
an unmeasurable portion behind to distribute to her children, an endelesse
patrimony, of howling, wringing, and gnashing which all the forepassed
mischiefs and maimes in this life, have skarse been shadows and
counterfeites of. The belly of hell, you hear, but in a type or figure, where
the word is mistaken and abused, and brought from his proper sense, though it
be fearful enough, and the extremity of pain has so beguiled and besotted
some (I speak it with sobriety) in the judgments of their minds, that they
have thought it very hell indeed, yet woe be to them ten thousand times
more, and more then can be imagined, by any heart as deep as a floude, whom
the belly of very hell has swallowed and closed up. It is not possible to be
spoken, it is more impossible to be endured (yet it must be endured) what the
terrors and tortures of hell are. Take him, says the gospel, bind him hand
and foot, Mat. 22. and ^.
is it no more but so? I ^ictor liga manus: go seargeant bind his hands? yes:
cast him into utter darkness: outward to those inward wherein they
delighted before, blindness of mind and understanding; outward, because the
whole man, body and soul shall be folded and comprehended therein; outward
because in extremity, without the limits and borders of any favor of God to
be extended. Where neither the light of the sun, moon and stars, and
much less the sight of Gods glorious face shall ever shine: There shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, there is, there shall be, no time set. It
stands for all aeternity, no myriade of years shall ever determine it. There
the eyes shall destill like fountains, and the teeth clatter like armed men,
and all the parts of the body relinquish their natural uses, and spend their
cursed time in wretchedness and confusion. These are the straightes indeed,
not like to those which before I mentioned, when hands and feet are so
bound, body and soul so hampered and snared, not with cords and withes as
Sampsons were, but with the inexplicable bands of long night, that not a
part of either of the two shall have any power or activity left to gratify
their owner with; neither the mind to contemplate more then endless
infelicity, nor the memory to recounte more then ancient and thrice most
hateful sins, nor the fantasy to present more then fearful visions, nor
the eyes to behold more then legions of unclean spirits, nor the ears to
hear more then the roarings of finds, nor the nostrelles to smell more then
the smoke of brimstone, nor the hands to catch hold of more then flames of
fire, nor the feet to walk further, then their gives and chains will give
them leave. Torments invented and inflicted by tyrants, have been most
hideous; the teeth of vvilde beasts, hot glowing ovens and fornaces, caldrons
of boiling oil, fiery brason bulls, powning to death in motters, rolling in
barrels of nails, rosting upon spittes, boaring with angers, parting the
nails and fingers-endes with needles, nipping the flesh with pinsers, racking
and rending a sunder the iointes with wild horses, no pittye no remorse taken,
whilst there was either flesh, or blood, or sinew or bone, Cyprian. Saevitum
est in vulnera. Non mihi si centum etc. Bern.
or I say not member, but wound in the body to work upon. But the torments of
hell are in greater variety; Had I an hundred tongues and mouths to hold them,
A voice of iron, yet could I not unfold them:
and in an other kind, or rather indeed without kind. Ibi ordo nullus, horror
sempiternus: where there is no order but everlasting horror. For who can
define either by speech or understanding a thing so infinite? so monstrously
compact of natures most disparate and repugnant? an end not ending, a death
not dying, unquenchable fire, yet a darkness withal to accompany it more
palpable then the fogges of Egypt, and blacker then blackness it self;
everlastingly burning, yet not consuming. So much more insufferable then any
torments of tortours upon earth, as the inventions of devilles can better
devise then man, and the malice of devilles better put in execution. Psalm. 60.
Psalm. 40.
This this is the cup of the deadliest wine that ever was tasted of; these
these are those deep graves in the Psalm from whence there is no rising
again. Cap. 8. Cap. 38.
This is the fire that goes not out, the worm that never leaves gnawing in
the last of Esaie. These are those waters of gall in Jeremy, those fearful
things wherewith the Lord shall plead against the unrighteous of the earth
as he pleaded sometimes against Gog and Magog in Ezechiell, pestilence and
blood, and sore rain, and huge hailestones, and fire and brimstone: not such
as fell upon the sisters Sodom and Gomorrhe, the witnesses whereof for many
succeeding ages were heaps of ashes and clouds of pitch; but fire and
brimstone from a bottomless mine, which burns in the lake of death, and
shall never cease from burning. Lastly, this is that great wine press of the
wrath of God, Revel. 14. Revel. 16.
where the smoke of torment ascends for evermore, and there is no rest day
nor night, those endless and unmerciful plagues which the angels power out of
their vialles, when men have given them blood to drink, and boil in heat,
and gnaw their tongues for sorrow. And yet are these but shadows and
semblances which the scripture has used, therein to exemplify in some sort
the calamities to come: fearful enough, if there were no more, to make the
heart of the strongest melte and fall asunder within him, as the ice against
the summers sun: but that as the joys of heaven are unmeasurable for their
part, so concerning the pains of hell, the eye has never seen, the ear not
heard, the tongue not uttered, the heart not conceived them sufficiently in
their nature and perfection. That accursed glutton in the gospel, who could
speak by experience of his inestimable discruciatio^s, as Aeneas did of the
troubles of Troy, Et quorum pars vna fut, what I have felt and borne a part
of, he gives a warning to al his brethren in the flesh, not to accounte so
lightly as they do, of the torments of that place. The flames and fervor
whereof were so importunate to exact their due of him, that he craved with more
streams of tears, tha^ ever Esau sought his blessing. but one drop of water to
cool his tongue with, and could not obtain it. And what if all the rivers in
the South, if all the waters in the Ocean sea had been granted him? his tongue
notwithstanding would have smarted and withered with heat still, and he would
have cried in the language of hell, It is not enough. Or what if his tongue had
been eased? his heart, his liver, his lunges, his bowels, his arms, his legs
would have fried still. O bitter day when not the least finger, I say not of
God, whose hand is wholly medicinal, but not of the poorest saint in heaven, nor
the skantest drop, I say not from the waters of life, but not of the waters of
the brook, shall be spared to a soul to give it comfort. Which if the latest
day of all the running generations of men, if the great year which Plato
dreamed of, might ever end, the ease were somewhat for hopes sake. But it is
appointed for a time and times, and no time even when time shall be no more,
then shall it continue. The gates are kept from egresse, Revel. 10.
as the gates of paradise were warded from entrance, not by the Cherubines with
the blade of a sword but by the angels of Satan with all the instruments of
death; and the seal of Gods eternal decree set thereunto, as the seal of the
high priests and rulers were set upon the tombe-stone of Christ. The covenant
of day and night shall one day be changed. The stars shall finish their
race, the elements melt with heat, heaven and earth be renewed, summer and
winter have an end, but the plagues of the prisoners in hell shall never be
released.

If you ask the cause why I enter so large and ungrateful a discourse of hell
upon so small an offer in my text, as some may conceive, I will not dissemble
it. Some may be deceived by the translation, impropriety, and abuse of words.
For because they hear the name of Jerusalem that is above, the walls and
foundations whereof are saphires and carbuncles, etc. take it to be no more tha^
Jerusalem in Palestina, or Venice in Italy, or any the like glorious and
sumptuous city upon the face of the earth, and therefore dispose themselves
with so much the colder affection to the attainment of it. Some have taught and
commanded their tongues to Nec que^qua^ vi^i qui ma^g^s ea time re^ quae
time^da esse negaret, morte^ dico, and deos. Affirma^t tibi non sibi. Jnterdiu
no^ noctu.
I never saw any man that more feared those things, which he said were not to
be feared, I mean, death and the gods, so I will never persuade my self but
the atheists of our times, heartily fear that which they are content to say,
they fear not. Now lest these sleepy adders should pass their time in a
dream, or rather in a lethargy, no man awaking the^ up from their careless
and supine opinions wherewith they enchant their souls, and infect others; Let
not the watchman hold his peace, least they die in their sins for want of
warning, let the trumpet of judgment often be blown unto the^, let it be
published in their ears 7^ times, as the rams-horns 7* times sou^ded about the
walls of Jericho, that their ruin and downfall is at hand, that hell gapeth for
the^* and that God has ordained long since, their impious and blasphemous
spirits to immortal malediction. Of others that is true, which God complains
in Esaias. Let mercy be showed to the wicked, yet he will not Chap. 26.
Preach honor, and glory, and peace, a garla^d of rightousnes, an incorruptible
crown, fruit of the tree of life, sight of the face of God, following the
la^be, fellowship with angels and saints and the congregation of firstborn,
new names, and white garments, pleasures at the right hand of God, and fulness
of joy in his presence for evermore; they are as obstinately bent and vnmovably
settled against these blessings of God, as Daniel against the hire of Balthazar,
Danel 5.
keep thy rewards to thy self, and give thy gifts to an other. They are not
won nor enarmoured with the expectation of good things: and the revelation
of the sons of God, which the whole creature longs and groneth for, savoureth
no more unto them, than a box of putrified ointment. What? is there no way to
quicken and put life into them? Deuteronomy. 27.
yes. If the blessings of six Levites upon mount Garizzim will not move them,
let them hear the cursing of six others upon mount Ebal: if they take no
pleasure in the beauty of Sion, let the thundering and lightning of Sinai, and
fire to the midst of heaven, and mistes, and clouds, and smoke ascending like
the smoke of a furnace, and the exceeding loud sound of a trumpet, put them
in fear, and make them believe that there is a God of judgment: if the spirit
of gentleness take no place, shake the rod over them, as the Apostle speaks.
Give the^ mourning for joy ashes for beauty, the spirit of heavines for the
oil of gladness, a rent instead of a girdle, and tear, I say not their
garments, but their hearts a sunder, pull their bodies souls and spirits one
from the other; lastly, if the offer of peace be refused, sound wars and rumors
of wars at their gates, and such tribulation besides, as the like has never
been since the beginning of the creation which God created unto that time,
neither shall be again. Who knows if they will be softened, if not for the love
of virtue, nor for the recompense that springs therehence, yet for the other
cause, Formidin^ poenae*
for fear of the wrath of God, which they hear denou^ced? It may be, feeding a
while upon the food of judgment, as Ezechiel calls it, will breed good blood
in the^ and the consideration of such misery, will work the (...) effect in
the^, that the sense of adversity wrought in Jonas, I mean, to shake of their
burden of sin, and to turn unto the Lord their God wi^h unfeigned co^versio^:
which was the 2. thing that I propounded unto you in the afflictions of the
prophet, what effect they produced from him.

I cried in mine affliction. Bind Manasses with chains, I cried.
load him with irons, bow down his neck and his back with bonds, and he
will know himself. Pull the king of Babylon from his throne, lay his honor and
insolency in the dust, hunt him from the company of men banish him from his
palace, wherein he ^erted like a monarch indeed, turn him into the field to
eat grass like an ox, to be wet with the dew of heaven, and you shall find a
miracle quickly done, an ox to have more understanding tha^ a man: he will the^
learn to praise the king of heaven whose; tower is an everlasting power and
his kingdo^^ from generation to generation. The idolatrous Jews in the 2. of
Ier. that being called to the true God, spoke desparately, and stiffly, No, but
we have loved strangers, and those wi^ we follow, in their trouble
notwithstanding they will cry to the right God, arise thou and help us. In
their affliction they will seek him diligently, Osee 5. Osee 6.
and will take sound words into their lips. Come, and let us return to the
Lord, for he has spoiled, and he will heal us, he has wounded, and he will
bind us up. Let Moab settle it self upon her lees, and not be emptied from
vessel to vessel, Ierem. 48.
and her sent will remain in her: Does the wild ass bray when he has grass,
Job 6.
or the ox low when he has fodder? But take away the grass from the wild
ass, and he will be tame^, and fodder from the ox, and you shall hear him
rore. There must be a whirl-winde raised, and a fiery chariot prepared to carry
Elias into heaven: there must be heresies to try the approved: there must be a
furnace to purge the silver and gold: Petr. Chrysolog.

Ser. 3. indivit. avaro.


there must be a fire to fine the sons of Levi: there must be an angel of
Satan to keep Paul from pride. A pilote must be tried by a tempest (says
Basile) a runner by a race, a captain by a battle, a christian by calamity,
tentation, provocation, and misery. Wherein, if poisons become preservatives,
and from the venime of serpents the wisdom of God can extract an antidote
against the venime of serpents, if all things shall work together to the best
for those that are Christ's, if evil by nature shall be made good by his
powrefull art, if the waters of a flood overspreading the whole globe of the
earth be so far from drowning the Arc, that they shall lift it higher, and
bring it nearer to the presence of God, if afflictions I mean by the good
ha^dling of our gracious God, be not afflictions but medicines, and the more
they increase upon us, the nearer they land us to the haven of his blessings;
how truly may we say and acknowledge with Barnard, Totus mundus fideli
divitiarum est, Sermon. 15. su^er Qui habitat. Epist. 87.
the whole world is riches to a faithful man (even when it seems to be
poverty) and with Augustine, that nothing happens to man from the Lord our
God, but comes in the nature of mercy, when tribulation it self is such a
benefit? For both prosperity is his gift comforting, and adversity his gift
admonishing us. Jnsipidum, amaru^ granum sinapi^, sed ingens fructus.
A very unlikely seed to yield such fruit, as bitter as mustard seed* but
give it leave to grow, and the fruit shall be very pleasant. The wicked
understand not this, and the unwise have not knowledge of his ways. She cries
in the comoedy, and she presents the person of them all, that are her
companions; In Rudente.
Hanccine ego partem capio ob pietatem praecipuam?
Tum hoc mihi indecore inique, immodeste datis dij:
Nam quid habebunt sibi igitur impij post hac? etc.
Is this my portion and guerdon for my especial piety? the^ do the gods reward
me very unseemly, unjustly and unreasonably. For how shall the wicked hereafter
be dealt with, if the godly be thus honored amongst you? Augustine in his
preface upon the 25. Psalm, lays down the like complaints of some, O Deus
Deus, Haeccine est iustitia tua? O God God, is this thy justice? and the Lord
answers them again, haeccine est fides tua? is this thy faith? have thou so
learned Christ? is this the best instruction thou have found in my law, to
murmr against my discipline? possess thy soul therefore in patience,
whosoever thou art, leave the ordering of these things to the wisdom of God,
with who^e it is alike to sweeten the pot of the prophets with meal, and the
waters of Jericho with salt, to cure the eyes of Tobias with a gall, and to
stre^gthen the sight of Ionatha^ with an honi-co^be. Some he heals by honey,
some by gall, some by salt, some by meal, some by sower, some by sweet, some
by piping, ^e^e punge^^^^ ^o^pung^ris. Bern Si peccator, ut corrigatur, si vero
^n^us, vt e^u^iatur. Hugo Card.
so^e by da^cing, some by prosperity, some by affliction, but al by some means
or other, that have a longing and desire to the ways of happiness. Now then
again I say, if it be a good thing sometimes to be humbled of the Lord, for
till we are humbled, commonly we go astray, if it be an happy pricking of the
body that makes a pricking in the heart, if expedient for all sorts of me^ that
the hand of the Lord should now and then take hold on them, because a sinner
is amended, the righteous is instructed thereby, because gold is prooved,
(...), p^ove^ur Si ferr^^^, (...). mittat. Gr^^ Hebr. 12.
iron is scowred by this means; if when the outward man is corrupted, the
inward^ i^ renewed daily, 2. Cor. 4. and there is honor in dishonor, riches in
poverty, life in ^eath possessing all things in having nothing; 2. Cor. 6. if
when the fathe^s of our flesh chasten us for their pleasures, the father of our
spirits corrects us for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holine^,
and though ^o chastisement seem ioious for the time yet it brings the quiet
fruit of righteousness to those that are exercised thereby; if when the body of
I^nas was in thrall beneath, the soul of Jonas triumphed aloft, and when the
tongue of his flesh could not speak perhaps a word* skarce mu^ter to it self,
the tongue of his spirit cried and cried alowd; if when he lay in the belly of
hell, even then he climbed above the stars of the firmament and though he saw
nothing with his bodily eyes* he saw heaven opened unto him with the eyes of
his understanding: the^ let us not be dismayed, my brethren, if tribulation
come, let us not think it any strange thing: yea rather if tribulation come,
let us not think it an unprofitable and unwelcome thing, let us receive it
with thanks, keep it with patience, digest it in hope, apply it with wisdom,
bury it in meditation, and it shall end unto us no doubt in glory and peace more
than can be spoken.

THE XXV. LECTVRE.
Chap. 2. ver. 2. I cried in mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me,
out of the belly of hell cried I, etc.
IN the two members of this second verse, signifying almost the same thing, I
observed first the measure of his afflictions, explicated by two metaphors
together with the effect they brought forth; secondly the force and zealousnes
of his prayers declared likewise by two words; and thirdly the audience which
ensued upon his praying.

The force of his prayer, wherein I am to proceed, 2. Clamavi, vociferatur sum.
is interpreted by 2. phrases, though not distinguished in our English
tra^slatio^s, yet in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin of Tremelius somewhat vari^d:
as if he had said, I called and cried, or I cried and outcried. Which Jerome
expounds vel aquis cedentibus, either the waters yielding him away, and
making passage, vel toto cordis affectu, or with the whole inte^tio^ of his
heart, The former is not likely; I rather take it to have been the vehemence of
spirit, such as is usually me^t in the scriptures under these or the like
words: as in the 119. Psalm expressly; I have cried with my whole heart.
Galath. 4. God has sent the spirit of his son into our hearts crying, Abba,
that is, father, though it be in the heart alone, yet it is called crying. It
ever not^th, whither in propriety or by translation, an earnest, loud,
importunate desire, 1. King. 18 1. Sam ^. Tolerare and odisse, non est virtus
mansuetudinis, sed velamen^tum fur^^is Homil. 2. in Ezech*

Murmura dum s^cum and rabiose silentia rodunt. Persius.


loath to loose audience for want of speaking out, and impatient of repulse,
when it has spoken. Therefore Elias bade the priests of Baal, cry with a loud
voice: and he in the comoedy, mervailing at overmuch patience, shows what
should be done; Eho, non clamas? non irasceris? What? do thou not cry? art
thou not angry? Annah in a part of her song tells us what the manner of the
wicked sometimes is, Impij in tenebris tacent: when they are afflicted, they
lay their hands upon their mouths, and hearts too, they frette with
indignation, and repine to themselves, letting neither voice nor groan come
forth, nor any other token of submission to him that has cast them down. Of
whom I may say with Gregory, To suffer so desp^ghtfully and maliciouslye, is
not the true virtue of patience, but a covered or concealed madness. Now Jonas
is many degrees beyond these. 1. He is not silent, which, as you heard, is
sometimes a mark of impiety. 2. He does not mutter to himself, as the
philosophers in the Poet, humming within themselves, and uttering a kind of
insensible and vnarticulate silence. 3. He does more than speak: for that
might argue the heart of a man but indifferently disposed to obtain. 4. He
speaks with most endeavored contention, he cries unto the Lord, and when he
has once cried, cries again, and with an other kind of crying. For as if
the former word were not enough, a latter is added, to signify either a
different kind, or if the same, in a more intensive and forcible affection.
This ingemination, either of one and the same word again repeated, or of sundry
bearing the same sense, gives as it were a double strength to the declaration
of that which is delivered. As Phavorinus gave his judgment of the verse in
Homer, wherein Idaeus labors by persuasion to pacify the contention betwixt
A^ax and Hector, Au. Ge. noct A^. 13.23.
(...), War not any longer, beloved youngmen, neither fight together; that
the addition of the second word, (though adding nothing in signification to the
former) is not to make up the verse, but as they continued in their strife, so
duplex eadem compellatio admonitionem facit intentiorem, his twice speaking
unto them in the same manner of speech, makes his advise the more earnest. And
if they were the same words, yet one might very well think them to be others,
quia aures and animum saepius feriunt, because they beat the ears and the
mind of a man often. These often and fierce inclamations within the spirit of
Jonas, Jbid.
speaking to the Lord, as it were with a doubled and cloven tongue, and sending
up his Prayers into heaven, as incense casts up smoke without intermission,
condemn the dissolute and perfunctorie prayings of our days both in churches
and chambers, who utter a form of words, as the manner of hypocrites or the
Gentiles was, or as the parret of Ascanius recited the creed, rather of
custom than zeal flattering God with our mouths, Psalm. 7^
and dissembling with him with our tongues, leaving our spirits as it were in
a slumber the mean time, or if we call the^ up to prayer, leaving them again,
as Christ his disciples before we have thoroughly awaked them; as if the
offering of the halt and the lame, body without soul, or soul without
devotion, voice without spirit, or spirit without clamor and vociferation could
please him. The prayers of David (I am sure) had an other edge upon them. In
the 55 Psalm, Plango* pers^^epo, (...).

Rugio prae^^ (...).


I mourn in my prayer and make a noise. Evening and morning and at noone will
I pray, and make a noise, and he will hear my voice. In the 38. before, I
roar for the very grief of mine heart. Lord mine whole desire is before thee,
and my sighing is not h^d from thee. Cor meum palpitat, my heart pants, or
runs too and fro, I have no rest, no quietness within me. Such was the pange
and palpitation of I^bs heart. My groaning comes before I eat, Chap. 3.
and effunduntur velut aquae rugitus mei, and my roarings are powered forth and
wave like waters: not gronings, nor cryings, but plain roarings, with a
continual inundation, velut vnda impellitur vnda, as one water drives on an
other. ^hese are wonderful passions. The Lion in the forest never roared so
much for his pray, nor the heart after the water-brookes, as the souls of the
faithful after Gods goodness. Yea, the Lion indeed has roared, Am. 3.
who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy? The
mighty Lion of the tribe of Judah has roared in his supplications, and his
righteous spirit been vexed and disquieted within him: and shall not we be
moved? of him it is witnessed in the 11. of John* that at the raising of
Lazarus, he not only wept, but groned or yearned in his spirit, and troubled
himself about it. It was trouble indeed, Tartarus has his name from such
troubles. (...).
He roared then for Lazarus whom he loved, and for Martha's sake, and for other
of the Jews that were there abouts. But afterward in his own cause, when
not only his soul was vexed unto death, and vexation held it in on every
side, but when he cried with a great voice, My God, my God, (...)
why have thou forsaken me? and crying again with a great voice, gave up the
ghost. Math. 28.
Therefore the Apostle speaking of the days of his flesh, and that fruit of
his lips and spirit which we are now in hand with, thought it not
sufficient to make mention of his prayers and supplications, Heb. 5.
nor of his tears, (...). Romans 8.
which watered his blessed plants, nor of a cry alone weakly sent forth, but
of a strong cry, which if heaven were brass, were able to break through it.
So it is said of the ^pirite of God, who helps our infirmities, that because
we know not our selves what to ask as we ought to do, he makes request in
our names, with groans not to be expressed. Ipse inducitur gemens qui gementes
facit, he that puts groninge into us, Bern ser. 59. in (...) 2. Ca^tic.
is brought in groninge himself. The voice of the (...) is heard in our
land: the groninge of this turtle dove, is heard within our bosom. Vox quid^m
gementinon ca^enti similis, a voice in truth, as of one that mourns, and that
si^geth not. Thus the example of the glorious Lord of life, who mourned
unspeakably, not for the sins of his own person, but of the sons and
daughters of Jerusalem, who led the way before us in water and blood, not in
water alone, but in water and blood both, who with his bleeding tears, showed
us the right form of faithful supplications, this very example bids us
cry in our prayers. The help and assistance of the blessed spirit of God
groaning as vnmeasurably on the other side, not for his own necessities, but
for ours his wretched creatures and clientes, not of infirmitye in himself,
but of compassion toward us, whom we continually grieve, and no way so much
as for want of our grief and repentance, bids us cry. The dreadfu^l
majesty of the sacred LORD of hosts whom we stand before, the roialty of
his nature, sublimity of his place, dominion over men and angels, who with
the spirit of his mouth is able to consume ou^ both bodies and spirits,
bids us cry. The view of our wretched mortalitye (as Adam and Eve when they
saw their nakedness, fled, Miriam when her leprousy, sheee was ashamed) after
mortality exceedingly mortal, the view of our sin exceedingly sinful, that
we are not worthy to cast up our eyes toward the seat of God, and after our
sin, our misery exceedinglye miserable, that the prophet was amassed in
himself to see either man or the son of man so kindelye visited, bids us
cry. Lastly the hope and expectation of success, (unless we will sow and
not reap, plant vines and not drink the wine thereof, power out many prayers
and not be heard: (the delicacie and tende^nesse of the ears of God, which
must be wisely entreated, and the precious favor of his countenance, which
must be carefully sought, bid us cry. Let us not think, that the sound and
noise of our lips, as the ringing of basins, or vocal modulation, without
cordial and inward meditation, can procvre us audience. Valentiores voces apud
secretissimas dei aures ^on faciunt verba, Greg.
seddesi^^ria. The most effectual speech in the secret ears of God, comes
not from words, but from desires. He that hea^eth without ears, can interpret
our prayers without our tongues. He that saw and fansied Nathaniel under the
figtree before he was called, saw and sanctified John Baptist in his mothers
womb, before he came forth, he sees and blesses our prayers fervently
conceaved in the bosom of our conscience, before they be uttered: but if they
want devotion, they shall be answered by God, Ezech. ^.
as the prayers of those idolators in Ezech. though they cry in mine ears with
a loud voice, yet will I not hear them.

And he heard me. The Hebrew says, he answered me; 3. Success.
which does better express the mercy of God toward Jonas, than if it had been
barely pronounced that he heard Jonas. For a man may hear when he does not
answer, as Christ heard the false witnesses, and when the priests asked him,
answerest thou nothing? t^cuit, he held his peace. Mark 14.
And likewise he heard Pilate, when upon the accusation of the priests he asked
him, answerest thou nothing? yet he answered not; Mark ^^*
so as Pilate mervailed at his silence. David in the 18. Psalm. confesses of
his enemies, that they cried, but there was none to save them, even unto the
Lord, but he answered them not. Now this answer of God, whereof he speaks,
is not a verbal answer sharpt of words, but a real, substantial satisfaction
and grant, directly and fitly applied, as answers should be to questions, so
this to fulfill the mind and desire of Jonas. For as be heard the heavens Osee
2. (not that the heave^s spoke, or he listened) and the heavens the earth, the
earth the corn, oil, and wine; and the corn, oil, and wine, Israel; not by
speech, but by actual performance of some thing which they wanted; he the
heave^s by giving virtuous disposition unto the^, they the earth by their happy
influe^ce, the earth her fruits by yelding the^ juice, and these Israel by
ministering their abu^da^ce: so does he answer Jonas here by grau^ting his
petition. For as to answer a question is not to render speech for spe^h alo^e,
but if there be scruple or uncertainty in the matter proposed, to resolve it; so
to answer a suite, is to ease the heart and satisfy the expectation of him that
te^dred it. In this case Pub. Piso a rhetoricia^ in Rome was abused by his
serva^t: who, to avoid molestatio^, had given his servants a charge, to
answer his demandes briefly and directlye without any further additions. It
fell out that he provided a supper for Clodius the general, whom he long
looked and often sent for at the hour* and ^et Clodius came not. At length he
asked his man; did thou bid Clodius? I bad him. Why comes he not? he
refused. Plutare. de garrul*
How chances thou toldst me not so much? because you demanded it not. Plutarke
in the same book, where he reports that tale, makes three sorts of
aunswerers. For some give an answer of necessity, some of humanity, others of
superfluity. The first, if you ask whether Socrates be within, tells you
faintly and unwillingly, he is not within: perhaps he answers by a
Laconisme, (...), not. The second with more courtesy, and to the sufficient
measure of the demand, willing to instruct the ignorant; he is not within but
in such a place, at the exchange. The third running over with loqua^ city,
knows no end of speaking; he is not within, but at the exchange waiting for
strangers out of Ionia, in whose behalf Alcibiades has written from Miletum
etc.

The aunsweres of God are neither so sparing and restrict as the first, leaving
the soul in manner as doubtful and perplexed as he found it by grauntinge
to little, nor so idle and superfluous as the last, to bring a lothing to men
by surcharge of his benefits, but they are in the middle sort, tempered with
good moderation, full of humanity, kindness, and grace, giving enough, and
happily more than was asked, and sending away the heart joyful for that which
it has obt^ined; According to the phrase of the Psalm, d^lata os tuum and
implebo illud, Psalm. 81.
ask largely, boldly, bountifully, I will not deny thee. Our savior promises
as franckely in the gospel, Ask and it shall be given you, seek and you shall
find, knock and it shall be opened unto you, Perhaps he means of
disciples alone: No, but whosoever asks receaveth, and he that seeks
finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened. Give but thy prayer a voice
to ask with, for it must not be dumb nor tounge-tide; give it an eye to
seek, for it must not be careless; give it an hand to knock with, for it
must not fear to molest and disquiet: and not only the doors, but all the
treasures and iewelles of the kingdom of heaven shall be open unto it. You know
what labor is made to the princes and states of the earth by travel of body,
expense of purse, mediation of friends, suppliancy of gesture and speech,
intervention of time, to obtain but temporary and frivolous suits. A widow of
Macedon had a long suit to Philippe the king, wherein she was persuaded the
equity of her cause called for judgment. At length he answered her, non est
mihi otium (which is the manner of most magistrates) I am not at leisure; she
boldly replieth unto him, Ergo ne sis Rex, then be not King any longer. No
mervaile if such an answer be given by a King or a Judge, when a private and
familiar friend in a small request for 3. loaves, shall answer his friend.
Trouble me not, my doors are shut my children in bed etc. Bathsheba comes to
Solomon her son in behalf of Adoniah, 1. King. 2.
about a matter of no great moment, as she interpreted it. The King
encourages her, Ask on, my mother, for I will not say thee nay. A son to
his own mother, and one whom he bowed unto, and set her at his right hand.
1. she requested it; 2. a small thing; 2. desired him not to say her nay. Yet
when she had opened it, then go ask the kingdom too, said he, and he swear
in her presence that Adoniah had asked it against his life, and forth with gave
order that he might be executed. Howefearefull was Nehemias, though he held the
cup to the king, to make a request unto him? At last, with some invitation from
his Lord, Chap. 2.
why is thy countenance sad? this is but sorrow of heart; not without lowly
salutation, God save the king for ever, and prayers to the God of heaven, he
disclosed it: the gladdest man alive that his suite was heard. It was the
danger of Esthers life to come before the king unless she were called for. For
it was their law, Esth, 4.
that whosoever man or woman came into the inner court, which was not called,
should die, unless the King held forth his golden rod. But the scepter of
the Lord our God, I mean not that iron scepter of his justice, but the golden
of his grace, is ever held forth to man, woman, child, bond and free,
stranger or citizen, whether they be called or not called, they may safely
approach, I name neither outward nor inward court, but even to the throne
where the King himself sits, and if they shall crave of him, I say not to
the half of his kingdom, as the Persian Monarch said, but to the whole, to
devide the inheritance with the principal heir Christ Jesus, to eat and
drink at his table, to sit upon a throne and judge the angels of heaven, it
shall not be denied them. Zedekias spoke it in folly, and in a servile, popular
affection that he bare to the princes of his land, when they required the life
of Jeremy; Ier. 38.
but God speaks it of the abundaunce of his heart and riches of mercies, The
King can deny you nothing.

Surely they do injury to his grace, who talk of warders, and porters, and
masters of requests, Angels and Saints, to admit us into presence, and to
bring us to speech with God. Services not unmeet for the governors of the
earth, whose life is the life of the country and their people with whom they
live; as Jeremy in the 4. of Lament* calls their King the breath of their
nostrells. And therefore it is very necessary that their persons should be
carefully guarded and attended upon. Caesar thought, that to be an Emperor,
was safeguard enough against danger, when a little ship or boat, and a great
tempest being committed together (a very unequal match) and the master himself
doubting the (...), f^are not, says he, thou carriest Caesar. Caesare^i v^.
his.
He might have been deceived, and afterward was, in a safer place. Maximilian
had some like conceit, when he told his soldiers dropping away at his heels,
with the sho^ of their enemies: You must not adventure as far as I do, habent
enim principes peculiarem quandam fortunam suam; for princes have a luck of
their own. I am sure they must have a peculiar regard and guard to their
bodies, or they may soon fall into dangers. Again it is true of the princes of
this world, which Iethro told Moses, when he sat from morning to evening to
hea^e the causes of the people, Exodus 18.
Thou both weariest thy self and the people that is with thee, the thing is to
heavy for thee, thou art not able to do it thy self alone: and therefore
infinite suites, besides the distraction of many other businesses, requiring
larger audience than the ears of any one mortal man can afforde, drive them
of necessity to the deputation of subordinate officers, both to receive and
commence the requests of their inferiors. But is there either danger in the
person of God, who rides upon the Cherubins, and makes his enemies his foot
stool? Or defect in his hearing, whose ears are open to the prayers of the
poor destitute, and his eye liddes soundelie try and examine the children of
men? He that boweth the heavens, and himself comes down with his
omniscient knowledge, has he need of intelligenciers and informers to give
him knowledge of earthlye things? He that planted the ear, does he not
hear? He that stands and knocks at our doors, and calls for entrance,
when we stand and knock at his, will he not grant entrance? Is he not
near and next of all to all such as call upon him with faithfulness? We
dream of outward and inward courts, doors and gates, porters and
mediators, impedimentes and stoppes, I grant, in earthly Courts. But the
Lord is porter himself at these heavenlye gates. Chap. 11.
For when the friend knocked in the parable of Luke at midnight, the deadest
hour of the night, who was nearest the gate, first awoke, if yet he slept at
all, and first answered? O quam dare vult etc. O how willing is he to
grant that is so wiling to be disquieted? Petr. Rave^.
How glad to hear thy knock, that has placed his bed so near the gate? O
quam non ad^anuam tantum, sed ipsa ianua dominus fuit? etc. And how truly may
we say, that he was not only near the gate, but the Lord himself the
very gate; who, when his children were a sleep, Primus and solus.
the ears of Angels and saints shut up, first and at the first call, nay
only amongst the rest, made answer unto it? The Lord is always nearer to
us than we to him; he hears the desires of the poor in the tenth Psalm,
he first prepares the heart, and sets it on work to pray, and when he
has so done, bends his ear unto them. Claudi^ Casari^ libertus

Aut manu. a^t (...), aut si res longior, scripto; scilices ne vocis dignitatem
iis impertiret.


If now they can otherwise demonstrate that as Pallas the Emperors libertine,
would never speak to any servant about him (forgetting his own late servile
estate) but either by pointing and signifying with the fingers, as the wiseman
calls it, or becking, or if the business vere long, by writing; because
forsooth he was loath to bestow the honor of speaking upon them; and as the
rulers of the earth in a kind of majesty not unfitting to their place,
answer by mediation of others; so the Lord above hears not suitors but by
the preferment and procurement of Angels and other glorified spirits, then it
cannot be hindered, but other advocates and spokes-men must be allowed of. But
this is likewise cleared in the 102. Psalm. where it is said, that he has
looked down from the height of his sanctuary, out of the heaven did the LORD
behold the earth; to what other end? but that he might hear the mourning of
the prisoner, and deliver the children appointed unto death. And this moreover I
am sure of, that the LORD has often and expressly enjoined us, Call upon
me: and if the book were searched throughout with cresset-light, never would
it be prooved, that he gave any charge to call upon others. Neither was ever
the shadow of any thing so faithful to the body, to follow and wait upon
it, as the success of good speed has been consequent to a prayer
faithfullye made. For, as if their souls were knit together, like the souls
of David and Jonathan, you shall ever see them joined. So in the fourth Psalm,
I called upon the LORD, and he heard me at large: and an hundredth the like
might be alleged for confirmation. And therefore if we err in this point
of doctrine, we may say truly with Jeremy, Thou have deceived us LORD,
when we were deceaved, that is, when we were willed to call upon thee
alone, thine was the blame, if we do amiss, and we may comfort our selves
that we err by warrant and authority from him, that must pardon errors.
Therefore I conclude from the two and twentieth Psalm; Praise the Lord ye
that fear him, magnify him all the seed of Jacob, and fear him all ye the
seed of Israel. For he has not despised the low estate of the poor, nor
hid himself from him, but when he called, he harkened unto him. Let the
house of Esau use the liberty of the wide world, and the feed of Babylon call
upon other helps as they have done, and those that fear not the Lord, use
their discretion. Our example leads us otherwise. Jonas was this poor man,
and his low estate, the belly of the fish, he called upon his God, and he
harkened unto him.

Thou heardest my voice.
The varying of the person, in that before he spoke of God, now to God, gives
us variety of instruction, and helps to confirm the doctrine before
delivered. For since we have immediate access to the Lord, to speak to his
majesty as it were face to face, and mouth to mouth, it were to shamefast and
senseless a part in us to make other means. And it is besides, a singular
testification of his thankful mind; who receaveth not the favor of God as
the nine lepers in the gospel received their clensing, not returning again to
give thanks to him that cured them, but first reports to himself, and as
many as shall read or hear this song what God has done for him, I called
upon the Lord, and he heard me, (which is somewhat further of;) and then
with a nearer approach joining his soul as closely to the ears of God, as
Philip joined himself to the chariot of the Eunuch, relates the blessing of
his prayer to the author himself of all blessings, And thou Lord hardest my
voice; thus rendering unto him grace for grace, a kind and dutiful
rememoration, for the mercies bestowed upon him. Some take the comforts of God,
as the beasts in the field take their meat, not looking up to heaven from
whence they come. Nay the Ox will know his owner, and cast an eye to his
hand, and the ass his masters cribbe, but my people know not me, says the
Lord: Some acknowledge the Author, and forget him presently, even whilst the
meat is between their teeth, as Israel did. Some remember sufficiently, but
accept them as due debt, as if they had God in bands to perform them. They
serve not God for naught, which was the objection of Satan. Some are ready to
kiss their own hands* for every blessing that comes upon them, and to
ascribe them to their strength or wit, whereof Bernard spoke, Vti datis tanquam
innatis, maxima s^perbia, It is the greatest pride, to use Gods gifts, Idem.
as if they were bred in us. Others there are that give thanks ex usu magis
quam sensu, rather of custom then devotion, as cymballes sound from their
emptiness; for even Saul will be a prophet amongst prophets, and an hypocrite
take good words into his mouth amongst hearty professors. Jonas, I nothing
doubt, from the ground of his heart, tells forth the deliverance of the Lord,
which in the spirit of a prophet he foreseeth and presumes before it comes,
not only to himself and us, but as the rivers of the Land send back their
waters to the sea, in a thankful remembrance and remuneration, that they took
them thence; so Jonas returns this mercy to the Lord himself that was the
giver of the mercy, And thou Lord heardest my voice: as if he had concluded
and agreed to himself, that neither God, nor man, nor his own conscience
should ever be able to accuse him of unthankfulness. I will both preach it
to my self privately, and publicly to the world, that the Lord has heard
me: And thou Lord shall also understand from mine own lips, that I make
acknowledgement and profession to have received my safety from thine only
goodness, Thou Lord have heard my voice. I will so meditate upon thy
benignities within mine own heart, and leave a chronicle of them to al
posterity to come, that I will not meane-while forget to look up to the
mountains from whence my help was. It is the part of an honest and ingenious
mind, Plin. prolog. not. histor. Deprehendi, in fur to man le quam mu^tuum
read, re.
to confess who they are by whom thou have profited; but on the other side,
the mark of a most ungracious amd unhappy nature, rather to be taken in the
theft, than to return like for like. And what do they else but steal and
embezell the graces of God, which either dissembling their author, assume them
to themselves, or confessing the author, extenuate their worth, as if they
were not meet to be accounted for? These are the thieves and robbers indeed,
capital malefactors, sure to be cut of on the right hand and on the left,
zach. 5. 1 Cor. 6. Prove. 6.
and not to inherit the kingdom of God, as the Apostle threatens. The
stealing of temporal things may be acquitted again, either with single, or
double, foure-folde, or seven-folde resolution. But the filching and purloming
of the glory of God can never be answered. Others steal of necessity to
satisfy their souls, because they are hungry, and but equal from equal,
man from man. But these of pleasure and pride break through heaven; which
though it be free from violent thieves, yet these by a wile and insidiation
enter into it, and steal away the honor of God which is most precious unto
him. When John Baptist was borne, Luc. 1.
the neighbors and cousins upon the eighth day at the circumcising of the
child, called him Zacharias after the name of his father. Elizabeth answered
them, not so, but he shall be called John, though it were a mervaile to them
all, and none of his kindred were so named; and Zachary wrote in his tables,
that John should be his name. They knew that he was the gift of God, which his
mother in her old age and in the state of her barrennes had conceaved, and
therefore called him John, that is, the gift of God, in remembrance of natures
vnfuitfulnesse, and their undeserved son, whom neither father, nor mother,
nor kindred, I mean not ordinary and carnal generation could have given unto
them such are the children of our wombes (a gift that comes from the Lord.)
And such are our children and fruit otherwise, whatsoever we possess,
outward or inward, we hold it in Capite, even in the Lord of Lords, who
is the giver of every good perfect gift, Val. Max. li. 5. cap. 3. Exanguem and
moritu^^am.
as James writes. Scipio Africanus the elder had made the city of Rome, being
in a consumption, and ready to give up the ghost, Lady of Afric. At length
being banished into a base country town, his will was that his tomb should
have this inscription upon it, Ingrata patria, ne ossa quidem mea habes;
unthankful country, thou have not so much as my bones. Many and mighty
deliverances have risen from the Lord to this land of ours to make
provocation of our thankfulness. For not to go by a calendar, but to speak
in 2. words, we have lien in ignorance as in the belly of the whale, or
rather the belly of hell (for blindness of heart is the very brimme and
introduction into the hell of the damned;) the Lord has pulled us thence. We
have also lien in the heart of our enemies as in the belly of the fish; Gebal,
and Ammon, and Amelek, and the Philistines with those of Tire, have combined
themselves, and cried a confoederacy, a confoederacy against us; the Lord has
also delivered us, to make some proof of our grateful spirits. For this a
rule in beneficence, Ingratus est adversus unum beneficium? Senec.
is a man unthankful for one benefit? for a second he will not. Has he
forgotten two? the third will reduce to his memory, those that are slipped
thence. God has liberally tried us, with one, and an other, and a third, and
yet cease not. But what becomes of our gratitude? It has been our manner
for the time, to have pamphlets and forms of thankesgiving in our churches,
our hearts have burnt within us for the present, as of the two disciples that
went to Emaus, to assemble our selves at prayers, preachings breaking of bread,
and to give an hour or two more than usual from our worldly affairs, as a
recompense of Gods goodness. Our mouths have been filled with laughter, and
our tongues with joy, and we have been content to say, the Lord has done
great things for us, whereof we rejoice. But how quickly forget we all
again? Ingrata Anglia, ne ossa quidam habes; Ungrateful England thou have not
so much as the bones of thy patron and deliverer; thou have exiled him from
thy thoughts, buried him in oblivion, there is not one remnant or footeprint
left, to witness to the world, that thou have been protected. What others
have testified in former times, by building of altars, pitching of huge stones,
raysinge of pillars, dedication of feasts, vvriting of books, that their
childrens children might ask a reason, and be instructed in GODS ancient
mercies; thou haste not left to thy race to come by one stone, one turfe, one
post, one paper or schrole of continuance, in remembrance unto them of thy
ampler benefits. It deserves the protestation of GOD 1. Esaias, (Hear O men?
and harken O Angels? no.) A greater auditorie is required. Hear o heavens, and
harken o earth, I have brought up, preferred, and exalted sons, and they have
despised me. If servauntes and bondmen, the sons of Agar, of whom it was
said, Cast out the bondman, it might less have been marvayled at: but
sons of mine own education, adopted by special grace, these have despised
me. They had an action in Athens against unthankful persons: The more their
blame, Val Max.
Qui cum aequissima iura, sed iniquissima haberent ingenia, moribus suis quam
legibus vti maluerunt; who having good laws, ill natures, had rather use
their manners than their laws. For if some of those excellent men, which
Athens despightfully and basely required, Theseus who was buried in a rock,
Miltiades who dyed in prison, and the son of Miltiades who inherited
nothing amongst them but his fathers bands, Solon, Aristides, Phocion, who
lived in banishmente, should bring their action against Athens in the court
of some other cittye, were it able to answer their just exprobrations? O
Athens, thy walls, thy people, thy trophies, and triumphs far and near, by
land and sea are thus and thus multiplied. Horum authors vbi vixerint, vbi
iaceant, responde. But put in thine aunsvvere, and shevve, where the authors
of those things lived, and where they are buried. God has an action of
ingratitude against his sons, and brings them into law, not before city
or nation, but (to note the horror of the vice) before heaven and earth, that
all the corners and creatures of the world may both know and detest it. And
surely it was well marked by a learned man; No man wondreth at dogs, or
wolves, because they are common: but centaures, and satyrs, and such monsters
of nature al gaze upon. It may be, drunkenness, and adultery, and other
faults, having either nature or custom on their side, are less odious to
men, though not less heinous in their kinds. But name an ungrateful person,
and without naming any more, we all detest him as a prodigious, unnatural
noveltie, Jngratum si dixeris. Psalm. 92.
violating the communion and nature of mankind. I conclude. It is a good thing
to praise the Lord, and to sing unto the name of the most high, to declare his
loving kindness in the morning and his truth in the night season. It is good
touching the actio^ it self. For it is better to bless the^ to curse, and to
give thanks, then to give out a voice of grudgings. It is good in respect of
the matter and object; that so glorious and renowned a God vouchsafes to be
magnified by our polluted lips, the honor returns upon our selves. It is
good because of the retribution. For Cessa^ decursus gratiarum, vbi non fuerit
recursus; the course and descent of the graces of God cease, and the spring
is dried up, where there is not a recourse and tide of our thankfulness.
Wherefore let not so good an exercise be a burden and grief to good souls.
Let the unrighteous vanish away in their graceless ingratitude, and become as
the dunge of the earth. Let them forget the God of heaven, that the God of
heaven may also forget them. But let the righteous always rejoice in the Lord,
for it becomes well the just to be thankful. Early and late let us bless
his holy name, though not with Lutes and Harpes and instruments of ten
stringes, yet with the best members and instruments we have, bodies and
spirits, which the fingers of God have harmonically composed and joined
together, and the joy of the holy ghost, has melodiously tuned for this
purpose. Let us never turn our backs to the temple of the Lord, Ezech. 8.
nor our faces from the mercy-seate. Let us not take without giving, as
unprofitable ground drinks and devoureth seed without restoring. Let us
neither eat nor drink, nay I will more say, let us neither hunger nor thirst,
without this condiment to it, The Lord be praised. Let the frontlets between
our eyes, the bracelets upon our arms, the gards upon our garments, be
thanks. Whatsoever, we receive to use or enjoy, let us write that posie and
epiphoneme of Zachary upon it. Zach. 4.
Grace, grace unto it, for all is grace. Let us learn the song of the blessed
before hand, that hereafter we may be able to sing it with more perfection;
Praise, honor, and glory, be unto him that sits upon the throne, and to the
Lamb. Paul is ours, Apollos is ours, Cephas is ours, the world ours;
children, friends, fields, vineyardes, health, wealth, all things ours, but
we are Christ's, and Christ Gods; there is the fountain, thence they come all,
thither they all return. He is a and o, first and last, author and finisher,
giver and receiver, his holy name be blessed for ever and ever. Amen.

THE XXVI. LECTVRE.
Chap. 2. verse 3. and 4. For thou had cast me into the bottom, in the
midst of the sea, and the flowdes compassed me about; all thy surges and all
thy waves passed over me. Then I said, I am cast away out of thy sight: etc.
IMAGINE the song of Jonas to consist of three parts, a proposition,
narration, and a conclusion; and the proposition already to be past in the
second verse, summarilye abridging the beginning, proceeding and ending of the
matter in hand, that is the peril, prayer, and deliveraunce of Jonas. The
narration now follows to the eighth and ninth, wherein he concludes: so
that all that lies between the second and those, makes but for exornation;
for both his danger is more amply described, and his prayers often mentioned,
and a frequent hope of his deliveraunce ingested. And it is well worthy your
considering, that as music consists of acutum and grave, high and low,
sharp and flat, so this song of Sion which Jonas sings in a strange land,
with a far heavier heart then ever Israel sange by the rivers of Babylon, is
mixte and compounded of two kinds of soundes. For on the one side, are
dangers, terrors, desperations and deiections of mind often heard, but on
the other, the sweetest comfortes and joys of the holy Ghost that could be
conceived. First in the third verse, Thou had cast me into the bottom of
the sea, with many exaggerations to declare his fear. But in the fourth, Yet
will I look again to thy holy temple. Again in the fifth, The waters
compassed me about unto the soul, etc. But in the sixte, Yet haste thou
brought up my life from the pit, O LORD my God. Lastly in the seventh, My
soul fainted within me, yet I remembered the LORD, and my prayer came unto
thee into thine holy temple. Invicem cedunt dolor and voluptas: sour and
sweet, mourninge and joy, trouble and peace come by courses and successions.
There is no weeding up of these tares, no remooving of these griefs and
annoyaunces from the life of man. This is the state and condition of our
present pilgrimage, as of a field, wherein there is wheat and darnell, they
must of necessitye grovve together till the harvest, when it shall be said,
priora transierunt, the former things are past, sorrovve and sickness,
dread and death have now their end. The eveninge and the morning are but one
day. Barnardes allusion to that place of Genesis is the interpretation of the
Psalm, heaviness may be in the evening, but joy comes in the morninge.
We bear forth our seed with tears, we shall bring home the sheaves in
our bosom with joy. The Son of GOD has been entertained in this life, at
one time with Benedictus, blessed is he that comes in the name of the
LORD; at an other, with crucifige, crucify him. John Baptist at one time is
reverenced and heard gladly, at an other beheaded. Not to speak of the head
or members aparte, Cantic. 1.
the whole body cries in the Canticles, I am black, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem, but comelye. Nigra vestro, formosa divino Angelico que iudicio,
Bern. ser 25. in Cantic.
black in the judgment of men, fair in the sight of GOD and Angels;
nigra foris, sed intus formosa, black without, by reason of the miseries and
deformities of this life, but invvardelye beautiful, with a godly
presumption and hope of my bliss to come. One generation passes and an other
succeeds, says Ecclesiastes, Eccles. 1.
the sun govveth down, and the sun draws to the place of his rising
again, the vvinde goes to the South, and compasses toward the North, Hoc
vnu^ aequale habet om^ium te^porum inaequalitas quod vicissi^udo in omnibus
reperitur. Nazian.
and returns by the same circuit: and though all times differ, yet they
differ not in this, that they are all subject to var^atitions. And as a
discord in music gives a grace and commendation to the song, so these
discordes and iarres in our life keeping their alternatio^, make our pleasures
more welcome when they come. That Christians should well digest them, there is
some better cause, by reason of their faith. For they think not how bitter the
potion is in taste, but what health comes after it. Nor are they ignorant,
that these crosses and disturbances, are as it were the first-fruites of the
spirit, the earnest penny of our fathers inheritance, Primitiae spiritus,
arrha paternae haereditatis, praelibatio gloriae.

Corpus and anima minu^a duo.


a prelibation of glory to come: that if we bestow all that we have as the
poor widow did, our 2. mites, body and soul (as one compares them) upon the
service and at the pleasure of our God, we leave but simpla pro centuplis, one
for an hundredth fold, which shall afterward be restored. But you shall find
that the Gentiles themselves, who were without the covenant of God, and
consequently the hope of better things, were loath to sur^et of pleasure, and
took it as an introduction to worse to come, if ever they received too much
even of good fortune. When tidings was brought to Philip of Macedon, that
Parmenio got the victory over his enemies, Alexander his son was borne, and
his chariots won the prize at Olympus, all in one day, Fortun^ o^^nipotem and
ineluctabil^ fatum.

Levi me a^fice infort^nio.


he called upon fortune (reputed a goddess in those days) to do him some
little hurt, and to spice as it were his joys, with bitterness, that they
made him not forget him self. It was the reason that the king of Egypt blessed
himself from having any thing to do with Polycrates king of Samos, because he
was over-fortunate. For having thrown a massy and rich ring into the sea to
try an experiment in despite of fortune, he found it again at his table in
the belly of a fish which was brought for a present unto him. They many times
wished good luck, Hostium ^iliis continga^ in delicii^ viver^.
and pleasurable days to the veriest enemies they had. In the books of Job
and the Psalms, the thriving of the wicked, wants not a learned orator to
set it forth at large. Their bullock gendereth and fails not, their cow
calveth and casts not her calfe. They send forth their children like
sheep, and their sons dance. Job. 21.
They take the tabret and harp and rejoice in the sound of the organs. Thus
far it were good, you vvoulde think, to be no good man. Psalm 7^*
For they come into no misfortune like other men. What? no misfortune? Even
the greatest in this, that they have so large an indulgence. Surely it were
good for us not to be acquainted with such engrossers of prosperity, and much
less to have to do with their unhappy happiness. For as in the burning of a
candle, when it has long given light, extremum occupat fumus and caligo, the
end is in smoke and caliginousnesse, so fares it, when the candle of the
wicked is put out (for so Job compares their felicitye.) Their end is worse
then their beginning, as the beginning of Saints worse then their end. In
puncto descendunt in infernum; in the stirring of an eye, they go down into
hell. Where if there be not, fumus and caligo, and much worse, there is no
hell. He that saw the wicked flourishing like a green bay tree, which winter
defaceth not, and it never withers til it be plucked from the earth, looked at
an other time for their place, (I say not the trees but their place) and they
were no more found. O how suddenly are they destroyed, perish, Psalm. 37.
and come to a fearful end? as a dream when one awaketh? Lord, when thou
raisest us up, thou shall make their image despised. Suddenly, Psalm 73*
and fearefullie and contemptibly; measure enough, themselves vanishing,
perishing, consumed, when others arise whom they thought not of. He that at one
time said of himself, I have cleansed my heart in vain, because he could not
judge aright of the prosperity of the wicked, Ibid.
at an other time said to the foolish, Be not so foolish, and to the wicked,
lift not up the horn, Psalm* 75.
lift not up your horn on high, neither speak with a stiff neck. For in
the ^ande of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is of the color of blood, it
is fully tempered, and he povvreth out the same, and all the wicked of the
earth shall surely vvringe out and drink the dregs thereof. What pleasure
is there now in the cups of Balthazar and his concubines, the cups of the
whore of Babylon, golden and sugared cups, and wine in ^oules as the prophet
speaks, when at the end of the banquet to close up the stomach, they must
take this cup from the hand of the Lord, and drink their fatal draught? Thus
of the one side, you shall ever find the happiness of the wicked in primis, it
comes at the first, and falls like a dry thistle flower. Son, thou had
thy pleasure: it is now past. Ierom. 30.
But if you will learn what becomes of the righteous, in novissimis
intelligetis, you shall understand it in the last days. Mark the upright man,
Psalm. 37. V^ eadem Catena custodem and militem copulat, sic sp^s and metus
c^^u^cta. 1* ep. 6.
and behold the just, for the end of that man is peace. Seneca writes that
as the same chain coupleth the keeper and prisoner together, so hope and fear
are ever conioined, and fear follows hope. For where our wishes and desires
are bent, we cannot choose but doubt of our good speed. These two are coupled
together in the song of Jonas, but their order inverted. For fear goes
before, like the keeper and iaylour of Jonas, and hope comes ever behind, to
give him comfort of enlargement. Fear seems to have the greater scope, and
to triumph over hope, as may appear, in that so many words, even four whole
members of the two next verses, are spent in the amplification of it, when as
but a short clause, and snatching look of the eye is added in the end to
express his hope. But how little leaven of hope seasoneth the whole lump of
the danger before mentioned? The divisio^ of the text.
1. Thou had cast me.

2. Into the bottom.

3. The floods compassed me etc.

4. Then I said.




The parts are according to the number of the verses, two. First, his danger,
secondly, the hope of recovery. The danger enlarged, first by the author,
Thou had cast me, which notes not only a violence, but a neglect, as if
the Lord had thrown him aside never to be remembered more: secondly by the
place, into the bottom in the midst of the sea: thirdly by the accessaries to
the place, the flowdes compassed me, all thy surges and all thy waves passed
over me: fourthly by the infirmity and distrust of his own heart, the effect
of the rest, and his conclusion upon the precedent proofs, Then I said, 2.
yet will I look again.
I am cast away out of thy sight. But in the second place, one cast and
motion of his eye toward the temple of the LORD, makes satisfaction and
amends for all those former discomfortes. 1. The author.


1 Thou had cast me. The author is not his equal; (a briar contending with
a thorn, an earthen vessel with an earthen vessel, wherein there is some
proportionate comparison: The children of Israel and sons of Anak* David and
Golias, were not equally matched, yet man to man; Wherein if either part be the
weaker, it may be redressed in time, either by themselves, or by their a
bettours, Or if never redressed, the body alone bears the smart, the soul no
whit endangered.) But the worker of this woe, is the most mighty LORD, whose
face is burning and his lips full of indignation; whose wrath he lives not
upon the earth that can abide, Psalm. 1^.
when the foundations of the mountains move and sbake because he is angry;
whose anger has a further extente, not upon the body alone, but upon the
soul too, not only to kill, but to cast them both away for ever into hell
fire. Behold, he breaks down and it cannot be built, Job. 1^.
he shuts up a man and he cannot be loosed. Woe, woe be unto us, cried the
uncircumcised Philistines, though they stood in battle array, 1. Sam. 4.
who shall deliver us out of the hands of these mighty Gods? erring in the
number, but not in the power of the glorious deity? The men of Bethshemesh,
being afterward smitten, because they had pried into the arc of Covenant,
accounted themselves but dead men before him, Who is able to stand before
this holy Lord God? The very pillars of heaven, says Job, 1. Sam. 6.
tremble and quake at his reproof. At his rebuke he dries up the sea, and
makes the floods deserte; Job. 26.
their fish rotte for want of water and die for* thirst. He clotheth the
heavens with darkness, and makes a sack their covering in the prophecy of
Esaias. Chap. 50.
How fearful a thing shall it then be, to a sinful man, whose foundation is
but dust, and not like those of the mountains, and the pillars of his body but
flesh and blood, far inferior to the pillars of heaven, all the moisture of
whose substance shall sooner be exacted than that of the floods and rivers, to
fall into the hands of the living God, who lives for all eternity beyond the
days of heaven, and therefore is more able to ave^ge any injury done unto him?
The anger of a prince, though it seems as dreadful as the messengers of death
unto us, may be pacified; if not, his anger is mortal like himself, his
breath is in his nostrels, and promises to those that fear, an end of his
life and wrath together. The hostility of a deadly foe may beeresisted by
hostility again, though his quiver be an open sepulcher, and they all very
strong; Ierem. 5.
if not, he can but eat up our harvest and bread, eat up our sons and
daughters, our sheep and our bullockes, our vines and fig trees, and destroy
our cities. But if the anger of the Lord of hosts be kindled, who can put it
out? if he be an enemy, let heaven and earth join hand in hand to work our
safety, it should not help. If he begin he vvil make an end, 1. Sam. 3.
in the first of Samuel, or rather not an end, in the fourth of Jeremy.
Consider the vision. I have looked upon the earth, says the Prophet, and lo
it was without for me and void; and to the heavens and they had no light. I
beheld the mountains, and lo they trembled, and all the hills shook. I
beheld, and lo there was no man, and all the birds of the air were
departed. I beheld, and lo the fr^^tfull place was a wilderness, and all
the cittyes thereof were broken down at the presence of the LORD and by his
fierce wrath. For thus has the Lord said, the whole land shall be
desolate, yet will I not make a full end. Behold now an end and no end.
Now if the Lord had so cast Jonas as he cast the Angels out of heaven,
without repentance and revocation of his fact, Jonas must have lien below as
the gravel and slime of the sea never to have risen up. But he cast him in
mercy not in fury, as he cast Adam out of Paradise to till the ground,
Nabuchodonosor from his kingdom to eat with the beasts of the field, Job
from h^s house and home to lie upon the dunghill, to do them greater honor and
favor in time to come.

2. The place. In profundum.
The place has three amplifications, 1. He was cast into the bottom of the
sea; vvhere-hence in likelyhoode, there was no recovery. Else, what meant
Micheas by the phrase in the seventh of his book, that God will cast our
sins into the bottom of the sea, but that he will lay them so low, and
heap such a burden and weight up* on them, that they shall never rise up
again? And our Savior by the same in the gospel, that he who should offend
one of his little ones, it were better for him that a mil-stone were hanged
about his neck and he thrown into the bottom of the sea? Math. 18.
Implying therein so desperate a danger to the body, as would never be
restored. So they singe of Pharaoh and his host in the fifteenth of Exodus:
Abyssi operuerunt e^s, and descenderunt in profundum velut lapis, and
afterward, profunda pe^ierunt vt plumbum. The bottomless depthes covered
them, and they sunk to the bottom as a stone; and as lead they were swallowed
in the waters. Some write, that the sea at the deepest is forty furlonges. I
cannot censure their estimation. But this I am sure of, it is very deep, and
our Savior meant to signify no less when he called it not (mare) the sea by
it self, Math. 18.
but Pelagus maris, the bottom of the sea. So Job speaks of Leviathan, he
makes the deep to boil like a pot of ointemente. Yea, Job. 41.
thou would think that the bottomless depth had an hoary head. Where it
is compared for depth with that which the legion of Devils in the eighth of
Luke, Abyssus.
desired they might not be thrown into. Now one furlong or faddome of waters
had been deep enough to have taken away the life of Jonas; much more was he
in ieopardy, when he was cast into the bottom of the sea. 2. he was not only
in the sea, but in the midst, the heart, the inwardst secrets and celles of
it, as the heart of a living thing is mid-most, and inwardst unto it. Jn cord^.
Whereupon Christ is said to have lien in Cord terrae, in the heart of the
earth Math. 12* and the depthes to have stood up together in Cord maris, in
the heart of the sea Exodus the fifteenth. This was the next augmentation of
the danger, that the whale bare him farthest from the shore, and kept his way
in the deepest channel or trade, so that all hope of ever coming to land
again seemed to have forsaken him. 3. he was not only in the heart of the
sea, but of the seas. There is but one universal and maine sea, which is the
girdle to the dry land, Marium*
but many particulars which take their several names from the places they lie
next unto. Now the voyage of Jonas was not limited and bounded within the
compass of the Syriacke sea, whereinto he was first received. But if it be
true which Josephus has, that he was cast up to land upon the shore of the
Euxine sea, then must he needs be carried through diverse seas, before his
arrival to that place. He had a purpose at first perhaps to go no further
then to Tarsus in Cilicia, which was hard at hand, and the Cilician sea, the
first he past by. But Jonas is borne from the Cilician to the Aegean, from
thence to Propontis, and so to the rode where his landing was. A just
judgment of God upon him, that because he would fly from the presence of the
Lord, he should be made to fly indeed. God threatens Sobna the treasurer,
Esaie the 22. that he would carry him into captivity, and toss him as a ball
in a large country, that he would drive him from his station, and destroy him
from out his dwelling place. So is Jonas carried into captivity, a prisoner to
a whale, and tossed as a bal in a large country, from sea to sea, driven from his
station where he mente to have settled himself, and destroyed from out his
dwelling place, and from the land of the living, and as Cain was a runnagate
upon the land, so is Jonas upon the waters, and till the Lord give a charge for
his discharge and manumission, no land dares receive him.

The floudes compassed me about, etc. His third peril is from the
accidents of the sea. For being in the bottom, 3. The accidents.
and in the midst of the bottom, not of the sea, but of the seas, is he at
rest there? No. There is no agony, nor passion of the sea but Jonas feels it.
The disquietmentes of that element, are either the meetinge of the fresh and
salt waters together, or the ebbing and flowing of it; or the waves and
surges that arise, either by vvindes in the air, or by flawes and expirations
from the cavernes of the earth; with all these is Jonas acquainted. Eccles. 1.
There is no question, but all rivers run into the sea, according to the
proverb, Qui nescit viam ad mare, quaerat sibi amnem, comitem, he that
knows not the way to the sea, let him get some river to be his guide. Now it
must needs breed a vexation and tumulte, when these contrary waters meet:
there is a fight and contention held betwixt them for the time. It is an other
disturbaunce, which the continual agitation, the flux and refluxe of the
waters makes. Cymothoe^ ^a regna vagae. Sil. Ital.
For when the course of that mighty body of waters is turned back again,
whither by the moon, as they hold in Philosophy, or by other disposition,
which all the instruments and engines in the world cannot bring to pass, we
cannot imagine that so reciprocal a motion is done in peace, but that the
whole heap of the sea is molested thereby. There be the floudes which
encircle him and compass him about, (...).
which either the confluence of the waters diversely qualified, or the ebbing
and flowing of the sea procured unto him. As who should say, I lay not in a
calm, but look where the waters were most unpeaceable and unquiet, even there
was I compassed about and had no way to pass forth. The sea is otherwise
disquieted, when either the winds in the air, or flawes from the vawtes and
breaches of the ground, raise up the waves thereof. For the earth has air
oftentimes imprisoned in the hollownes of it, which being inwardly choked, and
laboring to get out, sometimes shakes the joints of the land with
earthquakes, sometimes sets the people of the sea in a rage, and brings a
furious commotion upon the face of the waters. Wherefore Jonas being carried
through the Mid-land sea, having the land on both sides of it, must needs be
troubled the more, by reason the waters have not so free a passage as in the
patent Ocean, and therefore make a way with sorer impatience. Give them stream
at will, and there is less danger of travail, but straighten their course,
and they break a passage by force, and show what indignation they can against
the bars that hinder them. By common experience at home in locks and
mill-dammes we see what catarrhactes and downe-falles there are by the rage of
the water, what have it makes to pass, how impatiently it roreth because her
liberty is denied her. But those that ever passed the Magellan straightes, or
entered the mouth of the Gaditan sea betwixt Europe and Afric, where Spain
and Barbary is divided, to make a voyage into Barbary, or any other coast
within the Mid-land sea, know it to be most true, not by easy experience
alone, but by the adventure both of their vessels and their lives also. So
as, you see, the very nature of these seas, where the propinquity and enclosure
of the continent did so much annoye them on every side, partly by breathing
upon them out of many holes and ruptures thereof, partly by lessening their
channel, besides the ordinary winds which raised up their billows, and the
extraordinary providence of God which dealt more strongly than al these, did the
more afflict Jonas.

The words are very significant. Omnes fluctus and gurgite^ ^ui.
All thy surges and all thy waves passed over me. 1. They are not simply
waves (as all confess) but waves with irruption and violent assault. Our
English well interprets them surges, which is the meeting and breaking of
waters in such sort, that the one encountreth the other as if they were at
war. The Poet notably expresses them in the shipwreck of Caeix: Metam. 11.
that they plaide upon the ship, as engines and brakes of war play upon
castles, and as a Lion runs with all his might upon the weapons of man, or
as in the siege and skaling of a wall, though many have assailed it before, yet
one of a thousand at length surpriseth it; so when many volumes of waves had
before beaten and tried themselves upon the sides of the ship, Inter mill^
viros muru^ tamen occupat vnus. Vastius insurgens decimae ruit impetus vndae.
yet the tenth vvaue comes further and fiercer than all the rest. They were
not inferior to those that shook and battered the ship of Jonas, when the
sides thereof groned, and it thought to be rent in pieces. 2. They are not the
surges of the dead and senlesse sea, such as the wind and wether only might
excite, but they are the waves of God, chosen and appointed by him to be his
ministers to execute wrath against disobedient Jonas; Thy waves. 3. Their
number is so infinite and past comprehension, that he speaks in the largest
number, All thy waves, as if they had been levied from the ends of the sea,
and had assembled their forces into one place. 4. They lay not about him as
the floudes before mentioned, but they pass quite over him; and are a burden
to his head to keep him under still: they are on his right hand and on his
left, vpwardes and downewardes, forwards and backewardes, and leave him no
hope of evasion. The severing of the particulars weakeneth the force of the
words. But take a summary view of all in one, and make a single sentence of the
whole together, and you shall find them beyond exception. 1. He is in the
bottom, the lowest and basest part, far from the top of the waters. 2. in the
heart and entralles, far from the shore: 3. not of one singular sea, which had
some limits, but of a continual tract and course of seas. 4. Not where the
waters were placide and still, but where the floudes were ever fighting
together. 5. Those floudes lie as a circle about him, and keep him in like
armed men. 6. Not only the floods annoy him, the tides of the sea, and the
decourse of land rivers, but he is also troubled with waves. 7. They are not
simply waves, but surges, waves of the vehementest collision and insultation.
8. And not simply surges, but such as are strengthened by the arm and animation
of God, his waves. 9. As if there were no more in the world, but they had all
forsaken their proper places (as they came to the siege of T^oy) to turmoile
this one sea, he terms them in genelity, all thy waves. Lastly, they were
not about him as before, but lay like a pressure upon his body to keep it
down. There is yet a stinge in the tail of the Scorpion, a danger behind,
worse then the former; which as it is reserved to the last place, so has it
more venime in it then all the rest.

Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight, which contains the weakness and
distrust of his fearful conscience. 4. Infirmity of heart.
See what a dangerous conclusion he makes against his soul; not rashly
apprehended, but with leisure and deliberation conceived. I said: that because
the Lord had cast him into the bottom of the sea from the sight of men, and
the floudes and surges were over and about him, therefore he should think,
he is cast from the sight of God, that is, that the light of his face,
brightness of his countenance, aspect of his mercy and compassion had
everlastingly forsaken him. Jonas, thou art deceived. Thou speak more to thy
self, the^ ever the Lord said. He that cast thee into the sea, or caused the
mariners to do it, never said, that he cast thee out of his sight; and if thou
had asked the seas and the floods wherein thou were overwhelmed, they would
never have said it. They know that the Lord can say unto the earth, give, and
to the sea, restore, keep not those my sons and daughters back whom I call
for. It is the voice of the serpent that speaks this damnable sentence
within thee. Beware of his sophistry, admit it not, his reasoning is not good,
that because thou art persecuted and driven to the bottom of the sea,
therefore thou art wholly cast out. It is the pestilentest bait that ever Satan
laid to infect souls with. Who being himself the son of perdition,
compasses sea and land to make others his proselytes, the children of hell, as
deeply as himself is: and the cords wherewith he draws the^ into his own
inheritance of destruction, are to make the grievousnes of their sins, and the
sense of their present and but mome^tany afflictions, marks of their final
dereliction, and that the favor of God is utterly departed from them. This
was the snare that he set for the soul of Job in the mouths of his three
friends pronouncinge him a reprobate, and hypocrite, because he was afflicted
by God. The like for the soul of David, in the lips of his insolent enemies,
when they vpbraided him, where is now thy God? he trusted in God, let God
deliver him, if he will have him. Behold I show you a sea indeed, of a
bottomless depth, the ground whereof can no more be founded than the lowest
hell. He that is thrown into this sea, is always falling and descending, and
never finds an end. It has no midst in it, as the sea has, because it is
unmeasurable and infinite: I mean a desperate conscience, distrusting the
mercies of God, relinquished of it self; the floudes and surges whereof,
restless, turbulent, unplacable cogitations can never be quieted, and the
fightings therein, as betwixt waters and waters in the sea, between
affirmations and negations (it is and it is not) cannot be reconciled. Let all
the rivers and streams of fresh water which glad the city of God, and
comfort the souls of the faithful, run into it, they are resisted and
driven back. There is no entrance (I mean) for any persuasion of the
graciousnes and kindness of the Lord, though it be preached a thousand times.
The salt, unsavory, bitter quality in the soul, wherewith it is baned before,
has no communion with so sweet a nature. Which sin of desperation as the
nature of man has just cause to detest, because it breaks that league of
kindness which we owe to our own flesh, and many a bloody instrument has it
put into the hands of man to destroy himself, (which execution being done
against the laws of nature, a worse ever ensues from the judgment fear of God)
so for that injury and indignity which it ostreth to the Lord of heaven, sooner
shall he forgive the apostasy of his reprobate angels, than this damned sin.
Jerome observes upon the Psalms, that Judas offended more in despairing of
pardon, and hanging himself, In Psa 108.
than in betraying his innocent master to death. Isiodore gives a kind of
reason for it. Because to commit an offense is the death of the soul, but to
cast of hope of forgiveness is to descend into hell. Perpetrare flagitium est
more animae Sed veniam desperare est ad infernum descendere. 2. de sum b^.
What can ever be done more derogatorie and injurious to that righteous nature
of his, than to change his truth into a lie, and the lies of Satan into
truth, and to justify Satan more than God? that when as the Lord shall
speak on the one side and bind by promise, confirm by oath and seal with the
blood of his only begotten son, touching his goodness toward al true penitent
sinners, that although he have made a wound, he will heal it, though broken he
will bind up, though killed he will give life, yet he is not believed? But
when the Devil contrariwise shall suggest for his part that the justice of GOD
will never be satisfied, the heynousnesse of our sins never pardoned, as if
he had left his name of being the father of lies any longer, he is harkened
unto? What else is this, but to turn falshoode into truth, darcknesse into
light, and GOD for ever to be magnified into the Devil himself? Jonas went
not so far as I now speak of. For though it were a dangerous pang which
he was fallen into, and there vvanted but age and strength to make it up, yet
he persisted not therein; his feet had well nigh slipte, but he recovered
them, and he spoke vnadvisedlye with his lips, 2. His hope.
but he recalled it again. Yet will I look toward thine holy temple, I
will not so much explicate the words at large, as urge their consequence.
This was the difference between Judas and Jonas. Judas went out, and never
looked back more. The LORD cast him forth, and the devil bare him away to a
tree, whence he returned not till he had hunge himself. Jonas is cast out,
with an hope and mind to return. He forgets not the temple of the LORD,
and the place where his honor dwelt, though he were far remooved from it.
Judas has nothing but millstones about his neck (the neck of his guiltye
conscience,) to weigh him down; Jonas has wings and cork to bear him up.
Judas like a carkas wherein there is no life, falls down as the
Lacedemonian said of a dead man, whom he could not set upright upon his
feet oportet aliquid intus esse, there must be somevvhat within: Jonas has
that within, a spirit of comfort to quicken and supporte him. He has an
eye in his head, discovering those hidden ways which the eye of the eag^e
and kite never found out, to look to the temple of the LORD. VVhither he
meant the temple at Jerusalem, or vvhither his temple in heaven, Psa. 11.
whereof the Psalm speaks, the LORD is in his holy palace, the Lords
throne is in the heavens, I enquire not: but thrice blessed were those eyes
that did him this service. If his sentence and resolution had ended in those
former words. I am cast out, and there had been the periode and full point,
all his joys had ended. When the Jews said in the Prophet, Fortuna
innocenten deserit saepe, at spes bona nunquam. Senec.
perijt spes nostra, our hope is gone, they might as well have added, perijt
salus nostra, our salvation is gone, a man without hope is without his best
advocate. Good success may often for sake the innocente, but never good hope.
And therefore he changed his style in good time, veruntamen, yet
notwithstanding, I have anointed mine eyes with the eye salve of hope, and
through all those obstacles of sea and seas, floudes and surges, I am able to
look to the place of thy rest. It stands as the rudder in the sentence, and
turns it quite an other way. It was running apace upon dangerous shelues,
and had set up the full sails of deadliest discomfortes, but a breath of faith
comes in and stops that wretched course. Notwithstanding: Now does Jonas
begin to neese, with the child that the prophet called to life; now is his
first vprising from the dead; he had utterly fainted when he was in the belly
whither of the vvhale or of hell, but that he believed verily to see the
goodness of the Lord in his holy temple. Epaminondas being stricken thorough
with a spear, and his blood failing him, asked, if his target were safe, and
whither the enemy were put to flight: and understanding all to be answerable to
his hearts desire, said, my fellows in arms, Valor. Max. lib. 3. cap. 2.
it is not an end of my life that is now come, but a better beginning. The
loss of the body is not great. We sow it in dishonor, we shall reap it in
honor. And conscience may be wounded and daunted sometimes in the best that
lives. But if Jonas had lost his shield of faith, and his helmet of hope, the
principal armor of defense, the one for the head wherein the brain, the
other for the breast wherein the heart lies, and if the enemies of his soul,
these desperate agonies had gotten the upper hand, and not been vanquished by
him, where had his glory, where had his safety been? But his shield, you
hear, is whole, Notwithstanding I will look toward thine only temple.
With a little difference, you have the same speeches in the Psalms which
Jonas here uses. As in the 31. Psalm. I said in mine haste, I am cast out
of thy ^ight. Likewise in 42. All thy waves and thy floudes are gone over me. I
repeat no more. But they make it an argument, that Jonas had diligently red
the Psalms, and kept them by heart, and applied them as need served, to his
particular occasions. Est certe non magnus, Tul.
verum aureolus, and ad verbum ediscendus libellus. As he spoke of Crantors
book. Surely the book of the Psalms is not great, but golden, Nunquam de
manibus recedat. Discatur psalterium ad verbu^.
and thoroughly to be learned. Jerome advised Rusticus that the book of the
Psalms should never depart from his handling and reading. Let every word of
the Psalter be conned without book. I will say shortly, says he, It is a
common treasury of all good learning. It appears in the gospel that Christ
and his disciples were very conversant in that book; because in their sayings
and writings not fewer then threescore authorities are procured from above
forty of those several Psalms. But my meaning is not so much to commend the
book at this time as your use of it. For it is never so well red or heard, as
when the harp of David and the ditty of our heart, the scripture of the
Psalm, and the sense of our present occasion go together. Quid prosunt lecta
and intellecta, Bern.
^is^ teipsum legas and intelligas? readinge and understanding without
application, is nothing. Neither is it to purpose to singe Psalms, unless we
make them accord to our present miseries, when we are in misery; when we are
delivered, to our deliverances; and other the like variations. Thus did Jonas.

But to come back to David himself; though he spoke so daungerously as you
have heard, I am cast of: yet he confesses, he spoke it in his haste, and
he corrects that hasty speech with a veruntamen (a particle of better grace,
as Jonas did) yet thou heardest the voice of my prayer, when I cried unto
thee. And he exhorts all those that trust in the LORD to be strong, and
he will establish their hearts. Likewise in former words: these amongst
the restiarring very unpleasantly, and striking out of tune, I am forgotten as
a dead man out of mind, I am like a broken vessel. But I trusted in thee O
Lord, I said, thou art my God. But for ( nisi and veruntamen) but and
notwithstanding, notes as it were of a better sound, our hearts might quake,
to see such passions in the Saints of God. The beloved son of God, was not
without this convulsion of spirit, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
not feared and suspected, but felt and presently endured: why have thou done
it? yet he commends his spirit into the hands of that Lord, who seemed to
have forsaken him. Psalm. 68.
Thus ever the Lord sends a gracious rain upon his inheritance to refresh it
when it is weary: and it is true which Osee says, though we look for a day
or two, as if we were dead and forlorn, yet after those two days he will
reviue us, and the third he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.
Osee 6.
I will now proclaim from an other Psalm. Hear this all ye people, give
ear all that dwell in the world; low and high, rich and poor, one with an
other. My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart is of
knowledge. Psalm. 49.
I will incline mine ear to a parable, and utter a grave matter upon mine
harp. Surely it is wisdom, and knowledge, and a grave matter indeed, and
blessed are they that conceive it. If it be hid, it is hid to those that
perish, it is a parable to Cain, and Saul and Judas, and such like cast-awaies.
If I had the doubled spirit of Elias, and wisdom like the angels of GOD. I
would spend it wholly in the commendation of this grave and serious sentence.
Wherefore should I fear in the evil days, when iniquirie shall compass
me about as at mine heels? when it shall press and urge me so closely with
the judgments of God, that I am always in danger to be supplanted? now
what are the pillars of this heavenly security? can riches, or wisdom, or
houses and lands after our names, or honor sustain us? these are but rotten
foundations to build eternity upon. But, GOD shall deliver my soul from the
power of the grave, for he will receive me. I draw to an end. GOD is
faithful that has promised: heaven and earth shall pass away, but not a
jot of his blessed word. As the hills were about Jerusalem, and as these
floudes were about Jonas; so is the LORD about all those that fear him.
He has made a decree in heaven, it belongs to the nevve testamente,
confirmed by the death of the testatour, witnessed by three in heaven, and as
many in earth, and never shall it be altered, That at what time soever, a
sinner (whatsoever) shall repent him of his wickedness (whatsoever) from the
bottom of his heart, the Lord will forgive and forget it. O heaven before
heaven. And the contrary persuasions, hell before hell, damnation before the
time. I say again, if he repent of his wickedness, it is not the misery of
this wretched life, nor terror of conscience, nor malice of foes, let them be
men or devilles, let them be seven in one, a legion in another, all the
principalities and powers of darkness in the third, that shall hinder
forgiveness. Behold the lamb of GOD, you that are lions in your house, as
the proverb speaks, worst toward your selves; you that are ready to tear
and devour your own souls with grief and fear of heart, behold the Lamb
of GOD that takes avvy the sins of the world. Has his death put sense into
rocks and stones, and can it not persuade you? shall that blood of the lamb
cleanse you from your guiltiness, and will you in a mad and impatient mood
throw your blood into the air with Julian, or spill it upon the ground with
Saul, or sacrifice it upon an alder with Judas, and not use the medicine that
should ease their maladies? shall he open heaven, and will you shut it? he
nail the writings to his cross, and you renew them? he pull you from the
fire, and you run into it again? Is this his thanks? this the recompense of
his labors? this the wages ye give him for bearing the heat and burden of
the day in your persons? this the harvest for the seed he sowed in tears?
this the wine he shall drink for treading the wine press? in steed of a
cup of salvation, which you ought to take in your hands, and call upon the
name of the LORD, that is, as he has drunk unto you in a bitter cup of
passion, so you should pledge him in a pleasant draught of thanksgiving, will
you take a cup of death and desperation, blaspheme his name, evacuate his
cross, tread the blood of his testament under you ^eete, and die past hope?
God forbid, and the earnest prayers and sobbes of your own souls heartily
forbid it. Ianuas aeternae foelicitatis desparatio claudit, spes aperit:
Desperation shuts up, hope opens the doors of eternal felicity. And
therefore, he that has least and nothing at all to hope, yet let him despair
of nothing: Qui nil potest s^erare, desperet nihil.
it was the advice of an heathen, let it be the practice of a Christian. Let
him hope against hope, though the baseness of his condition, horror of sin,
weight of tribulation, envy of Satan, rigor of the law, justice of the
upright judge, seem to overthwarte him.

THE XXVII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 2. ver. 5.6. The waters compassed me about unto the soul, etc. Yet
have thou brought up my life from the pit, O Lord my God.
IN the third and fourth verses before I handled first the danger or fear of
Jonas, illustrated 1. from the person that cast him into it, 2. from the place
with the accessaries thereunto, the depth, the heart, the multitude of seas, 3.
from the passions of the sea, which were either floudes compassing him about,
or waves overwhelming him, and those waves in nature surges, touching the
author, Gods surges; touching the number, all his surges: 4. from the infirmity
of his own conscience, wherein, 1. advisedly he pronounces and says; 2. that
as an unprofitable thing he is cast out; 3. from the sight, that is, the favor
and grace of his merciful Lord. Secondlye I added thereunto his hope and
confidence, as a piece of sweet wood cast into the waters of Marah to take
away their bitterness, so this to relish and sweeten his soul again, and to
make some amends for all his former discouragementes. In these two contrary
affections, fear and hope, I told you the whole song was consumed to the
end of the seventh verse. First you shall hear his danger displaied in
sundry and forcible members, (for his words swamme not in his lips, but were
drawn from the deep well of a troubled conscience) and then at the end some
sentence of comfort added, as a counter-verse to alay the rigor of the other
parts, and to uphold his fainting soul. This was the order that David took
with his soul in the 42. and 43. Psalms, Why art thou cast down, O my soul?
Hope in the Lord, for I will yet give him thanks for the help of his
presence. Likewise in the 80. Psalm, Turn us again, O God of hosts, cause
thy face to shine, and we shall be safe. They come ((...) seems) as so many
breathings to a man wearied with a tedious race, or rather as so many lines and
recollections of spirits after swoonings. Now, unless I will leave my text,
as Jonas left the way to Niniveh which God had appointed him to walk in, I must
again entertain your ears with the same discourse which before I held: I
hope without offense to any man. For the hearing of these admirable words and
works of God is not, or should not be as the drinking of wine, wherein they
say, Primum po^^cultum necessi^atis, secu^dum voluptatis, tertiu^ ebriet^tis
etc^

Chap. 24. Eccles. 1. Cytharaedu^ ridetur.


the first draught is of necessity, the second for pleasure, the third for
sleep, and so ever more worse; but here it is true which the son of Syrach
wrote of wisdom (for this is the pure and holy wisdom,) They that eat her
shall have the more hunger, and they that drink her shall thirst the more. The
eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing such things. And
albeit it be a fault in music, evermore to strike upon the same string,
yet Jonas (I doubt not) shall easily be excused and find favor in your
ears, in handling this song of his, though he bring nothing for a time but the
repetition of the same matters. For first he gave you the ground and
plain-song, which I called the proposition in the second verse. The rest to the
end of the 7. though it be spent upon the same argument, yet is it with such
descante and variety to grace the plaine-song, the phrase so delectably
altered, and the sense of the words so mightily augmented, as I cannot feign
to my self, how the description of his troubles could have been furnished
with better lights of speech. I have heard the descriptions both of ancient
Poets, and of those in our latter days, Tassus, Ariostus, and the like so
highly extolled, as if wisdom had lived and died with them alone. And it may
be the sin of samaria, Angelus Politian preferred Pindarus his Odes before
the Psalms of David.
the sin of this land and age of ours (perhaps the mother of our atheism)
to commit idolatry with such books, that instead of the writings of Moses and
the prophets, and Evangelistes, which were wont to lie in our windows as the
principal ornaments, and to sit in the uppermost roumes as the best guests in
our houses, now we have Arcadia, and the Faery Queen, and Orlando Furioso,
with such like frivolous stories: when if the wanton students of our time (for
all are students, both men and women in this idle learning) would as carefully
read and as studiously observe the eloquent narrations and discourses contained
in the Psalms of David and other sacred books, they would find the^ to be
such, as best deserved the name and commendation of the best Poets. So rightly
did Jerome pronounce of David to Paulmus, that he is our Simonides, Pindarus,
Alceus, Flaccus, Catullus, Serenus, and in steed of al others. For the warrant
of my sayings, consider but this scripture now in hand. The danger of Jonas
(one might have thought) was so handled before, as if he had powered forth his
whole spirit at once. He told you of the deepest, and of the midst, and of the
number of the seas, with as many perturbations (for ought I know) as the sea is
subject unto, the confluge of repugnant waters, ebbing and flowing, and
breaking of the surges. Yet is he still as full as the moon, and as if he were
freshly to begin, enters again with an other style, and much more abundance
into the same narration.

Text.
Now he acquainteth you how far the waters came. He was in the waters and
waves before; but within the bowelles of the fish as it were in a crystal
cage: here it is otherwise, for the waters compass him ad animan vsque, even
unto the soul; he was now in the presentest danger of his life, there was
not an hairs breadth betwixt him and death, his soul lay even at the gates
of his body ready to pass forth. He told you of a bottom before, but now of a
depth without a bottom; there profundum, here abyssus: and he adds to his
former encumbrances weeds about his head, mountains, and promontories, and
rocks, and the bars of the earth wherewith he was imprisoned. The son of
Syrach speaks of wisdom, Eccles. 24.
that she is set up like a cedar in Libanus, and as a cypres tree upon the
mountains of Hermon, exalted like a palmetree in Cades, and as a rose-plant in
Jericho, and as a fair oliue-tree in a pleasant field, and as a plane-tree by
the waters; as a terebinth so she stretches out her branches and her boughs
are the boughs of honor and grace. Her root is so rich and so full of sap,
that an heart endued therewith, never lacks matter or words whereby to
persuade. It is written of Solomon, one of the offspring of wisdom, that God
gave him prudence and understanding exceeding much, and a large heart, even as
the sand that is upon the seashore, and that his wisdom exceeded the
wisdom of all the children of the East, and all the wisdom of Egypt. That
he was able to speak of trees from the cedar of Lebanon, to the hysope that
springs out of the wall, he also spoke of beasts, and fowls, and creepinge
things, and of fishes. 1. King. 4. Compare the heart of Jonas a little with
the heart of Solomon* You see how large it is. Larger, I am sure, if it be
wisely weighed, than of all the people of the East, and children of Egypt
before mentioned. He speaks of all his troubles by sea, from the greatest to
the least, even to the weed and bulrush that lies in the basest part of it.
We say, where the grief is, there commonly the finger^ It is not an easy
matter for those that are pint^ht with grief indeed, hastily to depart
either from the sense or report of it. A man must speak sometimes to take
breath. Jeremy wrote a whole book of Lamentations, and in the person of the
people of the Jews, as if all the afflictions under heaven had been stored up
for that one generation, proclaimed, Ego vir ille sum, I am that man that have
had experience of infirmities; that one and only singular man. This is the
manner of all that are afflicted: as Jonas before, all thy surges and all thy
waves passed over me; Etiam innocents cogit mentiri dolor.

Valor. Max. lib. 7. cap. 2.


they think their miseries to be alone, and that no other in the world has
any part with them. Contrary to the judgment of Solon the wise Athenian, who
thought that if men were to lay their griefs upon one common heap, and
thence to take out an equal portion with their fellows* they would rather
carry their own home again, and bear their burden aparte, than divide at
the stock, where they should find their wretchedness much more increased.
David in many Psalms declameth at large of his miseries. In the 69. by the
same words, which Jonas here uses, and happily borrowed from that ancienter
prophet. The waters are entered in unto my soul, and I stick fast in the deep
mire where no stay is. I am come into deep waters, and the streams run over
me. I am weary of crying, my throa^e (...) d^ie* and mine eyes fail whilst I
wait for my GOD. It is though^ that the 102. Psalm was a prayer written by
Daniell, or some other prophet, for the children of Israel whilst they were at
Babylon in captivity. My days are consumed like smoke, my bones are burnt up
like an hearth. Mine heart is smitten and withered like grass, I forget to
eat my bread, for the voice of my groaning my bones do cleave to my skin;
I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping. These were
persuaded, that the sun was no where overcast so much as where they were,
and that it would be happy for them to exchange their woes with any other
living creatures. How often did our Savior, the head corner stone of the
building, tell his disciples before hand of his perils to come at Jerusalem?
The emperor Otho thought it a part of dastardy to speak too much of death:
Plura de extremis loqui part ignaviae est. Taci^.
the emperor over Otho thought otherwise. If you search the Evangelistes, you
shall find his arraignement and death often repeated from his own mouth.
Matthew. the 17. as they abode in Galilee. The twentieth of that Evangelist, he
took them apart in the way as they were going to Jerusalem. Luke the ninth,
he bids them mark his words diligently, and put them into their ears,
(for he would not they should be committed to the wast air, which lay so
deep in his own heart,) The son of man shall be delivered into the hands
of men. In the 18. he reckons up all the particulars, the delivering of him
to Gentiles, mocking, reviling, spitting, scourging, putting him to death. That
elect ves^ell of his, 2. Cor. 11. as if he gloried in his infirmities, and
made them his triumphs, recapitulateth with a breath as many dangers as ever
he had endured either at home or abroad, his labors his stripes, his stonings,
his deaths, his scourgings, his shipwracks, by land, by sea, by thieves, by
false brethren, by his cuntrymen, by strangers, his hunger, thirst, fasting,
cold, nakedness, besides outward things. It was truly spoken by a learned man,
Sapiens miser, plu^ miser est quam rusticus miser. Scit enim exaggerare causas
dolendi, quas rusticus miser ignorant. A wise man in misery is more miserable,
than one that is simple, because he knows how to amplify the causes of his
sorrow, which the other does not. I take it to have been no small token of
wisdom in Jonas, Jeremy, David, Paul, and in wisdom himself, not only that
they felt the bitterness of the cup when they drank it, but were able to
discern what ingredients it had, and particularly to recounte whereof it was
tempered. The Stoicke philosophers, of whom we read, Acts 17. that they
disputed with Paul, (...).
and called him a sower of words, and a setter out of strange Gods (and it
shall not be impertinent a while to dispute with them, and to confute their
strange learning) they held many opinions incredible to the world, amongst the
rest, that grief was a matter of nothing. Orat pro L. Muraena. and in Paradox.
Tully recites some of their paradoxes, that their wiseman, whom they rather
supposed than ever could find in nature* (as Xenophon imagined a king, Tully
an orator, Aristotle felicity more perfect than ever that world was so happy
to attain unto,) though he were most deformed, was most and only beautiful,
rich though beggarly, a king though the servant of servantes like cursed
Canaan: that all sin: were alike, and he offended as much that killed a
cock when there was no need, as if he had cut the throat of his father:
that their wise man, was never moved with pity, never entreated, never went
by guess or opinion, never was deceived, never repented any thing, never
changed his mind, Thence it was that Chrysippus, Porticu^ Sto^^^rum (...)
dicebatur.
who was said to proppe up the gallerye of the Stoickes, offered that
stricte and tetricall division to the world, Aut mentem aut restim
comparandam, either to get them minds (constant and immovable) or to hang
themselves. Mentis qua^ mortis meta tenenda prior Tyrtae^^*
Now all other men that were not in the compass of this their fantastical
and Platonicall notion of wisdom, they condemned for fools, frantickes,
exiles, fugitives and the like. Amongst the rest of their admirable positions,
one was, that their wise man could not be enforced, and that sorrovve,
painfulness, and grief, were neither good nor evil, but indifferent at
least. And surely I must needs say, they were very prodigal of their lives;
and little would they seem to regard extremity of tortures. One told
Theodorus, that he would hang him: Threaten that, says he, Minitare
purpuratie tuis* Senec. Tull*

Noct. Atti^ lib. 12. ca. 5. Psalm 119. Bern. ser. 66. in Cant. Nonne plus est
sibimet hominem iniicere manus* quam id libe^ter ab alio sustinere? Veru^ est
vero^ martyrs aequo animo subiis^e dolores. Neque hoc facit stupor sed amor.
Submittitur enim sensus non amittitur, nec deest dolor sed superatur, sed
conte^nitur. (...).


to your carpet-knightes. It is all one to me whether I rotte in the air or
in the ground: and when you have al do^e, Cantherides, a little kind of wo^mes
can do as much as you. When they were upon the rack, they would cry, O quam
suave, O what pleasure is there in racking? Aulus Cellius writes of a fenser
at the games of Caesar, that when his wounds were l^nced by the Surgions, he
used to laugh at it. The Donatistes and Circumcellions were not much behind
them in this madness. But the reason of their insensibility is that (says
Barnard) that the Psalm gives; Their heart is as fat as grease. And that which
piety works in others, hardness of heart works in them. Some marvailed (he
says) that heretics did not only suffer death, but they underwent it with
joy. But they little considered what power the devil has, not only upon the
bodies, but upon the hearts also which he possesses. Is it not more for a man
to lay violent hands upon himself, than to endure it at the hands of
another? yet that the devil has thus far prevailed with many, we know by
frequent experience. He adds. It is true that the true Martyrs are very well
content to suffer death Which proceeds not from studipity, but from love;
neither is there an amission or leesing, but a submission of sense in them: not
that pain is away, but for the love of Christ, they vanquish and contemn it.
The Apostle does rightly express the cause of their wonderful patience. In all
these (he does not say, we are more than men) but we are more than conquerours.
I return to the Stoickes. It fell out that one of that sect was sick at
Lebadia. His disease was a fever, wherewith he was so afflicted, that he
groned deeply and inwardly to himself, yet would skarcely seem to do it.
Taurus willing to excuse him (a philosopher of a diverse profession) you have
seen a sight, says he not pleasant, yet profitable to be known; a
philosopher and pain wrestling and combating together. Faciebat vis illa and
natura morbi quod erat suu^ etc.
The force and nature of the sickness did her office, in causing a distraction
and vexation of the bodily parts. On the other side, reason, and the nature of
the mind, did that to them apperteined, in repressing the violence of grief,
and suffering no howlings or unseemly outcries to be heard. One that was
present, replied, Why groneth he against his will, if pain have no compulsion
in it? Taurus answered, that the Stoicke was best able to defend himself;
Inter ea quae (...).

(...).


but withal, that it was one of the principles in nature, to rejoice in that
which is good, and to shun the contrary; and that some of the Stoickes
themselves did never alovve their indolencye, or lack of passion; and lastly
that fortitude was not a monster to strive against nature, and to delight in
stupiditie and immanitie, but a knowledge and skill to discern what was meet
to be suffered, what not. And therefore because this opinion of the Stoickes
is not only against nature, but the practice of the son, and all the sons
of GOD, I thought it labor well bestowed to overthrowe these sowers of words
(as they called Paul) by their own practice, and by the judgment of other
natural Philosophers. Of whom we may truly say, as Plutarckes servant
sometimes said of his master; Non est ita ut Plutarchus dicit: It is not as my
master says His opinion is that it is a shame for a Philosopher to be angry,
and he has often reasoned of the mischiefs that come thereby, and he has
written a book Of not being angrye; Et ipse mihi irascitur, and yet is he
angrye with me. (...).
So these affirm in speech that sorrow is nothing, uses no violence against
a wiseman, yet when it comes upon them, they are no more able to endure the
gripings of it, than other fools. As Taurus spoke of the Stoickes ague, so may
I of the misery of Jonas. The force and nature of his miserye did her part;
reason and the nature of says on the other side, were not idle in their
offi^es. Jonas behaved not himself as the deaf ro^kes of the sea, which the
waves beating, and breaking upon, yet they feel nothing; dolere inter dolores
nesciens, not knowinge how to be grieved amiddest his griefs, but according
to the measure and quality of his sorrows, so was his sense, and so was the
purpose of God, by whom they were inflicted, To descend now to part^culars.
The matter of his fear, or the danger intended against him, arose from two
mighty adversaries, the sea and the land. His danger from the sea, is
tripled in the fifth verse, according to the number of the clauses therein.
First the waters compassed him about unto the soul. To have been in the
waters, had not been so much: nor much to be compassed and entrenched, as
those that are held in siege. But that they come unto his soul, the meaning
is, that his spirit, whereof the quickeninge and life of his body consisted,
was at hand to depart from him, and to yield it self prisoner to the
waters that assaulted it: there was the danger. Secondly, The depth closed him
round about. Abyssus.
The depthe, or rather no depthe. Some measure of water, where the bottom
might have been reached, would also have kept his fear within a measure. But
to be closed about with a bottomless water, makes a bottomless grief
whereof there is no end. 3. the weeds were wrapped about his head, the sedge,
the flagges, the bul-rushes, and other the like trashe, the very skorne and
contempt of the sea, dangerous impedimentes, to those that by swimming put
themselves upon the mercy of the merciless waters, they were not now fluent
and loose, but tied and entangled, not about the arms or the legs alone, but
about the head of Jonas, the principal spire of his body, (...)
the highest tower and as it were capitolle to the city, the leader and
captain to all his other parts. Now whether his head were bound about with
weeds, when he was first swallowed up, and so they remained about it still; or
whither the head of the whale be here the head of Jonas, because he is now
incorporate into the whale, and lives within him as a part of the whale, I
examine not: but this was the mind of Jonas to omit no word, not so much as of
the excrementes and superfluities of the sea, whereby his inextricable peril
might be described.

His danger by land is likewise expressed in two members of the 6. verse. First
he was descended to the bottomes, or ends, or roots, Verse. 6.
or cuttinges of, of the mountains; for where a thing is cut of, there it
ends. Man by nature and stature was made to ascend. God gave him his head
vpwardes. But Jonas was descended, which is the state of the dead, according to
the phrase of the scripture, Descendam lugens etc. I shall go down sorrowing
to my grave. Neither was he descended into the sides, or some shallowe cave
and vawte of the mountains* but as if he were numbered with those forlorn
souls, who call upon whole mountains, fall on us, and upon whole hills, cover
us, so was he descended ad radices and praecisa montium, Osee 10.
to the roots and cragges of them, lodged in so low a cabin, that all those
heaps and svvellinges of the earth lay upon him. 2. The earth with her bars
was about him for ever. What is the strength of a city or house but the bars
of it? as we read in the Psalm; Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem, praise thy God
O Sion: Psalm. ^4^.
for he has made the bars of thy gates strong, and blessed thy children
within thee. So then the bars of the earth, that is, the strongest muniments
and fenses it has, are the promontories and rocks, which God has placed in
the frontiers to withstand the force of the waters. These are the bars and
gates in Job, which God has appointed to the sea, saying unto it, Hitherto
shall thou pass, Job 38.
here will I stay thy proud waves,; and if you will these also are the pillars
of the earth, which god has fixed in such sort that it cannot be moved. The
meaning of the prophet was, that he was locked and warded within the strengh of
the earth, never looking to be set at liberty again. I told you before, that
the nature of the sea, wherein Jonas travailed, besides the over-naturall
working of God, did add much more trouble unto him, than if he had past
through the Ocean, where he had gained more sea room, and the continent being
farther of, would have yielded a liberal current, and less have endaungered
him. Now he has land round about him, by reason whereof, the sea is more
narrow, rockie, and hilly, apter to storms, skanter of rodes for safety, and
subject to a number of other incommodities. The course of the seas, through
which he past, was this. First he took shipping at Iapho, and was carried
thorough the Syriack sea; thence through Archipelago, or the Aegean; thence
thorough Hellespont betwixt Sestus and Abydus, where Asia and Europe are
divided not by more than seven furlonges, others say but five; afterward
thorough Propontis, where the sea is patent again, and has his forth; from
thence through Bosphorus Thracius, betwixt Constantinople and Natolia, where
the passage is so narrow that an ox may swim over; and lastly to the Euxine
sea, where, they hold, he was set to land. Thus was he often encumbred with
straightes, and never had cause to complain of overmuch liberty, where he was
most favored, till he came to the dry ground. Thus far of the dangers both
by sea and land. The first extended his rage, not to the chin or lips of the
prophet, but to his soul; and threatened him with a depthe bottomless and
unmeasurable, and came not against his life with limpide and pure waters alone,
but with other impedimentes, the unprofitable pelf and corruption of the
waters. The later gave him not rest upon a plain floor of the earth, but
clasped him under the cragges of ro^kes, and held him close prisoner under the
strongest bars and bounders it had. But as in the former staff of the song,
so also in this, there is a touch of a distrustful conscience: but there it
was openly expressed, and here it is closely conveyed in. The earth with her
bars was about me for ever. For ever.
For what means, in seculum, for ever, but that he was cast away from the
saving health and help of the Lord, without all hope of redemption? Did he
not know, that although his life were taken from him for a time, it should be
restored unto him at the resurrection of just men? what then, if the waters
were come up ev^n unto his soul? Or could he persuade himself that any
depth of waters could overreach the judgments and counsels of the Lord
in preserving his Saints? Are not they also abyssus magna, as great and a
greater deep than ever sea had? what then, if the depth closed him about? did
he not know that weeds should rotte and fall away from his head, and in
steed of weeds the head should be crowned with mercy and compassion, and
clothed with glory as with the sunne-beames? what then, though the weeds
were bound about his head? was he to learn, that the Lord should one day
say to all the prisoners of hope, (though Ossa and Pindus, the graves of those
Giants had buried their bodies,) stand up and show your selves, and that the
gates of hell, much less the bars of the earth are not of force to resist
his ordinances? what the^, though he were descended to the bottomes of the
mountains? etc. What if his head and heart also, body and soul, the whole
composition and frame of Jonas, had sustained a dissolution temporal, which
the law of mortalitye, and the common condition of all flesh had made him
subject unto? is there not a time of refreshing, when both the substance and
beauty of all these shall be renewed again? Then again, I say, what needs in
seculum? so deep a suspicion of the goodness of the Lord, as if it had for
ever relinquished him? it is an effect, which for the most part a vehement
grief works in all sorts of men, except some of a Stoicall disposition, and
others of a worse, that have seared their hearts with hot irons, and can feel
nothing. So we read in the Lamentations, Lam^ 3.
My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. And for a space of time
there is little difference either in speech or thought betwixt precious and
reprobate spirits. But whereas the nature of desperation is this, obligatur
consuetudine, obseratur ingratitudine, impenitudine obfirmatur; custom
binds, ingratitude locketh, impenitency barreth it up; there is not that
custom, ingratitude, impenitency in Gods chosen ones, but though they lay
down their hope, they take it up again, and though they give over the field
to the enemy, and seem to fly away, yet they fly to return and to fight with
more courage and upon better advantage.

The hope of a Christian man is very nicely and fearfully placed, betwixt two
extremities, as Susanna in the midst of two adulterers. Ista duo occidunt
anima^, aut desperatio aut perversa spes. Desperation and presumption are two
infamous gulfes, and here as ill, as ever Scylla and Charybdis did, for the
wrack and overthrow of in my poor souls. For as it is not good on the one
side to have too bold and head strong an hope, that howsoever we live, whither
swearing or fearing an oath, we shall be saved ( easpe freti, sperando pereunt;
they that so hope, perish by so hoping, Jnfidelis fiducia. Bern. Job 8. and 11.
it is the hope of the hypocrite, and shall come to naught, it is as the house
of a spider that shall soon be overturned:) so on the other it is not safe to
have our jealous god always in jealousy, and still to diffide, whither he be
our merciful father yea or not. For hope is ever accompanied with 2. sisters,
which never depart from her sides and society, faith and love; faith the guide
to keep us from desperation, love the rule to keep us from presumption. For
he that has faith can never distrust of the mercies of God, because he
believes the promises in Jesus Christ, and he that has charity will never
presume of a sinful and licentious life, because he is taught by love to keep
the co^ma^dementes of the most High. Jonas made some trial of both these
extremities. For when he went fiirst from the face of the Lord, and refused a
plain iniunction, what was it else but presumption in him? Now to distrust of
the mercies of God, and stiffly to affirm that his miseries shall never be
released, is a spice of desperation. But his wisdom was, that at their first
invasio^ he treads vpo^n the heads of both these serpents; as soon as he
feels them sting, he presently armeth himself with the grace of God to
escape from them. Otherwise, if as the speech of Jonas was in seculum, so the
thoughts of his heart had continued in seculum, without revocation, then had
he also taken up his place amongst those whom God had set on his left hand, and
made the mirrours to the world of his irrevocable damnation. For this were
insanabilis plaga, as Jeremy speaks, a wound that never can be cured, to
despair of the aid of God; as if a surgion should promise help to a sore,
and the patient should thrust his nails into it, and answer him, nay, but it
shall not be healed. It is the just state of the damned; for when all the
people upon the earth besides, live by hope, (for he that sows, sows in
hope, and he that reapeth, reapeth in hope, he that lives, lives in hope, and
he that dies, dies in hope, yea the whole creature groneth under hope, and
waits for that time with a fervent desire when the sons of God shall be
revealed, and it self restored,) these only are past hope. One compares
desperation to the beast in Daniell that has no name given to it. The first
of the four was a lion the second a bear, the third a leopard; Dan. 7.
but this without distinguishing the kind, was very fearful, and terrible,
and strong, and had great iron teeth, destroyed, and brake in pieces, and
stamped under his feet, and had horns enough to push at God with blasphemy, at
his brethren with injury, and at the soul within his own bosom with distrust
of mercy. Other our sins are fearful enough, and have as it were the rage of
lions and leopardes and bears, to spoil and make desolate the soul of man,
but the final decay indeed, which can never be recovered, whilst there
stands a seat of justice in heaven, is desperatio^. The greatest sins
(they say) are these, Th. Aquin. 2.2. qu. 20. art. 3.
which are opposed to the theological virtues, faith, hope, and charity;
infidelity to faith, desperation to hope, hatred to charity: amongst the which,
infidelity and hatred, the one not believing, the other hating God, are in
themselves worse, but in regard of him that sins, desperation far excedeth
the^ both in the danger annexed to it. For what can be more miserable, Quid
miserius misero non misera^te seipsum? August.
than a wretch not pitying himself? But to acquit the prophet of the Lord
from so damned a sin; as in the former verses, after his deadly downe-fall (one
would have thought) when his judgment came from his own mouth, I said I am
cast out, etc. he arose again and set up a sta^dart of comfort to all the
distressed of the world, yet will I look again toward thy holy temple; so
in this 2. fight and fit of his soul, when he is well-nigh spent, and it is a
question whether his faith be quick or dead, there comes an other veruntamen
like a shower of the later rain in the drought of summer, to water his
fainting spirit,, yet have thou brought up my life from the pit, O LORD my
GOD. The readings are diverse. The Hebrews s^y, thou have brought up my life,
or caused it to ascend. The septu^ginte, my life has ascended. Jerome, Thou
shall lift up. Some say from the pit, Fovea. Interitus Sepulchrum. (...).
August. ad Dardan. Jn aeternis idem est posse and esse. Nemo potest valde
dolere and diu. Epist. 97.

Aut toler^. bilem aut brevem.


some the grave, some from death, some from corruption. There is no odds. For
whither of the two times be put, the matter is not great, Thou have or thou
shall. For the nature of hope is this, futura facta dicit; Things that are to
come, it pronounces of as al^eadie accomplished. In the eigth to the Romans,
we are saved by hope, though we are not yet saved. And whom God has
justified, those he has also glorified, though not yet glorified. Ephesians
the second, we are raised from the dead, though our resurrection hereafter to
be fulfilled. But I stay not upon this. It is a rule in Seneca, that by the
benefit of nature, it is not possible for any man to be grieved much and long
together. For in her love she bears unto us, she has so ordered our
pains, as that she has made them either sufferable or short. that which
Seneca imputed to nature, Heb. 6.
I to hope, grounded in the promises of God, immutable things, the safe and
sure anchor of the soul of man. The sorrow of Jonas was wonderfully vehement,
but soon alaied. Whence had he that speedy mittigation? from nature? nothing
less. Here what the voice of nature is. When the people of Israel cries upon
Moses for flesh, Numb. 11.
what is his cry to God? I am not able to bear this people. If I have found
favor in thine eyes, kill me that I behold not this misery. When Iezabell
threatens to make Elias like one of the dead prophets, 1. King. 19.
he hastes into the wilderness, and breaks out into impatience and irkesomnes
of life, O Lord, it is sufficient, (either he had lived, or he had been plagued
long enough) take away my soul from me. The woman in the 2. of Esdras having
lost her son (be it a figure or otherwise, it is true in both) arises in the
night season, goes into the field, decrees with her self neither to eat nor
drink, but there to remain fasting and weeping till she were dead. Esdras
councelleth her, foolish woman, do not so, return into the city, go to thine
husband etc. she answers, I will not, I will not go into the city, but
here will I die. You hear how nature speaks. Was Jonas thus relieved? no.
The sense of his own strength or rather his weakness, would have sent him
hedlong, as the devils the heard of swine, into the lake of desperation. Thou
have brought up my life, my Lord and my God. Bern.
It is the Lord his God, whose name is tempered according to the riddle of
Sampson, both of strong and sweet, who is for^^ter suavis and suaviter fortis,
strong in sweetenes, and sweet in strength; fortis pro me, suavis mihi, strong
for me, and sweet to me, that has done this deed. Behold, my brethren, there
is ho^ie in the lion, there is mercy in the fearful God of heaven. He is not
only a Lord over Jonas, to note his majesty and fear, but the Lord his God, to
show the kindness of a father. It is the Lord his God, to whom he repaireth by
particular application and with the disciple of Christ leans as it were in
his masters bosom, that delivered his life from the pit, and his soul from
fainting. Before he lay in the depthes, and was descended to the ends of the
mountains etc. All that is answered in one word, eduxisti, thou have brought
me up from the pit wherein I was buried. Before, the waters were come even unto
his soul, ready to drink it in, and to turn him to corruption: but now God
has delivered that soul from the corruption it was falling into. What shall
we then say? the sea has no mercy, the weeds no mercy, the earth with her
promontaries and bars no mercy, the whale no mercy, the Lord alone has mercy.
It fared with Jonas as with a fore-ru^ner of his when his spirit was co^fused
and folden up within him, Psalm. 142
when he looked upon his right hand, and behold, there was none that would
know him (much less at his left;) when all refuge failed, and none cared for
his soul; then cried he unto the Lord his God and said, Thou art my hope and
my portion in the land of the living, O harken unto my cry, for I am brought
very low, (even as low as the earth is founded) and bring my soul out of
prison, (this pit wherein I lie) that I may praise thy name. O let not life nor
death (I name noe more, for death is the last and worst enemy that shall be
subdued) be able to take your hope from you. When your heart in thinking, or
tongue in speaking has gone too far, correct your selves with this wholesome
and timely veruntamen, yet notwithstanding, I will go to the Lord my God, and
trust in his name. The nails that were driven into the hands and feet of our
Savior, were neither so grievous nor so contumelious unto him, as that reproach
that was offered in speech, he trusted in the Lord, let him deliver him. This
was the root that preserved Job, and Job preserved it: when his friends became
foes, Job. 13.
and added affliction unto him, he willed them to hold their tongues, that he
might speak, not caring what came of it. Wherefore do I take my flesh in my
teeth (says he (and put my soul in my hand? that is, why should I fret and
consume my self with impatience? If he should kill me, would I not trust in
him? so far is it of, that I despair of the mercies of God, that my life shall
sooner leave me, than my assurance of his graces. This was the deep and
inward matter he meant in the 19. of his book, from the abundance whereof he
made that prophetical and heavenly protestation. O that my words were written,
written in a book, Revel. ^.
and graven with an iron pen in lead or stone for ever: I know that my
redeemer lives. Worms and rottenes shall consume me to nothing, but my
redeemer is alive, and behold he lives for evermore, and has the keys of
hell and of death. The grave shall be my house, and I shall make my bed in
darkness, but I shall rise again to behold the brightness of his countenance.
These eyes of nature shall sink into the holes of my head, but I shall receive
them again to behold that glorious object. And though many ages of the world
shall run on betwixt the day of my falling, and his long expected uisitation,
yet he shall stand the last day upon the earth, himself a and o, the first and
the last of all the creatures of God, to recapitulate former times, and to make
full restitution of my ancient losses. What needed writings in a book and
graving in lead or stone, but that he was careful of posterity, that the
scripture and sculpture of his own conscience' might be a monument in time to
come for other afflicted souls? Ps. 42. and 43.
The counsel which David gives his troubled soul, again and again repeated,
because his sorrows were again and often multiplied, shall be my last for this
time; O my soul, why art thou cast down, and why art thou disquieted within
me? I will not forget to note unto you, that one of the greatest temptations he
then felt, and that which fed him with his tears day and night, in steed of
meat, was the daily vpbraiding of his persecutours, where is now thy God? If
they could have battered the fortress of his hope, they had utterly spoiled
him. Yet he encourages that persecuted and downe-trodden soul, with hearty
incitations, Why art thou cast down etc. trust in the Lord, for I will yet and
yet give him thanks for the help of his presence. Hope is never put to
silence; never abasheth nor shameth the man that joins her unto him: Adhuc.
Romans 5.
the sweetest and plesantest companion that ever travailed with the soiourners
upon earth. She carries them along through all the difficulties and crosses of
the way that lie to interrupt them. Though they have passed through fire and
water, she says, be not discomforted, we shall yet give him thanks for the
help of his presence. Though through a life so replenished with misery, that
they bless the dead more than the living, and count them happier then both,
that have never been, she says, be of good cheer, we shall yet give him
thanks, and there is time and matter enough wherein to show his goodness. Yea
though they walk into the chambers of death, and shut the doors after them,
and see not the light of heaven, still she bids them be bold, for they that
sleep in the dust, shall arise and sing, the dew of their dry bones shall be as
fresh as the dew of the herbs, and we shall yet give him thanks for the help
of his presence. Cynaegerus.
I remember that valiant and thrice renowned Athenian (when I speak of the
tenure and pertinacy of hope) who, when other-meanes failed, grasped the ships
of the enemy with his hands, to hold them to fight, and when his hands were
stricken of, stayed them with his teeth, till he lost his life. Hope can never
be put from her hold-fast. her voice is according to her nature, adhuc
confitebor I will yet give thanks, in the winter and deadest time of calamities
she springs, and cannot die, nay she cries within her self, whether I live
or die, I will not loose my patience; for I shall see the day, when the Lord
shall know me by my name again, righten my wrongs, finish my sorrows, wipe
the tears from my cheeks, tread down my enemies, fulfill me with the oil
of joy, and I shall yet and for ever give thanks for the help of his presence.

THE XXVIII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 2. verse. 7. When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and
my prayer came unto thee into thine holy temple.
THE two last verses, if you remember, were but a varied repetition of that
which two others had handled before. The general parts of all which, were
the fear and the hope, danger and comfort of the prophet; which two
affections or conditions (you have often heard) the whole song spends it
self upon. His fear and danger in the last place was, that neither water nor
earth spared him. The waters, touching their pride and exaltation, came unto
his soul; touching their measure, promised him no bottom; touching their
train and confederates, bound their vveedes about his head. The earth
neither lodged him in a smooth and easy floor, but under the roots and
rags of mountains, nor in an haven, or any the like accessible place, but
within her bars. Notwithstanding, the head of the serpent, with all his
subtle devises against the life of the prophet, is bruised at the heel of the
speech, where one little particle of hope, wipeth out all the former
discomfortes: Yet haste thou brought up, etc. Once again, as heretofore I
dissembled not with you, I must enter into the selfsame matter of discourse
and explication. The soul of Jonas may fainte within him (as my text tells
us) the sun and moon may fail in their motions, day and night may fail in
their courses, the earth may fail and totter upon her proppes, the sea and
rivers may fail and be emptied of their waters, but the word of the Lord
shall never fail neither in truth, nor in the riches and plentye thereof, to
minister an everlasting argument to him that dispenses it. Time, and speech,
and audience shall fail, but matter can never want, when that abundant
treasure comes to be opened. It was well said by Chrysostom, that in a
thousand talentes of worldely words, a man shall hardly find an hundredth
pence of spiritual and heavenly wisdom, scarsely ten halfepence. But
infinite are the talentes of wisdom, that are hid in the words of God,
even when they seem in the judgment of man to be most exhausted. The
Apostles exhortation to the Colossians is, Colos. 3.
that the word of the Lord should dvvell plentifully among them. Surely
the word of GOD, in one of the deepest and vvaightiest points of knowledge^,
touching our hope, how to be used and where to be founded, has once and a
second time already offered it self unto you. VVhither as yet it has gotten
house-roume and dwelling among you, I cannot tell. Perhaps it did but
soiourne in your hearts, and was in nature of a passenger to tarry for a night
or an hour. Or happily as the Levite that came to G^beah, in the nineteenth of
Judges, it has sitten in the streets and no man has received it into house.
Or if it has gotten entrance and admission, it was perforce, as those that
let down the sick man by the tyles of the house, the doors being pestered and
thronged with multitude that they could not have entrance otherwise; it may
be the gates of your hearts being stopped with multitudes of popular and
worldely affairs, it took some little fastening against your wills. But that
it may dvvell in your consciences, never to depart from them, and not in a
narrovve corner thereof, sparingly, and with coffeehouse, but in such
plentiful manner as the Apostle spoke of, to enjoy her full liberty, all
other in-mates and associates put aparte, all distrustful cogitations either
from the wiles of Satan, or weakness of our flesh remooved, the providence
of GOD has so ordered it, that after twice navigation, as the proverb is,
there should be a third iteration of the same doctrine, that your hearts
for ever might be established. When the vision of the sheet was sent unto
Peter, in the tenth of the Acts, the voice was uttered unto him three times
Arise Peter, kill and eat. And the first time he denied it plainly, Not so
Lord. Afterward he was better advised, and harkened to the voice of the
Lord. When the angel of Satan was sent to buffet Paul, least his visions
should lift him up too high, he besought the Lord thrice, ^. Cor. 12.
that it might depart; and then the Lord answered him, My grace is
sufficient for thee. It may be according to the sign which God gave
Ezechias, that the first year, he should eat of such things as came up of
themselves; Es. 37.
the second, such as sprange again without sowing; the third, they should
sow and reap, and plant vine-yardes, etc. So for the first and second time,
that we hear the doctrine of salvation, we hear without profit, we breed no
cogitations within us but such as grow of themselves, natural, worldly,
corrupt, and such as accompany flesh and blood, fitter to cast us down, than
to help us up; but at the third time, when the words of God with often
falling shall have pearsed our hearts, as rain the marble-stones, we then
apply our minds to a more industrious and profitable meditation of such
heavenly comfortes. Let it not grieve you then, if I speak unto you again the
same things; and as Paul disputed at Thessalonica three sabbath days of the
passion and resurrection of Christ, Acts. 17.
so I three sabbath days amongst you of our hope in Christ. Let it be true of
vanities and pleasures, that the less they are used, Voluptates commenda^
rarior vsu^*
the more commendable: but in the most accepted and blessed things that belong
to our happiest peace, be it fair otherwise. Our daily bread, though it be
daily received, we are as ready to crave still: neither can the perpetual use
of it ever offend us. The light of the sun, would displease no body but some
lover of darkness, if it never went down in our coasts. The nature of such
things for their necessary use, must needs be welcome unto us, though they
never should forsake us. And can the doctrine of says and affiaunce in the
mercies of God, the light of our dim eyes, the staff of our infirmities, our
souls restoratiue when it lies sick to death, and as Chrysostom well
compared it, a chain let down from heaven which he that takes hold on, is
presentely pulled up from the hand of destruction, and set in a large place
to enjoy the peace of conscience, can it ever displease us? we were content to
hear it once, and I do not doubt, but it will be as welcome being repeated
ten times. I make no question, but as when Paul had preached at Antioche in
the synagogue of the Jews one day, Et placida seme^ etc. (...). Acts 7.
the gentiles besought him that he would preach the same words to them
again the next sabbath; so though it were the last work that I did amongst
you, to cut the throat of desperation, which has cut the throat of many a
wretched man and woman, to set the pillar of hope under all fainting and
declining consciences, yet because it is our last refuge in adversity, and
stands immovable like the Northern pole, when our souls are most
distracted with doubts, and fullest of scruples, to give us aim and direction
whither to bend our course, if I shall once again repeat unto you (...), the
selfsame words that before, in substance and sense, though not in syllables,
I trust I shall find your acceptaunce as good as when I first began it.

The words propounded are the last of the whole narration, and draw into a
narrower compass of speech all that has been said before. For whatsoever
you have heard, of the bo^tome of the sea, floudes, and surges, with all
those other disturbances already reckoned up, they are now concluded in a
little room, My soul fainted. The parts the same which I have observed
before: for I need not to acquainte you again, that he hangs and devideth
the whole song, between fear and hope. And as the feet to that image in
Daniell, Spemque metumque inter.
were part of iron, part of clay, which the prophet expounds, partly
strong, partly broken; so are the feet, if I may so call them, which Jonas
through all this travail goes upon, the one of clay, weak, impotent, always
shivering, and sinking downewarde, I mean his fear and distrust; the other of
iron, strong, stable, and firm, keeping him upright, his hope and confidence
in the mercies of God. His fear is in the former member of the sentence, When
my soul fainted within me: Division.
his hope in the next, I remembered the Lord, etc. Wherein to show that it was
not in vain for him to remember the Lord, and withal how he remembered him,
he tells us, that his prayer came unto him into his holy temple. Concerning
his fear, My soul.

2. Fainted.

3. In me.


we have to consider, first, what person or part he notifieth to have been
assaulted, his soul. Secondly, the plight or perturbation of his soul, it
fainted. Thirdly, the application of the place, within himself. The danger is
much augmented, from that which before it was. Then, the waters but came to
his soul: here, they had fought against him so long, that his soul plainly
fainted. Then, the peril but imminent and hard at hand: My soul.
here, it had taken handfast. Then, was he but threatened or beaten by the
waters: here he seeme^h to be vanquished. All that went before, might
concern the body alone, and the loss of his temporal life whereof he was
yet in possession. As when he pronounced against himself, I am cast away out
of thy sight, it might be no more in effect than what Ezechiell spoke, Es.
38.
I said, I shall not see the LORD, even the LORD in the land of the living:
I shall see man no more amongst the inhabitauntes of the world: mine
habitation is departed and remooved from me like a shepheardes tente, and as a
weaver cutteth of his threade, so is my life ended. But here he confesses
in open terms, that his very soul, that inward, immortal, heavenly
substance, which when the body faints, is sometimes most in health, and
lives when the body dies, that this part fails him, and leaves no hope
of better things. Saint Augustine very well defines the soul to be the
whole inward man, wherewith this mass of clay is quickened, governed, and
held together, changing her names according to the sundry offices, which she
bears in the body. For when she quickneth the body, she is called the
soul; when she has appetite or desire to any thing, the will; for
knowledge, the mind; for recordation, memory; for judging and discerning,
reason; for giving breath, Dum vivificat, anima^ dum vult, animus; dum scit,
men^ est* dum recolit memoria* d^ iudicat, ratio, dum spirat, spiritu^: dum
sentit, sensus. Aug. de Ecclesi^ Dogmati^. Cap. 34.
spirit; lastly for apprehending or perceiving outwardly, sense: so as the
fainting of the soul is the decay of all these faculties. Now if the light
that is in us be dark, how great is the darkness? if the life be death,
how great is the death? if the soul fainte, how great the defections? The
infirmities and disablementes of his body, I know, were very great, in the
whole service and ministry thereof. For what use had he either of his hands,
to help himself withal, more than Jeroboam had when his hand was withered?
or of his eyes, to behold the light of heaven, more than if the eagles of the
valley had picked them out? or of his ears, to hear any sentence of comfort,
more than if they had never been planted? The grinders within his head, what
did they for him, unless they ground and whetted themselves? His tongue what
tasted it, except his own spittle? He might truly say with the prophet Esaias,
Es. 1.
that from the crown of the head to the sole of his foot, there was no part
that did the duties of it. But all those former defectes, and impotencies are
nothing to that he now speaks of: When my soul fainted within me. For as
the soul is of more worth and excellency than the body; so the languishmentes
of the soul more grievous, and the death of the soul more remediless, than
those of the body: and therefore as the hazard exceeds, so the health of
the soul is more dearly to be tendered. In the greatest distemperatures and
disorders of the body, when the bones are smitten asunder, and the loins
filled with a sore disease, when the wounds are putrified and stink, the
marrow and moisture quite dried up, yea though it be brought and dissolved
into the dust of death, yet the soul may be safe and sound notwithstanding,
and in far better case, than when she lived in her house of claie. But if
the soul be sick, can the body have any comfort? May we not then infer
with him in the comedy, My heart is sick, my raines sick, my spleen sick,
Cor dole^, renes dolen^. etc. Plaut. Sermon. parv. Bonu^ casteilum custodit qui
custodi^ corpus suu^. No^a* non sic, sed sterquilinium vile etc.
my liver sick, and all my other parts are out of frame? Out of this
comparison between the body and soul, let me make my persuasion unto you.
The men of the world were w^nt to say, says Bernarde, that he that keeps
his body, keeps a good castle. A castle? how long to continue? this is the
error of worldly men, to call their tabernacle* which was made to be removed,
and pulled down upon every light occasion, a castle. We say not so, but he
that keeps his body, keeps a base dunghill. He that had seen the body of
righteous Job, vlcerated, botched, and blained, sitting upon the dunghill,
would he not have thought that a dunghill had sitten upon a dunghill? But he
that keeps his soul, Qui a^ animam custodit, etc.

Quid aliud voces animu^ quam Deum in corpore humano hospitante^* Sen. Nullus
extremus idiota, nulla abiecta muliercula, non credit ani^mae immortalitatem.
Non sic hodie filij hominum, non sic. Bern. in declamat.


he keeps a good castle indeed, borne to eternity, he keeps a heaven in
comparison, the sun and moon, and stars whereof, are understanding, faith,
and hope, with other Christian graces, and the Lord of hosts himself has his
dwelling therein. There is no man so simple, no man so vile, but takes this to
be a castle of honor and strength because they believe it to be immortal.
Our savior manifested this difference, both by the end of his coming in the
flesh, which was principally for our souls, after for our bodies, first to
take away the sins of the world, which are spiritual diseases, then to
remove corporal infirmities; and by the behavior of his own person amongst
us, who though he suffered his body to be tried with all kinds of ignominious
and accursed vexations, with spittings, whippings, buffetings, and the
bitterest death of the cross, yet was it ever his care to preserve his soul
free from stains and corruptions. It is not thus with the sons of men now a
days. They neglect the care and culture of their souls, but the lusts of the
flesh they make provision for with all possible diligence. They have learned
from the school of Hippocrates the physician, and Epicurus the swine, to
physic and diet their bodies, but the sickness and death of the soul, which
are their sins, they never account of, till they see they must be punished.
O ye sons of men, foolish and slow of heart to conceive the rightest
things, how long will ye love such vanities, and seek after leasing? These
times are allotted to the soul, not to the body. Now is the time of
salvation, not of pleasure and pastime. Let the flesh alone a while, more then
nature and necessity require, let it not be favored, either in food or
raiment, or any the like transitorye and fading benefit. And when it is
weary of walking upon the face of the earth, let it go down in peace, and
rest in hope, till he that came for your souls before, shall also come to
raise and reform it. In the fainting of our souls, there is a gross
difference betwixt Jonas and us. His soul fainted within him through pain,
ours through pleasure, and that pleasure the mother and nurse of a worser
pain. Our flesh is too insolent against the spirit, and keeps it under
with a strong hand. Hagar despises Sara, the servaunt sets her foot in
the neck of her mistress. The flesh is clothed like the raine-bowe, with
colors of all sorts, we go into the bowels of the earth, we go into the
bowelles of the sea, as far and as low as ever Jonas went, to seek pearls
and the riches of the sea to adorn it. We forget our selves shamefully in
such unnecessary travail. It is the Queen that should be clothed in a
vesture of needle work, wroughte with diverse colors; but the Queen is
stripte of her jewels, the soul robbed of her ornaments and rich attire, and
the body is the thief that deceives it. The flesh is daintily fed with the
finest flower of the wheat, and the reddest blood of the grape, we care not
what it costeth; the unworthiest member we have, is de^fied and made our God,
Nunqua^ animo praetijs obstantibus. Whose belly is their God.
(a sin beyond the sin of the Pagans, shameful and beastly idolatry) they
made them Gods of silver and gold and marble, we of our bellies; what is done
with the soul, the mean time? behold she is pined and famished, the bread
of life is not bought nor sought for to strengthen her withal, she is kept
from the gospel of peace and from the body and blood, Cibus animae
inconsumptibilis. Cyprian. Sursum animum vocant initia sua Senec.
(that inconsumptible meat) of her holy redeemer. She that was borne from
above, to eat the hidden Manna, the food of Angels, and to be nourished with
the tree of life, whose beginnings call her home again, is less regarded than
a lump of earth. O consider, that he who loses the life of a body may
find it again. The time shall come when they that are in the graves shall
hear the voice of the son of GOD. But the loss of a soul is vnrecoverable.
If it die in sin, it shall also die in perdition. Rather it shall not die,
for it is not as the soul of the beast that ends with the body. O living
and ever-living death. Let them take heed, that have ears to hear with.
Their price has been once paid, which if the riches of Solomon, treasures
of Ezechias, all the silver and gold within the globe of the earth could have
satisfied God would willingly have spared his own blood. Acts 2^.
Let them not look for more Christ's, or more passions; if they will go into
captivity again, let them go, but they shall not return; if they sell
themselves to the will of their enemy, let them never hope for a second ransom.

When my soul fainted. In the second circumstance of the first branch,
wherein is noted the affection of his soul, I will rather mark the efficacy
of the word here brought, than make discourse upon it. The very noting of the
word is discourse enough. The words that the holy ghost uses, are not vain
words, such as are used by men to deceive with, Ephesians. 5. (...).
the examination and search whereof yields no profit; but he that will weigh
them aright, must not only view the outward face of the whole sentence at
large, but suck out the juice and blood of every several word therein
contained. The extremity of the soul of Jonas seems to be very great,
because there is no little trouble and care how to express it. The Septuagints
render it an eclipse, or if you will a dereliction and death of the soul;
Calvin a convolution or folding up together; Tremelius an overvvhelming; Jerome
a streightning or compacting into a close room; Pomeran a despairing.
Whatsoever it is, Rabbi Kimhi affirms that the word is never used but of
great misery, happily such, as shall accompany the last times, (...). Luke
21. (...).
when men shall be at their wits ends for fear, and their hearts shall
fail them because of troubles. Now whither you say that his soul forsook
him as if it were, and there was deliquium animae, a disparition of it for a
time as if it were not, like the state of Eutychus in the Acts, who was taken
up for dead, though his life remained in him: or vvhither it were wrapped and
wound within it self, that her own house was a prison unto her, and she
had no power to go forth, no list to think of heaven, no mind to ask the
counsel of GOD or man, as when a bird is snared, the more it labors the
harder it tieth it self, and though it use the legs or the wings, it uses
them to a further hinderaunce; so all the thoughts that the soul of Jonas
thought, were not to ease the heart, but more to perplexe it, and all fell
back again upon himself: or whither the soul were overwhelmed within him
with her own weighte, as one that should gather stones for his own grave: or
that it was pinched and pressed within a narrow place, that all those former
impedimentes, promontories and bars of the earth, did not imprison him so
close as his own fear: or whatsoever it were besides, what was it else but
either the messenger and forerunner, or a near companion, to that unnatural
and ungracious sin, which we have often already smitten at with the sword
of Gods spirit, accursed desperation? How is the gold become dross? how is
the soul of man turned into a carkeise? The change is marvailous. That that
was given to quicken the body, and to put life into it, is most dull and
liuelesse it self. Sermon. 48. in parvis. Animae rationalis duo loca: inferior
quem regis, Corpus, superior inquo requiescit, Deus.
That that was given, to give liberty, explication, motion, agilitie, and art
to every part of the body, is now the greatest burden that the body has.
If I shall give the reason hereof, it is that which Bernarde alleges in a
Sermon. The reasonable soul of man, has two places, an inferior which it
governs, the body; a superior wherein it rests, GOD: which is the same
in substance, that Augustine had before delivered in his nineteenth treatise
upon Saint John, it quickneth, and it self is quickened. Wherefore if that
better life which is from above, Vivificat, vivificatur. Melius ipsa quam
corpus, melius quam ipsa est Deus. Id.
relinquish the soul, with the comfortes and aides of GODS blessed spirit,
how is it possible but that the soul should also relinquish her body, with
the offices of her life. This is the reason then that the soul faineteth* she
first dies vpwardes, then dovvne-wardes and invvardely to her self. She
forgets her maker and preserver, and he likewise strikes her with
amazement and confusion in all her powers, that she lies as it were in a
trance, and knovveth not how to apply them to their several and proper
functions.

Now therefore, if the floudes and waves of the sea, wherewith he was
embraced on every side, had been as kind unto him as ever were his mothers
arms, and those ragged ends of the mountains, like pillowes of down under
his bones, if the promontories and bars of the earth had vnbarred themselves
unto him of their own accord, like those doors of the prison in the Acts, to
let him out, yet if the soul within him did remain thus fettered and gived
with the chains of her own confusion, and all the devises and counsels of
her heart were rather hindrances than helps unto her, and her greatest
enmity, or at least her least friendship came from her own house, that either
she thought nothing, or all that she thought was but the imagination of a
vain thing, I would not wish her greater harm. He wants no other misery,
that is plagued with a fainting soul. Ask not the malice of the sea, the
malice of the land, the malice of hell against him, whom the vntovvardenesse
and distruste of his own soul has beaten down.

The third circumstaunce makes mention of the subject or place wherein his
soul fainted, that you may know, 3. Within me.
there is no power in man to undo such implicit cords, and to loose the
bands of sorrow and death, unless some virtue from without set too an
helping hand. The sense is very plain, that in himself his soul fainted,
that is, there was no domestical, earthly, natural help that could release
him; but when his father, mother, friends, land, sea, his soul, all had
forsaken him, the Lord took him up, and gave him better hope? For who should
restore to liberty a soul confounded as this was, and re-deliver it to her
former abilities, teach her to understand arighte, prudentlie to deliberate,
assuredly to hope? who reconcile a man fallen out with himself, and make peace
within his borders, or rather reviue and recover a man fallen from himself,
but he who is said to order a good man's goinge, and to be a GOD of order, not
of confusion. When the earth was without form, and void, and darkness
upon the deep, and neither heaven nor earth, land nor water, day nor night
distinguished, who fashioned the parts of that unshapen Chaos, separated light
from darkness, and brought the creature into a comely proportion, but even
the same LORD who finding this wastnesse and informity in the soul of Jonas,
made it perfect again? It is evident in the next words. For mark the
connection. I remembered the Lord. Sabellicus reports so of Joannes Scotus.
Thesaurus, Custos.
When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord. How is it possible?
for did his soul faint, and was it in manner no soul unto him, (as it fares
with some who seem for a space to be dead and their spirits to have
forsaken them) was all the strength thereof consumed, stifled, choked, given
over within him, and had he a memory left, the cofferer and treasurer of the
soul, to remember the Lord with? how came this gift of memory to a soul so
taken and possessed, that as Orbilius a Grammarian in Rome forgot not only the
letters of the book but his own name, so this is even dead and buried under
it self, and has forgotten to think a thought, and laid aside all her
accustomed heavenly meditations? Jonas, without question, had never remembered
the Lord, unless the Lord had first remembered him. Bernarde upon the words
of the Canticles (I sought him in the night season.) Every soul amongst you,
says he, that se^keth the Lord, that it turn not a great blessing into a
great mischief, let her know that she is prevented by the Lord, and that
she is first sought, Noverit se praeventam and ante quaefitam quam quarentem.
Ser. 84 in Cantic. Vtinuar donis tanquam non datis. Dilexit non diligentes
ipsum Et non existe^te^, addoctiam resistentes. Psalm. 119.
before she can seek. For then are our greatest felicities changed into our
greatest woes, when being made glorious by the graces of God, we use his
gifts as if they were not given, and ascribe not the glory of them to his holy
name. Who has first loved him? Give me a man that ever loved GOD, and was not
first beloved, and enabled thereunto, it shall be highly recompensed unto him.
But it is most cer^aine, that he loved us when we were his enemies, and
when we had not existence or being. I say more, when we made resistaunce to
his kindness. We can promise no more, in this heavenlesse race and exercise
of Christianity, than the Prophet does in the Psalm, I will run the ways
of thy commandments, when thou have set my heart at liberty. Will thou
run with thy feet, before thy heart be prepared? or can thou run with thy
heart, before God has enlarged it? or can thou run the way without the way,
which is Jesus Christ? a way that thou can not see, till thine eyes be
opened and illightened? or will thou run the way of Gods commandments, when
thou can not discern the commandments of God from the motions and fancies
of thine own mind? not so. But when the Lord shall have set thine heart at
liberty, then run, when the LORD has quickened and rubbed up thy memory,
then remember him. Otherwise without that help, we lie lame and impotent, as
the creeple at the poole of Bethesda, all the days and years of our life are
spent, like his, without ease of our infirmities, and the virtue of the waters
of life, as of those in the poole, are by others caught from us. Jerome
translateth the words with some little difference from others. I remembered the
Lord, Recordatu^ sum, vt pervenias.
That my prayer might come into his holy temple. So his prayer came unto the
Lord, by means of his prayer: for that remembering of the Lord was his
prayer. But whence came that former prayer, that made way for the later?
Fulgentius in an epistle to Theodorus a senator, Epist. 6.
laying a sure foundation and axiom to the rest of his speech, would have all
that Vt desideremus adiutorium gratiae hoc ipsum quoque opus est gratiae. Ipsa
incipi^ infundi, vt incipiat posci. etc.
For first it begins to be powered into us, that it may afterward begin
to be begged by us. As unless the light of the air first go into our eyes,
our eyes though made to see, yet see nothing. Fourthly, we cannot ask (he
says) unless we have a will to ask, and what will is there, if God work it
not? Lastly, he counsels all men diligently to converse in the scriptures,
wherein they shall find the grace of God, both preventing them in such sort,
that when they are down they may rise up, and accompanying them, to hold them
in

Thus much by the just occasion of my text, because he said, when his soul
fainted within him, yet he remembered the LORD, which I say again he could
never have done, his reason, knowledge, will, memory, all being past, except
the Lord had first remembered him. After his fear again his hope. 2. His hope*
I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came unto thee into thine holy temple.
The particulars are quickly had: after that fainting and fit of his soul, 1.
what he did: he remembered. 2. whom he remembered: the Lord. All the rest
serves for explication. As namely 3. how he remembered him, by prayer. For it
seems that not only his memory, but all the faculties and affections of his
soul were set on work by him. 4. How his prayer sped. It was not stopped by
the way, but came unto the Lord, and did the part of a trusty ambassador. 5.
It is not amiss to know, that every soul is the Lords, the soul of the
father, and the soul of the child are his, Nec ad multos multus, nec ad
pauci^atem carus. Sic vni intentus, vt non dete^tus: sic pluribus, vt non
diste^tu^. Bern. ser. 69. in Cant.
and that the promises are made not only to Abraham but to his seed after him,
and to all of that seed in particular, for he is neither multiplied with
multitudes, nor scanted with paucities; so caring for one, that he omitteth
not the care of many; so for many, that he cease not to care for one: and
therefore the prayer here sent was peculiarly his own, as of a person
accepted and chosen unto the Lord, my prayer. 6. The faithful conjunction of
his soul with God, which the Apostrophe, and sudden change of the speech
causes me to note. For now he speaks not to us, or to his own spirit as
before, I remembered the Lord, but unto the Lord himself, laying his mouth to
those pure and undefiled ears, my prayer came unto thee. 7. The place wherein
it was presented unto him, into thine holy temple, which either he means of
heaven, the palace and basilicke of the great king, or of the temple of
Jerusalem, which all the children of God in those days had respect unto. Dan.
6.
So Daniell though he prayed in Babylon, yet opened he the windows of his
chamber toward Jerusalem. And Solomon made request at the dedication of the
temple, that if ever his people, in the time of famine, battle, captivity, or
any the like tribulation, 2. Sam. 6.
should pray toward that city, and toward that house of prayer, the Lord
that sat in heaven would vouchsafe to hear them. Though not sure of the place
yet this I am sure of, that whither soever of the two be spoken of, the holy
Lord has dedicated it to holiness, and called it by the name of an holy
temple, setting thereby a bar about it, as he did about the mount, to
keep out beasts and brutish men. For as his temple upon the earth none
should, so that other, more sacred and secret that is in heaven, none shall
ever enter into, that is unholy and unclean. To draw these scattered branches
home to their root again, the general substance of them all together is
this; that Jonas received hope by remembering the Lord for his part, and that
the Lord on the other side accepted his prayer and gave success to it. As
Jeremy spoke in the Lamentations; so might Jonas say, It is the mercy of the
LORD that I am not consumed. Lam. 2.
The reason is, For his compassions fail not. The danger seemed incurable,
because it lighted upon the soul, not to the crazing and distempering alone,
but the utter overwhelminge of it: and no hope left in himself to heal the
hurt. I remembered
What does he then? he betaketh himself to the glass of memory, to see what
succor he can find there: and as it is placed in the hinder part of the
head, so he reserveth it for the hinder part of his miseries, and makes it his
latest refuge to ease his heart.

I have red of memories in some men almost incredible. Seneca writes of
himself, that he had a very flourishing memory, Pro^^m. Cursor.

Codices superva^u^s fecerat.


not only for use, but to deserve admiratiom. He was able to recite by heart
2000. names, in the same order wherein they were first digested, Portius Latro
in the same author, wrote that in his mind which other in note-bookes. A man
most cunning in histories. If you had named a captain unto him, he would have
run thorough his acts presently. Cyneas being sent from Pyrrhus in an
embassage to Rome, the next day after he came thither, saluted all the
Senators by their names, and the people round about them. A singular gift from
God, in those that have attained thereto, howsoever it be used. But yet as the
object, which memory apprehends is more principal, so the gift more
commendable: As Tully comparing Lucullus and Hortensius together, both being of
a wonderful memory, yet prefers Lucullus before Hortensius, because he
remembered matter, this but words. Now the excellentest object of all others,
either for the memory to accounte, or for any other part of the soul to
conceive, is the Lord. For he that reme^breth the Lord as the Lord has
remembered him, that names his blessings by their names as God the stars, and
calls them to mind in that number and order that God has bestowed them upon
him, if not to remember them in particular, which are more then the hairs of
his head, yet to take their view in gross, and to fold them up in a general
sum, as David did, what shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits?
though he forget his own people and his fathers house, though the wife of his
bosom, and the fruit of his own loins, yea though he forget to eat his
bread, it skilleth not, he remembers all in all, and his memory has done
him service enough in reaching that object. And for your better encouragement
to make this use of memory, understand that it is a principal means to
avoid desperation, only to call to mind the goodness of the Lord
forepassed either to our selves or others. Think with your selves, that as it
was he that took you from your mothers wombes, and has been your hope ever
since you hung^ at the breasts, and has opened his hands from time to time
to fill you with his goodness, so he is as able to bless you still. Compare
and lay together the times as David did, that because he had slain a lion and
a bear at the fold, therefore GOD would also enable him to prevail against
Golias: So if the mercies of the Lord have been so bountiful toward you
in former times, to create you of the slime of the ground, and to put y a
living and reasonable soul into you, to nurse you up in a civil and
well-mannered country, to redeem you with the blood of his begotten son, to
visit you with the light of his gospel, to justify you with the power of
his free gratuitall grace, to fill your garners with store and your baskets
with increase* and to give you sons and daughters to the defyinge of your
enemies in the gates; say to your selves, his arm is not shortened, h^^ is
the same to day that yesterday, he will never forsake us wit^ his loving
kindness. This is the course that David takes in the Psalms, a captain
never more skillful to lead in the vvarres, though the Lord had taught his
fingers to fight, than to conduct the desolate in the battles of conscience.
Psalm. 25.
Call to remembrance thy tender mercies, O Lord, which have been ever of
old. This was the song that he sange to himself in the night season, in
the closet and quire of his own breast, when he communed with his private
heart, and searched out his spirits diligently. Psalm 77.
Has the LORD forgotten to be graciou^? he has then left his old wont.
No, David forgot that the Lord was gracious, and afterward confessed his
fault of forgetfulness, stirred up his decayed memory, and said, But I will
remember the years of the right hand of the most high. Not the momentes, nor
hours, nor days, of a few moment any afflictions, which he has dealt forth
unto me with his left hand, but the years of his right hand, his wonders and
acts that have been ever of old. So likewise in an other Psalm. Psalm. 22.
Our fathers have trusted in thee, O Lord, Our fathers have trusted in thee,
and were not confounded. What is that to us? yes, we are the children of those
fathers, sons of the same hope, and heirs of the same promises. When the
disciples of Christ mistook the meaning of their master touching the leaven
of the Pharisees, supposing he had said so, Math. 16.
because they had brought no bread, he reprooved them for lack of memory: O
ye of little faith, why think you thus in your selves? do ye not remember
the five loaves, when there were five thousand men, and how many baskets full
ye took up? neither the seven loaves when there were four thousand men,
and how many baskets ye took up? thus we should remember indeed how few
loaves, and how many thousands of men have been fed with them, and what
reversions and remnantes of mercy the Lord has in store for other times. Sermon.
22. in Cantic.
O good Jesus (says Barnarde upon the Canticles) We run after the smell
of thine ointmentes, the perfume and sweeee savor of thy fat mercies. We have
heard that thou never despisest the poor afflicted. Thou did not abhor
the thief upon the cross confessing unto thee, nor Matthew sitting at receipt
of custom, nor the woman that washed thy feet with her tears, nor the woman
of Canaan that begged for her daughter, nor the woman taken in adultery, nor
the Publican standing a far of, nor the disciple that denied thee, nor the
disciple that persecuted thee and thine, nor the wicked that crucified thee,
therefore we run after the smell of thine ointmentes, and hope to be
refreshed with the like sent of grace. Many have written precepts of memory,
and made a memoratiue art, apointing places and their furniture, for the help
of such as are unexperienced. I will also give you some helps. When your soul
begins to fainte, as this prophets did, remember what the Lord is by name.
Jehovah a God not in show, Psalm. 9. Ephesians. 2.
but in substance and performance. For they that know thy name will trust in
thee. Remember what by nature, rich in mercy, as others are rich in treasure.
His justice, 2. Tim. 1.
The Lord is faithful. I know whom I have believed, and I am sure he is
able Psalm. 91. Psalm. 119.
wherein thou have caused thy servant to put his trust. If God be God, follow
him, believe him, build upon his word, his fidelity is a thousand times
alleged, that it may be past doubt. Remember what he is by covenaunte, made
unto Abraham and his whole seed, not in the blood of bulls O my people, Mich.
6.
says God by his prophet Micheas, remember what Balak King of Moab had
devised, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him, that ye may know
the righteousness of the Lord. He cries unto us all at this day, O my
people, remember what the prince of darkness had devised against you, and
how Jesus Christ the son of the living God has answered him, and stopte
his mouth with a voice of blood, and nailed his accusations to a crosle, that
ye may know the righteousness of the Lord, how assured it is to those that
believe it, This, this is the sure foundation, which he that builds upon,
Esaias 28.
shall never fall. This is the stone that was laid in Sion: as for the bow of
steel, the wedge of gold, the strength of an horse, the promise of a man
lighter upon the balance than vanity it self, the righteousness of the law,
merits of Saints, they are the stones of Babylon. This has been tried to
the proof, precious above all the merchandise of Tire: and stands in the
head of the corner. He that believes in this stone, let him not haste, says
the Prophet. Let him not yield too soon to the frailty of his flesh, nor be
overcredulous to the suggestions of Satan, nor suffer his hope to be quelled
at the first or second assault; let him stay the leisure of the Lord, for he
will certainly visit him. I have showed you some helps and directions for
memory. I know no better hiding place from the wind, no surer refuge from the
tempest, as Esaias speaks, no safer harbors and receptacles wherein to repose
your wearied souls, than those I have spoken of. What better secret or shadow
has the most High? what closer wings, 'warmer feathers to keep you from the
snare of the hunter (I mean not Nimrod or Esau, mighty, hairy, and wild,
making but temporal prays either of men or beasts) but the hunter of your
souls, than when you are distressed, and compassed with troubles round about,
and sins, which are the sorest troubles of all other, have taken such hold
upon you that you dare not look up, when the soul faints, as this prophets
did, wisdom has hid it self, and understanding is gone aside into a secret
chamber, that you know not what to advise, nor where to fetch a thought that
may minister comfort; then to remember the Lord of hosts, his name, how
strong a tower of defense it is; his nature, how sweet and amiable; his
promises, how faithful; his covenant, how precious in his eyes; that the Lord
may remember you again in his holy kingdom?

THE XXIX. LECTVRE.
Chap. 2. ver. 8, and 9. They that wait upon lying vanities, for sake their
own mercy. But I will sacrifice unto thee, etc,
THe narration is ended. We are now to annexe the conclusion of the song,
wherein the prophet betaketh himself to a thankful acknowledgement, and as his
tenuity will give him leave, a remuneration and requital of the goodness of the
Lord, which his heart had presumed before. The parts are three. 1. A
confutation and reproof of all kinds of idolatours, who as they call upon
false Gods, so they are likely to be sped but with false deliveraunces; They
that wait upon lying vanities, forsake their own mercy. 2. An affirmative or
positive determination, and as it were bond that he takes of himself, to
render kindness to his merciful and faithful Lord; But I will sacrifice
etc. and will pay that that I have vowed. 3. A sentence of acclamation, the
aphorism and juice of the whole song, the conclusion of the conclusion, the
comprehension of sacrifices, vows, prayers, thanksgivings, all things,
Salvation is the Lords, or the Lord.

They that wait upon lying vanities, forsake their own mercy. 1. Confutation.
What communion is there between darkness and light, falshode and truth, the
table of devils and the table of the Lord, idolatry and the right ^ervice of
the righteous God? This is the cause, that Jonas begins with confutation.
Before he will plant the vineyard, he will remoove stones, and briers, and all
other obstacles that may hurt the growth of the vines. Before he builds his
house, he will first pull down a ruinous and rotten foundation. So is the
duty of a prophet in the first of Jeremy: This day have I set thee over
nations and kingedomes, first, to pluck up, to root out, destroy, throw
down; secondly, to plant, and build, and set up again. And so is the duty of
an Evangelist also, who has received the administration of the gospel of
Christ: first to prepare the way, as it were, and to make straight paths
before the face of Christ; that is, first to reproove and then to teach
concerning doctrine, 2. Tim. 2.
first to correct and afterward to inform touching conversation. John
Baptist, you know, a middle man between the law and the gospel, a prophet
and more than a prophet, because he both foresaw, and visibly saw the Lord of
life, both prophesied and pointed with his finger, turning his face, like their
Ianus in Rome, both ways; he first made ready the houses and hearts of the
people before the king of Sion came, cast down hills, lifted up valleys, etc.
that the gospel of the kingdom might have the freer admission. He began his
preachings with reprehension of their vicious lives, O ye generation of
vipers; and convulsion of their false grounds, Say not within your selves,
we have Abraham to our father, etc. No man sets a new piece to an old
garment: he makes the rent but worse. No man puts new wine into old
bottles: for he then marreth both. It is to little purpose to offer truth, and
the tidings of peace, the news of the new testament, to the old man, whose
ancient corruptions hang upon him, and his wedded conscience is thoroughly
seized and possessed with inveterate errors. There is but one truth, oppugned
by falshodes without number, like the arms of the sea. But the nature and
courage of that one truth is, wheresoever she finds falshode, not to
dissemble her quarrel and emulation to her enemy, but to play the part of
truth, that is, simply, ingenuously, apparently, to defy her adversary, and to
withstand her to the teeth. Fulge^tius in his first book to Thrasymu^de king
of Vandalles, gives the reason of this orderly proceeding. It is almost all
one, to deny the faith, Pene id esse fidem nolle asserere, quod negare. Vno
eodemque sile^tio firmat errorem, qui terrore setu ^epore possessus silendo non
astruit veritatem.
and not to maintain it. He brings the reason of that also. Because, by one
and the same silence he strengthens error, who thorough fear or negligence
holding his peace, affirms not the truth. As a sleepy Centenar betrayeth the
tents of the king, not that he has a will perhaps to betray them, but because
he keeps not the watch as he ought, nor descrieth the enemy, which comes to
assault them. One heaven holds not Michael and the Dragon in peace, nor one
house the Arc and Dagon, nor one womb Jacob and Esau, nor one temple prayer
and merchandising, nor one camp the clean and the leprouse, nor one bath John
and Cerinthus, nor one heart God and Mammon, nor one tongue God and Milchom, nor
one conscience truth and falshode; religion and superstition. This, I suppose,
was the reason, why Jonas begins his speech with a triumph against
idolatours, and being to magnify the strong arm of the Lord, does it with
disdeine and contempt of all those that seek unprofitable means. Thus much
generally touching his order of proceeding.

The confutation divided.
The refutation devideth it self into two parts, an antecedent and consequent,
a position and privation, what they do, whom he taxes by his speech, and
what they loose by so doing. If they observe lying vanities, which is the
former, they are sure to forsake their own mercy, which is the latter. In both
these joined together the parts are so desposed, that there is a matching of
three with three. On the one side, 1. They are said to love, to be intentive
and fond upon: 2. that which they love is vanity, emptiness, nothing: 3. that
vanity is lying, fraudulent, deceitful unto them. On the other, whereas they
loved before, now first, they leave, abandon, give over: secondly, that which
they leave, instead of vanity, is mercy; which might do them good: 3. that
mercy is their own, as proper and peculiar unto them, if they would use it, as
ever any thing in their rightful possession. Do ye not see the change that
wordlings make? corn for acornes? a state of innocence, immortality,
incorruption, for an apple? the prerogative of birthright with the blessing
that belongs unto it, for a mess of potage, belly cheer, as Esau did? a
kingdom upon earth, and the kingdom of heaven also, for oxen, and asses, and
sheep, as Saul did? Christ, his gospel, his miracles, his salvation, for an
heard of swine with the Gadarens? God for idolles, mercy for vanity, the
comfortablest nature that ever was created, for that which profits not?

It is thought by some, that the speech here used, is by a concession or
insultation against idolaters, and as it were a farewell and defiance unto
them, Let them forsake their own mercy; Derelin. quant. Pereat, perdat,
profundat. Psalm. 6^*
if they like the change so well, and will not receive warning* as he in the
comedy; let him sink, and wast, and consume all that he has, I will never
speak word unto him more, Against sinners past grace, you shall often find
renouncements unto them. Lay iniquity to their iniquity, and never let them
come into thy righteousness. When they have ^o^de themselves to sin, and hate
to be reformed, this is the mercy that befit^eth them. Reprove not ^^^orner
says Solomon, least he h^^e thee. Prove. 9.
If there be any amongst us with who^ the mercy of God is so vile, and
contemptible, that it is (...) of force to over-sway lying vanity, but vanity
is the stronger (...), and keeps the house against mercy, let them go on in
van^^y still, and as Christ gave over the Scribes, let them fulfill the ^^asure
of their vvretched choice. But let them know withal, Math^ 23.
that as the prodigal son forsook his fathers house for a strange country,
his fathers favor and inheritance for a bag of money, father, and kindred,
and friends, for dishonest and discourteous harlots, and the bread in his
fathers house, for the husks of beans which the swine abroad fed upon, and his
soul desired; so they forsake God for this present world, heaven for earth,
the pleasure of sin for a season, for everlasting pleasures at Gods right
hand, and finally their own mercy, as faithful and true unto them as ever
was their soul to their body, for vvhorish and foreign vanities, which live
and die in an instante of time, and leave no substance behind them. O how
happy were our lives, think we, if these two might stand together, vanity
for a while, till we had satisfied our selves therewith, and afterward mercy
with a wish? Let me first go kiss my father, and take my leave of friendly
delights, let me not suffer the flower of mine age to pass without garlandes
of rose-buddes and sweet ointments, then I will come and follow thee. It must
not be. The Lion and the bullock, leoparde and kidde may feed and lie
together, but vanity vvaited upon, as my text speaks (serviceably pursued,
officiously and diligently embraced, and drawn with cords, as an other
prophet has) and the mercy of God, have no agreement.

In the former and positive member of the refutation, we are directed to
three particulars. First, their habit and affection of whom he speaks, who
are not content to think of, or sometimes to commit a vanity, but they love,
observe, attend upon it.

They keep it, and make much thereof, says Jerome, as if they had found a
treasure. Quasi invenerint thesaurum, Mordicus retinent.
Lyra notes perseveraunce, Mercer pertinacie, as of a thing, that in no case
they can be persuaded to forgo. Secondly, the nature of that which their
affections are set upon: vanity, that which is not; as Narcissus loved the
shadow that the water cast up. Nay, vanities. The singular is not enough to
express their folly. They run thorough all the classies and ranks of unity,
the kennel and sink of as much as their hearts can devise. Thirdly, the
quality of these vanities, that which must needs accompany them, unless
they could cease to be vanities, that they are lying, and unprofitable, having
no solidity in them. The first notes their superstition, in that they are so
diligent and observant. The second their folly and indiscretion, in making so
bad a choice. The third their confusion, 1. The habit.
that they trust and are tied to that wherein no substance, no succor is.

Nulla res efficacius multitudinem mouet q^uam superstitio Cu^t.

Superstitio ne qui est imbutus, quietus esse nunquam potest.


They that love lying vanities. I know not so well the reason, but I find that
conclusion every where prooved, which our Savior lays down in the gospel,
The children of this world are wiser in their generation, than the children of
light. First there is nothing that wins the common people (mark it when
you will) more than superstition. Add the judgment of the Roman Orator in
the second place. A man that is won to superstition can never be quiet in
mind. Which, whither it be our pride that we are all in love, as Pygmaleon
with his picture, so we with the works of our hands, and devises of our
heads, and therefore the true service of God we are not so soon allured with,
because it comes by precept, as with the inventions of our own brain,
because we are the authors of them our selves, (Philo implies so much,
writing of religions, that every man; a part seems best unto him, because
they judge not by reason, Suae cuique optima.
but by affection;) or whither it be the care and vigilance of the devil,
whom he has gotten prisoners, those to load with the more irons, and to
keep them in safe custody, and if it be possible, to make the^ love their
captivity; or whatsoever the cause else be, this I know (to begin at the head)
that Satan will spare no pains in compassing the whole earth to gain a
soul, a Scribe or Pharisee will travail sea and land to win a proselyte, an
idolatrous ^ewe will freely bestow his iewelles and earinges to make a golden
calfe, an Ammonite will not spare his son or daughter from the fire to
sacrifice to Moloch a Priest of Baall will cut and lance his own flesh to
demerite his idol, a false prophet will wear a garment of hair next his
skin to deceive with, a friar will whippe himself till the blood run down
his shoulders, the fathers and children of Babylon, will rise early and late,
to keep Canonical hours, observe fastes, walk pilgrimages, run over their
beads, and rather loose a limme of their bodies than a ceremony of their
church, and in every act of their councelles, and third line of their
writings, Anathema to men and angels that hold otherwise.

Let it be their commendation, Ier. 9.
that they take such pains to do wickedly. A thief is more watchful to
break through the house, than the goodman to guard it. The traitors that
Caesar feared in Rome were not those that were fat and well in proof, but
macilenti and pallidi Cassius and Brutus, that were lean and pale, spending
the sap of their flesh, with travailinge, watching, plotting devises. What is
it they love and labor upon so much? Vanities. Is it not of the Lord of
hosts, that men shall labor in the fi^e (to burn and consume themselves) and
the people shall even weary themselves for very vanity? 2. The matter of
their love. Abbac. 2.
They that plough wickedness (a toilesome occupation) do they not reap
iniquity and eat the fruit of lies, because they trust in their own ways?
Osee 10. Es. 55.
A man may ask them with the prophet, wherefore bestow you your labor
and are not satisfied? Or with the Apostle, when he sees their labor lost,
Romans 6.
what profit had ye in those things whereof you are now ashamed?

The vanities, he names, are not only the idolles of the heathen, which
have neither sight in their eyes* nor hearing in their ears, nor breath in
their nostreiles, nor help in their hands, to wipe away the dust from their
own faces; but whatsoever the world has, visible or invisible, outward or
inward besi^es, displacing God of his right, and bearing our heart and hope
after it, it is our idol in some sort, and one of those lying vanities that is
here mentioned. Jonas committed idolatry, in leaving the mandate of God, and
bending his journey after the lusts of his own heart. That improbable
cogitation which he fansied to himself of escaping the presence of God, by
taking a contrary way, was the idol he served and waited upon, and the lying
vanity wherewith he was beguiled. The God of heaven called unto him, Arise,
go to Niniveh; the God of his own making, the devise of his brain, commanded
otherwise, Arise, fly to Tharsus. The covetous man is called an idolatour in
plain terms, Ephesians. 5. Job expresses the right form of their canonization,
whereby they make gold a God: They say to there wedge, thou are my confidence.
As treason and rebellion puts up a nevve king (Absolon for David;) so
covetuousnesse a new God, Mammon for Jehovah. Ex superfluo.

Chrysostom. (...).


You cannot serve God and Mammon. Dispute not superfluously and idly that you
can do it, for God has pronounced the contrary. God cries, lend, give,
scatter, cast upon the waters, feed, cloth, visit, harbor, and is not
obeyed: Mammon cries on the other side, take, gather, extort, strippe, sterue,
spoil, and is harkened unto. Whether of these two is now the God? An other
idolatry as mentioned by Abbacuk in the first of his Prophecy, of those that
sacrifice to their nets, and burn incense to their flewes: who because
their portion is increased, and their meat plenteous by these instruments and
helps which they use in their trades of fishing or the like, they forgette
the right author of their thrifte, and arrogate all to themselves and their
serviceable means. Some make an idol of their own brain, as the king of
Tire did: who thought that by his wisdom and understanding he had gotten
riches into his treasury; Ezech. 28.
and his heart was so highly exalted with that conceit, that he could not
forbear that most blasphemous and Luciferian presumption, I am a GOD. Such are
the statesmen (as they love to be held) the Politicians and Machiavellistes
of our sinful age, plotters of kingdoms and common-vveales, who think
themselves vviser than Daniell, as the king of Tire did, and that Moises and
the prophets are not so able to instruct them, as they themselves. Some make
an idol of the strength of their arms, as Zenacharib did, By the multitude of
my chariots have I done thus and thus: but touching the true Lord of hosts,
Es. 37.
as if he were less than nothing, and had lost the strength of his mighty
arm, he vaunteth to the king of Judah, let not thy GOD deceive thee. The end
of all is this. Idolum nihil est. An idol is so far from being more than
vanity, that it is mere nothing I know, in an idol of silver or gold, or
brass, there is both matter and fashion. Gold is gold, and the thoughts of
our hearts, thoughts, our wisdom, beauty, and strength are qualities that
have their being. And if we make either belly or back our God, they are both
creatures that God has made; but they are nothing of that which we suppose
them to be. We make them our honor, our hope, our confidence, such they are
not. For yet a little while, and the moth, the worm, rottennes, rust, and
consumption shall inherit them all. The righteous shall behold it and fear,
and laugh them to scorn that have been so mad after vanitieis ecce homo,
behold the man which has not made God his helper, Psalm. 52.
but trusted in riches, or other like transitory things. Wherefore I exhort
you al, Acte^ 14. (...).
as Paul his auditors at Lystra, that ye turn from these vain hopes, from
these foolsh and paltry idols, (whether you are fallen in liking with your
selves or other creatures) to serve the living God, which made the heavens the
earth, the sea, and all that therein is.

The prophet might have called them by other names, to note that iniquity,
filthiness, abomination, that is found in the^; but (setting the Lord and his
kingdom aside) he taxes the whole world and whatsoever is therein contained,
with the general censure of Solomon; vanity of vanities, all is vanity. He
that filled the earth with his wisdom as with a floude, filled it also with
vanity as with a floude, he smites on both cheeks, vanity and vanity
again, and to show that he did not repent him of his speech, pronounces a
third time, All is vanity: that you may know, whatsoever you cleave unto,
besides the true subsisting Lord, it has not that substance and certainty
which you first imagined. Therefore is the attibute set unto it in the next
place, lying vanity: because there is nothing but deceit in them. 3. Lyinge
vanites, the quality.
In the 4 of Genesis when Eve had brought forth her first begotten son, she called
him Cain* a man purchased or obtained of the Lord. Some say more: I have
obtained the man that is the Lord. Thinking undoubtedly, that she had bin the
mother of that blessed seed, Virum acquisivi Jehovam.
which should bruise the head of the serpent. But finding her self deceived,
and overweening in a corrupt, cruel man, she named her second son Abell, that
is vanity, to note that her former hope was altogether frustrated. The Epithit
is very fitly adioined to vanity, and in effect signifies the same that
vanitye does: for what is vanitye but lyinge and deceavinge? Au^us Gellius
writes of a vain Grammatian, that made himself most skillfu^l in Salustes
words. Apollinaris, Lib 18. ^oct. A^tic. cap. 4. (...) esset an va^ior.

Priscoru^ ego verboru^ etc


to try his skill, met him on a day and asked him, what Salust meant (if he
were so cunninge in the blood and marrowe of his history, as he professed) by
saying of C. Lentulus, that it was a question, whether he were more foolish
or vain. The interpreter answered him; the knowledge I take upon me, is in
ancient words, not these that are common and worn by daily use. For he is
more foolish and vain than was that Lentulus, who knows not that both these
words note but the same weakness. Apollinaris not satisfied with this answer,
and to satisfy others that desired to be better instructed by him, at length
resolved; that they were properly termed vain men, not as the common people
held, who were dullardes, wi^lesse, and fools, but in the opinion of the most
ancient learned, Me^daces and infi^i etc.
such as were given to lyinge and faithlessenesse, who gave lightness for
waighte, and emptiness for that that has true substance. Now as in an idol
in proprietye, there are sundry reasons that make it to be a lying vanitye;
for first, the author and suggestour was the father of lies; secondly, the
former of it lied to himself, in thinking that it was the pleasure of God that
idolles should be fashioned; thirdly, he that trusts therein, lies, for he
says to wood or stone, thou art my helper; 4. the whole substance of the idol
lies, Substa^tia to ta mentitu^.
in promisinge help, where none is, and seeminge to be that which is not: so
on the other side, those other idolles, which I named, are lyinge vanities, and
shall as little profit us, when we crave their truth, as grass the mower,
that grows upon the house tops. If we trust unto them, let us look for
no better aid and comfort therein, than those others in the prophet, who
confessed too late, we have made falsehood our refuge, and under vanitye are
we hid. I conclude the first member. Trust not in oppression or robberye If
riches increase, Esa. 28.
set not your heart upon them; man disquieteth himself in vain, says the
Psalm, heapeth up riches not knowinge who shall gather them. An horse is but a
vain thing to save a man, neither is it his bow that can deliver him. A man
is but a vain thing to save a man, if you weighe him upon the balance, you
shall find him lighter then vanitye. Wisdom is as vain, and shall become as
foolish, as of the beasts that perish. Strength is as vain, and shall
become as weak as water spilte. Beautye is as vain, and shall be changed into
lothsomenesse more than the sores of Lazarus. All these are vanities, and vain
vanities, lyinge vanities, as emptye as the vvinde, as ^leetinge as the miste
in the air; God only is true, and his promise just, his faithfulness is
above the clouds, and his righteousness exceeds as the greatest mountains.

The consequent or private part of the refutation, The priva^tiue part.
Derelinqunt, non derelinquu^tur,

Deus prior in amore posterior inodio 1. They leave. Luke 16.


is in the words following, They forsake their own mercy. Mercy forsakes not
them, but they mercy. God is ever foremost in love, never hates till he is
first hated. It is not only to hazard, and put in adventure, nor to extenuate
and diminish the mercy of God, but wholly to renounce it, and to send a
farewell to God, to embrace vanities. It is a wall of partition, betwixt us
and grace: I had almost said, it is as the great gulf, that was betwixt
Abraham and the rich man. Surely it shall stand as the faithful witness in
heaven, that neither idolatour, nor adulterer, nor covetous persons, (both
which with many other offenders, are idolatours in an other kind) shall
ever inherit the kingdom of God. You see how the consequence holds. Love
they the one? they certeinlye leave the other. There is no haultinge betwixt
two opinions. If God be God, they must follow him alone, there is no
minglinge of Baal with him. Our God is a jealous God, and suffers no
copartner or competitour in any part of that honor that belongs unto him.
But in leaving mercy, 2. Mercy* (...). Luke 3. Psalm. 103.
so sweet and amiable a nature in him that is love it self, unwise and
unhappy wretches, what do they leave? more, than all the wordly solaces
shall be able to supply unto them* They leave even the bowelles of mercy, as
Zacharye sange in the gospel of Luke. For as a father pittyeth his children,
(and more by a thousand degrees) so has the LORD compassion toward all them
that fear him. And a mother may forget the fruit of her womb, but the LORD
shall never forget his children of election. These bovvelles and invvardes of
mercy they leave, (mercy, so deep and affectionate, that the seat of
affections in man suffices not to express it) that relinquishe GODS mercy.
It had been more ease and happiness unto them, if their own bowelles had
fallen from their bodies, as the bowelles of Judas. They leave not handefulles
of barlye and pieces of bread, temporal and tr^fling commodities, parcells of
that bou^ty and goodness which God has bestowed upon them, but the universal
mercy of God, as great in quantity as the spaces of the whole world (for
look how high the heaven is above the earth, so great is his mercy toward
them that fear him;) nay, the world may be measured and spanned, but of his
goodness there is no end. They leave that mercy that is better than their
life. Psalm. 63.
For what is life without mercy? Mercy gave it unto them at the first, mercy
preserves it, mercy shall exchange it hereafter, and mercy restore it at the
last day: without this life of mercy to their mortal lives, they live, or
rather die, in everlasting misery. Peter told his master in the gospel, to
show how willing they were to make Christ their only advantage; Behold, we
have left all. He might as truly have said, behold, we have found all.
They left their fathers, mothers, kinsfolks, houses, nets, vanities. They
found the mercy of God, which made a full amends. These other were the things
that were made to be left, Linquenda tellus, and domus, and placens, Vxor.
We must leave lands, Horat.
and houses, wives, and children, with their temporal commodities. But the
change of the apostles of Christ was no unprofitable change to have left all,
for him that is above all. But woe unto them, Non inutilis commutatio est* pro
eo qui est super omnia* omnia reliquisse. Bern.
who after their term of vanity expired, and vanities left, have not miserere
in store, a groan and sobbe in their souls to call for mercy, and a
favorable propension in the ears of their Lord, to ha^ken to their cry.
Lastly it is their own mercy which they forsake, that embrace vanity. I mean
not active mercy in themselves, 3. Their own.
inhabiting their own hearts, but the mercy of almighty God, tendered and
exhibited to each man in particular, vvhither he be bond or free, Jew or
Gentile. For his mercy is not only from generation to generation, but from
man to man. And in this sense it is true which God spoke by Ezechiell, Every
soul is mine: the soul of the father is mine, and the soul of the son is
mine also. Therefore it is not said in my text, that they leave the mercy of
God, but their own mercy, the patrimony of their father in heaven, a portion
whereof was allotted to every child. For the inheritance of the Lord is not
diminished by the multitude of possessours, Haereditas domini non minuitur
multitudine possesso^um, tanta ^ingulis, quanta universis. August.
it is as large to every heir a part, as to the whole number put together.
This poor man cried (says the Psalm, naming a singular person, but leaving
an universal president to the whole church) and the Lord heard him. And that
poor man cries, and the Lord will also hear him. Iste pauper and ille
pauper: you may make up a perfect induction and enumeration. For if all the
poor and destitute in the world cry unto him, he will hear them all.

The refutation is now ended, and gives place to the assertion or affirmation
what himself will do: not as before he did, 2. The affirmation.
walking after the lust^s of his own eye and heart: nor as the manner of the
heathen is, embracing lying vanities: but acknowledging his life and liberty to
come alone from the Lord of mercy; But I will sacrifice unto thee etc. I will
sacrif. Pay vows. Which I have made
To him only will he pay the tribute that is due unto him, not deriving his
safety from any other imaginary helps. He will offer sacrifice which the law
required, and he will first make and afterward pay the vows which the law
required not, the one an offering (in manner) of necessity, the other of a free
heart. With tha^ksgiving.

The voice of thankesgiving.


He will not offer with cakes or wafers, and oil (and yet perhaps not
without these) but with thankesgiving, an inward and spiritual sacrifice, and
that thankesgiving shall have a voice to publish it to the whole world, that
others may witness it. Sacrifices and vows I handled once before. Let it now
suffice by way of short repetition to let you understand, that he offers
the best sacrifice who offers himself, body and soul, all the members of
the one, affections of the other to serve the Lord. It shall please him much
better, and cast a sweeter smell into his nostrelles, than a bullock that has
horns and hoofes. And he makes the best vow, who voweth himself, I say not
in the world a virgin, but a virgin to Christ, that whither he marry or marry
not, he has not defiled himself with women; (for he that shall say, has not
coupled or matched himself with women, in an holy covenant, misseth the whole
scope of that scripture:) that voweth himself, I say not in the world a
pilgrim, to gad from place to place, but a pilgrim to Christ, that though he
lie beneath in a barren and thirsty ground where no water is, yet he walks
into heaven with his desires, and in affection of spirit lives above where his
master and head is: that vovveth himself, I say not not in the world a
beggar, but a beggar to Christ, that though he possess riches, yet he is not
by riches possessed, and albe it he leaves not his riches, yet he leaves
his will and desire to be rich. For it was well observed by a learned father,
Faci^ius sa^cus contemnitur quam voluntas.
The bag is more easily contemned than the will. And if you will, you may
relinquish all, though you keep all. This, I say, is the richest sacrifice,
and rightest vow, to give thy self, and vow thy service and adherence to
almighty God, Si vultis, etiam retinendo relinquitis. Psalm. 63.
as we read that Peter did (but to perform it with more fidelity) though all
forsake thee, I will not. And what, I beseech you, are these sacrifices and
vows but pensions of our duty, arguments and seals of thankful minds;
which is as marrowe and fatness to the bones of a righteous man, to praise the
Lord with joyful lips, to remember him on his bed, and to think on him in
the night watches; that is, both early and late, season and not season, to be
telling of all his merciful works, and recounting to himself his manifold
loving kindnesses?

^. The acclamation.
The last thing I proposed, is the sentence or Epiphoneme, concluding the
conclusion: or it may be the reason of his former promises. I will offer
sacrifices, etc. Why? because Salvation is the Lords. I am sure, it is the
sum of the whole discourse; one word for all, the very moral of the history.
Shall I say more? it is the argument of the whole prophecy, and might have
concluded every chapter therein. The mariners might have written upon their
ship, in steed of Castor and Pollux, or the like devise, Salvation is the
Lords. The Ninivites in the next chapter, might have written upon their gates,
Salvation is the Lords. And whole mankind, whose cause is pitied and pleaded
by God, against the hardness of Jonas his heart, in the last, might have
written in the palms of their hands, Salvation is the Lords. It is the
argument of both the testamentes, the staff and supportation of heaven and
earth. They would both sink, and all their iointes be severed, if the
salvation of the Lord were not. The birds in the air sing no other note, the
beasts in the field give no other voice than Salus Iehovae, salvation is the
Lords. The walls and fortresses to our cuntry, gates to our cities and
towns, bars to our houses, a surer cover to our heads than an helmet of
steel, a better receite to our bodies than the confection of Apothecaries, a
better receite to our souls than the pardons of Rome, is Salus Iehovae, the
salvation of the Lord. The salvation of the Lord, blesses, preserves,
vpholdeth all that we have; our basket and our store, the oil in our cruises,
our presses, the sheep in our folds, our stalles, the children in the womb,
at our tables, the corn in our fields, our stores, our garners; it is not the
virtue of the stars, nor nature of the things themselves, that gives being and
continuance to any of these blessings. And what shall I more say? as the
apostle asked Hebr. 11. when he had spoken much, and there was much more
behind, but that time failed him. Rather, what should I not say? for the world
is my theater at this time; and I neither think, nor can feign to my self
any thing, that has not dependaunce upon this acclamation, Salvation is the
Lords. Plutarcke writes, that the Amphictyones in Greece, a famous counsel
assembled of twelve sundry people, wrote upon the temple of Apollo Pythius, in
steed of the Iliades of Homer, or songs of Pindarus (large and tyring
discourses) short sentences and memoratives, as Know thy self, Use
moderation, Beware of suretishippe, and the like. And doubtless though every
creature in the world, whereof we have use, be a treatise and narration unto us
of the goodness of God, and we might weary our flesh, and spend our days in
writing books of that inexplicable subject, yet this short apopthegme of Jonas
comprehe^deth all the rest, and stands at the end of the songue, as the
altars and stones that the Patriarchs set up at the partinge of the ways, to
give knowledge to the after-worlde, by what means he was delivered. I would
it were daily preached in our temples, sunge in our streets, written upon our
dore-postes, painted upon our walls, or rather cut with an admant claw upon
the tables of our hearts, that we might never forget, Salvation to be the
Lords* we have need of such remembrances to keep us in practice of
revolvinge the mercies of God. For nothing decays sooner than love. Nihil
facilius qua^ am^^ putrescit Sene^*

Memoria delicata, tenera, fragilis, in quam primum senectus incurri^.

Primum senescit beneficium Diog Jni^. regn. Elizabet. 2. King. 7.


And of all the powers of the soul, memory is most delicate, tender and
brittle, and first waxes old; and of all the apprehensions of memory, first a
benefit. To seek no further for the proof and manifestation of this sentence
within our coasts, I may say, as our Savior in the nineteenth of Luke to
Zacheus, This day is salvation come unto this house. Even this day, my
brethren, came the salvation of the LORD to this house of David, to the house
of this Kingdom, to the houses of Israel and Aaron, people and priestehode,
church and common wealth. I held it an especial part of my duty, amongst
the rest, the day invitinge, and your expectation calling me thereunto, and
no text of mercy and salvation impertinent to that purpose, to correct and
stir up my self, with those four lepers that came to the spoil of the
Syrian tents. I do not well, this day is a day of good tidinges, and should
I hold my peace? let the leprosy of those men clea^e unto my skin, if it
be not as joyful a thing unto me to speak of the honor of this day, as
ever it was to them to carrye the happy nevves of the flight of Aram. It is
the birthday of our country. It was dead before, and the very soul of it
quite departed. Sound religion, which is the life of a kingdom, was abandoned,
faith exiled, the gospel of Christ driven into corners, and hunted beyond the
seas. All these fell, with the fall of an honorable and renowned plant; which,
as the first flower of the figtree, Hunc tani^^ terris fata ostendere.
in the prime and bloominge of his age was translated into heaven: they rose
again, with the rising and advancement of our gracious Lady and Sovereign.
Were I as able as vvillinge to procure solemnitye to the day, I would take the
course that David did. I would begin at heaven, Psalm. 1.48.
and call the Angels and armie^ thereof, the sun, moon, and stars, I
would descend by the air, and call the fire, hail and snow, vapors and
stormy winds, I would enter into the sea, and call for dragons and all deepes,
I would end in the earth, and call for the mountains and hills, fruitful
trees and cedars, beasts and all cattle, creeping things and feathered
fowls, Kings of the earth and all people, Princes, and Judges, young men and
maidens, old men and children, to lend their harmony and accord unto us, to
praise the name of the Lord, to accompany and adorn the triumph of our land,
and to showte into heaven with no other cry than this, salus Iehovae, salvation
is only from the Lord, by whom the horn of this people has so mightily been
exalted. Bona silua ^orint Angli.
O happy English, if we knew our good; if that royal vessel of gold, wherein
the salvation of the Lord has been sent unto us, were as precious and dear
in our accounte, as it rightly deserves. Her particular commendations, common
to her sacred person not with many princes, I examine not. Let it be one
amongst a thousand, which Bernard gave to a widow Queen of Jerusalem, and
serves more justly to the maiden Queen of England: that it was no less glory
unto her to live a widow (havinge the world at will, and being to sway a
kingdom, which required the help of an husband) than a Queen. Illud
successionis est, hoc virtutis* illud tibi ex genere, istud ex munere Dei,
illud foeliciter nata es istud viriliter nacta es. 2. honor, alter secundum
seculum, alter secundu^ Deum, uterque a Deo. Bern. in epist. Pers^

Potestas omnis debet esse ornata


The one, says he, Came to thee by succession, the other by virtue; the one by
descent of blood, the other by the gift of God; the one it was thy happiness
to be borne, the other thy manliness to have atteined unto: a double honor,
the one toward the world, the other toward God, both from God. Her
wisdom as the wisdom of an Angel of the Lord (so spoke the widow
sometimes to David) fitter for an Angel than my self to speak of, her
knowledge in the tongues and liberal learning in all the liberal sciences
(that in a famous University amongst the learnedest men, she has been able,
not only to hear and understand (which were something,) but to speak,
persuade, decide, like a graduate, orator, professor; and in the highest
court of parliament, has not only sitten amongst the peers of her realm,
and delivered her mind, maiestate manus, by some bodily gesture in sign of
assent, but given her counsel and judgment not inferior to any; and her
self by her self has answered the ambassadors of several nations in their
several languages;) with other excellent graces beseeming the state of a
prince, though they best know, on whose hand she lea^eth, and that are
nearest in attenda^ce and observance about her majesty, yet if any man be
ignorant of, let him ask of strangers abroad, into whose ears fame has
bruited and blown her virtues, and done no more but right, in giving such
gifts unto her, as never were more rare in the rarest Queen, and in the sex
of woman-hode carry admiration. Why do I say woman-hode? Virtue is tied
neither to revenew nor kind. Nec censum nec sexu^ exigi^ virtus. Senec.

Basil. ser. de Iulit a mart.


Iulita a woman and one that witnessed a good confession for the name of
Christ, as she was going to the stake to be burnt, exhorted women, that they
should not complain of the weakness of nature: because first, they were made
of the same matter, whereof man was finished; Secondly, to the image of the
same God; Thirdly, as fit and as capable to receive any goodness; Fourthly,
invested into the like honor. Why not? says she. Seeing we are kinned unto
men in all respects. For not their flesh alone was taken for the creation of
women, but we are bones of their bones: for which cause we are endebted to
God, for courage, patience, virility, as well as men. Sine excustione sexus ite
obviam pietati.
And Basile adds his own advise, that setting excuse of their sex aside,
they should set upon piety, and see vvhither nature has debarred them of any
thing, that was common to men. I note it the rather, because I know it greeveth
Abimelech at the heart, that a woman should cast down a millstone upon his
head to kill him; and therefore he calls his page to thrust him thorough,
that men might not say, A woman slew him. It greeveth Abimelech of Rome, Iud. ^.
and his whole faction, that the church of England, and the whole estate of our
land under the government of a woman, should be better able to defend it
self against his tyranny, than any country in Christendom. Their hearts
break with envy hereat, their tongues and pens dissemble not their grudge at
the foeminine primacie* that a woman should be the head (under Christ) of the
church of England. But as Chrysostom sometimes spoke of Herodias and John
Baptist, so (by a contrary application of their manners) may I, Ser de decoll.
Joan. Bapt.
of two as unlike (as ever fire and water) the one to Herodias, the other to
John Baptist; Mulier totius mundi ca^ut truncavit, A woman has beheaded
(within her realms and dominions) the falsely vsurpinge and surmised head of
the whole world. Her father and brother of most famous memory, had broken his
legs before, as they brake the legs of the thieves upon the cross; the one
his right leg of rentes, and revenewes, the milk and honey of our land; the
other his left leg of idolatrous worshippes, the doctrine of men, false and
erroneous opinions, wherewith the children of this realm had been poisoned a
long time. Queen Elizabeth has bruised his head, (for though his legs
were broken, he began to gather strengh again.) He now commands not,
lives not within our land (saving in a few disordered and luxate members,
which as the parts of an adder cut a sunder, retain some life for a time,
but never I trust, shall grow into a body again) neither ever is he likely
to revive amongst us, unless the Lord shall raise him up, for a plague to our
unthankfulness. Fecit virtutibus sui^ ne haec civitas poenitentia ageres etc.
And therefore as they said of Tarquinius Priscus in Rome, a Corinthian borne,
and a stranger to their city, he has well deserved by his virtues, that our
city shall never repent it of choosing a stranger to the king; so by her
gracious and religious government amongst us, has her most excellent Majesty
worthily purchased, that England shall never be sorry, that a woman was the
Queen thereof. When she came to her crown, she found the country (as
Augustus the city of Rome) of brick, Jnveni lateritiam, reli qui marmo ^eam.
she turned it into marble. She found it in the sands, she set it upon a
rock, the foundation of prophets and apostles: she found it a land of
images, ignorances, corruptions, vanities, lies, she has hitherto preserved
it, and I hope shall leave it to posterity, a land possessed of the truth, and
seasoned with the gospel of Christ crucified. This this is the savingest
salvation, that the Lord has, this the blessing and happiness that we enjoy
under her gracious government, (besides our peace, such as our fathers never
presumed to hope for, plenty, prosperity, corporal benefits, in that we lend
and borrowe not, not only our milk, but our blood, money, and men too, to
those that want, and when we ringe our belles for joy, and give ear to the
noise of timbrelles and tabrets, others are frighted with other kinds of
soundes, the neying of horses, roaring of great ordinance, howling of women and
children, to see their orbities and miseries before their eyes) I say, this is
the blessing we reap, that the gospel is free by her procurement, our
consciences not enthralled to the ordinances of men, our zeal rectified by
knowledge, and our religion reformed by the statutes of the highest God. Now as
we have great reason to singe merrily unto the Lord and with a good courage,
Salvation is the Lords, for these graces, so what was the cause of her own
so many, miraculous deliverances, both before and since she sat upon the
seat of her fathers, but the same Salvation, that by saving her, saved us? I
am sure she was in danger either of wolves or of butchers, when her
rightuous soul cried, Tanquam ovis, Suspecta multa, pro^a^a nulla.
and as a sheep was she led to the slaughter, or not far from it. When her
innocence could not be her shield, but though she were free from crime, and
God and man might justly have cleared her, yet she was not free from
suspicion. When she feared that the scaffolde of the Lady Jane stood for an
other tragedy, wherein her self should have plaide the wofullest part. Since
which almost despaired escapes, (but that her time, as David spoke, and her
soul was in the hands of that Lord who deposes and sets up Princes) how
it has fared with her, both at home and abroad, we al know: partly from
traiterous and false-hearted Achitophels, which have served her with an heart
and an heart; partly from the bloody bishops of Rome, and their pernicious
seminaries, as full of mischief to Christendom, as ever the Trojan horse to
the inhabitants of Troy; partly from the king of Spain, whose study long has
been to be the Monarke of Europe, of whom it is true, that they spoke of
another Philippe of Macedon, that he bought the more part of Greece, Ante
Philippus maiore ex part^ mercator Graeciae, quam victo^ Val. Max.
before he conquered it, so he buyeth countries before he wins them, and
would do that by his Indian gold, which will be little ease for him to do by
men. They have long maliced her, and I trust long shall; and malice shall do
the nature of malice, that is, drink out the marrowe and moisture of those
that foster it, and bring their devises upon their own heads, as Nadab and
Abihu were consumed with the fire of their own censors. So long as Salus
Iehovae endures, which is as long as Iehov^h himself, our hope shall not
perish. He has even sworn by his holiness, as he did to David his servaunt,
not to fail Queen Elizabeth. Psalm. 21. Jdoneum and compar tibi regnum fili
invenias, quoniam Macedonia tui capa^s non est.
He that prevented her with liberal blessings, before she took the scepter
into her hands, and set a crown of pure gold upon her head, will maintain
his own doings, perfect his good work begun and continued a long time,
glorify his blessed name by advauncing her to glory, increase his kingdom by
hers, subdue her people unto her, confound her enemies, and when the kingdom
of England is no longer capable of her, (as Philip spoke to Alexander his
son) he will establish her in a kingdom of a far more happy condition. Amen.

THE XXX. LECTVRE.
Chap. 2. ver. 10. And the Lord spoke unto the fish, and it cast out Jonas
upon the dry land.
JONAS has ended his song of Sion in a strange land, which was the second
part of the chapter now insisted upon. He has brooked the seas with
patience, and digested his perilles with hope, and is now arrived at the haven
of happy deliveraunce. Lament. 4.
The inhabitauntes of the earth vvoulde never have believed that the enemy
could have entered within the gates of Jerusalem, nor that the prophet of the
Lord could have had egresse from the gates and bars of this monstrous fish.
But so was it done by the Lord, and it is marvailous in our eyes. Act. 12.
And as the chains fell from the hands of Peter, the very night before Herod
intended to bring him forth to his trial, and he passed through the first and
second watches without interruption, and the iron gate opened by it own
accord unto him, though he were delivered to four quaternions of soldiers
to be k^pte, and that night slepte between two, bound with two chains, and
the keepers before the doors of the jail; so after seventie two hours, which
is the judicial hour of many dangerous diseases, happily the timeliest time
wherein Jonas, if ever, was to look for liberty again, and the Whale might
begin to plead to himself everlasting possession of his pray so long
retained, though his head were wrapte about with weeds, as Peter's hands
bound with chains, and he were delivered both to floudes and depthes,
promontories and rocks, as he to four quaternions, and at this instante of
his deliverye lay between the bars of earth and sea, as Peter slept
between two soldiers, besides the throat and jaws of the fish (his
loathsome prison) which sat as keepers before the doors, yet all these
encumbraunces and lettes fell from the body of Jonas, and he past through the
first and second watches, I mean, the entralles of the VVhale, and that iron
gate, of his strong armed teeth, and was cast up upon dry ground, as Peter
was restored to his friends house.

In miracles and mysteries must I spend my discourse at this time. The miracles
are not news unto you, Miraculis (...) mysterij^ ^^nia plena.
thorough out the whole decourse of these histories. Wherein the Lord has
the principal part, qui facit mirabilia solus, who only works wonders
and only wonders, what have you seen else? Jonas was svvallowed by a
miracle, by a miracle was preserved, lived, and sang, and by a miracle is cast
up. Who was the author of the miracle? The Lord. What were his means? The
Lord. Spoke. To the fish. He cast him up. Upon dry land.
His word or commandment? Who the minister? the fish. The manner what? by
vomiting or disgorging himself. Lastly, the terminus ad quem, or place that
received him; The dry land. In these particulars does the sentence of my text
empty it self.

1 The Lord spoke. One and the same hand both vvounded and recured him. 1.
Vna eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit. Job. 40.
Who else was of might to have encountered this fearful beast? For can
thou draw out Leviathan with an hook, or pierce his jaws with an angle?
Will he make many prayers unto thee, or speak thee fair? Lay but thine
hand upon him, and thou shall have cause to remember the battle, and to do
no more so. Behold, thine hope is in vain, if thou think to match him, for
shall not one perish even at the sight of him? Muchlesse can thou draw him
to the shore, and cast a line into his bowels, to draw out a prophet or any
spoil there-hence. They said of David in the Psalm, now he is down, he
shall rise no more. Psalm. 41.
If thou had asked both land and sea, when Jonas was fallen into the depthes
of them, they vvoulde have answered thee, now he is down, he shall rise no
more. Even his own most familiar friend, whom he best trusted, with whom
he had taken his sweetest counsel, the heart within his breast, told him
many a time, Thou shall rise no more, thou art cast out of the sight of the
Lord and company of men for ever. But he knew whom he trusted, and who
was best able to restore the pawn committed unto him, though he walked in
the belly of the fish, as in the valley of death. Yet the LORD was on his
side, what then could hurt him? The Lord lives, Vivit Dominu^.

Dicis Dominu^.

Dominus nomen eius.


the LORD has spoken, the Lord is his name, and such like preambles to many
sentences of scripture, are most effectual motives of persuasion, and give us
unquestionable assurance of whatsoever therein set down. The Angel appeared
unto Gedeon, Judges the sixte, and said unto him, The Lord is with thee thou
valiant man. What cause had Gedeon, when he heard but that preface, Dominus
tecum, the LORD is with thee, to speak of their miseries, and to call for
wonted miracles, and to think that God had forsak^n them? The weakest and
feeblest soul in the world, assist^^^ with the valiancie of the most valiant
Lord, cannot be endangered. And therefore he bade Gedeon, Go in this thy
might, Jn hac tua.
and thou shall save Israel out of the hands of Madian. Not in the might of
thine own arm, for who has enabled thee? but in this thy might, this that I
speak of, the presence of my majesty, mine by right, thine by use and
receipte; mine by possession, thine by communication; mine originally, thine
instrumentally: for have not I sent thee? and I will be with thee, and thou
shall smite Madian as one man. The like was the greeting of the angel to the
mother of the Lord, Dominus tecum, The Lord is with thee. I have said enough: I
need not give reasons of my message. Ask no questions, make no doubt of thine
overnaturall and unkindly conception, when thou shall but hear that the Lord
is with thee, and the power of the most high shall overshadowe thee.

2 The means or instrument. and
The Lord spoke to the fish. The instrumente that the LORD used in the delivery
of his Prophet, is that Delphian swoorde, or universal instrumente which he
used in forming the world, and all the creatures thereof. 3 The minister.
Genes. 1. Hebr. 1. Dixit, id est, perfecit. Alchym. Posuit, vt celeritate^ and
facilitatem operis Dei ostendere^.
He said, let there be light, let there be a firmament, let the waters be
gathered into one place, let the dry land appear etc. and it was fulfilled.
And at this hour the everliving word of GOD, bears up and supporteth all
things by his word. What is his word then, but his mere and effectual
commandment, and the giving of effect to that which his heart has
intended? Who as he goes without feet, sees without eyes, and reaches
without hands, so there is no question but he speaks without a tongue, and
such instruments of speech as are ordinary with the sons of men. For what
ears had the light, the firmament, and other his works, to hear and observe
his words if he had pronounced them? or what capacity and intelligence had
the fish in this place? Dicere est praecipere. Occolampad. Quia coactus est
facere voluntatem Dei. R. Kimhi.

Ad bonitate^ pisce^ adigit. Natura ^olent pisces grandes salo se defendere.
Plin.


But as the office of speech in man, is to be the messenger and interpreter of
his heart; and to signify his conceiptes invvardely and secretly purposed: so
somevvhat the LORD does, whereby he imparteth a knowledge, even unto
insensible creatures what his mind and pleasure is. Therefore it is said,
that the LORD spoke to the fish, when he commanded that service of him, and
compelled him to execute his will, when he moved him to more mercy than
nature had shaped him unto, and brought him to the shore, whom the hugeness
of his body naturally enforced to keep the depthes of the sea. It shows
what divinity there is (if I may so term it) in the word of God, how
imperious to command, how easy to obtain when it has commanded. One fiat,
is of power to make that which was never made before, and had lain in
everlasting informitie, if GOD had spared to speak; to establish nature when
it is not, and to change nature when it is; to create angels, men, birds,
beasts, fishes; to store heaven, earth, and the deep with innumerable armies
of creatures; and to make them bow their knees to their maker, and render
unlimited obedience to all his decrees. When God was manifested in the flesh,
and went about doing good, Math. 8*
as the Evangelist writes, a believing Centurion in a suite that dearly
affected him, desired not the travail of his feet, nor any receite of
physic to heal his servaunte, no not so much as the laying on his hand,
which some had requested, nor coming within the roof of his house, but
only a word from his lips; Speak but the word, LORD, and my servaunte
shall be healed. Man lives not by bread, neither recovereth by physic
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. A leper
had told him in the next words before, Lord, if thou will thou can make
me clean. Voluntas tua, opus est, Thy will is thy work: Origin.
And he said, I will, be thou made clean. As if with the breath of his
mouth he had spoken to his leprosy, be gone, as he afterward spoke to the
Devilles, (...), be packing into the heard of swine, Ibid.
and they went the next way over the rocks and cle^ues, as if a whirle-winde
had borne them. He rebukes the winds and the sea in the same place, with more
authority than ever Peter rebuked Ananias and Saphira, and with the like
success, for he smote the breath from the winds, and motion from the sea,
(...).

The voice of his thu^ders.


and a great concussion of waters became a great calm. Who is this, that the
winds and the sea obey him? For they not only hear him, but hear him with
effect, they go, and run, and stand still, like servauntes of their
master, and as it were, live and die at his commandment. The prophet in the
twenty nine Psalm, speaks of one voice that the Lord has, a mighty and
glorious voice, (a voice that has a sensible sound indeed, and smites the
ears both of man and beast sometimes with tingling and astonishment) that it
breaks the cedars, even the cedars of Libanus, and shakes the wilderness,
even the wilderness of Cadesh, that it divides the flames of fire, makes the
Hindes to cast their calves, and discovers the forrestes. But this voice,
whereof I speak, makes the cedars, even the cedars of Libanus, and creates
the wilderness, even the wilderness of Cadesh, forms the flames of fire,
fashioneth the Hindes and their young ones, and planteth the forrestes. And
this was the word that spoke to the fish to cast up Jonas. Behold, at the
voice of the Lord Leviathan casts his young, and aborteth a prophet before
he is willing. So true it is by absolute experience, which the spirit of God
testifies Heb. 4. That the word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and
sharper then any two-edged sword, and enters through even unto the dividing
of the soul and the spirit, and of the iointes and the marrowe, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and the intentes of the heart. Neither is there any
creature which is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked and open
unto his eyes, with whom we have to do. You hear how far it entered, in
the words of my text. It went into the bowels of a Whale lying in the bowels
of the seas, and as narrowly searched all his entralles as Laban Jacobs stuff,
it divided between his teeth and their strength that they could not chew, and
went between his stomach and the appetite thereof that it durst not concoct,
it drew him as an angle and hook to the land, ransackte his mawe, and opened
the straights of his throat that the prophet of the Lord might come forth.

He cast up Jonas. The manner of his coming forth seems to have been
without ease and pleasure to the Whale. 4. The manner.
For as a stomach overcharged, or offended with meat that it has received,
is not at rest till it has unloaded it self: so the VVhale feeling a morsel
within him, which he cannot turn into nutriment, what should he do, for
his own quiet, but by the riftings and reachings of his stomach send it
forth? Thus it is said of the hypocrite, Job the twentieth, Who has undone
many, and spoiled houses which he never builded, whose wickedness was
sweet in his mouth, as perhaps Jonas in the mouth of the fish, and he hid
it under his tongue, etc. That his meat in his bowels was turned, and that the
gall of aspes was in the midst of him; that he had devoured substance, and
should vomit it up, for GOD would draw it out of his belly; that he should
restore the labor, and devour no more; that ^ee should feel no quietness in
his body, neither reserve any thing of that which he desired. There you
hear at large what the nature of a surfitte is. And doubtless ill gotten
goods, when a man snatcheth at the right hand, and catches at the left,
without being satisfied, and eats up the people of the land as bread, is
a spiritual surfitte, and not a kindelye or hole-some mainetenance to him that
has coveted it. So is pleasure, and sweetness in sinning, when one favors
it (as Zophar there speaks) and will not forsake it, but keeps it close in
his mouth, though it dwell in darkness as dark as night, and say to the
soul and reins, hide me safe, yet it is a surfitte too, and when the belly
has been filled with abundance thereof, it shall be in pain, (to
continue the phrase of that book) and GOD shall send upon it his fierce
wrath. The angel of the Laodicaean Church, Ibid.
Revelation the third, was unto GOD as raw and undigested meat which his
heart could not brook. His lukenesse and neutralitye of dealing in his
service did so much offend him, that although he had been received into some
inward favor as sustenaunce is taken into the stomach, yet he is threatened
to be spued up again. (...).
The phrase is somewhat infrequent and rare in the scripture, yet is it no
where used, but it deserves wisely and waightily to be considered. In this
place, to conclude, the meaning is, that Jonas was not descended into the
belly of the fish to become a pray unto him, but to dwell in a desert and
solitary house for a time, as Jeremy wished him a cotage in the wilderness,
and as it were to go aside, and hide himself from the anger of the Lord, till
the storm might be overpast.

The words of Micheas do rightelye express my mind herein. I will bear
the wrath of the LORD because I have sinned against him, until he plead my
cause, Chap. 7.
and execute judgment for me. Then will he bring me forth to the
light, and I shall see his righteousness. When thou that art mine enemy
shall look upon it, and shame shall cover thee, which say unto me, where
is the LORD thy God?

Lastly the place which received Jonas, was the dry land. 5. The place.
Which notes a qualitye of the earth commodious and fit for habitation. He
felt the ground before, when he went down to the bottom of the
mounetaines, and the earth was about him with her bars, but he felt not
the dry ground. He vvalked not then upon the face of the earth, which is the
manner of living souls, but was under the roots of the mounetaines, where
he had not liberty nor power to breath, but by special providence. In the
beginning of the creation, the waters were above the earth, til the LORD
said, Genes. 1.
Let the waters under the heaven be gathered into one place, and let the dry
land appear, and it was so. According to the words of the Psalms; He
has founded it upon the seas, Psalm. 24.
and established it upon the flovvdes. And again, He has stretched out the
earth upon the waters, for his mercy endures for ever. Psalm. 136.
A strange kind of building, when others lay the foundations upon rocks, the
LORD upon the waters. Psalm. 104. Cum te p^ude^ti reputas insistere terrae:

Nonne vel hinc clare conspicis esse Deum?

Locus alius Naturalis, alius Fatalis and miraculosus.


And yet he has so set the earth upon those pillars, that it shall never
move. When thou call to mind, that thou treadest upon the earth hanging
(like a ball) in the air, and floting in the waters, is it not evidente enough
unto thee, even by this one argument, that there is a God? By the confession of
all, the natural place of the waters is above the earth. This at the first
they enjoyed, and after repeated and recovered again, in the overwhelming of
the world, when the LORD for a time delivered them as it were from their
bands, and gave them their voluntary and natural passage. And at this day,
there is no doubt, but the sea, which is the collection of waters, lies
higher than the land, as seafaring men gather by sensible experimentes, and
therefore the Psalm says, Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment.
For as a vesture in the proper use of it, is above the body that is clothed
therewith; so is the sea above the land: and such a garmente would it have
been unto the earth, but for the providence of GOD toward us, as the shirte
that was made for the muthering of Agamemnon, where the head had no issue out.
Therefore the Psalm adds immediately, The waters would stand above the
mounetaines, but at thy rebuke they flee, at the voice of thy thunder they
haste away. And the mounetaines ascend, and the valleys descend to the place
which thou haste established for them. But thou haste set them a bound, which
they shall not pass; neither shall they return to cover the earth. Job 38.
The like in the book of Job; where the phrases are, that the LORD has
established his commandment upon the sea (though a wild and untamed
creature) and set bars and do^es about it, and said, Hitherto shall thou
come and no further, Ecaenaculis.
here will I stay thy proud waves. What from the chambers that are above,
and from the fountains and sluices that lie beneath, how easy a matter were
it for the former of all things to set open his vvindowes and dammes, Genes. 7.
and every hour of our life to over-runne us with a new deluge? Nay, he has
water enough to drown us within our own bodies. He ca^^e there command a
full sea of distempered and redundant humors, Heraclius the Emperor dyed of a
dropsy. V^^a^err.
to take our breath from us. We little bethink our selves how daily and
continually we stand beholding to the goodness of GOD for sparinge our
lives. Who though he with hold the forces of those outward elements,
water, and fire, and the rest, that they do us no harm, yet we have
elements within, whereof we are framed and composed, we have heat and
cold, moisture and drought, which he can use at his pleasure to our own
destruction. Let these brethren of one house, but withal the fathers and
founders as it were of our nature, fall at variance within us, and they will
rende our lives a sunder like vvilde boares. How many have been buried alive
in the graves of their earthlye and melancholicke imaginations? How many
burned in the flames of pestilent and hot diseases? Their bowelles set on fire
like an oven, their blood dried up, their inwardes withered and wasted with
the violence thereof? The vapors and fumes of their own vicious stomach, as
a contagious air, how many have they poisoned and choked up? Finallye, how
many have been glutted and overcharged with waters between their own skin
and bones? And therefore we must conclude and cry with the Prophet, It is the
mercy of the LORD, that we are not consumed, both from without and from
within, Lamen. 3,
because his compassions fail not. Hitherto of the miracles, the former part
of my promise, and the second experimente of the everflowing mercy of GOD
continued toward Jonas his servaunt. O livinge and large fountain of grace,
alvvayes drawn, yet never dried up, because it runs from the breast, and is
fed with the good pleasure of an infinite and immortal GOD. For what better
reason can be given, of his lovinge affection toward us, than that which
Micheas has in the end of his prophecy, Because mercy pleases him? Mich. 7.
What other cause has induced him, (not to remove in haste from the sweet
songue of that Prophet) to take away iniquity, and pass by the
transgressions of his heritage, not to retain his anger for ever, though for
ever deserved, but to return and have compassion upon us, to subdue our
unrighteousness, and cast all our sins into the bottom of a sea, deeper and
farther from his sight than were these seas of Jonas, to perform his truth
to Jacob, and kindness to Abraham according to his oath in ancient time, but
because mercy pleases him? For who has first loved, or first given, or any
way deserved, and it shall be restored unto him a thousand fold? Blessings
and thankesgivinges for evermore be heaped upon his holy name, in whom the
treasures of mercy and loving kindness dwell bodylie, who of his own
benevolente disposition has both pleased himself and pleasured his poor
people with so gracious a qualitye. Even so LORD, for that good pleasure and
purpose sake, deal with the rest of thy people as thou have dealt with Jonas
and the mariners, take away those iniquities of ours, that take away thy
favor and blessing from us, and as a stranger that knows them not, pass by
our transgressions, retain not thine anger for ever, though we retain our
sins the cause of thine anger, but return to us by grace, who return not to
thee by repentance, and have compassion upon us, who have not compassion upon
our own souls, subdue our reigning and raging unrighteousness, and drown
our offenses in the bottom of the sea, which else will drown us in the bottom
of perdition.

2. Mysteries.
The mysteries buried under this type of the casting up of Jonas, the second
principal consideration wherein I bounded my self, are collected by some, 1.
The preaching of the gospel to the Gentiles not before the passion and
resurrection of Christ, because Jonas went not to Niniveh, till after his
sinking and rising again; 2. A lantern of comfort to all that sit in the
darkness of affliction and in the shadow of death, held out in the
enlargement of Jonas, who though he were swallowed down into the bowels of
an unmerciful beast, yet by the hand of the Lord he was again* cast our.
These are somewhat enforced. But the only counterpane indeed to match this
original, is the resurrection of the blessed son of God from death to life,
figured in the restitution of the prophet to his former estate of liuelyhode,
and by him applied in the gospel to this body of truth, who is very and
substantial truth. For so he tells the Scribes and Pharisees twice in one
Evangelist, Math. 12. and 16.
An evil and adulterous generation, (degenerated from the faith and works of
their father Abraham, wherein stands the right descent of his children)
asks a sign, but no sign shall be given unto it, save the sign of the
Prophet Jonas. For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whales
belly so shall the son of man be three days and three nights in the ^earte
of the earth. His meaning was, that if this so unlikely, and in nature so
incredible a sign could not move them, all the tokens in heaven and earth
would not take effect. That Christ is risen again, there is no question. The
books are open, and he that runs may read enough to persuade him. He
that told them of the sign before mentioned, signified the same work under
the name and shadow of the temple of Jerusalem, a little to obscure his
meaning, (and that he termed a sign also,) Destroy this temple, and I will
build it again in three days. He meante not the temple of Solomon, (...).
John 2. Ibid.
as they mistook, but the temple of his body, more costly and glorious than
ever that admired temple of theirs, the buildinge whereof in the counsel of
his father was more than forty and six years, even from the first age of the
world, and every stone therein, angular, precious, and tried, cut out of a
mountain without hands, Daniel. 2.
ordained from the highest heavens without humane furtheraunce; and such
whereof he affirmed long before in the mouth of his Prophet, who could
justify his saying, Psalm. 16.
Thou shall not suffer thine holy one to see corruption; though of the other
temple he prophesied, and it was performed, Math. 24.
there shall not a stone be left standing upon a stone that shall not be
cast down. Praedixit, and revixit. He gave warning before that it should so
be, and he fulfilled it. Bern. ser. 1. in pasch.
The earthquake at the very time of his resurrection, Math. 28. the testimony
and rebuke of Angels, why seek ye the living amongst the dead? he is
risen, he is not here, his manifestation to one, to two, to twelve, Luke 24*
to more than five hundredth at once, once and again, his breaking of bread
amongst them; the printes of his hands and side, their very fingers and nails
for evidence sake thrust into them, Qui alte dubitat, altius credit. Petr.
Chrysolog. de Thoma.
together with so many predictions that thus it must be, and so many sermons
and exhortations that so it was, are able to resolve any spirit, that sets
not it self of purpose to resist the holy Ghost. Or if there be any of so
audacious impiety as to deny the scriptures, (the warrante whereof is so
strong, that Paul in the Acts of the Apostles, not tarrying the answer of
king Agrippa, by his own mouth speaks in his name by a reasonable and
undoubted concession, I know thou beleevest them, Act. 26.
and he thought it afterward firm enough to prove any article of the faith
without other force according to the scriptures;) let them listen a while to
that learned disputation that GREAT ATHANASIVS held concerning this point. 1
Cor. 15. Quo vive^^^ res Christiana mirifice 46. annis sustentata est. Platina
in Siricio. Lib. de humil. verb. and corporaei^^ advent^.
He proves that the son of God could not choose but die, having taken unto
him a body of death; and that he could not but live again, because that
body of his was vitae sacrarium, The vestrie or chapel wherein life was
conserved. And he holds it a senseless thing, that a dead man should have
the power so to extimulate and prick the minds of the livinge, that the
Grecian and Pagan was brought to forsake his ancient, national idolatries,
and worship the Savior of the world: that a man forsaken of life, and able to
do nothing, should so hinder the actions of active and liues-men, that by the
preaching of Jesus of Nazareth, an adulterer leaves his adulteries, a
murderer his blood sheades, and at the naming of his dreadful name, the very
devilles depart from their oracles and oratories. He urges yet further. How
can the carkas of a dead man prevail so much with the living, that upon the
confidence of life therein contained, they have endured the loss of liberty,
country, wife, children, goods, good name, (...).
and life it self, with such Christian magnanimity, that the Arrians espying
it, began to receive it as a ruled and resolved case not to be doubted of,
there is no Christian living that fears death. As for the slander of his
sworn enemies the Jews, whose malice cannot end but in the end of the
woorlde, who contrary to common humanity belyed him in his grave, and gave not
leave to his bones to rest in peace, saying and hyring men to say, and with a
great sum purchasing that untruth, as the chief captain did his
burgesshippe, Acts the two and twentieth. His disciples came by night, Math.
28.
and stole him away while we slept: let it sleep in the dust with them, till
the time come, When every eye shall see him, even those that pierced him upon
the cross, and those that watched him in his grave also, and then they shall
say too late, we and our money are both perished. Why have we taken or given
the accursed wages of unrighteousness to speak falshode? But how could it be
the mean time, that you may know they showed themselves starkest fools,
where they professed greatest wisdom? Was there not caution and provision
enough before hand? Sir, we remember, (...).
this deceiver said thus? was not a great stone rolled to the mouth of the
grave? and their seal set upon the stone? and a watch appointed to attend the
sepulcher? Stands it with reason, that a few disciples, their eyes yet
streaming, and their hearts aching with their late loss, bruised reeds, the
staff of their comfortes being taken from them, the children of the
bride-chamber mourning for the absence of the bridge-grome, lambs amongst
ravenous and blood sucking woules, should dare to attempt an act so
dangerous to be undertaken, and so impossible to be compassed? But they did
attempt it by stealth; when there was need of engines to remove the stone,
and it could not be done without most tumultuous heaving and shouldering. And
the soldiers slept, they say; as if sleepers could truly report that
which they knew not. But why do I fight against a disarmed and unworthy
falshode? If angels, men, weomen, disciples, strangers, friends, foes, a
cloud of sufficient vvitnesses, if the emptying of the sepulcher, and leaving
of the linen clothes, which those that had eyes to see with, might behold,
if the amasemente of the watch, news of the soldiers, subornation of
high-priestes and elders, the letter of Pilate to the Emperor to signify no
less, if his own walking, talking, eating, drinking, conversing, visible
ascending, if preaching, believing, and both livinge and dying in that belief,
be enough to move credit, Christ is risen from the dead, and now he
dies not again, Romans 6.
neither has death any more dominion over him. Rather he has dominion over
death. For he is alive but was dead: And behold, he is alive for evermore,
Amen. Revel. 1.
And he has the keys of hell and of death. For who was worthy, nay who was
able of all the host in heaven and earth, to open this last seal of death and
destruction, but the Lamb that was killed, or rather the Lion that was raised
by the power of his own might? And therefore it is right well observed by
Bernarde, In die pasch. ser. 1.
that all those resurrections which we read of in former times, of the
Shunamites son and others, were istius praeambulae, not only forerunners
and leaders to this, but surely they were wrought in the finger and virtue
thereof. And these were the differences betwixt those and this later, that
then they came forth of their graves or were recovered to life mortui, sed
iterum morituri, dead I confess, but vvithall they were to die again: Christ
dies no more. That Elizaeus restored a child, sed alterum non seipsum, an
other not himself: Christ himself. Caeteros dicimus quide^ resuscitator;
Christum resurrexisse.
And they were rather raised, than did rise themselves, for they were but
patientes whilst the act was done upon them: Christ arose by his own strength.

But to return to the head of the race where we first began, we have
found the sign and the thing signified thus far fitted together, that as
Jonas the third day was cast up out of the bellye of the fish, so our holy
redeemer arose from the heart of the earth. Shall we here rest? Or shall it
suffice us to know what the body to that shaddowe is, and not to suck
there-hence the sweetness and juice which that body yields us? The Jews
asked a sign, and this sign was given them. And when they saw it fulfilled,
either they spoke against, or they did but wonder at it. To us it shall be
more than a sign, even dearer to our souls than our souls are to us. It
shall have wonder and wonder enough* but withal we will not lose our fruit and
our part therein for a worlds ransom. Our hope would vanish like smoke, and
our hearts within us wither away as grass upon the house tops, death would
sting us to death indeed, and the grave shut the mouth upon us, and hell make
her full triumph, but for this grain of faith, that Christ is risen from the
dead, and is become the first fruits of those that sleep. And, 1. Cor. 2^.
he is the head of the body of the church (not an head to himself without
respect to his member) the beginning and first begotten of the dead (not
without brethren and sisters in the same kind of generation) that he in all
things might have the pre-eminence. Golos. 1.
What other restoratiue had the fainting and dying soul of Job to comfort it
self with, what other blessing and sap in the vine, in that deadest winter of
affliction, what other couche to lodge his distressed and diseased bones upon,
what helper, when his wife molested him, what friend, when his friends
forsook him, but this only meditation which was in steed of friends,
wife, bed, board, all things unto him, I know my redeemer lives? that is:
The life of my life can never be destroyed, and for the enrollement of this
happy argument, he called for books of the longest continuance, and pens of
the hardest points, that the latest liver of all after worlds might learn by
it. Hence came it, that the blessed vessel of election made that free
challendge to all the actours and pleaders that condemnation had, fearing
neither the districte justice of God, nor the malice of his own heart, nor the
incessant accusation of Satan day and night; Who shall condemn; It is Christ
which is dead, (...). Romans 8.
yea, or rather, which is risen again: Who is also at the right hand of God,
and makes request likewise for us. So that the sinews and strength of his
confidence is not so much in the death, as in the resurrection of the son of
God, not to a weak and contemptible life, as before time, but to a full
possession of glory, nor for himself alone, but for his orphane members upon
the earth, for whom he makes continual intercession. And upon this stock
he seems to plant the whole body of Christianitye in his former Epistle to
the Corinthians. Chap. 15.
For if Christ be not risen, then is preaching vain, and faith vain, and the
living are yet in their sins, and those that are fallen a sleep are
perished, and we were of all men most wretched. As much as to say, pull down
temples and synagogues, burn the writings of Prophets and Apostles, stop
your ^ares at the voice of charmers, praise the dead more than the living, and
rather than them both, those that have never been, commend the wisdom of
the Epicure, who takes his portion in this life, and suffers not the flower
of his youth to pass without pleasure; If Christ be not risen again. But I
bring you other tidings. Bernard.
Our Phoenix is revived, the seed that was mortified in the ground, is come
up again with abundance of fruit: and the beautiful flower of the root of
Iesse, though withered and defaced for a while in his passion, has so
reflourished by raising him self, that in him is the blooming and springing of
all that love his name. This is that which Paul in his answer before Agrippa,
called the hope of the fathers; and this I may as properly term, Act. 26.
Revel. 13. Virtus agendi, spe^ futuri.

Toll spem resurrectionis, and resoluta est observantia omnis pietatis,
Chrysostom.


The faith and patience of the Saints. For as in every action, the virtue that
mooveth the agent to undertake it, is the hope of good to come, (for he that
sows, sows to reap, and he that fights, fights to get the victory:)
so take away the hope of resurrection, and all the conscience or care of
godliness will fall to the ground. Gregory upon these words of the last of
Saint Matthew, But some doubted, (Whereupon he elsewhere ^oteth, that it was
the especial providence of God, that Thomas should be away, and afterward
come and hear, hear and doubt, doubt and handle, handle and believe, that
so he might become a witness of the true resurrection; and that it was not so
much a touch of infirmitye in them, as a confi^mation to us, Non tam in^irmitas
illorum, quam nostra firmitas fuit.

In integrum de corrup^o etc. de resur. Carnis.

J^sorum temporu^ propria gula. Cr^s spera^do moriuntur, and hodie bibendo
sepeliuntur* Mor^^um quo^ mortuum.

Vive du^ vivis.

Nihil esse post mortem Epicuri scho la est etc. Quid enim mundus quotidie nisi
resurrectionem nostra^ in elementis suis imi^^^ur*


who by that means have the resurrection prooved by so many the more
arguments) there are many, says he, who considering the departure of the
spirit from the flesh, the goinge of that flesh into rottenness, that
rottenness into dust, that dust into the elements thereof, so small, that the
eye of man cannot perceive them, deny and despair of the resurrection, and
think it impossible that ever the withered bones should be clothed with
flesh and wax green again. Tertullian frames their objections more at
large. Can that body ever be sound again that has been corrupted, whole
that has been maimed, full that has been emptied, or have any being at all,
that has been altogether turned into nothing? Or shall the fire, and water,
the bowels of wild beasts, gordges of birds, entralles of fishes, yea the
very throat that belongs to the times themselves, ever be able to restore
and redeliver it to the former services thereof? Heerevpon they inferred, who
had no longinge after life, nor desire to see good days, let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall die; that is, they will not die before to
morrow, but in drunkenness and excess they will bury themselves to day. And
live whilst thou may live. And it is better to be a living dog then a
dead lion. And there is nothing after death, no not death (...) self. Who if
they held not, says Gregory, the faith, of the resurrection, by submitting
themselves to the word of God, surely they should have held it upon the
verdite of reason. For what does the world daily, in the elements and
creatures thereof, but imitate our resurrection? We see by degrees of time,
the withering and falling of the leaves from the trees, the intermission of
their fruits etc. And behold upon the sudden, as it were from a dry and
dead tree, by a kind of resurrection, the leaves break forth again, the
fruits wax big and ripe, and the whole tree is apparrailed with a fresh
beauty. Consider we the little seed, whereout the tree arises, and let us
comprehend if we can, in that small-nesse of seed, how so mighty a tree and
where it was couched. Where was the wood, the bark, the glory of the leaves,
the plenty of the fruit, when we first sowed it? when we threw it into the
ground, was any of these apparent? what marvel is it then, if of the
thinnest dust, resolved into the first elements, and remooved from the
apprehension of our eyes, God at his pleasure reform a man, when from the
smallest seeds he is able to produce so huge trees? The Apostle uses this
similitude of the seed, 1. Cor. 15.
and the body that springs from it. Thou fool, that which thou sowest, is
not quickened except it die. And that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that
body that shall be, but the naked and simple seed, whereof the blade and the
ear with the rest of the burden and increase arises. And Tertullian much
wondreth, that the earth is so kind unto us, De fraud^^rice fi^ servatrix. Vt
custodia^, perdit. Jni^ria, vsura: damno, lucro etc.
to return our corn with such abundance: of a deceaver she becomes a
preserver. And before she preserves she first destroieth. First by injury,
then by usury. First by loss, then by gain. This is the manner of her
dealing. He adds to give more light even from the star of nature, the
revolutions of winters, summers, autumnes, springes, as it were so many
deaths and so many resurrections; the dying of the day daily into night, and
vprising to the world again, as freshly be-decked with honor and bravery, as
if it had never died. So true it is which Arnobius wrote against the Gentiles,
Behold, how the whole creature does write a commentary to give us comfort in
this point. If we shall show this book to the Atheistes and Epicures of
these days, Vide adeo quam in solatium nostrum omnis creatura meditetur. li.
8. Observa orbem rerum in se remea^tium. Senec. Joel 1. Esa. 26.
and bid them read therein the resurrection of the flesh, lively discoursed,
and they answer us again, either that they cannot read it, because the book
is sealed and not plain unto them, or will not because their hearts are
seared, I say no more but this, at Paul of the hiding of the Gospel to the
like nighte-birdes, I am sure, they are seared and sealed to them that perish.
So let them rest, their bodies rotting in the ground, as the seed under the
clods, which God blesses not; the grave shutting her mouth, and destruction
closing her jaws upon them; and when others awake to singe, themselves awaking
to howling and everlasting lamentation. For our own parts we rest assured in
the author and finisher of our faith, that if the spirit of him who raised up
Jonas and Jesus from the dead dwell in us, he that raised up them, 1 The
author. Romans 8.
shall also quicken our mortal bodies. And as he spoke to the fish and it
cast up Jonas, spoke to the earth and it cast up Jesus (for upon the truth of
his fathers word did his flesh rest in hope:) so the time shall come, 2 The
in^strument. Act. 2. Ioh. 5.
when all that are in the graves shall hear the voice of the son of God;
when he shall speak to the earth give, and to the sea restore my sons and
daughters, to all the creatures in the world keep not back mine
inheritance, and finally to the prisoners of hope, lodging a while in the
chambers of the ground, Stand forth and show your selves. And as Jonas was
cast up against the will of the fish, his bowels not able to hold him longer
then the pleasure of God was, 3 Manne^
and Christ returned to life with a song of triumph in his mouth, Evomuit:
emphat^cu^, quod eximi^ mortis vitalibu^ vict^ix vita processerit. Hieron. 1.
Cor. 15. Act. 2. Es 26. 1. Cor. 15.
O grave where is thy conquest? because it was impossible that he should be
ho^den of it; so when that hour comes: the earth shall disclose her blood
and shall no longer hide her slain; And the sea shall find no rest, till the
drowned be brought forth* nor any creature of the world be able to steal one
bone that has bin committed unto it: but all kinds of deaths shall be
swallowed up into a general victory, and in his name that has won the field
for us, we shall ioifully sing, thanks be unto God that has given us victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

And as Jonas was cast up upon the dry ground, the land of the living, where
he might walk and breath and repose himself without danger of miscarying, and
Christ restored to life and immortality, 4 Terminus ad quem.
and exalted to a glorious estate at his fathers right hand: so the Lord shall
also show us the paths of life, and fill us with the joy of his countenance
for evermore. Our corruptible shall put on incorruption, our mortal
immortality, and we shall live with the lamb that was slain, in eternal glory
Other shall rise to shame and perpetual contempt, Dan. 12. Non addamus inquirere
quod ille non addidit dicere Et de compendio finata sit omni^ quaestio. August.
Quicquid futurum est decebit quiae no^ futurum est si non decebit.
And to the resurrection of co^demnatio^, Ioh. 5. Saddu^es, Saturnians,
Basilidians, Epicures, Atheists, which have trodden this precious pearl of
doctrine under their swinish feet, and have not believed that they might be
saved; but we to the length of days in the hands of God, and to the sight of
his holy face, which is most blessed blessedness. Other particulars of stature,
age, and the like, we cease to enquire of, because God has forborne to deliver
them. We will not loose that by our curiosity, which Christ has bought with
his blood, and is gone to possess in the body of his flesh that we may also
possess it. I am sure, there shall be al well, for else it should not be.
There shall be a dry ground, for this valley of tears and sea of miseries.
A land of the living for this desert of the dead. A commodious and settled
habitation for this tossing to and fro. There shall be no monsters of land or
sea to make us afraid any more, no sorrow to disquiet, no sickness to
distemper, no death to dissolve us, no sin to object us to the wrath of God and
to bring us in danger of loosing his grace.

THE XXXI. LECTVRE.
Chap. 3. ver. 2. And the word of the Lord came unto Jonas the second time,
saying, Arise, go unto Niniveh, that great city, etc.
THe sum of the whole prophecy, and of every part therein, I have often told
you, is in variety of examples, the mercy of God toward his poor creatures.
The bounds whereof, if any desire to learn how large they are, let him
consider that in this present history it is exhibited, both to Jews and
Gentiles: an example of the former was Jonas, of the later the Mariners and the
Ninivites; both to prophets and others of meaner and mechanical callings, both
to Prince and people, aged and infantes, men and beasts; that no man may
think either himself, or his seed, or any the silliest worm that moves upon
the earth, excluded therehence. Paul in his first to Timothy glories in the
mercy of Jesus Christ which he had showed upon him, Chap. 1.
to the ensample of such as should believe in time to come. But here are
four examples at once, and as it were four gospels, preaching to every
country and language, age, and condition, and sex, the hope of better
things. Blessed be the Lord God, which has written a whole book of
remembrances, and filled it with arguments to so good a purpose. Malac. 3.


This third chapter, which by the will of God we are entered upon, treats in
general of the mercy of God toward Niniveh, and sheadeth it self orderly
into four parts. 1. The calling or commission of Jonas renewed. 2. The
perfourmance of his message. 3. The repentance of Niniveh. 4. Their delivery.

Jonas is called and put in charge again in the two former verses. Wherein
(besides the author, and other particulars heretofore extracted from the same
words) we will rest our selves especially upon these three points. 1. The
repitition of his warrant; The word of the Lord came the second time. 2.
Whither he is willed to go; To Niniveh. 3. What he is to do there: 1.
touching the matter, he must preach the preaching that God shall bid them; 2.
touching the manner, he must do it by proclamation.

And the word of the Lord came unto Jonas the second time, saying, Arise, Jonas
being become a new man, The commission re^newed. Hebr. 5. Quid teipsum super
candelabru^ ponis, qui teipsum non accendis? Bern. ser. 17. in Cantic. Ier. 17.
after his baptism and regeneration in the water of the sea, receives a new
commission, his former being forfeited by disobedience. First it is not
lawful, we know, for any man to take that honor unto him without calling; nor
to set himself upon a candlestick, who has no power to burn unless God
kindle him. I have not thrust in my self for a pastor after thee, neither
have I desired the day of misery. Then, because Jonas had disanulled his first
commission, it stood as void unto him and of none effect, till it was repeated
the second time. Peter denying his master three times, and not less then
loosing thereby his legatine and Apostolic authority, repaireth his broken
credit by three confessions, and is newly invested into his former office. If I
fall now and then into the same points, which I have already handled in the
first chapter, you may easily pardon me. For first the words are the same or
not much altered; and happily as the first commission of Jonas took shipwreck
in the Syriacke sea, so the first notes I gave are perished in your memories,
and therefore there may be need or repetition of such doctrines, no less than
of his charge.

There is no material difference betvveene the two verses, The second time.
wherein the mandate is given unto him, but in the addition of one particle;
The second time. Which carries a double force: first Quot iteru^ parturio.
Gal. 4.
The Apostle was feign to travail in birth, and to do it again with his
little children the Galathians, till Christ were formed in them: for as the
ripening and perfiting of a child in his mothers womb asks the time of nine
months at least, so the breeding of Christ in the consciences of men, and
begetting or preserving of children to God, cannot be done without often and
careful endeavor bestowed therein. Secondly of the merciful clememcie of God
toward Jonas in restoring him to to his own home, an alien to his mothers
sons, an exile from the Israelites, a by-worde of reproach, for leesing his
wonted pre-eminence, and as they wondered, when they heard that Saul prophesied
What? is Saul become one of the prophets* so it might have given as just a
cause of admiration, that Jonas was become none of the prophets. But Jonas
abides a prophet still, and is as highly credited, as if he had not broken
his former faith. I know the patience of GOD is very abundante. He is
merciful and gracious, long suffering, and of great goodness. He cries unto
the fools (and such we are all) Prove^bes 1. O ye foolish, how long will
ye lo^^ foolishness? he deals with sinners as David dealte with Saul,
who took away his spear, and his vvaterpot, and sometimes a piece of his
cloak, as it were snatches and remembraunces, to let us understand, that we
are in his hands, and if we take not warning, he will further punish us. He
dresseth his vineyarde, Esaias the fifth, with the best and kindliest husbandry
that his heart could invente; afterward he looked (required not the first
hour, but tarrying the full time) he looked that it should bring forth
grapes, in the autumn and vintage season. He vvaiteth for the fruit of his
fig tree three years, Luke the thirteenth, and is content to be entreated,
that digging and dounging, and expectation a fourth year may be bestowed upon
it. They say that moralize the parable, that he stayed for the synagogue of
the Jews, the first year of the patriarchs, the second of the Judges, the
third of the kings, and that the fourth of the prophets it was cut down.
Likewise that he has waited for the church of Christianity, three years,
that is three revolutions and periodes of ages, thrice five hundredth years
from the passion of Christ; or if we furthe^ repeat it, that he has tarried
the leisure of the whole world, one year under nature, an other under the
law, a third under grace: The fourth is now in passing, vverein it is not
unlikely that both these fi^ge-trees shall be cut down. Whatsoever
judgments are pronounced (Amos the first and second) against Damascus and
Judah and the rest, are for three transgressions and for four: so long he
endured their iniquities. He was able to chardge them in the fourteenth of
Numbers, that they had seen his glory and yet provoked him ten times.
Ierusalems provocation in the gospel, and such care in her loving Savior to
have gathered her children under his wings of salvation, as the hen her
chickens, seems to be without number, Math. 23.
as appears by this interrogation, O Jerusalem Jerusalem how often?
Notwithstanding these presidents and presumptions of his mercy, the safest way
shall be to rise at his first call, and not to differ our obedience till the
second, for fear of prevention: least the Lord have just cause given by us to
excuse himself, I called and you have not answered. And albeit at some times
and to some sinners, Esa. 65.
the Lord be pleased to iterate his sufferance, yet far be it of that we
take incitement thereat to iterate our misdeedes. He punished his angels in
heaven for one breach, Achan for one sacrilege, Miriam for one slander, Moses
for one unbelief, Ananias and Saphira for one lie; he may be as speedy and
quick in avendging himself upon our offenses. But if we neglect the first and
second time also, then let us know that danger is not far of. Jude had some
reason and meaning in noting the corrupt trees, that were twice dead. For if
they twice die, it is likely enough that custom will prevail against them,
and that they will die the third time, and not give over death, till they be
finally rooted up. Two reasons against careless sinning
There are two reasons that may justly deter us from this carelessness and
security in offending, which I labor to disvvade. 1. the strength that sin
gathers by growing and going forwards. It creeps like a canker, or some
other contagious disease in the body of man; and because it is not Leves vndae,
little waves, afterward maiora volumi^a, greater volumes of waters, and then
perhapps ignei globi, balls of fire, and fluctus ad coelum, and surges
mounting up as high as heaven. Esaias describes in some such manner the breeds
of serpents: first an egg, Altera natura.

Affabricat^ natura.

Been consuetos pudebi^ dissuescere. Senec.

Cum in profundum veniunt, negligunt.

Vt mala co^suetudine delectem^^. Valor. Man lib. 7. cap. 2.


next a cockatrice, then a serpent, and afterward a fiery flying serpent.
Custom, they hold, is an other nature, and a nature fashioned and wrought by
art: And as men that are well invred are ashamed to give over, so others of an
ill habit are as loath to depart from it. The curse that the men of Creete used
against their enemies, was not a svvorde at their hearts, nor fire upon their
houses, but that which vvoulde bring on these in time and much worse, that
they might take pleasure in an evil custom. Hugo the Cardinal notes the
proceeding of sin upon the words of the seventh Psalm, If I have done this
thing, if there be any wickedness in my hands, etc. then let mine enemy
persecute my soul by suggestion, and take it by consent, let him tread my life
upon the earth, by action, and lay mine honor in the duste, by custom and
pleasure therein. For custom in sinning is not only a grave to bury the soul
in, but a great stone rolled to the mouth of it to keep it down. Ebrietas 1
Vi^^i 2 oblivionis 3 Libidinis peccandi.
And as there is one kind of drunkenness in excess of wine, an other of
forgetfulness, so there is a third that comes by lust and desire of
sinning. 2. Now if the custom of sin be seconded with the judgment of
God, adding an other weight unto it, blinding our eyes and hardening our
hearts, that we may neither see nor understand, least we should be
saved, and because we do not those good things which we know, Quia non
faciunt bona quae cognoscunt, no^ cognoscent mala quae faciunt August 2. pet.
2. Math. 12.
therefore we shall not know those evil things which we do, but as men
bereft of heart, run on a senseless and endless race of iniquity, till the
days of gracious visitation be out of date, it will not be hard to
determine, what the end will be. Peter says, worse than the first
beginning. Matthew shows by how many degrees worse. For whereas at the
first we were possessed but by one devil, now he comes associated
with seven others, all worse than himself, and there they intend for ever
to inhabit. Therefore it shall not be amiss for us to break of wickedness
betimes, and to follow the counsel that Chrysostom gives, alluding to the
policy of the wise men in returning to their country an other way. Math. 2
Have thou come, says he, by the way of adultery? go back by the way of
chastity. Came thou by the way of covetousness? Venisti per viam
fornicationis? etc
Go back by the way of mercy. But if thou return the same way thou
came, thou art still under the kingdom of Herod. For as the sickenesses of
the body, so of the soul there are critical days, secret to our selves, but
well known to God, whereby he does guess, whether we be in likelihode to
recover health, and to harken to the wholesome counsels of his law or not. If
then he take his time to give us over to our selves and the malignity of our
diseases, we may say too late as sometime Christ of Jerusalem, O that we had
known the things that belong to our peace, but now they are hid from our
eyes.

Arise, go unto Niniveh. Arise, is but a word of preface or preparation, and
notes, as I said before, that forwardness that ought to be in the prophets
of the Lord. Lying down for the most part is a sign that both the body and
mind are at rest. Sitting betokens the body at ease, ^ubatio sig number quieti
and corporis and animi, etc.
but the mind may be occupied. Rising most commonly is an argument that both
are disposed to undertake some work. Now as it is both shame and sin for any
sorts of men to trifle in their calling, (for we shall all rise in our order,
but those inordinate walkers, says Bernard, in what order shall they rise, who
keep not that order and rank which GOD has assigned them unto?) so
especially for those that are sent about the message. Christ told his
disciples in the ninteenth of Matthew, that when the son of man sat, they
should also sit. But I beseech you (says Bernard) when sat he in this world?
where rested he? or what place had he to lay his head upon? rather he
rejoiced, as a Giant refresht with wine, to run his race, and he went about
doing good, as it is witnessed in the Acts of the Apostles: birds had their
nestes and foxes their holes, but Christ had no resting place till his work
being finished, he had dearly earned and deserved to have his leave warranted
unto him, when the Lord said to our Lord, sit at my right hand. Thomas Becket
an evil man, and in an evil cause, but with words not impertinent to his
place if he had well applied them, answered one, who advised him to deal more
moderately toward the king: Sit I at the stern, Clavium ^^neo, and ad so^num
me v^cas?
and would you wish me to sleep? Our Savior to the like effect, when he
found his disciples a sleep, why sleep you? and to Peter by name: Sleep
thou Peter? is Judas waking? are the highpriests consulting? the soldiers
banding? the son of man near his betraying? the envious man sowing his
tares, marring the field, hindering the good seed, and the gospel of the
kingdom, and will not you awake? Rise, let us walk, and consider the regions
far and wide, that they are not only white to the harvest, but dry to the
fire, if they be neglected. Albae ad mes sem; Siccae ad ign^m. Bern.
They must be laborers that are sent into that harvest, and to show what a
blessing it is that such be sent, the Lord of the harvest, must be earnestly
prayed unto. Such a labourer was he, who though he were borne out of due time,
yet he omitted no due time of working, and though the least of all the
apostles, in some honors of that calling, yet in the burdens and taskes that
belonged unto it, 1. Cor. 15. Malo mihi male esse quam molliter.

Satis est mihi vigilare des^isse* Aliquando m^ dormisse scio^ aliquand^
suspicor. Epist. 33. Carn^ades. Praxagora^ Go to Niniveh.


he attributed it to the special grace of God, that he labou^ed more
abundantly than all they. Seneca was so far at odds with idleness, that he
professed he had rather be sick than out of business. I sleep very little,
says he, It is enough for me that I have but left watching. Sometimes I know
I have slept, sometimes I do but suspecte it. The examples of heathen men so
studiously addicted to their work, that they forgot to take their ordinary
food, and tied the hair of their heads to the beams of their chambers,
least sleep should beguile them in their intended labors, are almost
incredible, but to the open disgrace of us, who having a mark set before our
eyes, and running to the price which they knew not, are so slack in our
duties.

But as before, so again I demand, why to Niniveh? we have alrea^y
coniectured four reasons: Let us add a fifth. The force of example, we all
know, and very great to induce likeness of manners, and to verify the the
proverb in the prophet. Like people, like priest; Esaias 24.
like servant, like master; like maid, like mistress; like buyer like
seller; like lender, like borrower; like giver, like taker to usury. And the
greater the example is, the greater authority it has to draw to similitude.
Facile transitur ad plures. we are easily moved to go after a multitude. I may
add, facile transitur ad maiores. It is no hard labor, S^n^e.
to make us imitate great authorities, be our patterns good or bad. Evil
behavior in Princes, prophets, and higher degrees whatsoever, corrupts as it
were the air round about, and makes the people with whom they live, as like
unto them in naughtiness as, they say, bees to bees. God tells Jerusalem in
the 16. of Ezec. that all that used proverbes, should use this amongst the rest
against her, As is the mother, so is the daughter. Thou art the daughter of thy
mother, that has cast of her husband and her children: and thou art the sister
of thy sisters, which forsook their husbands and their children. You see how
evenly they tread in the steps of the same sins. Your mother is an Hitt^te,
and your father an Ammorite. Did the daughter degenerate from her kind? Her
elder sister at her left hand was Samaria, and her daughters. And the younger
at her right, Sodom and her daughters. Father and mother, daughter and
sisters, the whole brood was alike infected. Jeroboam the son of Nebat is
never mentioned in the writings of Israel, but he draws a tail after him
like a blasing star. Who sinned and made Israel to sin. A sick head
disordered all the other parts, and a dark eye, made a dark body. A
fearful instruction to those that fear God, to make them beware of binding
two sins together, that is of sinning themselves, and sinning before others,
to put a stumbling block before their feet of falling into the like offense,
especially when the credit, and countenance, and priority of their places,
Tutum est peccare authoribus il. (...).
makes others the bolder to sin, because they sin with such authors. Such
bitter roots shall answer for themselves and their corrupted branches. Such
poisoned fou^taines shall not escape with single judgment, because they have
polluted the whole course of waters. Such leprous and contagious souls, as
they heap sin upon sin, so by numbers and heaps they shall receive their
plagues, and account to the justice of God, not only for the pollutio^ of
their own persons, but of many thousands more whom by the warrant of their
precedence, they have pulled unto wickedness. The great city.
And for this cause I take it, amongst others, Niniveh is crowned in the next
words with the honorable title of her greatness, to let her know, that the
more eminent in dignity, the nearer she lay to danger, and as she gave to
the inferior cities of the land an example of sinning, so she should also
be an example of desolation unto them.

Go to Niniveh that great city: that is, preach repentance to the mother, and
the daughters will draw their instructions from her breasts. Win the Lady
and princess, and her handmaides will soon be brought to obedience. Speak to
the hauty monarch of the world, knock at the gates of his proud palace, beat
the ears of those insolent and wealthy merchants, shake them from the settled
lees of their long continued abominations* and thou shall end many labors in
one, thou shall do a cure upon the heart of the principal city, the
benefit whereof shall spread it self into the parts of the whole country.
But if Niniveh be so great in wealth, and so deeply rooted in pride* that
she will not be reformed, tell her, she has climbde so high to have the
lower downe-fall, and though her children should die in their sins, yet their
blood, for example given, shall especially be required at her hands. Many
goodly cities were there in Asia (Babylon so big, that Aristotle called it a
country not a city, and Niniveh greater then Babylon, (...). Colume^ pollentis
Asiae. Lucan.
and Troy less then them both, but in her flourishing days the pillar of that
part of the world) of which and many their companions we may now truly say.
O, iam periere ruinae, the very ruins of them are gone to ruin. The king of
the Goths when he saw Constantinople, pronounced that the Emperor there was
an earthly God. They write of Quinsay at this day, that it is an hundredth miles
about, P. Ven^^.
and furnished with 12000. bridges of marble. Let not Jerusalem leese her
honor amongst the rest. Though her honor and happiness were laid in the
dust long since. They that were alive when Jerusalem lived, to have numbered her
towers, considered her walls, and marked her bulwarckes, and to have told
their posterity of it* might have made a report skarsely to have been
believed. I am sure, Psalm. 48.
when the Kings of the earth were gathered together and saw it, they
marvailed, they were astonished, and suddenly driven back. Let me add the
renowned cities of Italy by some never sufficiently magnified, Rich Venice,
Dites Venetiae.

Jngen^ Mediolanum etc. Sabellie*


Great Millaine, Ancient Ravenna, Fruitful Bononia, Noble Naples, with all
their glorious sisters and confederates, and her that has stolen the
birthright from the rest, and says she is ancientest, and the mother to the^
all, which only is a city in the judgment of Quintilian, and others are but
towns were they all cities, great and walled up to heaven, Deuteronomy. 3.
as those of the Anakins, were they regions, as he spoke of Babylon, and every
one a world in it self, yet time shall wear them away, sin shall dissolve and
undo their composition, and he that is great over all the kingdoms of the
earth, can cover them with brambles, sow them with salt, and turn them vpside
down as if they had never been. When the Emperor Constantius came in triumph
to Rome, and beheld the companies that entertained him, he repeated a saying
of Cyneas the Epirote, T^^ se vidis se reges quot cives

Vt eo vix aspicere oculus humanus posset.

Naturam vires o^nes in vna^ vrbe^ effudisse. Stabulum quoque tale conda^
op^r^es, sivoles equum talem succedere. Jd tantium sibi placere respondi^* quod
didi cisses ibi quoque homine^ mori. platin. in vita foelic. 2.


that he had seen so many Kings as Citizens. But viewing the buildinges of the
city, the stately arches of the gates, the turrets, tombs, temples,
theaters, bathes and some of the works like Babell, so high that the eye of
man could skarcely reach unto them, he was amazed and said, that nature had
emptied all her strength upon that one city. He spoke to Hormi^da, master
of his works, to erect him a brazen horse in Constantinople, like unto that of
Traian the Emperor, which he there saw. Hormisda answered him, that if he
desired the like horse, he must also provide him the like stable. All this and
much more in the honor of Rome. At length he asked Horsmida, what he thought
of the city. Who told him, that he took not pleasure in any thing, but in
learning one lesson, which was, that men also died in Rome. This was the end of
those kingly men, which Constantius so termed, and the end of that lady
city, the mirror and mistress of the world, will be the same that has
befallen her predecessors. And as nature emptied her self upon it; so she
must empty her self into nature again, if she be so happy to fulfill the
number of her days, and come to a perfect age: but such may be the judgment
of God, upon her notorious and incurable witchcraftes, that as an untimely
fruit she may perish, and reap the meede of the bloud-sucker in the Psalm,
not to live out half her days.

Preach unto it the preaching which I bid thee. Or proclaim against it the
proclamation which I enjoin thee. So that first the matter must be received
from the Lord, secondly the manner must be by proclamation, and out-crying,
which requires not only the lowdenesse of voice, but the vehemence and
fervency of courage to excecute his makers will. In Esaias they are both joined
together. For first the Prophet is willed to cry. Esaias 40.
And secondly, because he was loath to trust the invention of his own spirit,
he takes his text from the mouth of the Lord, What shall I cry? that all
flesh is grass etc. John Baptist in the gospel, is but a voice (himself not
the author nor speaker) but only the voice of one that cried in the
wilderness, prepare the ways of the Lord. And whether he spoke as loud as
the will of that Crier was, I report me to the Scribes and Pharisees,
Publicans, soldiers, Herod and Herodias, whose ears he claue in two, with
denouncing his masters judgments. The preaching which I bid thee. 1. The
mattor.
How dangerous it is for any messenger of the Lord to exceed the bounds of
his commission by addinge his own devises thereunto, and taking words into his
mouth which were never ministered unto him, or to come short of it, by keeping
back the cou^sailes of his master which he has disclosed to be made known,
let that fearful protestation in the end of the book, summing and sealing
up all the curses and woes that went before, Revel. 22*
testify to the world. I protest unto every man that bears the words of
the prophecy of this book, (and of all those other books that the finger of
God has written) If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto
him the plagues that are written in this book. And if any man shall diminishe
of the words of the book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his part out
of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from those things which
are written in this book. The protestation has weight enough without help,
to make it sink into the dullest ears of those who dare adventure at such a
price to set their sacrilegious hands to those nice and religious points. Let
them bevvare, that preach themselves, and in their own names, and say, the
Lord has said, when he never said, that abuse the world with old wives
tales, and old men's dreams, traditions of Elders, constitutions of Popes,
precepts of men, unwritten truths, untrue writings, or that sell the word of
the Lord for gain, 2. Cor. 2.
and merchandise that pearl, which the wise merchant will buy with all the
treasure he has, that hold the truth of God in vnreghteousnesse, and dare
not free their souls for fear of men, and deal in the work of the Lord as
adulterers in their filthiness: for as these esteem not issue but lust, so the
others not the glory of God, nor profit of their hearts, but their own
wantonness. Chap. 23. Iud. 1.
Some have too many fingers upon their hands, like the Giant in the second of
Samuel. And some too few like those whom Adonibezek mained: some offend in
excess, some in defecte, some add, some diminishe. But he that has power to
add plagues, whilst the world stands, that is, to multiply and continue
them in such sort, that they shall ever increase to an hundredth hundredth fold,
and never see an end, and to diminish blessings so low, that not the least
dram of them shall remain; he shall retale their doings into their
bosoms, and give them their reward in the same manner and kind wherein they
have deserved it. The Apostle vvalked vvisely in this calling, and stinted
himself with that measure which God had divided unto him. Quod accepi a domino
tradidi: What I have received of the Lord, that I have delivered unto you. ^.
Cor. 11.
neither more nor less, but just weight. And being jealous over Timothy with
a godly jealousy, for fear he might err concerning the faith as others had
done before him, he adiureth him in the sight of GOD who quickneth all
things, and before Jesus Christ who under Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession, to keep the commandment given unto him without spotte and
unrebukable, 1. Tim. 6.
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in that praescience he had
of times to come, and love he bare to his scholar, Exclamatio ista and
prescientiae est and charitatis. Vince^t. Lirin. adu. prophan. novat.

Ecclesia, prae positi, sacerdos* tracta^or, doctor. Quod tibi creditum, no^
quod a te inventum etc Non author debes esse sed custos, no^ in stitutor sed
sectator, non ducens sed sequen^.

Vt cu^ dicas nove non dicas nova.


he calls unto him with intensiue inclamation. O Timotheus keep that pledge
or gage that is committed unto thee. Who is that Timotheus in our times? The
church, the Priests, the doctors, the pastors, the treaters of the word of
God whatsoever. Keep it because of Thieves, because of enemies, which watch
to sow their tares. That that is committed unto thee, not that thou have
invented; that thou haste received, not devised; a matter not of thine own
wit, but of thy learning; not priva^lie caught up, but publickely taught;
wherein thou must not be an author but a keeper; nor a master but a scholar;
nor a guide but a follower. The Talent of the universal faith, vvherevvith
thou art credited, keep vnviolated; thou have received gold, return gold,
give not lead, or brass* or copper in steed of gold. The precious jewels of
heavenly doctrine, cut and adorn, give beauty, grace, and comelines unto them,
but suborne them not. Illustrate that which was obscure, and let posterity
gratulate it self for understanding that, which before they reverently
esteeemed being not understood. But ever be sure that thou teach the same
things which thou have learned, and though thou bring unto them a new fashion,
let the matter and substance be all one. Much more, and in fitter terms does
Vincentius utter to the same purpose.

Preach or proclaim unto it. The office of a faithful prophet, when he has
received his message from the Lord, is as faithfully to deliver it. 2. The
manner. Chap. 20.
Jeremy savve what ensued upon his simple and plain dealing, in not
dissembling the faults of the world, but setting them in order before the
faces of men^ Since I spoke, I cried out of wrong, and proclaimed desolation,
therefore the word of the LORD was made a reproach unto me, and had in
derision daily: And he heard the railing of many, and fear on every side,
and thought to give over speaking in the name of the Lord: but his word was
as fire within his bones, and he was weary of forbearing and could not do
it. He afterward cursed the day of his birth, Ibid.
and the man that brought news to his father, saying, a man child is borne,
and wished the messenger in case of one of those cities which God overturned
without repenting him, because he had not slain him from the womb, that his
mother might have been his grave, and his belly his everlasting conception
that he might not have come forth to see labor and sorrow, and to have
consumed his days with shame; he went not into corners to smother the will of
him that sent him, but in terms of defiance, and personal application to the
stowtest that bare an head, And thou Palshur etc
roundlye disclosed it. He had showed the preciseness of his calling, that
he must not spare either small or great, though it pulled the whole world
upon him, not long before, and with words of no less heaviness. Chap. 15.
Woe is me my mother that thou have borne me a contentious man, and a man
that striveth with the whole earth. I have neither lent in vsurye, nor men
have lent unto me, that is I deal not in these affairs which for the most
part breed quarrelles and heart-burninges, yet everye one does curse me.

We are the children of those prophets that have lived in former days. We were
borne to contend and strive with the whole earth, we are despised, despighted,
hated, cursed of every man, because we preach the preachings, that the Lord
has bidde^ us, and proclaim his venga^ce against sinners, our hand against
every man and every man's hand against us, our tongue against every vice, and
every tongue walks and rangeth at liberty through our actions. We are thought
to clamarous against the disorders of common life, to busy and severe in
making Philippickes and declamations against every offense. Forgive us this
fault. A necessity is laid upon us. And as it is our woe, that our mothers
have bredde us to so quarrelsome a vocation, so it is an other and our greater
woe if we preach not the Gospel, if not also the law; if not the tydinges of
joy to those that rejoice in our message, if not also the terrors of
judgment to those that contemn it; if not liberty to captives, if not also
captivity to libertines, if we pipe not to those that will dance after us,
and sound not a trumpet of war to those that resist: if we build not an
arc to those that wilbee saved, and pour not out a floude of curses against
those that will perish; Lastly, if we open not the doors to those that knock
and are penitent, and stand not at the gates with a flaminge swoorde in our
mouths against those that are obstinate. What? Lib. 1. epist. 3 ad Cornel.
Ecclesia cede^ Capitolio?

Maiorae furentium scelera, quam sacerdorum iudicia? Viden^, non videns, praeco
mu^u^.


Shall the invincible t^nts of Christ (says Cyprian) defended with the
strength of the Lord, give place to the terrors and threatenings of men? shall
the Church yield to the Capitol? shall the outrages of mad men be greater
than the judgments and censures of ministers? It must not be. If we be the
light of the world, we must esp^e faults? and if voices of John Baptist, we
must cry against them. If we be the seers of the Lord we must not be blind; and
if his criers, we must not be du^be or tonguetide. I know* the preaching of
mercy is more acceptable unto you. O how beautiful are the feet, and how
sweet the tongues of those that declare peace? and publish good things? and
how unwelcome of those that proclaim wars and publish woes. If every
congregation we came into, we would cry peace to to this place, and to this
auditory, and would singe upon earth as the Angels sange from heaven* glory
be to God, and peace to men, then no men better pleasing. But you will not
suffer us to think the thoughts of peace. When we say, we will meditate of
mercy, we are presently interrupted and called to a songue of judgment. These
latter and last days, full of the ripest and last sins, Non habet vlterius
quod nostris moribus adda^.

Posterita^.


which no posterity shall be able to add unto, so drunken and drowned in
viciousnes, that as in a plague, we marvel not so much at those that die, as
at those that escape, so in this general infection of sin, not at the
vileness of the most, but that any almost is innocent, give us no rest from
bitter speakings. And to give you one reason for many, we are fearfully
afraid, if we take not that wise advertisement that the Apostle gave in the
Epistle to the Coloss. Chap. 4.
Say to Archippus, take heed to the ministry that thou have received in the
Lord that thou fulfill it. Paul wrote it to the Collossians, and the
Collossians must do it by word of mouth to Archippus, and they all to us all
(as many as are in the office of Archippus, write, speak, proclaim, and least
it might be forgotten, set it in the end of many precepts, and advise it by way
of postscript, *Take heed, look unto it, give good and careful regard, have
your eyes in your heads* and your hearts in your eye liddes, it is a work not
a play, a burden nor an honor, a service not a vacancy; and you have received
it in him that will require it, talent and use, principal and interest, and
give you the fulness of wrath, if you do it* to halfes, and not perfitely
fulfill it.

THE XXXII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 3. verse. 3. So Jonas arose and went to Niniveh, according to the word
of the Lord. Now Niniveh was a great and excellent city of three days
journey.
THE first part of the Chapter, wherein the commission of Jonas is renewed unto
him, we have already absolved, and are now to proceed to the execution
thereof, which was the 2. general branche. Wherein he so warily behaveth
himself, havinge bought his experience with cost, that he departs not an
hairs breadth from his directions perfined. Being bidden to arise, he
arises; to go, he goes;) not now to Tharsis, as before, but to Niniveh) to
proclaim, he proclaims; not the fancies or supposalles of his own head,
but the preachinge no doubt which the Lord bade him, because it is said,
according to the word of the Lord. As for that which is added, or rather
interposed, and by a parenthesis conveyed into the rest, of the greatness of
Niniveh, it makes the rather for the commendation of his duty, that failed
not in so large a province, and the faith of that people, who were so presently
reformed. I will follow the card that Jonas does. As he went to Niniveh, and
preached according to the word of the Lord, so because the same word of the
Lord again repeated in my text tieth me to a rememoration of the same
particulars, which erst I have delivered, let it not offend your ears, that I
pass not by them without some further explication. The present occurrents are,
1. his readiness and speed to obey the calling of the Lord; So Jonas arose: 2.
his running to the mark proposed, not out of the way; and went to Niniveh: 3.
his walking by line and level; according to the word of the Lord: 4. a
caution or watchworde cast forth by the holy ghost concerning the greatenesse
of of the city, as if it were plainly said; Be careful not to forget the
compass of Niniveh. If you think on that in the course of this story, you
will easily grant, that the service of my prophet was the more laudable in
persisting, 1. Jonas arose.
and the conversion of the inhabitants in taking so short a time*

They spoke of the Lacedaemonians in former times, Turpe est cuilibe^ vir^
fugere; Laconi etiam deliberasse*
a people in defense of their right most prodigal of their lives, and quick
to encounter any danger, That it was a shame for any man to fly from the
battle; but for a Lacedaemonian, even to pawse and deliberate upon it. Jonas
being willed to Arise and go to Niniveh, is now so far from flyinge the face
of the Lord, that as if his ear were pulled, and his soul goaded with that
word, he takes the first handsell of time, to begin his work. So truly was
it said by Esaie in the 40. of his prophecy, They that wait upon the Lord
shall renew their strength, they shall lift up their wings as the Eagles,
they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not fainte. Jonas
was quick enough before, when he highed himself to Tharsis with more have
then good speed (as the wicked and disobedient have wings upon their heels to
bear them to destruction, Alacrius currunt ad mortem quam nos ad vita^ Bern.
their feet are swifte to shed blood, and they run with more alacrity to
death, then others to life) but he wanted that encouragement which Esaias
speaks of, he waited not upon the will of the Lord, neither had he the
testimony of a good conscience, and therefore was soon weary of that unhappy
race. Now he arises with a better will, and feels agilitie put into his
bones which before he was not acquainted with, The word implies many times
such have as admits no dalliance, The Jews in the 2. of Nehemias havinge
heard of the goodness of their God upon them, and the words of the king for
the repairing of Jerusalem, presently made answer to the speech of Nehemias
let us rise and build. Let us not loose so good an opportunity nor give
adva^tage to our enemies by protraction of time. And it follows immediately
upon that accord of theirs: So they strengthened their hand to good. The latter
expounds the former Let us rise and build, that is let us strengthen our
hands, and heartily address our seues to dispatch this business. Afterward
when their adversaries reproched the^ and charged them with rebellinge against
the king, Nehemias answered, the God of heaven will prosper us and under the
warrant of his protections we his servantes will rise and build, that is, we
will not be removed from our work with all your threatenings and
discountenancings. Then arose Eliashib the high priest with his brethren the
priests and they built the sheepgate etc. Chap. 3.
And surely if you consider the order and manner of their building how they
flanked one the other in the work, some setting themselves to the sheepgate,
some to the fishport, some to the gate of the old fishpoole, others to the
valley gate, these next unto those, and all in their appointed wards and
stations, and I doubt not but every man (except the great ones of the Tekoites
who put not their necks to the work) as earnest as Baruch was, of whom it
is said that he killed and fired himself in the doing of his task, Jbid.
A^^^ndis se.
( for they watched in the night time, Chap. 4.
and put not of their clothes save only for the washing:) you will easily
confess, that their meaning was, when they first said let us rise and
build, to do their work at once, and to busy themselves about nothing
else, not to give rest to their bodies, Hoc age.
more then nature did necessarily and importunately call for, nor vacation to
their minds, till their work were at an end. Thus Jonas arose (for I am as
willing in these our lasie and loytring days to build upon the word, as
those upon the fragmentes and ruins of Jerusalem) that is, he strengthened, and
armed, and inflamed himself to run with his errande to Niniveh, his legs
are as pillars of marble, and his feet as the feet of an Unicorn to
undertake the travail. He knevve that as vinegar is to the teeth, and as
smoke to the eyes of a man, so is a slowthfull messenger to him that sends
them: Prover. 10.
but much more a slowthfull prophet, would grievously offend so high a LORD
as he was now to deal with. So Jonas arose. The example rises with full
strength against idlnesse, a sin as idly and carelessely neglected in this
place, as carelessely committed. I will speak with your good leave. Your
collections for the poor (by hearsay) are not over-spating. (The Lord
increase not only your oil and meal, in your vessels, but your mercy within
your bowels, The lower you draw forth these wels of charity, the clearer will
your waters flow unto you.) But where are corrections for the slowthful the
mean time? an alms as necessary as the former, and a work of mercy not to
be slipte in a well-ordered commonwealth. The faithless steward in the
gospel being warned to make his accounte and give over the stewarde-shippe,
Luc. 16.
amidst his perplexed thoughts what he should do for times to come, said
within himself, I cannot dig, and to beg I am ashamed. These more
faithless in their callinges then that unrighteous steward, are not ashamed
to beg, though they are able enough to dig, and sustain the burden of
other labors, but will not; as unprofitable to the earth as Margites in the
Poet, of whom it was said, that he neither ploughed, Neque, arasse neque,
^odis^e etc.
nor delved, nor did any thing his life throughout, that might tend to good.
Will you know the cause that Aegysthus became an adulterer? we need not call
for Oedipus or any cunning interpreter to render a reason of his lewd living.
Slowthfulnesse was the bane that poisoned him. Jn prompt^ causa est.
And if you will know the cause of so many robberies in the fields, riottes
in your streets, disorders in common life, we may shortly and in a word
derive them from idlnesse: it is so rank a sink (says Bernarde) of all
lustful and lavvelesse temptations. Lib. 11. cap^ 5. etc. Prope ex vmbra
minimi animalis.

Jncomparabile quiada^. Nullus cum per coelum licuit otio perit dies. ca. 6.
Cap. 10. More castiorum.

Gemino aut triplici bombo vt buccino aliquo. Mane ruu^t portis, nusquam mora*
Virgil.

Neque enim separatim vescuntur. cap. 10. Mita observatio operis. ibid.

Cessantium inertiam notant and puniunt morte. ibid.

Verarum apum seruitia cap. 11.


It is not less then a wonder in nature, that Pliny in his natural history
reports of the bees: their industry and painfulness to be such, and so
hardly to be matched in the world, that almost of the shaddowe, says he,
(rather then substance) of a very small living creature, nature has made an
incomparable thing. They never loose a day from labor, if the air will give
them leave to work. And when the weather is lowering and troublesome, they
cleanse their hiues, and carry out the filth of those that labored within
doors. The manner of their working is this. In the day time they keep watch
and ward at the gates, as they do in camps. In the night they take their
rest, and when the day is sprung, they have an officer to call them up with
humming twice or thrice, as with the sound of a trumpet. The younger go abroad
to fetch in work, the elder stay at home, some bring burdens, other unload
them. Some build, other polish, some supply them with stuff for the work,
other take care for their victuals, for they take not their diet apart, that
they may be equal in all things. Moreover they are very observant and strict
in exacting the labors of every one, and such as are idle they note and
chasten with death. Finally, the drones, which are the servantes of the right
bees, they are content to give house-roome unto, in fruitful years, but they
rule them as their slaves, and put them foremost to the labors, and if they be
slack; punish them without pity, and when the honey is ripe, they drive them
from their dwellings, and many falling upon one spoil them of their lives. Go
to the bees O sluggard, consider their ways and be wise, they are but small
amongst fowls, yet does their fruit exceed in sweetness, says the son of
Sirach, and their labor in greatness. And go to the bees ye magistrates of
the earth, and learn from that little kingdom of theirs to use the vigor and
sharpness of discipline against our unserviceable drones, who like
paralyticke members in the body of man, loose and unbound in the iointes of
obedience, say to the head command us not, for we will not stir at thine
apointment. I will add to the former example what the same history speaks
of the pismires, a people not strong, yet prepare they their meat in summer.
Pro. 6. and 30. Sed illae faciunt cibos, hae condunt. Plin. lib. 11. cap. 30.
Humeris obnixae.
They labor likewise as the bees. But these make, the other horde up meat.
Their bodies and the burdens they bear have no comparison. But such as are
overgreat for their strength, they set their shoulders unto and with their
hinder legs draw them backe-warde. And because they fetch their provision
from sundry places, the one not knowing which way the other goes, therefore
they ordain certain days of mart, wherein they meet and confer, and take
a general account each of others labor. We see, says he, Certi dies ad
recognitione^ mutua^ nundinisdantur. ibid.

Ne quis dubitet qualibet in re quid possi^, quantulacu^que assiduitas. Prove. 6.


that the very flintes are worn, and paths trodden out with their
iournying, least any might doubt, in every creature of the world how
availeable it is to use never so little diligence. I say again, Go to the
pismires O sluggarde, consider their ways and be wise. For they having no
guide, governor, nor ruler, provide their meat in summer, and gather their
food in harvest. We having our rulers and guides of many sorts, soul to
govern our bodies, reason our souls, God our reason; nature to show us the
way as it did these creatures, law to hold us therein, and grace to further us;
and not laboring for the food of this transitory life alone, but for that
meat that perishes not, and for the rest from our labors; yet are content as
it were to languish alive, and to linger out our little time in a continual
weariness of well-doing, as if the law had never been given to the sons
of Adam, to labor, nor to the daughters of Eve to pass through affliction;
and when (I say not pismires and bees and the little worms of the ground)
but the angels of heaven are evermore attending upon their businesses, for
thousand thousands stand before him, and ten thousand thousands minister
unto him; yet we will sit down and hold our selves bound to no ministration:
nay when the Lord himself sanctified not his rest, before he had first
labored and finished the work of six days, we are ever in our Sabbathes
and restes, and suffer our days of work to slide without remembrance. But as
verily as the God of heaven has sanctified both labor and rest in his own
person, so truly shall it be fulfilled, that if we rest in the time of labor,
2. To the mark.
we shall labor in the time of rest. Jonas arose,

And went to Niniveh. The firstborn of idleness, is to do nothing, Pro vitando
otio, otiosa sectari, ridiculum est. 1. Tim. 5. (...). Curiosum genus ad
cognoscenda^ vitam alienam, desidiosum ad corrigendam sua^. Aug 10. co^f*
the next issue she has, is to do that that appertains not unto us. For to
follow unnecessary business to keep our selves in exercise, is little praise,
and most commonly it falls out that there is a fellowshippe and affinity
between these two, as Paul vvriteth of the wanton young widows, that they
learned nothing in their idleness, but to go about from house to house: and that
they were not only idle, and did nothing, but were also pratlers, and
busi-bodies, and given to utter uncomely speech a curious kind of people to
know the lives and affairs of other men, desidious and negligent to amend
their own. The corruption is natural to us al, and aunciently descended. Adam
in that richest and roiallest liberty of his, over all the works of Gods
hands, had more desire to know and to do that that was forbidden him then
all the rest, and the very commandment of God which should have restrained
him, gave occasion to his will to become more wilful. From thence it comes,
that we his unwise and ungracious children, are Physicians to other men rather
then our selves, and statesmen in foreign commonwealths, rather then our
own, and medlers in any calling of life rather then that which God has
enioined us. Aliud plectrum aeliud s^^ptrum S^olam Aaronis omnes assumimus.
Su^or vltra ^repidam. Tuum est pulmenta Caesari praeparare, non evangelium
exponere. Basil. Esaias 1. 2. Cor. 12.
Harpers will deal with the scepters of princes and tell them how to rule. The
people will put on Aarons robes and teach him how to teach. The cobbler will
find fault with the thigh of the picture, though his art go no higher then the
foot. The Emperors steward will pervert scriptures to strengthen the Arrian
heresy; though fitter to be a market man, or to command broth for the Emperor
in the kitchen. Vzzah will bear up the arc, though he overthrow himself by
it; and Nadab and Abihu offer strange fire though they burn in the flames of
it. God will surely require of us all for doing more then we should, or that
which we ought not, as he did of the Jews for doing less, Quis ista a vobis
requisivit? Who has required these things at your hands? There are
diversities of gifts, and diversities of administrations, and diversities of
operations, though the spirit be but one, and God the same that works all in
all. Are all apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all doers of
miracles? have all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tongues? do all
interpret? Or has not God divided these graces to sundry men, that every one
might know and do what belongs to his calling? The members in the body of
man, are not the same, nor ordained to the same function. If the whole body
were an eye, where were the hearing? or if the whole were an ear where
were the smelling? Roman. 12.
Seeing then that we have gifts that are diverse, according to the grace that
is given unto us, whither we have prophecy, let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith: or whither an office, let us wait on the office; he that
teaches, on teaching; he that exhorts on exhortation; he that
distributeth, let him do it with simplicity; he that rules, with diligence;
he that shows mercy, with cheerfulness. Let every man, as he has
received the gift, m^nister the same (and not his brothers or companions) as
good disposers of the manifold grace of God. 1. Pet. 4.
One and the same spirit, which is the author of order not of confusion, see
how constant he is, and like himself in the mouths of sundry Apostles, to
teach this ambitious and idly busy age (bringing into nature the like deformed
informity of things by mingling all together, wherein the world sometimes
was, and whilst it does all things, doing nothing worthy of thanks) neither
to be wise in matters appertaining to God or man, more then may stand with
sobriety, and having a charge of their own properly distinguished, Spartam
nactus es han^ ornae.

Praefat. in l. de ar^e rhetor. ad An. dream Naugerium.


not to trouble their heads, with aliene, and unnecessary affairs. It was a
worthy epigramme, that Aldus Manutius wrote upon the door of his chamber to
avoid such wearisome ghestes. Their cause of troubling him (a man carefully
bent to enlarge the bounds of good learning) was, negotij inopia, want of
business: for then their agreement was, Eamus ad Aldum, come let us go to
Aldus. At length to prevent them, he set an unmannerly watchman at his door,
which could not blush, and whose entertainment was on this manner. Quisquise^,
rogat te Aldu^ etia^ atque etiam, vt si quid est quod a se velis* perpaucis
agas, deinde actutum abeas: nisi tan. quam Hercules defesso Atlanti veneris
suppositurus humeros. Semper enim erit quod and tu agas, and quotquot huc
attule. rint pedes. Psalm 119. Pedes eorum ped^s recti. Ezech. 1.
Whosoever thou art, Aldus does heartily beseech thee, if thou have ante
bunesse with him, briefly to dispatch it, and presently be gone: unless thou
come as Hercules did, when Atla^ was weary, to put his shoulders under the
burden. For neither thy self can want work of thine own at any time, nor
any of those that repair to this place. To conclude the note, Jonas arose and
hasted before at his first call, there wanted not speed to his travail, he
went like the lightning as Ezechiell speaks of the four beasts: and spared
neither the pains of his body, nor the benefit of wind and sails to bear
him forwards. But he lost the approbation and reward of his labor, because
he mistook Tharsis for Niniveh, and bended his course to a wrong place. Now he
has learned the song of David, I will not only run, but I will run the
way of thy commandments. And as the feet of the beasts before mentioned
(which in the tenth of Ezechiell are interpreted to be Cherubins) were
straight feet, so are the feet of Jonas straightened toward Niniveh, and like
an arrow that flies to the mark, so sets he his face and heart upon the
place commanded. According to the word of the Lord. The most absolute,
constant, infallible rule that ever was devised; and as many as walk according
to this rule, they shall not fail to be blessed. It was deservedly wished and
longed for in the Psalm, O that my ways were made so direct that I might
keep thy statutes, so should I not be confounded, 3 His rule. Psalm 119.
Secundum o^ Jehovae.
whilst I had respect unto thy commandments. It is said of the children of
Israel, Numbers the ninth, that at the mouth of the Lord they iournied, and
at the mouth of the LORD they pitched or lay still. They knew his mind by the
cloud that was over the tabernacle. For if it abode upon the tabernacle two
days, or a month, or a year, they also abode, but if it were taken up, Ex
praestituto Jehovae.
then they went forward. Again it is added in the same place, and as it
were with a breath, to praise their obedience, At the commandment of the
Lord they pitched, and at the commandment of the Lord they iournyed, Ibid.
and at the commandment of the Lord, they kept the Lords watch, by the
hand of Moses. O happy and heavenly sound of words, where the lusts of their
own eyes, and counsels of their own hearts were displaced, and the
commandment of the Lord in all things for going and tarrying, from a day to
a month, and so to a year, was only observed. That which David demanded in
behalf of a young man, we may ask of young and old and all sorts of men.
Psalm. 119.
In quo corriget, etc? Wherewithal shall a young man amend his ways? or an
old man his? or theirs, the Prince, subject, noble, unnoble, Priest, prophet,
for we are all crooked, and have need to be rectified. Ioh. 6.
But wherewithal? even by ruling our selves after thy word. Whither shall we
else go? as Peter akt his master in the gospel. Thou have the words of
eternal life, not only the words of authority to command and bind the
conscience, nor the words of wisdom to direct, nor the words of power to
convert, nor the words of grace to comfort and uphold, but the words of
eternal life to make us perfitely blessed. Ezech. 13.
And therefore woe to the foolish prophets that follow their own spirits, and
prophecy out of their own hearts: so likewise woe to the foolish people that
follow their own spirits, and walk by the dim and deceitful light of their
own devises. I may say unto such as Jeremy to their like in the eighth of his
prophecy: How do ye say, we are wise, and the law of the Lord is with us?
for he answers them with wonder and demonstration to the world, that they
were to senseless to build upon so false a ground. Lo, they have rejected
the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? The messenger that went
to Micheas, to fetch him before Ahab and Iehosaphat, might sooner have craved
his head and obtained it, then one word from his mouth contratying the word of
the Lord. He spoke him very fair, in a foul matter. 1. King. 22.
Behold now, the words of the prophets declare good unto the king with one
accord. Let thy word therefore I pray thee, he like the word of one of them,
and speak thou good. But the prophet wisely answered him, knowing that the
best speech is that, not which pleases the humors of men, but the mind of
GOD, As the Lord lives (though I die for it my self,) whatsoever the Lord
says unto me that will I speak. So like wise, whatsoever the Lord says unto
us, that let us do, and let us learn how dangerous it is to swerue from his
will, I say not by open rebellion as Jonas did, but in the least
commandment, by the smart of Moses and Aaron; who being willed in the
twenteth of Numbers, only to speak unto the rock, and to use no other means
save the word of their mouths, and it should give water unto them* because
they smote it with the rod, and smote it twice, both to show their distrust
of the promise of God, and to utter their impacience, they were also smitten
with the rod of his lips, and had a judgment denounced against them, that they
should not bring the people into the land which he had promised unto them.

( Now Niniveh was a great and an excellent city of three days journey. 4.
The greatness of Niniveh. Verse. 2. (Now Niniveh etc.) Great and excellent. Of 3.
days journey.
) We have heard of the greatness of Niniveh twice before, once so late that a
man would think it were needelesse so presentlye to repeat it. Howbeit, we
shall hear it again, and this third time, in an other manner then before,
forciblie brought in as it were, and breaking the hedge of the sentence, and
with greater pomp of words, and every place of her ground exactly measured
unto us. Jonas was going apace to Niniveh. The history was running onwards as
fast, and keeping her course. And it may be, the minds of those that hear or
read the history, pass too quickly and lightly over the sequel thereof. They
hear of the greatness of Niniveh as that Queen did of the greatness of
Solomon, but they will not believe how great it is, unless they may see it
with their eyes, and have a table or map thereof laid before them at lardge.
By a paren^thesis.
This is the reason that first the wisdom of God interrupteth the sentence,
and makes an hole as it were in the midst thereof, as God in the side of Adam,
and closes not up the flesh again, till the greatness of Niniveh be thoroughly
known. Now Niniveh, etc. That is, I must tell you by the way once again for
fear of forgetting, I will rarher hinder the history a while then not put you
in mind of a matter worthy your gravest attnetio^, That Niniveh was a great
city, yea very great, Magnae* Deo.
a city though lent to men, yet better beseeming the majesty of God, so
stately and excellent, that we find not in earth wherewith to match it: and
somewhat to say in particular, not filling your eres alone with general
terms, the very walk of their borders, Itinere tridui.
will ask the travail of three days.

A great and excellent cytty, or exceedingly great. The mother tongue wherein
the history was written, has it thus, a cytty great to God. Per-quam maxima.
The like manner of speech is used by Rachel Genesis 30. When Bilha her maid had
the second time borne a son to Jacob, and Leah ceast to be fruitful, with the
wrestlings of God have I wrestled with my sister, Excellent wrestlings.
and gotten the vpper-hand, that is, with wrestlings, above the nature and
reach of man. I take the meaning of the phrase to be this (if life finite and
infinite have any proportion) Either that Niniveh was as great for a city,
as God is great for a God; or that it surpassed so far the nature of created
and inferior things, that nothing but the most excellent himself must be
named with it; or happily as Troy was feigned to be the buildinge of the
Gods, Coeli^u^ egre gius labor.
so no worke-man in heaven or earth was worthy to be credited with the
building of Niniveh, but the chief of all. Others do otherwise interpret it, I
know. That therefore it is called a cittye to GOD, Vrbs Deo.
because there was no idol in it, but it was truly and properly multitude of
her fornications mentioned in the third of Nahum, and by Nisroch their false
God which Senacharib was worshipping in the temple of Niniveh, 2. King. 19.
when his two the least amongst the thousands of Judah, and but an handefull
to Niniveh, and Bethania the town of Marie and Martha, Joan. 11.
though more tender in the eyes of GOD, for the birth, doctrine, and miracles
of more then a prophet, were never so called. Undoubtedly the reason is,
whatsoever in nature or art is most perfect and exquisite, and has as it were
a kind of divinity in it, that to ascribe to GOD, for these foote-printes, and
that imitation sake which it has of his perfection. Ordinary mounetaines,
cedars, or cittyes, have their fellows and equalles upon earth wherewith to
be sorted. But such as excel in greatness, and refuse the copartnershippe of
all in that kind, because it were an iniurye and disparagement unto them to
match them with their inferiors, they are claymed by GOD himself as his
especial rightes^ Non est parvus in parvis.

Aug. ad. volus ep. 3. Per diverticula and flexiones, lent and pedeten^im.

Cum pagis. Cum suburbijs.

Vrbis appellatio muris, Romae aute^ contine^tibus aedificijs finitur.


Not to exempte the smaller from his care and providence, (who is as great a
GOD in the least, as in the greatest, and has given more wisdom to the
little antes and bees, then to asses and camels) but to teach the unwise
world, to esteem his majesty as it is, not to serve him with lame or lean,
base and imperfect offeringes, and to think there is nothing in the whole
godhead, but is most rarely and incomparably excellent.

Of three days journey. Some say, if you walk the streets, a soft and
leasurely pace, with all the lanes and allies that are therein. Some, if you
join the villages round about, the dition, liberties, and marches that
appertained to Niniveh. Others, if you take it with the suburbs alone. For
though the name of the city, be limited within the walls, yet the name of
Rome or Niniveh, includes also the continent buildinges. Lastly others
expound it, of the very ambite of their walls and turrettes. And by the
judgment of the civil law, which defines a days journey, by twenty miles,
Niniveh might iustlye spend the labor of three days. I apply these
testimonies of her largeness to that which follows. Niniveh was a great
cittye (vvhither you take the people or their dwellinges:) Jonas not more then
an ordinarye man. Civitas magna. Vrbs magn^.
Niniveh was very great, Jonas very little, and in comparison but as a locust
among them; Niniveh a city of three days journey, Jonas had newly begun
to enter his voyage of the first day; and yet this great, Verse. 4.
and spacious cittye, is presently reformed, by the preaching of an ordinarye,
common, and contemptible Prophet. I will not reap the harvest of the next
words, but only view them in haste to make my connection. They are all, if
you mark them, stinted and diminished by the holy Ghost. Jonas began, had
not finished; to enter into the cittye, had not gone over it; the journey of
one day, the second and third were behind: yet Niniveh in these
beginninges; did not only begin, but almost end and consummate her
repentance. And as Jonas cried, yet forty days, and Niniveh shall be
destroyed, so Niniveh cried unto him again, yet not forty hours, and thou
shall see Niniveh wholly changed. Our Savior in the eight of Matthew, tells
his disciples, that the people had endured him now three days havinge
nothing to eat (for he held their stomachs and appetites, that they might
not hunger, as he held the disciples eyes that were walking toward Emaus
that they might not see, and when he had fed them sufficiently with the
bread of life, then he restored them to nature again, and gave them leave to
hunger and thirst after corporal relief.) The people of Niniveh as
commendable in an other kind, never weary of the preaching of Jonas, and
willing to endure him more then three days without eating or drinking, they
weary not him so much, as to put him to the toil of the second and third
day, neither suffer they the next morninges sun to arise upon their former
days iniquity. But as if every soul in the city had been summoned as Lot
was, Escape for thy life, make haste and save thy self, Genes. 29.
so these address themselves with all possible speed to escape the wrath of
GOD, and the morning and the evening were the first day of their repentance. At
the beginninges of the preaching of John Baptist, they went out by flocks
unto him, Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the regions about Jordan, (as if
the cities and towns had emptied themselves to fill the wilderness, and to
lead new Colonies into desert and uninhabitable places) and they were baptized
of him in Jordan confessing their sins, and many of the Pharisees and
Sadduces also went to his baptism. Math. 3.
At one sermon of Peter Acts the second, the principal and final
application whereof was, Save your selves from this froward generation, there
were added unto the church about three thousand souls, which was as great a
number as a man may imagine at one time to have been capable of the speakers
voice. The LORD has not dealt so sparingly with our nation. Abbac. 2.
The vision has spoken a long time, and we nor waited for it, but it for us,
and he that has begun a good work in us, has endeavored to make it
perfitie. Our king has followed the parable Matthew the two and twentieth. He
has sent forth his servauntes to call us away, not to the house of mourning
as he did Niniveh; But to the marriage feast of his only son (which what
honor it is to sit and eat at the kings table, let Haman report to his wife
and friends, Esther. 5.
) Again he has sent forth other servauntes, to tell us what provision he
has made, and to invite us with the hope of most bountiful entertainment.
But we, as these unworthy ghestes, rather esteeming the dinners of this world,
then the supper of the Lamb, which is the last meal of the day, and whereof
who so tastes, shall never hunger again; And thinking the garlic and onions
of Egypt to have a better relish, then the milk and honey in the land of
promise, make light of his often biddings, and not much less then enforce him,
to pronounce against our unthankfulness, and to commune with his servauntes
of furnishing his house with worthier ghestes. All the day long has he
stretched out his hands unto us, Ios. 10. Es. 38.
and made as long a day as ever he did to Iosuah, and as long hours of the
day, as ever were shadowed upon the dial of Ahaz, to provoke our repentance;
for the twelve hours of the day, he has given us thrice twelve years, under
the happy and peaceable government of our godly Josias. Yet as Paul asked them
of Ephesus, Whither they had received the holy ghost, and they answered him,
We have not so much as heard whither there be an holy Ghost; Act. 19.
so such strangers are we to the work and fruits of repentance, that
scarcely we understand what repentance means. And so far is it off that
we are become true Israelites, Ioh. 1. Act. 26. In agro Nar niensi sicci^ate
lutum fieri (ex Plinio) imbre pulverem.
with Nathaniell, or but almost Christians with Agrippa, that we are rather
proved fully Atheistes. And that which Tully reports amongst his wonders in
nature that in one country, Drought causes dirte, and rain stirs up dust,
may be truly applied unto us, that abundance of grace has brought forth in
us abundance of sin, and as sin took occasion by the law to wax more
sinful, so iniquity had never been so rife amongst us, but through the
rifen^sse of the gospel. Surely the men of Niniveh shall rise in judgment
against us, for they repented at the preaching of Jonas newely begun amongst
them: the men of Jerusalem and Judea and the regions about Jordan, and some of
that serpentine brood of the Pharisees and Sadducees shall rise in judgment
against us, for they confessed their sins, and were baptized at the first
preaching of John Baptist; The Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and of every nation
under the heaven some, shall rise in judgment against us, for they were
prickte to their hearts, and be thought them what to do, at one sermon of
Peter, and were added to the Church: and low we are still in our sins, and
as men without feeling have given our selves to wantonness, to work all
uncleanness even with greediness, Ephesians. 4*
though we have learned Christ a longer time then Christ lived amongst us, and
Prophets have early risen, and late continued, to win us to repentance. The
sins of Niniveh are not specified by Jonas. They are said in the first
chapter to ascend into the presence of God, and to stand like Satan amongst
his children before his face; Job. 5.
surely ours are as impudente and saucy as ever were theirs. And if theirs
cried into heaven, ours are not tongue-tide. In the prophecy of Nahum, she is
described a bloody city, and full of lies, and robbery, and one from whom
the pray departs not, Nah. 3. Ibid. 2.
she is famous for the lions dens, and the pasture of the Lions whelps. We
reach home to them with our wickedness, I would to God our repentance were as
theirs. Our houses, hands, and hearts are full of blood. Our words and
works full of lying. The lion teareth in pieces for his young ones, and
worieth for his lioness, and his hole is full of spoils. We all climb up to
honor and might (as Jonathan and his armor-bearer to the garrison of the
Philistines by the raggedness of the rocks) so we by the ruins and
desolations of the country about us. 1. Sam. 14.
Blessed is the man in this vain and ambitious age of building, wherein the
Lord does even skorne them from heaven (what do these weak builders? will
they fortify themselves? Neh. 4.
will they establish their seed for ever? will they dwell in houses of Brick
and hewn stone for all eternity?) I say blessed is the man, the timber of
whose beams, and stone from whose walls and foundations, cries not a woe
against him. Behold the days come, when you shall be bruised your selves, O
ye bruisers of the people, and the pray shall be pulled from your teeth, ye
lions and lions whelps, and your holes emptyed of your hidden treasures. How
long have we cried against such oppressions? And smitten the oppressors with
the rod of Gods vengaunce, as Moses smote the rock? And yet what one drop
of remorse have we ever wrung from their stony hearts? how long have we
clapte our hands at the shameless usury of this place? If usury be to stiff
to be moved, yet we must free our our souls, and if it were possible, we
would also free them that are wrapped in her snares. If they little esteem the
warning of the fifteenth Psalm, that give their money upon usury, let them at
least take heed that receive it. Plutarch. de vsura.
Let them not try to bear an Ox upon their shoulders, when they are unable
to bear a goat. That is, if poverty be burden enough unto them, let them not
add the burden of usury. They ask, what they shall do? Do thou ask?
says Plutarke. Thou have a tongue, beg. Thou have hands, work. Thou haste
feet, walk. Thou have an heart, think. Naviga, renaviga, sail forward and
backewarde, Nihil tam mole^^um quam reddere.
take any pains, rather then to fall into the mercy of an usurer. There is
nothing so bitter as to restore. Our adulteries are like Absolons, even upon
the house tops: open to the world, we know their faults as we know their
faces that commit the^: and such in some, 1. Cor. 5.
as are not named amongst the Gentiles. I scarsely persuade my self that
Sodom lies in ashes for a greater offense then has been found amongst us
within these few days. Pride, it seems, Pater filia^.
is proud that she is so much talked of. She loves to be noted, though it be
with a cole. Woe be unto her. We have spit in her face seven times, and yet she
blusheth not. I have seen drunkenness drunk till it thirsted, Vidi
ebriosorum sitim and vomentium samem. Sen.
and gluttony vomit till it hungered again. Go too drunkards, and hear what
your doom is, from his mouth who has threatened to pull the cup from your
mouths. Drink, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more. These
are the linkes which held the chain of your plagues together, and wherewith
you shall as certainly be bound, as ever your flesh was tied together with
sinews. Of the contempt of the word of God, his sabbathes, and sacraments,
and whole service I speak not. I know there are a few names in Sardis, which
have not given themselves to the company of those wicked. God grant, I be not
deceived in them. For though I see them come to the wels of salvation, as
Christ came to the well of Jacob, perhaps they have not pitchers to draw
with, that ^s, they have left their minds and meditations behind them, where
with these waters should be received. But as the disciples of Christ spoke of
the fevve loves amongst so many thousands, so may I of so few souls amongst
such a multitude of inhabitants, what are these amongst such a number? I
would humbly beseech the magistrate, because he serves God in a double
place, to have care not only of his own soul, but of the souls of others.
And as Paul Romans 9. had so fervent a love toward his brethren that he wished
to be made an anathema, that is to be separated from the love of God for their
sakes; so let him also become an anathema for the time, and separate himself.
I say not from the favor of God, but from the assemblies of the brethren, for
their brethrens sake; let him go forth into the highways with those
servantes of the king, and walk the streets, and ransacke the idle and
irreligious corners of the city, and compel them to come into the house of
the Lord, that the roumes may be filled. It shall be a crown unto his own
head, a recompense of our labor, a sweet smelling sacrifice to the Lord, the
joy of Angels, a blessing to the city, the saving of souls, and revocation of
such from destruction, who are speedily falling thereinto, by their obstinate
contempt.

THE XXXIII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 3. ver. 4. And Jonas began to enter into the city a days journey etc.
WHAT we have heard already in the former verse, was but a preparatiue and
an introduction to this that follows. As that: 1. he arose, who before time
had been slack and undisposed: 2. went to Niniveh, who else when had diverted
to Tharsis, 3. according to the word of the Lord, which erst he had
disobeyed. Thus far we understood whither he went; now we are to learn what
he did in Niniveh, namely: 1. for the time, He begins his message
presently at the gates 2. for the place, he had entered but a third part of
the city, so much as might be measured by the travail of one day: 3. for the
manner of his preaching, he cried: 4. for the matter or contents; Yet fortye
days and Niniveh shall be destroyed. I have tasted nothing of this present
verse, but what might make a connection with the former. For the greatness of
Niniveh repeated in the latter end thereof, served to this purpose, partly to
commend the faith of the Ninivites, who at the first sound of the trumpet
changed their lives, partly to give testimony ito the diligence and consta^cy
of the Prophet who was not dismaide by so mighty a chardge. 1 The time and

2 The place


And Jonas began to enter into the city: All the words are spoken by
diminution. Jonas began, had not made an end, to enter the city, had not
gone through. A days journey which was but the third part of his way. Not
that Jonas began to enter the city a days journey and then gave over his
walk, for he spent a day and days amongst them in redressing of their
crooked ways; But Niniveh did not tarry the time, nor defer their conversion
till his embassage was accomplished amongst them, which is so much the more
marveilous, for that he came unto them a messenger of evil and unwelcome
tydinges: it is rather a wonder unto me that they skorned him not, that they
threw not dust into the air, ran upon him with violence, stopped his mouth,
threw stones at him with cursing and with bitter speaking as Shemei did at
David, 1. King. 18.
and as Ahab burdened Elias with troubling Israel; so that they had not
challenged Jonas for troubling Niniveh, because he brought such tidinges as
might set an uproar and tumulte amongst all the inhabitants. That wicked
king of Israel whom I named before, hated Micheas unto the death for no other
cause, 1. King. 22.
but that he never prophesied good unto him. A man that ever did evil and no
good, could not endure to hear of evil. And for the same cause did Amaziah
the priest of Bethell banish Amos from the land, for preaching the death of
Jeroboam and the captivity of Israel, Amos 7.
therefore the Lord was not able to bear his words, and he had his pasporte
sealed, O thou the seer, go flee thou away into the land of Judah and there
eat thy bread, and prophecy there, but prophecy no more at Bethel, for this
is the kings chapel, and this is the kings court: so I would rather have
thought that they should have entertained Jonas in the like manner, because
he came with fire and sword in his mouth against them; the cittye is not able
to bear thy words, we cannot endure to hear of the death of our king, and
the universal overthrow of our people and buildings. O thou the seer, get thee
into the land of Judah, and return to thy cittye of Jerusalem, and there eat
thy bread and prophecye there, but prophecy no more at Niniveh* for this is
the kings chapel, nay this is the court of the mighty Monarch of Assyria. But
Niniveh has a milder spirit, and a softer speech and behavior in receiving
the Lords prophet. Now on the other side, if you set together the greatness
of Niniveh and the present onset which the prophet gave upon it, that
immediately upon his chardge, without drawing breath, he betook him to his
hard province, it makes no less to the commendation of his faithfulness,
then their obedience. For when he came to Niniveh, did he deliberate what to
do? examine the nature of the people whether they were tractable or no?
enquire out the convenientest place wherein to do his message, and where it
might best stand with the safegarde of his person? did he stay till he came
to the market place, or burse, or the kings palace, where there was greatest
frequency and audience? No; but where the buildings of the city began, Jonas
began.

To enter.


there he began to build his prophecy. And even at the entrance of the
gates, he opened his lips and smote them with a terror of most ungrateful
news. Again, he entered their city, not to gaze upon their walls, not to
number their turrets, nor to feed his eyes with their high aspiring buildings,
much less to take up his Inn, and there to ease himself; but to travail up
and down, to weary out his strong men, not for an hour or two, but from
morning til night, A days journey.
even as long as the light of the day will give him leave to work. I
depart not from my text, for as you hear, 1. Jonas began, protracted not, 2.
to enter, not staying till he had proceeded, 3. to travail, not to be idle, 4.
the whole day, not giving any rest or recreation to his body.

If we will further extend and stretch the meaning of this sentence, we may
apply it thus. It is good for a man to begin betimes, and to bear the yoke of
the Lord from his childe-hoode (as Goliath is reported to have been a warrior
from his youth) to enter in the vineyard the first hour of the day, and to
hold out till the twelfth, to begin at the gates of his life to serve God, and
even from the womb of his mother to give his body and soul, as Anna gave her
Samuel, Nazarites unto the Lord, that his age, and wisdom and grace may
grow up together as Christ's did: And that as John Baptist was sanctified in
his mothers womb, Solomon was a witty child, Daniell and his young companions
were well nurtured in the fear of the Lord, and David wiser then his
auncientes; so all the parts and degrees of his life from the first fashioning
of his tender limbs, may savor of some mercy of God which it has received.
That whether he be soon dead, they may say of him, he fulfilled much time;
4 Wised.
or whither he carry his graye hairs with him down into the grave, Psalm.
119. Detur aet^t^ a^^^uid.

Non est mihi creed vitium adolesc. etc,


he may say in his conscience as David did, Thy statutes have ever been my
songs in the house of my pilgrimage. As for the devils dispensation, youth
must be borne with, and as that unwise tutour sometimes spoke, It is not trust
me, a fault in a young man to follow harlots, to drink wine in bowls, to
dance to the tabret, to wear fleeces of vanity about his ears, and to leave
some token of his pleasure in every place; so giving him lycense to build the
frame of his life upon a lascivious and riotous foundation of long practiced
wantonness: it was never written in the book of God, prophets and Apostles
never drempt of it, the lawgiver never delivered it, he^l only invented it
of policy, to the overthrow of that age which God has most enabled to do him
best service. And as it was the wisdom of the king of Babylon, to take the
young children of Israel whom they might teach the learning and tongue of
Chaldaea, Dan. 1.
rather then their old men, so it is the wisdom of the Devil to season
these green vessels with the li^our of his corruption that they may keep
the taste thereof while life remains. Job. 20.
But their bones are filled with the sin of their youth, and it lies down
with them in the dust, and when their bodies shall arise, then shall also their
sin, to receive judgment. So says the wise preacher giving them the raines
in some sort, but knowing that the end of their race will be bitterness.
Rejoice O young man, Eccle. 11.
and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, walk in the ways
of thine heart and in the sight of thine eyes, but know, that for all these
things, God will bring thee to judgment. Let the examples of Elie his sons
whom he tenderly brought up to bring down his house, and whole stock to the
ground, and the boys that mocked Elizaeus, be a warning to this unguided age,
that the LORD will not pardon iniquity neither in young nor old; and that not
only the bulls and kine of Basan but the wanton and untamed heighfers, and the
calves that play in the grass shall bear their transgressions. It is the song
of the young men, Wisdom the second. Let not the flower of our life pass
from us etc. and it is the cry of the young men in the fifth of the same book
what has pride profited us? For whilst they take their pleasures upon earth,
the Lord writes bitter things against them in heaven, Job. 13. and shall make
them possess the iniquities of their youth.

3. Manner of preaching
And he cried. His manner of preaching was by proclamation, loud and audible,
that it might reach to the ears of the people, he hid not the judgments of
God in his heart, as Mary the words of her Savior, to make them his proper and
private meditations, but as ever the manner of God was, that his prophets
should denounce his mind, least they might say, we never heard of it, so did
Jonas accordingly fulfill it. Esaias. 53. Ier. 2. and 50.
Thus Esaye was willed to cry, and to lift up his voice like a trumpet;
Ieremye to cry in the ears of Jerusalem, to declare amongst the nations, and
even to set up a standarde and proclaim the fall of Babylon. And Ezechiell had
a like commandment, Clama and vlula fili hominis, Ezech. 21.
Cry and hovvle son of man, for this shall come unto my people, and it shall
light upon all the princes of Israel. Our Savior likewise bad the Apostles
what they heard in the ear, that to preach upon the house tops. Math 10.
They did so. For being rebuked for their message and forbidden to speak any
more in the name of Jesus, they answered boldly in the face of that wicked
consistory, whether it be fit to obey God or man judge ye. Wisdom her
self Proverbs the first, Acts 4.
cries not in her closet and the secret chambers of her house, but without in
the streets, neither in the wilderness and infrequent places; but in the
height of the streets, and among the prease, and in the entrings of the
gates, that the sound of her voice may be blovvne into all parts. If John
Baptist were the voice of a crier in the wilderness, Math. 3.
then was Christ the crier, and John Baptist but the voice. Surely it wanted
not much that the very stones in the streets should have cried the honor and
power of God, for even stones vvoulde have found their tongues, Luc. 19.
if men had held theirs. The commandment then and practice of God himself
is to cry, to leave the world without excuse: the nature of the word
bids us cry, for it is a fire, and if it flame not forth, it vvil burn his
bowels and hearts that smothereth it. I thought I would have kept my mouth
bridled, says the prophet, Psalm. 3^.
Whilst the wicked was in my sight; I was dumb and spoke nothing, I kept
silence even from good, but my sorrow was the more increased. My heart was
hot within me, and while I was musing, the fire kindled, and I spoke with my
tongue: lastly, the nature of the people with whom we have to deal
requires crying. Deaf adders will not be charmed with whispering, nor deaf
and dumb spirits, which neither hear nor answer God, cast forth without much
prayer and fasting, nor sleepie and careless sinners, possessed with a spirit
of slumber, and cast into a heavy sleep, as Adam was when he lost his ribbe,
so these not feeling the maines that are made in their souls by Satan, awaked
without crying. Sleepers and sinners must be cried unto, again and again,
(for sin is a sleep) What? can you not watch one hour? And dead men and
sinners must be cried unto, for sin is a death, and asks as many groanings
and outcries as ever Christ bestowed upon Lazarus, Exiforas Lazare, Lazarus
come forth, Ioh. 11*
and leave thy rotten and stinking sins, wherein thou have lien too many
days. Happy were this age of ours, if all the cryings in the day time could
awake us. For I am sure that the cry at midnight shall fetch us up; but if the
mean time we shall refuse to hearken, and pull away the shoulder, and
stop our ears that they should not hear, and make our hearts as an
adamant stone that the words of the Lord cannot sink into them; Zach. 7.
it shall come to pass, that as he has cried unto us and we vvoulde not
hear; so we shall cry unto him again, and he will not answer.

And said, yet forty days, and Niniveh shall be overthrown. The matter of
the prophets sermon is altogether of judgment. 4 The matter.
For the execution whereof 1. the time prefined is but forty days: 2. the
measure or quantity of the judgment, an overthrow, 3. the subject of the
overthrow, Niniveh, together with an implication of the long sufferance of
almighty God, specified in a particle of remainder and longer adiourment in the
fourth place yet forty days, as much as to say, I have spared you long enough
before, but I will spare you thus much longer.

The only matter of question herein, is how it may stand with the constancy
and truth of the aeternall God, to pronounce a judgment against a place, which
takes not effect within an hundred years. For either he was ignorant of his
own time, which we cannot imagine of an omniscient God, or his mind was
altered, which is improbable to suspect. For is the strength of Israel as man
that he should lie? Numb. 23.
or as the son of man that he should repent? is he not yesterday and to
day and the same for ever? Heb 13. Revel. 1.
that was, that is, and that is to come? I mean not only in substance, but
in will and intention, does he use lightness? are the words that he
speaks yea and nay? Does he both affirm and deny to? are not all his
promises, 2. Cor. 1.
are not all his threatenings, are not all his mercies, are not all his
judgments, are not all his words, are not all the titles and iotes of his
words yea and amen? so firmly ratified that they cannot be broken?
doubtless it shall stand immutable when the heaven and earth shall be
chandged, and wax old like a garment, Ego Deus, Malac. 3.
and non mutor, I am a GOD that am not chandged. The Aliud mutare volu^tate^.
Aliud velle mutatione^. Aquin. 1. qu. 19 art. 7.
another to will a change, or to be vvilling that a change should be. God
will have the law and the ceremonies at one time, Gospel without ceremonies
at another. this was his will from everlasting, constant and immovable, that
in their several courses both should be. Though there be a change in the
matter and subject, there is not a change in him that disposes it. Our will
is, in winter to use the fire, in summer a cold and an open air, the thing is
changed according to the season, but our will whereby we have decreed and
determined in our selves so to do, remains the same.

2 Sometimes the decrees and purposes of God consist of two Mutat sententiam
(...) mutat consilium. lib 20. Mor. cap. 23
God changes his sentence pronounced sometimes, but never his counsel
intended. Sometimes things are decreed and spoken of according to the
inferior cause, which by the highest and overruling cause are otherwise
disposed of. One might have said, and said truly both ways, Lazarus shall
rise again, and Lazarus shall not rise: if we esteem it by the power and Es.
38.
put thy house in order for thou shall die, considering the weakness of his
body, and the extremity of his disease, he had reason to warrant the same; but
if he had told him contrariwise, according to that which came to pass, thou
shall not die, looking to the might and mercy of God who received the prayers
of the king, he had said as truly. But the best definition is, that in most of
these threatenings, there is a condition Ier. 18.
I will speak suddenly against a nation or against a kingdom to pluck it
up, to root it out, and to destroy it; but if this nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the plague which I
thought to bring upon them. So likewise for his mercy, Ibid.
I will speak suddenly concerning a nation and concerning a kingdom to build
it, and to plant it; but if it do evil in my sight, and hear not my voice, I
will repent of the good I thought to do for them. Genesis 20. it is suppressed;
where God tells Abimelech withholding Abraham's wife, thou art a dead man
because of the woman which thou have taken: the event fell out otherwise, and
Abimelech purged himself with God, with an upright mind and innocent hands
have I done this. There is no question but God enclosed a condition within his
speech, thou art but a dead man, if thou restore not the woman without touching
het body, and dishonouring her husband. Thus we may answer the scruple by all
these ways. 1. Yet forty days and Niniveh shall be overthrovven, and yet
forty and forty years, and Niniveh shall not be overthrowen. Why? because
Niniveh is changed, and the unchangeable will of God ever was, that if Niniveh
showed a change it should be spared. 2. There were two parts of Gods
purpose, the one disclosed touching the subversion of Niniveh, the other of her
conversion, kept within the heart of God. Whereupon he changed the sentence
pronounced, but not the counsel vvhereto the sentence was referred. 3. If you
consider Niniveh in the inferior cause, that is, in the deservings of Niniveh,
it shall fall to the ground; but if you take it in the superior cause, in the
goodness and clemency of almighty God; Niniveh shall escape. Lastly the judgment
was pronounced with a condition, reserved in the mind of the judge. Niniveh
shall be overthrowen if it repent not. Now he that speaks with condition
may change his mind without suspicion of lightness. As Paul promised the
Corinthians to come by them in his way toward Macedonia and did it not; 2.
Cor. 1.
for he evermore added in his soul that condition which no man must exclude,
if it stand with the pleasure of God, Iam. 4.
and he hinder me not. Philip threatened the Lacedaemonians, that if he invaded
their country he would utterly extinguish them* they wrote him none other
answer but this, If, meaning, that it was a condition well put in, because he
was never likely to come amongst them. The old verse is. Si nesi non esset,
prefectum quialibet esset. If it were not for conditions and exceptions, every
thing would be perfect. But nothing more imperfect then Niniveh, if this
secret condition of the goodness of God at the second hand, had not been. Arias
Montanus has an exposition by himself, yet forty days, and Niniveh shall be
turned, Et Niniveh versa, non eversa.
not overturned, that is, Niniveh shall be changed either to the better or to
the worse, Niniveh shall either amend her ways, or see an end of her happiness.
Niniveh in such extremity cannot stand at a stay, no more then the sicknesses
of the body when they are come to the highest degree. But to leave his singular
opinion, we have specially to mark in this fearful sentence and doom of
Niniveh, that the thoughts of God were rather for peace and reco^ciliatio^ then
to overthrow it. Here are Esaues hands, but Jacobs voice; hard speech, rough
countenance, a strong tempest of words, but an hidden spirit of te^dernes and
loving kindness: who knew rightwel that unless they were touched to the quick,
til their blood were drawn out they would not be moved. Else what did he
mean, (if he meant not mercy) to send a prophet unto them, who might have
sent his angel from heaven as against the host of Senacherib presently to have
destroyed them? Or why prefixed he a time, and gave them a respite of forty
days, who in the motion of an eye could have laid them in the dust, and
slain them with the least breath of his angry lips? But come we to the
particulars.

The time that was lent them before their overthrow, is forty days: 1. The time
neither too long, least they might presume, and put of from day to day;
neither too short, least they might despair of mercy, by thinking themselves
overmuch straightned. Pro. 30.
But as Solomon bounded his estate in a middle and convenient sort, between
poverty and ririches little and much, least ^f he were too full, he might
deny his maker, and ask who is the Lord? or if he were too empty he might
steal, and take the name of God in vain; so is the time of this people,
temperatly measured unto them, between long and short, that neither
abundaunce of days may make them forget GOD, nor skarsitie drive them from the
hope of their wished salvation. Ancient wounds (says Jerome) are not cured
in haste, Ta^ antiqua Vulnera di^ apposito emplastro curanda erant. in hunc loc.
the plaster must long lie upon them, and the old festared sins of Niniveh
could not be done away with a days repentance. The measure and quantity of
their judgment is an overthrow. Niniveh shall be destroyed. She might have
been plagued many ways and yet have stood upon her pillars and foundations;
plagued with the want of rain, as Samaria in the days of Ahab; 2. The
measure of the judgment.
with skarsitie of bread, with pestilence, with siege of enemies, with the
tyranny and exaction of her own kings and governors; but these are all too
light in the eyes of God, and nothing will satisfy his justice* but her final
subversion. Ier. 49.
If the grape-gatherers come to a vine (says Jeremy) will they not leave
some grapes? if thieves come by night, they will but steal till they have
enough; but Niniveh must be gathered, and prayed upon by the insatiable
judgment of God, till it has left her nothing. Some of the Hebrews think
that Niniveh should have been destroyed by fire from heaven as Sodom and
Gomorrhe were. Others suppose by the sword of a foreign enemy. If by the
former of these two, what a fearful thing was it, that in steed of the
fatness of the clouds, the greater and the smaller rain, the sweet dewes of
heaven, comfortable showers, which God has engendered in the air, and divided
by pipes to fall upon the earth in their seasons; their ground should be
(watered?) nay withered, and the fruits of the earth (cherished?) nay
consumed; their temples and buildinges resolved into cinders, yea their very
skins and bones molten from their backs with the heat of Gods vengeance?
The other in effect is not much behind, though in manner and kind different,
when so forcible and fierce an enemy comes, Nah. 1.
that destructions shall not need to arise up the second time, where neither
the aged has reverence for his gray hair, nor the suckling release for the
innocence of his age; where neither matrone, nor virgin, priest, nor Senator
shall be privileged from slaughter. When mourning shall be in their streets,
and they shall say in all their high ways, Amos 5.
alas, alas; or as it is in the fourth of Jeremy, Woe is me, for my soul
faints because of the murders: when there shall be no man left to carry
nevves to the next city, none to say to his friend, leave thy fatherless
children to me and I will preserve them alive, and let thy widows trust in
me. Finallye, when the blood of men shall be powered out as dust, Ier. 49.
and their flesh as dung, and all the beasts of the field, together with the
fowls of the air, shall be called to a sacrifice of dead corpses. Zoph. 1.


3 The subject.
The subject of that overthrow is Niniveh; Niniveh in state and magnificence as
the stars of God; Niniveh that excellent city, which had her name from God
himself. Niniveh of such antiquity that from the flood of Noah she had stood
upright; Civitas Deo
Niniveh that over-avved Babylon, destroyed Samaria, brought Jerusalem under
tribute, and was the rod of Gods anger to smite the nations with; Niniveh that
glorious city which dwelt in confidence and said in her heart, I am, and there
is none besides me, Niniveh must be subverted. Niniveh built with so much labor
and ambition by infinite numbers of men, exquisite artificers, unmeasurable
chardges, Niniveh with her walls 400. miles about, their height and theit
breadth wondered at, with her thousand and five hundred turrets, so glorious to
the eye, Niniveh must be subverted. Her wealthy, insole^t, imperious
inahbitants, not only those of Assiria, but the choice of all the countries
round about, father, son, nephew, old and young, all must be destroyed. It is
not the loss of their king alone that is here threatened, nor decay of
merchants and men of war, nor the rooting out of the noblest families in
Niniveh, nor the funerals of private houses. It is the fall and overthrow
without restraint of the whole city. Thus pride, when it comes to the
highest, I say not in the sons of men and women, but in the very son of the
morning, and the angels of heaven, and not only in common and singular
persons, but in societies, cities, kingdoms, monarchies, shall be brought
down. Notvvithstanding write it in tables, and let it be a monument for the
last day, how gracious the Lord is toward ungracious sinners. Niniveh is
threatened to be overthrowen, and has yet forty days stinted to repent her in:
but who can number the years which Niniveh has enjoyed aforetime? 4 Gods
patience.
yet God is content to sustain the loss and profusion of all those, and as he
added in mercy 15. years to the life of Ezechias; so to the life and being of
Niniveh 40. days. The particle of remainder yet 40. days does wonderfully set
forth the bounty of God; that albeit ten generations had past before, and ten
more succeeded without fruit; yet he would spare them thus much longer to try
their amendment.

The people of the Jews endured sufficiently in the wilderness, when he
protested in the Psalm, Psalm. 95.
forty years long was I grieved with this generation: not only provoked,
offended, discontented but grieved at his very soul, who could have grieved
all the veins of their hearts, and taught them the price of angring so
dreadful a majesty as his is. In the prophecy of Jeremy, he repeateth their
disobedience from farther antiquity. The children of Israel, Ier. 32.
and the children of Judah have surely done evil before me from their youth;
and this city has been unto me a provocation of anger from the day that they
first built it. But I need not labor to prove the patience of God, when the
worst servant in his house confesses it. Math. 24.
My master is gone into a far country, and will not return in have, yea
when the Athiest and skorner himself acknowledges no less. For if they were
not acquainted with his patience and long sufferance, they vvoulde never have
called it slacknesse, nor asked in derision, 2. Pet. 3.
for the promise of his coming, nor taken advantage of impiety, because al
things had stood in their state from the days of their fathers, nor put the
evil day far from them, and slaundered the footsteppes of Gods anointed
son. Conclus. Tempus vitae tempus poenitentiae.
The time of this life is as the forty days of Niniveh, a time of repentance,
to some it is forty years, as it was to Israel in the desert, to some not
hours, to others not minutes; but their spirit departs from them, as Jacob
went from Laban, and the Israelites from the land of Egypt without leave
taking, carrying away their jewels and treasures, and whatsoever in this life
is most dear unto them. O happy are they to whom this favor is lent
which was showed to Niniveh, yet forty days for thy repentance. But thrice
most vvretched on the other side whom the Angel of God has answered, time
shall be no more unto thee, the night is come wherein thou can not work, the
vision is ended, the prophecy fulfilled, the doors shut up, thy gracious
visitation past; who in the closing of an eye are pulled from the land of the
living, and their place is no more known. Let me tell you for conclusion, that
which was spoken to Niniveh in this place under condition, was afterward
simply pronounced by Nahum, and Niniveh was destroyed indeed. Tobias before
his death heard of the fall of Niniveh, Tob. 14.
and the monarchy that said within it self here will I dwell, was translated
into Babylon. He that endured Jerusalem so long, was afterward so obstinate
against it, that if Moses and Samuel had stood before him to ask her pardon,
he would not have been entreated; he that forbear that froward and
stubborn generation forty years long, afterward swear in his wrath that they
should not enter into his rest. And as he has spared, and spared, and spared,
so he will overturne, and overturne, and overturne, Ezech, 31. and as he has
added yet more hours, and yet more years, and yet forty days, so he will
add yet more plagues, and yet more punishments, and yet more vengeance.
According to his fearful commination Levit. 26. I will yet plague you seven
times more, and yet seven times more, and still with further repetition, as
there is no end of our sins, so there is no end of his anger. This were the
preaching fit for these times: blessings must sleep a while, mercy go aside,
peace return to the God of peace and not be spoken of. That reverend,
religious, honest estimation which was of God, in former times, there is mercy
with thee o Lord, and therefore shall thou be feared, is now abandoned and put
to flight. This rather must be our doctrine, there is judgment with thee o
Lord, with thee o Lord there is ruin and subversion, with thee are plagues o
Lord, with thee there is battle and famine and snares and captivity and
storm and tempest. there is fire and brimstone with thee O Lord, therefore
thou shall be feared. Happy are we if either love or fear will draw us to
repentance, if our marble and flinti hearts will be softened with any rain that
falls, if our stiff and yron-sinued necks will bow with any yoke, either
the sweet yoke of the gospel of Christ, or the heavye and unsupportable yoke
of the law and judgment. But if Niniveh continue as it has begun, Niniveh
shall be overthrowen. I am not a prophet, nor the son of a prophet to set
the time, either of forty or fifty, days or years more or less; he sits
above to whom it is best known, and is coming in the clouds to determine
that question. But mercy and justice I know are two sisters, and as the one
has had her day so the other shall not miss hers; and the Lord has two
arms, two cups, two recompenses, and doubtless there is a reward for the
righteous and doubtless there is also a plague for obstinate and impoenitent
sinners.

THE XXXIIII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 3. verse. 5. So the people of Niniveh believed God and proclaimed a fast
etc.
THE third part of the four, whereinto the Chapter divides it self
contains the repentance of Niniveh, continued without interruption from the
beginning of the fifth verse to the end of the ninth, where it is ioifully
embraced by the mercy and pardon of God toward her, which was the last part.
The first of these five, which we are presently to deal with, is the general
table and contents, of that which the other four diduce into special
branches. as Ezechiel first portraied the siege of Jerusalem upon a brick,
Ezech. 4.
to give the people of the Jews an image of that misery, which afterward
they should find distinctly and at large accomplished: For whatsoever we
hear in the lineall succession of all the rest, touching their faith, fastes,
sackloth, proclamations, without respect of person or age, we have broched
unto us, in this prooemiall sentence. Their ordering and disposing of this
weighty business of repentance, with every office and service belonging unto
it, is so comely, convenient, and with such art, as if David were to apoint
the Levites and priests of the temple their courses again, and to settle the
singers and porters in their several ministrations he could not have showed
more wisdom and skilfulnes. For such are the duties tendered to God by this
people of Niniveh, as were these officers of the temple. Some principal,
others accessory; some moral, others ceremonial; some for substance, others
rather for show, and to set out the work; some to the soul belonginge, others
to the body and outward man. And in all these, the first have the first places,
the second and inferior, such as are fit for them. Faith goes before works,
and in work fasting goes before sackloth and in the persons the greatest
goes before the less, and in the doing of all this, the proclamation of the
king and counsel goes before the excecution of the people. The army that
Solomon spoke of, was never better set, Cantic. 6.
nor almost the stars of heaven better ordered, then this conversion of
Niniveh. First they believed God. For the Apostles rule admits no exception.
Without faith it is impossible to please God. For he that comes to God must
believe that God is, and not only his being, Heb. 6.
but in his nature and property, that he is also a rewarder of them that seek
him. This is the first stone of their building, the first round of the ladder
of Jacob, whereby they climb to the presence of God. From faith which is an
action of the mind, they go to the works of the body. Fasting and sackloth.
For faith cried within them, as Rachel cried to Jacob, give me children or I
die. Faith is hardely received and credited to be faith unless it be
testified. For that is the touchstone that the Apostle tries us by, Show me
thy faith by thy works. So first they quicken the soul, (for faith is the
life of it) and then they kill the body by taking away the food thereof,
wherein the life of the body consisted, and buryinge it in a shrowde of
sackloth. In their works they begin with fasting as it were the greater
things of the law, and end with sackecloth as the less. For as Jerome
notes, fasting is rather to be chosen without sackcloth, then sackcloth
without fasting; therefore is fasting put before sackecloth. Jeiuniu^ magis
eligendu^ absque sacco, quam saccus sine ieiunio, ideo iciuniu^ ante saccum.
But if we shall adioyne from the 8. verse their turning from their evil
ways, and from the wickedness of their hands (which some expound of
restitution) we shall see that they went from fasting and sackcloth to that
which was more then both. The persons are as rightly placed. For they humble
themselves from the greatest of them to the least of them, which declares not
only an universal consent, that there was but one heart, one soul, one
faith, one f^st, one attire amongst them all, but that the king began, the
people were led by him, and that old men gave example to the young, parents
to their children. Lastly according to the words of the Psalm, Mayor aetas
incipit, ad minorem pervenit* Hier.
I believed, therefore have I spoken, no sooner had they hold of faith in
their hearts, but their tongues are presently exercised, nay their pens set
one work, not only to speak, but to speak publicly, to speak upon the
house tops, by open proclamation, that all might understand; and it is
probable enough from the 7. verse, that ill the proclamation was heard, for
order and obedience sake, they did nothing. More particularly, They beleved.

2. God.

3. ^asted and wore the saeke.

From greatest. etc.

5 Proclaimed a fast. 1. King. 14.


1. the radical and fundamental action wherewith they begin is faith, 2. the
object of that faith God, 3. the effects and fruits of their faith,
abstinence from two vices, the slander and reproach whereof Asia was famously
subject unto: 4. their generality in that abstinence: 5. their warrant and
commission for so doing by the edicte of the King, I reserve to an other place.

So the people of Niniveh believed God. When Ahiiah the prophet told Jeroboam,
that God should raise up a king in Israel to destroy his house, not to leave
him in hope that the time was far off remooved, he corrects himself, with
sudden and quick demand, and makes the answer unto it: What? yea even
now. Did I say he should? nay, it is already done. So soon as the word was
gone from the mouth of Jonas, Quid adte^? eiam nunc.
yet 40. days and Niniveh shall be destroyed, without pawsing and resting
upon the matter, they believed God. What? yea, even now. It was so speedily
done that almost it was less then imagination. It is very strange that a
Gentile nation, which were ever al^ants from the common wealth of Israel,
and strangers from the covenants of promise, should so soon be caught within
these nets. For when prophets preach the mercies or judgments of God, so
fat are the ears and incapable the hearts of the incredulous world, (much
more when God is a stranger amongst them) that they may preach amongst the
rest as Esaias did, Es. 23.
who has believed our report? or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
either the gospel which is his power to salvation to them that believe, or the
law which is his rod of iron to crush them in pieces that transgress it?
Rather, as it is in Habbaccuk, Hab. 1.
they will behold amongst the heathen, and regard, and wonder, and mervaile
they will lend their eyes to gaze, and their tongues to talk, but with all
they will despise and lightly esteem all that is said unto them. Behold ye
despisers and wonder at your unbelief, you that wonder so much and yet
despise. For I will work a work in your days, says the Lord, ye will not
believe it, though it be told you. The Lord will work it, prophets declare
it, and yet the people believe not. Nay, their manner of deriding, and
insulting at the judgments of God is, let him make speed, let him hasten his
work that we may see it, Es. 5.
and let the counsel of the holy one draw near and come that we may know
it. And sometimes, they plainly deny the Lord, and all his judgments,
saying, It is not he, neither shall the plague come upon us, Ier. 5.
neither shall we see sword or famine. And as for his prophets they are but
wind and the word is not in them. Exodus 5.
Moses and Aaron preached unto Pharo, not only in the name of the Lord, and
with kind exhortations, let my people go, nor only by threats and sentences
of judgment, but by apparent plagues, the effectuallest preachers that might
be, by the tongues of frogs, lice, flies, grasshoppers, of morraine, botches,
darkness, haile-stones, blood, and death it self; could not all these move
him? Exodus 7. Exodus 8. Jbid.
No, but the first time he returned into his house, and hardened his heart;
and the second, When he saw he had rest, he hardened his heart again; and the
third time: his heart remained obstinate, and likewise the fourth, though
Moses gave him warning, let not Pharaoh from henceforth deceive me any more,
and so he continued to his dying day, building up hardness of heart as high
as ever Babell was intended, even up into heaven, by denying and defying the
God thereof, till he quite overthrew him in the red sea. What shall we say
to this, but as the apostle does? All men have not faith. 1. These. 3.
God sent his patria^kes in the ancienter ages of the world, and found not
faith; sent his prophets in a later generation and found not faith. Last of
all sent his son, a man approoved to the world, and approoving his doctrine
with great works, and wonders, and signs, and found not faith: and when
the son of man comes again, Act. 2. Luc. 18.
shall he find faith on the earth? So contrary it is to the nature of man to
believe any thing, that custom and experience has not invred him with, or may
be comprehended by discourse of reason. Yet this people of Niniveh having
received, you hear, but one prophet, and from that one prophet, one sentence,
and but in one part of the city skattered and sown amongst them, presently
believed, as if the Lord from heaven, had thrust his fingers into their ears
and hearts, and by a miracle set them open.

It rather seems to have been faith of credulity, which is here mentioned,
yielding assent to the truth of the prophecy, then faith of affiance and
confidence, taking hold of mercy. That is, they first apprehend God in the
faithfulness of his word, Fides fiduciae
they know him to be a God that cannot lie, Titus 1.
they suspect not the prophet, distrust not the message, assuring themselves as
certainly as that they live, that the judgment shall fall upon them, without
the judges d^spensation. Notvvithstanding there to have stayed, without tasting
some sweetenes of the mercy of God, had been little to their hearts ease. The
devils believe, Iac 2. Epist. Jude.
and tremble. They are reserved to the judgment of the great day, and they
keep a calendar that they are reserved. For they neither see, nor hear of
Jesus of Nazareth, the judge of the quick and dead, Angels and men, death and
hell, but they are inwardly afflicted, and ask why he is come to vex them
before the time. And surely to believe the truth of God in his justice, without
aspect and application of mercy to te^per it, and to consider nothing in that
infinite supreme majesty, but that he is fortis vltor dominus, the Lord a
strong revenger, and reddens retribuet, he that recompenceth, Ier. 51.
will surely recompense, and to take hold of no word from his mouth, but
Niniveh shall be destroyed; this were enough to make them desperate, Vna salut
nullam sperare salute^.
to cause them to stone his Prophet, to set their cittye on fire as Zimri did
the palace, and to die cursinge and blaspheming the name of the Lord of
hostes^ But there is no question, but either by the preachinge of Jonas, who
might mingle a little sweet with their sower, or by the goodness of God by
delivering Jonas, which many of the Rabbis think they had heard of, or by
the light of nature, some particles and sparkles whereof, might yet remain in
them, because they came from Assure, Assure from Sem, and Sem had the knowledge
of God, or by some other means (the spirit of God especially havinge a work
to work, and ready to help their infirmities) they conceived some hope, of
the bountye and graciousnesse of the LORD, and thereupon, humbled themselves
in fasting and prayer upon trust to receive it.

They believed GOD not Jonas, 2. The object.
although in meaning it is all one, they believed GOD as the author, Jonas as
the minister. God in Jonas, or Jonas from GOD, and for Gods sake; therefore
Rabbi Esdras says, they believed GOD, that is, the word of GOD, which GOD
sent, Jonas pronounced. As it is said of the Israelits Exodus the fourteenth,
joining both together that they believed God and his servant Moses. And 2. Cor.
5. there is a like savinge: Now therefore are we ambassadors for Christ, As
if GOD did beseech you through us etc. We for Christ and GOD through us.
Therefore to show that the contempt of the servant redoundeth to the Lord, God
tells Samuel. 1. Sam. 8. They have not cast thee away, but they have cast me
away: and Christ his disciples Luc. 10. he that hears you, hears me, and
he that despises you, despises me, and him that sent me, and he that
receaveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, and a disciple in the name of a
disciple, Math. 10.
(not in the name of an Israelite or Samaritan, brother or stranger, But under
that relation) shall not loose his reward. An admirable and gracious
dispensation from God, to speak unto man, not in his own person, and by the
voice, of his thunders, and lightnings, or with the sound of a trumpet
exceeding loud, as he did upon the mount; Exodus 20.
(for then we should run away, and cry unto Moses or any other servant of
God talk thou with us, and we will hear thee, but let not God talk with
us, least we die,) but by prophets and disciples of our own nature, flesh of
our flesh, and bones of our bones, and as the Scripture witnesses of Elias,
men subject to the same passions, Iam. 5.
whereto we are, according to the word of Moses, Deuter. 18. A prophet will
the Lord thy God raise up unto thee, like unto me, from amongst you, even of
thy brethren, bringing neither shape nor languadge other then I have done. And
that prophet, shall raise up others of the like condition, for the perfiting of
his Saints ^^ll the worlds end. In which borrowing and using of the tongues
of men, Jmperans non mendicans hoc facit.

Jndulge^tia est non indigentia^

Non efficatiam quaerit sed congrue^tiam. Bern. ser. 5. in ca^t. Act. 14.


he does not beg but command; nor wants himself, but benefiteth us; nor
seeks strength to his own word, but congruence and proportion to our
infirmities; for we were not able to bear the glory of that majesty, if it
did not hide in some sort and temper it self under these earthly instruments.
But now we may say (renouncing their idolatry) as they did in Lystra of Paul
and Barnabas when we take the counsels of God from the lips of our
brethren, God is come down amongst us in the likeness of men. It is he that
speaks from above, and blesses and curses, binds and loses, exhorts
and dehorteth by the mouth of man. And surely for this respect, and relations
sake betvveene God and his ministers, whom it has pleased of his mercy to
dignifie in some sort, with the representation of his own person upon earth,
the world has ever held them in very reverent estimation. Insomuch that Paul
told the Galathians, although he preached the Gospel unto them through
infirmity of the flesh, Galat. 4.
without the honor, ostentation, and pomp of the world, rather as one that
studied to bring his person into contempt, yet so far was it off that they
despised or abhored his infirmities, that they rather received him as an Angel
of God, yea as Christ Jesus. And he bare them record, that if it had been
possible (nature and the law of God not forbidding) they would have plucked out
their eyes to have bestowed upon him. Chrysostom upon the second to Timothy
thinks no recompense equal to their dangers: Homil 2. Quantumlibet obsequil
deferas etc.
and that it is not more then deserved, if they should lay down their lives
for their pastors sake, because they do it daily for them, although not in
this life for lack of persecution to try it, yet by exposing their souls to
the perrill of eternal death, I bear you record (to use the Apostles words)
that in former times, when you had ligneos sacerdotes, wooden priests,
priests of Babylon to be your leaders and guides, and not only Balaam the
Prophet of Moab, Balaams asses, who never opened their mouths, but it was a
miracle to hear them* you gave the^ the honor of angels and of Christ Jesus
himself. You the^ bestowed your earings and frontlets (as Israel did upon a
golden calfe) upon those leaden calves, I mean your lands and revenewes, to
maintain the covents of Monks, cages of ignorant and unlearned buzzardes.
Then you committed idolatrye with stocks and stones, and to every Friar that
drew you aside, were ready to submit your selves, pater meus es tu, you are my
father. Then religion ate up policy, the Church devoured the common wealth,
cloisters were fuller of treasures then Kings courts, all the wealth and
fatness of the land was swallowed down into the bellies of Frieries and
No^neries. And as the king of Persia continued his feast to his princes and
servantes an hundredth and fourscore days, Esther. 1.
so if these had continued their eating and drinking the substance of the world
to this day, their appetite would have lasted. Then had you priests without
learning, Zeal without knowledge, devotion without discretion, and liberality
without moderation. But there is a time to win and a time to loose, a time to
gather and a time to skatter, a time to eat and a time to cast up. For now
policy has eaten up religion, the common wealth the Church, and men spoil
their Gods, as God expostulateth Malac. 3. against all equity and conscience.
His tithes and offeringes are translated to strangers; they eat the material
bread of the Prophets, who never give them spiritual food, and they that
serve not at the altar, live by it, when they that serve indeed cannot live.
Antigonus asked Cleanthes a learned Philosopher, and painful student at his
book, Cleanthes do thou yet grind? I grind, says he, and that for
sustenance sake. Molis adhu^ cleanthe? molo idque vit^e sustenta^dae causa.
Quibus ille manib etc* Plutarch*
Wherein they noted a great indignity, that those hands should be used at the
mill wherewith he wrote of the sun and stars. It grieveth me to speak
what shifts they are driven unto, who are able to labor in the word and to
do the work of right good evangelistes, idque vitae sustentandae causa, not
to grow rich thereby, but to put meat into their mouths and the mouths of
their families. I conclude with the exhortation of the Apostle, 1. These. 5. Now
we beseech you brethren, that you know them which labor amongst you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you, (...).
that ye have them in singular, or abundant, or more then abundant love for
their works sake. From an abundant spirit he craveth abu^dant abundance of
love, empting his soul of words, that if it were possible, he might stir
their hearts. In this sparingly sparing generation of ours, what words might
serve to warm their frozen devotion, whom neither painfulness in
laboring, nor preeminence in overseeing, nor vigilance in admonishing, can
cause to know and discern? no nor keep from contemning; or so exceedingly to
love? no, nor withdraw from exceedingly hating, these laborers, rulers,
watchmen of theirs, but even for their works sake, because they are
ministers, most debase and despite them? They knew Christ among the Jews, to
be the carpenters son, and such to be his brethren and sisters: So these
they are content to know, not in the worthiness of their calling, givinge
countenance to their place, and maintenaace to their service, but in the
baseness of their birth and kindred, poorness of their liuinges and
pensions, and whatsoever may make to add unto them further disgrace,

3 the effect of faith.
And proclaimed a fast, and put on sackloth. Fasting and sackeclothe, says
Jerome, are the armor of repentance. She comes not to God with a full
belly and meat between the teeth, Arma penitentiae saccus and ieiunium^

Jnanis venture and luct^osus habitus ambitiosius Deum depre^antur. Hieron.
Moeroris in signia. Tull.


nor in gorgeous attire of silver and gold or of needle work, but with the
thinnest face, and coursest apparel that she can provide. She is so much
the apter to apply her suite, and to entreat GOD. Not that the emptiness of
the stomach, or roughness of the garment do so much content him: which are
but outward signs of an inward cause from whence they proceed. For when the
soul is touched indeed, and feels the smarte of her sins, because it
hungreth and thirsts after the righteousness of God, therefore it cannot
think on feeding the outward man, but commands it abstinence for a time
even from necssary eating: and because it longs to be clothed with the
salvation of God, therefore it charge her flesh and blood, not to take care
for wonted attiring, but to change their accustomed ornaments into sackcloth
and ashes. Meanetime the pleasure that God has is in the sorrow of the heart
and in the humility of the mind which the humiliation of the body gives him
assurance of. The practice of David Psalm. 35, is, me thinks a very good
pattern, both to show the order of repentance, and to assign the place that
fasting and sackcloth have therein, When they were sick, I clothed my self
with sackcloth, and humbled my soul with fasting, and my prayer was turned
upon my bosom. I behaved my self as to my friend or brother, and made
lamentation as one that bewaileth his mother. 1. There must be some misery, as
the sickness of friends, maladies of our own souls, or the public sores of
the whole land. 2. Upon that misery, ensues an inward and hearty compassion, as
in a case that dearly affects us. 3. upon that compassion, grief, which
mercy is never sundred from. 4. upon that grief, a neglect of bodily duties,
and neither leisure to fill it with meats and drinks, nor care to trim it
with ornaments. 5. upon the neglect of the body, do the exercises of the soul
prayer and the like offer themselves, and 6. prayer with her other companions
at length come laden home with the sheaues of comfort and bliss from the
plentifullest fields. So that sackecloath and sasting, as they are the
witnesses of sorrow or some like passion, so are they helps also and occasions
to more acceptable works then they are themselves, neither lie they next to
the favor of God, but they thrust prayer and faith between them and home to
beg remission. I mean not to prevent my text, by showing the nature,
original, kinds, and use of fasting amongst both heathens and Christians,
which some later verses of this chapter do challendge to themselves. Only I
observe for this present, that both those sins, wherewith the people of Asia
did most especially abound, and these in Niniveh perhaps more especially then
the rest, they labored forthwith to reform, that is, the delicacy of meats
and drinks, and intemperancy in clothing. Luke 16.
The rich man in the gospel is noted for both these, as handmaides that waited
upon his riches. And Niniveh the richest lady under heaven was not clear from
them. To rid themselves of these baits and allurements, 1. they fast, from
meat, drink, sleep, ointments, delights and recreations of all sorts. For
that is truly to fast; not only to forsake and forget ordinary food, Non solum
ab escis sed a cu^ctis illecebris abstinere. Hieron.
but to emprison and shut up the body from all the pleasures of life, to pull
down the strength and pride thereof, and for neighbour-hoods sake to afflict
the soul with it, and in effect to give it straight commandment, touch not,
taste not, handle not any thing wherein thy wonted ioies consisted. 2. They
proclaim a fast, they leave it not indifferent and arbitrary to the will of
every private citizen to do what he best fansied. They bind them by a law
and decree to do as the rest did, least there might have bin some in the city,
carrying their Epicurisme and looseness of life to their grave, Let us eat
and drink for within forty days we shall die. 3. They put on sacke-cloath.
Perhaps not sacke-cloth in kind, which all the shoppes in Niniveh could not
supply them with, but the vilest and simplest vveedes that they might devise.
Their purple and prince-like furniture, wherein they esteemed not warmth, Non
calor sed color. Be^. Pretium affectatur in vestibus non necessitas. Id.
but the color and die, and ware them for their price more then necessity;
their wanton, disdainefull, superfluous sails of pride and vainglory they
lay aside, and, but for open vncivilitie, they would strippe themselves to the
bare skin, and repent naked. 4. from the greatest to the least. They spare
no calling, Prince nor peer, noble nor vulgar person. They spare no age, old
nor young. The aged that went with his staff, and the suckling that drew the
breast, are all chardged alike, even those who for bodily infirmities, were
unable enough to bear it.

The two daughters of the horse-leach which suck the blood of our land, The
conclusion.
wasting the substance and commodity thereof in vain, in some the effects of
their wealth, in others the efficientes of their beggary, are the vices of
these Assyrians which directly and purposedly they cross in this work of
repentance. For what has undone both gentlemen and mean men in our country
so much, and brought some to shame, as their back and belly, pride and
profusion? What means shall we use to crush these vipers amongst you?
declaiming will not serve. Denouncing of the judgments of God we have found
unprofitable by overlong experience. Have we not beaten your ears? (I
mistake, the air and the wind) a thousand times with faithful and earnest
detection of these monsters, pride and prodigality, strangenes of apparel,
excess of meats and drinks, and have we not gained thereby, as if we had
preached but fables? Niniveh is fallen long since, because she returned to
that wallowing which here she repented her of. But Niniveh shall rise again
and stand upright against us, and condemn us face to face, for she repented
in hunger and thirst, we in satiety, gluttony, surfeiting, drunkenness; for
either we never repent at all, or these are the stomakes which we bring in
repentance: And Niniveh repented in sacke-cloth and ashes, stuff of the
coursest woofe and workmanship, and of the simplest fashion that their wits
could invent, we in our silks and velvets, of French, Italian, Jewish,
Turkish, Barbarian, hellish devises: for either we never repent at all, or
these are the guises and shows we bring in repentance. These, these are the
stomakes we go with, I say not to our beds, to stretch our selves, and to
take our ease, till we have gotten our appetites again, and these are the
weeds we carry, I say not to the theaters to be stared upon, nor to the kings
court where soft raiment is more tolerable to be worn; But with these
stomakes and these weeds, we go to the temple of the Lord, his house of
praying and preaching, and as boldly present our selves therewith, as if the
favor of God were sonest won by such intemperancies. Whither we be a people
defiled and corrupted as these in Niniveh were, we are not so shameless to
dissemble; and whither prophets have been amongst us, as Jonas was in Niniveh,
let their wearied tongues and sorrowful souls for their lost labor, witness
an other day; and whither the judgments of God, some we have already felt,
and some we have cause to fear, though not so grievous as they did, we need
none other messengers to report, then our eyes standing in our heads, and
beholding some part of them accomplished; And lastly, we would think it a
great wrong unto us to be chardged with unbelief. We say we believe God as
frankely and confidently, as ever the men of Niniveh did. Thus far we will be
equal with Niniveh* But show me your faith by your works as they did in
Niniveh. If your sins have deserved a judgment, and judgment has been
sounded by prophets, besides the preaching of experience; and prophets, you
say, are believed, because you receive them as those that speak in the name of
the Lord: I say again, show me your faith by your works, as that city did.
When did you fast, I name not bread and water, but from superfluous sustenance?
When did you pull one dish from your tables, or one morsel from your bowels?
Nay, do you not daily add, and invent for pleasure, even till the creatures
of God, which die for your lives, cry out upon you; we desire not to be
spared, but not to be abused; we refuse not to serve your necessity, but
your riot; kill to eat, Necessitate^ haud deprecor sed iniuriam.

Necessitati subservire haud recuso sed luxu^, vt vescuris iugula, vt lautius
and iucundius vescaris haud iugulae. Plut. de es^ carn.


but to eat deliciouslie and intemperately kill us not? Or when did you
chandge one suit or thread of your raiment, in sign of suppliant and contrite
spirits? shall I say by proclamation? no, nor by the secret and single decree
of any private heart. Or from the greatest to the least? No. For greatness
will not stoop but at greater judgments. The Lord does bruise but the heel
of the body, when the poor are smitten, unless he reach the head, the rich
and mighty amongst us feel it not. Brethren there must be some end of these
things, our eating and drinking not to live, but as if we would die with
fullness, and wearing of pride like a chain to our necks, and a mantle to our
whole bodies; or if Moses and Samuel were amongst us, they would be weary of
their preaching. Yea there must be some end, or if Moses and Samuel vvithall
the angels in heaven were amongst us; to bestow both their preachings and
prayers that we might be saved, they should save but their own souls, and
neither us, nor our sons and daughters. This is an year of temptation
whereof I may say as Moses did in Deuteronomie of a strange prophet, Deuteronomy.
13.
T^ntat vos dominus vester, The LORD your God prooveth you whither you love
him or no, vvhither you can be content for his sake to leave superfluities a
while and to lay aside vanity, and converte your hearts and hands to the
works of mercy. In the timeliest time of your harvest he covered the heavens
with a sack, to teach you the way to sacke-cloath, and sent leanenesse upon
the earth, to teach you frugalitie and thriftinesse in the use of his
blessings. Many the poorer of our land vvoulde be glad with the disciples
of Christ to rub an ear of corn between their hands, for relief of their
hunger, if they could come by it. Their bowels sound like shaumes for want
of food, and their teeth are clean, when your barnes and garners are filled
to the top, your presses run over, and your bellies are satisfied with
more then the flower of wheat. O take somewhat from your bellies and backs,
if you have any love to that hidden Manna, the meat that perishes not, the
fruits of the tree of life in the midst of the paradise of God; if any
desire to those white garments washed in the blood of Christ, and rather to
shine hereafter as the stars in the firmament, then as glo-wormes upon the
earth in this present life; take from your bellies and backs, both in regard
of your own souls, to witness humility and sobriety before God and man, and
for your poor brethren sake, that they may be fed and clothed. It is Christ
that hungreth, and Christ that must satisfy you. Christ that craveth, and
Christ that must give unto you. Christ that lies at your gates, and Christ
that must advaunce you to glory. He is the advocate to the poor, and the
judge of the rich, he has the sentence of blessing and cursing in his mouth,
and to those that are plentiful givers, he shall render a plentiful
recompense.

THE XXXV. LECTVRE.
Chap. 3. ver. 6. For word came unto the king of Niniveh and he rose from his
throne, etc.
THE first of those five verses wherein the repentance of Niniveh is laid
down, is nothing else, I told you, but a general comprehension of that which
is afterward repeated and repolished with more particular declaration. Therein
they lay their foundation low and sure: for the first stone of their building
that bears up all the rest, is faith, plainly and expressly mentioned: which
if it had been suppressed by silence, as one that sees the branches and fruits
of a tree, knows there is a root that carries them, though it be buried in
the moulde of the ground; or the members of the body of man, stirring and
mooving themselves to their several functions, knows there is a heart that
rules them, though it dwell secretly within the bosom: so though the name of
faith had not here been heard of, he that had seen such branches and members
of religious devotion and humiliation in the people of Niniveh, might easily
have ghessed that there was a root and heart of faith from whence they
proceeded. To this they adioine fasting and sacke-cloath, not only as arguments
and outward professions of their inward contrition or grief: but as
adminicles, helps, and commendations besides to that effectual prayer of
theirs which afterward they powered forth. The belly, they say, has no ears,
and we may as truly say, Venture no^ habet aures* Vexiliu^ superbiae nidusque
luxu^riae. August.
it has no tongue or spirit to call upon God; and sumptuous garments are
either the banner of pride and nest of riotousnes, as the Emperor of Rome
termed them, or tokens at least of a mind at rest and no way disquieted,
therefore they cry in the second of Wisdom, Let us fill our selves with costly
wine and ointments, and let us crown our selves with rose buddes. And Amos
complains of them in the sixth of his prophecy, that put the evil day far
from them, and approach to the seat of iniquity, that they eat the lambs of
the flock, and the calves out of the stall, drink their wine in bowls, and
anointe themselves with the chief ointmentes, but no man is sorry for the
affliction of Joseph. For it is not likely that the affliction of oath ers
should move their hearts, who are so occupied and possessed before with fulness
of pleasures.

For the better explication hereof, it shall not be impertinent to consider
and apply the behavior of Benadab 1. Kings. 20. he had received an overthrow of
the children of Israel, one year in the mountains, the next at Aphek. An
hundred thousand footmen were slain in the field in one day, seven and twenty
thousand perished with the fall of a wall in the city, besides the danger of
the king, who is afraid of his own life, and runs from chamber to chamber
to hide himself. Upon this misery wherewith they were touched, one danger
being past, another imminent, his servauntes come unto him with these words:
Behold now, we have heard say, that the kings of Israel are merciful kings:
we pray thee therefore, let us put sacke-cloath about our loins and ropes
about our heads, and go out to the king of Israel, it may be that he will
save thy life. They did so, and came to the king, and said, thy servant Benadab
says, I pray thee let me live. Benadab of late a puissant king, having two and
thirty kings in his army, is now content with the name of a servant.

First then you see, there is a persuasion of mercy in the kings of Israel: so
there must be a persuasion of mercy in the God of heaven, which the Ninivites
were not void of. Secondly that persuasion was imperfect, mingled with fear,
standing upon terms of doubt, it may be he will save thy life: so likewise
said the king of Niniveh, who knows if the Lord will repent? Thirdly, upon
this persuasion, such as it is, the Sirians go and entreat the king of
Israel: upon the like do the inhabitants of Niniveh cry unto God: Lastly, to
testify their humility, and to move him to pity, they put sacke-cloath
about their loins, and ropes about their heads; so do the people of
Niniveh sit in sacke-cloath and ashes, to bewray their contrite spirits. Now
as Aram put ropes about their heads, to show that for their own parts they
had deserved nothing, but their lives and deaths were in the kings hands,
either to save, or hang them; so to fast, or wear sacke-cloath, with any
intention to merit, or satisfy the anger of God, is to abuse the ends of
both these services. 22. Quaest. 147. art. 1. Conc^us. Sine Baccho et Cerere
friget Venus. applied by Jerome. Cibum reru^ desiderabilium non comederam.
Aquinas recites three ends of a fast: First to repress and subdue the
insolency of the flesh; he prooveth it from the second to the Corinthians
the sixte, where the Apostle joins fasting and chastity together: the one
the cause, the other the effect that follows it.

Secondly, to elevate the mind, and make it more capable of heavenly
revelation: as Daniell in the tenth of his prophecy, after his fasting three
weeks from pleasant bread, flesh and wine, beheld a vision. Thirdly, to
satisfy and appease the anger of God for sins: which we can in no case
admit: the proof he brings is from the second of Ioell, where we are
willed to turn unto the Lord with all our heart, with fasting and mourninge
and weeping, to rende our hearts and not our garments, etc. What then? It is
the manner and usage, we grant, of suppliant petitioners to abstain from
meats, and to tear their garments from their backs, not with purpose to
satisfy the wrath of GOD, but rather to execute wrath and vengaunce upon
themselves, and by macerating their bodies, and stripping them of their best
ornaments to show, how unworthy they are of the blessings of God, whom by
their heinous iniquities they have so offended. For it is not fasting and
sacke-cloath that pleases him so much, nor rending the garments, nor looking
under the brow, nor hanging down the head like a bulrush, nor shaving the head
and the beard, nor casting dust upon the face, nor sitting in ashes, nor
filling the air with howlinges and outcries: but inward and hearty
conversion to God, acknowledgement of our grievous provocations, confession of
our own unworthiness by these outward castigations, unfeigned repentance,
vacation to prayer, and a faithful apprehension of his ancient and accustomed
mercies. Therefore it follows in Joel, For the Lord is gracious and
merciful* slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil.
As much as to say, when you have sorrowed sufficiently for your sins, and
signified that sorrow with abstinence and tears, take comfort at the length
again, not in your own satisfactions, but in the remembrance and view of Gods
everlasting mercies. For word came unto the king of Niniveh. Some think, that
the matter herein contained is distinguished from that which went before in
the fifte verse: and that the rulers and warders of the several parts of the
city which Jonas had past through, had proclaimed a fast to the people, before
the preaching of the prophet came to the kings ears. Hereupon they infer,
that in matters appertaining to God, we must not tarry the leisure of Princes
their license be obtained, for Princes (they say) are slowest to believe, and
farthest from humbling themselves before the majesty of God when his anger is
kindled. I take it to be otherwise, and I am not left alone in that opinion:
for most agree, that the former verse is but an index or table to that that
follows. Wherein the repentance of Niniveh is first rough hewn, and
afterward revised and gone over again with more special explication. For
thus it hangs together. If you will know what the people of Niniveh did
upon this strange and unexpected news, they doubted nothing either of the
word, or of his calling that brought it: but from the greatest to the least,
old and young, princes and inferiors, all orders and states of men, they both
believed the report, and became spectacles to God, and men, and angels of
admirable contrition, condemning themselves in those two things especially
whereof the whole world might justly have condemned them, luxuriousnes of
meats, and drinks, and costlinesse of garments: But if you will know their
order of proceeding more particularly, thus it was: 1. Word came unto the
king, Prover. 15.
as to the most excellent power and authority amongst them: 2. the king calls
a council, of the princes and peers, as being the pillars of his government:
for where there are many counselors, there is strength. 3. the king and his
counsel make an act, touching fasting and prayer, and renouncement of sin,
4. they cause it to be proclaimed in manner and form as afterward follows:
5. for encouragemente and example to the rest, the King is the first man that
humbles himself. So that in truth, their sovereign and liege-Lord is first
made privy to their service intended; wherein, for mine own part (simply to
speak my mind, as one that must give account what I have built upon my
masters foundation, whether gold, silver, hay, stubble or the like, for both
my works and my words must be tried by fire) though I make no question, if the
prince should be backewarde and careless in the worship of God, but God
must be served, and so I would wish it: yet in a common cause, concerning the
weal and welfare of the whole common wealth, where it lies upon all sorts
of men alike, to do some extraordinary worship to God (as the case of Niniveh
here required) I hold it a point of disorder and confusion, that the foot
should run without the head, the people or inferiors do any thing in
public, whereunto the knowledge and authorizement of the prince is not first
had. Give unto Caesar the things that belong to Caesar, and give him this for
one amongst the rest, if Caesar be willing and ready to join with thee in the
honor of God, leave him not out. I would not open this gate of liberty, to any
subject or people in the world with whom Christ and his kingdom are
harbored, that in a common danger of a country when God is to be pacified,
and the land purdged in general, the private members thereof may enter into
the action, without the vvarrant of the prince both to command and direct the
same. If such were the king as Darius was, Daniell, 6. and such his rulers and
officers as would make a decree to defraude God of his worship, that
whosoever should make a petition to any, either God or man, ^n thirty days,
save only to the king, should be cast into the den of the Lions, then be
thou also as Daniell was, enter into thine house, and open thy vvindowes
toward Jerusalem and pray, or enter into the house of God, and set open the
doors and pray, or go into the corners of the streets, or into the market
place, or climb up to the house tops and pray, stay not till the king or his
council release thee thereto, and if every hair of thy head were a life,
redeem thy duty to God with adventure and loss thereof, rather then neglect
it: and if thou hap to be alone in that action as Elias was, yet forgo it not.
But if such be the king as Josias was, or the like, and such his Princes and
officers as make decrees for the worship of God, and are more wise then thy
self, to know the dandger of the state, and as zealous to prevent it:
whatsoever thou do in private betwixt thy self and thine own spirit, thy
self and thine own household, yet gather no open assembly, sanctify no
public fast, call not to sacke-cloath and mourning before the magistrate have
decreed it. It may be a presumption of thine own zeal, an affectation of
singularitye, a commending and preaching of thy self unto the people, but sure
I am, it is a censure by consequence, and a judgment under hand, against the
rest of thy brethren, that they are over-colde in religion, a prejudice against
the magistrate, that he is to slack, a breach of obedience to the powers that
God has ordained, and the mother of Anarchie and confusion which within a
christian common wealth must carefully be shunned. In many the dangers of our
land both at home and abroad, many the members and subjects thereof, as if
our country had no more orators, and there were none to stand in the gappe
but themselves, have assembled together, either in towns, or in hamlets, and
sometimes in a private house to fast and pray before the Lord. Their humbling
of themselves in such sort, confessing of sins, offering of their hearts in
devout supplication, singing of Psalms, prophesying in course from morning
till evening, as they are plausible exercises in the sight of men, so I will
not say the contrary but full of Godliness and Christianity. But (under
correction of better knowledge and judgment) I think, that obedience and
love, had been better then all this sacrifice, and that thus to minishe the
authority of the magistrate, by preventing his decree, and controlling as it
were his government, and to give sentence against all the children of the
land besides of negligence and vnmindefulnesse in Gods affairs, may more
offend, then their service or devotion can do good otherwise. Much more
seemly it were, that as the Apostle exhorts the Corinthians, not the one to
prevent the other, when they come to the supper of the Lord, ^. Cor. 11.
which is a sacrament of communion and fellowshippe; so in a calamity of the
realm, when all the iointes thereof are disquieted, and have need to be
salved and helped by the saving-health of GOD, that all might concur and
agree for seeking that remedy: that the people might stay for the magistrates,
magistrates lead the people, the prophets preach and denounce, the king and his
counsel enact, and all put in practice: that a whole burnt offering might be
made unto the Lord, from the highest to the lowest, a solemn dedication of
every person and state that the land has. And as Jerusalem was commended for
her building, so we for our praying and fasting, a people at unity within our
selves, where neither the greatest nor the least are excluded. But of the
nature of a public fast hereafter. Meane-while, the dangerous conclusions,
that have, and might have ensued out of this maxim, to weete, that in matters
belonging to God, we are not bound to expect or respect the magistrate, make
me the more wary and scrupulous in handling this point. For I like not in any
case, that the least advantage and scope in the earth be given to the people,
against his lawful and Christian governor. It is as fire to flax, an easy
and welcome persuasion to busy and catching natures. The least exception once
taken against their want of religion, piety, justice or the like, is so far
followed, that not only the prince, in the end, but the whole people rueth
it. The Anabaptist in Germany, no sooner entertained this fancy in his
brain, that a godless magistrate may be made away, but forthwith he
grants to himself, that all the magistrates of Germany are of that kind:
and casts in his head how he may lay his hands upon the Lords anointed.
He bears the world in hand, that God has had speech with him, and given
him a chardge to destroy the wicked, and to constitute a new world,
consisting of righteous and innocent. The ordinary preachings of Muncer were
these, God has warranted me face to face, he that cannot he has commanded
me, Joan. Sleid. Com. 5. Jpsemet mihi coram promisis etc.
to attempt the chandge by these means, even by killinge the magistrates.
Phifer his lewd companion, did but dream in the night time, of the killing of
many mice, and presentlye expounded his dream of murdering the nobles. So
likewise, let a papist from Rome or Rhemes give forth, that a prince which is
an Apostata, or excommunicate by the Church, for heresy or Schism, and
openly denounced to be such, may be deposed from his seat, seignories,
title to the crown, claim of subjects allegiance, how many traiterous
hearts, slanderous and mutinous books, libelles, speeches, declamations,
defamations, rebellious, violent, hostile conspiracies, has it brought forth?
how ready has the Lion been, to take cares for horns? that is, a preiudicate
opinion, of men maliciously bent, to interpret the service of God heresy,
and departing out of Babylon, schism; and falling away from Antichrist, flat
Apostasy? The Brownist in England of late, imagining to himself, that in the
disorders of the Church, reformation may be made without the leisure and leave
of the Prince, if God had not slak't that heat, vvoulde have followed his
conceit per saxa, perignes, through all the dangers and difficulties that
are, would have trodden order, obedience, conscience, religion, duty to God
and man under his feet, rather then have missed his purpose. Schismatici
semper inter initia sua fervent, incrementa vero habere non possunt. 4. epist.
2.
But the mercy of God assisting us, we have found it true which Cyprian some
times observed, that schismatickes are ever hotest in their first beginninges,
but cannot take increase.

To conclude, this fact of the people of Niniveh in this their religious
intendment of public repentance and conversion to God, eve^ for that order
and obedience sake, which they hold toward their king, is the rather to be
commended; and may be an image to all other kingdoms and Churches on the
earth, how to demean themselves in the like businesses; not to neglect their
rulers and governors, not to suspect them of carelessness in their chardges,
not to impair their credit and dignity in the opinions of men, with
uncharitable and hasty surmises, not to usurp their authority, in the
practice or publication of unusual acts: But to give them this prerogative,
not only for policy but even for conscience sake, that as they are the heads
of the body, and set over the rest; so in all such weighty affairs as this
whereof I speak, they think their knowledge, advise, and association most fit
to be required. And word came to the king of Niniveh. If we consider the
words in particular, we shall find them to have marveilous force: 1. Word
came, not only the brute, fame, 1. Word came.
report, tidinges or hear say of it; but a word of a far different kind, a
burden, a judgment, a powrefull, terrifying, threatening word, a dreadful
alarm of the wrath of God, a word that has a deed in it and is not only
pronounced, but done, or not far from doing. Such a word as we read of in
the second of Luke, when the shepheardes said one to another, Verbum hoc quod
factum est.
let us go into Bethlehem, and see this word that is done, this singular,
miraculous, extraordinary word, the like whereof, we never heard uttered. 2.
to the king of Niniveh, not to a viceroy, 2. To the king of Niniveh.
apetite and tributary king, a king of a molehill, or of a little i will, a king
under awe and subjection to some higher kingdom; but to the king of Niniveh,
the successor of Nimrod, the Monarch of the (...), the terror and scourge of
the world far and near, the mightiest, maiesticallest, prowdest king that
the sun at that day looked upon. For what is the reason that the history
having mentioned Niniveh so often before ( go to Niniveh, and he went to
Niniveh, and Niniveh shall be overthrown, and the men of Niniveh believe
God,) does yet, add the name of the city, as if without this addition it
could not be understood what king were meante, but that the mind of the holy
Ghost therein was, to note the unlikeliest king, to strike sails, and to
yield his scepter to the king of kings of all the countries and kingdoms that
the world had. Yet this potent and insolent king of Niniveh, though he had
builte his nest as the eagles of the sky, for earthly provision and
pre-eminence, as soon as he heard the tidings of this word, 3. He arose.
what did he? 3. he arose, as if he had felt his seat shaken under him,
and tossed with an earthquake, so he raises himself, starteth from his ease
and tranquillity, thinks it no time to sit and deliberate, and ask
questions, to examine circumstances, to convent the disturber of Niniveh before
him, and to take an account of his preaching, but if ever he hasted, and
bestirred his iointes, and called his senses and wits, his princes and people
together to work a work, now to do it. 4. he rose from his throne, not from
his bed, 4. From his throne.
VVhereon he took his ease; nor from his board, whereat he ate and drank;
but from his seat of honor and principality, his royal, magnificent,
monarchical throne; where he sat as king, and commanded, and took state
upon him. From thence he arose, to do his obeisance to the Lord of all
Lords, whose throne is the heaven of heavens, and all the thrones of the earth
but his foote-stooles. 5. Cast of his robe.
5 More then this, as if the robe of majesty, his vesture of purple and gold,
his kingly attire, had been a burden to his back, and as unseemly to be
worn as ever the botch or scabbe was to the Egyptians, he does not only
despise or refuse, and not reckon of it; but he puts it off, nay he casts
it off, and throws it down, and bids it farewell for ever as not
becoming him: as if he had rated and reprooved it in this manner: have I
(...) thee for pomp and pride, and given countenance unto my beggarly and
base vveedes in comparison of him who is clothed with zeal as with a cloak,
and with righteousness as with an habergeon? lie aside, I mistook thy nature,
thou art but the painting of a grave, or whiting of a rotten wall, the cover
and case to a lump of mortal flesh; vain and unprofitable ornament, I am
weary of thy service, thou haste made me honorable in the sight of men, thou
can work me no reverence or estimation before the Lord of hosts: 6. It had
been enough to have proceeded thus far, 6 Covered himself with sacke-cloath.
to have stripte him into his weekly and ordinary attire: to have gone like a
common man, as Ahab in the first of Kings, chandged his apparel that his
enemies might not know him: first, the king of Niniveh does not so; but he
that had silver and gold as the dust in the street, and precious stones as
the gravel in the river Tigris, to have wrapped his body in, and to have
glistred against the rays of the sun, as Herod in his shininge gown,
forgets the wardrobe of the Empire, and goes to the beggars press,
humbles himself like a bondman, one that had ground at the mill could not
have taken a garment of baser condition, he puts on sacke-cloath, nay he
covers himself with sacke-cloath, sacke-cloath is all the apparel he
wears, sacke-cloath is the diadem to his head, sacke-cloath the mantell to
his back, from the crown of the head to the plant of his foot there is
nothing but sacke-cloath. The king has wound his body in sackcloth as a
corpse made ready for the burial, and fitter to lie in the ground, then to live
and breath upon the face of the earth. Lastly, when he has all done, he lies
not on an heap of violets and roses, as the Sibarites were wont to do; 7 Sat
in ashes.
nor upon a couch beautified and decked with the tapestry of Egypt; neither
goes he into the temple of Niniveh, to cleave to the dust of the pauement, nor
shuts himself into his closet, to grovell upon the flore thereof; but he
sits, dwells, abides in an heap of ashes, sacke-cloath was the ground,
ashes is the garnish, lace, and welt to all his garments. A wonderful
alteration, from a king of the earth, to a worm of the earth, from a robe to
sacke-cloath, from a throne to a dunghill, from sitting in estate, to lying in
ashes, from the pomp of a monarch, to the image of a caitife: he whom all the
reverence of the world attended upon, to whom the knee was bowed, the head
uncovered, the body prostrated, who had as many salutations as the firmament
stars, God save the king, long live the Emperor; throws away his crown,
his scepter, his majesty, with all the signs and solemnities thereto
belonging: and in effect rebukes himself, Why art thou proud O earth and
ashes? Humble thy spirit, see thy mortality, tremble before the presence of
that God, who sends terror into the hearts, and confusion into the faces of
all earthlye potentates.

Conclusion.
To make an end (for I have ever for the most part, against my meaning and
purpose offended you with prolixitye of speech) I have briefly two instructions
to commend unto you: the one to the magistrates Imperatores leges dare no^
accipere.
is first and foremost in the service of God. The other in general to all sorts
of men; The king of Niniveh, you hear, for whom the silver and gold and
riches of goes from his throne and puts on sacke-cloath about him, as one
that must give account to the highest God, like those of the meanest condition:
Psalm. 82.
( I have said ye are GODS, but ye shall die like vulgar men:) and sits
in ashes, as one not forgetting his first foundation, that as he was bred of
the ashes, so to ashes he must return. My brethren, let not the pomp of the
world deceive you, whither it stand in authority, or opulency, or
voluptuousness of life, I say let it not deceive you. As the fresh rivers
run into the salt sea; so shall all the honors of the world end in
baseness, all the pleasures of the world end in bitterness, all the
treasures of the world in emptiness, all the garments of the world in
nakedness, and finally, all the viands and delicates of the world in
lothsomnesse and rottenness. Throw away your robes and costly caparisons, you
Kings and Queens of the earth, (you that are such not by the ordinance of
God, but by your own usurpation, that take such honor upon you not being
called thereto, but bear the bravery of princes, the royalty of Solomon upon
your backs) throw away your robes: least he give you a rent that gave you a
garment, and cloth you with worse then leprosy, that has hitherto clothed
you with honor and beauty. But why do I spend my time in so impertinent and
unprofitable exhortation? fashion brought them in (these disguisementes I
mean) and fashion must bear them out, or nothing will do it. Fashion is the
best preacher and orator of our age. I would to God our preaching were in
fashion to, for then I am sure it would win both men and women, we use all
the fashions therein that our commission can extend unto, we preach season and
not season, we bring forth old and new, we give milk and strong meat, we
come in a spirit of gentleness, and with a rod, we entreat, we threaten, we
preach mercy, we preach judgment, all these fashions we use, and yet without
success. But the fashion of the world preaches and persuades with more
effect. Fashion brought in silks and velvelts at one time, and fashion brought
in russets and gra^es at another; fashion brought in deep ruffes, and shallow
ruffes, thick ruffes, and thin ruffes, double ruffes, and no ruffes, fashion
brought in the verdingale, and carried out the verdingale, and has again
revived the verdingale from death, and placed it behind, like a rudder or
stern to the body, in some so big that the vessel is scarce able to bear
it. Thus whilst we fashion our selves after this world, and every garish
devise therein; or rather after the devil himself (for these are Satanae
ingenia, the inventions of satan, not of man:) It is to be feared, Terull.
that when God shall come to judge the quick and the dead, he will not know
those, who have so defaced and multiplied that simple fashion which he
created, Opus hoc meum non est, nec haec imago mea, this is not my
workemanshippe, nor this the similitude I first made. The Lord is king,
Cyprian.
let all the kings of the earth ascribe glory unto him: he rides upon the
cherubins, let all their chariots and chaires of estate stoop before him: he
has put on glorious apparel, let all their glistering and counterfaite
ornaments be ashamed at his presence. O let us all from the highest to the
lowest fall down and kneel before the Lord our maker, let us lie low before
the footstool of his excellency, and withal submission both of body and
spirit, acknowledge his hand and power over us. He is our God, and will thus
be served; our Lord, and will thus be honored; our father, and will thus be
followed; our judge and dreadful revenger, and will thus be feared.

THE XXXVI. LECTVRE.
Chap. 3. verse. 7. And he proclaimed, and said through Niniveh by the counsel
of his king and nobles, saying, let neither man etc.
IN the particular explication of the repentance of Niniveh, begun in the
sixte verse, I observed principally both the order of their dealing, that
without the knowledge and warraunt of their king, they attempt nothing in
private; and the example, or precedence of the king therein for his own part:
which was, as if he had thus pronounced against himself; a judgment is come
forth against all the sinners of Niniveh, Ego primu^* Scilicet in vulgus
mana^^ exempla regentum.
and I am first, and the only way to mitigate the anger of God is repentance,
and I will be first therein also. The repentance of the king, was in effect
the repentance of the whole city: as it is noted of the ruler: Ioh. 4. when
he heard the words of comfort, Go thy ways thy son lives, he first
believed himself, afterward when he better knew the time, and other
circumstances, then he believed and his whole household. You have heard
already in what life the repentance of the king is described: for whatsoever
he had, making, for honor and princelyhood, that he forsook; and whatsoever
there was on the other side, to degrade and discountenaunce himself in the
eyes of his subjects, that he admitted and endured: he rose from his throne,
and threw of his robe, as much as to say, he laid down all his authority,
state, excellency, and forgate himself to be a king, and the monarch of the
country, and more then that, covered himself with sacke-cloath, and sat in
ashes, so far from being a king, that he seemed in his own sight to be
less then nothing. The throne and the robe with other royal preheminences,
as the scepter, the crown, and gorgeous attire in difference from other men,
have ever preferred unto the eyes of the world, an image of that glory and
honor, wherewith the kings of the earth are invested. It appears in the
book of Genesis, what majesty the Egyptian kings had, by that second degree
of honor which Pharaoh awarded unto Joseph, he put a ring upon his finger,
Genes. 41.
and araied him in garments of fine linen, and hunge a golden chain about
his neck, and placed him upon the best chariot save one, and they cried Abrech
before him: he only reserved unto himself the Kings throne, Likewise we may
read what honor belonged unto the kings of Chaldaea, and of the Medes and
Persians in the books of Esther and Daniell: and of the throne of Solomon,
with all his other port and prosperity, wondered at so much by the Queen of
Saba, ChaP. 10.
in the first of kings, and other places. And there is no question, but the
kings of Niniveh, being grown and swollen in pride, were not far behind
these. The stranger it is unto me, that this golden cup of honor and
authority, made him not drunk, and drove him from all sense of his earthlines
and mortality: it is so usual an intoxication to the rulers beneath, making
them forget that God which sits above them. We have seen what the king of
Niniveh has done in his own person: now we must also attend what he did with
the multitude and in common: for he is not content to mourn, or pray, or fast,
or repent alone, or alone to be freed and delivered from the curse of God
hanging over them: but he is careful of his people too, by giving the best
example he can, he is both carbo and lampas, Gregor. in Ezec. hom. 1.
a cole burning unto himself, and a lamp shining unto other men. The ointment
runs down from the head by the beard, to the border of the garment:
repentance I mean descends from the king, by the counsel and nobility, to
the meanest soul of the city. First, Division.
he calls his counsel together: secondly, they make an act: thirdly they
cause it to be published, fourthly, that act was only for repentance, and
the service of God* Who ever heard the like, I say not in Israel, where
prophets, and Apostles, and Christ himself preached: but even in paradise, the
garden of the Lord, who ever heard the like, to this that was done in
Niniveh? The Lord had but one pair of men in paradise, and preached but one
word unto them, himself by his own mouth, and they obeyed him not: but in the
city of Niniveh, barbarous, wild, and barren Niniveh, where all the plants
were unnatural, and it could not be hoped that the fruit should be other
then sour and unsavory to him that gathered it, they are all turned saints,
at the preaching of one Jonas. As one reported at Rome, after his long voyage,
that he had seen in England a goodly king, in France a goodly kingdom, in
Spain a goodly counsel; so behold all these together in Niniveh; Pul^^am
regem, pulchrum regnum. palchrum senatum.
a good king, a good counsel, a good nobility, a good people, the whole city
good. The king commands, the princes consent, the people obey, all jointly
excecute, as if all Niniveh were but a single man, and had but one head, and
one heart amongst them. It was undoubtedly the unction of Gods spirit, and
not their natural gift, that caused such tractable and tender hearts:
prophets may preach long enough, as the drops of rain fall upon marble
stones, but if the God of peace and unity, join not two in one; and tie the
tongue of the preacher to the ears and conscience of his hearer, not by a
chain of iron or brass; but by the bond of his holy spirit, and wrappe a
blessing and power in his words, to subdue the soul of man, and bring it in
subjection to the will of God; it can never be effected. By the order and
course of the things themselves, though not of the words; the first thing that
the king did, was the assembling of his princes and counsailours, 1. Counsel
called.
as appears manifestly by the parenthesis that follows ( by the counsailr
of the king and his nobles.) Thus the king does nothing without his counsel,
nor the counsel without the king, but both together. No man is ignorant that
the greatest offices have need of the greatest supportation: and that a king
must have many eyes, Exodus 18. Si satis norint homines quam molestum sit
tantarum rerum tam numero sas epistolas, tantum legere aut scribere, diadema
abiectum nemo acciperet.

Si solus sit sapiens: (...). Hesiod.

AEquius est vt ego tot taliu^ que ami^corum consilium sequar, quam tot
talesque amici meam vnius vo^unta^em


ears and hands* as Xenophon wrote in his institution of Cyrus; that is, many
subordinate counsailours, ministers, and assistantes, by whom to discharge the
burden of his place. When Iethro saw Moses his son in law, sitting himself
alone and judging the people, from morning unto even, he did not less then
reprove him for it: What is this that thou do to the people? why sit
thou thy self alone? the thing which thou do is not well: thou both
vveariest thy self greatly, and thy people that is with thee: and he caused
him to apoint rulers cover thousands, rulers over hundreds, rulers over
fifties, and rulers over tennes, to judge the people at all seasons in their
smaller causes. Moses confessed as much Deuteronomy the first, as Iethro
complained of, I am not able to bear you my self alone. It was a saying of
Seleucus one of the kings of Syria, that if men did considerately know how
troublesome it were only to read and write so many letters of so weighty
affairs, if the crown were thrown at their foot, they would not take it
up. Anacharsis, one of the Sages of Greece, thought it the only felicity of a
king to be only wise, and not to need the help of other men, but who was
ever so wise to attain to that happiness? I will not deny, but he that can
counsel himself in all things, is very absolutely wise: but it is a second
degree of wisdom not to reject such counsels and directions as are given
unto him. And therefore worthily was it spoken by Antonius the Emperor: with
much more reason it stands that I should be ruled by the advice of so many
and such my friends, then that such and so many should yield to my will
alone. We read that Assuerus the king of the Persians, Esther the first, did
nothing in the remove of Vashtie the Queen, without the advice of the seven
Princes which saw the kings face, and sat first in the kingdom. Solomon 1.
Kings. 10. had his ancient counsel, it was senatus indeed, because it
consisted of grave and old men, Consilia senum hasiae iuvenum sunt. Jbid.
according to the proverb, spears are fit to be handled by young men
counsels by the aged. But Roboam his young son, provideth counsailers like
himself; young in years, and young in descretion: which howsoever they were
friends to Roaboam, they were not friends to the king, though happily they
loved his person well, they were enemies to his kingdom.

As it is meet that the king should have peers to consult with: 2. An act
made.
so it is a blessed combination and knot, when all their consultations and
acts are referred 1. to the glory of God (for that is the first and great
commandment) then, to the peace and safety of the weal public For as the
law of God (says Cyprian) is the stern that must guide all counsels, and
be of counsel unto them; Consiliorum gubernacul^ lex divna.
so if it be not also the haven where all their counsels arrive, and both
the beginning and ending of their decrees, their success will be according.
The qualities of those whom the superior magistrate should associate to
himself, in administering his government, are numbered in the 18. of Exodus, and
1. of Deuteronomy. to be these seven. 1. they must be men of courage. 2. fearing God.
3. men of truth. 4^ hating filthy lucre. 5. the chief of the tribes. 6. wise.
Lastly, known men: such as had experience of the people, and the people of
them. Without these conditions and respects, they were very unfit helpers. For
what were a magistrate without courage, but a lion without his heart? or
courage without the fear of God, but armed injustice? or what fear of the true
God, where his truth is neglected? or how can truth consist with aucupation of
filthy gain? or if their persons and parentage be in contempt, how shall the
people regard the^? or if they have not wisdom to rule, what are they else but
an eye without seeing, or as if the day and the night should be governed
without sun and moon? Lastly, as arts are made by experiments, so they must
be tried and approoved before hand by the sight of their virtues. Otherwise to
meet at any time, and to lay their heads together for the dishonoring of God,
and defacing of his religion, and so to intend policy, that his worship is not
cared for, and his fear lies at the threshold of their counsaile-house, not
admitted amongst them; is to make themselves such counsailers as Alecto called
in Claudian, Concilium deforme vocat, glomerantui in vnum
Inumerae pestes Erebi:
Untoward and unfashioned counsailers, so far from being the pillars and props
of the common wealth, that they are rather mischiefs and plagues which hell
has cast up. Now as it is meet, that the king and his nobles should come
together, 3. The act Proclaimed.
to decree wholesome constitutions; so it is as meet to publish them abroad,
that the subjects may know what their duty is. The statutes of a kingdom must
not be locked up in cofers, as the books of the Sybils in Rome, nor as the
sentences of Pythagoras which no man might write, be kept from the knowledge
of the vulgar sort. In the 1. of Sam. 14. Saul had charged his people by oath
not to taste any thing till night: upon an eager intention he had to pursue the
Philistines. Jonathan his son heard not of it and as he went through a wood,
being faint with hunger, raught forth the end of his rod and d^pt it in an
honey comb, and put it to his mouth: you know what danger it brought him unto:
I tasted a little honey with the end of my rod and lo I must die. Therefore it
is not amiss to publish such decrees, if for no other cause, yet to safeguard
the people from that danger which by their ignorance they might incur.
Besides, the glory of God is proclaimed by such proclamations; as
Nabuchodonosor, Dan. 3. made a decree that every people, nation, and language
that spoke any blasphemy against the God of Syrach Misach and Abeduego should
be drawn in pieces: and that it might be known abroad, he caused it to be
published. Nabuchodonosor king, unto all people, nations and languages that
dwell in all the world, etc. The like did Darius in the sixth of that book,
first he made an act that all should tremble before the GOD of Daniell in
the dominions of his kingdoms, and afterward for the promulgation of it,
vvrote to all people, nations, and languages in the vvordle what the act was.

Let neither man nor beast, etc. The matter enacted and proclaimed is in one
word repentance wherein they were blessed from heaven with as great a measure of
wisdom as the sons of men were capable of: 4. The act it self.
when they were to bethink themselves, and to beat their brains wherewith to
wrestle with the judgment of god, that they made their choice of repentance.
Repentance an act of all acts; if they had spent their days in consulting,
this one in steed of infinite thousands to save their lives. An enemy did
aproach unto them, a spiritual enimye, from the higher places, justice I mean
from the throne of GOD, whose forces were invisible, and could not be repelled
with sword and target. What gate or fortress should they then use to shut out
justice, but only repentance? their city had been laid in the dust, their
candell put out, their monarchy translated, their carcasses had rotted in
dung, their souls been drowned in perdition without repentance.

The ground and provocation of this their repentance is in the knows if God
will turn and repent, etc? Faith in the mercies of God: this is the star that
goes before the face of repentance, the pillar of fire that guides it in the
night of her sorrows, and gives her light, and tells her how to walk, that
she stumble not. For who would ever repent indeed, if he had not hope that
his sins might be pardoned? Jn Luc. l. 10* cap. 22.
and therefore Ambrose notes, alluding unto Peter's den^al^es, that men do
never truly repent, but when Christ looks back upon them. For Peter denied
the first time and wept not, because Christ looked not back: denied a second
time, and wept not, because Christ looked not backed: but denied a third time
and wept bitterly, because his master looked back upon him. And he looked not
back so much with his outward and bodily eye, Non oculo exteriore, sed oculo
clementiae.
as with the eye of his clemency. The substantial parts of repentance are in
the latter part of the eigth verse; turning from their evil ways, and from
the wickedness that was in their hands; their diet and preparation to
repentance, fasting; the habit and livery weerein they come, sackcloath, the
libel or prayer and strong cry. You see the members let neither man nor beast,
bullock nor sheep taste any thing: Ieiunij canitiem diligenter perseru^are.

Homini primo coaevum.


the antiquity whereof makes it venerable, and the perpetuity unto this day,
and to the end of the world, highly graceth it; it is no new invention; some
have derived it from paradise, and made it as ancient as the first man: for the
forbidding of the tree of knowledge, they say, was a law of abstinence. The
exercise of nature, the law, the gospel of Christ, the practice of gentility
it self, if I name but Niniveh alone, it were sufficient to prove it; but
the stories of gentility make it nore plain. Ceres had her fast, Jupiter his;
and Priamus in Homer bewaileth the death of Hector with fasting and in dust.
Patriarckes used it, prophets forsook it not, Christ and his disciples
departed not from it: and the true children of the bride-chamber continue it at
this day: they mourn because the bridegroom is taken from them, and til his
return in the clouds of the air, they shall ever mourn. But there are fasts
of diverse kinds: 1. there is a spiritual fast from sin, improper an
translated, Magnum et generale ieiunium.
This is the great general fast, and a Lent of abstinence which we must all
keep consisting in the holiness of our lives. Niniveh fasted this fast, but it
fasted also otherwise. There is a corporal In hoc seculo quasi quadrag^simam
abstinentiae celebramus dum been viuim us, August.
and this is either natural, prescribed by physic for healthes sake; or
above nature, and miraculous such as the fast of Moses, and Elias and the son
of God for forty days or civil and politic, as the prohibition of Saul,
mentioned before, which Jonathan was angrye with, because the people vwaxed
faint; and Saul had no religious respect therein, but an earnest purpose of
heart of sparing no time from chasing ^eiuniu^ ie^unii, a fast 1. Sam 14
because the earth forbeareth her fruits, we forbear our food, ^eiunium
ieiunantis, the fast of him that fasteth: that is, a voluntary and free fast.
Lastly, there is a christian and religious fast, Pauperum conviva et
Contubernalis ieiunium.
either common and ordinary, using frugality in meats and drinks at all
times, according to the warning of our Savior, See that your hearts be not
overcome Or special and extraordinary, Luc. 21.
above the custom, but not beyond the nature of man: let the flesh be tamed
(says Jerome) and not killed. Dometur caro sed non in terimatur. holocaustum
de rapina offert.
For he offers an offering of robbery, and bereaveth both GOD and man of his
due, who afflicts his body overmuch with immoderate subtraction either of
food, or rest. Now the latter of these two is either private to one, or few,
as to David, and the friends of Job, or public, as this of the people bin
proclaimed, secondly, through out Niniveh.

In this fast of the Ninivites, there are many things to be considered: first,
it was timely, secondly orderly, thirdly universal, fourthly exact, fifthly not
hypocritical.

1 The time which they took for fasting (I mean not time in the (...). Epist.
^8.
distinguishes these two: times, and seasons: so does the Apostle in the first
to the Thes^alonians and fifth, which the Latins have rendered tempora, and
momenta, times, and momentes of times: wherein there is weight and worth not to
be omitted. The former signifies but space or leisure alone, which passes to
fools and wisemen alike: the latter, convenience or inconvenience for the
doing of any thing. So long as there shall be a sun in the firmament which
has his course, there shall be a time for the handling of our actions, but
perhaps not a season. As a man that gathers his grapes at the first
knotting thereof, gathers them in time, but if he tarry the vintage then he
gathers them in season. Now the fittest and convenientest time for a fast, if
you consider the fact of the Ninivites, and peruse all the examples that are
written in the book of God, is ever some extremity, when the anger of God is
thoroughly kindled, and threatens a wound to the whole body. Me thinks it
should be in these public fasts, as the schoolmen write of their solemn
penance: Differt a publica and fit cum po^pa. lib. 4. distin. 14.
which is seldom granted by Origin, and by the Canonistes but once; The reason
is given by the master of the sentences: Ne medicina vilesceret, least the
medicine should grow in contempt by the common use of it. I have heard of a
nation of men (I will not say that their neighbour-hoode has a little infected
England) who when their king has intended a feast, for the honor of his
country, and entertainment of foreign Ambassadors, they on the other side
have proclaimed a fast, as if God had sent them an Embassage of the last
judgment; I cannot deny them time, but surely they took not a season for so
doing. I will prove the matter in hand in the next circumstance, and join
them both together: wherein I observed, Secondly, that it was an orderly
scriptures, for they bear witness of the truth, whither these public,
religious, extraordinary fasts had not always their authority and emanation
from public persons In the 20. of the book of Judges, the chosen soldiers of
Israel, which were taken by lot out of all their tribes, to fight against
Benjamin, in the quarrel of the levite, whose wife was shamefully abused and
murdered; they held a public fast from morning until evening; verse. 26.
the cause was, a slaughter which they had receved of forty thousand men, and a
conscience they made of fighting against Benjamin their brethren. verse. 2.
The authors of the fast, Anguli vel extremitates populi. ve^s. 6. ibid.
are the rulers of the people, who in the Original are called* the corners and
heads of the people. In the 1. of Sam. 7. they fast publicly, they drew
water says the text, even rivers of tears, and powered them out before the
Lord; the appointment is from Samuel, who judged Israel in Mispah; and the
cause, their idolatry committed to strange Gods, and the absence of the arc
from them full twenty years. verse. 2 and 3. verse. 3.
In the 2. Chronic. 20. there is a fast proclaimed throughout all Judah,
Iehosophat the king proclaimed it; the cause was, the sudden coming of a
great multitude, from Ammon and Moab aad Aram, verse. 1 and 2.
to invade his kingdom. Esdr. 8. there is likewise a public fast summoned in
their return toward Jerusalem: verse. 21. 7. Esd. 5.
Esdras the high priest ordains it; the reason is, that God would direct
them in their way and preserve themselves, their children and goods in safety.
verse. 16.
Another, Esther 4. which Esther gave Mordecay in charge for: now Mordecay was
the man on whom the hearts of all the Jews in Shusan depended at that time.
The cause that God would assist Esther, who with the hazard of her head, when
her people were near their utter extirpation, adventured her self to speak
to the king in his inner court, being not called before him. Another, Jeremy
36. verse* 9.
In the days of wicked Iehoikim, who cut the book of the Lord with a
penknife* and caused it to be burnt. It was certainly proclaimed by order from
some that might command. For who else could assemble together, all the people
in Jerusalem, and all the rest that came from the cities of Judah without
special authority? yea Iez^bell her self, 2. King. 21.8
though the daughter of Belial, was not ignorant what the manner of those times
was. She proclaimed a fast in Iezrael where N^both dwelt, to rob him of his
vineyard, and to betraie his life; but first she sent letters in the kings
name, and secondlye sealed them with the kings seal, and lastly directed them
to the elders and nobles of Iezraell, that they might put them in execution.
But the Phrases used in Joel do sufficiently determine the nature of this
action, Blow a trumpet in Sion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly,
gather the people, sanctify the congregation, gather the elders, and all the
inhabitants of the land: assemble the children, and those that suck the
breasts, let the bridegroom and the bride go forth of their chamber.
Sanctificatum ieiuni^^ quod public indicitur per deu^, vel per magistratum,
episcopum, prophetam. P. Mart Jonathan sanctificare vertit per decernere.
Now what is a sanctified fast, but that which is publicly called and
established either by God himself, Levit. 23. or by the magistrate, Bishop, or
prophet? or who has authority to draw the people from their work, to gather
the aged and sucklings, and all the inhabitants of the country together, to
apoint an holy day unto the Lord, to be spent in prayers and sacrifices, but
only these governors? As in a receipt of Physic, the ingredients may al be
good, yet is it not so warrantable unto us, neither are we willing to meddle
therewith, unless a professor of Physic by his art and authority prescribe
it: so in a public fast, privately convented, I said before that all the
exercises were christian and religious, their prayer, preaching, singing, and
distributing to the poor; but as our savior told the rich young man in the
gospel, there is one thing wanting unto thee, if thou will be perfect, sell
all that thou have etc. So there is one thing wanting unto these, Med^cina est
ieiunium. sed medicina licet millies vtilissit; per vtentie imperitiam fit
invtilis Homil 3. ad Pop. Ant. Nosseoporte^ et tempus. etc

Jnter ieiunij labore^ a ieiunii corona excidemus. Jbid.

(...). Can 66. Ap. Non been succedi^ quicquid fit ^assim. de singular Cl^ri^.


and to give them their full perfection, we must suffer the rulers of the
common wealth to apoint them. Chrysostom calls fasting a kind of Physic;
but Physic may be profitable a thousand times, and yet be hurtful at a time,
for want of skill to use it: therefore he would never have it done but congrua
cum l^ge, with all the laws that agree unto it: and every circumstance of
time, quantity, state of the body, with the like, precisely observed. He
applies the Apostles similitude: No man striving for a maistery is crowned,
unless he strive lawfully, and so it may fall out, that amiddest the pains
and afflictions of fasting, we may leese the crown of it. Zonaras has a
rule to the same purpose, treating likewise of fastes, Good is never good,
except it be done in good sort. And Cyprian in like manner, It prooveth not
well, which is done of headiness and without order.

The Third thing in the fast of Niniveh, is the vniversalitye of it: for it
was not only public and open, but included almost whatsoever breathed
amongst them. It concerned first men (which is here indefinitelye put)
signifying the whole kind, from the man of grayest hairs, to the tenderest
infant: and as you heard before, from the greatest to the smalest: secondly,
Beasts* yea all sorts of beasts, great and small, oxen, horses, sheep,
goats, and whatsoever cattle they had of any service.

Fourthly, it was very strict, for they are forbidden to feed, I say not to
glut themselves, but they might not so much as taste; perhaps not delicate
meats; no nor any thing: it had been enough to have kept them from eating,
but neither might they drink I say not wines, and curious electuaries, but not
so much as water, which their rivers and wells afforded them.

from their evil ways, and forsaking that wickedness which was in their
hands. So that, by this their behavior, they seem to intend thus much; we
acknowledge before thy majesty (Lord of hosts) we thy unworthiest creatures
that ever thy hands have formed, viler then the sackcloth we wear; (for if
there had been baser stuff in the world, we vvoulde not have refused it)
and fowler in thy fight, then the ashes we are besprent with; we
acknowledge before thy majesty, our king, princes, and senators, our sons
and daughters, old and young, even from the ground of our heart, that thou art
a righteous Lord, and we an unrighteous nation, not vvorthie our meat,
drink, clothing, or any other thy benefits, yea worthy to fall upon the
sharpest edge of thy severest judgments; we have endangered our selves, wives
and children, infants and dumb beasts, life and goods, city and people, to
thy heaviest ire? and in acknowledgement thereof and sign of our humble
subjection, as guiltye within our selves, and condemned in our own
consciences, whatsoever thou have given us to enjoy, outward or inward, nearer
or further of, for comfort, for pleasure, for service, or any other use,
either in our familes at home, or in our foldes and stalles abroad, we
resign into thy hands, as having no right unto it, we lay it down at the
feet^ of thy justice, Why not beasts?

1. To provoke repentance.

2. To amplify the misery.

3. To move men to pity.

4. To draw God to commiseration.


and beseech thee for thine own names sake to take mercy upon us.

Let neither man nor beast etc. But what mean the king and council of Niniveh
by so mad a decree? have they a purpose to regaine favor of God, and think
they to do it by trifles and vanities? are they so simple and insensible, to
put insensible beasts to repentance? has God care of bullockes and sheep? or
have bullockes and sheep care of God? do they not live and die? (without
repentance shall I say?) yea, without religion, and without reason also? did
they fear? nay did they ever know God that they should be threatened? have
they ever sinned, or shall they ever come to judgment that they are taught
here to humble themselves and to be Godly as it were, and to join with the
people of Niniveh in their public repentance; O pardon repentance a-greater
absurdity then this: her unspeakable griefs and compunctions let neither man
nor beast taste any thing. For these outward, but grievous objects, sights and
sounds of misery in others, carry word to our souls, how general the misery
is, and move our inward affections to continue in repentance. Chrysostom
adds some other reasons; that they made their beasts to fast, Homil. 3. ad
pop. Antioch
as at the funeralles of rich men, not only the friends and servantes of the
deceased, but their very horses are clad in black, and led in the train with
them, both to note the greatness of their loss, and Et calamitatis
magni^udinem oftentante^ and omnes ad misericordiam al licientes. Ier. 14.
and finding no confidence in themselves nor way to excuse their iniquities,
not knowing whither to fly for patronage, nor daring for very shame in their
own names to crave pardon for their sins, betake them to the brute beasts, and
tell God of their woeful plight, as if by the commemoration of their miseries
he would sooner be persuaded. Thus did Jeremy in his prophecy, the hind
calved in the field, and forsook it because there was no grass And thus did
Joel in his, how did the beasts mourn? the herds of cartell pinde awa^e
because they had no pasture, and the flocks of sheep were destroyed. And for
this cause also they put their infantes to fast, Joel. 1.
that the innocent age might speak unto God in be ha^fe of the riper sinners.

I now conclude. The repentance of Niniveh made them hard hearted, Conclusion
unmerciful and vncompassionate to themselves and to their beasts, harmeles
and innocent creatures, to debar them of their meat and drink, and because
they understood not the anger of God by preaching, Non licet brutis sermon
iram Dei discere, discant fame Chrysostom. vt supra.
to make them understand it by famine. Where is the repentance of our times?
Whither is (...) fled? or where has it hid her self? ^ur land and our sea may
say, repentance is not in me. Repentance the gift of God, the joy of angels,
the salve of sins, the haven of sinners, I say again, what is become of it? It
is not for the angels of heaven to repent, because they sin not: nor for the
devils of hell, for their judgment is sealed: it is only for the sons of
men, and we only know it not. The people of Niniveh sinned and would not eat,
sinned and would not drink, sinned and would not be clothed, nay sinned and
would not give leave to their beasts to feed. We sin, and yet we eat, nay
we sin in eating: we do not only taste, and feed, which are here
forbidden, but we taste and feed deliciously, we are wanto with the gifts of
God, and abuse them to surfeit. We sin, and yet we drink, nay we drink and
sin in drinking: for we drink intemperately; I say not water, which is here
forbidden, but wine, and wine in excess, and wine withal the helps that may
be to make us more exceed. And we sin and cloth our selves, rather we
cloth our selves, and sin by clothing us: for we cloth our selves
superfluously, I say not with sackcloath, but with that which might beseem
Solomon if he were now king in Jerusalem. And we feed not only our selves but
our oxen in our meadows and stalles, to feed our unprofitable carcasses, and
our horses in the stables to bear our unprofitable carcasses, when the poor
in our streets, and at our gates, feed upon empty air for lack of
sustenance. I ask again, in the he^ghth of our sins, what is become of
repentance? Repentance, which God preached in paradise; for he showed our
forefathers their sin, and gave them the promise. Which Noah proclaimed to the
old world; Lot to Sodom; Moses to Egypt; Prophets in their sundry generations
to Israel and Judah; John Baptist, the day star and morning of the Gospel,
Christ the son of righteousness, and all his Apostles the shining lamps of the
new world, what else did they preach to the people that then was? of faith and
repentance were their sermons. Repent and believe the gospel. Repent, for the
kingdom of God is at hand. These and such like were their textes, and these
shall be our preachings, and themes till we see some number, and measure of our
unruly transgressions. If we believe not we are already judged. And if we
repent not the kingdom of God is coming upon us But the scepter will be
changed and the government wholly altered. Then was the kingdom of grace, now
of glory and justice. Then was the saving, now the judging of souls; then came
it in the tongues of men, now in the trumpet of an archangell; then with
tidinges of great joy to the whole world, now with terror and amasement to
all the kindreds thereof. Then with glory to God on high, and peace upon the
earth; now with, vae, vae, vae, habitatoribus terrae, thrice woe to them that
dwell upon the earth. Then to gather the lost sheep of Israel into the
sheepe-folde, now to sever the goats from the sheep; then to embrace both Jew
and Gentile, now to divide between servant and servant at the same mil;
between man and wife in the same bed; between Jacob and Esau in the same
womb, and to pronounce the one of them blessed, the other accursed. Repent
therefore, for this kingdom of God is at hand, to deface all kingdoms, to
root up the nations, to consume the earth with her works, and her people with
their sins, and to feed them with the food of judgment and water of gall,
who eat and drink up iniquitye like their daielye repaste. It belongs to us
all to repent. We were all conceived in sin, and in iniquitye have our
mothers brought us forth. Concupiscence has been the nurse whose milk we
have drawn from time to time, and as we have grown in years our selves, so
has corruption grown with us. What remains, but to repent? to chandge our
Morians skins, to put off our stained coats, and to wash our feet from
their filthiness as Job spoke, and not only our feet, but our heads also
as Peter spoke in the gospel, to renew both bodies and souls, and to serve
him in holiness and righteousness, who long time has served himself under
the burden of our sins. So God shall answer repentance with repentance.
He shall be sorye in his heart, that ever he past that sentence against us.
It repents me to have made man: And if he have thought upon any plagues to
smite us vvithall, it shall also repent him that ever he devised them.

THE XXXVII. LECTVRE.
Chap, 3. verse. 8. But let man and beast put on sackloth etc.
OF the two general parts wherein the repentance of Niniveh stood, the
negative being ended in the former verse, containing the diet of repentance, we
are now to proceed to the affirmative, delivered the most part in this eighth,
wherein 1. the habit and attire of repentance, sackcloth. 2. the tenor of her
speech, mighty crying* 3. her very substance and soul, the change of life are
expressed. We moved a question why beasts should be called to communion of
fasting, and those other afflictions exercised by the Ninivites. Some think
they are put by tanslation of speech, so that the distribution of man and
beast, signifies not two disparate kinds of creatures, but in the same kind,
men of sundry condtions; wise and unwise, prudent and simple, reasonable and
unreasonable, so does Jerome expound them. Prude^tes and simplices,
rationabiles and irrationab.
How be it there is no question, but the most foolish are also men, and
therefore included in the former member of the division. Of withholding food
from the beasts there is less doubt, but that they should cloth them in
sackcloth, and place them in the number of those that cry mightily unto the
Lord, seems more insensible: for they have neither understanding, nor
speech, and their bodies are wet with the dew of heaven, as Nabuchodonozors
was, Dan. 4.
and their hydes are those natural indumentes which God has provided for
them. 1. Sackecloth.
Touching the sackcloth, it is not necessary to enquire whether they were all
covered with it yea or no: happily but their horses and mules, which were in
greatest price, and wherein they most gloried, whose manner aforetime was* to
be clothed in sumptuous trappings; of such it is likely enough that their
ornaments were chandged, and it may be their whole heardes and flocks, to
make the greater spectacle and solemnite of dolefulnes. For it is no more
unprofitable in these funeralles of their city when she was going as it were to
her grave, that these beasts should also accompany her in mourning steedes
with the rest of her people and children, then that at the funeralles of noble
men not only their kinsmen and friends, nor their houses and herses alone,
but their horses which they used for service, should also be drawn into the
fellowshippe of their sorrovvinge. And we read, Judith. 4. when the approach
of Holofernes was feared, that the children of Israel cried every man to God
with great fervencie, and their souls with great affection; and that both
they, and their wives, and their children, and their cattle, and every
stranger and hireling, and their bought servantes put sackcloth upon their
loy^es. And to make the greater show of sorrow, they sprinkled ashes upon
their heads, and spread out their sackcloth before the face of the Lord, and
they put sackcloth also about their altar.

Their cryinge, Lyra expounds to have been after their kind; 2. Crying*
they roared and brayed for want of food, Clamaban^ suo more. Deficiente pastu
mug^eban^. Qui mugi^^s dicebatur ad Deum clamare.
which natural moan of theirs was their cryinge, It is said, Psalm. 147.
that God gives food to the beasts, and to the young ravens that call upon
him, Likewise, Job. 39. Who prepares meat for the crovves, when their young
cry unto the Lord for it? By these, and by the like scriptures, you may know
what the cry of the beasts was. That which David speaks of the heavens and
firmament day and night, Psalm. 19. that they declare the glory of God and show
forth his handy works; least any should mistake he explaineth in the third
verse, They have neither speech nor language, yet without these is their voice
heard: so we may say of these beasts, that though they cried not unto the
Lord, as the men did, yet they cried after their usage. R. Iarhi has a
conceit that they tied their dammes and their foles asunder and said, before
the Lord of the world, Dixerunt coram domino mundi, nisi tu nostri misereare
nos horum non mis^rebim^^
unless thou take pity on us we will not pity these. I will not think
them so unwise to have conditioned with God, but I will easily admit, that they
might part the old and the young, and do all that was to be done, to fill
the air with lamentable outcrying. To acquit the king and his counsel, from
folly or distraction of their wits, in this so unusual and unreasonable an
act, I showed you the manner and nature of sorrow before; how gladly it
seeks companions, Est aliquid, It is no little comfort in discomforts not to
be left alone in lamenting, and to see all things turned into mourning, that
are near about us. For as we desire nothing more then heavines of spirit in
such a case, and the cheerefulnes of any thing is as welcome unto us, as
prickels to our eyes; so we bless that creature, whatsoever it is, that will
help to feed us in our melancholic humors. We wish fountains of water in
the heads both of men and beasts, to be a pattern for our imitation, and to
draw us forward in our well-pleasing pensivenes. And as in the contrary
affection, when the name of God was highly to be magnified, and there was just
cause to exult and triumph, David cont^^ted not himself with the secret of his
own spirit, or with aw king his lute and harp to praise the Lord; but he
desired the harm^^ny of heaven and earth to be added unto it; (so did the
child^^^ of Babylon in their song. O all ye works of the Lord bless ye
(...) Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever; So did the Prophet^ in their
writings, Psalm. 148 Esa. 44.
Rejoice O heavens, showte ye lower parts of the earth, burst forth into
praises ye mountains, ye forrestes and every tree therein:) Even so is the
nature of grief never so well pleased, as when all the pleasures of the world
are exiled, She calls heaven above too weep, the earth beneath to lament,
beasts to pine away, rocks to cleave in twain, the mountains to give none
other Echo but lamentations, the rivers to run with tears, and all the
fruits of the whole creature Romans 8. is subject under vanitye: that is, a
fliting and unstable condition; and not only under vanity, but under
corruption, yea under a bondage and thraldom of corruption; not of it self,
but for him that has subjected it, (which is either God offended with sin,
or man that provoked him,) and it groneth with us, and travaileth together in
birth, and puts out the head to look and watch for the revelation of the
son of God, because that is the time when her service shall be ended. Genesis
3. besides the curse of the serpent, the curse of Eve, the curse of Adam in his
own person, In the sweat of thy face, thou shall eat thy bread, that is all
callinges of life shall be laborious and painful unto thee, and thou shall
eat the herb of the field, common and wast, not the fruits of the garden
as thou did before, and thistles and briers shall the earth bring forth unto
thee, though thou spend thy labor to the contrary; it is added in the same
place, maledicta esto terra propter te, the earth which thou treadest upon, and
which is free from deserving the curse, the earth which was made before thee,
and thou made of the earth, cursed be that earth for thy sake. Likewise,
Genesis the sixte, when the Lord ^aw the wickedness of man, how greatly it
was increased, then it repented the LORD that ever he had made man, and he
was sorry in his heart; therefore he said, I will destroy from of the
earth the man whom I have created, (he stays not there,) but from man to
beast, from creeping thing to the soul of the heaven, for I repent that I
have made them, not only the man, but these that were created for man's use.
Behold the ungraciousness of sinful man. We were made the Lords and
rulers of the earth, both of the fruits, and of the people and living
creatures thereof; we have dominion over all the works of GODS hands,
Psalm. 8.
all things are put in subjection under our feet, all sheep and oxen, yea
and the beasts of the field, the birds of the air, and fishes of the sea,
and whatsoever walks through the paths of the sea; but we have chandged
our governemente into tyranny, and are not content with the rule, unless we
seek the spoil, nor with the use and commodity, unless we work the ruin
and wrack of our poor bond-servantes. Quid meruistis oves? (says Pythagoras
in the Poet) what have our harmless sheep and oxen deserved at our hands,
thus to be misused? But we, the nocent wretches of the world, workers of all
iniquity, deserving not rods but scorpions, cause innocence it self to be
scourged for our transgressions. But that the providence of God restrains
them, it is a marvel that they break not their league, and shake of their
yoke of obedience toward us, and with their horns and hoofes, and other
natural artillery, make war upon us as their unrighteous Lords, whom it
suffices not to have used their service alone, unless we plundge them
besides into such undeserved vengeance.

Again, the punishing of their beasts was to add something Cum haec i^menta
sint homini dat^ in adiutorium, little afflictio in homine^ r^dund^^.
for when these are not fed and nourished, and kept in heart* not only the
beast, but the owner himself smarteth for it. Undoubtedly, it is a blessing to
men, that their oxen are strong to labor, their horses swifte to the race,
their asses and camelles meet for their burdens, that their bullock
engenders without failing, their covve calveth without casting, their sheep
bring forth thousands and ten thousands in their streets: and it is a
curse on the other side, to be berefte of these commodities, as in the fifth
plague of Egypt. Now then, a part of the wealth and substance of Niniveh
consisting in these beasts, by reason of the service they enjoyed, and profit
they reaped thereby, does not the afflicting of them redounde to their
masters? and do they not loose themselves, by vveakening the bodies of their
cattle through lack of food, whereby not only their labor, but also
their fruit and increase is hindered?

Non sic Petru^ etc. De Consid.
Bernard tells Eugenius the Pope, that Peter rode not upon a white warre-like
horse, clad in trappings of gold. And it is not unlikely but the kings of
Niniveh did offend in the sumptuousness of their horses, as much as the
Emperors or Popes of Rome. In these it was not amiss that their glory and
pomp should be abated, howsoever it fared with the rest; and that their
bellies should be pinched with hunger, which were pampered before; and their
backs clothed with sackcloth, which were wont to be magnified with such
costly furniture. These and such other reasons of their act as might be
alleged, I let pass, and come to the handling of the words themselves.
Sackcloth.
But let man and beast put on sacke-cloath. The first member commands the
habit that their repentance must be clothed with. It was the manner of those
times, especially in the East parts, if either they lost a friend or child by
death (as Jacob his son Genesis 37.) but rather for the loss of the favor of God,
and commonly when they repented their sins, and sometimes when they prayed,
not only to refuse their best garments, as the children of Israel, Exodus 33.
When the Lord told them that he would not go himself, but send an angel
with them, they sorrowed exceedingly, and no man put on his best raiment; and
sometimes to cut their clothes, as Iosu. 7. sometimes to rend them from their
backs, as Joel. 2. but instead thereof to take unto themselves the
vncomfortablest weeds and fashions that might be devised. For besides their
wearing of sacke-cloath, they would sit upon the ground and in ashes, as the
friends of Job; Job. 2.
and not only sit, but wallow in dust and ashes, as the daughter of Jerusalem
is willed to do, Ierem. 6. and claspe the hands upon the head, and sprinkle
ashes upon it, as Tamar did, 2. Sam. 12. and their hair, as their man's is
described, Amos 8. and finally, take up an howling, and make an exquisite
lamentation, Ier. 6.
as one that should mourn for her only son. In all which and such like
outward observaunces, I like the judgment of a learned Divine, that they are
neither commanded by God, nor by GOD forbidden, and are not so properly
works, as passions; not sought, or affected, or studied for, but such as in
sorrow, or fear, or the like perturbations offerre themselves, Non tamopera
quam passi^^^^. Pomera^*
and are consequent of their own accordes as helps to express unto the world
our inward dispositions. So when we pray unto God, we bow the knees of our
bodies, lie upon our faces, cast up our eyes to heaven, smite upon our breasts,
with the like ceremonies. In all which, prayer is the substance and work
intended, and these, though we think not of them, come as a kind of furniture
and formality (if I may so speak) to set it forth. The ^^^nesse of the
spirit draws the whole body into participation of the grief, making it
careless of the food, and negligent in the attire that belongs unto it. And
if ever they be alone (these shadows and dumb shows, I mean of
sacke-cloath and mourning) without their body of toward contrition, (as they
fasted in Esaias from meat, and were proud of their fast, Esa. 58. Zach. 13*
Why have we fasted and thou regardest it not? but not from strife and
oppression; and the prophets in Zachary ware a rough garment, but it was to
deceive with:) then is our thanks with God, the same that he gave to Israel in
the place before mentioned, Is this the fast that I have chosen, that a man
should afflict his soul for a day, and ^owe down his head like a bull-rush,
and lie in sackcloth and ashes? will thou call this a fasting, or an
acceptable day unto the Lord? or is not this rather the fasting that I have
chosen, insteede of forsaking thy meat, to deal thy bread to the hungry,
and for sacke-cloath about thy loins, to cover thy naked brethren, and not to
hide thine eyes from thine own flesh? And as of sacke-cloath and fasting, so
we may like wise say of crying which was the voice of repentance. And ^rie
mightily.
For was it the neying of horses, lowing of oxen and bullockes, lamentation of
men, eiulation of women and children, mingling heaven and earth together with a
confusion of outcries, that could enforce the LORD above to give them
a^dience? doubtless no. For the prayer of this people (a shield against the
judgment of GOD, which nature it self thrust into the hands of the mariners
before, and here of the Ninivites, yea that obstinate king of Egypt, which
set his face against heaven, and confronted the GOD thereof, was glad to
fly unto it, Exodus 8.
Pray unto the LORD for me and my people, that this plague may depart; and
Simon the sorcerer, who deceived the world with his enchauntmentes, thought it
the only charm whereby the mercy of God might be procured; Act* 8.
) though it be reported of by as special notes as prayer may be honored
with, 1. for the manner of it, that it was vehemente and forcible, They cried;
2. for the ground, inward and intentionall, They cried mightily, and from
the bottom of their hearts; 3. for the object, right and substantial, They
cried upon GOD; yet if their words and works, purpose and performance had not
kissed each other, if with their lips alone they had honored God without their
hearts, or with their hearts alone without their hands, as we have to
consider in the next words, they had soon been answered, as a people
better favored than themselves were, Esaias the first, Though you stretch out
your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers,
I will not hear you. The Gentiles, Matthew the sixte, used long speech and
much babbling, and thought to be heard for that cause, but they lived as
Gentiles. The Scribes and the Pharisees in the same place, prayed also, not as
the Gentiles to unknown GODS, but to the God of the Hebrews, they cried Lord,
Lord, with often inclamation, yea they stood and prayed, not only in their
houses, but in the synagogues and corners of the streets to appear to men,
and no doubt to be heard of men, and they used likewise long prayers, Luke
the twentieth as the Gentiles did, yet they were but hypocrites, and the
portion of hypocrites was reserved for them. And this is your meede (look for
it, hypocrites, as you look for summer when you see the blooming of the
fig tree) when you pray as if you dreamed without your senses, your lips
walking, and your eyes aspiring into heaven without devotion, you, whose heart
lies within your bosom as a secret thief, calling to your tongue and hands
and bodily members, and saying, give me credit in the eyes of men, make some
show of piety at the least, recite the prayers of the Church though you pray
not, and use the gestures of the Saints of CHRIST though you mean them not,
your part is with those hypocrites, and with Simon Magus, your lying tongues
the LORD shall root out of their tabernacles, your deceitful eyes shall sink
into the holes of your heads, the sacrifices of your forged and faithless
consciences stink in his nostrelles, your prayers are an abomination unto
him, and, that ever you have taken his fearful name within your lips, shall
turn to your sorer condemnation. The complement and perfection of all that
went before, the soul of their corporal fasting, sackcloath, crying, which is
their spiritual fast from sin, and insteede of putting on sackcloath, putting
on the new man, follows to be examined in the next part of the mandate:
wherein the substantial parts of repentance are contained.

Yea let every man turn from his evil way, etc. For what is repentance in
effect, but a returning to that integrity and uprightness of life from whence
thou art departed? Therefore says the edict, let every man return. There is
terminus a quo, Revertitor quisque.
and terminus ad quem, in this sanctified motion; somewhat which we must
forsake and relinquish, somewhat which we must recover, and procure again.
There must be a death to sin, and a resurrection to justice: for as Eusebius
calls repentance a type of the resurrection, so may we the resurrection a
type of repentance. There must be an aversion from sin, and a conversion to
God; a mortification of old Adam with all his concupiscences, and a
vivification of the new man. Ioell expresses both these parts. First, Joel 2.
rende your hearts. What? shall we smooth them? annointe them? flatter them?
bind them up? No. We must pull them in pieces, rack them upon tenter-hookes,
tear them with gripes and convulsions; we must not suffer sin to hide it
self in any corner thereof, which is not produced to light and thoroughly
examined: and then turn unto the Lord your God, etc. GOD by his prophet Esaias
gives likewise his people a chardge concerning both these, vvash you, Es. 1.
make you clean, take away the evil of your works from before mine eyes,
cease to do evil; afterward follows the second, learn to do well, seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed, with other effects of a new life. And who was
ever a better expounder of repentance, than he, who went before the face of the
Lord, and both preached the doctrine with his lips, and with his hands
administered the baptism of repentance? Albeit the text that he used unto them
were (...), which signifies a change of the mind, and the inward powers
thereof, yet he added by way explication, Math. 3.
Bring forth fruits vvorthie of amendment of life. And when the people asked
him, Luke the third, What shall we do then? he answered them, he that
has two coats, let him part with him that has none, and he that has
meat, let him do likewise. Thus much in effect. The repentance that I preach
unto you, does not only forbid cruelty, in pulling clothes from the
back, and meat from the teeth of others, but it also enioyneth the works of
mercy. Chrysostom in his third Homily to the people of Antioche demanding
what it was that preserved the Ninivites from the inevitable wrath of GOD,
thus reasons with himself; was it their fasting and sacke-cloath alone?
we cannot say it, but the chandge of their whole life. How know we? (...).
10.
by the very words of the prophet. And God saw their works. What kind of
works? That they fasted and vvare sacke-cloath? neither of both. For the
Prophet suppressing all this, infers, that they returned from their evil
ways. I speak not this (says he) to bring fasting into contempt, but rather
to honor it: for the honor of a fast, is not abstinence from meats, but
avoidaunce of sin. Honor ieiunij* non ciborum abstine^tia, sed peccatorum
fuga.
And he that defines a fast, by the only forbearing of food, is the man
that most disgraceth it. Do thou fast? show me thy fasting by thy works?
Thou vvilt ask, what kind of works? if thou see a poor man, take mercy
on him. If thine enemy, reconcile thy self. If thy friend deserving praise,
envy him not. If a beautiful woman, make a covenaunte with thine eyes not
to be taken in her beauty: and let not only thy mouth and thy bowels fast,
but thine eyes, thine ears, thy feet, thy hands, and all thy bodily members.
Let thy hands fast from robbery, thy feet from bearing thee to unlawful
spectacles, thine ears from sucking in slanderous tales, thine eyes from
receiving in wantonness. For what avails it to abstain from eating and
drinking, if mean time we eat and devour up our brethren?

1. Let every man.
The matter of this edict is very notable, and in so few words as much as
wisdom and religion might contain: first, it requires of every man a
chandge of life. For the word is a particle of distribution and excepteth
neither the age, sex, nor estate of any person. Maximilian the Emperor
comparing himself and the kings of Spain and France together, had a witty
and pleasant saying that there were but three kings in the time wherein he
lived. Rex hominum, rex asinoru^, rex regum.
The Spanish, a king of men: because he used them ingenuouslie and liberally
as men: The French, of asses; for the immoderate exactions which he took of
them: Himself, a king of kings; for they vvoulde do no more then their own
pleasure was. But the king of Niniveh is a king of subjects. Behold a
general decree enacted for repentance, and there is not one soul in Niniveh
that starteth back. Secondly, it requires of every man not only to go from
his wickedness, 2. Return.
but to return to that justice from whence he was fallen and to renew the
image of holiness decayed in him. It is a good degree of repentance to
bewail those sins which we have committed, and not to commit those
sins which we have bewailed. But it is not enough in repentance; for he
that is not a gatherer with Christ is a scatterer, Plangere comussa.

Plagenda non commitere.


and as great displeasure we reap in the omission of duty, as in commission
of iniquity. John Baptist did not tell them in his sermon of repentance, that
every tree which brought forth evil fruit should be hewn down, (though
that were employed) but if it brought not forth good fruit, it was in danger
of the same judgment. Neither did our savior tell his disciples, that except
their injustice were less then the injustice of the Scribes and Pharisees,
they should not enter into the kingdom of heaven: but except their justice
were more. He that buried his talent in the ground had a purpose not to
offend. But he had no purpose of doing good. This then is the meaning and
sentence of the decree: we are fallen from labor to idleness, from meekness
to pride, from temperance to riot, from mercy to oppression, from justice to
violence; let us not only leave and forgo these vices, but let us return to
their contrary virtues. Thirdely, It requires of every man to return from his
evil ways, 3. From hi^ evil ways.
his ancient and accustomed sins wherein he had travailed and traded
himself, and made it his walk a long time. Therein they imply this secret
confession. We are not fallen by ignorance and mischaunce as those that
labor to rise again, neither has our foot slipped alone by the frailty and
infirmity of our flesh, but we have wilfully and weetingly brought our selves
into an habit of viciousness. We are not sinners of yesterday, and novices in
the school of Satan, but we have long trodden the paths of injustice, and
wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness. Fourthly, it requires of every
man to return from the wickedness that is in his hands, 4 From the wickedness
in his hands.
not in his heart alone; that is, not only from his proper sins, which
harmed no more then his own conscience, but from his violence, rapine,
extortion, which were his open transgressions, noisome and hurtful unto other
men. For there are some sins private and domestical, the stinge and smarting
whereof for the most part dies within the soul, and plagueth but the person
of him that commits it. We commonly say of a prodigal man, that he is no
man's foe but his own, and envy eats but the marrowe of his bones that
envieth, not his that is envied* And pride is but thine own vanity, and
sloth an ignominy belonging to thy self. But some, their nature is such,
that wheresoever they have their dwelling, they are the hammers and mallets to
the whole country that lies about them. These are the vnrighteousnesses which
before I specified in part, and ^re therefore called the wickedness of the
hands, though other parts of the soul and body are not innocent, because
the hand is the chief instrumente and weapon whereby they are wroughte.
Curtius writes of the Elephant that he takes an armed man with his hand,
Lib 4 Ma^^ (...) virosque corri^it.
and delivers him to his master that sits upon him. He means the bosse
of the Elephante which he uses, as men their hands, to do that service.
And Achilles asked Palamedes goinge to the battle of Troy, why he went
without a servaunt. Palamedes showed his his hands, and asked him again,
whether he thought not those in steed of servauntes. It is the strength,
Nonne hae illorum vi^e sunt?

Manus organum organo^um.


agilitie, serviceablenesse of the hands by reason of the aptness they have
to so many and sundry offices, which chardgeth them with unrighteousness
common to other parts. But the chief thing to be considered, and wherewith I
will conclude, is the especial hold that the king and the counsel takes,
omitting other sins, namelye of this forcible and hande-stronge violence.
Other things we leave to your own consciences, commune with your hearts
about them, and purdge your selves. We are not the searchers of the heart and
reins, we know not the faults that lie in darkness; but that which is
open to the world, for which we are hateful to GOD and man, the worm that
has bred of our greatness and wealthinesse, the daughter of the monarchy, a
familiar to kings courts, and not a stranger to the burse of merchantes,
fraudulency and forgery in contractes, bribery in justice, crueltye in common
life, overbearing of right by might, grinding the poor like corn between
the milstones of oppression, and eating them up like bread, pushing at the
weak sheep with side and shoulder, and leaving neither flesh nor arm,
vineyarde nor house free from invasion, this we namely forbid, and precisely
give in chardge that it be amended. I would our usurers would mark this,
that of all those grievous offenses whereof Niniveh had labored a long time,
the rest are held a sleep, and their names spared, as not worthy in
comparison to come in speech with their far superior iniquity; Namque meos
nec equos mihi nec rapuere i^venc^s. ^lutar. de vit^ndo* ere alieno.
only the wickedness of their hands, which is not least in bytinge the
poor, is remembered and reported in special words. Spoke I of usurers? There
are none: neither is there a sun in the sky. For mine own part, I know
them not. For they have taken neither horse nor bullock of me. But for my
brethren sake both in the cittye and country, I vvish that their bellies and
bonds were all heaped together in the market place, and set on fire, as they
were sometimes at Athens, that we might all joy and say, as Alcibiades then
did, we never savve a clearer fire. Nunquam vidi ignem puriorem.
But because we cannot ease our hearts so soon of them, nor by such means,
I will tell them for their own comfort what they shall trust too amongst
other things: E^si vorsura sua ignem assidue nutriant.
that although they labor in the fire, to get riches, yet the time shall
come, when there shall nothing remain unto them but this, that they shall
be able to know and recounte with themselves, how many debtors they have
quite undone. Quot debitore^ pessum dedere.

De male quaesitis etc.


As for their treasures of iniquitye, let them plainelye understand that they
put them into a bottomless bag which could hold nothing. Ill gotten
goods never descend to the third heir. Perhaps, nor to the second, nor
first, nor to benefitte himself, who thinks he has most handfast. Mich. 1.
She gathered it of the hire of an harlotte, and it shall return to the
wages of an harlot. They gathered their wealth by vsurye, and vsurye or
somewhat else shall consume it. Gnipho the usurer, as Lucian reports. lies
in hell, bemoaninge his hard estate, that Rhodochares an incestuous unthrift
should waste his goods: so may these. But I leave their judgment to GOD,
to whom it belongs. For vengaunce is his, and he will surely repaye. Yet
dare I give sentence against them* as far as the laws of the ancient Romans
did: wherein because a thief was bound to make restitution of double, the
usurer of fourefolde, their meaning is plain enough, that they esteemed usury
a double theft, and that at the least is my judgment. And therefore as
Alexander Severus made an act, that none should salute the Emperor, who knew
himself to be a thief; so let our usurers take themselves warned and
dischardged (so long as their hearts accuse them of their double and treble
theft) from saluting Christians, and much more from eating, drinking,
conversing, most of all from praying, fasting, communicating with Christians.

This cittye of all other parts of the province, is not otherwise unfit to
receive dehortation from this wickedness of the hands. Here are the thrones
of David, the seats of judgment in both kinds of laws. Ecclesiastes said
of the one, Chap. 3.
I have seen under the sun the place of judgment where was wickedness,
and the place of justice where was iniquitye. And Bernarde to Eugenius of the
other, A great abuse, Noe manne looks to the mouth of the judge, all to his
hands. These are they that do all the Popes business. Omne Papale negotium
illae agunt. 4. De consid. Manus sermo gentium.
You see how active and stirring the hands are. Surely as Anaxagoras thought
man to be the wisest of all creatures because he only had hands, whereby
he is able to speak, if need be, and to express all signs: so I do
think him the wickedst of all creatures, because he only has hands; and no
Tiger or vulture under heaven more hurtefull with his claws or talentes, then
man with his excellent member, when he is disposed to use it to bad
purposes. But to return from those wicked hands the Popes factours, As Paul,
albeit he knew nothing by himself, yet was he not justified thereby; so
though I know nothing by either of those two places, which I speak of, yet
have I not freed my soul, nor dischardged my duty, unless I admonish them
both of that which may be. I trust they will pardon my charitable jealousy
over them, 2. Micah. J^ qui tignum rapuit and construend^ magn^ arci adhibuit,
totam arcem subvertere debet, et ^ignum domino suo restituere. Abb. 2. Epist.
54. Si res aliena propter qua^ peccatu^ est, reddi potest and non redditur,
paenitentia non agitur sed simulatur. Si autem veraciter agitur, non dimi^t^tur
peccatu^, nisi restituatur ablatu^^, Sed vt dixi, cum resti^^i po^est.
the same reasons of mightiness and authority agreeing to them, which were
found in Niniveh. For what is the reason that men first imagine iniquity, and
afterward contriue wickedness in their beds, and when the morning is
light, put it in practice, but because their hand has power? First they
covet fields and then take them by violence; and houses, and take them away*
so they oppress a man and and his house, even a man and his heritage. When a
malicious will, and a mighty hand, concupiscence and violence meet, you see
how a family and posterity is overthrown by it.

Whatsoever either violence or fraud be meante by the wickedness of the
hands, the Hebrews agree, that the meaning of the king and his counsel was
to call for restitution. In the observation whereof, as R. Kimhi affirms,
their forefathers of godly memory were so carefully careful not to offend,
that they made this decree; If any had wrongfully taken a beam or rafter, and
used it in the building of a great tower, he was to pluck down the whole
tower again, and restore that piece to his owner. Habacuk does not much
dissent from them. For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out
of the timber shall answer it, woe unto him that builds a town in blood,
and erecteth a city with iniquity. It shall be better for them to pull
down towers, and towns, and cities, and countries to the ground, rather
then to suffer such sk^ich-owles of woe to singe in the chambers thereof. Saint
Augustine to Macedonius, is as peremptory in terms as ever the oppressor was
in his violence. That if the goods of an other man, the taking away whereof was
unjust, may be restored and is not; repentance is never truly done, but
counterfeited. But where it is truly done, the sin shall never be
pardrned till the spoil be restored. But as I said before, when it may he
restored. Wherein thou may deceive thy self. For though thou can not
restore in identity the same for the same, yet thou may restore in equality
so much for so much, which was the meaning of Augustine. Fulgentius notes upon
the words of Matthew, Every tree which brings not good fruit etc. If
barrenness shall be cast into the fire, what does rapine and robbery
deserve? If judgment shall be without mercy to him that shows not mercy, Si
sterilita^ in ignem ^ittitur, rapacitas quid m^retur? etc. Quid recipiet qui
ali^^a ^uli^, si semper ard^bit qui sua non dedit^
what judgment shall be to him, that does also show cruelty? And Rabanus
notes no less upon that complainte of Christ Matthew twenty five, I was
hungry, and thou gave me no bread. What shall he receive for taking away
other men's, who shall ever burn in hell fire for not giving his own? I was
hungry and thou gave me no bread. Nay, I was hungry, and that little bread
that I had, thou tookest from me. I was naked and thou gave me no clothing.
Nay that simple coat and cloak that I had, thou spoiledst me of. I had but
one vineyarde, and thou deceavedst me of it. These in their judgments and
conclusions went not so far touching the necessity of restitution, but
Nehemias avowed it as deeply by actual demonstration; for he shook the lap
of his garment, and wished that the Lord would even so shake out all those
that restored not. But if so excellent a governor in so different a case, the
houses and lands of the people being laid to gage by themselves and monye
received upon them, were so angrye in his mind for the cry of the poor,
that he rebuked the princes and rulers for their sakes, and set a great
assembly against them, and put them to silence, telling them that for the
reproach of the heathen, they ought to have vvalked in the fear of the Lord
(Which now they did not) and praying them to give back the pledges again and
to remitte some part also of the debte, and not content with their word,
binding them by oath before the priests to perform it; nor with their oath,
but sealing it for more assurance with that fearful sacrament of emptying
his garmente, himself cursing them to their faces* if they brake promise, and
all the congregation crying Amen: what shall we then say of them, or with
what reasons shall we vrdge them, or what bonds shall we take for their
restitution, who have taken the houses and fields and of their brethren, not as
pledges but prays; not voluntarilye yielded, but violentlye wrunge ou^,
without either money or recompense to those whom they have displaced? If they
loose the accepted time, they will come and restore hereafter, as Judas did. He
brought the thirty pieces of silver again, but it was too late. Luke 19.
Let them rather learn of famous Zacheus, whose praise is in the gospel, and
the singularity of whose fact makes it almost a miracle. He was the chief
receiver of the tribute, and he was rich withal, and if the country belyed
him not, a man of a sinful life. I vvil not say that his office made him
rich, and his riches an evil man: (but officers that grow rich in haste,
hardly escape that gradation;) howsoever it were, little Zacheus, but as great
in example as ever we read of, a chief receiver and a chief restorer, rich in
substance and rich in good works, and in the midst of his sinful life, a
renouncer of his sinnefulnesse, no sooner he received Christ into his house,
and much more into his conscience, but as if he had lien in his dregs of
extortion before, he now stood up; and not caring to be heard of men, nor
hunting after earthly commendation, spoke unto the LORD, 1. He stood and said.

2. Lord.

3. Behold.

4. Half.

5. My goods Dona no^ spolia.

6. I give.

7. To the poor.

8. If I have defrauded.

9. Any man

10. Of any thing.

11. I restore

12. Foure-folde.


Behold Lord, with a ready and cheerful heart, (offering his service and
sacrifice before the face of his Savior;) not the crummes of my table, nor
morselles of my meat, but half of my goods, a frank and bountiful present,
and I take them to be mine own, honestly and lawefully gotten; I give with as
free a mind, as ever thou gave to me; not to my friends and kindred, or to
the rich of the world, who are able to make me recompense, but to the poor;
and if ever I defrauded, much more if ever I defeated by might any man,
stranger or homeborne; I say not of his maine estate, but of any his smallest
portion, nor by open detected wrong, but by secret concealed cavillation; I
restore it, principal and damage; for I restore it foure-folde. What
follovved, but that he emptyed his house of the transitory treasures of this
vvoorlde, and insteede thereof let in salvation unto it. This day is salvation
come to this house, not only to the private soul, but to the house of Zacheus
thorough his means. I scarsely think that these ravenous and greedy times can
yield a man so innocent, as to say with Samuel, whose ox or ass have I
taken? or whom have I vvronged? At the least let him say with Zacheus, I say
not in the former part of his speech, half of my goods I give to the poor,
(for that were heresy to be held, and false doctrine to be preached in
this illiberall age) but in the latter clause, if I have iniuried an^e man,
though I restore not foure-folde, yet I restore him his own. Otherwise our
houses and consciences will be so full, of houses, fields, vineyardes,
olives, silver, gold, unrighteous pledges, that there will be no room for the
peace and consolation of GOD to dwell with them. Therefore wash your hands
and hearts from this leprosy, my brethren, that you may be received into the
host of the Lord, and dwell with his firstborn: and either forsake your
violence, or convert it an other way. Let the kingdoms and commodities of the
earth alone, and learn that the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and
must be won by force. Math. 11.
See if you can extorte this spoil from him that keeps it. Spare no
invention of wit, intention of will, contention of sinews, strength of
hands to get this kingdom. Beg it, buy it, steal it, assault it, use any
means. This, this is the only oppression and violence that we can allow you,
and in this only thing. Be not modest and courteous toward any man in this
heavenly price. Hither if you bring not tooth and nail, and resisting unto
blood, and hating your lives unto the death, you are not worthy of it. It
suffers violence it self (it is so proposed and conditioned) and they are
men of violence, (...).
that by violence must attain unto it. Therefore wrestle for this blessing,
though you lame your bodies, and strive for this kingdom, though you loose
your lives.

THE XXXVIII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 3. verse. 9. Who can tell if God will turn and repent? etc.
THE last thing in the repentance of the Ninivites, by the order of the
words, though in purpose and intention first; and that which presently gives
place to the repentance of God, their expected deliverance in the next
sentence, is the foundation whereupon they ground, a knowledge and
apprehension, such as it is, of the goodness of God, and some likely hope to
escape his vengance intended. There may be some part of repentance without
faith; contrition, anguish, vexation for sin, till not only the heart aketh,
but the conscience also is quite swallowed and drowned in the gulf of it. As
there is no question, after that horrible fact of Judas, but his spirit was as
full of grief, as before of treachery and covetousnes. Let the world witness
with him, how deeply he rued his malice, when he pledged body and soul for
it, and gave over the one to the tree, the other to hell fire. For it there had
been a penalty to have taken of himself worse than death and damnation, he
would not I think, have shunned it. Caine was also as sorry for his bloody
fact as ever greedy before to commit it. He felt even a talent of lead upon his
soul, never to be remooved; and therefore uttered a blasphemy against the
grace of GOD never to be pardoned: My sin is greater than can be forgiven.
Genes. 4.
This is the reason that he had a mark set upon him, that no man should kill
Caine, who with a thousand daily wounds killed himself; and that ^ee ran
from place to place, not so much in his body, as in his mind, tossed like a
wave of the sea, and finding no place for rest, because the mercy of God shone
not unto him: Behold, thou haste cast me this day from the face of the
earth; is that all? And I shall be hid from thy face, driven from thy
presence, banished from the light and favor of thy gracious countenance. This
is the dart that wounds him to death. For, this received into the mind, that
we are hid from the face of GOD, that we are so far in contempt and
hatred with his majesty, that he will not vouchsafe to give us the looking
on; if all the clouds in the air rained love and compassion, we could not be
persuaded that any of the least drops thereof should fall upon our ground.
Wherefore there must be a belief to conceive, and an hope to expect our
reconciliation and and atonement with God, and GODS with us; or it will be an
unprofitable and impossible attempt, to endeavor a true repentance. For either
it will follow that we become desperate, and give over care of our selves, it
is in vain to serve GOD, and what profit shall we reap to humble our selves
before him, seeing his mercy is clean gone from us for ever, and he has bent
his soul to do us mischief? And as it is written of Julius the Pope, that
having received an overthrow by the French at Ravenna, which he looked not for,
he set his face and mouth against the God of heaven, and thus spoke unto him,
So, henceforth become French, in the name of all the devils of hell, holy
Switzer pray for us; Sic, esto nunc Gallicus: in nomine omnium diabolo^u^ S*
S^i^er^ ^ra pro (...)* In col. (...) Lu. (...).
so we betake us to new Saints, or rather to new divelles, flying to
hardness of heart, carelessness of salvation, contempt of God; or else we
repent but after the manner of hypocrites, we make some proffer and
likelyhoode of returning to God* but cannot do it. Such I think was the
repentance of the Philistines, the first of Samuel the fifth and sixth, when
they had taken the ark of the Lord, and placed it first in Ashdod, and there
were punished with Emerodes and with death; afterward in Gath, and Eckron,
and there they could not endure it, It is said of them, not only that they were
troubled, and conferred of carrying home the arc again, but that they cried,
and their cry went up to heaven, and they sent it back with a present unto
the Lord, and with sin offerings: nay their priests and soothsayers said
unto them, wherefore should you harden your hearts as the Egyptians and Pharaoh
hardened theirs? Such the repentance of Saul, 1. Sam. 15. who having received a
message by the prophet, that as he had cast of the word of the Lord, so the
Lord had cast him of from being a king, and that his kingdom was given to his
neighbor better than himself, though at the first he denied his crime, yea, I
have obeyed the voice of the Lord; yet afterward he confessed, I have sinned
in transgressing his commandment, and he desired Samuel to take away his
sin, and to return with him that he might worship the Lord; which when
Samuel refused, he then altered his speech; yet turn with me I pray thee,
and honor me before the elders of my people, and before Israel. So that his
principal care was not the service of GOD, but honor and estimation in the
sight of men. Such the repentance of Ahab, 1. King. 21. who having heard the
words of Elias thundering the judgments of God against him and his house, he
rent his clothes and put sacke-cloath upon him, and fasted, and lay in
sacke-cloath, and went softly; but how temporary and feigned his repentance
was, may appear in the next Chapter by his despitefull dealing with Micheas.
Such is the repentance of those who are not rightly persuaded of the pardon of
their sins: fitter for Philistines and reprobates than Christians, and to be
used in Ashdod or Ascalon, than at Jerusalem. The conjunction of faith and
repentance is so close, that some have thought it to be a part of repentance. I
rather take it to be the beginner and leader thereof. As the body and soul,
though they are joined together in the same man, yet is not the body a part of
the soul, nor the soul of the body, but both distinct: so faith, hope, and
charity, if they be true, they are narrowly lincked one to the other, yet
naturally and essentially severed. For final resolution whereof, you may best
satisfy your selves by proof from this place. For although this sentence
which I have in hand, be the last of the mandate, in order and disposition of
words, yet is it first in proposal. For if they had asked in Niniveh a reason
of the king and his counsel, why they should bid them fast, and wear
sacke-cloath about their flesh, sparing neither beast nor sucklinges, why they
should add affliction, and misery to misery, as if it were not sufficient
to be plagued by the hands of God, at the time prefixed, but they must plague
themselves and their cattle forty days before hand, having but a handful of
days (in comparison) to enioie their lives, and to take their pleasure in
earthlye commodities, or why they should cry unto the Lord, and not be
heard, and forsake their wickedness, and not be pardoned; the reason of all
this is alleged in this Epilogue, who can tell if the Lord will turn and
repent? It cannot lightly be worse, it may be better with us; the doing of
these duties to God, will not put us nearer to our judgment, it may send us
farther of; we are sure to be overthrowen if we repent not, we may repent,
and happily escape it; it is but the leaving of our meat and drink for a
time, who must leave both belly and meat too; the missing of our better
garments, who must miss our skins and our flesh from our backs; if we use
our tongues in crying, we loose nothing by it; and if we wash our hands, and
cleanse our consciences from iniquity, we shall go the lighter to our
judgment. Who can tell? it is the nature and property of God to show pity
unto the whole world, and although Niniveh be the sincke of the earth, why not
to Niniveh?

Some chandge the reading, and insteede of quis novit, who knovveth they put
qui novit, Chald. pa. raph.

Ar. Mon^. Rabbini nonnull^. Qui scit. co^vertatur qui sibi conscius est
admis^i facinoris etc quisquis penes se existerepe^cata agnovit. Jra est Dei
non intelligere peccata ne sequatur poeniten^ia. Cypr. Luke 15.


he that knovveth; connecting the sense with that which went before, in this
manner: let every man turn from his evil way, and from the wickedness
that is in their hands, qui novit, who knovveth so to do, and is not
ignoraunte what belongs to such a chandge, or thus; he that is privy in his
heart of any wickedness committed against God or (...) an, public or private,
let him amend it. The instruction from so translating it, is good, though the
translation it self be mistaken; that knowledge must ever go before the face
of repentance. Knowledge I mean, not only in kind, to distinguish sin
from sin, and to call them all by their proper names, but by number and
weight, how many, how grievous they are, how far they extend to the
annoyance of the earth, provocation of heaven, breach of christian charity*
and strikinge at the majesty of God himself. Thus he acknowledged his sin
in the gospel, who spoke in his heart before he did it, and therefore was
not ignorant what he went about; I will go to my father, and say, I have
sinned, yea but not a simple sin, I have sinned a mighty and manifold
transgression, I have sinned against heaven, I have also sinned against thee;
against the father of my spirit, against the father of my flesh, against him
that gave me his law, against thee that gave me my nature; both the tables
have I broken by my misdeedes, and whatsoever duties I had to perform, those
have I violated by mine unnatural disobedience. If you observe the order of
all the repentances in the book of GOD, vvhither in Moabite, Edomite,
Egyptian, or in the people of God, they ever began with the knowledge of their
sins: that as the first argument of life which the widows son of Naim gave,
was this, he began to speak* so in this spiritual resuscitation from the
death of the soul, the first token of their recovery, was the acknowledgement
and confession of their misdoing. The voice of Pharaoh, Exodus 10. was, I have
sinned against the Lord your God. The voice of Balaam, Number. 22. when he saw the
Angel in his way, I have sinned. The voice of Saul to Samuel, 1. Sam. 15. I
have sinned: and 1. Sam. 26. when he saw the kindness of David toward him,
I have sinned. The voice of David to Nathan, 2. Sam. 12. I have sinned: and 2.
Sam. 24. to God, after the numbering of the people, I have sinned. Nay, valde
peccavi, I have exceedingly sinned in that I have done. And it is further
added, that his heart smote him when he had done it. And when afterward he
felt the smiting of the Lord, with plainer demonstration, and with clearing
the whole land besides, Ego sum qui peccavi, and ego sum qui inique egi, It is
I, and only I, which have done wickedlie. The voice of Job in the seventh of
his book, I have sinned. The voice of Daniell in behalf of himself, their
kings, princes, fathers, of every man of Judah, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and of all Israel both near and far of, was, we have sinned,
and committed iniquity, and done vvickedlie, and rebelled, and departed from
thy precepts, and not obeyed thy servauntes the prophets, and nothing save
open shame appertains unto us. We hear no end of accusation; iniquity upon
sin, wickedness upon iniquity, rebellion upon wickedness, and still a further
proceeding in the testification of their unrighteousness. When Ezra heard
that the people of the captivity were mingled with the heathen, he rent his
clothes, and pl^ckte of the hair of his head and bearde, Ez. ^.^.
and sat astonished until the evening sacrifice, at what time he arose
again, and fell upon his knees, and spread out his hands unto the Lord his
God, and said, O my God, I am confounded, and ashamed to lift mine eyes unto
thee, my God; for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our
trespass is grown up into the heaven. As the manner of auncienter times was,
when heaviness and trouble was upon them, to call for women and others that
were most skillful in mourning; so they that will learn to repent, and are
not cunning in the art thereof, let them repa^re to Esdras and such like, who
were most skilful in repenting. O how available, says Ambrose, are three
syllables? peccav^, is but three syllables, but the flame of an hearty sacrifice
ascends therein into heaven, Lib. 2. de poenitent.

Quantum valent tres syllaba?


and fetches down three thousand blessings. Christ came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. Sinners? then all, even the greatest
Princes and rulers of the Jews; for they the greatest sinners: No. but sinners
in sense and conscience, sinners in action and plea against themselves, sinners
in judgment from their own mouths and against their own heads, these are
they to whom Christ has designed the medicine and restoratiue of his saving
health. According to his courteous invitation, Mat. 11. Come unto me all ye
that travail and labor, not you that loiter with your sins, and trifle with
my judgments, you that bear your iniquities like strawes or cork, seek you
other pardoners; come you that are weary, and are laden with the burden
thereof, and I will refresh you. The poor Publicane, Luk 18. was one of those
patients that tasted of such mercies: he stood a far of, not daring to approach
unto God, Non aude^ appropinquare, vt Deu^ ad ipsum appro. pinquet. Bed. Poenas
de se exigit, vt Deus par^as. Gloss.
that God might approach unto him; nor to lift up his eyes unto heaven, which
he had moved to anger against him: but smiting upon his sinful breast, as
the arc of all iniquity, and punishing himself with stripes that the Lord
might forbear to punish him, with a fearful heart, and trembling tongue
called upon his Savior, O Lord, be merciful unto me a sinner. I say not
thy creature, or servant, or child, but only a sinner: my whole composition
is sin, whatsoever I am in body or soul, so far as my manhood and humanity
goes, a sinner: and not only by mine office and calling, because I am a
Publicane; but even by nature and kind it self, a sinner. So did Mary
Magdelen in the seventh of the same Evangelist, of whom there is no more
reported, but that she was a sinner, as if the spirit of God had forgotten her
other names: when she heard that Jesus was come into a Pharisees house, 1. She
stood at his feet, 2. behind him, 3. weeping 4 she began to wash, as if she
durst not go on, but did often retract and pull back her hands, 5. the lowest
part of his body, his feet, 6. with her tears, though the water of the brook
had been humanity enough, 7. did wipe them, not with the lap of her coat,
but with the hairs of her head, 8. kissed them, and lastly, anointed them with
a box of ointment. O how precious an ointment flowed from her heart and eyes?
how odor^ferous and wel-pleasing unto Christ, who made her apology, not only
against the Pharisee, in preferring her kindness before the entertainment of
his house, but against Satan, and the power of hell, in forgiving her many
sins? Math. 9.
The like submissiue behavior we read of the woman which had the issue of
blood, for she also came behind Christ, as Mary Magdelen did, avoiding the
sharpnes and pearsing of his eagles eye, and touched the hemme of his garment;
for she said in her self, I dare not be so rude and unmannerly to press
him, as the multitudes did; if I may but touch (not embrace) him? nay his
garment; the very hemme of his garment, no upper or honorable part thereof, I
shall be whole, In all these, humble, and skillful repentances, as of those who
knew their sins by heart, and were able to set down their full catalogue,
what success do we find? That virtue went out from Christ to this woman, and
many sins were remitted to the other; the Publicane went home to his house
justified, the children of the captivity were delivered, the last days of Job
were blessed more than the first, David at one time had his sin translated, at
another the punishment mitigated, Foelix conscientia in qu^ misericordia and
veritas obviaverune sibi, In med^ta^.
the Lord himself crying unto his Angel, It now suffices, hold thy hand:
yea Balaam and Pharaoh themselves fared the better for the false fire, and but
blazing of repentance. Happy therefore is that conscience, to conclude with the
saying of Bernard, wherein truth and mercy meet together. The truth of him
that confesses his sins, and the mercy of God that pardons them. For mercy
can never be wanting unto that soul, which truly knows it self. Fieri
potest forsan.

Ambiguum ponitur, vt dum de salute dubitant homines, fortius aga^^
paenitentia^ Hiero.

(...).

Ne forsitan magnitudo clementiae nos facere^ negligente^. Multos impedis a
firme^tate praesumptio firmitatis.




Others, in a far greater number, and with far better reason express it by an
interrogation, who knows? and make it a sentence absolute and complete in it
self, without referring it to the former words Then they make this
construction of it: it may be the Lord will turn, or peradventure have mercy
upon us. They put it with ambiguity, that while men doubt of salvation, they
may be the more earnest in repentance, and seek the better means to provoke
God to mercy. And surely, as doubting is the mother (they say) of enquiring,
(for a man that doubts not, will never ask) so some kind of doubtfulnesse
is the mother, or at leastwis the nurse of repentance. Jerome, whose note the
former was, writing upon the second of Joel, who knows of the Lord will
return and leave a blessing behind him? expounds the prophet, least happily
the greatness of the clemency of God should make us negligent, therefore the
prophet subioineth, who knows? So that it seems, those terms of
uncertainty, are not in any sort to admit or allow of doubting of salvation,
but rather to keep us from presumption. We al know the mischief of that heady
sin. Many are hindered (says Augustine, from their strength, by presuming on
their strength. The collection that Pomeran makes upon these words, is, rather
to justify than to condemn the Ninivites. Tantum ab^st vt confiderent etc.
So far was it of, that they had any confidence in their works, that they
rather doubted of the mercy of God; and they were saved by faith, who, if they
had rested upon their own merits, must needs have despaired. And he removes
all diffidence from the king and his nobles, as if they included not themselves
in the speech who knows if the Lord will return? but only spoke it unto the
people, in this sense: In these dreadful frightes and perplexities, being
encountered with 3. sore mischiefs at once, atrocity of your sins, shortness of
time, greatness of destruction, none of you knows of the mercy of God, as we
do, and therefore we preach it unto you that you may take knowledge. And for
this cause do the septuaginte add in the end of the former verse (...), that
is, saying; as if it were the voice of the people that is now in question, and
not of the king and his princes. An objection answered.
But how can it any way stand with the nature of repentance, either in prince
or people, to doubt, seeing that faith is the principal proppe wherewith
repentance is borne up, and we cannot acknowledge this to be a true faith,
which hangs and wavereth between such uncertainties? Rather it savoreth of
infidelity and desperation to cast forth such demaundes. It might be answered,
that albeit they doubted of the event of this sentence, yet not of the favor
of God toward the^: for what if their city had bin overthrowen as the tower of
Siloe, and their bodies had perished? had that bin an argument that his mercies
had forsaken them? No more, than it was to Moses who died for angring the Lord
before he went into the land of promise: or than it was to Paul, who said that
the Lord had delivered him out of the mouth of the Lion, 2. Tim. 4.
and would also deliver him from every evil work, and preserve him unto his
heavenly kingdom, though afterward he was slain by Nero, Certe infidelitas
dixisse^ negative. Desperatio ad deum non clamaret, nec tale serium
praetend^ret. Luther. Dubitatio affirmationem quandam in se continet. Mercer.
who was the Lion he there meant. But I rather answer, that infidelity
would have spoken by a flat negation, God will not return: and desperation
would not have cried upon God at all, nor have pretended so much earnest. This
speech of the Ninivites, at the most has but doubting, and doubting contains
in it a kind of affirmation. As Mardochey spoke to Esther in the fourth of
that book, if thou hold thy peace at this time, breathing and deliverance
shall arise to the Jews out of an other place, but thou and thy fathers house
shall perish: and who knows whither thou art come to the kingdom for such a
time? That is, I little doubt, but the providence of GOD has advaunced thee
thus high, to do this service. I find noted upon the same phrase, Joel the
second, Vox aptissima poenitentis vtrumque in se continet sensum peccati, et
spem liberationis.
that is the fittest speech the penitent may use: for it includes both these,
a sense of sin, and hope of deliverance. The leper comes to Christ, Mar. 1.
and tells him, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean: I cannot say
that either thou will, or thou will not, I leave it to thine own wisdom. For
mine own part I have deserved no grace at thy hands, I see nothing in my
self either in body or soul, but leprosy and uncleanness: but in thee there is
power and mercy, if it shall please thee to extend the^ toward me. In the
ninth of the same Evangelist, our Savior answered the father of the child
that had a dumb spirit, requesting him if he could do any thing, to help
them, If thou can do any thing help us
and to have compassion upon them; this if thou can believe, all things are
possible to him that believes. The father cried with tears, Lord, I
believe, help mine unbelief. That is, I believe and skarse believe: I would
feign, but I feel a fainting in my self: and therefore he that craved but
lately a cure for his sons infirmity, now craveth help for his own
unbelief. So then I make no doubt, but these are the words of faith: who
knows if the Lord will return? albeit an infirm, and unsettled faith.
Jgnorati^ negationis.
For as between knowledge and mere or negative ignorance, opinion lies; so
between a perfect and ripe faith, and plain infidelity or distrustfulnes, a
weak and midling faith. For there are degrees in faith: it has a beginning,
increase, and consummation, The disciples are rebuked, Mar. 9. by the name of a
faithlesses generation: O faithless generation, how long shall I now be
with you? etc. Peter, O thou of little faith why doubtest thou?
Mat. 14. for a little and doubting faith. Paul, 2. Cor. 10. speaks of an
increasing faith; but Colossians the first and second, of a faith wherein they
are rooted, built, and established. Yea the strongest faith that ever was, is
it not mixte with doubtfulnes? overcast with clouds? shaken with storms?
beaten with winds and raines? winowed by satan, that, if it were possible,
it might be turned into chafe and branne? What else meant that wary
advertisement, given to Peter by his master, Luke 22. and his vigilant care
over him, Simon, Simon, listen to my speech; Behold, look well to thy
foote-steppes, have an eye to thy soul; Satan has desired you, it is the care
of his heart, it is the mark that he shoots at, he watches walks,
roareth, transformeth him into all shapes, yea into an angel of light to have
his purpose; to sifte you, ex. amine you; as wheat, grain after grain,
person after person, that, if it be possible, you may be reprooved. And surely
we need the prayers of our own spirits, and of the spirit of GOD that
groaneth with groanings which cannot he expressed; and of the son of God
himself, who si^teth at his fathers right hand, and makes request for us,
that our faith fail not. For what think we of our selves? are we pillars of
brass? or as the deaf rocks of the sea? or as mount Sion on that can never
be remooved? Our shield and breast plate of faith, (for so it is called) is it
not beaten and driven at with darts? fiery darts? Ephesians. 6.
yea all the fiery darts? I say not of the wicked that are in our flesh,
Athiestes, Arrians, Jews, Paynims, deriders, blasphemers of our faith, but of
him that is pricinpally wicked and Leader of the dance, Satan himself? This
made him trivmph so much when he saw the field ended, and his tabernacle at
hand to be pulled up, that he had fought a good fight, though his enemies were
increased against him as the hairs of his head; 2. Tim. 4.
that he had run his race, though he had many stumbling blocks and snares
laid in his way, openly to detain, secretly to undermine him; and finally,
which was the chief glory of a christian soldier, that he had kept the
faith, and not lost his target, though he had borne in his body the marks of
Christ Jesus, and felt in his soul many a buffet and wound given by Satan and
his confederates. The issue is this: the faith of a christian is sometimes in
fight and conflicte, in agony, passion, sweating, bleeding, as Christ was in
the garden, resisting (unto blood shall I say) nay even unto hell it self They
knew it by experience, who said, thou bring down to hell. It is as the
last and least sparkle of fire, almost extinguished, as a little grain of
seed, which the birds, nay the devils of the air seek to pick from us, and
as the last gasp and pant of the soul, ready to fly out: at length it
gets the victory again, according to that Ioh. 1.5. this is the victory
that overcommeth the world even your faith. Such as I speak of, was the faith
of these Ninivites, doubting, I confess, but not despairing. And as Aquinas,
to acquit the blessed Virgin from sin, makes a double kind of dubitation,
Dubitatio infidelitati^. Dubitatio admirationis seu discussionis.

3. Quae. 27. 4. ad. 2. Jn quaest. vet. and no^. ^^stam. 73.


one of infidelity, another of admiration and discussion, how can this thing
be? (for it is not doubted by any man, but the Virgin there doubted, and
Augustine so expounds the svvorde that should pearse through her soul, Luke
the second) so may I with better reason make a double kind of infidelity,
one of abnegation, denial, renouncement, the other of wrestling, combat,
contention, which has not yet subdued the adversary force, nor gotten the
upper hand. I never knew the soul of any man, no not of the son of man, or
rather of the son of woman, though anointed with the oil of gladness and
spiritual comfort above all his fellows, I never knew the soul so happily
guarded with the strength and munition of God, that it could escape these
fightes and terrors of conscience whereof I speak. Look upon Abraham the
father of the faithful, distrusting the providence of God, as unable to defend
him and his wife from Pharaoh and Abimelech, unless he committed an untruth;
upon Moses, when he was called from Egypt; Gedeon, when the Angel appeared
unto him at the threshing floor; Samuel, when he was willed to anoint David,
and he feared the malice of Saul; Elias, when he hid himself, and needs would
have died in haste, because of the theatnings of Iezabell; upon Mary and
Zachary, who asked as doubtful a question as the Ninivites here did, (...);
upon all the Apostles of Christ, whom he often vpbraied with little faith, and
no faith; and Christ the head of his Apostles, when he died upon the cross,
with such passionate outcrying, as if all the mercies of God had died with him.
And this is the lot of all the members of Christ, thus they totter and and
reele in their souls, though the foundation of the Lord stands sure, 2. Tim.
2. Certainty of salvation. Flac. Jlly. de. Controvers. relig pp. Certum posse
fieri homine^ certitudine, quae licet no^ sit aequalis fidei catholicae, est
tamen vera fides. Idque lege communi, nempe testimonio illo etc.

Non videri quaestionem hanc satis discussam ad decisionem. Et ipsam synodum
bi^ declarasse etc.


and has this seal upon it, the Lord knows who are his. I will more say,
they are the happiest souls and dearest unto God, that are so tried they are
as the best gold which has been purified in the fire seven times, and the
LORD will heap comfortes and ioies sevenfolde into their bosoms. The
certainety of election and grace, and our special assurance of the mercy of
God, is mightily oppugned by the adversaries. I will say for this time no more
than what note Catharinus gave of the decree made against it, by the last
Council of Trent: he was Archbishop of Minoria, inward with the Popes of
Rome, and himself in person present at that Council. Besides his own private
opinion, declared at large against Dominicus of Soto confessor to Charles the
fifte, that a man may be certain of his salvation by that assurance which
although it be not equal to to the catholic faith, yet it is true faith; and
that by the common law, namely by that testimony which the spirit gives
unto our spirits that we are the sons of GOD; he further tells us that
both the Presidentes of that Synod (one of them afterward Julius the third)
did protest that the question did not seem unto them sufficiently discussed,
to decide any thing: and that the Synod it self twice declared, that the
definition thereof was to be omitted and put of to another time: lastly,
that the title thereof did abundantly manifest as much; the tenor whereof was
against the vain confidence of heritiques not against the certainty of
salvation in sound and sober believers. Contra inanem haereticorum fiduciam.
Sess. 6. Cap 9.
Vain confidence of heretics? Vain, without probability? And in heretics,
not holdinge the truth of doctrine? Who ever allowed it? But, is it vain
confidence which is grounded upon the promises of God, watered by the blood of
Christ, sealed by sacraments, testified by the spirit, and assertained by the
fruits of charity and obedience? that vain confidence, where, and in whom
soever we find, In 8. Romans and. 1. Cor. 9.
we call by no milder names, than the Rhemist commenters do, damnable, false
illusion, unhappy security, presumption, faithless persuasion, and not the
faith of Apostles, but the faith of devilles. Against such, we shut up the
bowelles of charity, the bosom of the church, the communion of her treasure,
and dowry, which are the merits of Christ, and, as far forth as the keys are
committed unto us, the gates of everlasting life. Against such, we say not
with the Psalm, Psalm. 2.
Rejoice and tremble, but tremble without rejoicing: nor with the Apostle, 2.
Philip. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, but tremble and
fear without any hope of salvation. We use nothing but fretters and
corrosives against such, to make them smart, be not high minded, but fear: and
he that seems to stand, in his own conceit, Romans 11. 1. Cor. 10.
let him take heed that he fall not. We will sooner cast pearls to swine,
and bread to whelps, than salvation to such men, who, howsoever they live,
having no testimony of a good conscience, vaunting of hope without the love of
God, despighting the good spirit of grace, treading the blood of the new
testament under their feet, turning grace into wantonness, and using the
liberty of the gospel for a cloak of maliciousness; yet say, they are sure to
be saved by the mercy of God. Thus far we both agree, but from the assurance
of salvation wisely and substantially held, neither the learning of our
adversaries, nor the cunning of devilles shall ever be able to draw us. We
will say with Antonius Marinarius in the Counsel before alleged, If heaven
fall, if the earth vanishe away, Si coelum ru at etc. Domi (...)
if the whole world run headlonge, I will look to the goodness of God,
and stand upright: and if an Angel from heaven shall labor to persuade me
otherwise, I will say Anathema unto him. O happy confidence of a christian
heart. If an honest and virtuous man, says Cyprian, should promise thee any
thing, thou would give credit unto him: now when God speaks with thee, and
promises thee immortality, do thou waver in thy mind? (...) thou so
faithles to distrust him? this is not to know God at all: this is to offend
Christ the master of believers with the sin of unbelief. This is to be
planted in the church, that is, in the house of faith without faith. Steven saw
the heavens open unto him, Hoc est in Ecclesia constitutum in domo fidei fidem
non habere Vbi tuta firmaque infirmis sceuritas nisi in vulnerib. servatoris
etc. Ber ser. 61. in Cant.

Quid ta^ ad mortem quod non morte Christi sanetur? Jbid. Revel. 2.


and commended his spirit unto God, though as his body was overwhelmed with
stones, so were his ears with contumelies; and as many stones of temptation
were cast by the devil against his conscience. For where should the weak
have safty and security, but in the wounds of their savior? the mightier he is
to save me, the more careless I dwell there; the world rages, the body
overbeareth, the devell lies in wait, yet I fall not, because I am founded
upon a sure rock. I have sinned a huge sinnne, my conscience is troubled, but
it shall not be dismaide, for I will remember the wounds of the Lord.
What is so deadlye thae may not be cured by the death of Christ? therefore if
I call but to mind how sovereign and effectual a medicine his death is, I
cannot be daunted by the malignitye of any disease. Wherefore, as Christ
admonished the church of Thyatira, so I in the name of Christ exhort you, that
which you have already, hold fast till he come. Let not your hope and
consolations in the mercies of GOD be taken from you, let others for their
pleasure, and for want of better grounds because they lean upon a staff of
reed, masses, merits, indulgences, and the like, make shipwreck of this
sweet article, and be carved away, as the winds and seaes of their own
opinions shall drive them, till they find some other haven to rest in. But
shall ever reign and bear the scepter in our consciences, as an article of
that price, without the which our lives are not dear unto vs^ The sun may
be under a cloud at times, but fear not, it will shine again: the may fire
be buried under ashes, but it will break forth: the arc may be taken by the
Philistines, but it shall be restored to Israel: and these heavenlye
persuasions may sometimes be assaulted, and battered, but they shall eftsoons
return unto us. I dare affirm, that there was never elect soul upon the
earth, redeemed by the blood, and sanctified by the spirit of God, but has
drunk largelye of these comfortes whereof I speak: and then their largest
draught, when they have most thirsted after it: that howsoever their life has
been tempered of good and bad days and good again, as those that are held
with agues, of honor and dishonor, health and sickness, war and peace, joy
and heaviness; yet the betrer of these two conditions has ever had the later
and the upper hand: and to have ended their lives, I say not in their beds,
but under a shower of stones, as Steven did, or by the sword of a tyrant, or
amongst the teeth of wild beasts, has been no more unto them, than if a
ripe fig had been pluckte from the tree which it grew upon. For they have
gone away with a sentence of peace in their lips, as the dove came back to
the arc with an olive branch, Christ is my life, death mine advantage. Thus
much of the Phrase, who knows if God will return? The matter which they hope
for (in a word, and to conclude) is the mercy of God. In the explication
whereof they use an order of words, 1. Return.
1. that God must return: as if he were now absente and had withdrawn
himself from them; 2. Repent.
2. that God must repent, not by changing his mind, but by calling in the
decree which was gone forth; 3. Turn from his fierce wrath.
3. that the fury of his wrath must be pacified, Lastly, to this end, that
destruction may be averted from them: as much as to say; if God vouchsafe not
his presence unto us, or if he hold his former intendment, or if the heat of
his fierce wrath be not quenched, 4. That we perish no^.
we are sure to perish. And so it fares with us all, that except the Lord
do illighten us with his favorable and gracious countenance; except he apply
himself with his whole heart and with all his soul, (as it is in Jeremy) to
do us good; and unless the fire of his anger be drowned in the bowelles of
compassion, Ier. 32.
and his rage burning down to hell, be swallowed up into pity above the
clouds, what else can follow, but the wrack of our bodies and souls, the
eversion of our houses and families, and utter desolation to towns, cities,
and entire countries? Therefore let us beseech God that he ever vouchsafe to
dwell with us, as he sometimes dwelt in the bush; to change his cursing into
blessings; and to quench his deserved wrath, kindled like a whole river of
brimstone, with his streams of grace, that it may be well with us, and our
children, and our whole land, and our last end may be that, which is the end
and conclusion of the kings edict, that we perish not.

THE XXXIX. LECTVRE.
Chap. 3. verse. 10. And God saw their works that they turned from their evil
ways.
THE ground which the people of Niniveh took for repentance, was faith: which
although it appears by their manner of speech having scruple and uncertainty
in it, to have been an imperfect faith, not thoroughly strengthened, and
fighting as yet against the horror of their own sins, and terror of Gods
judgments, yet an imperfect faith is faith, more or less, and the best that
ever were, have not escaped such distractions and disquietinges of their
souls, and when they have wrastled a time against the adversarye powers, they
have returned with the victory, and have set up their banners of triumph in the
name and virtue of the Lord of hosts: their foundations are in the holy
hills, not in the valleys of their own infirmities, for then they must
despair; but in the might and mercy of almightye God which stand for ever.
The matter of their faith, consisting of four members, (three of them
appertaining to God, his return, repentance, and leaving of his fierce wrath,
the fourth and last to themselves) I went over in have, and will briefly
repeat unto you. 1. They believed that God might return, and vouchsafe them
his presence and company again; taken from the manner I will go and return
to my place, till they acknowledge their faults and seek me. In their
affliction they will seek me diligently, and say, come, let us return unto
the Lord. So they depart from God, and God from them. They withdraw their
obedience, he his blessings: and although he be in the midst of them,
nearer than their flesh to their spirits, yet by any demonstration of love,
they cannot perceave his presence. God was ever in Niniveh, no doubt, by his
essence, his power, his overlooking providence, for in him they lived, moved,
and alvvaies had their being; but he was not in Niniveh by grace, by the
guiding and government of his holy spirit, neither by special favor and
assistance: he had fotsaken their city and consciences, as thorny,
unprofitable ground fitter for idols and abominations, than for himself
repent; which is also borrowed from the affections of men, whose manner is, to
be sorry in their hearts, for their former displeasure conceived, and to wish it
had never bin, and as much as possible they may, to revoke whatsoever he
return and repent, his anger must needs be remooved. Al these motions either
of the body, in going from place to place, (...)
or of the soul, in altering her passions, are attributed unto us truly, but
unto God in no other manner than may stand with the nature and honor of his
immovable majesty. Now lastly, where God is departed, children of wrath,
borne to inherit it, as we inherit our fathers lands, but Christ has
purchased us favor by his blood, and we confirm it to our selves in some sort
by making conscience to offend, and walking warily in the fear of the Lord.
But such as run on their wicked race without turning, and draw their unhappy
breath without repenting, heaping anger upon anger, and not caring to pacify
the force thereof, their end is the end of the sentence, that they are sure to
perish: not in themselves alone, but in all that appertains unto them; their
tabernacles, children, posteriey, memortials; nor only in the life of their
bodies, but in the life and eternity of their souls; nor for an age and
generation of time, but whilst God reigns in heaven able to do justice. To
avoid this danger, it shall be safe for us all to quench the anger of God in
time, to take the blood of the Lamb, and cast upon the flames thereof, and
through the riches of his merits, to seek the acceptance, and to hold
acquaintance and friendship with our God, that we perish not.

And God saw their works etc. The deliverance of Niniveh.
We are now come to the fourth part of the chapter, the mercy of God toward
Niniveh, greater than both the former, because it is not exhibited to one, as
unto Jonas; nor unto a few, as unto the mariners; but unto a whole city,
plentifully peopled and stored with inhabitants. Even so it is; whither one or
more many or few, man, woman, child, cities, kingdoms, Empires, worlds,
all generations, past, present, and those that are to come, we draw out
waters of joy and comfort out of this well of salvation. 1. God saw their works
There is a degree also in the words of this sentence. For 1. God approoveth
their works, and conceaveth a liking of their service done: if you will know
what works, you have it by explication made plain, their conversion from their
evil ways that is their whole course of repentance. Secondly, 2. God repented
of the evil.
upon that approbation, he repented him of the evil which he said he
would bring upon them. Thirdly, upon that repentance and change of mind, he
does it not. The words are not greatly obscure, 3. He did i^ not.
a little explanation may serve to unfold them.

God saw. Why? was he a stranger till that time in Niniveh? or did he but then
begin to open his eyes, and to take the knowledge of their works? or is there
any thing in heaven, or earth, or in the deep, that he sees not with his eyes
te^ thousand times brighter than the sun? yea though it were hid, I say not
within the reins and hearts of our bodies, but in the reins and heart of the
lowest destruction? Some interpret it thus: he saw, that is, he made themselves
to see, or the world to see, 1. Vidit. i. videre fecit* 2. Vidit. i. approbavit.
that he was well pleased with their works: others more simply and truly, he
saw their works, that is, himself approved them, as Genesis 1. he saw that the
light was good, that is, he allowed it by his judgment: so here he showed by
his fact and event that followed, that the repentance of Niniveh highly
contented him. Likewise, Genesis 4. God looked unto the gift of Abel, but not unto
the gift of Cain; he saw the^ both with his eye of knowledge, but not of liking
and good affection. Or to say further, God saw that in the works of the
Ninivites, which if Jonas, or the whole world had presumed to have seen, they
had deceived themselves: he saw their hearts, from whence those works
proceeded, how truly and syncerely they were done without dissimulatio^. In
this sense we say that the church is invisible, and as we are taught in our
Creed, we rather believe that it is, tha^ with our eyes can behold it: not
that we turn men into spirits, not having flesh and bones, or into tra^spare^t
substa^ces, such as the air is, which we cannot see; but because, although we
behold the body and the outward appearance, we cannot search into their
spirits, neither are able to discern them in that, whereby they are
Christians, and of the householde of faith. We think they are myrtles, when
they are but netles; lambs when they are but vvoolues; and citizens of
Jerusalem, when they are but Iebusites.

Conditio a ^ictatis.
Their works. Not only their works of ceremony, order, and discipline, as
fasting, sackcloth, crying, which are not godliness it self, but gestures and
behaviors setting it forth; nor only their moral works, of charity toward
God and man, in forsaking their wicked ways, and making restitution of ill
gotten goods; (for these are most of them outward works,) but he saw the
works also of the inward man, and, as it is expounded in the next words, he
saw their perfect and full conversion; which consisted not in fasting and
sackcloth alone, or in formal professions, but in the change and alteration of
all their powers. Thus to acknowledge the true and immortal God, is a work,
but a work of the spirit, both because the spirit of God is the author, and
because the spirit of man is the actour and administer thereof. To believe, is
also a work of the spirit; for when they asked, Ioh 6. What shall we do that
we might work the works of God? Jesus answered them, this is the work of
God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent. GOD saw all these works in
them, what they thought, how they believed, which way the purposes of their
hearts were bente; he saw their faith: as well as their ceremonies, their
justice Evangelicall, as well as their Legal; he saw their whole body of
repentance, wherein there was knowledge, desire, judgment, affection, faith,
hope, and whatsoever else was requisite to be used in that work.

And God repented. We had the word before, who knows if God will repent?
But can this be? Repentance has ever some grief annexed unto it, and an
accusation of our selves, of something done amiss, which we would gladly
retract: both these are far from God, who sits in heaven, having all
sufficiencye of pleasure and contentment in himself; and for his works
abroad, they are so exactly done by rule, that we cannot suspect any error
therein committed. The answer is this: he that dwells in such brightness of
light, as never eye of mortalitye could approach unto, the sight of whole
face, to an earthly man is insufferable, and the knowledge of those invisible
things in the Godhead, impossible; yet to give some aim and conjecture unto
us what he is, he appears as it were transfigured into the likeness of our
nature; and in our own familiar terms, not departinge from our accustomed
manners, speaks to our carnal senses: and that man may know him in some
measure, he will be known as man, by eyes, ears, hands, feet, other
bodily members; by anger, sorrow, repentance, jealousy, with the like
spiritual affections. By which he would signify unto us not that which is
so indeed, but that which is needful on our be^alfe, so to be uttered and
expressed. Quibus significare illud quod itae non essit, sed quod ita dici opus
esset. August. li 1. de Tim. 1. ca.
For because we are not ignorant of the use, office, effect, of these daily
and natural things in our selves, therefore when we hear them ascribed to
God by translation, we are able partly to guess what is meant by them. The
rule which Bernard gives in his 4. Sermon upon the Canticles, is catholic,
and universally serves to the opening of these figures. Haec habet omnia Deus
per effectum, non per naturam; All these has God, not by nature, but by
effect. Now what is the effect of anger? revenge. For a man that is angered is
desirous to be satisfied, and to wreake himself upon him that has provoked
him: the passion of anger is not in the nature of God, but the effect is:
Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord. What is the effect of
repen^ance? The change or abrogation of some thing formerly done, or at least
determined. Non implevit quod fuerat comminatus. verse. 8. Malum culpae, Malum
poenae. Quo quis male feci^ quoque mali perpessus est. August. de li* arb.

Malum natura. Malum secundum sensum. Basil. sermon. An deus si^ author mali^
Against the merit of works*


Repentance is not in God, the effect of repentance is; the recallinge or
vndooinge of a work, which in the judgment of the world, was like to have
continued. Thus he repented the making of man, Genesis 6. and the advancing of
Saul to the kingdom, 1. Sam. 15. not that his heart was grieved, but his
hands, that is, his justice and power undid it: and thus he repented his
judgment against Niniveh, by slayinge the sequel and fall thereof. So that
the easiest exposition indeed of the repentance of God, is in the third member
of the verse: for therefore he repented him, because he did it not.

The evil which is here mentioned, is different from that which went before,
where their evil ways are spoken of: for that was culpable, this but poenall;
that defiles a man, this but chas^eneth and afflicts him; that was evil in
doing, this but in suffering; that in nature, this but in feeling: the latter
proceeds from the justice of God, the other he is most free from.

And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil ways. When I
first took in hand to declare the repentance of Niniveh, I desired you to
bear in mind, that the first and principal gate whereby they entered into
that service toward God, was faith. The Prophet, who compiled the history,
noted no less, as appears by his placing of it in the head of the book,
that is in the beginning of the whole narration; They believed God, they took
him to be a God of truth, Crediderunt deo.
and made no question but his word in the mouth of his servant should be
established. And I as little doubt, Crediderunt in deum
but they also believed God; not only assentinge to the truth of the message,
but entertaining in their hearts a persuasion of deliverance: in the ninth
verse it is very plain, where the hope of his mercy is that which induces
them to all these works of pietye. Here it is said, that God saw their
works, and consequentlye repented him of the judgment, and did it not. The
place has been abused and a weapon drawn there hence to fight against Gods
grace: that these afflictions of the Ninivites, macerating themselves with
fasting and sackcloth, prepared them aforehand to the easier attainement of
their pardon. Such are the pillars which they build their works of
preparation upon; that before a man is justified, his works may deserve that
favor of God: not of condignity, (they say) worth for worth, but of of
congruity; as if it stood not with reason and conscience that their works
should be forgotten. If the prophet had trusted our simplicitye herein, and
concealed the name of faith, weich here he places with her open face, as the
leader and forerunner to all their other actions, could we ever have imagined
that they would have humbled themselves by repentance, and prayed unto God on
whom they had not first believed? and whosoever he be that spends his
wretched days in the wilderness of this world, a wilderness of sin, as
the children of Israel in that wast and roaring wilderness of SIN, Exodus 16.
without this cloud by day, and pillar by night, to guide him the way to his
rest, he walks he knows not how, he strayeth, stumbleth, falls,
because he has not light, he lives and dies in darkness, his soul is as
a field untilled, or as a vineyard grown wild, which though it have store of
grapes, they are but sour grapes, his worship of God, and works of common
civility, what glass soever they bear, of honesty and commodity in the eyes
of men, they are both unfruitful to himself, and before the face of God, full
of sin and reprobation. There are two things in the whole course of this
history, whereunto I will limite my speech: the one what the Ninivites did;
they believed, proclaimed a fast, repented: the other what God; What the
Ninivites did.
he saw their works, and was satisfied.

In the person of the Ninivites, faith goes foremost, works follow it. This is
the nature of a true and a living faith, it ever works by love, Gal. 5. and
by works it is made perfect, Iam. 2. and faith without these is as an alms of
the rich man to the poor, depart in peace, warm thy self, fill thy belly;
but he gives him nothing. Or as the body without the spirit, wherein the life
and motion thereof consists. For even the thief upon the cross, that little
time which he had, he bestowed in good works: In reproof of his fellow,
condemnation of themselves, justification of Christ, invocation of his name,
and a true confession that he was the king of Israel. And this, although we
speak, and write, and imprint, and preach in all our assemblies, and even the
pillars of our churches can bear witness unto us, that faith is an idle,
imperfect, verbal, and dead faith, where is not sanctity of life to attend
it; and we both receive it our selves, as a faithful saying, and confirm it
to others, that such as have believed God, must also be careful to excel in
good works; yet, Tit. 3.
if the pens and presses of the Roman faction might pass without controlment,
we should be tr^duc^d as far as the world is christian (for preaching only
faith in the justification of a sinful man) that our gospel is a gospel of
liberty, epicurisme, sensuality, that we pluck up good works as weeds by
the roots, and cast them forth of the doors, as the children of the
bondwoma^, not worthy to inherit with the freeborn. We never said that faith
without works (barren and empty of her fruits) justified an unrighteous soul:
but that faith so qualified, does notwithstanding justify without those
works, this we mainetaine against men and angels: so we remove not works
from faith, but works from justifying. Still they follow their mistress, but
in remission of sins, and clothing the sinner with the justice of God,
therein they give her the place, and put the burden of that work upon her
shoulders. Let Bilha the handmaide supply the defectes of Rahell, and bear
children unto Jacob, but let her ever remember that Rahel is above her, and
singular in some respect. And let not Joseph forget, though he ride in the
second chariot of Egypt, and be the next man to the king, yet that the king
has reserved the throne to himself. Shall I yet teach you by a more sensible
and familiar demonstration? Bethulia is in danger of Holofernes, the terror of
the East, as we of the justice of God: Iud. 13.
and as the strength of Bethulia was thought too weak to encounter him, so all
our obedience to the law of God is weak and insufficient to defend us. Judith
undertakes for the people of her city; faith for us: Judith goes accompanied
with her handmaides; faith with her works: and though the eyes of her handmaid
were ever toward her Lady, to carry the scrippe, etc. yet, in performing that
act of deliverance, Judith is alone, her maid standing and waiting at the
door, and not so much as setting her foot within the chamber: So although our
love and obedience be as attendant to faith as ever that servant was to
Judith, yet in performing this mighty act of deliverance, acquiting the
conscience from the curse of the law, pacifying the anger of God, and
presenting us blameless before his holy eyes, al which stands in the
apprehension of the merits of Christ, and a steadfast persuasion that he has
assumed for us, faith is wholely and solely alone, our works not claiming any
part in that sacred action.

Therefore we conclude, says the Apostle, Romans 3. that a man is justified by
faith without the works of the law. An objection dissolved.
Therefore you see, says James in the second of his Epistle, that of works a
man is justified, and not of faith only. He is, and he is not? does the one
conclude the former, and does the other infer also by way of conclusion that
he has prooved the latter? What shall we say? is God divided? or is there
dissension in the spirit of unity? or is there more than one truth? Apostle
against Apostle, James against Paul, in one and the same question deriving a
contrary conclusion? Not so. But as the striking of two flintes together,
beats out fire; so the comparing of these their two opinions, will make the
truth more manifest. Surely by faith we are justified, and without the works
of the law. Mean it of ceremonies as some do, mean it of moral
commandments, the position is both ways true. This rock we must cleave unto,
this rock must be published abroad rocks and stones will publish this rock
if we conceal it. To him that works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteousness: Romans 4. to him
that works not. I will not say that he works not at all, but he works not
in this action, nor with any intent, either to prepare or further his
justification before the face of God: his works are not reckoned at that time,
nay they withdraw their presence, and hang down their heads, and are abashed
to offer themselves in that service. But here is the point. As I am justified
by faith without the works of the law, so by the works of the law must my
faith be justified, Exercitatio vel consummatio iustitiae: res enim tum dicitur
fieri, quando perficitur vel innotes^it*
that is, avouched, made good, and testified both to God and man, with
effectual proof and demonstration that it is not a naked, fruitless,
hypocritical faith, but soundlye and substantially conditioned. So James meant
it. And Thomas Aquinas writing upon that Epistle, confirms that meaning, that
the justification whereof he spoke, is the exercising or accomplishing of
justice: for a thing is then said to be done, either when it is perfected,
or when it is made known. So then, there is one righteousness imputed,
favored, and cast upon us, though it be not ours; there is another
righteousness exercised, or declared; there is one justice of justification,
there is another justice of testification; there is one that acquiteth before
God, another that approves especially before man; the one without us and lent,
the other within us, inhabitant and inherent; the one in Christ, and from him
communicated to us, the other in our selves, and to him in some sort
recompensed. For such is the nature of faith and love, as the Auncientes
described their graces: the one is in taking and apprehension, the other is in
giving and remuneration. First, we receive by our faith, and then by our
charity we return something. Paul speaks of the former of these
iustifications, James of the latter: Paul delivered simply the doctrine, James
answered an objection against those that gloried in the name and shadow of
faith: Paul instructed the understanding, James informed the life: Paul as a
Doctor and in the schools lecturing, James as a pastor, and in the pulpit
applying; the one handling justification properly, the other (to speak as
properly) sanctification; the one establishing a real, christian, justifying
faith, the other confuting a verbal, devilish, falsifying faith. There is now
then but one Lord, one spirit, one truth, one gospel, one tongue, one soul in
both these Apostles. Consider the state of the question in this present example
of the Ninivites. You know what they were, not only aliantes and strangers from
the covenant and hope of God, but of aliantes and strangers such, whose
iniquity streamed into the highest heaven, and called down vengance upon them.
What should they now do to redeem their peace? For if they had fasted till
their knees had bowed under them, if they had put sacke-cloath about their
loins, till the hair and wale thereof had entered even into their souls, if
they had spent the day in crying and the night in wailing, and if they had
lived besides as justly to the world, as Aristides did in Athens, who was
banished the city for overmuch justice, and had not withal believed, I will
not say, but God might have spared to have made them notorious examples of his
justice to the world, but surely they had remained as aforetime, children of
darkness still, and sons of perdition, and the ways of peace they had never
known. Therefore to conclude on their part, they are justified by their
faith, This is it that investeth them into the friendship and love of God:
their very believing of him is imputed unto them for righteousness, as it was
to Abraham: and to testify that faith to man, to make it perfect before God,
to seal it up to their own conscience, they are abundant also in good works:
which is that other justification whereof James disputes. For as in the
temple of Jerusalem, there were 3. distinctions of roumes: the entry or porch
where the beasts were killed; the altar where they were sacrificed; and the
holiest place of al, whither the high priest entered once every year: so in
this repentance of Niniveh, there are 3. sorts of righteousness: the first of
ceremony, in wearing sacke-cloath, and fasting; the second of morality in
restitution; the third the justice of faith, Osee. 2.
and as it were the door of hope whereby they first enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

2. What God did.
We have heard what the Ninivites did for their parts, let us now consider,
what God for his It is said that he saw their works, and repent^d him of the
plague intended, and brought it not. Nay it is said, that God saw their
works, Vidit deus. Poeni^ui^ deum.
and God repented him of the plague, with repetitio^ of that blessed name, to
let the world understand, that the mischief was not turned away for the value
and virtue of their works, but for the acceptance of his own good pleasure;
nor for the repentance of the city, but for the repentance of his own heart, a
gracious inclination and propension that he took to deliver them. No marvel
it was, if when God saw their works, he bethought him of their deliverance.
For when the person is once approved, and received to grace (which their faith
procured them) his blemishes are not then looked upon, his infirmities covered,
his imperfect obedience taken in good part, nay co^me^ded, honored, rewarded,
and daily provoked with promises and invitatio^s of greater blessedness to come.
So a father allureth his son; the serva^t does ten times more; yet is the
reco^pe^ce of the son ten times greater: for the father respects not so much
the works of his child, but because he is a father, te^dreth and follows him
with fatherly affection, whereas the hired servant on the other side, is but a
stranger unto him. Why then were the works of Niniveh acceptable unto God? not
of themselves, but for their sakes that wrought them, and they for their faith:
for this is the root that bears the^ al. In that great cloud of witnesses,
Heb. 11. what was the reason that they pleased God (besides the honor of the
world, verse. 6.
that they were well reported of) and obtained the promises, which was the
garlande they ran for, (besides their suffering of adversities, subduing of
kingdoms, vvorking of righteousness, verse. 33.
with many other famous exploites there ascribed unto them) what was the reason
I say, but their faith, which is the whole burden of the song in that memorable
bead-role? By faith did Abell thus, Enoch thus, and others otherwise. But why
not their works of themselves? For is not charity more than faith? these three
remain, faith, hope and love, but the greater of these three is love. 1. Cor.
13. In continuance.
And the first and the great commandment is this, Thou shall love the Lord
thy GOD, etc. Math. the two and twentieth. And, the end of the commandment is
love, 1. Tim. 1. And, love is the fulfilling of the law, Romans the
thirteenth. I grant all this if thou be able to perform it. Love the Lord
thy God with all thy heart, etc. and thy neighbor as thy self, and there is
nothing wanting unto thee, thou have kept the commandment, thou have fulfilled
the law, thou need not the passion of thy redeemer, thou may catch the
crown of life by rightful desert. But this thou art not able to perform,
were thou as righteous as Noe, as obedient as Abraham, as holy as Job, as
faithful as David, as clear as the sun and moon, as pure as the stars in
heaven, yet thou must sing and sigh with a better soul than thine own, who
saw and sighed for the impurity of all living flesh, Enter not into judgment,
with thy servant, O Lord, for no flesh living can be justified in thy sight.
God has concluded thee and thy fathers before thee, and the fruit of thy body
to the last generation of the world, under sin, and because under sin,
therefore under wrath, and malediction, and death, if thou fly not into the
sanctuary to hide and safegarde thy self. But blessed be the name of Christ,
the days are come, wherein this song is sunge in the land of Judah, and
through all the Israel of God far and near, we have a strong city,
Esaias 26.
salvation has God set for walls and bul-workes about it. Open ye the gates,
that the righteous nation, which keeps faith, may enter in. Which is that
righteous nation that shall enter into the city of God thus walled and
fortressed, but that which keeps faith, or rather faithes, as the Hebrew
has? that is, Fide^.
all faith, not ceasing to believe till their lives end. They that believe
thus, adding faith unto faith, the Lord will return them as great a measure
of his blessing, even peace upon peace, in the next words, because they trust
in him. We need no better expositour. Pacem p^cem.
The righteous man is he that believes, and the believing man is he that
works righteousness, for these two shall never be sundred; and the only key
that opens unto us the gates of the city, is our faith So then when we see
good works, we must know that they are but fruits, and seek out the root of
them, and when we have the root, we must also have regard to the moisture and
juice whereby it is nourished. For as the fruits of the earth grow from their
root, and that root lives not by it self, but is fed and preserved by the
fatnes of the soil, warmth of the sun, and benefit of the air under which it
stands; so good works grow from faith, and that faith lives in the object,
the merits and obedience of Jesus Christ, feeding and strengthening it self by
the sweet influence and sap of these heavenly conceits, that he came into
the world to save sinners, and that he died for her sin, and rose to life
for her justification. For as we esteem the worth of a ring of gold not so
much in it self as in the gemme that it carries; so are we justified and
magnified also in the sight of God by faith in Christ, not for this quality of
believing, which is as imperfect as our works, but for the object of this
quality, Christ our mediator, which is the diamonde and jewel borne therein.
The hand of a leper, though never so bloody and unclean, yet it may do the
office of an hand, in taking and holding fast the alms that is given. The
giver may be liberal enough, and the gift sufficient to relieve, though the
hand that received it, full of impurity. So it is not the weakness of our
faith, in apprehending and applying the passion of Christ, that can prejudice
the bounty of our GOD, and those rich benefits of his grace which his beloved
son has purchased for us.

Secundum omnem iustitiam tuam. ver. 16. Propter dominum. 17. Propter
miseratione^ ^uas amplissi mas. 18. Propter ^e. 19.

Non enim propter vllas iustitias nostras.


I now conclude. GOD saw the works of the Ninivites, and in those works,
not only their outward countenance, but their inward and unfeigned affection,
and faith the root from whence they sprang: and as the fruits of their faith,
so he accepted them; not for the worth and accounte of the works, which they
dare not themselves rely upon, but through the riches and abundance of his own
loving kindness. This is the plea that Daniell held in the ninth of his
Prophecy, a man of as righteous a spirit as ever the Lateran palace of Rome
held, according to all thy righteousness; for the LORDS sake; for thy great
tender mercies; for thine own sake; and with direct exception to their
inherente justice, for we do not present our supplications before thee for
our own righteousness. This plea we must all stick unto, Gods mercy in his
own gracious disposition, Gods righteousness in his promises, Gods goodness
in the Lord, his anointed, his Christ, his Messiah. And this shall be a blessed
testimony unto us at the last day, that we have stood and fought for the seed
of the woman, and for the preciousnesse of his blood and passion, against the
seed of the serpent, that we never gave place, no not for an instant, to
Pharisee, Jew, Pelagian, Papist, Libertine, to diminish or discredit the power
thereof. Give me that soul that breaths upon the earth in plight as the
souls of these Ninivites were, now called to a reckoning of their fore passed
lives, their consciences accusing them of hydeous and monstrous iniquities, the
law pleading, the anger of GOD flaming against them, the throat of hell gaping
wide and ready to swallow them down, when they were to take their leave of one
world, and to enter another of endless punishment, unless they could find
the means to appease the fury of their maker and judge; Give me the soul,
that dares for the price of a soul stand in contention with the justice of
GOD upon the trial of good works, either to be justified the meane-time, or
hereafter to be glorified and live by them. O sweet and comfortable name,
nature, operation of grace, (grace and only grace) blessed be the womb that
bare thee, and the bowels that ingendered thee. When it comes to this
question, iustificemur simul, Let us be judged together, Esaias 43.
if thou haste ought to say for thy self, bring it forth, O happy, heavenly
and only grace, that bear thy children safe in thy bosom, and set them
with confidence and joy before the seat of God; when the clients and followers
of their own righteousness, be it what it may be; with the least flash of
lightning that flees from the face of God, shall tremble and quake as the
popler in the forest. O the Ocean and maine sea of overflowing grace, and we
drink at puddles! We sit in our cells and comment, we come into the schools
and dispute about the merit of good works, without trouble. But lie we upon
out beds of sickness, feel we a troubled and perplexed conscience, we shall be
glad to cry, grace and grace alone, Christ and Christ alone, the blood of
Abell, and Peter, and Thomas, and Paul shall be forgotten, and the blood of the
Lamb shall be had in price, and as for the merits of our unprofitable service,
we shall be best at ease when we talk least of them. The only one and fiftith
Psalm, Have mercy upon me O Lord etc. (his memory be blessed that gave the
note) has saved many distressed souls, and opened the kingdom of heaven unto
them, who if they had stood upon riches and sufficiency in themselves, as the
church of Laodicea did, they had lost the kingdom. Revel. 3.
It is usually given to our selo^s for their neckeverse, when the law is
disposed to favor them. We are all felons and transgressors against the law
of God; let it be our soules-verse, and God will seclude the rigor of his law
and take mercy upon us. Some of the words of that Psalm were the last that
Bernarde uttered even in the panges of death. Let them also be the last of
ours, a broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise. Finally, the
choice is briefly proposed, and as quickly made: if grace, not works: if
works, not grace: if this be the choice, let us humbly beseech God to
illighten our eyes, to open our understandings, to direct our affections, and
to reach forth our hands to the better part which shall never be taken from
us: that leaving our works to his favorable interpretation, either to follow
us, or to stay behind, and either to be something or nothing in his sight,
his mercy may only triumph, and his covenant in the blood of Christ Jesus may
ever be advanced, that we may sing in our Jerusalem, as they sing in the
courts of heaven, worthy is the Lamb that was killed, to receive the glory,
and honor and praise, and to bear the name of our whole salvation.

THE XL. LECTVRE.
Chap. 4. verse. 1. Therefore it displeased Jonas exceedingly, and he was angry.
THE whole prophecy of Jonas (again to repeat that, which ought not to be
forgotten) is the preaching of mercy. An history written to the world, and as a
public evidence and instrument from God delivered unto us, in every page and
line whereof, his goodness toward mankind is mervailously expressed. And as the
4. beasts in Ezechiel, were joined one to the other by their wings, so the 4.
Chapters of this book hang together by a continuation and succession of Gods
loving kindness. Open this book, as our Savior opened the book of the
prophecy of Esaias, by chance, and read at your pleasure from the first of it
to the last, you shall never want a text or example of comfort, whereby a
distressed conscience may be relieved. The mariners are delivered from the
fury of the elements, Jonas both from those and from the belly of a cruel
fish, the Ninivites God knows from what, whither from fire and brimstone, or
from sinkinge into the ground, or any such like weapons of wrath, which in his
armoury of justice in heaven are stored up and reserved for the day of the
wicked; but all are delivered. Notwithstanding which rare examples of mercy,
as Christ spoke in the gospel, behold, more than Jonas is here, so though
the prophet did his part before in penninge those discourses, yet in handlinge
this last he is more than himself, and though the mercy of God abounded
before, yet here it excels. Then was mercy practiced I confess, but here
it is pleaded, maintained, prooved by arguments, apologies, parables, the
equity and reasonablenes thereof vpheld, and means made unto Jonas in some
sort, that if God be gracious to Niniveh, he will be pleased favorably to
interpret it. The distribution of the Chapter is into three parts. 1. The
affection of Jonas upon the deliveraunce of Niniveh, whither revealed, and by a
prophetical spirit discovered before the term of 40. days, or to the
expiration of them differred, I cannot say. 2. The reprehension and rebuke
which God uses against him for that affection; both by speech, do thou well
to be angry? and by fact, in confuting him by a real similitude, of a gourde
soon sprunge up and as easily withered. And as Jonas repeateth his impatience,
so God walks with an even pace by him, and repeateth his reproves. 3. The
conclusion or scope which God referred himself unto. Not the forbearing of the
city, which was already past, but the justification of his goodness therein. For
first he did it of fact (as they say,) and then defended the right of it.

The affection of Jonas is generally recited in the first verse, and more
particularly displaied in the rest, touching his speech, gesture, and carriage
of himself in all points.

So it displeased Jonas exceedingly. What displeased him? The affection of
Jonas.

Malum videbatur apud Jonam, malum magnum.


Turn back your eyes to the epilogue of the former Chapter. God repented him
of the evil, he did it not. This is it, that so much disquieteth Jonas, that
seems so evil, and very evil (as the Hebrew has,) in his unmerciful eyes:
rather this was evil and very evil in the heart of Jonas. For why is Jonas so
exceedingly displeased, that God has spared Niniveh? It had been fault enough
in Jonas, not to have blessed and embraced the mercy of God toward Niniveh,
and to have given testimony unto it. But to go so far from renowming it, that
he conde^neth it in his judgment, and so far in conde^ning it, that he is
grieved at the heart, and so far in grieving that he holds no measure and
stint therein, but does exceedingly vex himself, this was a sore offense.
Had Jonas received mercy himself, and does Jonas envy mercy to others? Did he
know by experience in his own person, what it was to be driven from the land
of the living, to be cast into the mouth of destruction, to loose the favor
of God, and has he no sparkle of charity left, Calamitas sine ratione, quid
miser angeris, nihil duri passus?
no grain of compassion to weigh with himself the destruction of this great
city? Avexation, says Bas^l, without all reason. Unhappy man, why art thou
troubled so, having felt no harm? I would rather have thought if need had
been, that Jonas would have stood for Niniveh, being a prophet, and so lately
plucked from the fire himself, as Abraham did for Sodom: If there shall be ten
righteous men found in Niniveh destroy it not. For what else is the joy and
crown of a Prophet, Apostle, any messenger of Christ in this service emploide,
but the winning and saving of souls, converting men unto righteousness,
translatinge them from darkness into light, a blessing from God upon his
labors, an increase upon the seed he has sown, which others would spend
their days, and consume their bodies, and ieopard their lives to obtain, when
Jonas obtained it with ease, and in the compass of a short time? The parable
of the Lord and the laborers which wrought in the vineyard, thus far accords
to Jonas. Take that which thine is. I do thee no wrong, Math. 20.
is it not lawful for me to do with mine own as it pleases me? Is thine eye
evil, because I am good? I will give to this last, as much as to the first: to
this least, as much as to the greatest; to a Gentile, as much as to an
Israelite; to Niniveh, as much as to thy self. You see the nature of envy: the
honor, prosperity, wealth, and whatsoever is good in an other, sometimes life
it self, it repineth at; fruitful increase, and full vdders in the fields and
beasts of any man, it pineth with. 't fills men to the eyes, and in the eyes
it sits, and by those windows looks forth, and whersoever it sees a
blessing, it is sickness and death unto it, if God curse it not. And it is true
that Basile notes of envy. A Scythian seldom maliceth an Egyptian. Aegyptio
Scytha non invidet.
They spend their despite for the most part within the same country, same
kindred, same profession, same benefit: as Jonas envieth Niniveh, for
communicatinge with him in the mercy of the Lord. According to that wisdom
which God gave to man to call things by their right names, so is the name of
envy: Invidia, vel non videt, vel nimis intuetur. Cypr. Genesis 4.
either because it will not see at all, that which in the blessings of God is
to be seen, or because it prieth too deep into them. It was the first vemine
which the devil powered forth against mankind. Hince perijt primus and per
didit; By this he first perished himself and destroyed others. What else was
the cause that Caine lifted up his hand against his brother Abell, and robbed
himself almost of his only comfort in that newborn world? But that the
gift of his brother was accepted to God, his own rejected? upon this he was
very wroth, and his countenance fell down, as not able to endure the sight of
his brother, and his anger was not satisfied with blood. Did the brethren of
Joseph go home to their old father Jacob, and bring him into an error that a
wicked beast had devoured the child, Genesis 37.
and that Joseph was surely torn in pieces? A wicked beast had devoured him
indeed, and Joseph was torn in pieces by the envy of his brethren. Israel
looved Joseph more than all his other sons, therefore they hated him, and
could not speak peaceably unto him. And Joseph dreamed a dream, and told it
to his brethren, therefore they hated him so much the more. This was the
wicked beast that cast him into the pit, where their meaning was to have
sterved him to death, and to have kept his blood secret, as appears by the
speech of Judah, and but that Reuben persuaded the contrary, with their own
hands they had taken his life from him. Because the women sange in the
streets, Saul has slain his thousand, 1. Sam. 18.
David his ten thousand, therefore was Saul exceedingly wroth, and it is
said, that Saul had an eye to David from that day forward. It was a
venomous, mischievous eye, such as the burning eyes of witches, or the
Basiliske, Vrentes sculi. Pers.
or Gorgon, that he cast toward him. The elder brother, Luke 15. when he
heard melody and dancing in his fathers house, and knevve what it meant, and
that his father had killed the fat calfe, to welcome home his lost son, he
was angry at the matter, and would not go in, but that his father went out
and entreated him. He omitted no argument of exprobration, his service for many
years, without breach of any commandment, and not the gift of a kid by way
of recompense, he says not, wastfully to spend, but to make merry amongst his
friends: when the other, that had devoured his goods with harlots, must be
entertained with the fat calfe. Examine the reason why innocence it self was
hunted and followed to death, with crucify him, crucify him, he is not worthy
to live, and Barrabas set at liberty; and let Pilate be the judge to pronounce
sentence against them: he knew (besides the knowledge of their own
consciences) that for envy they had delivered him. Do we look that envy
should favor the honor and welfare, Math. 27.
when it favors not the life; or the life of man, when the Lord of life
himself is vile before it? Poison, they say, is life to a serpent, death to a
man, and that which is life to a man, his spittle and natural humidity, is
death to a serpent. I have found it thus applied: virtue and felicity, which is
life to a good man, is death to the envious; and that which the envious lives
by, is the misery and death of a good man. For envy endeavors either that
he may not live at all, as all the former examples declare (for even the
prodigal son was also dead, and it grieved his brother, Luke 15.
that he was brought back to life) or that he may live such a life, as for the
discomfortes thereof, he may call it happiness, to have ended. (...).
Therefore amongst other the fruits of a reprobate mind, Romans 1. those two
are joined together, (...), envy, and murder: and likewise amongst the works
of the flesh, Galathians the fifte, with the same combination, as if they
were twins growing in one body, and could not be put asunder. (...).
It is not namely expressed in the former member of the verse, what
perturbation it was wherewith Jonas was so overborne. But by the effects it
showed in him, 1. Cor. 13. Miserico^diae cor miserum.

Jn qua multa sunt mala vnum tantum vtile, quod authori incommoda. Basil.

Carpitque and carpitur vna Suppliciumque suum est. Metam. 2. Vt AEtna seipsam.
Sic se no^ alio^ invidus igne coquit. Metamor. 2, Ira optimo loco est donu^
dei, et magna est ars irasci verbi^ praemeditatis et tempore ^oportuno. M. Luth.

Si deui^ irascitur nobis, remediu^ esse potest, etc. Val Max. lib. 9. cap. 3.
Jlla procursu celerio^, nocendi cupidine hoc pertin^ciu^ vterque
consternatio^is plenus affectus, acnun quam sine* tormento sui viole^tus etc


in seeking so heartily the overthrow of Niniveh, and wishing to die himself,
because the Ninivites lived (besides the bidding of open battle to charity,
one of whose properties is, that she envieth not, and setting pity at naught,
which has ever a miserable heart when it sees the wretched) we may reasonably
suppose it to have bin envy. The nature whereof is this, that God in his
justice has appointed it to be a plague to it self, and amongst many
mischiefs it has furnished it with one only profitable quality, that the
owner thereof takes most hurt. He biteth and is bitten again, and becomes
his own punishment. And as Aetna consumed it self, so the malicious man is
burnt with the fire of his own heart. And therefore the Poet did notably
describe her to have a pale face without blood, a lean body without any juice
in it, squint eyes, black teeth, an heart full of gall, a tongue tipped with
poison, never laughing but when others weep, never sleeping, because she
studieth and thinks on mischief. It displeases Jonas exceedingly. But the
vexation which he took, hurt himself more than Niniveh.

And Jonas was angry. We have not ended the affections of Jonas. We have an
other companion to add to envy, which for the most part is coupled with it.
For so we read, Genes. 4. Caine was exceedingly wrath. And, 1. Sam. 18. Saul
was wrath at the song of the women. And, Luke 15. the elder brother was angry,
either with the father, or the younger son. Ange^ in a fit place is the gift of
God, and there is great cunning in being angry, with advised speech, and in a
seasonable time. But of that hereafter. Meane-while, the time, and cause, and
measure of this anger in Jonas, I think, are worthy to be blamed. For with
whom is he angry? It seems, with himself: Take away my life from me. Or
rather with God; who if he had taken him at his word, the sun had gone down
upon his anger, I mean, his life had ended in a froward and furious passion.
If God be angry with us, there may be some remedy, because God is merciful.
But if we be angry with him, there is no help for it. Quis populo Romano
irasci sapienter potest? What man of wisdom can be angry with the people of
Rome? much less with God. And that you may know how righteous the Lord is, in
this affection of anger, as before of envy, when we are unruly and lawless
therein, Valerius Maximus comparing anger and hatred together (the one, at the
first setting forth, the quicker, the other, in desire of reve^ge, the more
obstinate) says, that both those passions are full of consternation and
amasement, and never use violence without torment to themselves; for where
their purpose is to offer wrong, they rather suffer it: as shall better appear
unto us here^fter in the behavior of Jonas.

I have in part described unto you the nature and enormitye of these
perturbations, from the mouth of natural and worldly wisdom. What judgment
belongs unto them, when they break their bounds, I learn in a better
school* Math. 5.
Whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be culpable of
judgment. And they are numbered amongst the works of the flesh, (...).
Gal. 5. whereof the Apostle gave them double warning, that they which did such
things should not inherit the kingdom of God. Notwithstanding the viciousnes
hereof has been both opened and condemned by those, who though they had not
the law of God by peculiar assignement, as the Jews had, written in books or
in tables of stone, yet the effect of that law was written in their hearts, Romans
2*
and they were a law to themselves, their thoughts accusing or excusing them in
most of their doings. Precepts of moral conversatio^ they have as soundly
delivered, and some as strictly observed, as if Moses had taught and lived
among the^. The Apostles precept is, Romans 12. Give place to wrath and Ephesians. 4.
Be angry and sin not. Let not the sun go down upon your wrath. They had the
same precepts in Gentility, who saw no less herein by their light of nature,
and therefore devised laws to repress anger: That an angry man should not set
hand or heart to any thing til he had recited the Greek alphabet, for by that
time, the heart of choler would be alaide; and that he should sing to his
passion, as nurses to their babes, (...), have not, cry not, and anon I will
content thee. Occidissemte nisi iratu^ essem.
And the practice of Plato was according to these rules: for his servant
offending him, he said he could have killed him, but that he was moved, and
therefore desired a friend to punish him in his steed. Likewise reprehensions
of all sorts of vices, and commendations of their contrary virtues, they have
both wisely conceaved, faithfully penned, and earnestly persuaded. And although
they were ignorant of the joys of heaven and hell fire, yet in their Gentile
learning the saw reason sufficient, that the embracers of these contrary
qualities, should be contrariwise recompensed. In arundin^ sterili atque arida
vel alligata sole^ vnapendere. De bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 6. cap* 1.
Therefore I am not of opinion with those men who think that all secular and
profane learning should be abandoned from the lips of the preacher, and
whither he teach or exhort, he is of necessity to tie himself to the sentence
and phrase of only scripture. Good is good wheresoever I find it. Upon a
withered and fruitless stalk, says Augustine, a grape sometimes may hang.
Shall I refuse the grape because the stalk is fruitless and vvhithered? There
is not any knowledge of learning to be despised, Non vlla dispiciend^
disciplinae cognitio* cum de genere bonoru^ scientia si^ omnis: quin potius
ipsa^ spernentes et rusticos and plane ignavios existima re debemus etc.

Greg: Nazian. in monod.


seeing that all science whatsoever, is in the nature and kind of good
things. Rather those that despite it, we must repute rude and unprofitable
altogether, who would be glad that all men were ignorant, that their own
ignorance lying in the common heap might not be espied. If Philosophy
should therefore not be set by, because some have erred through Philosophy,
no more should the sun and the moon, because some have made them their
Gods, and committed idolatry with them. It seems by the preface of M.
Luther upon the Epistle to the Galathians that the Anabaptists condemned the
graces and works of God, for the indignity of the persons and subjects in
whom they were found. Luther retorted upon them. Then belike matrimony,
authority, liberty etc. are not the works of God, because the men who use
them, are some of them wicked. Wicked men have the use of the sun, the moon,
the earth, the air, the water, and other creatures of God. Therefore is not
the sun the sun, and do the others loose their goodness because they are
so used? The Anabaptists themselves, when as yet they were not rebaptised, had
notwithstanding bodies and souls; now because they were not rebaptized, were
not their bodies true bodies, and their souls right souls? Say, that their
parents also had a time when they were not rebaptized. Were they not therefore
truly married? If not, it will follow thereupon, that the parents were
adulterers, their children bastardes, and not meet to inherit their fathers
lands.

Likewise truth is truth wheresoever I find it. Whither we search in
Philosophy, or in the histories of the Gentiles* or in Canonical scriptures,
there is but one truth. If Peter, if the Sibylles, if the devilles shall say,
that Christ is the son of the living GOD, it is not in one a truth, a lie in
the other; but though the persons, motives, and ends be different, the
substance of the confession is in all, the same. It was true which Menander the
Poet spoke, before the Apostle ever wrote it to the Church of Corinth; Evil
words corrupt good manners. And because it was a truth in Menander, therefore
the Apostle alleged it, which else he would not. The difference between
them is, Sic bona sententia man* sit, turpis a^^thor muta^us est. Aui. Gell.
Noc. At. lib. 18. cap. 3.
that as in Lacedaemon sometimes, when in a weighty consultation, an eloquent
but an evil man, had set down a good decree, which they could not amend,
they caused it to be pronounced by one of honest name and conversation, and in
such simplicity of words as he was able presently to light upon, by that
means neither crediting the bad author so much as to take a judgment from
his mouth, nor rejecting the good sentence: so that which was a truth in the
lips of Menander, is not more true, uttered by an Apostles tongue, but it has
gotten a more approoved and sanctified author. And surely as in the tilling of
the ground, the culter and share are the instruments that break the cloddes,
and carry the burden of the work, yet the other parts of the plough are not
unnecessary to further it: so for the first breaking up of the fallow ground of
men's hearts, and killing the weeds and brambles that are therein of Adams
ancient corruption, or for preaching the great mystery of piety, and
comfortable spe^king to Sion touching the points of salvation, the only word
of God, sharper then culter or share or two edged sword, is only and
absolutely sufficient. But a man must daily build upon the former foundation,
and not only teach, but explicate by discoursing, illustrate by examples,
exemplify by parables and similitudes, by arguments confirm, shame the
gaine-saiers, convince the adversaries, fashion the life to the doctrine, plant
judgment and justice insteede of unrighteousness, stir up the affections, 2.
Tim. 2.
and show himself every way a vvorkeman not to be ashamed, and rightly
dividing the word of truth: from whom if you take his knife, that is, his
art and cunning, he shall rather tear it with his teeth, and pull it asunder
with his nails, than rightly divide it.

But you appeal to the consciences of believers, and desire to know, vvhither
their first conversion to the faith, were by reading or hearing of Gentile
stories? No. For who ever required that service of profane learning? which,
whatsoever the instrument or means be, is principally and almost wholly the
work of the holy Ghost; and wherein is fulfilled upon every convert that
comes to the knowledge of the truth, that which Samuel comforted Saul
with; The spirit of the Lord shall come upon thee, and thou shall be turned
into an other man. Who else takes the stony heart out of their bodies, 1.
Sam. 10. Ezech. 3^.
and gives them an heart of flesh? And we know besides, that the conversions
of men to the faith, have not been all after one sort: in some, by the
preaching of Christ crucified, as in those that were added to the Church by
the sermon of Peter: in some, Act. 2.
by a word from the mouth of Christ, Follow me: in some, by visions and
voices from heaven, as Paul, Act. 9. was thrown from his horse, and smitten
with blindness, and a voice came down from the clouds, saying, Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? and Saint Augustine reports, Confess. 8.12. that by
a voice from heaven, saying, Take up and read, To^le, lege.
take up and read, he was directed to that sentence Romans 13. Not in
chambe^ing and wantonness etc. Iustine Martyr witnesses of himself in his
Apology to Antoninus, Eusebius. 4.8.
that when he saw the innocent Christians, after their slanderous and false
traducementes, carried to their deaths, patient and joyful, that they were
thought worthy to suffer for the name of Christ, it occasioned his chandge of
religion. Socra. 4.15. Sozom. 7.15.
Socrates and Sozomene write that many of Alexandria, when the great temple of
Serapis was repurdged and made serviceable for the use of the Christians,
finding some mystical letters or ciphers therein, Literae Hieroglyphicae.
whereby the form of a cross was figured, and signification long before
given, that the temple should have an end, thought it warning enough to
forsake their heathenish superstitions, and to embrace the gospel of Christ
Jesus. Many other Egyptians, being terrified by the strange inundation of
Nilus, Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 20.
higher than the wonted manner thereof was, immediately condemned their ancient
idolatry, and applied themselves to the worship of the living God. Clodoveus
the French King, after many persuasions of Crotildis his lady, a religious
Burgundian, vainelie spent upon him, having at length received a great
discomfiture and slaughter in a battle against the Almannes, and finding
himself forsaken of all earthly aid, An. Do. 496. vid. Joan. Pappum histor.
de. conver. gen^iu^.
cast up his eyes into heaven, and vowed to become a Christian, upon condition
that God would give him the victory over his enemies; which he faithfully
performed. Now it holds not in reason, that because men are converted to the
faith by miracles, martyrdoms, visio^s, inundatio^s, hieroglyphics, and such
means, therefore they should always be confirmed by the same; or that those
who are converted by the word of faith, should no otherwise be confirmed and
strengthened than by that only word. For our own parts, we cannot work
wonders, we cannot call down lights and visions from heaven, we must use such
means as God has enabled us unto. And therein, tell me also by experience,
If as in former times the Gentiles were confuted by the writings of the
Gentiles (which is either a part or at least a preparatiue to conversion, for
we must first remove the preiudices conceaved against the truth,) by the
philosophy of Plato, Trismegistus, and others, which Julian a wise but wicked
Emperor saw, Proprij^ pennis consigimur. Theodoret. tripart. histor. lib. 6.
cap. 17.
behold we are wonded with our own quilles, out of our books they take
armor which in fight they use against us, and therefore made a law that the
children of the Galilaeans should not read philosophers nor Poets; and as the
Jews in later years by the Talmud of the Jews (for proof whereof I send you
to the Truenes of Christian religion, written both in Latin and French, and put
into English by as honorable a translator as the author was, So in the winning
and reclaiming of Papists at this day, it be not an ordinary way, to root up
their errors, besides the scriptures of God, not only by consent of Fathers,
decisions of Councels, but even by principles of philosophy, by reason and
outward sense, from the verdict whereof, in many questions amongst them, they
are wholly departed. Hoc quod oculi renunciant etc.
In Transubstantiation, by name, do we not shake and co^vince their in
extricable absurdities by evidence of sense, by that which our hands handle,
and our eye declares unto us, by natural demensions which a natural body is
subject unto, by circu^scriptio^ of place, and collocatio^ in one place at
once, and how insensible a thing it is, to have accide^ts without their
subject, roundnes, whitenes, and the relish of bread without bread, even as
the Lord himself proved the truth of his body, by a truth of philosophy, when
they took him for a spirit, touch me, handle me, Luke 24. Lucre^.
see me, Ta^gere enim and tangi nisi corpus nulla potest res, for nothing ca^
touch or be touched but a true body? Is it enough in this conflict to tell a
Papist, that Christ is ascended into heaven, and there must sit til al things
be restored? does he not drive thee from thine hold, and put thee to a further
replication? So do they also in many other questions; wherein if we rest upon
scripture alone, we shall send them away unsatisfied, because they admit not
this judge without other copartners, to sit and give sentence alone in the
ending of our controversies. And therefore they must be vanquished, as
Basilides and Saturninus were in Eusebius, (...), both by written
demonstrations, and by unwritten redargutions. Lib. 4. cap. 7. bistor. eccles.
Is this now to make the pulpit a philosophers school or rather the
philosophers school a foote-stoole to the pulpit, and to use it as a servant
to Divinity that it may the better proceed in the necessary work? The
histories of the Heathen (as lightly as we reckon of them) of Moab and Ammon
and all the cuntries of Canaan in former times, of the Medes and Persians,
ancient Romans and Graecians; and at this day of the Mores, Moscovites,
Turks, and Tartarians, their religion, sacrifices, manners, laws, leagues,
wars, stratagemes, and even the wars of Ha^niball and Scipio, wherein the
providence of God mightily wrought and the policy of men carefully bestirred
it self; have they nothing in them fit for the use of the temple and for the
building of Gods house? Then why do we train up our children, in poets,
orators, histories, Greekc and Latin, old and new, and not presently set the^
to the testaments, and everlastingly keep the^ in the reading and conning of
only catechismes, if all that elementary learning (for so I confess with
Seneca, rudimenta sunt, non opera, they are rudiments and beginnings, not
works) must be wholly forgotten and laid aside in the exercising of an higher
calling? Or is it a point of wisdom, think we, to season these new vessels,
when their taste of life to come is especially to be framed, with such
unprofitable licour, whereof there is no good use to be made in riper years, and
at sounder discretion? If such were the vanity, and no better fruits of these
younger studies, when an elder profession, and a more settled judgment has them
in handling, let Licinius be cleared of that infamous speech of* his in
tearming good Letters, Vir^^^ reip.
the poison of a co^mo^-wealth; and let al our books be heaped together and
burnt in the marketplace, as those books of curious arts, Act. 19* and let
their barbarous opinion who cry to pull down schools and universities, find
favor and good speed in the wishings of al men. But I ever retained, and til I
am better informed, will endevor to maintainea more honorable opinion of
learning; and such poor friendship as I am able to lend to the defense of it,
I will ever be ready to show as Ionatha did to David, not only in the field,
where no man sees it, but even to the face of those by who^ it is most
discredited. Because I have ever found by my little and simple experience, that
neither the use of Gra^mer in the proprieties of words, nor of Logic in
distinguishing ambiguities, nor Rhetoric in following precepts and rules of
speech, nor Philosophy in sca^ning causes and their effects, nor history in
calculating times, nor of any of these in many other uses and services* could
at any time be missing to the mistres and Queen of al these arts I mean to the
handling of Divinity, which is the science of sciences. S. Austin writing
against Petilian, tells us, that his adversary sometimes with open mouth and
full breath would accuse him for a Logician, and bring Logic it self to her
trial before the people, as the mistress of forgery and lying: Lib. 3. co^s.
Petil. ca. 16. Anhelis pulmonibus, tan quam dialecticum criminatur, etc Jbid.
^a. 21.
and because he showed some Rhetoric, would note him by the name of Tertullus
the orator, and charge him with the damnable wit of Carneades the Academicke:
but you must know the reason, Cu^ ad interrogatum respondere non posset, when
he was not able to answer the question propounded. No doubt, it was some great
disgrace to that learned father, to be blamed for good arts, and to bear an
objection and reproach for too much schollership. Thus let ignorance ever be
able to object to the champians of the true church and propugners of the faith
of Christ. The testimonies of the (...)*
And because I am fallen into the testimony of S. Austin let me further
acquaint you what he writes of this very argument, in his 2. book of
christian learning. His judgment is ample and plain, that if the
philosophers, so called, especially the Platonickes, Cap. 40. Tanquam ab
iniusti^ possessoribu^.
had spoken any truth consonant to our faith, we should be so far of, from
fearing it, that we should bereave them thereof, as unjust owners, and
possessioners, and apply it to our own use. For as the Egyptians had not only
idols and burdens which Israel detested, but vessels and ornaments of silver,
and gold, and store of raiment, Non solum idolae e^ onera etc.
which Israel not by their own authority, but by Gods commandment borrowed,
and Egypt ignora^tly lent, not knowing how to use the^ as they ought: So all the
learning of the Gentiles, besides their superstitious and abominable figments,
has also liberal arts, serviceable to the truth, and profitable precepts of
civility, and somewhat unreprovable of the worship of the true God, which is as
it were their silver and gold, not which themselves found out, but took it
from the mines of Gods heavenly providence, universally infused into the minds
of al me^ living. Likewise the institutio^s of me^, as it were apparel fit for
humane society, which the life of man cannot want. He also numbreth the
Israelites that went out of Egypt, Suffarcinati.
laden with those spoils, Cyprian, Lacta^tius, Victorinus, Optatus, Hilary;
and besides those who were then living, an innumerable sight of Graecians; and
before al these, the most faithful servant of the Lord, Moses, of who^ it is
written that he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. Finally he
there concludes, not preiudicing any other either his equal or superior,
that would otherwise understand it, that the policy of the children of Israel
in robbing the Egyptians, did undoubtedly prefigurate this our spoiling of the
Gentiles. I will not conceal withal, his retraction touching this point, Quod
multum tribu^ disciplini^ liberalib. quas multisancti multum nesciu^t quida^
autem qui sciune eas sancti non sunt. 1. Retrac. 3. Jn can^ic. ser. 9. Lib. 1.
epist. 82.

Si praepare^^ ingenium* non detin^an^.


in that he had much ascribed to liberal sciences, which many holy men are
much ignorant of, and some that know them, are not holy. Therefore in his first
book of order, he brings himself into an order and measure therein, that
the learning of these liberal sciences must be modesta atque succincta, modest
and short. Otherwise it is vinum inebrians, as Bernard calls it, wine that
makes a man drunk, implens no^ nutriens, inf^ans non aedificans, rather
glutting than nourishing, and puffing him up than edifiying him. Therefore
Seneca, though he knew not the sovereign knowledge which we do, and that
which is life everlasting unto us, concerning the father of lights; and him
whom he has sent, Christ Jesus, yet in comparison of other more profitable
studies and meditations, he ascribes vtility no farther unto these, than that
they prepare the wit, rather than fasten and seize upon it. Non enim discere
debemus ista, sed didicisse. For we must not ever be learning these, but have
learned them. Jerome, (or whither it were Valerius) in an epistle to Ruffinus
writes thus: Do thou mervaile, Tom. 4.
or art thou displeased, that I send thee to the imitation of Gentiles? a
Christian of Idolatours? a lamb of whelps? the good of the evil? I would
have thee like the witty discoursing Be, which from a nettle gathers honey.
So do thou suck honey from the rock, Volo sis api argume^tosae similis etc.
Omnis crea^ura dei habet aliquod exemplar honesti.

Crassam illi rusticitatem solum pro sanctitate habent.

Ne vescentiu^ dentibus edentulus in vide at, and oculos capra rum talpa
contemnat Epist. 84. Deuteronomy. 21.


and oil from the hardest stone. I know the superstition of the Gentiles, but
every creature of God has some president of goodness in it. Many things they do
perversely, but some things which have died with themselves, have caused fruit
to abound in us. And in his 102. epistle to Marcella, he taxes some, who held
gross and palpable rusticity, (ignorance, lack of learning) for only
sanctity, and bragged that they were disciples of fishermen, as if they were
therefore holy, because they knew nothing. And elsewhere he wrote to Romanus,
that he should admonish Calphurnius, if he vvanted teeth himself, not to be
envious against others who were able to eat, nor to contemn the eyes of
goats, himself being a want and stark blind. To this purpose he alleges
and applies the law of the beawtifull captive woman taken in war,
whereunto if a man had a mind, he must cause her head to be shaven, her
nails pared, and the garments, wherein she was taken, put of, and then he
might marry her. What mervaile is it then, says he, if I take the wisdom of
the world, for the grace of speech and comeliness of parts that I find
therein, and of a captive make it an Israelitish woman, and whatsoever it has
dead, idolatrous voluptuous, erroneous or the like either I cut it away or
shave it, and bring forth lawful children to the Lord of hosts? Thus O see
took him a wife of fornications, Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, who bare him a
son, Ose. 1.
and he called him Izreel, that is, the seed of God. And toward the end of
that epistle, as if he had been exercised with the objections of our times, he
would not have him mistake, as if it were not lawful so to do, save only in
disputations against the Gentiles; for almost there is no book written by any
man, excepting Epicurus and his followers, Jn aliis dispu^ationibus
dissimulandum.
but is very full of learning. Basilius the Great, in a large treatise to his
nephews of this very argument, counsaileth the^, not to cast the ankers of
their shipping, nor to fasten their opinions and affections upon such men, but
only to pick out those things that were profitable. To life everlasting he
doubts not but they may be sufficiently furnished out of the sacred volumes.
Those other writings: which were not altogether discrepant from the books of
God might serve as shadows and glimpses before hand to prepare the sight, and
for trial of wit, as those that practice a while in the sense-schoole,
before they profess their better skill, and as fullers lay some ground color,
before they die purple. He adds, that as to trees laden with fruit, the
leaves give some ornament and grace; so when the excellentest truth is
apparelled and compassed with this outward wisdom of the world, it becomes
thereby the more delightful and pleasant. Notwithstanding, he wishes them not
to take their choice at ra^dom, and to esteem al alike. But as in plucking
roses, they are careful to avoid the prickles; so they give heed to that only
which is good, and eschew the noisome and pestilent. And although he leaves
obscene and wanton Poets to the stage, yet he encourages them to the better
sort, upon the iudegment of a grave man, and well skilled in the Poets, of whom
he had heard, Omnis Homeri poes^ virtutis laus.

Prolegons in Genes.


that Homers whole poetry, was but a praise of virtue. David Chytraeus a little
to break the rank of the fathers, speaks as highly in the commendation of
philosophers and orators: that al their writings of manners are as it were a
certain commentary, upon the 5. former commandments of the later table. The
knowledge of the former he confesses, was overobscure unto them, and of the
last of all touching concupiscence, almost extinguished. And he honoreth
histories no less, the common and universal argument of all which he
affirms to be that which an Heathen spoke, Discite iustitiam moniti, and no^
temnere divos; Ye Princes and people of the world, take your warning, to do
justice and to fear God. For this cause, to return back to the fathers, S.
Agustine in one place clears philosophy, and philosophers, and tells his
mother that the divine scriptures, which she embraced so earnestly, did not
condemn philosophers simply, but the philosophers of this world. 1. De ord.
cap. vlt. Colos. 2.
And if any man thought that all philosophy was to be shunned* his meaning was
none other thein, than not to have us love wisdom. In an other he speaks
for eloquence, and thinks it no reason, that because some bear arms against
their country, others should be debarred of armor to defend it; or that
Physicians instruments should be denied to the skillful, Advers. Crescon. li.
1. Cap 1. Quae vtina^ mihi prodesiderio provenisse^. Jbid. cap. ^.
because the unlearned have used them to kill with. Eloquence, he says, is not
evil (which for the uttering of his mind, he wishes had fallen unto him to
his hearts desire) but a sophistical, maligna^t professions, proposing to it
self, not is it means but either of co^tentio^, or for commodity sake, to
speak for all things and against all things. What were more profitable than
the eloquence of Donatus, Parmenian, and others of your sect, if it ran with
as free a stream for the peace, unity, truth, and love of Christ, as it
flows against it? for else it is venenata fafacundia, a venomous eloquence,
Si noxium, ibi damnatu^, si vtile, ibi in venitur. etc. Aug. 2 de doct Chr. 42.
August. Ibid Covasrubdom. 1. advent. ser. 6. Quaecunque a pud omnes recte dicta
su^t, nostra Christianoru^ su^t. Justin. Mart orat. ad Gentil. and Sen. Romans

Progymnas mata.

Tert. in Apol 1. and 5. strom Joan Langus praefat. in Justin. Mare ad Gent.
Justin. Mart adver Graec. Praesumpsio ne^ in iis, in nobi^ su^mae scientiae.
Petrus Blesent.

Non refert qua terra nata, ^uius hortulani cura creverit herba, modo sanet. 2.
Sam. 12. Joan. de Bro^^ardo Ei^s igitur exemplo and ^u^ilio etc.


as Cyprian wrote of the eloquence of Novatus in his epistle to Cornelius* I
know there is much amiss both in the matter and in the use of profane
learning. But this we are sure of, that if we bring it to the touchstone of
scripture, whatsoever we read in foreign authors, if it be vicious, it is
there condemned; if wholesome, we shall there find it, and many things besides
which we have found no where else. For it shall never be denied, but that here
are the riches and treasures of wisdom; and that the knowledge collected out
of the books of the Gentiles with this of the book of God compared, is no
more, than the treasure carried out of Egypt, which to the riches of Jerusalem,
especially when Solomon was the king there, was in a manner as nothing. For as
the wine that comes from the vines of the mountains, is both finer and
pleasanter, than that of the valleys; so the heavenly knowledge which
descends from the highest hills, and from the throne of God, must needs be
sweeter to our taste, than the sour and unsavory knowledge of the world, which
grows in the valley of tears. To conclude, what things soever, and in what
authors soever, were well spoken, they are ours, I mean the christians; and we
may take our own where we find it. Plato is sometimes alter Moses, and Moses
Atticus, an other Moses, and Moses at Athens: wheresoever therefore he speaks
as Moses did, that is ours. Orpheus and Sybilla have delivered certain
introductio^s or assaies of prophetical learning; those are ours. What Poet,
what Philosopher is there, that has not drunk at the well of the Prophets?
that is ours. Cleme^s Alexandrimus calls the^ thieves, and charge them to
have stolen their best opinions from holy writers; those are ours also. Many
things they speak at unawares, and tanquam per recantationem, at a fit, as it
were recanting their errors, many things ingratis, compelled and against their
wills, which in them are but ghesses and presumptions, in us grounded knowledge;
these are ours likewise. It skilleth not in what ground the herb grew, nor
what gardener sowed it, or brought it up, so it heal. And what matter is it
though the crown were the kings of Ammon, so it be meet for the king of
Jerusalem to take away, and to set upon his own head? A countryman of our
own, though an obscure author, wrote not obscurely touching this controversy.
For in the prologue of his tripartite work, he gives a reason why he induces
the laws of the Heathen. The wisdom of God* says he, has brought the
storke, and the kite, and the swallow to witness against sinners. Wherefore
by his example and assistance, who has brought an hony-combe out of the mouth
a lion, and abondance of water from an asses iawbones, and who is able of
stones to raise up children to Abraham, I have endeavored of the laws of
Pagans, to make childrens bread, fit for the information and instruction of a
christian life. I have long troubled you with the opinions of the ancient
Fathers, and some later Divines, touching these Gentile and external helps.
But where shall I seek patrones, if need be, for these fatherless and
friendlesse Fathers themselves? for these we also account to be spots in our
sermons, and our labors seem the worse, if the names of Augustine, Jerome,
and other reverend Doctors do but sound therein. Surely according to that
image of the world, which I have found pictured with the feet vpwardes, to
note that all things are turned vpside down, we the Pu^ies and proselytes of
good learning, control and correct our fathers: and although in many of us,
there be very small cause, yet we presume to say with David, not speaking from
the humble spirit of God, but from a strong conceit of our own weakness, and
a weaker judgment of the strength of others, I am vviser than my teachers,
Psalm. 159.
I have more understanding than the ancient ever had. Howsoever we account of
them, it is most true, that they have labored for us, and we are entered upon
their labors. The fruits whereof if we reap without acknowledgement, we are
unthankful; or if we pass the^ over with contempt and disdain, and think
it the loosing of good hours, to peruse their books, we are too fond of our
own learning. Other men as they list. Let them esteem the light of antiquity
no better worth than to be hid under a bushel, and quite suppressed, that they
may set their own upon a candlestick, Senec. lib. 8. Epist. 65.
and cause it to blaze to the view of the whole house: Ego vero illos veneror,
and tantis nominibus semper assurgo, But for mine own part, I have them in
great reverence, and honor their very names; and I say of their works in
general, as Theotimus a Bishop amongst the Scythians spoke of the works of
Origin, when Theophilus and Epiphanius urged him to join in the condemnation
of them: I will neither discredit him, Vt reprobem quae maiores nostri non
reprobarunt* Socrat. lib. 6. Cap. 12.
who is long since happily fallen a sleep in the LORD: neither dare I attempt
so blasphemous a thing, as to reprove those writings which our forefathers
have not reproved. They carried memorable names in former ages. Cyprian called
Tertullian his master. Vincentius Lirinensis says of him, that his
arguments were as the lightninges to beat down heretics. The testimonies
that Augustine gives unto Cyprian, are very large, Inter raro^ and pauco^
excellentiss. gra^ae viros L^. 6 de bapt con^. Donatist. cap 2. Erasm. praefa^.
in opera Cypriani* Haeretico. rum malleus Orbis terrarunt oculus. Magnus
Athanasius.
and this amongst the rest, that the Mother Church reputed him in the number of
a very fevv of most excellent condition, But who can study to spend more
honor upon him, than he who said, Loquitur a^serta, sed magis fo^^ia quam
diserta, neque tam loquitur fortia quam vivit; His speech is eloquent, yet has
more strength in it than eloquence, and his life more strength th^n his speech.
Augustine they termed not unworthily the hammer of heretics. Athanasius
called Ambrose the eye of the world. Athanasius himself was surnamed the
Great, for his invincible courage in defending the Church. Nazianzen writes
of Basile, that between him and his followers, there is no more comparison
than between pillars and their shadows. I omit the rest. But such are our
unequal judgments, of those whose equalles we shall hardelye be, that if
we were willed to speak what we thought of Basile, we would reckon him but a
shadow and counterfeit to our selves, and great Athanasius as one of the least
amongst us, and thrust out the eyes of Ambrose, and term him a crow and a
chough as the Pie of Mirandula did, and Cyprian should have a letter of his
name changed as sometimes it was, Corvum and corniculam. Cyprianus. Caprianus
Lactant.
and be but Caprian unto us, one that wrote of trifles and vanities. I omit
the rest, the classical and principal Doctors of the church (next the
Apostles of Christ, and their next succeeders) the stars and ornaments of
learning, the pillars of religion and Christianity in their time, who put their
bodies and souls betwixt Christ and his adversaries, who spoke, and vvrote,
and lived, and died in defense of his truth, whose labors were then renowned,
and GOD in his providence has reserved their books to this day, monumentes to
us of their infatigable pains, and helps to our studies, if we be not
enemies to our selves. I could be content to say much for them; because I use
them much. For I never could be bold to offer mine own inventions and
conceiptes to the world when I have found them such in S. Augustine, and
others, as might not be amended. I would not wish the learned of any sort,
that has but borne a book, to dispraise learning. She has enemies enough
abroad, Oportet sapientiam ab insipientibus feriri Diogen*
though she be justified by her children. It is fitter that wisdom be beaten
by fools, than by wisemen:, and that Barbary disgrace arts, rather than
Athens the mother and nurse of them. But above all other places, a blow given
in the pulpit, leaves a skarre in the face of learning, which cannot easily be
removed. It preiudiceth the teaching of others, as if they fed the people with
akornes and husks in steed of bred; and because they gather the members of
truth together, dispersed through orators, philosophers, poets, fathers,
scriptures, and make one body of them all which God is the author of, they are
thought in a manner to preach falshod. Or at least, it is vanity, in those that
preach, and itching in those that hear, and in neither of both to be allowed.
I also condemn it, when it is so. Vain and vain glorious invention let it
wither at the brain that sent it forth. And let itching ears fret and consume
away with the malignity of their humors. Where we find them itching afte^
plea^sure, it is good to make them smart with the acrimony of severe
reprehension. But where it is otherwise, let not a rash conclusion without
proof, be admitted against good learning. If Asclepiodorus will draw with a
cole, or chawke alone, I judge him not; if others will paint with colors,
neither let them be judged. If some will barely teach, and others prove; if
some affect to speak with simplicity, and others with variety illustrate; If
some confer with men of yester day, others with antiquitye, some bind
themselves precisely to the words of God, others not refrain the words of men,
using the^ as the words of God; If some stand narrowlye upon the terms and
sentences of faith, (...) 1. Pet. 4.
others not depart from the proportion of faith nor bring in any thing
dissonant and disagreeing to the uniformity thereof; both may do well, but the
latter, in mine opinion, do far the better. That which concerns you, in
this little dissent of judgments, the sheep of his pasture, by whom we are
set in his house to give you your portion in due time, is this that you be not
dismayed heereat. For we preach not our selves in such kind of preachinges,
but Christ Jesus the Lord, not to commend our gifts, but to edify your
consciences. And to this end, I may say, with some alteration of words, as
the Apostle to the Corinthians, All things are yours, whither it be Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, 1.
Cor. ^
or things to come: so all things are yours in our preachinge, whither it be
scripture, or nature, or art, all is yours. Yours are Philosophers, Orators,
Historigraphers, Poets, Jews, Gentiles, Grecians, Barbarians, Fathers,
new-writers, men, angels, that you may be saved; this only is the end, where
unto our knowledge and learning of what kind soever is directed.

To return to Jonas discontented, and withal to conclude; The conclusion.
you see the fall, nay you see the relapse of a chosen prophet, a sickness
recovered, and a recidivation into the same or a worse sickness. Before he had
sinned, and recanted his sin, and washed his disobedience away with the water
of the sea, but now is returned to the mire again: mire indeed, wherein his
heart as a troubled and muddy spring is so disordered, that he discerns
nothing a right, neither in faith to God, nor charity to man, nor love to
himself; accusing the most righteous Lord, envying his innocent brethren, and
carried away headlong with a kind of detestation toward his own person; once
angry, and angry again, and not only conceaving, but defending anger; angry
with the worm in the earth, angry with the sun in the sky, angry with the
wind in the air, angry with the former and governor of all these, who could
have ended his passion with the least breath of his angry lips. A dangerous
and grievous wound in a Saint, If I would thrust my fingers into it, and
thoroughly handle it. But I leave it to the order of my text, worthy of
another sea, and of another whale, and once more of the belly of hell, even of
hell indeed, if God would exactly stand to repay it, Improbe Neptunum accusat,
qui iterum naufragium facit; He has no reason to accuse Neptune, that so
presentlye after a late danger, will hazard himself to take shipwreck again.
God is admirable in his Saints, not only in their risinges, but in their
fallings also. The best amongst them have fallen. And I love to report their
falls, not that I take any pleasure with ungracious Chain to uncover the
nakedness of my fathers, but because that mantell and cloak of charity, which
God casts over their sins, to cover their weaknesses with, is the
comfortablest reading and learning that the world has. S. Augustine spoke
wisely of the error of Cyprian: Lib. 1. de baptis, cont. Donat. cap. 18.
Propterea non vidit aliquid, ut aliquid per eum supereminentius videretur;
There was something which he saw not, that he might gain the knowledge of some
more excellent thing, That which he lost in faith, he got in charity. So
there is somewhat that Jonas does not, to make way to the doing of some bettter
work. For if he gained nothing else, the mercy of God might by this means
be the more commended in the forgiveness of his trespass, and that which he
loses in charity, he gets in faith, that is in the assurance and
ratification of the love of God toward him. Commissum atque conscriptum est:
says Augustine upon the 51. Psalm. of the adultery and murder of David. So
is this fault of Jonas both done and written by one of whom I am sure that his
witness is true, because he accuses himself: and it is written for our
learning, that those who yet stand, fall not; and those that are fallen, may
rise again. Trust not your arms of flesh, trust not your hearts of ashes,
trust not your purest and vprightest spirits, whilst they have their dwelling
in houses of clay, and there is a law in the members striving against them to
get the victory. If you have stood a time, yet trust not your legs, you may
slide again; or if you have slipped and recovered, trust not that recovery, for
fear of backsliding. Trust not the prerogative of your calling; Prophets have
fallen, Patriarchs have fallen, Apostles have fallen, stars have fallen,
Angels have fallen; trust notly your strength, it is infirmitye; trust not
wisdom, it is folly; trust not the frendshippe of the world, it is enmity
with God; trust not the authority thereof, it is contemptible in his sight;
trust not the purity of nature, it is defiled; trust not the righteousness of
your works, it is imperfect: trust in the mercy of God, for that only is
absolute; and in the merits of his beloved son, for they are all-sufficient.
It is I, it is even I, Es. 43.
which for mine own sake put away thine iniquities. It is not I, nor thou,
nor Abraham, nor Moses, nor Peter at Rome, not Paul at Jerusalem, that can do
this cure: Hear thy Physician; It is I, even I. Not with the preparation of
thine own nature, nor with the liberty of thine own will, nor with the
cooperation of thine own justice: hear him once again; It is I, even I,
which for mine own sake. If thou thinks to hire him, thou loosest him. He
stands not upon thy desert, but upon his own most holy name, his own most
righteous promise, and the obedience of his own and most only begotten son,
the Lord Christ Jesus.

An admonition to the readers.
IT may seem strange, that I have used so lardge and impertinent a digression
in behalf of good learning. As after a long oration spent in the praise of
Hercules, one asked, quis vituperavit? Who dispraised Hercules? So you may
desire to know, who dispraised learning. Let it suffice you to understand,
that one of my fellow laborers in this work of the Lord, whom neither I
judge in the freedom of his conscience for speaking what he thought, neither
can free from the community of erring with my self and others, because we are
all imperfect in knowledge, upon the best day of the seven, in the best place,
and before not the meanest assembly, handling the words of the Apostle, 1.
Cor. 16.13. watch ye, stand fast in the faith; took occasion thereupon, to
stand for the only word of faith in sermons, with vehement exception
against the histories of the Gentiles, Orators, Poets, and other profane
knowledge. Wherein, let it be his commendation, that according to the warning
of his text, he was diligent in his watch, and being jealous for the truth,
suspected those for enemies which were not, and showed his fidelity to the
faith, though he went a little too far, and missed in the just measure of
applying it. For mine own part, I would have spared mine answer, especially
in public, but that I perceived the speech to be bent to some mark of a few
that labored in that calling, and the ears of the people drank it in with
earnest atte^tion, because it was heartily spoken, and some were perplexed,
others offended therewith, and learning was wounded, which not to have salved
had been a wrong, and the arrow flew from her side, and glanced upon us all
without exception in that church, who in our manner of teaching held no other
course.

THE XLI. LECTVRE.
Chap. 4. ver. 2. And he prayed unto the Lord, and said; I pray thee, O Lord,
was not this my saying when I was yet in my country? etc.
THe first part of this chapter is spent in declaring the fault of Jonas, his
unmerciful affection toward this poor people freed from the wrath of God, to
who^ he should have wished well if they had been enemies, as now they were
friends and reconciled by apparent repentance, and rather the^ have missed this
success which fell out, not only have doubled and trebled his pains, but even
have pulled out his eyes, and laid down his life to have saved their lives.
Jonas in liew hereof, envieth their mercy received, and is angry against God,
the dispenser and carver of that mercy, and angry against himself, that he
lives to behold his expectation so contraried. A wound in a prophet so much
the more intolerable, that it was but green after his late recovery. For
being newly raised up from falling, he dasheth his foot presently against the
same stone; rebelling before against the express commandment of God, and now,
repining, fretting, expostulating, and not much less then rebelling again.
One would have thought that the salt sea should have purged and washed away
all his choleric distemperatures, and that his danger so newly endured and
eschewed, farther than his hope could see into, should wholye have
transformed him into a man of mercy. But you see it is otherwise. For the
goodness of God displeases Jonas exceedingly, and he is angry. The impatience
of Jonas consisting of envy implied, and probably coniectured, ( it displeased
Jonas) and of anger openly expressed, we have in general laid down in the
first verse, and are particularly to pursue in those that follow. The^ were
named the affections only, now we come to the effects of those affections,
with what gesture and speech he came before God. Surely the effects are such,
that they deserve to be smitten with the censure of the wise man; A stone is
heavy, and the sand weighty, but yet a fools heart is heavier than the^ both.
Prove. 27.
Balance the justice of God in his righteous dealing with the penitent city of
Niniveh, against the anger of Jonas fired and enraged, does not Jonas impeach
it? as if the Lord had done some injury, for which he were justly to be taunted
and brought into question? O I beseech thee, was not this my saying? etc.
Po^der his own offense, which if Saul, or some other aliant had committed, he
should have borne his trespass, does he not justify it? therefore I prevented
it, that is, I did not amiss to fly unto Tharsis. The state of this mighty
city to be desolate and overthrown he regards no more, than to see a grass
in the field mowen down. For I knew thee to be a merciful God; that which I
feared is fallen upon me, the exhibition of thy grace to Niniveh. Yea the price
of his own life is but vile in his own eyes, so he may wreake his anger, and
satisfy his disconte^ted mind, by any either lawful or unlawful means: Now
therefore, I pray thee, take my life from me etc. Neither did he only conceive
anger in his mind, but he follows, feeds, maintains it, that we have
just cause to strike him again with another sentence of the same wise man, Be
not thou of an hasty spirit to be angry for anger rests in the bosom of
fools. Eccles. 7. Lib. 2. cap. 16. de fide orthod.
Damascen makes three degrees; of anger, bilem, iracund^a^, infensione^,
Choler, wrath, and heavy displeasure. The one he says, has beginning and
motion, but presently cease; the other takes deeper hold in the memory; the
third desisteth not without revenge. Gregory Nyssen keeping the same number,
calls the 1. anger, the ^. lightness of the brain, Iram, maniom, furorem.
Comment. in Damas. 4 Ethic. 11. (...).
the 3. stark staring madness. Clichtoveus compares the first to fire in
stubble, which is soon kindled, and soon put out; the second, to fire in
iron, which hardly takes and longer abides; the third, to fire that is hid
and never bewraieth it self, but with the ruin and wast of that matter wherein
it has caught. Some are sharp, says Aristotle, others are bitter, a 3. kind
is implacable. The anger of Jonas may seem to have been in the third place;
it cannot be mitigated. He desires nothing so much as that Niniveh may be
overthrowen. He complains, persisteth, replieth, and by no persuasions can
be brought from showing his displeasure both against God, and against his
own life. To come to my purpose; the particulars to be examined, for the
better searching out of his fault, are, 1. that he prayed unto the Lord: 2.
what he prayed: and therein both the substance of his petiton in the 3. verse,
therefore I beeseech thee take my life from me; and the causes that moved him
so to pray, for that, the mercy of God had disapointed him, I knew that thou
art a gracious God etc. together with an exprobration, that he suspected so
much when he was at home.

1 That he prayed.
And he prayed unto the Lord. That Jonas prayed, or that he prayed unto the
Lord, I dislike not. Happy is that man who either in the midst of anger, or of
any other offense can pray. He ever obtains either that which he prays
for, Aut hoc quod orat. aut quod melius est, ^ut quod sufficit.
or that which is better, or that which is sufficient, If Jonas had
restinguished and choked the fervor of his wrath, with the fervency of the
spirit, he had done beyond exception: but it is well that he remembers
himself any way to be a prophet, and does not quite forget God and his whole
duty toward him. For anger has a company of most pestilent daughters; Aquin.
2.2. quae. 158. tumor men^is.
swelling of the mind, so high and so full, that there is no room for any
good motion to dwell by it: contumely, toward men; blasphemy, toward God;
indignation of heart, impatience and clamor of speech; violence of hands,
with other savage and monstrous demeanor, as far forth as strength will give
it leave. Prover. 27.
Anger is cruel, (says the Proverb) and wrath is raging, but who can stand
before Envy? I know that the effects of anger have been such as I named
before. Genes. 49.
They were such in Simeon and Levi, whom Jacob their father upon his
deathbed, when all displeasure should have died with him, detested in his
very soul, and insteede of blessing, cursed them. They were such in Saul
against Jonathan his own flesh, for excvsing the absence of David, and making
no more than a just defense of his innocence, wherefore shall he die? 1 Samuel
20.
What has he done? When he took up a iaveling in his hand, and would have
nailed him to the wall, if his mark had not shunned him^ It appears by that
which follows, that if it had been possible for Jonas to have commanded fire
from heaven, as the disciples would have done, Luke 9. against a town of
Samaria, he would not have spared it. But anger exercises the arms of the
strong, ths tongue of the weak. Therefore, Jra forti producit lacertos,
imbelli linguam. Scaliger.
sithence he has not power over the thunders and lightnings of God, he
occupies but his tongue, but whatsoever may be done by the intemperatnes
thereof, he dissembleth it not.

It is no great commendation to Jonas that he prayed, because he prayed in
choler, with a spirit troubled and disordered, measuring all things, not by
the will of God, but by the fancies thereof; because with such distraction of
mind, the founteine of his heart pouring forth sweet and sour together; the
words of his lips directed unto God, but his inward cogitations altogether
bestowed in purging himself, wishing revenge, accusing God, and other such
like foreign and improper intentions. It might have been said to Jonas,
bending himself to prayer in this sort, as the prophet spoke to Jerusalem,
wash thy heart from malice, Ierem. 4. Mat. 9.
how long shall thy wicked thoughts remain within thee? Or as it was said to
the Scribes in the gospel, why think ye evil in your hearts? Our savior
counseled his disciples, Mat. 6. when they prayed, not to be as the
hypocrites, standing at the heads of the streets, but to enter into their
chambers, and shut the doors unto them, and to pray to their father in secrett,
that he might openly reward them. Now to what purpose is it, to remove the
body from the eyes of men, to close it up in a private chamber, within walls
and doors, Molesta intus familia. Senec.

Turbam intus sustinet. Gregor.


if the soul have a troublesome and unquiet company within, anger, impacience,
envy to disturb her meditations with noise? for these must also be put forth
as Christ put forth the minstrelles and mourners, all the affections of the
heart must be repressed, the whole strength and might of the soul kept nearely
together, without wandering abroad, that by their forces united in one, the
goodness of the Lord may the sooner be obtained. The oracle gave answer to
a man desirous to know what art he should use in praying, thou must give the
half moon, the whole sun, and the anger of a dog, that is, cor, Da media^
lunam, solemn simul, and canis iram.
thy whole heart, with every affection belonging unto it. In that introduction
of prayer, which our Savior sets down in the gospel, though there be
sundry branches of requests to God, as the sanctifieing of his name, the
enlardginge of his kingdom, or whatsoever else is meet, either for the body
or the soul of man, yet all the rest are passed over with their only first
reciting, and the only exposition which he leaves unto us, is upon the fifth
petition, wherein we desire pardon of our own debts, as we pardon others.
Math. ^.
For there our Savior adds, culling this one from amidst all the rest, and
setting his special mark upon it, if you forgive men their trespasses, your
heavenly father will also forgive you; if not, look accordinglye to be dealt
with. His meaning, no doubt, was, that when we bring our gift to the altar, the
oblation of our lips and hearts, and come not in charity, whatsoever we make
request for, is returned back again, and our whole offeringirefused, as an
unsavory thing which the Lord has no pleasure in. 1. Cor. 13.
Though I speak with the tongues of men and angels, and have not charity, I
am as sounding brass, or a tinckling cymball: and though I had the gift of
prophecy, and knew all secrets and knowledge, yea, if I had all faith, so that
I could remove mountains, and had not charity, (...); before I was little, I
was but a sound, now I am nothing, What can we less pronounce of the prayer
of Jonas? though one that spoke with the tongue of a man, and in comparison of
other men, the tongue of an angel, a tongue of the learned, a tongue refined
like silver, though one that had the gift of prophecy, and knew as many
mysteries of knowledge as was expedient for flesh and blood to be acquainted
with, one that had faith enough to save him in the bottom of the seas, the
bottom of the mountains, the bottom and belly of a monstrous fish, but that
the want of love was sufficient to have lost the blessing and grace of all his
hearts desires?

2. What he prayed.
And said, I pray thee, O Lord, was not this my saying etc. Consider now I
beseech you what he prayed, and therein, how long it is before he comes to
the matter intended, a foolish and unnecessary discourse interposed of his own
praise, but his subjection to the will of God not thought upon. For what is the
substance of his prayer? that which is inferred, after a long preface, therefore
I pray thee, take away my life from me; he strengthens it by reason, for it
is better for me to die than to live. Why better? the cause of this
commodiousnes and convenience are contained in the prolocution, in those
frivolous and vain speeches that are first laid down, I beseech thee, was
not this my saying etc. As Much as to say, I was thrust forth into a charge,
which from the first hour I had never liking unto, and wherein I thought, and
said, and resolved to my self from the very beginning, that I should be
deceived. Admit all this. Say thou foresawest it, and that the end would be
other than thou lookedest for, ought thou therefore to have refused thy
message? a necessity was laid upon thee, and thou might well assure thy
self, that woes would have lighted upon thee as many as the hairs of thy
head, if thou did it not. Leave the event to God, let him use his floor at
his pleasure, whither he gather into the barn, or skatter as the dust of the
earth, do thou the office of a prophet. Again, thou sentest me to denounce a
judgment, and thou meantest nothing but well unto the^; I preached righteousness
and severity, and thou art a gracious God, and full of pity; I made their
accounts perfect and straight, that destruction should fall upon them at the end
of forty days, thou take a pen of thy mercy, and dashest thy former writing,
and writest the^ a longer day, years and generations to come, I know not how
many. Upon this he concludes, therefore now O Lord, take away my life etc. But
we will weigh the conclusion when we come to it. Mean-time, we must rip up his
former speeches, which were of preparation, making the way to his suit before
hand. Peruse the^ who will, he shall find them fuller of affections than words:
and such a bundell of errors wrapped together, as one would hardly have imagined
in a prophet. Wherein by a blind selfe-liking, and love to his own wit and
judgment, he is carried from reason, truth, obedience, and from that reverent
estimation which he should have had of God. For how often in so short a space
does he challendge wisdom to himself? I beseech thee, O Lord, I appeal to
thine own conscience, speak but truth, and be not partial in thine own
cause, was not this my saying? I am able to allege particulars, I can
remember the time and the place when I was yet in my country; therefore I
prevented it: If I had had mine own will, I had stopped this inconvenience, for I
was not to learn that thou vvast a gracious God, there was no point of
foresight wherein I mistook. Thus his saying, his providence, his prevention,
his knowledge, these are the things that he stands to much and to long
upon. Thy saying, Jonas, or my saying, or the saying of any mortal man? what
are the words of our lips, or the imaginations of our hearts, but naughty,
foolish, perverse from our youth up, if God direct them not? or what thy
prevention and forecast, or of all thy companions, prophets, or prophets
children in the world, to know what to morrow will bring upon you, or the
closing up of the present day, unless some wisdom from heaven cast beams
into your minds to ^llighten them? 2. King. 13.
As Elizeus directed the hand of Ioash the king of Israel to shoot, and the
arrow of Gods deliverance followed upon it, and so often as he smote the
ground, by the apointment of the prophet, so often, and no longer, he had
likelihoode of good success: so the Lord must direct our tongues and hearts in
all that proceeds from them; and where his holy Spirit cease to guide us,
there it will be verified that the prophet has, Surely, every man is a
beast by his own knowledge. Therefore the advice of Solomon is good; Prover. 3.
Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not unto thy wisdom:
in all thy ways acknovvledge him, and he shall direct thy paths. Be not wise
in thine own eyes, and fear the Lord, and depart from evil, so shall
health be to thy navell, and marrow to thy bones. You have heard the counsel
of the wise: now join unto it for conclusion, the judgment of the most
righteous, Esaias 5.
W^e unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own
sight. Wisdom presumed, you see, and drawn from the cisterne of our own
brain, is, in the reputation of God, as the sins of covetousness,
oppression, drunkenness, and such like, and stands in the crew of those damned
and wretched iniquities which God accurseth.

Querelam temporat, quod iniustitiae quoda^ modo Deum arguat.
I pray thee. I like the note that Jerome gives upon this place, he tempereth
his complaint, because in some sort he accuses God of injustice. For this
cause he sweetneth the accusation with fair and flattering speech. For, to
have challendged God, in gross and blunt terms, had bin to apparent; therefore
he comes with a plausible and glosing insinuation unto him, I pray thee, O
Lord; for, remembering that fearful name of his, Iehova, wherein he saw nothing
but majesty and dreadfulnes, could he do less than entreat him? if he had
spoken but to the king of Niniveh, in whose dominions he was, or to Jeroboam
the second, who reigned in his own native country, the very regard of their
persons and place would have enforced him so much. It was the counsel that
AEsop gave to Solon, enquiring what speech he should use before Croesus, A^t
quam minima aut quam dulcissima. Pro. 25. and 15.

Osser^m. Qu^so Iehova.

Pauper cum obse^ratio. nibus loquit^r. Pr. 18. Job. 21.


either very little, or very sweet. For a prince is pacified with courtesy,
and a soft answer turns away wrath, and a gentle tongue breaks a man of
bones, that is, of the hardest and toughest disposition that can be. If such
then be our usage before the princes of the earth, who are but smoke and
vanity, much more does the presence of the most high God require it.

I pray thee. The form of speech, I have elsewhere noted, befitteth suitors,
The poor speaks with prayers, but the rich speaks roughly: for those that
are rich, are full and sufficient, as they think, in themselves, and therefore
they say unto God, in the vain trust of their own abundance, who is the
Almighty that we should serve him? and what profit shall we have, if we
pray unto him? The Jews, Esas 58. were so filled and blown up with the
opinion of their own merits, that they thought perhaps God was little able to
stand them in steed, and therefore they come not unto him, we beseech thee, but
vpbraiding, challendging, provoking, wherefore have we fasted, and punished
our selves, and thou regardest it not? As if God were bound unto them to hear
them for their service sake. Such were the Scribes and the Pharisees in the
Gospel; why eats your master with Publicanes and sinners? and, this man is
a friend to Publicanes and sinners; and, if this man were a prophet, he would
have known who had touched him, for she is a sinner. Themselves, what were
they in this eying and pointing at sinners so much? Angels, or men? Saints, or
sinners? One of that school, though he went into the temple to pray, yet he
prayed not as if he found want, but rather gave thanks for that which he had
received: and gloried in himself before all other men, and especially with
scorneful demo^stration, before that Publican. Luke 18.
Let them swell with their full conceiptes till they break, and let their eyes
stand out with fatnes, let them bear the collopes of presumption and disdain
in their flanks: but the voice of the gospel of Christ, which is the rod of
our comfort, The poor receive the gospel, and, Blessed are the poor in
spirit, is smally to the comfort of these stately and stout guestes. I came not
to call the righteous, but the sinners to repentance; This is the sparre of the
gate; if ever thy think to enter into the supper of the Lamb, their
righteousness fasly supposed keeps them out. They have purchased a farm of
righteousness, they think their dwellings safe enough without the house of
God, and therefore they desire to be excused; they plough with the oxen of
their own imagined righteousness, and have married themselves unto it as unto a
wife, and therefore they cannot come. To him that is full, honey is unpleasant,
but emptines and sinfulnes lies at his gates who is rich in mercy, as Lazarus
at the gates of the Rich man, with all her ulcers and sores laid open, all her
infirmities detected, craving, begging, beseeching to be refreshed with the
crumbs that fall from his boarde, even with the smallest pittance of mercy that
God is author of. Therefore he says, I pray thee, Lord.

In the prayer of the Mariners before, I commended their humility, upon
occasion of the like term, Chap. 1.
in that they used the right form of supplication: it shall not be amiss to
commend humility unto you, and you unto it once again, there is so hard
getting, harder keeping of it. We have all hawty, and Pharisaicall eie-browes,
whether we talk with God or man: and as all vices are against humility, either
openly or privately; so especially pride of heart is a sworn, and professed
enemy unto it in the open field. Yea all virtues are against humility; for we
are proud of giving alms, tithing, fasting, praying, learning, wisdom, Saepe
^tiam homo de ipso vanae gloriae contemp^s vanus gloriatur.
knowledge, and love to be seen of men. To say further; humility has an hand
against humility, against her own person, and by an unnatural prodigious
birth, brings forth pride: For the humble sometimes is as proud of his
lowlines, as Digones of his rags. Even for that difficulty sake, we are to
desire the teacher and actor of humility, who both delivered it by precept,
Math. 11. and declared it by the example of his whole life, when we send our
prayers into heaven, not only to bow* the knees of our bodies, but the knees of
our hearts; yea even to humble and bow the very phrase of our words, that we
may utter the^, as if the smallest grasshopper of the earth were to speak with
fear and reverence before that dreadful Majesty, I beseech thee, Lord;
without vpbraiding, challe^dging, covena^ting, for any our highest service that
has bin, or shall be done. If we well examine our selves, we shall find somewhat
without us to teach us humility, Extra nos.
not only the better virtues of other men, who have more deserved, and received
less at Gods hands, but even their falls in the midst of those virtues;
Jnfra nos.
somewhat beneath us, the obedience of beasts and birds, who in their kinds
glorify their maker, and God has enabled them with strength and comelines of
nature more tha^ our selves; somewhat within us, Intra nos.
the conscience of our own unworthiness, and deformity of sin wherewith we are
spotted; Supra nos.
somewhat above us, the majesty, justice and vengance of an angry God; finally,
somewhat against us, enemies of al sorts, Contra nos.
outward, inward, carnal, spiritual, many, mighty, deadly, both in heavenly and
in earthly places. Boughs of trees, the more they are laden with fruit, the
nearer they hang to the earth: the best gold goes down in the balance, the
lighter staieth above: good corn lies in the bottom of the heap, the chafe
keeps on high: so the more fruitful, precious, and virtuous the soul is,
the more it abaseth and vilifieth it self; that he who has chosen the weak
to confound the mighty, may the more exalt it.

Was not this my saying? Jonas began well, if he had continued it: but he
stumbleth at the thresholde; and in the first entry of his speech starteth
back. I should have thought, by the hope which he gave in the greeting and
salutation of GOD in his foremost words, I pray thee, LORD; that he would have
proceeded to an humble recapitulation and recital of his rash both speeches
and actions before past: pardon, O Lord, mine unadvised words which I used
in mine own country, forgive my purpose of preventing thy will, bury my
flying to Tharsis and all my transgressions in the bottom of the sea, where
thou buriedst me; thus he should have done: but he in a different mood, as
if he had gotten a victory against God, begins gloriously to triumph, little
esteeming to set his foot upon the neck of justice it self, so the credit
of his doings and sayings may be justified: Lo Lord, this, this was the
cause why I plaide the fugitive: was not this my word? had I not reason to do
as I did? to run unto Tharsis? did I not say thus much before? Eia domine,
illud vero* illud erat cur fierem tran^fug^. Luth. Verbum.
was I not wise to presage the event that would fall out? if my counsel had
been followed, all these inco^veniences of falsifying my message, of bringing
thy truth into question, had been avoided.

Was not this my word? his word? that is, his thought, the word that his soul
spoke: for the tongue is but servant and messenger from the soul in this
action. When Jesus healed the man sick of the palsy, Mat. 9. willing him to
be of good comfort, and adding moreover, that his sins were forgiven him:
Behold, certain of the Scribes, not thought, but said within themselves, this
man blasphemeth. They thought there were no witnesses present to their speech:
but when Jesus saw their thoughts, (...).
he said, wherefore think ye evil things in your hearts? That which the
Gospel says they said, Christ calls thoughts: because the tongue is but
the instrumente, it is the soul that speaks: and Christ is as near to the
speech of the one, as the voice of the other. I touch it in a word. The
thoughts of our hearts (we think, as the Scribes did) are close and
private to our selves; but the Lord has spies and watchmen over them. The
birds of the air shall bewray the counsels and conspiracies of thy
bedchamber, but the God of heaven beholds thy thoughts in the midst of thy
bosom. Say not within thy self, I did it not, I spoke it not, I only thought
it in my heart, and what more free than thought? mistake not. Thy thoughts
are not only thoughts, they give their sound without, they go for words and
actions to, in the sight of God.

The speech of Jonas in every part thereof, Annon.
savoureth of much presumption. 1. He demands, was not this my saying? which
is the manner of checking and controlling for the most part, Art thou a
master in Israel, and know not these things? aunswerest thou the high
Priest thus? know thou not that I have power to kill thee, and power to let
thee go? thou sit to judge according to the law, and smitest thou me
contrary to the law? I spare the rest. My meaning is but to let you
understand, that it had been a milder manner of speech thus to have delivered
it, this was my saying, etc.

2 He magnifieth his word, as if there were more than wind in it. Verbum meum.
Was not this my word? What is the word of Jonas, or of any mortal man? what
virtue? what power? what truth? what edge? what authority? what spirit? what
life has it in it? By the word of GOD the heavens were formed, and they are
reserved for fire by the power of the same word. By the word of God is man
turned to destruction, and by the power of the same word is it commanded,
return ye sons of Adam. By the word of God Niniveh is warned, and Niniveh
is spared by the power of the same word: Number. 22.
but as touching the word of Jonas, unless he observe the rule that Balaam
did, the word that God puts into my mouth, that shall I speak, it is as
weak as water, and as easy to be dispersed as the mist in the air.

Dum in patria me^. In terr^ mea.
3 He brings in a calendar of the time and place, amplifying his complaint
against God by singular circumstances: when I was in my country, I told thee
this. He says not in Jury, but in mine own country: as who should say; what
needed my travail and pains into Assyria, a country unknown unto me, the
going from mine own home where I was best at ease, and the compassing of seas
and lands, to lose the fruits of my labors?

4 When I was yet in Iudaea; if I had spoken to late, I had spent my speech in
vain: Ad huc.
but I spoke in season, when I was first called, before ever I stirred my foot,
when all these troubles and mishaps might have been eschewed.

Jdcirc^.
Therefore: as if he had won the field, and evicted it by plain argument and
proof. Thus he insolently disputes, and concludes against God, Job 9. Ante
verteram.

Tharsum fugiendo.


as if he reasoned with his neighbor: yet God is not as man that we should
answer him. And he does not only resist, but prevent, as if the wisdom and
providence of the most High were inferior to his; and not by staying in
Israel, but by going to Tharsis, nay by flying to Tharsis: as one that meant
to leave the Lord behind him by the swiftness of his pace. If this be not
sin and sins, presumptuous, high minded, high speaking sins, I know not
what sin is: and those that labor to assoile the Prophet from sin in this
his disobedience, what do they else, but cover a naked body with fig leaves,
which either the heat of the day will wither, or the least blast of wind
pull from it? If we wash his fault with snow-water, and purdge his hands and
his heart never so clean by our charitable defense of him, yet he has
plunged himself in the pit, and his own clothes, his own words have laid
open his imperfections unto us.

The remembrance of his native country, I doubt not, was sweet unto him. The
Application. Genesis ^0.
It was one of Jacobs conditions in his vow to God, when he was sent to Haran,
that if God vvoulde be with him in journey which he went, and give him
bread to eat, and clothes to put on, so that he came again to his fathers
house in safetye, then should the LORD be his God. It was also a great
probation and trial of Abraham's obedience, Genesis 12.
when God sent him word to go from his own country, and from his fathers
house. And it seems unto me by this speech of Jonas, that he had some
longing after the land of Israel, and thus spoke to himself; O that I were
as in the months past, when I stood upon mine own ground; that corner of
the world best pleased me; Jlle terrarum mihi praeter omnes, Angulus ridet.
there I was in the midst of my friends and companions; here I am a stranger
to strangers, with men of a foreign tongue, and foreign condititions. But he
remembers that with pride and ostentation of himself, and to justify a
fault, which without grief of heart, and shame of face, and stammering of
tongue he should not have remembered. Were those thy words in thine own
country? the more thy sin, and thy shame to; thou spakest against thy life,
if God had not favored thee, if his mercy had not held the bridle of thy
tongue when it was in motion, insteede of speaking folly, thou would have
proceeded to mere blasphemy. Can thou remember the time and the place
without blushing? without smiting thy self upon thy thigh, and asking
forgiuenes^ wretched man that I am, what have I done? thou should rather
have cursed the ground in thine heart, which thou then stoodest upon, than
remembered it with vaunting, and bitterly condemned thy tongue for sending out
such words of folly and indiscretion. But so ^s the manner of us all: we
sin as we breath, sin as we eat and drink, as daily, and with as much
delight. We commit sin with greedines, we are drunk with sin, and again
thirst after it: yet we will justify our selves, whether God be justified,
yea or no; we will double sin, and bind two together, by hiding, excusing,
translating sin: if there be any means in the world, and bush in paradise
to fly unto, we will shrovvde our selves. If we can put it to the woman, or
rather by rebound to God, the woman, not of mine own choosing, but which thou
gave me, whereas ^ndeed it was a woman of his own choosing, even the
concupiscence of his heart, or if we can lay it upon the serpent; if we can
cover it with lying as Gehazi did, thy servant went no whither; or color it
with pretense, as Saul did, I kept the best for the sacrifice; if there be good
intention, I meant well, or happy event, it succeeded well; 2. King. 5.
or any other thing to be alleged, we will not omit it. Brethren, forsake
these* ways, of dissembling, diminishing, selfe-liking, and set your desires
wholly upon that which our Savior prayed for, Ioh. 12. father, glorify thy
name. His own name he would not say, that had a name above al names; and shall
we seek to glorify and set forth ours? Whither we seek the glory of his name
or not, the voice that came from heaven at that time, shallbe fulfilled, I have
both glorified it, and will glorify it again. God is true, the
unfaithfulness of man shall never be able to diminish his truth; his justice
shall be justified in heaven and earth, and his name shall be sanctified, even when
we study most to blaspheme it. Therefore let us conclude with that general
dischardge and manumission that the bless Prophet gives to the whole honor
of mankind: Psalm. 115.
Not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy name give the glory: not we to our own
earthly, corrupt, rotten names. And let it not repent us once to have given it
away from our selves, but again, and for evermore, Not unto us, not unto us.
And rather than thou shall loose any part of thy glory, loss of credit and
reputation be to all our doings and sayings, loss to our goods and good
names, lands and lives, and whatsoever in this world is more dear unto us.
This is the way to be justified, to justify God in his words and works, and
to condemn our selves; to cast away our righteousness as stained clowtes, to
renounce our wisdom as foolishness, our strength as weakness, our knoweledge
as ignorance, and to asc^ibe all unto him, who is all in all, righteousness,
wisdom, sanctification, glory, and peace unto us.

THE XLII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 4. verse. 2. Therefore I prevented it to flee unto Tharsis: For I knew
that thou art a gracious God.
IN distributing the matter in hand, I have already acquainted you, both that
Jonas prayed, and what he prayed. In the latter of these two, 1. the substance
of his petition, together with the reason subioyned; 2. the causes impulsive,
that moved him to make it. In those impulsiues we weighed every moment: 1. his
smooth insinuation, I pray thee, O Lord: wherein, I doubt no^, was hid some
secret murmuring and repyning; but all the rest bewray a manifest imperfection:
2. his speaking by demand, which is the manner of vpbraiders: 3. the advancing
of his own word and thought: 4. his fighting against God with circumstaunces
of time and place: 5. his malapert concluding, as if he had overthrowen God by
plain argument, 6. his endeavor to prevent, as if he had been able to do it:
and lastly not by going, but by flying to Tharsis, as if by the swiftnes of his
feet he could have outrun him, who rides upon the wings of the Cherubins.
That which angered and disco^tented Jonas so much, was the mercy of God, which
Jonas knew, and upon that knowledge concluded with himself, that he was to
decline the commandment, howsoever it fared the meane-time, either with his
own safety, or with the honor and will of him that sent him. But admit that
the Lord was a merciful God, and would deal with the Ninivites otherwise
than Jonas had preached: what then? was this a just cause to refuse the errand?
surely it seems so: for thereupon Jonas infers, Therefore I prevented etc.

There are two reasons brought why Jonas assaied to prevent this business. 1.
Because he was loath to be accounted a false prophet, Idcir^o. 1. Reason of
refusal*
to have his credit impaired, to have his name called into question, as if he
had run not being sent, and to be mistrusted in whatsoever he should
afterward speak. The cause, I confess, is vehement and weighty. For the
least suspicion of heresy and falsehood, if any thing in the world, makes a
man impatient; and he that dissembleth or puts up one note of heresy
without clearing himself, is not a Christian. Suspicio haereseos impatientem
facit.

Vnam notam haereseos qui dissimulat, non est Christianus. Zach. 13.


It is required of a dispenser that he be found faithful, 2. Cor. 4. and the
master of the house Luke 12. asks for a faithful servaunt whom he may set
over his household. The law of God is strict against false prophets, Deuteronomy. 13.
and 18. his father and mother that begat him, shall say unto him, thou shall
not live: for thou speak lies in the name of the Lord: yea his father and
mother that begat him, shall thrust him through, when he thus prophecieth.
One shall say unto him, what are these wounds in thine hands? then he shall
answer, thus was I vvounded in the house of my friends. The admonitions of
Christ in the gospel, and his disciples, are frequent against false prophets,
false Apostles, false Christ's, wolves in sheep clothing, lying spirits,
Antichrists, mockers, seducers. How careful was Samuel toward the end of
his life, to approve his innocence both to God and man, through the whole
course of his forepassed administration? first in the integrity of his life,
whom have I ever wronged? 1. Sam. 12.
afterward in the syncerity of his office, God forbid that I should sin unto
the Lord, and cease praying for you; but I will show you the good and the
right way. When Jeremy saw that the word of the Lord was in reproach and
derision, and that every man mocked him, his familiar friends watching for his
halting, and saying, It may be he is deceived, so shall we prevail against
him, Ier. 20.
you know what perplexities it drove him unto. First, he would not make mention
of the Lord, nor speak any more in his name; afterward, he curses the day of
his birth and the messenger that carried word of it. It is a memorable
apology which Paul makes in the Acts, Act. 20.
for himself and his Apostleship unto the clergy of Asia: appealing to their
own knowledge, that he had taught both Jews and Graecians, openly, and
throughout every house, and that he had kept nothing back which was
profitable, but showed them all the counsels of GOD: he cares not for
bonds, afflictions, death it self, so he may fulfill his course with joy,
and the ministration which he had received of the Lord Jesus. Consonant
hereunto was that which he did in other Churches: 2. Cor. 2.
We are not as many, who make merchandise of the word of God, but as of
syncerity, but as of God, in the sight of God speak we in Christ. 2. Cor. 4.
(...).
Again, we walk not in craftiness, neither handle we the word of God
deceiptfullie, but in the declaration of the truth, we approve our selves to
every man's conscience in the sight of God. Nay to every conscience of men,
that is, be the conscience good or bad, light, or darkness, they shall have
no just cause against us. What needs longer discourse? the son of God
himself, Ioh. 18. confesses before Pilate, For this cause am I borne, and for
this cause came I into the world, that I might bear witness unto the
truth. For when the truth of God is wronged, then the advice of Cyprian takes
place: Tacere non oportes ne iam non verecundiae sed dissidentiae incipiat esse
quod tacemus etc. Trac contra Demetr. Jncompara biliter pulchrior est veritas
christianorum qua^ Helena Graecorum. Aug. ad Hyeron. 1. King. ^.2.
we must not hold our peace, least it begin to savor not of modesty and
shamefastness, but distrust of our cause, that we keep silence: And whilst
we are careless to refute false criminations, we seem to acknowledge the
crime. The truth of Christians is comparably fairer than that Helen of the
Greeks, and the Martyrs of our Church have fought more constantly in her
quarrel against Sodom, than ever those nobles and Princes for Helen against
the Troianes. There was never prophet, true nor false, in Israel nor Canaan,
but took it a great reproach and stayne unto them, to be touched with
falsehood. Micheas, whom neither the court-like persuasions of the Eunuch that
went for him, nor the consent of four hundred prophets, nor the favor of
two kings, nor danger of his own head, could draw from the word of God,
stands firmly in defense of the truth; Zedechias the false prophet, (in
seeming) as earnestly for the truth likewise: yet these as contrary one to
the other, as Hiena and the dog: the one says, go to Ramoth Gilead and
prosper; the other says, if thou return in saftie, the LORD has not sent
me. The one, to express it in life, and by a visible sign makes horns of
iron, and tells Ahab, with these thou shall push at Aram till thou haste
destroyed him: the other has also an Image, and a vision whereby to describe
it, I savv all Israel scattered upon the mountains like sheep that had no
shephearde. Yet both for the truth. Jeremy and Hanany, agreeing like fire and
water, Ier. 28.
the one bidding the king to go unto Babylon, the other advising the contrary,
the one sending fetters to the king and the nobles, the other, pulling the yoke
from the neck of Jeremy, and saying, thus shall the yoke of Babell be broken;
the one affirming, the other denying, yet both are champians for the truth.
The devil a liar, and the father of lies, who abode not in the truth,
because there is no truth in him, who when he speaks a lie, speaks of
his own, that is, his natural and mother tongue is lying, Ioh. 8. yet he
transformeth himself into an Angel of light: therefore it is no great
thing, says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 11.
though his ministers transform themselves, as though they were the ministers
of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works. Christ is
truth indeed, Antichrist truth pretended. Veritas Chr^^stus: simulata veritas
Antichristus. Origin. Sacrorum librorum traditores. Non convicti sed co^fict^
traditores. 2. de bapt. con^. Donat 6. Ego defendo dogmata S. pairu^ etc. Non
obiter nec in transcursu.

Novatianus simiarum more arripi^ sibi authoritate^ ecclesiae. August. li. 2.
cap. 16. de morib. M^nich.


The daily exclamations of the Donatistes in Afric against the Orthodoxe and
sound believers, was, that they were traitors against the holy books and
themselves the propugners of them. Augustine answers, traitors, not by
conviction, but by confiction and false accusation of their enemies. Dioscorus
cries out, himself an heretic, in the Council of Chalcedon. I defend the
opinions of the holy fathers, I have their testimonies, not by snatches, or at
the second hand, but uttered in their own books, I am cast out with the
holy fathers; as if truth it self had been condemned in the condemnation of
Dioscorus. So is it at this day; the Prophets of Babylon, though they have
received the mark of the beast in their foreheades, that all the world may
know them to be such, yet as Cyprian in his Epistle to Iubaianus wrote of the
Novatian heretic, that after an apish manner he takes unto him the
authority of the Church, so these, by the like imitation, take unto them the
Church, truth, Scriptures, Fathers, all antiquity, consent, perpetuity unto
the end of the world, and rather than the world shall think that they deal
not truly in defense of truth, they spend both conscience, and sometime life
upon it. O quantum tegmen est falsitatis? O how great a show does falshod
make?

For our own parts, who by the grace of God are that we are, put in chardge
for the gathering together of Gods Saints, if we be harmed in our goods, or
good names, or in the carriage of our lives, or in our wives and children, as
sometimes the manner is, we account them our private wrongs, and easilye may
digest them. It has been done in the green, in all the times that have been
ever of old, much more in the dry: they have called the master of the house,
Beelzebub, much more those of the household. We preach not our selves, but
Christ Jesus the Lord, 1. Cor. 4.
and our selves your servauntes for Jesus sake, and for his sake we will endure
it. We are fools for Christ's sake, and you are wise, we are weak and you are
strong, 1. Cor. 4.
you are honorable and we despised. Be it so. But we will never abide that the
honor of Christ Jesus himself shall be wounded through our loins, that the
rebukes which fall upon us, shall redound to his disgrace, that his gospel and
truth shall be defamed, the doctrine which we preach, discredited our calling
reproached, which, though in vessels of earth, yet he has sanctified and
blessed to such a work, (I mean the saving of souls) as by the policy of
man, and all forcible engines, could never have been compassed. How usual a
thing it is, upon every light surmise not only to chardge us for false
prophets, but because we are prophets at al to co^te^ne us, and to disdain us
for that, wherein we are most to be (...), I report me to that common phrase of
speech, when if men will shoo^ ^oor^h arrows against us with poisoned heads,
even bitter and sharp wor^es, they think it the greatest ignominy, to call us
Priests or Ministers. Herein if the zeal of gods house and his holy ordinance
consume us, if the maintenance of his cause and our calling bear us away, and
make us forget the spirit of gentleness for a time, let no man blame us. For is
our office dishonored amongst you? We tell them whosoever they be, as David told
Michol, who scorned him for dancing before the Arc, it was before the Lord
which chose me rather than thy father and all his house, ^. Sam. ^.
and commanded me to be ruler over the people. And therefore I will play
before the Lord, and I will yet be more vile than thus, and will be low in
mine own sight. It is before the Lord that we are Priests and Ministers, to
serve in his house and at his table, who has chosen us rather than their
fathers and whole stock to serve in this office. And therefore we will yet be
more vile and low in our own eyes, and rather than these names shall die and
be out of use, we will wear them upon our garments, and if you were sparing to
yield them unto us, we would desire you for Christ's sake, and as you tender
our credit, not to term us otherwise. The Jews, who thought they mocked
Christ, when they bowed their knees, and cried, Hail king of the Jews, they
knew not what they did, they did him an honor and favor against their
wills, for he was king of the Jews and of the Gentiles also: whatsoever their
meaning is, who think to nicke-name us by obiecting these names, (which we
will leave to the censuring of the righteous Judge in heaven) we embrace them,
honor them, and heartily thank God for them, and desire that they may be read
and published in the ears of the world, as the most glorious titles of our
commission. The Angels of God are ministering spirits, Heb. 1. (...) etc.
Math. 20. (...). O praeclarum ministeriu^! quo non id gloriosius magistratus
Bern. ad Eugen. 2. Cor. 10.
and sent forth to minister for the elects sake. Christ Jesus himself came to
minister, not to be ministered unto. We will therefore say as the Apostle said,
2. Cor. 11. Ministri sunt? plus ego. Are Christ, and his Angels, and all the
Apostles of Christ, ministers? we speak like fools in the deeming of the
world, we also will be ministers of the gospel, and if it were possible, we
would be more than ministers. O honorable ministry! what government, rule,
and dominion is it not superior unto? I conclude with the same Apostle, though
I should boast somevvhat more of our authority which is given unto us for
edification and not for destruction, I should have no shame. By this discourse
it may appear unto you, if this were a motive in the mind of Jonas, as some
both Jews and Christians conceive, how grievous it seemed unto him to be held
in jealousy, for deceit in his calling, that any in the world should be able
justly to tax him for a false prophet, and one that prophesied lies in the
name of GOD. Notwithstanding, the matter is quickly answered: For whatsoever
the event had been, the voice of the Lord was in reason to have been obeyed.
1. It was no new thing to be so accounted of: it A Prophet is not without
honor save in his own country. Jonas might have said to himself, as Elias
in another case, I am no better than my fathers. Thus were we borne and
ordained to approve our selves in all kind of patience, by honor and
dishonor, by good report and evil report, as deceavers, and yet behold, 2.
Cor. 6.
we are true, and deceive not. The world was never more fortunate for
prophets than thus to reward them: flatterers may break the heads of men with
their smooth oiles, but the wounds that prophets give, have never escaped the
hardest judgments. 2. Why should Jonas fear the opinion of men? his duty
being done, the very conscience It is a very small thing for me to be judged
of you, or of man's judgment, for I know nothing by my self etc. 1. Cor. 4.
Non ait, pr^ nihilo est, sed pro minimo. 2. Cor. 1.
He does not say, It is nothing unto me, but it is a very small thing: I
esteem my name somevvhat, but I stand more upon my conscience. This is our
rejoicing, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and purity
we have been conversant in the world, When the princes had given sentence
upon Jeremy, this man is vvorthie to die, Ier. 26.
he answered them, the Lord has sent me to prophecy against this house,
therefore amend your ways, that the Lord may repent him of the plague
which he has pronounced against you: as for me, behold, I am in your
hands, do with me as you please, but know ye for certainty, that if you
put me to death, you shall bring innocent blood upon your selves; for of a
truth the Lord has sent me unto you to speak all these words in your
ears. This is the brazen wall, the soundnes of the cause, and the assurance of
the conscience, which all the malignant tongues cannot pearse through. Let the
world be offended with us in these latest and sinnefullest times, because the
tenor of our message is either to sharp or to sweet, to hot or to cold,
for it can hardly be such as may please this way-warde wotld; let Satan
accuse us before God and man day and night; yet if we can say for our selves,
as the Apostle did, Romans 9. We speak the truth in Christ, we lie not, our
consciences bearing us witness in the holy Ghost, who is not only the witness,
but the guide and inspirer of our consciences; it is a greater recompense, than
if all the kingdoms of the earth were given unto us. of the elders stood up
and spoke to the assembly in this sort: Chap. 26.
Micah the Morashite prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, saying,
thus says the Lord of hosts, Sion shall be ploughed like a field etc. Did
Hezekiah put him to death? did he not rather fear the Lord, and prayed
before the Lord, and the Lord repented him of the plague? thus we might
procure great evil against our selves. You know the collection those elders
make; that the judgment was conditional, and upon their unfeigned repentance
might be otherwise interpreted. Thus much Jonas was not to learn: for why
did he know that God was a merciful God, but to show the effects of mercy?
and the Ninivites themselves had an happy presumption thereof, as appears by
their former speech. 4. He was not to stay long in they believed God, and his
Prophet, as the children of Israel 1. Sam. 12. feared the Lord and Samuel
exceedingly. For what greater argument touching their good and reverente
opinion of Jonas could they give, than their speedy and hearty repentance?
whereby they assured him that they esteemed not his word as a fable, or as a
iestinge song; but as a man sent from God, and fallen down from heaven,
bringing a two edged sword in his lips, either to kill or to save, so they
received him. And surely I rather think, that they blessed Jonas in their
hearts, and that the dust of his feet was welcome and precious unto them, who
by his travail and pains had taught them to fly from the anger of God that
was now falling.

Others conceive the reason here employed, The second reason of refusal.
therefore I prevented, to be this. He saw that the conversion of the Gentiles
was by consequence an introduction of the overthrow and castinge out of the
Jews: and that it would be fulfilled upon them which is written in
Deuteronomy. They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God, they
have provoked me to anger with their vanities, Deuteronomy. 3^.
and I move them to jealousy with those which are no people, I will provoke
them to anger with a foolish nation. That is, if we will interpret it by
this present subject, Niniveh shall repent, and condemn Israel the more, for
not harkening to the voice of so many Prophets. Jerome briefly thus; It
grieveth him, not that the Gentiles are saved, but that Israel perishes. Our
Savior (we all know) would not give the bread of children to dogs: Dolet
quod pereat Israel, non quod Gentes serventur.
and he was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: and he
vvepte over Jerusalem, which he never did over Tire and Sidon: and the
prerogative of the Jews was, either only or principally, that repentance and
remission of sins should be preached unto them. I remit you to the 10. of the
Acts, to see what labor was made to draw Peter to the Gentiles, whom he
called common and unclean things. And in the 11. of the same book, they of
the circumcision contended with him about it, saying, thou vventest in unto
the uncircumcised, and have eaten with them. It might be his further grief,
that he only amongst so many Prophets, should be singled out to declare the
ruin of his people by the vprising of strangers; to bear the envy of the
fact, and to be the messenger of the vnwelcomest news that ever Israll
received. For he is the first that must bring Iudaisme in contempt, and make it
manifest to the world, that his countrymen at home are unfruitfully
occupied, and troubled about many things, sacrifices, sacraments, washinges,
cleansinges, and the like, when others abroad, observing that one thing that
is necessary, with less labor and business came to be saved. Luther,
comparing the times wherein Jonas and himself lived, opens the case by
familiar explication thus. The Jews accounted themselves by a constant opinion
and claim, the peculiar people of God; the Romish themselves the only
Catholics: they thought there could be no salvation without observing the law
of Moses, and the rites of the Jewish Synagogue; nor these without observing
the ordinances and ceremonies of the Romish Church: they cried, power out thy
wrath upon the nations and upon the people that have not called upon thy name;
these held them for heretics, not worthy the air they drew, that joined not
themselves unto them. Now lastly, as it was an odious office in these latter
days to preach unto any nation or city under heaven, that the foolishness of
preaching, and only Christ crucified was able to save souls, without creeping
to crosses, kneeling, knocking, kissing, sprinckling, censing, ringing,
fasting, gadding, with such like toys, and the conversion of any part of
Christendom with less circumstaunce, could not but be a shame, prejudice,
and condemnation unto Rome in some sort, that having greater helps and
furtherances to God, went further from him: so the reclaiminge of Niniveh, by
one, when Jury had many prophets; by the denouncement of one, when Jury had
many prophecies; by a single and short commination, when Jury had the whole law
and testimonies; by a compendious course of repentance, when they fasted, and
tithed, and sacrificed, and cried, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the
Lord, and I know not what; could not less be than a reproach to the people
which was so backwarde, and an exception to their whole form of religion
wherein they no better profited. It had been no marvel, if, when Jonas
returned into Israel, the hand of his own father and mother had been first
against him, for doing that wrong to his people, as they adjudged their bodies
to the fire, and their souls they delivered to Satan, who opened their mouth
against the church of Rome. Whatsoever his reasons were, whither the care of
his credit, or whither affection to his countrymen drew him away to that
recusancie, (both which are but particular and partial respects, when God
commands otherwise) his fault is no way excusable by reason, but that God of
his grace, is ready to give pardon and relaxation to al kind of sin.

Therefore I prevented. Thy ground is unstable, Jonas* thy argument unsound,
thou use but a fallacy to deceive thy self, thou had no reason so to do,
the will of the Lord of hosts, which is absolute righteousness, a reason beyond
all reasons withstoode it. Thou thoughtest to prevent the Lord, thou could
not: the vvindes saw thy have and stayed thee, the sea held thee back, the
fish made resista^ce against thee, the bars of the earth shut thee up, and if
these had failed in their mysteries, the wisdom of God would have invented
other stays. He could have stopped thee in thy course, as he stopped Paul in
his journey, by dazeling thine eyes that thou should not have found thy way;
or as he stopped Lots wife in her way, by making thee a pillar of salt, or some
other rock of stone, a monument of contradiction to the latest age of the
world. He could have dried up thy hands, tied up thy feet in iron? no, but in
the bands of death, never to have stirred again. Let all the wisdom of man
beware of the like preventio^; least it prevent it self thereby of all the
blessings of God, use of native country, comfort of kinsmen and friends, life
of body, happiness of soul, as Jonas might have done, if the mercies of God
had not favored him. When we are ignorant of the will of God, let us lay our
hands upon our mouths, and upon our hearts too, till God grant wisdom, that
we may descry it: when we are doubtful, let us enquire, deliberate, ask
counsel, of the law and testimony of God: but when it is clearley revealed
by open and express comm^undement, let us not then pawse upon the matter, and
much less resist, and least of al prevent, unless by making a proof and
experiment of our own wit as Jonas did, we will hazard that loss which the gain
of the whole world shall never be able to recompense.

For I knew that thou art a gracious God and merciful slow to anger, The
ground of his petition.
and of great kindness and repentest thee of the evill^ Jonas proceeds to
that which was the ground and inducement to his rebellion. For the order of the
scripture is this: God is a merciful God for many respects: and one part of
office of that mercy is to repent him of the evil, that is, to change his
sentence, in the last words of the sentence; this Jonas knevv, he says,
and upon that knowledge resolved long since, upon his resolution, labored to
prevent it. We are now come to that which if Jonas had rightly conceived of, it
would never have grieved him to see the bowels of pity opened and enlarged
toward his poor brethren. Did Jonas know, that God was gracious, merciful,
slow to anger, of great goodness, repenting him of the evil? (I will render
these variations in as many words more) did Jonas know, Benignu^ affectis,
misericors effectu, etc. Glossa in Joel. 2.
that God was gracious in affection, merciful in effect, long suffering in
waiting for the conversion of sinners, of great kindness in striking short
of their sins, repenting him of the evil, in vouchsafing mercy to sinners,
and remitting their misdeeds? Did Jonas know, that God was graciois, in
himself by nature; merciful, toward his creatures by comunicatio^; long
suffering, before he inflicteth vengeance; of great goodness, in the number and
measure of his stripes, penitent, in the stay and intermission thereof; and is
it so strange and offe^siue unto him, that God should spare Niniveh, a thing,
which his nature and manner was so inured unto? The words, though different in
sound, and the power and signification of them not all one, yet in the
principal they all agree, and knit their souls together in the commendation of
Gods mercy. The 1. imports a liberal disposition, franknesse of heart,
Gracious.
gratuitall, undeserved benevolence, not hired, and much less constrained, but
voluntarily, and freely bestowed. The 2. a commiseration over other men's
miseries, Merciful.
motherly bowels, tender compassion toward those that suffer affliction:
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? We have not a high Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities; I would not the death of a sinner.
It goes to his heart when he is driven and enforced to take punishment. Long
suffering. Of great goodness.
The 3. bewraieth a nature, hard to conceive and not willing to retain wrath;
and when it seems to be angry, not angry indeed, and using rather a fatherly
scourge of correction, than a rod of revenge. The 4. declares that there is no
end of his goodness; and although he is somewhat in all things, nay all in all,
yet he is much more in mercy and more than in other his properties: Mayor est
propretas bonitatis, quant proprietas vltionis. Hebraeorum sapientes^

Repenting him of the evil. (...). Act. ^7.


for his mercy is over all his works, to the good, evil, friends, enemies;
and that when he gives, he gives with an open hand, not sparingly, more than
our tongues have asked; or our hearts ever thought of. Lastly, he repents him
of the evil, that is, alters the word that is gone out of his lips, and
shows how easy he is to be entreated, that the rod may be pulled forth of
his hands even when he is smiting us. Paul in his voyage toward Rome,
speaks of a certain place which was called the fair havens. We are now
arrived at the fair havens; they are in number many, and for the harbor and
rode of a wearied, sea-beaten conscience, which has long bin tossed in a sea
of wretchedness, more comfortable and safe, than ever was the bosom of a mother
to her young infant. Happy is the soul that landeth at these havens: and
blessed be the God of heaven which has given us a card of direction, to lead
us there unto, the witness of his holy word, written and sealed, that can
never deceive us. For these are the words of the ignorant, but he that knew
them, bare record, and his witness is true: they are the words of a prophet,
who spoke not by his private motion, but as he was moved by the holy Ghost.
Nay, they are not the words of one, but of many prophets, that in the mouths
of sufficient witnesses they might be confirmed. Jonas recites them in this
place. Joel repeateth them in the second of his prophecy. David has the same
thrice in his Psalms, either al, or the most part of them. Psalm. 86.103. and
145.
Moses in the 14. of Number. brings in their perfect catalogue. Nay they are not
the words either of Moses, or David, or the prophets, but of God himself. The
fountain and wellhead from whence they have all drawn them, as Moses there
confesses, Number. 14.
is the proclamation which God made, Exodus 34. when he descended in the cloud*
and delivered his name in this manner: the Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful,
and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness, in truth; reserving mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquites, transgression, and sin. Ho* all ye that
thirst, come to the waters of comfort. Hear are wells enough to be drawn at:
drink at the first fountain, the Lord is gracious; and if your appetite be
not there quenched, go to the second, the Lord is merciful; and if you be yet
thirsty, go to the third, the Lord is slow to anger; and thence to the fourth
and fifth, bibite, and inebriamin^, drink, til your seules are more tha^
satisfied. Do you not read 1. Sam. 17, of five smooth stones which David chose
out of a brook to fling at Golias? here is the brook (my brethren) the
history of this prophet, and these are the five smooth stones, which are now
proposed. Let them not lie in the brook unhandled, and unoccupied, but put
the^ in your scrip as David did bear the^ in your minds, lay the^ up in your
hearts, apply the^ to your consciences, that they may be ready at hand against
the face of the Philistine, against the force of Satan, if ever he step forth
to de^^e the Lord of hosts, or any Israelite in his camp. We find but 3.
temptations Mat. 4. that Satan bent against the son of God, differing both in
the place, and in their strength. The 1. was upon the ground, of turning stones
into bread; the 2. upon the pinnacle of the temple, of casting his body down;
the 3. upon an exceeding high mountain, of committing idolatry. The 1.
concerned his power, the 2. his life, the 3. his conscience. And our Savior
refelled him in all these with 3. several answers. But here we have matter and
answer enough for more than 3. temptations: for if Satan object unto us lower
and upon the ground as it were, that God is a righteous judge, full of
indignation and impatience, and not making the wicked innocent, answer him,
that withal he is a gracious God, and cannot deny himself If he climb higher
in temptation, as it were to the pinnacle of the temple, and reply upon thee,
but thou art unworthy of that grace because thou art full of iniquity and
unrighteousness, answer him, that withal he is a merciful God and shows
greatest pity where there is most need of it. If he assault thee a third time,
and think to overthrow thee as it were upon the top of a mountain, by
telling thee that thou have long continued in thy sins, that thou broughtest
them from the womb, and they have dwelt with thee to thy gray hairs, answer
him that God is as much commended for his long sufferance. If yet his mouth be
not stopped, but he maintain a further plea against thee, that thy sins are as
the sins of Manasses, more than the sands of the sea in number, and their
burden such that they are gone over thine head, like mighty waters, answer him
that the goodness of the Lord is as much, and that there is no comprehension of
his loving kinds. If lastly he object, that judgment has begun at thine
house, and, to put thee out of doubt that thou art not in the favor of God, he
has smitte^ thy body with sore diseases, thy soul with agonies, thy family
with orbities and privations, tell him for full conclusion, that he can also
repent him of the evil, and cease to punish, and leave as many blessings
behind him when his pleasure is. It was never the meaning of God that these
words should be spoken in the winds, and blown away like empty bladders.
They were spoken and written no doubt for the use of sinners. This is the name
which God has proclaimed to the world, and whereby he would be known to me^,
that if ever we came before him, we might speak our minds in the confidence
and trust of that amiable name. Thus Moses understood it. For as soon as the
Lord had ended his speech, Moses applied it to the present purpose, for he
bowed to the earth, and worshipped God and said, O Lord, I beseech thee,
pardon our iniquities and sins; Exodus 34.
and take us for thine inheritance, Likewise in the 14. of Number. And now I
beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great according as thou have spoken,
saying, The Lord is slow to anger, etc. referring himself to the speech and
proclamation which God had used upon the mount. We are the children of our
father which is in heaven. If therefore it be an honor unto us to be reputed
his sons, let us follow our fathers steps, and bear some part of his heavenly
image. Let us not seek to be like unto him in the arm of his strength, nor in
the brain of his wisdom, nor in the finger of his miracles, but in his
bowels of pi^^y and tender compassion. Let Lions and Bears and Tigers in the
forest be (...) toward their companions, let them bi^e and be bitten, devour
and be devouted again; let dogs grinne, let Unicorns push with their
horns, let Scythians and Cannibals because they know not GOD, (not know
what belongs to humanity and gentleness; but let Christians love their
brethren even as God has loved them, and remitte one the other their offenses,
as Christ has freely forgiven the sins of his church. Let those
reprobate-minded, Romans 1. carry to their graves with them and to the bottom of
hell, where all hatred must end, that mark which the holy Ghost has scored
upon their brows, that they are (...), without natural affection, not fit for
society, void of pity; but let the example of the most holy Trinity, the God
of peace, the prince of peace, the spirit of peace, that one God of all
consolation, rich in mercies, be ever before our eyes, that as we have
received freely, so we may freely return grace, mercy, long-suffering,
abundance of kindness, revocation of our wrongs and injuries begun, to all our
brethren in the flesh, but especially to Christ's chosen and peculiar members.

THE XLIII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 4. verse. 3. Therefore now, O Lord, take I beseech thee my life, etc.
THat Jonas prayed, and how he prayed, in what sort expostulating with God,
justifying his offense, and abusing his knowledge of the mercy of God to utter
the malice and cruelty of his own heart, we have already seen, and
considered the reasons which are supposed to have moved him to that undutiful
and uncharitable course. Either the care of his own credit, which he should
not have stood upon to the derogatio^ of the honor of God, when the angels of
heaven sing glory unto him; or affection to his country, which persuasion was
as weak to have drawn him to obedience, seeing that the Israel of God might
have bin in Niniveh as well as in Jury, because there are Jews inwardly and in
the spirit as truly as outwardly and in the letter, and those that hear the
word of Christ are more kindly his brethren and sisters, than those that are
affined unto him in the flesh, Upon these premises, be they strong or weak,
is inferred the conclusion, including his request to God, Therefore now O Lord,
etc. A man so contraried and crossed in mine expectation, how can I ever
satisfy my discontented mind, but by ending my life? and he adds a reason or
confirmation drawn from vtility, and amplified by comparison, It is not only
good for me to die, but better to die than to live.

The force of anger we have in part declared before. It rages not only against
men made of the same mold, but against God. Let the blood of Julian thrown up
into the air, and together with his blood, blasphemy against the son of God,
witness it. Nor only against those that have sense and understanding, but
against unreasonable and insensible creatures. As Xerxes wrote a defying letter
to Athos a mountain of Thrace; Mischievous Athos, lifted up to heaven, make
thy quarries and veins of stone passable to my travail, Plutarc de ^ohiben.
irac.
or I will cut thee down and cast thee into the midst of the sea. Nor only
against those things which are without us, but against our selves. As in this
place, the anger of Jonas begins to take fire against the Ninivites,
Proceeds as far as it dares against God, and ends in it self.

In one word, that which Jonas requesteth, though spoken by circumlocution,
Auf^r animam meam
and more words than one, is, that he may die. Take away my soul from me. For
what is life, but, as the philosopher defines it, the composition and
colligation of the soul to the body? In the 2. of Genesis the Lord formed man of
the dust of the ground; there is his matter: (...). Arist
and breathed in his face the breath of life, and the man was a living soul;
there is his form and perfection. And what is death on the other side, but the
dissociation, and severing of these two parts? or the taking of the soul from
the body, according to the form of words in this place? God tells the rich
man in the gospel, who was talking of lardger buildinges, when the building
within him was near pulling down, and thought he had goods enough for his
soul to delight in, when he had not soul enough to delight in his goods, Thou
fool, this night (...), do they require, and redemaunde thy soul that is,
this night thou must die. Elias, in the first of Kings and nineteenth, uses
the same phrase in the wildarnesse, It suffices Lord, take away my soul from
me. Let me not longer live to see the misery that Iezabell has threatened unto
me. As when you take away structure and fashion from an house, temple, or
tabernacle, there remains none of all these, but a confused and disordered
heap of stones, timber, iron, mortar, and the like; so when the soul is
taken from the body either of man or beast, there remains but a carkas.
Therefore the Apostle calls death the dissolution or pulling down of our
earthly house; 2 Cor. 5. (...). 2 Pe^ 1. ^ohn 2.
Peter the deposition or laying along of a tabernacle. And our savior bade the
Jews, speaking of his bodily death, Destroy this temple, and in three days
I will rear it up again.

There are many phrases throughout the scripture abroad, whereby the terror of
death is lenified and tempered unto us, and the very nature thereof wholly
changed. For whereas the nature of death is to kill, and to spoil the being of
living things, by these we may gather, that touching the elect, death it self
is slain, and deprived of it own being. God tells Abraham, Genesis 15. that
his seed should be a stranger in a land that was not theirs, but himself
should go to his fathers in peace. What is that? shall he travail again,
as he did to Chanaan, or Egypt? no, but he shall be buried in a good age,
not prevented by vmtimely death, nor carried into captivity, but laid in the
grave amongst his ancient friends and acquaintance. A thing, which a man
vvoulde desire with much suite if he were held from it. To Moses his servant
he alters the phrase. For, Numb. 27. he shall be gathered to his people,
as one that were scattered and straied from the rest of the flock; and Deuteronomy.
31. he must sleep with his fathers, and take a comfortable rest wi^h others
that have labored in their times. David beginning as it were where Moses
leaves, calls it the rest of the flesh in hope, Psalm the sixteenth. Esaias
adds the place, and notes where that rest shall be; They shall enter into
their chambers, and shut the doors unto them, Es. 26.
and hide themselves for a time. But in the fifty and seventh of his prophecy,
more perfitely, speaking of the deliverance of the righteous, they rest in
their beds. So first they go to their fathers, as men left behind to the
company of strangers; after their going, they are gathered unto them, that as
there was but one fold of the living, so there may be but one fold and
condition of the dead; after their gathering unto them, they sleep and take
their rest, the visions of their heads not making them afraid, nor breaking
their quiet, as in their life time; not upon a stone, as Jacob did, nor in the
tent of an enemy, as Sisera but in their chambers and upon their beds, the
doors being close about them, and their bones delivered from former
disturbances. But all these concern the body alone. The sweetest and
ioyfullest of them all (I mean to the Lords inheritance) is the surrendering
of the soul into the LORDS custody and protection, and the resigning up of
the spirit to him that is the LORD of the spirit of all flesh, Numbers the
sixteenth. So was the prayer, or rather bequest of David, Psalm 31. leaving
his crown to Solomon, his body to worms and rottenness, or to their lodging
in darkness, as Job called it; Lord, into thy hands I lay down or pavvne
my spirit. And CHRIST of the seed of David, D^pon^
commended his spirit to none other keeper nor in other terms, (...). Luke
23. (...).
And that you may know, how uniform and like it self the Spirit of God is,
the blessed Apostle keeps the same style, 2. Tim. 1. These things I suffer,
but I am not ashamed, for I know whom I have trusted, and I am persuaded that
he is able to keep my pledge, that I have committed unto him against that day.
To those that must die, more surely than they live (for Iosuah calls it the
way and custo^e of the whole earth) can there be a greater comfort than this,
Ios. 23.
that when the dust shall return to the earth as it was, and yet in fullness
of time to be formed into a new Adam as that first original dust, Eccles. 12.
the spirit returns to God that gave it? and that we may as boldly go to our
maker, as ever Paul went to Carpus at Troas to leave his cloak and books and
parchments in his hands, so we to commend the richest jewels we have unto his
fidelity, and to say with his holy martyr, Lord Jesus receive our spirtes?

Act. 7.
But to cease from farther discussion of the phrase, we may a little enquire,
whither it were lawfulll for Jonas to wish for death. Many I grant, oppressed
with misery, and not able or willing to bear their cross, do little les^e
than call to mountains and rocks to fall upon them, and to end their wretched
days. I am sure they complain that light should be given unto those men,
whom God has hedged in, and they rejoice for gladness when they can find the
grave. Job 3
For then, they say, we should have lien and been in quiet, we should
have slept then and been at rest. Mors mise^^ru^ portus. Caesar*

(...).

Theophrast. Ephesians. 6. (...). 2. The^. 3. Parum etsi multos a^no^. Infantes
sumu^ and senes videmur Mars.


As if they had been borne with any other condition the^ to walk a pilgrimage
of few and evil days: or as if the evil day which the Apostle warns us of,
were not the whole course of our life, partly through him who is principally
evil, breathing out his malice against us, partly through evil men infesting
and disturbing our peace but rather through the evil of sin procuring wrath
and the evil of adversity ensuing thereupon. In consideration of which troubles
of life it was, that Simonides being asked, as Jacob was by Pharaoh, how long
he had lived, made answer, but a little, though many years. For if we
remember, how much of our better and vital life, goes away in agues, and
feebleness, and other the like annoiances, we may seem perhaps old men,
and are indeed but children. It was a worthy answer that Artabanus gave to
Xerexes the mighty Emperor of Persia, when viewing his huge army of at least a
thousand thousand men, drinking whole rivers dry as they went, and
commaundinge both hills and seas to give way unto them, he vvepte, because
it came to his mind, that within the space of an hundredth years not one of
that goodlye company should be found alive: I vvoulde that were the
vvorst, says he. For we endure much more sorrow by retayning life. Neither
is there any one of these, nor of all men living besides, so happy upon the
earth, that he does not once, and often cast in his mind, how much more
pleasure there were in dyinge than in living. As our life is replenished with
all kind of misery, so death by nature is an enemy to life: which both man and
beast fly from. All things desire being. And God never created death amongst
his good works. It came partlye through the envye of the devil, who lied
unto man, saying, ye shall not die; partly through the transgression of Adam,
and partlye through the anger of God rendering the right stipend due to sin.
Wherefore he threatened it as a punishment, Genesis the second, The day
wherein thou shall eat of the forbiedden fruit, thou shall dye the death.
Afterward when the Law had been given. Moses in the name of GOD protests
unto them by heaven and earth, that he had set before them life and death, and
wishes them to choose life, that they might live, they and their seed. Death
is called an enemy in open terms, 1. Cor. 15, The last enemy that shall be
subdued, is death. Deuteronomy. 30. (...). De verb. apost ser. 33. (...). Act 2. 1.
King. 19
But who loves an enemy simply and for his own sake? And amongst orher
blessings betrothed to the elect of God, one is, that Death shall be no more,
Revelation 21. And to reason with Augustine, Si nulla esset mortis amaritudo,
non esset magna matyrum fortitudo; If there were no bitterness and
coffeehouse in death, the constancy of martyrs were not great. Therefore
when Elias heard the word of Iezabell, The Gods do so and much more unto me,
if to morrow by this time I make not thy life as the life of one of those
whom thou have slain, it is said, that he arose, and went for his life to
Beer-sheba. How did David plead for his life. Psalm. 30. What profit is there
in my blood, when? I go down into the pit? shall the dust give thanks unto
thee? or shall it declare thy truth? as if he vvoulde move the Lord for his
own good and glory sake, not to cut him of: but afterward with respect
to himself, Stay thine anger a while, that I may recover my strength, before
I go hence and am no more seen, And being assured elsewhere of that request
granted him, he sange ioyfullye to his soul within* Return unto thy rest,
Psalm. 39,
O my soul, the LORD has been merciful or beneficial unto thee. Because
thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, Psalm. 116, Esa.
38,
and my feet from falling; and I shall walk before the Lord in the land of
the living. I speak not of the moan that Ezechias made, how he turned his
face to the vva^, after the Prophet gave him vvarninge of his death, and prayed
unto the Lord, and wept sore, and like a crane or a swallow so did he
chatter, and mourn like a dove, and lifting his eyes up on high, said, O
Lord, it has oppressed me, comfort me; and after his life was freed from
the pit of corruption, as it were leapt for joy; the living, the living he
shall confess thee, as I do this day: when the beloved and blessed son of
God, he that had power to lay down his life, and to take it up again,
against that time, began to be very sad and grievously vexed; (...). Mat. 26.
and in the presence of Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, let not to
disclose his passion, My soul is vvonderfullye heavy unto death. And but that
the will of his father was in the midst of his bowelles, and his obedience
stronger than death, he would have begged three times more, that the cup
might have passed from his lips. Likewise Ioh. 12. when Andrew and Philip
told him of certain Greeks that were desirous to see him, he seeing an
image of his death before his eyes, witnessed unto them, saying. Now is my
soul troubled: And what shall I say? father save me from this hour: and but
that an other respect called him back, therefore I came and father glorify
thy name, he would still have continued in that praier^ Quis enim vult mori?
prorsus nemo; and ita memo etc. For who is willing simply to die? surely no
man. And so undoubtedly no man, that it was said to blessed Peter, August. de
verb. apost. ser. 33. John. 21. (...). Salve crux. Veniat ignis.
An other shall guide thee and lead thee to the place whither thou would
not go. Peter would not unless he were carried. But what then was the reason
that the Apostle desired to be dissolved and to be with Christ, which he
said, was best of all? Philip* 1. and that the Saints which were racked, Heb.
11. cared not to be delivered, that they might obtain a beetter resurrection?
that Peter and Andrew welcomed their crosses, as they were wont their dearest
friends, and embraced the^ in their arms, and saluted them with kisses of
peace? that Ignatius called for fire and sword and the teeth of wild beasts?
and other martyrs of Christ went to their deaths with cheerefullnes rejoicing
and singing, and not less than ran to the stake, as if they had run for a
garland? We may easily answer, partly from the former authorities; that they
might be with christ, and that they might obtain a better resurrection. But
the Apostle in excellent terms decideth the question in the 2. to the
Corinthians, 2. Cor. 5.
(...), We will not be unclothed and stripte of our lives, we take no
pleasure or joy therein; but we would be clothed upon: we have no other
means to get that better clothing, than by putting of this, or that upon this,
that mortality may be svv^llowed up of life, and corruption of incorruption.
So that their thoughts subsist not in death, but have a further reach, because
they know it to be the high way which must bring them to felicity. And it is
no small persuasion unto them, when they think that by the ending of their
lives they make an end of sinning. For whilst they are in the flesh, they see
a law in their members striving against the law of their mind, and subiecting
them to the law of sin. Therefore they cry, as he did, VVretched man that I
am, Romans 7.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? In which postulations not
witstandinge they evermore submit themselves to the straigtest and equallest
rule of the will of God, desiring no otherwise to have their wishes
acomplished, than with that safe and wary condition, Si dominus volet, If the
Lord be pleased with them. Iam. 4.
And as they regard their own good therein, so because the blood of Martyrs
is the seed of the Church, and that which is fire to their flesh and bones, is
water to the gospel to make it flourish, 1. Tim. 6.
and a good ^onfession witnessed before the wicked tyrants of the world, does
good service to the truth, Philip. 1.
in this respect also they are not sparing of themselves, that Christ may be
magnified in their bodies, whither it be by their life or death. Now Jonas
has more of all these forenamed ends to allege for himself, why he
desires to die, neither the glory of God, nor the good of his brethren, nor
profit of his own soul; but in a peevish and froward mood, because his mind
is not satisfied, and to avoid some little shame, or to rid himself from the
grievances of life, which are not reasons sufficient, he will needs die, and
follow the stream of his foolish appetite, with some such like affection, as
Dido at her departure expresses. Sic sic iuvat ire sub vmbras, Thus I am
disposed to dye and not otherwise.

But to leave generalities, let us look a while into the parts of his wish.
1. It is his great fault, as Ioab offered his treachery to Abner under the
pretense of a friendly and peaceable parle, and Judas his treason to Christ
under the color of a kiss, so to tender his impatient fittes unto the Lord,
the searcher of his heart and reins, under the nature and form of prayer. His
anger at an other time, and in another action, Toll quaeso.
when he had sequestered his soul from the king of heaven and heavenly things,
had been more sufferable. But then to pray, when he was thus angry, or then
to be angry when he came to pray, and not to slake the heat thereof, but
still to heap on outrageous words, as hot as Juniper coals, can no way be
excused. Yet thus he does. The fire is kindled in his heart, and the sparkles
fly forth of the chimney, as Salamon spoke undutiful speeches toward the
majesty of God, and most vnaturall against his own life. Surely the wrath of
man does not accomplish the righteousness of God; Iam. 1.
it is very far form it.

2 Consider his haste, how headlong he goes in his rash and unadvised
request. For as if the case required some such speed, as the prophet had in
chardge for the anointing of Iehu, power the box upon his head, and say, thus
says the Lord, and then open the door, and flee without tarrying, 2 King. 9.
no sooner has he opened his lips, or conceived his suit in his mind, but
the Lord must presently and without delay effect it. It appears in that he
vrdgeth the matter so closely at Gods hands. Nune erg^.
Now therefore, since I have prooved it, and I am not able to bear the burden
of my grief, nor longer endure the tediousnes of my life, do it without
protraction of time. It was a goodly and sober oration that Judith made to her
people of Bethulia, touching their oath to deliver the city to the enemy
within five days unless the LORD sent help, Jud. 8.
And now who are you that have tempted God this day, and set your selves in
the place of GOD among the children of men? Nay my brethren, provoke not the
Lord our God to anger. For if he will not help us within these five days,
he has power to defend us when he will, even every day, or to destroy us
before our enemies. Do not you therefore bind the counsels of the LORD.
for God is not as man that he may be threatened, neither as the son of man
that he may be called to judgment. Therefore let us wait for salvation of
him, and call upon him to help us, and he will hear our voice if it please
him. Thus we should teach and exhort our selves in all our prayers; not to set
him a time, as the disciples did about the kingdom of Israel, when LORD? or
as Jonas does in this place, now Lord; or then Lord; but when it pleases
him And as the Psalm advises us, O tarry the LORDS leisure, hope in the
Lord, Psalm. 17.
and be strong: and he shall comfort thine heart, when he thinks good.
There are many reasons why God differreth to grant our petitions: 1. to prove
our faith, vvhither we will seek unlawful means, by gadding to the woman of
Endor, or the idol of Ekron, Desideria nostra dilati one extenduntur.
Desiderata di^ dulcius obtinentur.
or such like heathenish devises: 2. to make us thoroughly privy to our own
infirmities and disabilities, that we may the more heartily embrace his
strengh: 3. to strengthen and confirm our devotion toward him; for delay
extends our desires: 4. to make his gifts the more welcome and acceptable to
us: or 5. it is not expedient for us to have them granted too soon: Or lastly,
there is some other cause which God has reserved to his own knowledge. Now
this petition which Jonas is so forward and hasty in, is contrary to all
reason. For are not the days of man determined? Job. 14. is not the number of
his months with the Lord? and has not the Lord set him bounds which he
cannot pass? Does not an other say; My times are in thine hands O Lord?
Psalm. 31.
why then does Jonas so greedily desire to shorten his race, Aufer.
and to abridge that number of time which his Creator has set him? 3. We
commonly pray that it will please the Lord to give, not to take away, and to
bestow something upon us, not Give unto thy servant an understanding heart:
and, Psalm. 119*
da mihi intellectum, give me understanding, was the usual request of his
father David. We say in our daily prayer, give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our trespasses, that is, give us remission of all our sins. That
that is said to descend from above, from the father of lights, is (...) and
(...), giving and gift, not taking away. Iam. 1.
For God has a bountiful nature, and as liberal an hand: he opens it at
lardge, and fills every living thing with his blessing. He asks of every
creature in the world, what have thou, that thou have not received? and of us
that have received the first fruits of his spirit, and to whom he has given
his son* what is there in the world that you may not receive? But Jonas is
earnest with God, against the accustomed manner of prayer, and the course of
Gods mercies, to take something from him. 4. But what? Aufer-opprobrium? take
from me shame and rebuke, as David besought. Animam. Psalm. 119. 1. Chro. 21.
Vanitatem and verba mendacia long fac a me? vanitye and lyinge words put
far from me? Aufer iniquitatem servi tui? take away the sin of thy
servant, when he had numbered the people? Or as Job prayed, Job 9.
Aufer at a me virgam suam, let him take away his rod from me? Or as
Pharaoh requested Moses and Aaron to pray to the Lord for him, to take away
the frogs? Exodus 8. Exodus 10. Vir fortis etiam cum moritur dole^.
and afterward when the grassehoppers were sent, to take away frow him
that one death only? No, his life. His dearling that lived and lay within
his bosom. Which because it is the blessing of God, good in nature, and fit^
for the exercise of goodness, the strongest man living is loath to depart from.
The other which I spoke of, were plagues to the land, banes to the conscience,
hindrances ^o salvation, and therefore it was no marvel, if God were humbly
entreated to remove them. But Pharaoh in his right wits, nor skarsely Orestes
being mad, vvoulde ever have desired that his life should be taken from
him. Who ever became a suter to GOD, to take away the life of his ox or
ass? because they were given him for labor. Much less of his wife, which was
made an helper unto him; or his child, a comforter. Or who ever has entreated
him to give him evil for good, a scorpion for a fish, a serpent for an egg,
stones for bread? Jonas is found thus senseless, skant worthy of that soul
which he sets so light by. He should have desired God to have taken away the
stony heart out of the midst of him, and not scelus de terra, Ezech. 23. or
spiritum immundum de terra, Ezech. 36.
Zach. 13. wickedness out of the land, or an unclean spirit from the earth,
but a wicked and unclean spirit from out his own breast, whereby he was
driven to so frantic a passion. 5. He will also prove (which is the reason
annexed to the is better for him to die than to live, 5 Praestat mori.
and he prooveth it by comparing two opposites, death and life, the horror of
one of which he should rather have commended the svveetenesse, and comfort of
the other. Thales on a time giving forth incredibly and strangely enough, that
there was no difference between life and death, one presently closed upon him,
Cur ergo non moreris? why then di^st thou not? because, says he, there is no
difference. Albeit, it appears sufficiently that he showed a difference by
refusing it* But the paradoxe which Jonas hear alleges, adds much to that
of Thales. For he affirms in peremptory terms, havinge them laid before
his eyes to compare together, and to make his choice, Death is better than
life. Howbeit, he says not simply, it is better to die than to live, Melius
mihi mori.
but better for me. One as wise as ever Jonas was, who had been taken up into
the third heavens, and seen revelations, in this very question between life
and death, gave no other answer or solution unto it, but per hoc verbum
Nescio, by this word I know not; (...), and what to choose I know not. And
he confessed that he was streightened or pinched between these two, Philip.
1.
whither it were better for him, to abide in the flesh, or to be with Christ.
No doubt, simply to be with Christ. For that is (...), but only better, but
much and very much better: but to abide in the flesh, was (...), more needful
and profitable for the Church. For we were not borne to our selves, but for
the good of our parents, country, kindred, and friends, said Plato, and much
more for the flock of Christ which he has purchased with his blood, whither
they be Jews or Gentiles, weak or strong, Israelites or Ninivites, to
further their faith, and to help them to salvation: for thus we are debtors to
all men. The speeches of Caesar were wont to be, that he had lived long
enough* whither he respected nature or honor. Tully answered him, Naturae
fortassi^ and gloriae; a^, quod maximum est* patriae cerie parum Sed tum id
audirem, si tibi soli viveres etc.
It may be for honor and nature long enough, but that which is chiefest of
all, not for the common wealth. Again, I have heard thee say, that thou have
lived long enough to thy self. I believe it. But then I would also hear, If
thou livedst to thy self alone, or to thy self alone were borne. We are all
placed and pitched in our stations, and have our watches and services appointed
us. Let us not offer to depart thence, till it be the pleasure of our God to
dismiss us. Unless we have learned that undutiful lesson, which the
messenger used at the doors of Elizeus 2. of Kings and the 6. Behold, this
evil comes of the Lord, should I attend on the Lord any longer? Si
consilium vis,

Permite ipsis expendere numinibus etc. Iuvenal Nam pro iucundis aptissima etc.
Valor max. lib. 7. cap. 2. Quia qui iribuere bona ex facili solemn, etiam
eligere aptissima possunt




It is better for me to die than to live. Say not so, for how know thou? If
thou will harken to counsel, leave it to the wisdom of God to judge what is
best for thee: for he will not give that which is most pleasant, but most
convenient: Charior est illis homo quam sibi, A man is dearer to God than to
himself. Socrates in Alcibiades, would not have any man ask ought at Gods
hands in particular, but in generality, to give him good things. Because he
knew what was most behoofe-full for each one, whereas our selves crave many
things, which not to have obtained had been greater ease. At length he
concludes. For he that is wont to give good things so easily, is also able
to choose the fittest. The promises in the gospel, I grant, are very lardge;
Whatsoever you shall ask in my name, that will I do. Ioh. 14: And, Ask, and
it shall be given you, Math. 7. For every one that asks receaveth. How
comes it to pass then that the sons of Zebedee ask and receave not? We
would that thou should do for us, that that we desire, Mark 10. The
reason is given there by our Savior* Nescitis quid petatis You know not what
you ask. This is also the cause that Jonas receaveth not his asking: he
knows not what he asks. You have not, because you ask not, Iam. 4. that
is one cause. Yea but you ask and have not (...), Because you ask amiss;
both concerning the end to consume it on your lusts; and touching the manner,
because without faith; and for the matter it it self, because it is hurtful
unto you. And if you observe it, Mat. 7.
you shall epsy a condition conveyed into the promise of Christ; If you being
evil, give good things to your children, how much more shall your father in
beaven give good things to them that ask him? (...) good things* not such as
may do you hurt. Another evangelist faith for (...), or (...), the holy or
good Spirit. Which is all in all, able and ready to rectify your minds,
order your affections, and set you to crave more wholesome and profitable
gifts. For if we ask the contrary, (except when the Lord is pleased to lay
a curse upon our prayers) though we call never so loud and impatientlye in
his ears Vsque quo domine clamabo and non exau^ies? Hab. 1.
O Lord how long shall I cry unto thee, and thou will not hear me? he
answers, at least by his silence and denial, even as long as a man in a
burning ague shall say to his Physician, vsque quo, how long shall I cry for
cold water? I burn, I am vexed, I am tormented, I am almost out of breath;
and he answers again, Voluntas tua contra te p^^it Hieron. in Habbac.
Non misereor modo, I cannot yet pittye thee. Such mercy were cruelty, and
thine own will and wish is daungerously bent against thee. This is the cause,
to conclude, that Jonas his suite speedeth not. Jonas thinks it better to
die. It is only better in seeming, as a distasted palate is soonest pleased
with the worst meat. God thinks the contrary. Nay Jonas thinks, God
knows, that he dies indeed if he die out of charity, and that if he
should give his body to the fire, or again to the water, or a thousand
deaths more, without love, it could not profit him. Therefore he is not
suffered to dye when he would, but by another mercy of God, not inferior to
that in his former deliverye, is reserved to an other repentance, and to more
peaceable days. Saint Augustine upon the words of the Evangelist, If thou will enter into life, Math. 19.
keep the commandments, (where he proves that there is no true life, but
that which is blessed, nor blessed but that which is eternal) notes the
manner of men to be in their miseries, to call for death rather than life. Deus
mitte mihi mortem, accelera dies meos, O LORD send death unto me, shorten my
days. And sometimes sickness comes indeed, but then there is coursinge to
and fro, Physicians are brought, money and gifts are promised* and death it
self perhaps speaks unto them, Ecce adsum, behold here am I; Thou
calledst for me: thou desiredest the LORD not long since to send me.
Wherefore do thou fly me now? I have found thee a deceaver, Invenite
falsatorem.
and a lover of this vvretched life, notwithstanding thy show to the
contrary. It is the use of us all, with the like form of petition, rather o^
banning and imprecation, to wish for death: yea strange and accursed kinds of
death, wherein God shows a judgment. Let me sink as I stand, let the
earth open unto me, let me never speak word more; And every cross and
vexation of life, make it irksome and unsavory unto us, vvoulde God I were
dead. If God should then answer us, Ex ^re tuo, out of your own mouths, I
grant your requests, Be it unto you according to your words, how miserable
and desperate were our case? But as old Chremes in the Comedy, told Clitipho
his son, a young man, and without discretion, who because he could not
wringe from his father ten pounds, to bestow upon Bacchis his lover, had
none other speech in his mouth, but Em^ricupio, Priui queso disce quid sit
vivere, tum etc.
I desire to die: First know, I pray thee, what it is to live* when thou
haste learned that, then if thy life displease thee, use these words; so
first know, my brethren, you that are so hastye to pronounce the sentence of
death against your selves, what belongs to the life of a Christian, Quid
sumu^ and quidnam victuri gignimus* Pers.
why it was given you by the LORD of life, to what ends he has made you
living souls, what duties and offices he requires at your hands; these
things rightlye weighed, if you think good, call for death; for by that time,
I think, you will learn more wisdom than to do it. It is good for you to
see to the whole course and transaction of your lives, they should be
prelusions and preparations for a better life to come. Begin not then to
live, Quidam incipiu^t vivere cum desinendum est: quidam ant^ desierunt quam
inceperint.
when you must give over, which is the folly of most men: or rather take
heed, that you give not over life, before you have begun it. As one hair
shall not fall from your heads without GODS providence, so nor the least
hair and minute of time from your years without his account taken. But
especially remember your end, look to the fallinge of the tree, consider how
the sun goes down upon you: Now, if ever before, cast your accountes,
you build for heaven; now, if ever before, bring forth your armies, you fight
for a kingdom. Lay not more burden of sin upon your souls at their going
forth. Let the last of your way be rest, and the closing up of the day a
sweet and quiet sleep unto you. My meaning is, vvish not for death, before
you be very ready for it. Nay rather desire GOD to spare you a time, that you
may recover, I say not your strength, and bodilye ability, but his favor and
grace, before he pluck you away and you be no more seen. It is not comfort
enough unto you, to say, Vixi* and quem dederat cursum natura, peregi, I have
lived indeed, and finished some time upon the earth; unless you can also
add, your consciences bearing you witness, and ministering joy to the end of
your days, (...), the second to Timothy and 4. chapter; I have finished my
race, I have not only brought it to an end, but to a perfection; though I
have died soon, yet I have fulfilled much time, my life has been profitable
to my country and to the Church of God, and now I depart in his peace.

THE XLIIII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 4. ver. 4. Then said the Lord, Do thou well to be angry?
The first of those 3. parts wherinto this chapter was divided, touching the
impatience and coffeehouse of Jonas, we have in part discovered out of the
former verses: reserving a remnant thereof to be handled afterward. The
reprehension of God, which was the 2. begins at these words, and is
repeated again in the 9. verse, upon the like occasion given by Jonas. The
mercy of God toward his prophet, manifests it self in this fatherly
obiurgation many ways. 1. That the Potter vouchsafes and hu^bleth himself to
dispute with his Clay: 2. that he is ready to give a reason of all his actions,
as a righteous Lord, who does not enforce any thing by his absolute and mere
authority, but deals reasonably and justly; much more, that the Lord speaks
unto him who spoke and fretted against the Lord, and gives an account unto
him why he spared Niniveh, of who^ no man wisely durst to have demanded, what
do thou? that he that dwells in light vnapproachable, and his counsels
are so high in the clouds as who ca^ find the^ out? places the^
notwithstanding in the eyes of the world, to be examined and sifted by the
reason of man; But most of all, that he ministers a word in season unto Jonas,
and when the stream of his anger was so violent, that it bare him into an
hearty desire and longing after death, then, that the Lord intercepteth him,
and answers in his course as Elihu answered Job, Job 32.
Behold, I have waited upon thy words, and harkened unto thy speech, whilst
thou soughtest out reasons, I will now speak in my turn, and show thee mine
opinion, Do thou well to be angry? It is the singular wisdom of God, and
without which policy, it were hard for any flesh living to be saved, that when
we are running on in our sins, and wearying our selves in the ways of
wickedness, amongst other his retentiues and stops, he has the hook of
reprehension to thrust into our noses, and pull us back again. Our iniquities
would wander with out measure, and become rottennes in our bones, our wounds
would dwell for ever in our bowels, and fester to the day of judgment, with
out this medicine. So wisdom began her lore, Pro. 1. O ye foolish, how long
will ye love foolishnes? and the scorner take pleasure in scorning? and the
fools hate knowledge? She gives us our right names, according to our corrupt
natures; for wisdom is able to judge of fools, and knows that without her
instruction we are wedded to our follies, therefore she adds, turn ye at my
correction, lo, I will power out my mind unto you, and make you understand my
words. In pro^rept.
Cleme^s Alexandrinus compares our Savior to an expert Musician, such, as
Terpander or Capito never were, for he sings new songs, and has sundry
kinds of moodes and varieties to work the salvation of man. Sometimes he has
spoken by a burning bush unto him, sometimes by a cloud of water, sometimes by
a pillar of fire, that is, he has been light to those that were obedient, and
fire to those that rebelled; and because flesh is more precious than either
bushes, or fire, or water, therefore he has spoken unto him by flesh: it was
he that spoke in Esaias, in Elias, and in all the prophets, and at length,
though he were equal to the Father in majesty, yet he was found in the shape
of a servaunt, and spoke with his own lips. This gracious instrument of
almighty God, to show the chandges of his notes, both pittieth and chasteneth,
entreats and threatens, and by threatening best admonishes, and by speaking
roughly, soonest converteth. He that called Adam out of the thicker, (which was
the first elements of this learning whereof I speak) he has produced the
same through all the ages of the world; he sent Angels to Sodom, Noah to the
old world, Nathan to David, Samuel to Saul, Elias to Ahab, prophets to Judah
and Jerusalem, John Baptist to the Scribes and Pharisees; he reprooved the
elders and Princes with many taunting parables, corrected Peter with looking
back, retracted Paul with a vision from heaven, advertised the seven
Churches with epistles sent unto them. Leprosy, unto Miryam was a vvriting and
skrolle upon her flesh, engraven in her skin to teach her obedience;
dumbness, unto Zachary was not a dumb instructour, it taught him faith
against another time; blindness, sent upon Paul, took away his blindness,
and opened the eyes of his mind, making him to see more in the ways of life,
than all his learning gathered at the feet of Gamaliell could have revealed
unto him. Such are the admonitions that God sometimes uses, to mollify our
hard hearts, least we should freeze too long in the dregs of our sins,
and because we proceed with impunity, and freedom, claim them for
inheritance. Behold therefore, as Eliphaz comforted Job, Blessed is the man
whom the Lord corrects; therefore refuse not the chastising of the
Almighty, for he makes the wound, Job. 5.
and binds it up, he smites and his hand makes it whole, he shall
deliver thee in six troubles, and in the seventh the evil shall not touch
thee. Nay he finds a wound, and binds it up, he espieth a blow, and his
hands heal it, he lets thee alone in six iniquities, but in the seventh he
will pull thee by the garment, and thou shall no more offend. On the other
side, wretched is the man, whom the Lord corrects not; whose first messenger
and monitioner is the first borne of death: that is, his life is taken from him
before he sees his sins. This were (as Augustine calls it) len^ty full of
horror, and sparinge cruelty; Ye^ribilis lenitas, crudelita^ parcens.
such precious balmes, break the head, nay wound the conscience, when bitter
and biting corrosiues were more wholesome for us. This is also one part of our
duty, who are to gather the sheep into the sheep fold of Christ, we must not
only teach, but reprove for otherwise (as Origin notes upon Exodus) we
offerred, but not scarlet: the color and die of our preaching goes not deep
enough: Obtulisti coccu^, sed non bis tinctum, no^ duplicatum. Jgnis noster
illumina^, non acce^dit. 1. The manner of reprehensio^.
our fire gives light and shining, but kindles not: we lead men the right
way unto knowledge, but we bring them not to the practicke and better part of
divinity, to feel a pricking in their consciences, and to be driven to say,
men and brethren what shall we do?

In the reprehension which God here uses, 2. things come to be handled. The
manner thereof, which is mild, courteous, and peaceable; and the matter, which
altogether concerns his anger. The manner is as kind and familiar, and with
as much indulgence, as if Eli, or the kindest father in the world were to deal
with his child whom he most favored; no anger or gall uttered in the
reprooving of his anger, no unpleasant expostulation, and neither bitterness
nor length of spe^ch, but as few and as friendlye words as lenitye it self
might devise. Do thou will to be angry? I should have looked for burning
from his lips, and coals of fire from his nostrels, that one who dwelt at
his foote-stoole should dare to assault heaven with his indignation, and cross
the doings of his dreadful judge: but that the thoughts of the LORD are
peace, and of an other disposition than the thoughts of man. Doubtless, if
one of his brethren, the prophets of Israel, out of his own tribe and
family, had taken the cause in hand, I cannot conceive how he should have used
him with so favorable and sparing an increpation, Do thou well to be angry?

If there be any amongst you that takes advauntage heere-at* to say in your
hearts, what mean our prophets and preachers to make such bitter invectiues,
declamations, outcries, against the sins of our age? their salt is too
quick, and we are overmuch seasoned with it, our ears are not able to bear
their words; we cannot offend in the wearinge of a garment, in the use of
our money, in eating our bread, and drinking our drink, but the pulpits must
presently ring, our ears tingle, and the world wonder at it. God never taught
them such roughness of speech; it had been an happier thing for us to have
lived and sinned in former times, and then to have been an adulterer, then a
drunkard or extortioner, when God spoke himself, who knew how to temper his
words, and to shape his reprehensions in milder sort. He would have said but
thus, Do thou well to be angry? well to be proud, well to be covetous, well to
give thy money upon usury? he would not have threatened and stormed as the manner
of our preachers is. Surely (my brethren) God is the master of his own, both
speeches and actions: his wisdom is as the great deep, I cannot find it out;
it may be he saw amendme^t in the heart and reins of Jonas, which we cannot do:
or he was able by his power to create his spirit a new, and to cha^dge his
heart, that it should be rectified in an instante, as well by one word, as if
he had tired, and torn his ears with ten thousand; and he dealt with a
prophet, an anointed servaunt of his, one that was dear in his eyes: or he
kept him for another time, when his anger should be past, and his heart more
capable of discipline and correction: or he qualified his speech, to school
and scourdge him the more with actions. Behold then, and rest satisfied with
us: our tongues should be still enough, if we had worms to command to eat up
your plants and fruits, or if we could chardge the sun in the sky, or the
east wind in the air to beat upon your heads, and to grieve your souls, as
God grieved Jonas; he spares him in words, but he paieth him in fact, and
though he vex not his ears, as we do, he vexes his head by taking away
his shelter, the only temporal comfort which he then enjoyed. I would we
might see those days wherein our speech might never exceed this compass, Do
you well to do thus? It is no pleasure to us, to sharpen our tongues like
razors against you, to speak by the pound or talent, Grauissimus nodus in
ligno non potest expelli nisi gravissimo oppressorio. Ambros.
mighty and fearful words, if softer might suffice. But if we be briars
in your coats and flesh, it is because we dwell with briars; if we be
perverse, it is because we dwell in the midst of a perverse generation. An
hard knot in the timber cannot be driven out, without heavy blows: sundry
diseases require sundry kinds of cures, and as the dispositions of men are
varied, Hic lavacra mollia, ille ferrum quaerit ad vulnera. Cassiod. Raban. in
Matthew. 9.
so must we vary our teachings: one must be washed with gentle bathes, another
must have his wounds cut with lancers: and as the damsel, Matthew. 9. was
raised up in her fathers house, the widows son of Naim without his mothers
gates, Lazarus before a great multitude of all sorts; so some must be handled
privately, others openly, a third kind publicly: some must be held for
weak, Varium poscit remediu^ diversa qualitas passionum. Subesse debet
iracundia, non praeesse.

Non vt dominando praeveniat, sed simulando subsequatur.


others accounted Publicanes unto us; some, their infirmities supported, others
delivered unto Satan; some chastised with a rod, others warned in the spirit of
meeknes; some pulled out of the fire, others left to be burnt; some saved by
fear, others by love; some must be used as our own bowels, others as rotten
members, whose cure is despaired, cut of from the body, that they do no more
hurt. In all which reprehensions, (except where all hope is past) that singular
precept of Gregory takes place. In the controlling of faults, there must be
some anger, rather to attend upon reprehension, than to command it; so that in
the execution of this charitable and merciful justice, it bear not a sway by
going before, but rather make a show by coming after. And Leo has the like
counsel, that it must be used, non saevientis animo, sed medentis, not with
the mind of a tirant or persecutor, Gala^. 6. 2. The matter reprooved.

Number quid benefacit ira tibi? Oecolamp.

Number putas quod just irasceris? An factum been, i. rationabiliter? Lyra.

An valde irasceris R. Kimhi. Jonathan verti^, admodum. Nonne vehemens est ira
tibi? Optime. Deuteronomy. 9.


but of an helper. Considering thy self (says the Apostle) least thou also be
tempted. For a man may once, and often in his life time, say to him that
reprooveth another, as Eliphaz did to Job. Behold, thou haste taught many, and
strengthened the weary hands, thy words have confirmed him that was falling,
and thou haste vphelde the weak knees; but now, it is come upon thee, and thou
art grieved, it touches thee, and thou art troubled.

The matter reproved by God is anger, Do thou well to be angry? or, as some
render it, does anger help thee? or, art thou angry justly? and upon
reasonable cause? or, as some of the Hebrews expound it, art thou very angry?
is not thy wrath vehement? interpreting been by valde, as Moses did Deuteronomy. 9.
when he told the children of Israel that he took the sin, the calfe which
they had made, and ground it very well, that is, sufficiently; till he had
brought it to the smallest dust. So some interpret well, in this place, by the
quality, and goodness of anger, whether it may be justified; others by the
quantity and greatness, noting the excess and immoderation thereof. They come
both to one: for whether God ask of the quality, he seems to imply a secret
subjection, it is not well done of thee, thou have no just cause to be angry;
or whether of the quantity, he thinks that there is as little reason that the
sparing of penitent sinners, should move such stomach in Jonas. The question
is disputed throughout the whole chapter, between God and the prophet, God the
opposer, Jonas the defender, whether he do well to be angry; God confuteth him
both by word and deed, and Jonas contendeth for it to the death. I will not
trouble you with the aunswering of the question till we come to the ninth
verse, where the Lord does demand again in the same words, and Jonas, though
he be silent in this place, yet there dissembleth not his mind, for he
answers, I do well to be angry, and adds measure sufficient, even unto
death. Meane-while, because this is the time, wherein a general forgetting of
wrongs, and laying malice a sleep, (...).
is professed, so far as the world is christened, partly the Canons of the
church, and partly devotion it self, leading us al to a thankful
commemoration of the death and resurrection of Christ, and to the communion of
his body and blood, which is a badge of our Christian love and fellowship; the
time inviting me thereunto, which S. Austen calls the sole^nity of
solemnities, and the vncurteousnes of these our times, requiring no less; give
me leave in few words to convert my speech unto that which the celebration of
the feast it self does easily exhort you unto. The blessed Apostle, thought
not that any more effectual persuasion to charity could be gathered, than from
the example of the son of God himself, whose dying and rising again is now
sole^nized. For so he frames his exhortation to the Colossians: Now therefore,
Coloss. 3.
as the elect of God, holy and beloved, as you have any part in these graces,
election, sanctification, and the love of God, if you have any argument and
seal to your own consciences, that you are a part of his inheritance, (for
they are not marked for his chosen which are without these marks) put on the
bowels of mercy, kindness, humblenes of mind, meekenes, long suffering,
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, (...).
let these be your robes and coverings, wear the^ as you wear your garments,
and let them be as tender and inward unto you as your own principal and most
vital parts: even as Christ freely and bountifully forgave you, even so do ye.
How that was, (...).
I need not recite. The Apostle Romans 5. collecteth sundry arguments to show
how far forth that substa^tiall and saving grace of God has gratified us. 1.
We were weak, 2. godless, 3. sinners, 4. enemies; (...).

(...). 1. Pet. 3.


we had neither strength to endeavor, neither piety to procure, nor
righteousness to satisfy, nor acquaintance and friendship to deserve in the
fight of God; yet, notwithstanding all these impediments and deficiencies,
Christ died for us. So the other Apostle speaks; Christ suffered for sins,
the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. The cause most
odious, the persons most unequal, the end most absolute. How the^ ca^ I better
exhort you, Philip. 2. (...).
to an imitatio^ of the love of Christ, than as S. Paul exhorts the
Philippians; If there be any consolation in Christ, so we may render it, or if
there be any advocation in Christ, (as all the consolation and advocation that
we look for, must (...) drawn from that fountain) If any comfort of love,
(as who feels not the use of love that has not been nursed up with the
tigers of the wilderness?) If any communion of the spirit, by whom we are al
knit together in the body of Christ, (...) etc.
lastly, if any bowelles of mercy; surely he means that there is or should be
much of all this, much consolation in Christ, much comfort of love etc. But if
there be any remnant and seed left, if all be not spent and exhausted to
satisfy your rancorous malice, fulfill my joy, and your own joy, and the joy
of the angels in heaven, and the joy of the bride and bridegroom, to whom it
is a good and pleasant thing to see brethren dwelling together in unity, (...).
minding the same thing, not the like, but the same, and having the same love,
not equal but the same, and having the same souls, growing together like
twins, concorporate, coanimate, and being of one judgment. Lastly, he
forgets not the most exquisite pattern of all loving kindnesses, let the
same mind be in you that was in Christ Jesus. The same mind? I am out of
hope of it; his love was as strong as death, water could not quench it, yea
water and blood could not put it out. He cried upon his cross for the Jews,
when he hung upon the top of a mountain, in the open face of heaven, God, and
angels, and men beholding, hearing, wondering at it, Luke 23.
father, forgive them, they know not what they do. Let not that mind be in
you which is in lions and leopardes; and good enough. I have heard of such
peaceable times prophesied, that swords should be turned into fishes, and
spears into mattockes, but never of so warlike and furious, wherein the
tongues of men should be turned into swords, and their hearts into wounding
and slaying instruments: yet, though this were never prophesied, we have
fulfilled it. To make an end, the best remedy against injuries, is
forgetfulness: Marcus Cato on a time, being smitten in the bath, to him that had
done the wrong, and was desirous to make him amends, Non memini me percussum.
answered, I remember not that I was smitten. Shall Cato be wiser and patienter
in his generation than we in ours? If we cannot forget the time wherein we
have been smitten, or otherwise iniuried, at least let us follow the counsel
of the Psalm, to be angry without sinning: that is, if we do that which is
natural and usual, and can hardly be stayed, let us avoid the other which
can never be justified. Psalm. 4.
Or if we sin in our anger, (as who in the world is angry and sins not?)
let the monition of the spirit of God in another place, quickly temper our
heat, and let us beware that the sun go not down upon it. Ephesians. 4.
It was one part of the epitaphe written upon Sylla his tomb, Nemo me inimicus
infere^da iniuria superavit; I never had enemy that went beyond me in doing
wrong. Let not our lives or deaths be testified unto the world by such
monumentes. It was an honor fitter for Sylla of Rome, an heathen and a tyrant,
who died the cha^nels of the streets with blood, than for any Christian. I
will, by your patience, enter a little way into the next verse, and send as it
were a spy to view at least the borders thereof, before I proceed to examine
the whole contents.

So Jonas went out of the city. verse. 5.
It is thought by some that he offended no less in going forth, than when he
first refused to come thither. For he should have continued amongst them to
have given them more warning. The reason why Jonas went out, I cannot rightly
set down. Some conjecture, and it is not unlikely, to avoid the company of
wicked men, for so he accounted the Ninivites, and he was afraid to bear a
part of their plagues. The rule is good, for can a man take coals in his
bosom, and not be burnt? or handle pitch and not be defiled? or fly with
the Ostriches and Pellicans, and not grow wild? or dwell in the tents of
wickedness, and not learn to be wicked? or if Rahab abide still in Jericho,
Lot and his kindred in Sodom, Noah and his family in the wast world, Israel
in Babylon, shall those execrable places and people be punished by the hand of
God, and these not partake the punishment? One place for many, Josh. 23. If ye
cleave unto these nations, and make marriages with the^, and go unto them, and
they unto you, the Lord will no more cast them out, but they shall be a snare and
destruction unto you, and a whip on your sides, and thorns in your eyes,
until ye perish out of this good land which the Lord your God has given you:
but his error was in the application of the rule; for if the Ninivites were
so penitent as before we heard, the worst man (for ought I know) was within his
own bosom.

And sat on the East side of the city. His purpose in chosing his ground
cannot certainly be perceived. Ar. Most. gives this guess, Why on the
east side.
that he thought if any plague were sent from God, it was likely to come from
West and South, because Iudaea in respect of Niniveh was so placed; and
therefore, because God was only known in Iudaea, and seemed to dwell no where
else, he would surely punish the^ out of those quarters: for this cause, as if he
had decreed with himself, if a scourge come from God, it shall not come near
me, he takes up his lodging in that part of the city which was most safe.
Others make this supposition; they say Tigris the river ran on the west side
of Niniveh, where by reason of their haven there was daily concourse of
marchantes and passengers to and fro. This frequencie Jonas avoided, and
betook himself to that part where the walks were most solitaire, and his
heart might least be troubled. Others think that he shunned the heat of the
sun, which in those countries is far more fervent than in ours; and because
in the mourning, it is more remiss than at the height of the day when it is in
the south, or between the height and the declination when it draws to the
west; therefore he seated himself on the east side of the city where he
might be freest from it. Happily he went unto that side by adventure, quopes
tulit, as his mind and feet bare him, and it had been indifferent unto him
to have applied his body to any other side. Or it may be he was thither
brought by the especial commandment and providence of almighty God. As when
Elias had prophesied of the drought for three years, he was willed to go
toward the East, where he should find a brook to drink of, 1. King 17.
and the ravens were appointed to feed him. It is not unlawful for me to add
my surmise amongst other men. In the East, because of the sunne-rising, there
seems to be greatest comfort; and I nothing doubt but in this banishment of
his, Jonas sought out all the comfortes he might. The garden in Eden, which the
Lord God planted for man, Genes. 2.
was planted Eastwarde. Some say Eastwarde in respect of the place where Moses
wrote the story, that is, of the wilderness where Israel then was. Others
with more probability, in the Eastern part of Eden; the whole tract whereof
was not taken in for the garden, but the choicest and fruitfullest part, which
was to the East. It is true in nature, which some applied to policy, and to
the state of kingdoms and families; That more worship the sun in his
rising than at his going down. Pl^res orientem solemn quam occidentem adorant.
I saw all men living, says the Preacher, joining themselves with the second
child which shall stand up in the place of the other. Our Savior, who was
evermore prophesied to be the light of the Gentiles, is by none other name
figured Malach. 4, than of the sun rising; Unto you that fear my name, shall
the sun of righteousness arise: and in the song of Zachary, Luke 1. he is
called the day spring from an high. Many religious actions we rather do
toward the East, than any other point of heaven. We bury our dead commonly,
as the Athenians did, their faces laid and as it were lookinge Eastwarde. And
for the most part, especially in our temples, we pray Eastward. So did the
idolatours Ezech. 8. turning their backs to the temple of the Lord, and their
faces to the East. Will you have the reason hereof? Why was Aaron willed,
Levitic. 16. to take the blood of the bullock, and to sprinckle it with his
finger upon the mercie-seate Eastwarde? It was the pleasure of God so to have
it. And unless nature direct us to these observations, whereof I have spoken,
I know not how we are moved. The rising of our sun, whose resurrection we
now celebrate, the true and only begotten son of God, was in the Morninge.
Matthew says, in the dawning of the day; Mark, very early, Math. 18. Mar. 16.
Ioh. 20.
when the sun was risen, not that he had yet appeared in their hemisphere, but
his light he sent before him: John says, when there was yet darkness, that
is, the body of the sun was not yet come forth. And Thomas Aquinas thinks
it probable enough, that our resurrection shall be very early in the morning,
the sun being in the East, In Supplem* quaest. 77. (...) 2.
and the moon in the West, because, says he, in these opposite points* they
were first created. You may happily mervaile what the event of my speech will
be. I have seldom times carried you away from the simplicity of the prophecy
which I entreat of, by allegories and enforced collections. Yet I am not
ignorant, that many men's interpretations in that kind, are of many men gladly
and plausibly received. Easter day.
I hope it shall be no great offense in me to fit and honor this feast of
the resurrection of the Lord of life, with one allegory. We are now walking
into the West, as the sun in his course does; Behold, we are entering into
the way of the whole world. And as the sun goes down and is taken from our
sight by the interpositio^ of the earth, so into the body of the earth shall
we likewise descend, Ios. 23.
and be taken from the company of the living. Christ our Savior, (...). Revel.
1. (...). Ioh. 11.
who was both the living and life it self, and had the keys of hell and of
death, and whose manner of protestation is Vivo in saecula, I live for ever and
ever, yet touching his humane nature, when he soiourned upon the face of the
earth, had his setting and going down. In this sense we might ask the Spouse
in the Canticles, O thou fairest amongst women, what is thy wellbeloved more
than other men? And though she answer, Cantic. 5.
my vvelbeloved is white, and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousand, yet in this
condition of mortal and natural descent, he is equal unto his brethren. This
Passe-over we must all keep, and therefore let us trusse up our loins, and
take our staves in our hands, that we may walk forwards toward the West:
in steed of other precious ointments, let us anointe our bodies to their
burial, and for costly garments, let us lay forth shrowdes for our flesh,
and napkins to bind about our heads; that is, let us remember our end, and
the evening of our lives, and we shall offend the less. The death of the Son
of God if ever any man's, was ratified and assured as far forth, as either
the justice of his Father, or the malice of men might devise. If his body had
been quickend with seven souls, and they had all ministered life unto it in
their courses, yet such was the anger of GOD against sin, and the cruelty of
man against that just one, that they would all have failed him. And his burial
and descension into the lower parts of the ground, was as certainly confirmed
For you know what caution the providence of GOD took therein to prevent all
suspicion of the contrary. For his body being taken down from the cross, was
not only embalmed, and vvrapt in a linen cloth, but laid in a nevve
sepulcher, where never corpse had lien before, least they might have said,
that the body of some other man was risen; and in a sepulcher of stone, because
the dust and softer matter of the earth might easily have been dug into; and
in a sepulcher of rock or one entire stone, least if there had been seames
and fissures therein, they might that way have used some cavil against his
resurrection. Besides a stone at the mouth of that stone, and a seal, and a
watch, and as sufficient provision besides, as the wisdom of vvordlye and
ill-minded men could think upon. Notwithstanding, as the brute of his death
was universally spread and believed, for the very air range with this sound,
Magnus Pan mortuus est, The great and principal shephearde is dead, and the
sun in the sky set, or did more, at his setting, and the graves opened and
sent forth their dead to receive him; so the news of his resurrection was
as plentifullye and clearly witnessed, by Angels, men, women, disciples,
adversaries, and by such sensible conversation upon earth, as that not only
their eyes but their fingers and nails were satisfied. Behold then once
again the sun of righteousness is risen unto us and the daie-springe from
an high, or rather from below has visited us; for then when Zachary
prophesied he was to descend from the highest heavens, but now he
ascended from the heart of the earth. Once again, we have seen our brighte
morninge star, which was obscured and darkened by death, shining in the east
with so glorious a countenance of majesty and power, as shall never more be
defaced. Even so, the days shall come, when after our vanishing and
disparition for a time under the globe of the earth, we shall arise again,
and the LORD shall bring us out of darkness into the light of his
countenance. Our night wherein we sleep a while, shall be chandged into a
morninge, and after obscurity in the pit of forgetfulness, we shall appear
and shine as the stars of GOD in their happiest season. We shall go out of
Niniveh as Jonas did, a Gentile and strange city, a place where we are not
known, a land where all things are forgotten (for vvhither we be in the
flesh, we are strangers from GOD, or whither in our graves, we are not with
our best acquaintance, both these are a Niniveh to right Israelites) and we
shall fit in the East, that is, we shall meet our Savior in the clouds, and
be received up with him into glory, and dwell in everlasting day, where we
shall never know the West more, because all parts are beautiful alike, nor
fear the decay of our bodies, because corruption has put on incorruption, and
neither feel the horror of darkness, nor miss the comfort of the sun,
because the presence of eternal and substantial light illighteneth all
places. My purpose was not upon so easy an occasion, to prove the
resurrection either of Christ (which I have elsewhere assayed to do) or of
his members that belong unto him. For as it rejoiced Paul that he was to
speak before king Agrippa, Act. ^^
who had knowledge of all the customs and questions amongst the Jews, so
it is the happier for me, that I speak to those who are not unskilled in the
questions of Christianity, and neither are Sadducees, nor Atheistes, nor
Epicures, to deny the faith of these liuelye mysteries. Only my meaning
was, upon the LORDS day, whereon he rose to life, and chandged the long
continued sabbath of the Jews, and sanctified a new day of rest unto us, to
leave some little comfort amongst you, aunswerable to the feast which we now
celebrate. Surely the angelical spirits above, keep these paschall
solemnities, Agunt in coelestibus haec paschalia gaudia ipsi angeli^^ spiritus
etc. Cyprian. Delectantum in eo quod forma serva reversa fit in forma^ De^ Jd.
this Easter with great joy. They wonder at the glory of that most
victorious Lion who has triumphed over death and hell. It does them good,
that the shape of a servaunt is again returned into the shape of GOD. They
never thought* to have seen that star in the East, with so fresh and
beautiful a hew, which was so low declined to the West, and past hope of
gettinge up. We also rejoice in the memory, and are most blessed for the
benefit and fruit of this day, the sabbath of the new world, our
Passe-over from everlastinge death to life, our true Iubilee, the first day of
our week, and chief in our calendar to be accounted of, whereon our Phoenix
rose from his ashes, our eagle renewed his bill, the first fruits of sleepers
avvoke, the first begotten of the dead was borne from the womb of the earth,
and made a blessed world, in that it was able to say, The man-child is brought
forth; the seed of Abraham which seemed to have perished under the clods,
fructified, not by proportio^s of thirty, or sixty, or an hundredth, but with
infinite measure of glory, both to himself, and to all those that live in his
root. Him we look for shortly in the clouds of heaven, to raise our bodies of
humility out of the dust, and to fashion them like to his own, to perform his
promise, to finish faith upon the earth, to perfect our glory, and to draw us
up to himself, where he reigns in the heaven of heavens, our blessed
redeemer and advocate.

THE XLV. LECTVRE.
Chap. 4: verse. 5. And there made him a booth, and sat under it in the
shadow.
BEfore, the Lord has begun to reprehend Jonas in words, now he
addresseth himself to reprove him also by a sensible sign; and because his
ears were incapable, speaks unto his eyes, and shows him a life glass,
wherein he may see himself and his blemishes, Words are oftentimes received
as riddles, and precepte upon precept has not prevailed, when a familiar and
actual demonstration has done good. So Ah^iah the Prophet rent the new
garment of Jeroboam the king in twelve pieces, and bade him reserve ten to
himself, in sign, that the kingdom was rent out of the hands of Solomon, 1.
King. 11. Es. 20. Ier. 27.
and ten tribes given to Jeroboam. So Esaias, by going bare-foote, teaches
Egypt and AEthiopia that they shall also go into captivity in the like sort.
Jeremy, by wearing yokes about his neck, and sending yokes, and gives, to the
kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, Tire, Sydon, Judah, gives them a visible
sacrament, and representation of their captivity in Babylon. Thus Ezechiell
portrayed the siedge of Jerusalem upon a brick; Ezech. 4. Act. 21.
thus Agabus takes the girdle of Paul, and binds himself hands and feet,
and says, so shall the man be bound that owes this girdle. And thus does the
Lord admonish Jonas by a real Apophthegme, a lively subjection to his eyes,
what it is that he has just cause to dislike in him. But before we come to
the very point and winding of the matter, wherein we may see the mind of
God, there are many Antecedents and preparatiues before hand to be viewed. 1.
That Jonas goes out of the city, 2. builds him a booth, 3. that God
provideth him a gourd, 4. sends a worm to consume it, 5. that the sun and
the wind bet upon the head of Jonas till he fainted. All this, is but the
Protasis, an only proposition; so far we perceive not whitherto the purpose
of God tends: then follows the narration, the anger of Jonas once again,
and once again Gods increpation, first touching the type or image, which was
the gourd, (for the gourd standing and flourishing, was an image of Niniveh in
her prime and prosperity, the gourd withered, of Niniveh overthowen) then
touching the truth represented by that figure; which was the city it self. For
the meaning of God was, to lay open the iniquity of Jonas before his face, in
that he was angry for the withering of an herb, and had no pity in his
heart, upon a mighty and populous city. The order of the words from this
present verse to the end of the prophecy, is this: in this fifth, Jonas
builds for himself, in the 6. GOD planteth for him, in the 7. he destroys
his planting, in the 8. Jonas is vexed and angry to the death, in the 9. God
reprooveth him in the figure, in the 10. and 11. in the truth, by that figure
exemplified.

Of the Antecedentes, I have already tasted two members, 1. his goinge out of
the city, to shun their company who did not so well like him; 2. his sitting
on the East Side of the city; either to be farther from the judgment of God,
which was likely to come Westward, because Jerusalem stood that way; or to be
out of the trade and thorough-fare of the people, which was likeliest to be at
their kaie, for the river lay also upon the West Side; or to be freer from
the heat and parching of the sun, which in the morning, and toward the
East, is less fervent; or lastly, I told you, to take the comfort and
benefit of the sun rising. Now the 3. in the number of those Antecedentes
is, that he makes himself a booth. Made him a booth.
Wherein I might observe unto you, that a Prophet is enforced to labor with
his hands for the provision of necessaries. And surely, if it were not worthy
the notinge, the Apostle would never have said, Act. 20. You know that these
hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to those that were with me.
(...), these very hands that break the bread of the Lord, these hands that
baptize, and that are laid upon the heads of Gods servauntes, these have
ministered unto my necessities. Likeweise the first to the Corinthians and
fourth We labor, (...). 1. These. 2. and 2* 3.
vvorking with our own bands. And in his Epistles to the Thessalonians,
twice he makes mention of his labor and travail day and night. But I rather
chardge you at this time with these particulars: 1. what Jonas made, a booth;
2. for what use, to sit under the shadow of it; 3. how long to continue, till
he might see what was done in the city. The 1. and the 2. show unto us,
the one the nature, ^. The nature of houses. Esa. 1. Job 8. and 27.
the other the use of all buildinges. By nature, they are but boothes and
tabernacles, and such as the Prophet reports of Sion, that she should
remain as a cottage in a vineyarde, and like a lodge in a garden of cucumbers.
Or as Job speaks in the 27. of his book, like a lodge that the watchman
makes, no longer to abide than till that service is ended. I would be loath to
term them the houses of spiders and moathes, as Job does, but compared with
eternity, such they are. The patriarchs and people of auncienter times dwelt
but in tents, easily pight, and as easily remooved; and as many other things
in antiquity* so this amongst the rest, was a figure to all the ages of the
world to come, that so long as they dwell upon the earth, they have but a
temporal and transitory habitation. The earth which we dwell upon, is but our
place of soiourning, and wherein we are strangers, as God told Abraham, Genesis
17. In the 47 of the same book, Pharaoh asked Jacob how many were the days
of the years of his life: Jacob, to express our condition of travailing and
flitting upon the earth to and fro, answered the king, the whole time, not of
my life, but of my pilgrimage or rather pilgrimages (by reason of often
remooues) is an hundredth and thirty years. Few and evil have the days of my
life been, and I have not attained unto the years of the life of my fathers,
in the days of their pilgrimages. David, 1. Chron. 29. gives thanks unto the
Lord in behalf of himself and his people, that they were able to offer so
willingly toward the building of the temple, because all things came of him,
and from his own hand or liberality they had given unto him. For (says he)
we are strangers before thee and soiourners like all our fathers: our days are
as the shadow upon the earth, and there is none abiding. Thus Jacob and his
fathers, David and his Princes and his people, and their fathers al were
pilgrims. Let us see now, what use the Apostle makes hereof. He says of
Abell, Hebr. 11.
Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Sarah, and the rest, that all these died in faith, and
received not the promises, but saw them a far of, and believed them, and
received them thankefullie, and confessed, that they were strangers and
pilgrims on the earth. For they that say such things, declare plainly that
they seek a country. It may be, their own, from whence they were exiled; the
Apostle answers, no. For if they had been mindful of that country from
whence they came out, they had leisure to have returned. But now they desire a
better, that is, an heavenly* Wherefore God is not ashamed of them to be called
their God, for he has prepared for the^ a city. Likewise he exhorts us,
Heb. 13. As Jesus, to sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered
without the gate, so that we should go forth of the camp, bearing his
reproach, for here we have no continuing city, but we seek one to come. And
our Savior told his disciples, Ioh. 4. that in his fathers house there were
many mansions, or settled dwellings, for here we have but tabernacles. Houses,
I confess, we have, as foxes have thtir holes, and birds their nestes, and
bees their hiues, to be chased and driven from them: but till the promise be
fulfille, which is mentioned, Deuteronomy. 2*
Revel. 21. that the tabernacle of God shall be with men, that is, men shall be
with the tabernacle of God; and God dwell with us, and we with him in heavenly
Jerusalem; we must trust to that other prophecy, Mich. 2. surgite, and ite,
arise, and depart, for this is not your rest.

The use of buildings is, that we may sit under the shadow thereof. 2. The use*
The posterity of Noah, Genesis 11. having found out a place in the pla^ie of
Sinar, said go to, let us build us a city and tower to get us a name. Was that
the end of buildings? Nabuchodonosor, Dan. 4. built them a palace for the house
of his kingdom, and for the honor of his majesty, to vaunt of the mightines
of his power, and to forget the God of heaven. Was that the end of building? It
seems by the words of Solomon, Eccles. 2. that he made him great work, and
built him houses, to prove his heart with joy, and to take pleasure in
pleasant things. Or was that the end of building? Some build wonders of the
world, as the walls of Babylon set up by Semiramis, the house of Cyrus, the
tomb of M^usolus. All which buildings, whither they be summer-parlours, as
Eglons, Iud. 3. or winter-ca^hbers, houses in the city, or Tuscula^ farms in
the country, were they as stately for height, as the spires of Egypt, or as the
temple of the great Diana of the Ephesians, which as they were wo^dred at for
their buildings, so for their ruin and dissipation; or were they as sumptuous
for cost, as that palace of king Alcinous, the walls whereof were of brass, the
gates of gold, the entries of silver; they are all but vanity, and when we
have all done, there is none other use of building, than to sit, and shadovve
our selves, and to defend our bodies from the violence of the weather, and
other foreign injuries. Martial. Dum tamen adifice^ quidlibet il^ facie*
It is a sickness that some men have, to spend their time in building, as the
Epigramme noted Gellius, Gellius aedificat semper, Gellius is alvvaies
building, or repayring, or changing, or doing somewhat, to keep his hand in.
If a friend come to borrowe money of him, Vnum illud verbu^ Gellius, ^difico.
Gellius has no other word in his mouth, but I am in building.

Alas to what purpose are these lardge and spacious houses without inhabitants?
chimneyes without smoke, windows, not for prospect but for martins to breed,
and owls to sing in? Such are the tenants, instead of families heretofore
kept, and hospitality maintained, now hedge-hogs lying under the walls, and
wesels dwelling in the parlours, Jeremy does notably tax the vanity of a great
builder. He says, I will build me a wide house and lardge chambers; Ier. 22.
so he will make himself great windows, and seele the^ with Cedar, and paint
them with Vemi^ton. But shall thou reign, (says the prophet) because thou
closest thy self in Cedar? did not thy father, and thy grandfather eat, and
drink, and prosper, when they executed judgment and justice, kept houses and
relieved the poor? but thine eyes and thy heart are but only for covetuousnes
and oppression, and for vainglory, and to command and over-looke the country
round about, and to leave a name behind thee, even to do this, and according to
the ends thou proposest herein, so shall the Lord visit thee.

Till he might see what should be done in the city. But the proof hereof may
seem to have bin already past, 3. How long.
and the forty days fully accomplished. Rabbini putant die. 36. vel 37.
Some think that Jonas went out of the city, some 3. or 4. days before that
term expired, and there waited the event, and that he was not displeased with
God, till after the time fulfilled. Which seems not probable unto me, that
Jonas so lately and seriously, with so much danger of his life, admonished of
his duty neglected before, would now again forsake the Ninivites, and give
over his preaching, before the acco^plishment of those days which God has
nu^bred unto him. Others are of judgment that the time was fully elasped, and
that Jonas knew well enough that God was minded to spare Niniveh, touching their
final and utter overthrow; yet not to pardon the^ altogether, without the
irrogatio^ of some lighter punishment upon them. As he dealt with Israel, Exodus
23. when they worshipped the molte^ calfe, saying, these be thy gods, O Israel
etc. He threatened to consume the^, yet afterward, though by the intercession
of Moses he changed his mind from the evil which he threatened unto them; yet
he forgave the^ not wholly, but punished the^ by the slaughter of three thousand
men. Lastly it is thought by a third company that Jonas saw by revelarion the
sparing of Niniveh. In such variety of opinions, I abridge not your liberty to
take which best likes you. But howsoever you take it, Jonas, (you see) has
the thirstiest nature after the destruction of Niniveh, that might be. If Jonas
had bin armed with power (for in this respect he wanted not the spirit and
wish of Elias) to have commanded fire against the Ninivites, as Elias did
against the captains and their bands, 2. King. 1.
Niniveh had lien in ashes at the end of forty days, for nothing can please
Jonas, unless somewhat be done against the people of that place. Vsque dur^
But his message being ended, why returns he not toward Israel again? No: he
will take an homely, and comfortless habitation, he will labor with his hands,
and put them to base service, he will lie abroad in the field, bearing the
heat and burden of the day, and wet with the dew of the night, and happily not
fed in that solitary place, but with the waters from the brook, and fruits of
the earth of his own provision and dressing, only to stay the time, and not to
miss that opportunity when God should plague Niniveh, Videre^ Qui andiunt
audita referunt; qui vident, plane sciunt.
the brute and report whereof might not content, but he will see with his eyes
his desire upon his enemies. for they that hear, are able to speak but of
hearsay; they that see, are out of doubt. There was some reason that Moses was
so sharply bent against an Egyptia^, offering wrong to one of his cou^try-men,
Phinees against adulterers, Peter against Malchus, a serva^t to his masters
e^emies. Paul against Elymas a sorcerer, other Apostles against a village of
Samaria, for refusing to entertain Christ: but Jonas, upon small reason, a
prophet of the Lord, and but lately his orator and bead-ma^ in a capital
danger of his own, you hear how his heart and eyes are fixed in a merciless
affection against penitent and reformed men.

And the Lord God prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over Jonas. verse. 6.
It seems that the booth was withered, being built but of boughs or reeds,
or some other stuff which the heat of the sun did easily work upon. For when
the gourd was afterward smitten, the sun and the wind beat upon the head of
Jonas, which argues that his booth was defaced. Before, you have heard of the
building of Jonas, now God builds; the one by art, the other by nature; the
one a tabernacle of boughs, the other an arbor or boure of a living or growing
tree, which the fatnes of the earth nourished, having seed and bud in it
according to the kind thereof; the one withers, because it is but propt up,
having no juice in it, the other spreads her roots and strings in the
ground, having whereby to increase. I need not say how unprofitable and barren
the labor of man is, being left to it self, without the favor of God to
supply the imperfectio^s thereof. This very place does sufficiently justify
that of the Psalm, Psalm 127.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it. The
fruits of the body, fruits of the field, fruits of cattle, increase of kine,
flocks of sheep, the basket, and the store in the basket, Deuter. 28.
they make a number and show of goodly commodities: but unless you give them
their blessing which is their annexed, benedict us fructus ve^tris, blessed
shall be the fruit of thy body, and blessed all the rest mourn as Esau did when
Jacob had prevented him of the blessing, and as the grass upon the house tops
which no man takes in his hand or blesses in his heart, so do they
languish, pine away, and come to nothing. The Lord must command his blessings
to be with us in our storehouses, Jbid.
and in all that we set our hand unto, as it is there added, or our labor dies
between on^ fingers. Zophar, Job 20. speaks many things of the joy of an
hypocrite, his excellency mounting unto heaven and his head reaching up unto
the clouds; yet he shall perish (says Zophar) like the dunge, and they that
have seen him shall say, where is he? he shall flee away as a dream^ and pass
away as a vision of the night; there is nothing left of his meat, and no man
shall hope for his good: yea when he shall have filled his belly, God shall send
down his fierce wrath, and rain even upon his meat. You see there is nothing
prospers with him, because he is an hypocrite, and when he went to his work,
the blessing of the Lord was commanded to stay behind. The blessing of the
Lord must be upon the building of our houses, watching of our cities, tilling
of our ground, filling of our bellies, training up of our children, or
whatsoever pains we bestow in all these, falls into emptines. This was it
that seco^ded and supplied the labor of Jonas: he built him a booth which
withered, but God prepared him a gourd, an house of a better foundation,
because it lived by the moisture of the earth, which the other was destitute of.

There is a great question and co^tentio^ between writers, touching the pla^t
that was here provided, what it was by kind, and how to be termed. The wisdo^e
which God gave unto Ada^, Genesis 2. was yery great in the morning of all those
creatures that God brought before him But concerning the herb or tree here
mentioned, the most learned and wise amongst the Hebrews, Grecia^s, Latins,
Spanish, French, Germans, Hetruria^s, have labored and beaten their brains to
give it a na^c, but hitherto have not found it: and unless there be some
second Adam to speak his mind, or an other Solomon, who was able to speak of
the trees from the Cedar to the Hysope, I think the controversy will never be
ended. Notwithstanding, as the best wine is that which is farthest brought, for
the more it is shaken in carriage, the more it is fined and made fit for use;
so there is both pleasure and profit to hear any point of learning* sifted and
moved to and fro by the diverse judgments of learned men. If I were as skillful
in simpling as some are, I would give you my simple opinion. But now I must
speak from mine authors. R. Esdras says, that the wise of Spain called it
Cucurbita, or Cucumer, which is in English a gourd or cucu^ber: but withal he
adds, ratio iniri non potest, vt sciatur quid sit, we cannot find out the
means to know what it was. The Latin vular tra^slatio^ calls it Hedera,
which in our English signifies Ivy, Jerome disprooveth that, eve^ against
himself, and says that the Latins have no name for it: for Ivy and gourds,
and cucumers (he says) creep upon the ground, and have need of tendrels and
props to bear the^ up; but this tree sustained her self with her own
truncke, and had broad leaves like a vine, and the shadow which it cast was
very thick. Some called it Bryonia, bryony or wild nep and the white vine
which grows in the hedges with red berries, and blistereth his skin that
ha^dleth it. So^e, rapu^ siluestre, the wild rape root. The Hebrews and the
Chaldees name it Kikaio^: the Grecia^s (...), and (...): the Arabians Elkerva,
whereof ye have the oil of kerva in the Apothecaries shops. Sometimes they call
it Cataputia mayor, great spourdge, and Pendactylum, for the similitude which
it has with the 5. fingers of the hand Whereupon the French, by reason of the
ioints and knots which are in the leaves thereof. name it Palm de Christ, that
is to say, Christ's hand. The Hetrurians call it Phaseolum, faselles, or long
pease, a kind of pulse, rising so high, that it served them for arbours.
Lastly, the Germans, for the admirable height of it call it wonder boome, that
is the wonderful tree. Thus every nation, as it could get any tree, which in
their imagination came nearest unto it, so they lent it a name. But we may
conclude with Oecolampadius, according to that of Esdras before, Incertum
qualis frutex vel arbor, It is not known what bush or tree it was. Animal
c^nibus infestum.

Similem ficul sed minorem, folia h^^be^tem simil^lima platano sed maiora etc.

Lib. 15. na^. hist* cap. 7^ ^^clnium. Croton, ^rix* i^, sesamum silvestre.
etc. Pla^anu^ (...)


At length the Latins, the latest, and in my judgment the skilfullest amongst
them, have all agreed to call it rici^us, which in propriety of speech
signifies a tike, a creature noisome to dogs; and for the likeness of the seed
or grain that it bears, is applied to this tree. Dioscorides calls it
arborosum frutice^, a bush, yet a tree; like unto a fig tree but less; with
leaves like to a plane, but greater, soft, and blackish, and bearing seed like
unto tikes. We may read of it in Pliny and of the oil that comes therhence;
together with the variety of names that are give^ unto it. But al with one
consent agree, that it suddenly springs to the height of an Olive, and
diffuseth it self like Ivy, and that it has scattering boughs, and broad
leaves, like the plane tree wher-vnder they were wont to feast, and most
commodious to give a shadow. For which cause, R. Kimhi notes, they used to
place it before tavern doors. Whither we have lighted upon the name or not, it
suffices for the history to understand, that God provided a tree, wonderfully
tall, plentifully stored with boughs and leaves, and such as was most
convenient to give comfort unto Jonas. O how admirable are the works of God,
the least whereof may challenge so many commentaries and expositions to be spent
upon it? what shall we then think of all nature, if the whole table and book
thereof were set before our eyes to be viewed and considered, when one plant of
the ground finds not learning enough, amongst Jews, Barbarians, nor
Christians to unfold it? When we behold the heave^s, Presentem que refert
quaelibet ^erba Deu^.
the works of his fingers, the moon and the stars which he has ordained, I
say not then as the Psalmist does Lord, what is man or the son of man that thou
should so visit him? but what is man, or the son of man, that he should
judge, or give sentence of the? and we may both begin, and end that Psalm, as
the prophet does, O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the world,
and in the great buildinges and treasures thereof, when one small creature, and
parcel of thy works breeds such confusion in the wits of man? Much more
deeply might the Lord oppose us, as he did his servant Job, with the greater
wonders of nature, when we strain at gnats, and cannot conceive of little
things; Job 38.
have thou entered into the bottomes of the sea, or walked to seek out the
depth? have the gates of death ben opened unto thee? or have thou seen the
gates of the shadow of death? have thou perceived the breadth of the earth?
tell if thou know all this; and where is the way that light dwells? and
where is the place of darkness? Anaxagoras being asked why man was made,
au^swered* to behold the heave^s, and to magnify God in his creatures. Surely,
as our Savior co^me^ded the small mites which the widow cast into the treasury,
so there is not the least work that God does, but deserves the greatest
admiration that our hearts can comprehend. And therefore the enchau^ters of
Pharaoh, when they were come to try their cunning in lice, the basest and
conte^ptiblest creatures, they were enforced to cry out, Exodus 8.
this is the finger of God. To conclude, as Christ made the comparison between
the lillies and his servants, if God so cloth the grass of the field, which
to day is standing, Math. 6.
and to morrow is cast into the ove^, how much more shall he do unto you, O ye
of little faith? so may we say; if God be so glorious in a mea^e pla^t of the
field, which in a night ca^e up, and in a night perished again; much more are
his mightier works highly to be marvailed at.

But in this 6. verse, (to bring it into order) there are two parts 1. the
creation of the gourd, by the hands of God, 2. the acceptance of Jonas. The
former has 4. ioints and divisions, in it: 1. the gourd was prepared by the
Lord God, for who else was able to create? some have gone about to imitate the
works of creation, as to make thunders and lightnings, and to fly in the air,
but they have paid the price of saying in their foolish hearts, I will be like
the most high. 2. It was made to ascend; 3. to be a shadow over the head of
Jonas; 4. to deliver him from his grief. The preparing of the gourd had little
pleasured Jonas, unless it had ascended to some height; nor the ascending on
high, unless it had been flexible, and bowed it self over his head; nor the
hanging over his head, without such quantity of boughs and leaves as were
sufficient to shadow it: all these grow and ascend in my text higher and higher
as the tree it self does; that we may know how wisely the works of God are
done, and they never miss the end, whereunto they were addressed. Two of these
four members, to weete, the springing and climbing of the gourd, that in a
moment of time it was over the head of Jonas, show the omnipote^t power and
providence of the Almighty, who contrary to the rule of the philosophers, that
nothing is made of nothing, ^ gigni. De nibil^ nihil.
without some matter praeexistent, causes a tree to arise, without either
seed or stock to produce it; and hasteneth the work in such sort, that
wereas other plants require the cha^dges and seasons of the year to make them
sprout, and yield their increase, not without the kindness of the ground,
dropping of the air, influence of the sun and stars, and other natural
concurrences, this by the extraordinary hand of God, presently and immediately
came to a full growth. For I like not their opinion, who think that the gourd
was there before, and therefore Jonas applied himself to that place, and there
erected his booth, when the judgments of so many learned, and the letter of
the text, Pullulare f^cit eo momento. R. Kimhi. Repent a^cto frutice. Ar.
Mont. Nocte extitit. 10. verse.
is flatly against them. Besides the word of preparing that is here and
elsewhere used (for who but the same Lord God, prepared the fish before, or who
the worm and the East-winde hereafter?) notes a quick and speedy expeditio^
in the working of God, when his pleasure is, and that al things in the world
great and small, the winds in the air, the fishes in the water, the plants in
the earth, and under the earth worms and creeping things are subjected to his
mighty providence. The latter two declare the goodness of God toward Jonas in
his application of the gourd to so acceptable an end. For by that means his
body was shadowed, and his soul eased. I know there is misery enough in
nature, and that judgment sometimes begins at the house of GOD, Ier. 49.
and they drink deeply of the cup to whom it was not meant. And the
grief which Jonas here feels, is but a portion of that grief, which
corruption and mortality has addicted us unto. And the farther we go from
GOD, the nearer we ever approach to misery: for neither land, nor sea, nor
city, nor field, nor air, nor earth, nor any worm of the earth shall favor
us, no more than they favored Jonas. I am not ignorant on the other side, that
all nature is provided for the comfort of Gods elect. And nature shall even be
chandged, and made to run faster than her manner is, to do them good. The
Lord shall not only do it, but do it with speed, when we have little reason to
look after it, sometimes by rule, and sometimes at liberty, sometimes by law,
and sometimes by privilege and above his law, sometimes by nature, and
sometimes by miracle, but do it he will, rather than his help shall fail.
Who thought of the ram in the bush, when Isaac lay upon the fagots? the good
will of him that dwelt in the burning bush, sent it. He came not upon his
feet, but was brought by special providence. Who dreamed that an Eastwind
should have filled the camp of Israel with quails? It had blown often
before, and sometimes hurtful and unprosperous blastes, but never quails.
Who looked for Manna from heaven, when they wanted bread in the wilderness?
Many a dew and frost had they seen upon the ground, but never with such
effect. Who durst presume to think, that Jordan would run back, or the red
sea divide it self, till they saw it fulfilled? Or would not have sworn that
the lions would have rent Daniell in pieces, and bruised every bone, and the
fire of that oven in Babylon, have burned those three Salamanders to powder,
till they saw it otherwise? But these things have been done, we know, and
done on the sudden; the LORD has risen earlye to do them, that is, hastened
his act, and set wheel as it were to his power and goodness, to make them
speed. And thus was this gourd provided, to the growing whereof were required
a spring and summer at the least, but to such augmentation and largeness, the
space of many years. These two companions, the might and mercy of God,
between which, as before I said, those 4. members of my text divide
themselves, are his two wings, under the shadow whereof we shall be safe.
And as the disciples of Christ were sent into the world two and two before his
face, to preach the gospel, and to heal diseases; so these two has the Lord
joined together, and they go before his face as far as the earth is bounded,
to assist his chosen in all their griefs. And rather than any temptation shall
wax too strong for them, and put them in hazard, he will be Adonai, Adonai,
twice a God as it were, and double his spirit strong and, strong, merciful
and merciful: and as his goodness is infinite, so it shall draw forwards his
infinite power to some extraordinary and untimely work, which nature without
leisure and tracte of time could not have produced.

THE XLVI. LECTVRE.
Chap. 4. verse. 6. So Jonas was exceeding glad of the gourd.
IN the building of God, after the building of Jonas withered and defaced, I
noted, 1. the provision that the Lord made for him, 2. his own acceptance.
The former with the branches thereto belonging, namely the creation and
propagation of the gourd, wherein the power of God was manifested, together
with the shadow, and end of the shadow wherein his goodness showed it self, we
have already treated of; and are now to consider the acceptance and applause
that Jonas gave unto it. It offers unto us these two things: 1. Jonas was
glad.
1. his affection, joy; 2. the measure of that affection, The cause of his joy.
exceedinge great joy.

Many things there were which might provoke the rejoicing of Jonas. 1. The
fa^ning of the leaves, which was a great comfort to a man for the sun is a
marveilous instrument, as the son of Syrach speaks, Eccles. 43.
it burns the mountains three times more than one that keeps a furnace, it
casts out fiery vapors, and with shining beams blinds the eyes: and we
know that burning heat is in the number of the plagues threatened, Deuteronomy. 28.
and Revel. 16. Ardor and aestus.
The fourth Angel powered out his vial upon the sun, and it was given him to
torment men with heat of fire, and men boiled in great heat, and blasphemed
the name of God for it. This was the grief wherewith it is said before that
Jonas was perplexed; for it is not a mean plague to lie open to the skorching
of the sun without shadow and protection: so much the rather, if (as the
Rabbines imagine) the skin of Jonas were waxen more tender, since his
enclosure in the bowelles of the fish than before. 2. The gourd saved arbor
being green and fresh, pleased well his eyes. 4. That the sent Paulus de
Palatio adds other reasons of his joy. 1. He thinks that Jonas was sick if
God be with us, where are his miracles? Judge. 6. to seal up his mercies
toward him; the same does the Lord bring in this place for the confirmation
of Jonas. That Jonas rejoiced for the gourd, I cannot dislike: it argues that
he weighed and esteemed the blessings of God as they deserved. Many, though
they fall upon their heads, as the dew of heaven upon their ground, yet are
more senseless in them: and as they meet the motes in the sunne-beames, so
they entertain the gifts of God, as if they came by chance, skarsely lending
a thought to consider them. Others are joyful enough of that which they are
possessed of; sometimes insolent and proud, their looks and their gate have
majesty and disdain in them against those who are not so plentifully visited;
but they little regard the author of those benefits, who has sent this ticket
or remembrance to every man, upon the face of the earth, what have thou, that
thou have not received? Let Naball be the person and parable in whom I report
(only chandging the name,) the history of all worldly men, who having the
riches of the earth, take them as inheritance or due debt, and spend them like
Lords, to fulfill their lusts; meane-while, not minding either sacrifice to
God, or relief to the poor, or any way applying themselves to those ends for
which they were enriched. Naball, 1. Sam. 25. had riches enough, and mirth
enough, he made a feast after his shearing like a king, and his heart was
merry within him; the reason was, for he was very drunken: there is the use of
his riches. Besides, the opinion of his mightines and wealth, made him as
drunk otherwise. For the usage of himself in the dispensation of his riches,
was so base every way, that neither servant, nor wife, nor stranger gave good
report of him. The servant utters his complaint, he is so wicked that a man
cannot speak unto him: the wife concealeth not hirs, let not my Lord regard
this wicked man, for as his name is so is he; Naball is his name, and folly is
with him. David oftentimes fretteth at his churlishness, he has requited me
evil for good, who would not bestow a little portion of his substance, to
refresh the servants of David, that walked at the feet of their Lord, though
they were a wall unto him, by day, and by night, and safegarded all that he had
in the wilderness. But his end was au^swerable to his deserving; for it is said
in the text, the Lord smote him within ten days that he died, and before that
death of his body, his heart died within him, and he was like a stone. The
best instruction is, as we rejoice in these temporal blessings of God, so to
use them, that they may be our joy (for to some they are snares and
destructions) to receive them with thanksgiving, embrace them in measure, and
dispense them with wisdom, to the honor of our bountiful God, relief of
afflicted Joseph, and a furtherance unto us to dischardge those Christian
duties whereunto we are bound.

Besides the acknowledging of the author, the pleasure which Jonas took in the
gourd, was a sign that he felt the sweetnsse and use of the benefit, which
(if you observe) is a blessing upon a blessing: for as the wise Preacher noted,
Riches, and power to use them Eccles. 5.
to every man to whom God has given riches and treasure, and gives him power
to eat thereof, and to take his part, and to enjoy his labor, this is the
gift of God: the other are his gifts, but this is a double gift. Surely he
will not much remember the days of his life, because God answers to the joy
of his heart: Without which joy and comfort of heart, he will remember, not
only the days, but the hours and minutes of his life; and everye one is more
bitter than other unto him: all the meat that he eats, seems to be
mingled with gall, and his drink spiced with wormwood; his clothes sit to
straight upon his body, his body is a prison to his soul, and his soul a
burden and clogg to it self. Therefore the Preacher adds, there is an evil
which I have seen under the sun, and it is much amongst men, Eccles. 6*
a man to whom God has given riches, and treasure, and honor, and he
wants nothing for his soul of all that it desires, but God gives him not
power to eat thereof, but a stranger shall eat it up: this is a vanity, and
this is an evil sickness. Jonas was not sick of this disease: for he both
enjoyed the gourd, and perceived those comfortes and pleasures for which it was
provided.

Exceeding glad. Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria ^urrunt. Norat. in. Sat.

Quicquid agit valde agit.

Maguum est hominem agere: de aliquo quem vid isti heri. meri^o po^^est diei,
hic quic est? ^anta muta^tio est iram Colligit et poni^ tem ere etc. Horat. in
ar. poet. Es. 8.

Vitae disconvenit ordine toto. Hor. in Epist Ibid.


But what means the immoderate and excessive joy that Jonas took therein? for
I come now to the measure of his affection. It is true oftentimes which the
Poet has, So foolish are we, that while we avoid one fault, we fall into
the contrary. Jonas is quickly angry, and quickly pleased, and very angry,
and very well pleased. Whatsoever he is, or does, he puts full strength unto
it. It is a great maistery, says Seneca, to play a man kindly. Of one whom
thou saw but yesterday, thou may ask the next, who is this? he is so much
changed. Would a man know Jonas to be Jonas, that had seen him before in his
exceeding wrath, and now should find him so exceedingly well pleased? This
were enough for a child, whose limber and inconstant passions are every hour
altered. Yet Jonas bewraieth his weakness in the like mutability of ma^ners:
sometimes boiling like a sea, or like the river in Esaias, mighty and great,
with abundance of choler, sometimes as strongly over-borne with a contrary
affection; constant in nothing but in his inconstancy, and never moderating
himself with a mild and sober carriage, as those waters of Shiloah, that
ran softly. Peter Martyr vvriting of the affections of man, sorrow, joy,
hope, fear, anger, and the rest, compared them to the winds wherewith a
ship is driven: they may be helps to the ship, and they may overthrow
it. The passions, I think, wherewith Jonas was driven too and fro, were more
vehement than that wind, which raised the former tempest. For when he is
angry, he is sore grieved; when he is glad, he is overmuch apaide; and when
he is angry again, he is angry to the death. So he is not only variable in his
affection, as Proteus was in his shapes, wrought like wax upon a sudden,
but he is also as intemperate in them, not able to contain himself within the
listes of any moderation.

That you may know what vessels they are which GOD does use in the
mninistration of his holiest work, in bearing his name before the world,
and preaching the gospel of Christ the richest treasure that ever the earth
received: they are earthly vessels, made of clay, and shaped of the
selfsame moulde, whereof all mankind is fashioned. Prophets they are, but
as Moses spoke, like unto their brethren, not only in similitude of flesh, as
CHRIST only was, but in similitude of sinful and infirm flesh; Apostles
they are, and CHRIST chose twelve of them, but Judas was a devil incarnate,
and Peter was a Satan in his kind, and none were Angels; they are also the men
of God, yet men; or if they be Angels by a more honorable style than their
nature can bear, Revel. 1 behold, he has not found stedfastnes in his Angels,
Job. 4. or if they be stars, in the same vision, behold the stars are not pure
in his sight, Job. 25. From both which places of Job, is inferred by way of
comparison; much less they that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is
in the dust, and they are consumed before the mothe: much less man that is but
rottennes, and the son of man that is a worm. He skarsely bears a tongue
in these days, that frames not this, or such like objections against us. They
say, and do not: Physician, first heal thy self: Math. 23.
you that preach that a man should keep the law, by breaking the law dishonor
you God? what then? if we be not worse in your opinions than the Scribes, and
Pharisees, do you the part of dutiful auditors; all that we shall bid you
observe, that observe and do: so long as we sit in the chair of Moses, and
Christ, and his Apostles, and teach you no other doctrine and precepts than
they have delivered, you need not fear us. If we live well, it is our own, I
mean not only our praise, Si been vi^^ erimus, nostrum est. Si been
dixerimus, vestrum etc.
but our crown also: if we teach well, it is yours; take you the portion which
belongs unto you, and leave the other to our selves. If we be careless of
our own sores, when your wounds are healed and bound up by us; if we, as
unprofitable salt, good for nothing but to be thrown to the dunghill, be
thrown out indeed, and you seasoned; if we be cast into darkness, and you
illuminated by our light; if when we have preached unto you, our selves become
reprobates; if when we have shone like lamps and candles in the house, our
selves go out in smoke; if when we have built you an arc, our selves be
drowned; if when we have guided you into the land of promise, our selves die
short of it; if when we have served in the temple of the Lord, as that plate of
silver and gold, our selves be carried captive into Babylon, or some stranger
land; if when we have sowed you fields we reap them not; and planted you
vineyardes, we drink not of the wine; and when we had preached salvation unto
you, we taste not of the fruits thereof; be it unto us as we have deserved. Be
not you our judges* leave us to stand or fall to our own Lord; only, use you
the benefit of our labor and travail as God has appointed it, Jonas (to
apply my speech) when he rebelled, he rebelled without measure, and when he
slept* he slept without measure, his anger before, Nil fuit (...) quam. Sic
impa^ sibi. (...)
and afterward, is without measure, and his joy in this place as much without
measure. There was never any thing so unlike it self. Behold (as the gospel
spoke) more than Jonas is here. I mean, worse than Jonas is amongst us, if you
come to examine the lives of ministers. We transgress the commandment of God
more than ever Jonas did, and we are more sleepie than he was, in the hazard
of the ship, that is, in the danger of Christ's Church: and our passions of
anger, envy, and joy, bear us away with more violence. If any be offended
with us for such infirmity and frailty graffed in our flesh, let them ask the
reason of the Potter, quare fecisti sic? why have thou done it thus, and not
rather appointed that the perfitting of our salvation should have been wrought
by stronger instruments? But I turn to my matter in hand. How exceeding and
unmeasurable the joy of Jonas was, appears, 1. by doubling the affection,
laetabatur laetitia, he rejoiced with joy; 2. by adding an attribute, magna,
laetitia, with great joy: so it was joy, and joy, and great joy. Such as Esaias
describes in the 9. of his prophecy, according to the joy of harvest, and as
men rejoice when they divide a spoil: or as one that comes with a pipe, to
go unto the mount of the Lord. The nature of joy, as also of love and liking
to any thing, Esa. 30.
is, to dilate and stretch out the heart; for when it takes pleasure in the
object, it opens it self as a friend his bosom and arms to embrace a
friend, so this, the chambers and roumes thereof to welcome that pleasure which
is come unto it. So does Esaye prophecy unto Jerusalem of the joy that shall be
unto her for the coming of the Gentiles, thine heart shall be astonished and
enlardged, because the multitude of the sea shall be converted unto thee etc.
Esa. 60^
The Apostle uses the same kind of speech to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 6.
O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is made lardge, you
are not kept straight in us, but you are kept straight in your own bowelles:
now, for a recompense (I speak as to my children) be you also enlardged. That
is, as I have opened all the affections of my soul to receive you; so be you
as willing and joyful on the other side to receave me again. And afterward,
receive us, for I have said that ye are in our hearts to die and to live
together: 2. Cor. 7.
I rejoice greatly in you, I am filled with comfort, and am exceeding joyous in
all our tribulation. In effabile gaudium mente concipirur, quod ne^ abscondi
po^est, nec sermonib. aperiri. etc. Lib. Moral. 24.
Such is the force of joy, it so possesses and replenisheth the heart, that
while a man lives, he cannot forsake the thing which he is fond of. I leave it
to Physicians to examine the cause, but if histories deceave us not, some have
died through immoderate joy, as Diagoras of Rhodes in the arms of his three
sons, returning victorers from the games of Olympus. The highest degree of
joy, is that which they call Iubilee, described by Gregory thus, when an
unspeakable gladness is con^eaved in the mind, which neither can be hid,
nor speech uttered; and although it be not expressed by any proprieties, yet it
is signified by some kinds of gesture: Or when the abundance of the heart is
not answered by sufficiency of words, Cum cordis laetitia oris efficaci a non
exple^ur etc. Ibid. 28.
but he which rejoices is neither able to rule his joy, nor to fulfill it. I
think the joy of Jonas was a Iubilee, he is so ravished and overcome with the
pleasure of the gourd, that he knows not how to contain himself. Alas, a
gourd was not worth thus much, Mensurae laetitiae de magnitudine nuntii veniat.
Cassiod. epist, Lib. 1.
if the rule be true, that the measure of our joy should be according to the
news that is brought, and the cherefulnesse of the mind no more than is the
thing which we rejoice for. If Jonas had received tydinges of deliverance from
the belly of the fish, or of redemption from eternal death; if a Prophet had
sung unto him, as he did unto Sion, rejoice, and be glad Jonas, behold thy
King comes; or Angels had brought him word, as they did the shephardes,
behold, we bring thee news of great joy that shall be to all people; what
could Jonas more have done? For these, and such like are the things wherein
our greatest joy should be placed: and there can be no intemperancy of
rejoicing, where these are affected. So witnessed one Apostle, God forbid that
I should rejoice in any thing but in the cross of Christ: Gal. 6. 1. Pet. 1.
illud est verum gaudium quod non de creatura sed de Creatore concipi^tur etc.
Bern.
and the other agrees unto him, in whom, though you see him not, yet do you
believe, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious. For that is the true
and principal joy which is conceaved not from the creature, but from the
Creator: which when thou have received, no man can take from thee: wherewith
compare what pleasure soever, it is grief; all sweet, is sour unto it, and
there is nothing that may delight, but seems troublesome, and offensive.
There are many that say, who will show us any good? they are au^swered by the
prophet in one word, Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us:
open but our eyes, that they may behold thy merices, For thou have given me
more joy of heart by the light of thy face, than wordlinges have felt when
their wheat and their wine has most abounded. And therefore blessed is the
man whose strength is in thee, Psalm. 4. Psalm. 84.
whose heart is in thy ways, who going through the vale of this world, make
wells therein: that is, use such commodities as this valley of tears affords
them to relieve their present wantes, but stay themselves upon the hope and
expectation of better things to come. The Scripture does everye where call us
to higher pleasures: so does wisdom Prove. 8. with me are dureable riches,
the riches of this world are uariable. So does Esaias in the 55. of his
prophecy, why lay you out your money, and not for bread, but bestow it upon
akorns and branne that cannot feed? So does the son of God, Mat. 6. Lay up
treasures for your selves in heaven. And Ioh. ^ labor not for the meat which
perishes, but for the meat which endures unto everlasting life. So likewise
he advises the Church of Laodicaea, Revel. 3. I counsel thee to buy gold
of me, that thou may be made rich, and white raiment that thou may be
clothed, and that thy filthiness appear not. As for the mutable and
transitorye either pleasures or profittes of this life, which are ever coming
and going, A^e^ tanqua^ osurus.
it shall be good for a man so to love them* as that he may find in his heart to
leave them, when need requires. And as Fabricius told Pyrrhus, who one day
tempted him with gold, another day terrified him with an Elephant, which he
had never seen before, yesterday I was not moved with thy money, nor to day
with thy beast; so whether we were tempted with the gain, or terrifi^d with
the loss of these wordly commodities, we do not trouble ou^ selves either
way, because they were given us but for use, and not everlastingly to enjoy.
(...) mundo frui^ur Deo. August. Eccles. 9.
No man knows either love or hatred by all that is before him: for all
things come alike to all, and the same condition (I mean in these outward
things) is both to the just and the wicked. And therefore, happy are we if
therein we can compose our selves to that indifferent resolution, that David
had when he fled from Absalon his son, touching his coming or not coming
back again to Jerusalem to take his former comforts, behold, here am I, let
him do to me as it seems good in his eyes. 2. Sam. 15.


But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smo^e the
gourd that it withered. ver. 7
The pleasure of Jonas is quite dashed, he little thought of so speedy an
alteration; who seemed to say in his heart not long before, I shall never be
grieved; but the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away: and he that
has power over the blessings, has power also over the plagues, Rev. 6, And as
every good gift comes down from above, so there is not an evil in the
city, nor in the world, that the Lord does not. And his providence is as
mighty in using the service of a worm as of Leviathan. I need not trouble
you either with the author, 1. The Lord
whom I have often mentioned before; 2. Prepared
or with his manner of working* for he does not only create al things* but
he orders and fitteth them in such sort, that they are ready at all times
to work his will. There is nothing sudden, or new, or unprovided unto him,
but all his creatures, both great and small, as if they watched their turns,
stand forth to give their attendance. 3 (...) worm.
The instrument that God uses to afflict Jonas with, is very vile and
co^te^ptible: he that could have sent a wind, to have turned the gourd vpside
down, or lightning to have blasted it, or an whole army of worms and
caterpillars to have devoured it, or withered it with his word, as Christ did
the figtree, never bear leaves henceforth, prepares a worm, and but one
worm to execute that business. The scripture no where speaks of worms, but
with a kind of co^te^pt, as of a base and silly creature: as Psa. 22. but I am
a worm, and no man, the reproach of me^, and the scorn of people; where the
later expounds the former: and Esaias 41. fear not, worm Jacob, though thou
art the least amongst the nations, and all the people of the earth set
themselves against thee. Jn ijs quae sun^ minora granohordei*
The Hebrews have an opinion, that encha^ters cannot show their skill in little
things, if they be less, they say, tha^ a barley corn, and therefore the
sorcerers of Egypt failed in producing lyce. But our God is as cunning and
artificial in the smallest creature of the world, as in the greatest: the
organical body of a little Ant, is no less to be wondered at, tha^ the huge
body of Behemoth. And as Vulcane is co^me^ded in the Poet, for beating out
chains and nets so thin, that the eye could not see the^, Quae lumina fallere
possint.

Non illud opus ten^issima vincu^^ Stamina.


smaller than the smallest thread, or tha^ the web of the spider: so the smaller
the creature is, the more is the workmanship of God to be admired, both in the
shaping and in the using thereof. We al know, that God has scourged the
mightiest tyra^t in the earth, as much with worms, as if he had sent out whole
armies against him. As he plagued Zenacharib with an Angel from heaven, the
Sodomites with fire and brimstone, Corah and his conspiratours with the opening
of the earth: so, he destroyed Herod with worms, Antiochus with worms, and
against many other bloody persecutours of his church used none other
executioners. And be it spoken to the dau^ting of all flesh, to pull down the
pride thereof, that the day shall come, when worms shall cover them, and they
shall say to the worms, you are our brethren and sisters; and to the confusion
of all the wicked and damned of the earth, that their worm dies not; whereby
though an infinite torment be meant, yet the gnawing of a poor worm is made
to express it. The time which God chose for smiting the gourd, 4. When the
morning rose.
was, in the rising of the morning; a little before the sun ca^e forth of his
chamber, when the shadow of the gourd should most have pleasured him; for in
the night season, the air was cold enough, and Jonas passed it with sleep, so
that the covering of the boughs was superfluous for that time. But when the
morning arose, the rightest hour that the cross could have fallen upon Jonas,
the worm is sent. They say in Esaias, Esa. 5.
let the counsel of the holy one come: what need they call for it? it shall not
only come, but come in a time which God has appointed fittest for their smarte.
All the judgments of the Lord are number and measure, he reckons the hour and
the minute of the hour when it is most convenient to inflict them. Sisera
shall not die in an army, nor by the hands of a man, nor any bow bent, nor
sword drawn against him, the Lord has reserved him to a tent, and to a
ten-penny nail to be driven in to his head by the hands of a feeble woman.
This was the time, and these the means which the Lord made choice of to punish
him. Zenacherib shall not be slain in the field, nor by the Angel of the
Lord* which smote a great part of his army, but at home, in his own city,
and in the temple of his idol, and by the hands of his sons that sprange
from his bowels. This is the time, and these the means that the Lord has kept
him unto, to show his justice. Therefore the day of vengance and destruction,
is evermore called the day of the Lord; not that the rest are not his, but
these he has specially marked out, and allotted to exercise his judgments
in. Ierem. 51.
There is a time to plant, and a time to root up that that has been planted.
Babylon is as a threshing floor, says the prophet, the time of her threshing
is come, yet a little while and her harvest is come: so Babylon (you see) has
a time for her threshing. Our Savior Revel. 3. speaks of an hour of
temptation which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the
earth. And in the fourteenth of the same book, the Angel flies in the midst
of heaven, saying with a loud voice, fear God, and give glory to him, for the
hour of his judgment is come. And another Angel cried unto him that sat upon
the clovvd, thrust in thy sickle, and reap the harvest of the earth, for the
time is come to reap it. God suffered the gourd in the night time, when Jonas
had little benefit by it; but when the morning arose, and when his soul most
desired the comfort thereof, then it withered. Rich men shall have riches when
they have least use of them, but when the evil day comes, they shall cast
them away to the mowles of the earth: and Epicures shall have their pleasures
for a time, but when they shall say unto pleasures, stand up and help us, they
shall fly away from them. 5. The next day.
And as he chose the unhappiest time for the plaguing of Jonas, so he made
speed to plague him: for how short a time did Jonas enjoy the pleasure of the
gourd? God prepared a worm the very next day to smite it. Where are those
greedy dogs that never have enough of pleasure? Who say, come, we will
bring wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and to morrow
shall be as this day, Esa. 56.
and much more abundant. What else is this drunkenness of yours, Vnius hor^
hilaris insania. Iam. ^.
in wine and strong drink, and fulfill of pleasures, but the merry madness of
one hour to be recompensed with sorrow for ever and ever? Go to, you that say
to day, and to morrow we will do this and that, and yet ye cannot tell what
shall be to morrow: for what is your life? or what is your pleasure intended?
It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and afterward vanishes
away. Boast not thy self of to morrow, Prover. 7.^*
for thou know not what a day may bring forth! Nescis quid serus vesper
ferat, thou know not what a chandge the next evening may make. 1. King. 16.
Did Elah the king of Israel think, when he was feasting in his stewardes
house, that his time had been so short? and that a captain of his own
should have slain him? Did the sons and daughters of Job, when they were
banqueting in their eldest brothers house, dream of the wind that came from
the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house that it overwhelmed
them? Did Babylon, Job 1.
which was called tender and delicate, and the Lady of kingdoms, Esaias 47.
which assumed to her self, I am, and there is none else; I shall not ^it a
vvidowe, nor know the loss of children; she that trusted in her wickedness,
and said, none sees me; did she imagine how near they were that came with a
contrary news, Advenit finis tuus, Thine end is come? Ier. 51.
Dumah calls to the prophet in scorn, Esa. 21. watchman, what is in the
night? watchman, what is in the night? The watchman answers, The morning
comes and also the night; that is, thou have had a time of light, and
delights, thou shall also have a time of darkness. Thus the Edomites and
Epicures of our days mock their prophets, and watchmen. You speak of a
night, ye watchmen, and of a day of judgment* but when comes that night?
or where is the promise of his coming? We tell you again, The morning
comes, and also the night. If ye will ask, ask to amendment of life, ask
not to scoff us and to deceive your selves; enquire, return, and come, that
is, continue not still in your former abominations. The time is very short,
it is but mane and vespere which is the measure of one day. Yet a very little
while, and he that comes, comes: 1 Thessalonians. 5. Psalm. 73.
sudden destruction shall come upon the wicked, as fear upon a woman that
travaileth with child. How suddenly are they destroyed, perish, 6. It
smote the gourd.
and come to a fearful end? The service that God put the worm unto, was to
smite the gourde: as a messenger sent from heaven, like his Angel to
Nabuchodonosors tree, with this commission, Hew down the tree. The little
worm with his teeth, or rather no teeth, but such feeble grinders as nature
had armed it with, smites the gourde, and gives it a mortal stroke, as if a
workman had come of purpose to lay an axe to the root of it. Consider, I
beseech you, the miraculous working of God, as in the pla^ting of this
creature, so in the overthrow of it. It dies not with age, or continuance of
time, as annosa quercus, the long lasting oak, or for lack of soil and mould
to the root, or because the spowtes of the air restrained their dew from it:
but a little and base messenger with weapons of no power, but that it was
strengthened by the will and might of God, gives it a blow, and takes the
vegetation and life from it. 7. It withered.
For the effect of all is, that it withered. So the author of all is God; the
readiness of his working, preparation, as of one never vnstored; the minister,
a worm; the time, the morning; the speed, the next day; the work, smiting
the gourd; the effect, vvithering. Thus is the life of man tempered, as the
condition of Jonas was without the wales of Niniveh, like a garment pieced
together of old and new cloth, so this of sower and svveete, and there are
many and sore rentes in it. Sometimes pleasure asswageth pain, but most
commonly pain kills pleasure. If our days were distinguished, the good with
white, the evil with blackestones, at the end of our lives we should find
more black than white. Take a pattern from Jonas, and see how the blessings
and scourges of God kiss one the other, in this his banishment; and rather the
scourdges exceed. He builds a tabernacle, but it falls; is provided of a
gourde, but it withers. And instead of that little momentanie joy which he
took therein, comes a worm, and the sun, and a fervent vvinde, and
faintinge in his body, and in his mind most intolerable languishment. Behold
this image of alteration in the state of Jonas, especially this of the gourde,
and tell me if all the pleasures of our life are not fitly exemplified by it.
The pleasure in the days of Noah, their eating, drinking, marrying, and giving
in marriage, what was it but a gourde? and came there not a worm from God that
smote it, Math. 24.
a flowde that took them all away? The mirth of the Philistines, Judges the
sixteenth, when Sampson was their laughing stock, and must be called in to
make them pastime, was it more than a gourde, wherewith their hearts were
merry for a while, and they exceedingly reioiced? And how quickly came a worm
that smoate it, when the pillars of the house were shaken, and fell upon the
Princes and all the people that were therein? The peaceable days of the
wicked, Job the one and twentieth, their freedom from the rod of God, their
dancing to the tabret and harp, all is but a gourd: in an instant of time
they go down to hell; there is the worm that smites it. But in the four
and twentieth of Job, they shall be broken like a tree: they come nearer to the
smiting of the gourde here spoken of. And in the fifteenth before, their
branches shall not be green, but they shall be cut of before their day: God
shall destroy them as the vine her sower grape, and shall cast them of as the
Olive does her flower: there are the right gourdes and their worms expressed.
The young man has his gourde to rejoice in, Eccles. 11. The days of his
youth, the cheerfulness of his heart, the lusts of his own eyes; but let
him remember the worm of judgment, that shall smite that gourde. The rich
man has his gourde, Luke 16. purple and fine linen, and delicious fare every
day, and he rejoices vnmeasurably in this gourde, for he knovveth not what
the grief of Lazarus means; but he has a worm that smites his gourde:
his pleasure vvithereth with himself, he dies, and lies in the grave, and
cries in hell, for one drop of rain to cherish his decayed gourd, but he is
answered by Abraham, (...), thou had thy gourde in thy life time, now it
is dead and can never be revived. The goodly tabernacle of King Assuerus,
Esther. 1. in the garden of his palace, under an hanginge of white, green,
and blewe clothes, fastened with cords of silk and purple, in silver ringes
and pillars of marble, the beds of gold and silver upon a pauemente of
porphyre, and marble, and alabast^r, and blevve color, was but a tabernacle
like the tabernable of Jonas. His hundredth and seven and twenty provinces, and
his princes and capitaines thereof, his throne in the palace of Sushan, his
feasting according to the power of a king, and to show the glory of his
kingdom, his abundance of royal wine, and chandges of vessels of gold, and
the beawty of Vasht^ his Queen, all these were but a gourd, and had their
worm to consume them. The treasures of Ezechias, his silver, and gold, and
spices, and precious ointment, and armory, and all the store of his house,
which he and his fathers had laid up; the soldiers of David, Esa. 39. 1.
Chro. 21.
a millian and half of fighting men; Balthazar his thousand Princes, wives and
concubines; Assuerus his hundredth, and seven and twenty provinces, etc. O what
glorious shadows do they cast over the heads of men, with their hundreths,
and thousands, and millians of branches to give comfort unto them? how
willingly do they say within themselves, under the covert of these gourdes we
will sit and be at rest? But they forget the worm, some messenger from the
Lord, either sickness, or bands, or death to smite these gourdes; Medio de font
leporum Surgit amari aliquid. From the fullest fountain of vvorldlye ioies,
flows some bitterness. Adam vvanted not a serpent in the garden of God, nor
Jonas a worm on the East side of the city, (...). Tit. 3.
where he rathest delighted. Harken unto it, ye that are bonde-slaues to the
sundry pleasures of this world, you that suffer the good seed of admonition
and instruction to be choked with these thorns, the pleasures of this life,
Luke 8. for this is one of the thorns there spoken against; you who esteem to
be called the sons of Pharaohs daughter, to be the dearlings of the pleasure
of Egypt, and be set upon the knees of the Delilah of this world, (...). 2.
Tim. 3.
and to enjoy the rejoicing of sin for a season, or rather as the Apostle in
the spirit of prophecy long since^noted you, you that are (...), lovers of
pleasure more than of God, or if you love it no more, than that it makes you
to forget God, in whose presence is the fullness of joy, and at his right
hand pleasure for evermore, Psa. 16. and who gives us drink out of a whole
river of pleasures, Psalm 36. contemn these transitory gourdes, and reserve
your selves for a better building in heaven, where is neither sun nor wind
to beat upon your heads, nor worm to alter your happiness: Where your
joy shall ever be present, yet can you not be filled, rather you shall be
filled, but cannot be satisfied. Or if I say, that you cannot be satisfied,
August. homil. 3. in Ioa.
then there is hunger; or that you may, then there is loathing. I know not what
to say; Deus habet quod exhibeat, God has somewhat both to reveal and to
bestow upon you, which I know not; but (...) beata vita in ^onte, there is
blessedness at the head of the spring, not in cisternes, or brooks, that I
am sure of. Were you able to drink up the pleasures of the world in as
plentiful manner as Cleopatra drank the riches, (the value of fiftye thousand
pound at a draught,) yet remember that it is but a draught, and quickly down
the throat. The length of the throat (says Bernard) is but two or three
inches at the most: or if it were as long as a cranes neck, which Philoxenus
the Epicure wished, that the sweetness of his meats and drinks might the longer
abide with him, the matter were not much. But when they are drunk and
digested, then what becomes of them, more than of your meats and drinks, to
be cast out into the draught, so these to perish with their use, and not
without shame and sorrow of heart to be thrown away as unhappy superfluities?
whereas the pleasures of aeternity, before the face of God, deserve that
commendation which Booz gave to Ruth, (and with his words we may bless it)
blessed art thou my daughter, Ruth 3.
for thou haste showed me more goodness in the latter e^de, than at the
beginning. To conclude, the blessedst tree is in the midst of the paradise of
God, neither on the East nor on the West side of Niniveh, nor any other city of
the world. And the leaves of the tree are not only for shadow, as these of the
gourd, but to heal the nations with, Revel. 22.
and it has both leaves and fruits to satisfy our hunger, and twelve manner
of fruits, every month brought forth, to satisfy our pleasure. And it grows
by a river side, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God, that
it cannot possibly wither. For it, let us keep our better appetites, and let
us beseech him who has planted it with his own right hand, that we may live
to taste, how wholesome and pleasant that tree is.

THE XLVII. LECTVRE.
Chap. 4. ver. 1. And when the sun did arise, God also prepared a fervent
Eastwinde, and the sun beat upon the head of Jonas, etc.
THe temporary joy which Jonas entertained for the gou^d, is as quite forgotten
as if it had never been; and buried under an heap of succeeding griefs as
the fruitful years Genesis 41. were buried under the years of famine; for so
said Joseph, the famine shall be so great, that the years of plenty shall
not be thought upon. It follows in the line of those afflictions which God
stretched out upon the head of Jonas, that when the sun did arise, God
prepared also a fervent East-winde, etc. For it did not suffice him to have
sent a worm which smote the gourd; but he adioineth new corrosiues and
calamities to afflict the soul of Jonas. For as his blessings, when he
watches to do us good, (as the prophet speaks) the foot of the one shall
ever be treading upon the heel of the other; so also in his castisements and
corrections, he does not desist to inflict the^, till he have left an inward
sense in those who are his patients. Thus he dealt in the scourdging of Job,
though a servant dearly beloved, as appears by his complaints: how long will
it be ere thou depart from me? Job 7.
thou will not let me alone while I may swallow my spittle. Again, thou
renuest thy witnesses, that is, thy plagues, Job 10. Vices and exercitus.
witnesses of thy displeasure against me; changes, and armies of sorrow are
against me. Surely God is wiser in handling our sins, tha^ any Physician in
dealing with sicknesses: therefore he best knows both what medicine is
fittest, and how long to be applied.

1 The sun arises, as a giant refreshed with wine to run his race; 1. When the
sun arose.
or rather as an enemy prepared to the battle: the only enemy which Jonas
had cause to fear, his fortress and castle of boughs being taken from him.
2, After the sun, a wind; and that fighting under the banner of the sun, and
confaederate with him, an East-winde: and for the quality of it, a fervent
East-winde. 3. The sun is not sent to shine, and to cast forth his beams,
but to beat. 4. Not any inferior part, but that which was highest and next to
heaven, the head of Jonas. 5. The effects that follow al these, are, 1. his
fainting in his body; 2. in his soul, wishing to die; 3. professing it with
his tongue; it is better for me to die than to live.

And when the sun did arise. The arising of the sun, notes no more than the
opportunity of time which God takes to punish Jonas. He begins with the
beginning of the day; the shadows of the night are gone, the fresh dews of the
morning sone dispersed, and the sun at his first discovery has a chardge
from God to assault the head of Jonas: no part of the day (and as it seems)
not the coolness and te^perature of the morning are friendly unto him. He
rather wished in his heart, ^ob 3.
as Job did, let the day be darkness still, and let not God regard it from
above, nor the light shine upon it; but let darkness and clouds and the
shadow of death stain it; that is, let there be an everlasting night, rather
than the beams of the sun should come forth to do me this violence: and as the
sun did once go back in the days of Hezekias upon the dial of Ahaz; 2. King.
20.
so it would have reioiced him, if it had gone back again to the North; or
stood immovable in a place, that the earth might have been as a pillar
between him and the heat thereof.

2. God prepared also a wind.
God prepared also a fervent East Wind. I should but roll the same stone once
again and too often, to speak of the author of this whole business, and his
speedy expedition therein* which I have told you before is noted in the word of
preparation: whose mighty and over*spreading providence is as the soul of the
world, as inward and familiar to all the actions therein, great and small, as the
spirit to our reins; and better may a body live without breath, than any
counsel or work under heaven proceed without it. But I leave those
repetitions. The sun and the wind (we see) rise together, Esaias 7.
and set themselves against Jonas; as the two smoking fire-bra^ds, Rezin and
Pekah against Jerusalem: co^bining, and binding themselves not to give over til
they have both done their part in the vexing of the prophet. The wind here
mentioned, is described by 2. attributes; the one of the quarter or coast from
whence it blew, an East Wind: the other of the quality which it had, 3. An East
wind.
a ferve^t East Wind. The cardinal and principal winds, as appears both in
many places of the scripture, and in foreign authors, are but 4. breathing
from the 4. quarters or divisions of heaven: Pliny.
as in the 37. of Ezechi, come from the 4. vvindes O breath. And Math. 24. God
shall gather his elect from the four winds. Afterward they added 4. more,
which they call collateral or side-windes, subordinate to the principal: and
thence proceeded to the number of 12. In these days we distinguish 32.
Between every two cardinal winds, seven inferior. We may read Act. 27. that
Paul was very skilful of the sea-card, used in those days: for, describing his
voiadge to Rome, he makes mention, not only of East, and West, and South, but
of South-west and by West, and of North-west and by West, as the Western wind
blew either nearer or further of. But not to trouble you with these things, the
wind that is here spoken of, some take to be Eurus, or Vulturnus, which is the
Southeast and by East, and follows the sun in his winter rising; others, to
be the principal and high East-winde, (...).

Subsolanu^* Serenator.


following the sun when he rises in the Equinoctial. Now the nature of an
East Wind in any point thereof is to be hot and dry, and for the most part a
clearer of the air: but this of all the rest, being so serviceable to the sun
going forth so right with it, and walking in the same path which the sun
walks in, must needs be an hoter wind tha^ if it had crossed or sided the sun
any way. 2. Touching the quality or the effect which it wrought, 4. Ferven^*
it is called a fervent East Wind; some turn it vehement, not for the sound
and noise that it makes, but for the excessive heat. For no doubt it is
distinguished from Caecias, North-east and by East, which is a more sou^ding
and blustering wind, and not so fit for the purpose of God in this place. Of
that ye have mention Exodus 14. where it is said, that the Lord made the sea
run back with a strong East^*winde all the night, and made it dry land. Some
translate it silent and quiet, to put a difference betwixt this and the former
East Wind: albeit others give the reason because it makes me^ silent and deaf
with the sound that it has: others, Silentes and surdo^ homines facit
obstrependo. Silere facit reliquos ve^tos a conspectu suo.
because it makes the rest of the winds silent and quiet when it self
blows. Howsoever they vary otherwise, they al agree in the heat; for it is a
gentle and soft wind; which when the air is enflamed by the sun, is so far
from correcting the extremity thereof, that it rather helps it forward, and
becomes as a wagon to carry the beams of the sun forth-right. It is
manifest by many places of scripture, that it is an eastern wind which burns
with his heat, not only the fruits, but the people of the earth. The 7. thin
ears of corn, Genesis 41. were burnt with an East-winde; so are the fruits
withered Ezekiel. 19. so is the fountain dried up, Ose 13. The vulgar edition
does evermore translate it, vrente^ ventum, by the name of a burning wind: and
whersoever it is mentioned in the book of God the property of it is to
exiccate and dry up. Columella writes that at some time of the year, and
especially in the dog-daies, Vento vru^tur velut halitu flammeo.
me^ are so parched with the East wind, that unless they shade themselves under
vines, it burns them like the reaking of flames of fire. I have now showed
you both the nature and the quarter of this wind, that albeit it were a wind,
yet you may know it was not prepared to refrigerate, but to afflicte the head
of Jonas. When the sun and the wind are up, what do they? the sun (not
without the help of the vvinde, which was in manner of a sling or other
instrumente to cast the beams of the sun more violently upon them) although
created for another end, 5. The sun bet. Genesis 1.
to govern the day, and to separate it from the night, and to give light in
the earth, yet here receives a new commandment, 6. Upon the head.
and is sent to beat, (all other inferior parts omitted) even the head of
Jonas: wherein is the government of the whole creature, Jn quo reginem totius
animalis. Vbi seeds mentis. Totius divini operis qua si culmen. Lactant. de
opi^ic. dei. Caput, quod hin^ capiant initium sensu^ and n^rvi. Varro.
the seat of the mind, the top of Gods workmanshippe, from whence the senses
and nerves take their beginning. In this assault of the principal part, the
danger was no less to the body of Jonas, than if an enemy had besiedged the
Capitol of Rome, or the Mount Sion, and Anthonies tower in Jerusalem. But we
shall the better conceive the vexation of Jonas, if we join the effects which
these two enemies drove him unto. 1. It is said he fainted; I marvel not:
for the force of heat is intolerable when the pleasure of God is to use that
rod. So he tells them, Amos 4. Percussi vos vredine, I have smitten you with
blasting or burning, and you returned not. On the other side, it is numbered
amongst the blessings of God which Christ shall bring unto his people, Esaias 49.
they shall not be hungry, neither shall they thirst, neither shall the heat
smite them, nor the sun: which is spoken (I grant) by translation, 7. He
fainted. and 2. Aggai. (...).
but that from whence it is transferred, in the natural sense, must needs be
very commodious, because it is applied to the highest mercies. So likewise in
the 3. of Act. the state of everlasting life is called the times of refreshing
or respiration. 8. Wished in his heart etc.
2. He wishte in his heart to die: my text says not so in terms, though in
effect; but he desired his soul, or he made petition and suite to his soul to
die, Expetivit animam sua^ mori.

Petivi^ animae suae mortem.

Alloquutus est animam suam.


that is, to relinquish and give over his body; or he desired death to his
soul, as a man forlorn and forsaken, having no friend to make his moan unto,
he utters his grief to his private spirit; speaking thereunto, that if it
were possible, some remedy might be had. 3. Though the ear of jealousy, which
hears all things, heard the wishes and desires of his heart; yet he is not
content with secret rebellion, unless his tongue also proclaim it: for he
says, it is better for me to die than to live. I showed the madness of Jonas
before in this very wish; 9. And said, it is better etc.
It was not better for Jonas to die than to live, nor for any other in his
case: a millstone about their necks to have drowned them in the bottom of the
sea, had been less unhappiness. When they die, let them pray to the Lord of
life to close up their eyes and to take them to his mercy in peace, let them
agree with their adversary in the way, much more be at one with God, that
neither their hearts nor tongues murmr at his judgments. Death (I
confess) is an advantage to some men* but such as with an obstinate heart, and
sinews in their forehead, strive against the Lord their maker, and go to
law with one mightier than themselves, not caring to make an end in time,
of the controversies between them, their death is a death indeed, and little
profit or ease to be found in it. The purpose of this verse in hand, was
none other than to set forth unto us the afflictions of Jonas: and undoubtedly
they are very great. For as Nahomi answered her people in the first of Ruth,
when they asked, is not this Nahomi? call me not Nahomi, that is, beawtifull
or pleasant, but call me Marah, for the Almighty has given me much
bitterness; I went out full, and the Lord has caused me to return empty; why
then call ye me Nahomi, seeing the Lord has humbled me, and the Almighty has
brought me to adversity? So Jonas might have answered to those that had
asked, is not this Jonas? call me not Jonas, a dove, but call me a Pelican,
or owl in the desarte; I was full of pleasure and amaenity, and my heart
replenished with exceeding joy, but the Lord has emptied me. Many things
there are in our lives for which we may change our names, (as Nahomi did) from
beawty or pleasure to bitterness. But if we remember withal, that it is the
work of the Lord to humble us, and the hand of the Almighty that brings us
to adversity, that one cogitation will suffice to teach us patience. For to
whom do we rather owe the quietness and subjection of our spirits, than unto
him, who, as Theodorite somevvhere excellently spoke, both gives his benefits
unto us, to teach us how easily he can bestow them, and takes them away, that
we may know how little we deserve the^. Thus have the children of God evermore
begun their consultations in their days of tempation, and as it were
beckoned to themselves for silence, Dominus est, it is the Lord, take heed of
repining at his judgments; it is not mine enemy, for then I vvoulde have hid
my self; it is not the son of man, for then I vvoulde have resisted him; it
is not any creature of God, I vvoulde then have devised some means to redress
my grief: it is the Lord himself, who has more right to my soul, than
that he may be contraried: for both he has been beneficial unto me
here-tofore, and may again hereafter. Ille operar^^us victoria^rum dei*
Tertull.
Patience was the shield wherewith that notable atchiever of the victories of
God repelled all those venomous darts which either in the death of his
children, or in the loss of his substance, or in the runnings and sores of his
body, or in the cursed persuasions of his wife, miserable comfortes of his
friends, malicious and importunate accusations of Satan, were thrown against
him. Oqual^ vexillum tulit etc. Terrul.
O what a glorious banner set he up against the enemy both of God and man, when
for every calamity that was cast upon him, there came nothing from his mouth,
but thanks be unto God? Satan expected that he should have accursed God; and
his wife, another Satan in his bosom, so persuaded him: but the witness is
true, which is there given, non peccavit labijs suis, he offended not with his
lips. I conclude therefore with Tertullian, totum licet seculum pereat, dum
patientiam lucrifaciam, I care not though all the world perish unto me, so I
may gain patience.

Verse. 9.
And God said to Jonas, do thou well to be angry for the gourd? etc. The
gourd prepared by God, had a double use: the one natural and open, to cast a
shadow over the head of Jonas: the other typical and secret, to demonstrate
the iniquity of his judgment, which use we are now coming unto. In this
actual reprehension, which God is framing against him, there were many
antecedents (I told you) which made the way thereunto: al which we have already
examined. Now we are descended to that end whereunto God disposed them.

The words here spoken by God, Do thou well to be angry? are the same which
were used in the former insimulation: and the same provocation of the words, to
weete, the anger of Jonas. Who would not have thought but one reprehe^sio^
might have served one kind of sin? but so is sin to the soul of man, in some
part of comparison, as Jacob was unto Esau, Genesis 27. of whom Esau complained,
was he not rightly called Jacob? For he has deceived me these two times,
first he took my birthright from me, and lo now has he taken my blessing.
And surely sin will supplant us twice and ten times together, unless God
preserve us. Jonas offends once more in the same perturbation, and the Lord
reproves him once more in the same form of reprehension. What else shall I
say hereof, but as Joseph said to Pharaoh touching his two dreams, the one of
the kine, the other of the ears of corn, both Pharaohs dreams are one;
therefore the dream is doubled to Pharaoh the second time, Genesis 41.
because the thing is established by God, and God hastes to perform it? So,
both Gods reprehensions are one, and therefore is the reprehension doubled unto
Jonas the second time, that Jonas might beware to offend in the like
transgression. Nehemias told the merchants that abode about the walls of the
city, why do you stay here, all night? Nehem. 31.
si iter^m feceritis, inijciam in vos manus; if you shall do it again, I I
will lay hands upon you. It is marvel, that God laid not hands upon Jonas,
nor at leastwise corrected him with some sharper castigation, who^ he had taken
and warned before for the same offense.

To that which heretofore I have said of reprehe^sion, Vbi reso^^^ vtrimque
modestia, dulce est colloquium, ubi vel ex part altera, vtile, vbi ex neutra,
p^rniciosum, vbi hinc inde duritia sonat, iurgium etc.

Cedenti insistere, cedere resistenti.


I will add no more than the rule and practice of Bernard, as I find it
mentioned in his life. His rule or observation is this. Where there resou^deth
on both sides, between the reprover, and him that is reproved, modesty, and
mildnes of speech, it is a sweet co^fere^ce; where it is held on the one side
only, it is profitable; where both parts lay it aside, it is pernicious; but
where there is hardness and bitterness from the^ both, iurgiu^ est, non
correctio, nec disciplina, sedrixa, it is not correction and instruction, but
chiding and brawling: and (to adioine the words of Anselme,) tunc no^ veritas
quaeritur, sed animositas fatigatur, the^ is not the truth sought for, but men
exercise and weary their stouts hearts. Therefore the manner of S. Bernard,
because he would be sure to retain this modesty on the one side, was, to be
very urgent upon him that yielded, and as yielding another time to him that
resisted. Albeit, Jonas behave himself very vnmodestly and undutifully
toward God, yet God is otherwise affected toward Jonas; and rather than the
strife between the^ shall vanish without profit, shows more mildness than
Jonas had deserved. His kindness appears in 3. things. 1. In reprooving, and
repressing his rage; for which cause David blessed Abigaill, blessed be the
Lord God of Israel which sent thee this day to meet me, 1. Sam. 25.
and blessed be thy counsel, and blessed be thou which haste kept me this day
from coming to shed blood. 2. In reprooving him twice for own thing; who with
one angry word of his lips could so have abated his passion at the first, that
there should have been no place for a second; as Abisai spoke to David of
smiting Saul, let me smite him once to the earth with a spear, 1. Sam. 26.
and I will not smite him again. 3. In reprooving him so friendly. I am sure,
servants with their fellow servantes have dealt otherwise. John Baptist with
the Pharisees, Peter with Ananias and Saphira, and with Simon Magus, Paul with
Elimas, and Ananias the High Priest, Steven with the rulers of the Jews, O ye
of hard necks, and uncircumcised hearts; yet God the Creator of all things,
with his sinful creature, or more properly, as David termed himself before
Saul, with a dead fly, demeaneth himself with favorable speeches. Do
thou well to be angry for a gourd? The interrogation arises by degrees, and
accuses Jonas in many over-sightes. 1. Art thou angry, Jonas? thou should
rather humble thy self, acknovvledge thine ignorance and weakness, presume
the judgments of thy judge to be righteous; thou should rather bless, and
pray, and give thanks, (for this is the manner of Prophets) and art thou
angry? what is anger, Appetitue vltionis propter contemptionem. Arist. and
Aquin. Been.
but a desire of revendge for contempt or wrong done? and whom desire thou
to be revendged of? the worm? or the sun? or God that has sent them? 2. Art
thou not only angry, but art thou very angry? For if (well) do note the
measure of his anger, the exprobration is the greater; because passions offend
not commonly, but in excesses and extremities: or if the quality, Do thou
well and justly to be angry? will thou defend and patronage thy wrath? it is
then a greater fault than the former. Absit a servo Christi ^^le in
quinamentum, vt patientia maiorib. praeparata in frivolis ex^idat. Tertul.
3. And art thou angry for a gourde? so small a matter? far be such
corruption from the servant of Christ, that his patience prepared for greater
things, should fall away in trifles. Thou have lost but a poor gourde, a
little plant of the earth; what if thou had lost a vineyarde full of trees,
as Naboth did, of far greater value than a gourd? or thy life, more dear
than a vineyard? what if thine one and only sheep, as Vrias did, the wife of
thy bosom? or thy life, more precious than thy wife? Art thou angry for a
gourd?

Jonas answered* I do well to be angry unto the death. Thou had done better
if thou had held thy peace, if (as before) thou had passed the demand of
God without answer. Was Balaam fit to speak unto an Angel of the Lord, being
so blinded and overcast with the clovvds of wrath, that he saw not so much as
the dumb ass under him? is Jonas fit to speak unto the Lord, himself?
rather as Plato said to his servant, I would have killed thee but that I am
angry; so he should have said unto the Lord, I would have answered thee,
but that my passions have set me besides my self. Qui peccare senescit,
corrigi no^ vult. Epicurus.
He that knows not his fault, will never be amended. There is little hope
that the speech of God can do good upon Jonas, who rather becomes a patron
of his sin, than a suitor for pardon.

The answer justly follows the steps of the interrogation, and indeed
over-runneth it. Art thou angry? I am angry, I dissemble not, I blush not to
confess it, though I concealed it before, at thy first asking, Causa pa^ro
cinio non bona peior erit. Quoties instantia facta est deterior causis suis?
Tertulli. Pro. 9.
yet now be it known unto thee, I am angrye. Art thou very angry? yea, I put
not a counterfeit person upon me, I am on fire with my wrath, I burn like
re^in or pitch that cannot be quenched. Do thou well to be angry? I do well
to be angry. It does not repent me, and more than before thou ever have
demanded, I do well to be angry unto death. Thus an evil cause is made much
worse by evil handling: and the defense of the fault, waxes more
unpardonable than the fault it self. Give admonition to the wise, and he
will be the vviser; teach a righteous man, and he will increase in
learning: but he that reprooveth a skorner, purchases unto himself shame: and
he that rebukes an angry man, Perver (...) corripere, est stimulare insanum,
and oleum camin^ adhibere. Petr. Raven. Nihil impatientia susceptum, sine
impetu transigi novit quicquid impetu fit, aut offendit, aut corruit aut
praeceps. abiit. Tert. Whether lawful to be angry.
heapeth more coals of anger upon him. To admonish the frovvarde, is to set
goades to one that is mad enough already, and to power oil into the chimney.
Nothing undertaken with impatience, can be done without violence: and
whatsoever is violently done, either miscarrieth, or falls, or flies
headlong away. Hitherto I have deferred to handle a question which this whole
contention between God and Jonas leads me unto, whither it be lawful to be
angry? For answer whereof, we must know, that anger is in the number of
those affections which God has engraffed in nature, and given them their
seats in man, and fitted them with their instruments, and both ministered their
matter from whence they proceed, and provided them h^mours wherewith they are
nourished. They were ordained to be spurs unto us for the prosecution of
virtue; and as the body has his nerves, so has the soul hers, whereby she
is moved, either with a slower, or speedier cariadge.

The Stoicke Philosophers hold a vacuity of affections, and condemn them all
as vicious: why? Because they drive us to disorder, and exceed their compass.
I grant it. (...).
But this is not the nature of the affections themselves, but the affection of
our corrupt natures. Christ himself was not without affections; he was angry,
when he cast the merchantes out of the temple; pitiful, Jra cos
fortitudinis. Nervus animae quidam, and cav^ veluti ferro dura^ efficiens.
Basil. sermon. de Jra.

Jrasci est hominis. Epist. ad Salin. Nec doctrinae proficiu^t. nec iudicia
stant etc. Homil. 11. in Math. (...). Paulus and 70. interpr^.


when he saw the people scattered like sheep without a sheepehearde;
sorrowful, when he shed tears over Jerusalem: and we know, that anger,
repentance, mercy, hatred, and the like, are attributed to GOD in the
Scriptures; which, if they were simply and by nature evil, should never
have been ascribed unto him.

Touching anger in particular, the Philosopher said truly, that anger is the
whet-stone unto fortitude: and Basil called it a nerve or tendon of the soul,
giving it courage and constancy, and that which is remiss and tender
otherwise, hardening it as it were with iron and steel, to make it go
thorough with her business. To be angry (says Jerome) is the part of a
man. And if anger were not (by the suffrage of Chrysostom) neither would
teaching avail, nor judgments stand, neither could sins be repressed.
Wherefore the counsel of David in the 4. Psalm (and of the Apostle to the
Ephesians) is, be angry, but sin not. Whereupon the gloss noted, Be angry,
(...). ex Hieron. Infirmitates non iniquitates, ex Ambro. Jrascimini primi^
^^otibus and ne ducati^ ad actum.

Quod est consuetudinis permisit, quod culpae prohibuit. Respectio 1.
appetibili^ 2. Modi. Aquin. 2.2. quaest. 158. artic. 2.

Ira tyrannicus affectus. Chrysostom. Jrae and insa niae nihil medium. Irati non
magis compescu^tur quam demoniaci.

Servatur ira tam diu in vase and suavitas vindictae. donec acescat.

Jn Math. homil. ^1. op. imperf. (...).

Non irarum dia sed iudicium, simplex motus voluntatis ex praescripto rationis
etc. Aquin. 2.2. quae. 158. art. 8. Conclus.


as touching the first motions, (which they accounted not sins, because they
were rather propassions and entrances into passion than passions, rather
infirmities than iniquities) but bring them not to action. As much as to say, I
know that the motion of anger is not in your power, but take heed of
consenting unto it. Cassiodore expounds it thus: the blessed Prophet
permitted that which is usual and accustomable unto man, (which is to be
angry) but forbad that which in anger is sinful. Others are of opinion,
that he rather counseled that which is natural, (allowing it to be good)
than permitted that which is usual. Surely to be angry, is not sin, but in
the circumstance we may offend; either in regard of the object, which is
revendge; as if we desire revendge against him who has not deserved it, or
more than he has deserved, or not holding a lavvefull course therein, or not
observing the right end; that is, if we bend not our selves to the
preservation of justice, and the correction of offenses, but to execute our
malice: either in regard of the measure, when we are angry overmuch. For anger
is a tyrannical affection, if it be not stayed with laws; and there is little
odds between it and madness. And as hardely are they ordered and pacified,
that are thoroughly possessed with a fit thereof, as men possessed with
devils. To the measure of affection we may also add the length of time. For
anger and a sweet conceit of revendge may so long be kept in the vessels of
our hearts, til it wax eager and sower, and be turned into malice. For anger
and malice differ but in age, as new and old wine. Chrysostom concludes
upon the words of our Savior Math. 5. Whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause etc. Qui cum causa non irascitur, peccat. Therefore he that is
not angry, when there is just cause, sins; for unreasonable and supine
patience, sows vice, nourishes negligence, and inviteth not only the bad
and ill disposed, but the good to naughtiness. The iustest cause is the cause
of God, rather than of man, public rather than private, when the gospel of
Christ is dishonored, justice trodden under foot, falshod extolled, not when
our proper injuries are pursued. For as anger in the former place conceaved, is
not anger but judgment, and a simple or advised motion of the will, in the
upper part of the soul arising by the prescripte and rule of reason, not a
sudden and troublesome passion of the sensitive and lower part: so,
apprehended in the later place for private and personal grudges, whither
unjustly, or upon deserte, it never finds toleration in the sight of God.
Cain was angry with Abell vndeservedly, and sinned: Esau with Jacob upon the
receipt of injury, and yet sinned. Vterque punietur, and in just irascens,
quia in just, and iusta, Chrysostom.
quia iniuriarum memor, Both shall be punished, the one for being angry without
cause, because without; the other for cause given, because he remembers
wrongs. Wherefore the schoolmen and divines, Cum mandato Dei. Contra
mandatum. Wellerus.

Ira per zeli^^ Ira per vttium.

Gregor. and Aquin. Ira privat^ Jra officii. Bucer. Genes. 4.


to keep us within our marks, have distinguished anger into two sorts. The
one agreeing with the commandment of GOD and lawful, the other flatly
against wis will, The former, zealous, officious, grounded upon cause, having
both radicem bonam and finem bonum, as Bucer requires, a good root and a good
end, such as the anger of Moses was, Exodus the two and thirteeth, for the
golden calfe that was made, when he avendged the quarrel of GOD upon a few,
and spared the multitude to shevve that he hated the sin, loved their
persons: The other vicious, affectionate, private, lightly accepted, forgetting
injuries done to God, and proposing to please it self as Lamech did, Truly
Lamech shall be avendged seventy times seven-folde; and not regarding so much
the offense, as desirous that the offendour himself may be rooted not. The
former of these two a little troubles the eye of reason, as eye-salue at the
first causes smarting. and hinders sight, but afterward the eye is
cleared and amended thereby; the other puts it quite out. By this short
discourse, Turbat ^^^lum.

Excaecat. Hugo card. in Psalm. 4.


you perceive what kind of anger is not only allowable, but necessary and
requisite, in those that are zealously zealous for the LORD of hosts, as Elias
was, and cannot abide that his name and honor should take harm; what kind
utterly condemned, the original whereof is in the sands, that is, for
trifles and gourdes; the proceeding rest-lesse, till a moate becomes a beam,
which difference Augustine notes betvveene anger and hatred; the mark, the
person not the crime; and the end, not to amend but to destroy him.
Conclusion. Sermon. de ira* Alius qui instigat. Alius qui instigatur. Ambros.
(...) offic.
I conclude therefore with Saint Basile, if you will be angry without
sinning, and show forth the right use of this natural and lavvefull
affection, know that one is allured to sin, another allureth him. Converte
your anger against the latter of these two, a murderer of the brethren, and
the father of lies, malign not the other. Irascimui vbi est culpa cui irasci
debetatis, Be angry where there is a fault that may bear anger. Which
cannot be private displeasure; but a fault openly tendinge to the
profanation of Gods fearful name, pollution of his service and sacraments,
a public, scandalous, enormous, incorrigible, and insufferable fault, whereby
his Christ is dishonored, his good Spirit of grace despighted, and the whole
congregation or family that is named in heaven and earth, wounded, blasphemed.
Be angry with those that are angry with God upon every light occasion; for
every cross wherewith they are tried, ready to go back and to walk no
longer with him: or if their mouths be not filled with laughter and pleasure
to their hearts desire, or their bellies with garlic and onions, and
fleshpots, as in the days of darkness, breaking forth into terms of highest
undutifulness, what profit have we by him? Be angry with those that are angry
with the prophets for prophesying right things unto them, and freeing their
souls. Be angry with Jonas and your prophets, if they go out of the city, to
sit and shadow themselves under bowers, and preach not; and be angry with the
city, if it repent not at the preaching of her prophets, rather when they have
pronounced the threatenings and judgments of the most High, take them to be but
fables, and like the sayings and doings of the mad man, Prove. 26. who casts
firebrarnds, arrows, and mortal things, and then says, Am I not in sport? Be
angry with dogs, who return continually to their vomit, though they have
been purdged ten times. And finally, to knit up all in one with the words of
Ludolphus upon the fourth Psalm, irascimini vitijs, diabolo, vanit atibur,
mendacijs, vobis ipsis etc. Be ye angry with sins, the devil, vanities,
lies, your selves: with hearty repentance for your former misdeedes, and
zealous indignation, that ever you have fallen into so base and beastly
corruption: and nolite peccare vlterius, and take heed that you fall not the
second time, as Jonas did, into the same faults.

THE XLVIII. LECTVRE.
Cha. 4. ve. 10.11. Then said the Lord thou have had pity on the gourd etc.
WE are at length come to the last part of the Chapter, which was the scope
whereunto all the sayings and doings of God were referred, comprehended in
these 2. last verses, and containing generally an earnest contention and plea,
for the justification of his goodness in sparing Niniveh. For what other purpose
had God in the whole course of his speeches and actions, by the words of his
mouth once and again iterated, and by the sensible image of the gourd,
objected to the eyes of Jonas, than by irrefragable demonstration, and by the
concession of the adversary himself, to clear and deliver his mercy from just
reproof? God first drew him by demau^ds, and as it were by captious,
Socraticall interrogations, whither he would; and when he had him in snares,
the^ infers upon him, which no man could deny, that were not too prefract
and obstinate, thou have had pity on the gourd etc. and shall not I spare
Niniveh? thou on a light, te^porary plant which was not thine, wherein there was
neither value, nor continuance, nor any propriety belonging unto thee, and shall
not I much more spare Niniveth? etc. The argument stands in comparison from
the less to the greater, and both the members thereof compared, are so
strengthened and set forth, that he must needs show himself forsaken of common
sense, that does not assent unto it. Jonas has not now to deal with
Chrysippus, who was able to speak probably of any thing brought in question,
but with the most expert schoole-man that ever spoke with tongue, with the God
of heaven, who binds with arguments as with chains of iron, and leaves no
evasio^. For unless Jonas would except against the reaso^ing of God, as those
who^e Tully scoffeth at, who when they were brought to an inco^venience in
disputation, Hoc extremem eorum est; postulan^ vt excipian^ur haec in
explicabilia. Tribunum aliquem, ce^seo, ade^n^ etc. Jn Academ.
had no other refuge but to crave that those inexplicable arguments might be
left out; and Tully answered the^ again that then they must go to an officer,
for they should never obtain that exception at his hands: what should he do to
rid himself of this strong opposition? Before, you have heard, 1. of the
affliction of Jonas, the sun, and the East-winde following the sun the same
tract, pace by pace, confederate with him, working his woe, a fervent
East-winde, beating, upon his back and sides? no, but upon his head, the most
dainty and dangerous place by reason of the senses; his fainting and wishing in
his soul to die, and professing in open terms that it was better for him so
to than to live: 2. of the reproof of God in controlling that impatience: 3.
of his obfirmed and heretical maintaining of it, Nullum malum punicu^ in quo
non granum aliquod putrescie.

Culpam deprehensam pertinaciter ^ueri culpa altera est. Mitior poena debetur
verecundiae. Errare humanum, perseverare in errore belluinum.

Bi^ pecca^ qui peccanti obsequium accommodat Hebr. 2.


which was his greater offense; for there is no man that falls not, as there
is no pomegranate wherein there is not some kernel amiss: but when a fault is
espied and convicted, then to defend it with pertinacy, is another fault. And
the milder punishment is evermore due to modesty. It is the fact of me^ to
err, but of beasts to persist and persevere in error. The^ said the Lord, by
way of conclusion, inferred upon the au^swer and grant of Jonas, vouchsafing to
reply upon him, whose answer before was more worthy of stripes than speech;
and by continued remembrances as by bands of love, pulling his prophet out of
the fire, who had burnt to ashes in the coals of his indignation, if God had
not stayed him: even that merciful and patient Lord, who when he begins to
love, loves to the end; who spoke within himself, though he have often
refused my word, and dealt unfaithfully with my commandment, yet once more
will I shake the heavens and speak unto him, I will not loose a soul for want
of admonition. It is true in men, that he twice sins who is over-indulgent
and favorable to a sinner. God is a debtor to no man, yet of his grace and
benignity he does often admonish us.

Then the Lord said. The dignity of the person adds great authority to the
speech: the Apostle vrdgeth the credit of the speaker strongly in his epistle
to the Hebrews, If the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobed^ence received a just recompense of reward, how shall
we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? which at the first began to be
preached by the Lord, and afterward was confirmed unto us by them that heard
him, God bearing witness thereunto by signs etc. Again, see that you despise
not him that speaks, for if they escaped not which refused him that spoke on
earth, Ibid. 12.
shall we escape if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven?
Therefore do the prophets, Haback aub Zachary, becken with the hand as it
were to the whole earth, and to all flesh to give ear when the Lord speaks,
the Lord is in his holy temple, let all the oerth keep silence before him: and
let all flesh be still before the LORD, Habb. ^. Zech. 2.
for he is raised up out of his holy place.

Thou have had pity, tu parcis, thou favourest, or desire that it may be
preserved, Conversari cupis.
tu doles, thou art grieved, all which constructions are included in the
demand that went before, Do thou well to be angry? For whereas other
affections are simple, anger is compounded and mixed of diverse; partly of
grief, for the injury received, partly of commiseration of the thing
injured, partly of desire and pleasure to revendge the wrongs. But I stick
not in the words. I I proceed rather to the argument which is so mightily and
invincibly shaped, that Jonas frames no answer unto it. It must needs be,
Necesse est vt lancem in libra ponderibus impositi^ deprimi sic animum
perspicuis cedere. Tull. in Academ, Geomesrae se profiten^^ non persuadere sed
cogere.

The text divided.


that as the plate sincketh down in the balla^ce, when weight is put into it;
so the mind must yield it self captive unto the truth, when things are
evidently and perspicuously proved. Geometricians profess, that their art
stands not upon persuasion, but upon coaction and inforcement, their
principles and theoremes are so firmly grounded. But let all arts give place,
al actions bow, all Logic submit it self unto him who is admirable in
counsel, excellent in his works, incomparable for his wisdo^e. The manner of
speech which God uses, being not plain and affirmative, I will spare Niniveh
as thou pitiest the gourd, but by interrogation and negation shall not I spare
Niniveh? shows what indignity is offered unto him, as if so^e right of his
were kept back. To set some order in my speech, the comparison here formed,
consists of 2. parts the antecedent or that which goes before, the lesser,
inferior and weaker part in the 10. verse; and the conseque^t or stronger in
the 11. The persons balla^ced together, thou and I, thou art moved; and shall
not I pity? The things weighted one against the other, are for their
substance a gourd, and Niniveh. For their accidents, 1. of the gourd, Jonas had
not labored for it, Jonas had not brought it up, it was neither of his making
nor of his cherishing, Jonas had not right in it, it was not his work;
besides, the continuance was so small, that he had no reason to be fond of it;
for it came up in a night, and in a night perished. 2. for Niniveh, it was not
a bush or a tree, but a city, and not a little, but a great city; and had
not only those of riper years, but infantes, and not a few, but six score
thousand infantes, and as they were in age to be pitied, so for their
innocence, because they kn^vv not their right hand from their left, and not
only men, but cattle, and not in a sparing quantity, but much catle: all
which, both in nature and use are better than the gourd for which thou
contendest. These things considered, be thou the judge, whither it be not
lawful and reasonable for me me in a far greater matter to take upon me that
right, and to put on me that affection which thou challengest unto thy self in
a much less. The members of the comparison must be matched together as I go*
to give the more light one to the other; for being severed, we shall not so well
perceive the force of them.

Thou and I, as different as heaven and earth, light and darkness, thou a man, 1
The person^.
I a God, thou flesh, I spirit, thou dust and ashes, I the Lord of hosts, thou
a creature, I thy maker, thou the clay, I the potter, thou sitting at my
footstool, I inhabiting eternite, thou creeping as a worm upon the circle of
the earth, I spanning heaven and earth in my fist, weighing the mountains and
hills in a balance, finally and especially, thou an unmerciful man, cruel,
hard-hearted, without natural affection, whose kindness to mine is not so much
as a gravel stone to the whole sea-sand, nor as a minute of time to the days
everlasting; yet thou take pity, and shall not I much more be moved, whom
thou have both preached and known to be a merciful, gracious, long-suffering
God? The inequality of the persons is very emphaticall and forcible: thou
sparest and shall not I spare, who have more wisdom in my purposes, more
liberty in my actions, more goodness in my nature than all the sons of Ada^?
so does our Savior reason Mat. 7. from this disparity of persons, if you which
are evil can give to your children good gifts, how much more shall your
father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him? So did the
famous Orator reason against Catiline; Did Pu. Scipio, a private man, kill Tib.
Gracchus, but lightly weakening the state of the common weal; and shall we that
are Consuls let Catiline alone, desirous to lay wast the world with
slaughterings and fierings? So did Juno reason in the Poet; Could Pallas burn
the navy of the Grecians, but I that am the Queen of the GODS, Pallasne
exurere classem.

Asi ego quae divum incedo regina etc.


the sister and wife of Jupiter, shall I be able to do nothing against mine
enemies? So likewise it holds strongly on the other side, from the greater to
the less; as Luke 11. If I through Beelzebub cast out devilles, by whom do
your children cast the^ out? they are far inferior to me in righteousness and
innocency. But in the 18 of Mat. beyond al exception, O thou evil servant, I
forgave thee all that debt because thou praiest me; a Lord my serva^t, not mine
equal, I did not respite and give time for, but forgive a greater debt, yea
all that debt upon thine own entreaty: Ought not thou then to have had
pity on thy fellow even as I head on thee?

2 The same affection.
Secondly these persons are compared, as the nature of comparisons requires in
some third thing common to them both: thou sparest, shall not I spare?
Petimusque da^usque vi^issim. A^quum est pe^cati^ ve^ium poscen (...) etc.
I depart not from thine own affection* the law is equal to us both; if we
take leave, we must also give leave, and it is meet that he that craveth
pardon for a fault, should also yield pardon for the same fault. If thou had
favored, and I maliced, thou pitied* and I hated, thy complaint perhaps had
carried some color of Justice: but both our dispositions are alike, and thou
accusest me of that whereof thy self art not free, thine own deeds, and thine
own mouth witness against thee. T^^rius ma^e^ recta in^cae.
Is it a fault in me to pity? begin at thine own house, and there correct it
first, go thou upright before thou accuse me of going crooked. But this is the
fashion of us all: in f^r^ v^x decimus quisque est qui s^ipsum noverit,
scarsely every tenth man amongst us knows himself. And we have need of
censurers to make us more careful of our own doings who are so privy and severe
to others men's, as Diogenes sometimes was to the Gramatians, whom he much
laughed at, for taking diligent pains in searching after the faults of
Ulysses, and not seeing their own.

Thirdly, 3. More agreeable to God.
sparing was more agreeable to the nature of God tha^ of Jonas: and therefore
he might better contend for it. Never was it more lively expressed tha^ when
David made his choice of a third plague, which came immediately from the hands
of God, man not working therein: O let me not fall into the hands of man. 2.
Sam. 24*
He prays to be delivered from his own kind, more than from lioness and
shee-beares. A man may play at the hole of an Aspe, and handle a Cockatrice
with more safety than fall into the danger of his own brother. The finger of
God has signed it, the Apostle has concluded it, of us all, Jews and
Gentiles, there is none righteous, no not one; Romans 3.
their throat is an open sepulcher, they have used their tongues to deceit, the
poison of Aspes is under their lips, their mouth is full of cursing and
bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood, calamity and destruction are in
their ways, and the way of peace they have not known. This is the glass
wherein we may all behold our natures. If there were need of proof, I would
ask the generations both past and present, and they should make report unto
you, that neither the master has been safe from the servant of his own
tabernacle, nor the king from the subject that has lived by the salt of the
palace, nor the father from the son of his own loins, nor the brother from
his brother of the same womb, nor the husband from the wife of his own
bosom; and that not only nature has been dissolved and unknit in private
families, by treacheries, poisonings, slaughtering, and such like Scythian
kindness; but policy, and community of life cut a sunder, torn, and
dismembered by sacking of towns and cities, depopulations and wastes of whole
countries, through the intractable and unpeaceable nature that man is fallen
into. But on the other side the mercy of GOD is so infinite, that no affection
in nature, no dimention or proportion in the whole creature has been fit to
express it. The height of heaven above the earth, the distance of the East
from the West, the love of fathers toward their sons, of mothers toward
the latest fruit of their vvombes, of nurses toward their sucking babes,
Eagles toward their young ones, hens toward their chickens, have been
shadows and kennings in some sort, but not sufficient measures to skanne it
by. It is well observed by Cassiodore upon the 51. Psalm, that the beginning
thereof, Have mercy upon me O Lord, is the only voice, quae nunquam
discutitur, sed tranquille semper auditur, which is never examined, suspended,
delaied, deliberated upon, but evermore heard with peace and tranquillity from
God. And in the Psalm 136. you shall find his mercy, both the mother that
bread, and the nurse that to this day feeds, and to the end of the world shall
cherish and maintain all the works of God. For his mercy endures for ever.
It stands there like a pillar or bounder at the end of every verse, an
endless and durable mercy, not only to beautify the Psalm, but to note that
the whole frame of the world, and every content thereof in particular, touching
both creation and government, owes not only their being, but their
preservation and sustenance to Gods goodness.

4. The things
4. To leave the persons, and to examine the things themselves, what was a
gourd? a matter of nothing, and in nature but a vulgar and ordinary plant: for
there is a difference in trees, as Deuteronomy. 20. there is a law made that in
besieging a city, they shall not destroy the trees thereof by smiting an axe
into them: the reason is, for thou may eat of them, therefore thou shall
not cut them down. For the tree of the field is man's life. Only those trees
which thou know are not for meat, those thou shall destroy, and make
fortes against the city Now of this tree there was none other use, either
for meat, or for ought besides that he knew, save only for shadow. From this
difference of things, our Savior argues Luke 14. when he healed the man
sick of the dropsy, upon the sabbath day, which of you shall have an ass or
an ox fallen into a pit, and will not straight way pull him our on the sabbath
day? For if they tendered the welfare of their beasts, much more might he
regard the life of man, which was far more precious. And it is there said, that
they were not able to answer him again in those things, they were so
plainly evicted.

5. Touching the accidents of this gourd, if Jonas had planted and nursed it
up, 3. The accidents of the gourd*
which he did not, he should have regarded it none otherwise than as a gourd;
he should not have doted upon it, as Xerxes is reported to have loved a
plane-tree in Lydia, and he could hardly be drawn away from it, and Passienus
Crispus, twice Consul of Rome, a mulberry tree; they seem to have been some
notable bovvers which they fell so in love with. The nature of man is to love
the works of his own hands. The Poet describes it in the fable of Pigmalion,
art sua miratur, he is surprised with the liking of his own art. Who
planteth a vineyard, says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 9.
and eats not of the fruit thereof? For this is the end why he planted it.
It is confessed, Eccles. 2. to be the hand of God that we eat and drink, and
delight our souls with the profit of our labors. Nabuchadonozor, Dan. 4.
boasts of his great palace, not which his fathers and progenitors had left
unto him, but himself had built for the honor of his kingdom. The Apostle
tells the Corinthians that he had laid the foundation amongst them: and that
others did but build upon his beginninges: 1. Cor. 3.
and that although they had ten thousand masters in Christ, yet had they not
many fathers, for in Christ Jesus he had begotten them through the gospel.
Wherefore he requires them in equity, to be followers of him, because they were
his building and children, and he had a right in their consciences, which other
men could not challendge. Now this was a tree wherein Jonas bestowed no
labor, nec arans, nec serens, nec rigans, neither in preparing the ground, nor
in setting, nor in dressing, it was not his work, whereas the Ninivites were
Gods creatures; neither belonged that to his tuition or chardge, to see it
preserved, whereas that people had evermore lived under Gods providence,

6. If the continuance and diuturnity of time had bred any liking in Jonas
toward the gourd, 6 It quickly perished
(because we commonly love those things wherewith we are acquainted) his passion
might the better have been tolerated. Nathan does the rather amplify the fault
of David, in taking away the poor man's sheep, because he had had bought it,
and nourished it up, and it grew up with him and with his children. Length of
time commends many things. It commends wine, 2. Sam. 1^. Consila senum
has^ae iuvenu^ su^^ Proverb. 22 Prover. 27. Eccle. 9^
we say, the old is better. It commends wisdom, Counsel must be
handled by the aged, speres by the young. It commends truth, Id verius quod
prius, The first is truest. It commends custom, thou shall not remove the
aunc^ent bounds which thy fathers have set. It commends friendship, thine
own friend, and thy fathers friend forsake thou not: forsake not an old
friend, for a new will not be like unto him. It commends service in the
field, do thou despise the soldiers of thy father Philippe? says Clytus
to Alexander; Nisi hic Atharia^ senex. Curt.
and have thou forgotten that unless this old Atharias had called back the
young men when they refused to fight; we had yet stuck at Halicarnassus?
Lastly, it commends our dwellinge places and possessions. Barzillai tells
David who vvoulde faigne have drawn him alonge with him; I am foure-skore
yearee old, 2. Sam. 1^*
let me return to mine own cit^ye, and be buried in the grave of my father
and mother. 1. King. 21.
And Nabo^h tells Ahab, the Lord keep me from giving the inheritance of my
father unto thee. It would somewhat more have commended the gourd, if Jonas had
long enjoyed the use thereof, which he did not: it was but the child of a
night, both in rising and falling; Filiu^ nocti^.
suddenly sprung up, and suddenly dead again. So there is neither price in
it, because it is but a gourd; nor propriety, because he had not labored for
it; nor prescription of long acquaintance because it was soon dead.

Now, that which is set against the gourd on the other side, is by name, 7.
Niniveh.
Niniveh; by form, a city; by quantity, a great city; and shall not I spare
Niniveh that great city? Niniveh. A City. Vrb^ ab vrvo.

Vel ab orb.


Niniveh, at this time the head of Assiria, the fame and brute whereof fills
the world, and holds the people in awe by reason of her sovereign
government? Niniveh, no villadge or hamlet of the East, but a city that had
walls and gates: for so is the nature of a city described, we have a strong
city salvation shall God set for our walls and bulwarks, Esaias 26. and the
people whereof are enclosed within orders and laws, A great City.
as the buildinges within fences? Niniveh, no small city in Assiria, as
Bethlehem was in Judah, or as the little city of Zoar which Lot fled into; but a
lardge and spacious city, in circuit of ground, but for the number of
inhabitants most populous and abundant? Now the greater the place is, the more
matter is ministered for pity to work upon. Jerusalem was more labored and
applied by Christ in the days of his flesh, than either Bethania a country
town, or any other cittye of Judah or Samaria less than Jerusalem. Agesilaus
a renowned Lacedaemonian was grieved in his heart, when he had slain ten
thousand of his enemies; and when many of the rest that were left alive had
withdrawn themselves within the city of Corinth, his friends advising him to
lay siedge unto it, he answered, that it was not fit for him so to do, for he
was a man which would compel offenders to do their duty, Se ^um esse qui ad
officium peccatore^ cogeret, non qui vrbes vastares. Non missura ^^tem etc.
but not pull down cities. The ruinating and overthrowing of cities, are
miserable either spectacles or histories to those that with any humanity shall
consider them. Nero may sing and triumph when Rome is on fire, a bloody
horse-leach, feedinge upon the spoils of men and towns; but Abraham will pray
for Sodom, though the sink of the earth; and not only Jeremy will lament.
and write lamentations, but Christ will mourn for the downe-fall of Jerusalem.
And Titus whilste he lies in siedge, when he shall see such slaughter of the
Jews, will throw up his hands to heaven, and lay the massacre upon God to
clear himself. That Sodom whereof I ^pake, consider but the rain that fell
upon it, Genes. 19.
brimstone and fire from the Lord in heaven, it self overthrown with her
sisters, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the city, and all
that grevv upon the earth turned into ashes; and whatsoever came up afterward
from that ground, unwholesome and unprofitable fruit, pestelent vines, and
bitter clusters, Deuter. 32. Esdr. 2. Jude.
the whole land mingled with clouds of pitch and heaps of ashes, the people
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, and notwithstanding all this, it
self made a byword to all ages that came after it, as we read in Esaias 1. and
Romans 9. unless the Lord had left us a seed, we should have been as Sodom
I say, consider but these things, and pity her ruin and desolation though
she be Sodom, Iosuah. 6.
because she was a city. Though Jericho were Jericho, a city of the
uncircumcised, idolatrous in the worship of God, and hostile toward his
people, can it sincke into your ears without pitying and bemoaning the gate
thereof, to hear that her walls fell flat, and all that was therein, was
utterly destroyed, both man and woman, young and old, ox and sheep, and
ass, with the edge of the sword, and the city burnt with fire, and all that
was in the city, except some silver and gold that was reserved? Though Jericho
be suncke so low that it shall never rise again, to stand long (for it is
sealed with a curse to his person that should adventure to reedifie Jericho,
and with the blood of his eldest and youngest sonnne) yet say to your selves
when you read that lamentable narration, alas for Jericho, because it was a
city sometimes, girded with walls, fortified with bulwarks, stored with
treasure and wealth, peopled with men, and furnished with other such
habilities, as the very name of a city presently implies. But that Jerusalem
whereof I also spoke, Jerusalem, the sanctified city, and the cittye of the
everlasting God, Jerusalem, builte in unity, Jerusalem, the Queen and
Empress of the provinces, so defaced and levelled with the ground that not a
stone was left standing upon a stone, neither in their houses, walls,
bulwarks, turrets, no nor in the altars, sanctuary, temple of Jerusalem, the
old and young, matrones, virgins, mothers, infants, princes, priests, prophets,
Nazarites* all slain, famished, fettered, skattered abroad, utterly
consumed; If it come into the mind of any man, either by reading or hearing,
without commiseration, I say that his heart is more barbarous and rude than
the very fragments and rubbell wherein Jerusalem is lodged. Who can express
those havockes, by speech, Quis funera^ findo Explice^ etc. Lam. 4.
or find tears enough to equal their miseries? For this cause I weep,
faith the Prophet, mine eye, even mine eye casts out water, which it draws
up from the fountain of my overflowing heart; and he calls to the daughter
of Sion, to let tears run down, like a river, day and night, to take no
rest, neither to suffer the apple of her eye to cease, to arise and cry in the
night, Lament. ^.
in the beginning of the watches, to power out her heart like water before the
Lord. Aeneas Silvius in his oration (of the spoil of Co^sta^tinople) against
the Turk, with great compassion relates the murdering of their children
before the faces of their parents, the noble me^ slaughtered like beasts, the
Priests torn in pieces, the religious flead; the holy virgins incestuously
defiled, the mothers and their daughters despightfully used, and at length he
cries out: O misera^ vrbis faciem, O the miserable face of that city O
unhappy people, O wicked Mahomet. Who is able to report such things without
tears? there was nothing to be seen, Qui^ talia fand^ Tempere^ a lachrymis?
Namque animus meminisse horre^ etc.
but full of mourning, murder, bloodshed, dead carcasses. At last converting
himself to Greece, (his mind eve^ quaking and starting back with sorrow) he
thus bewaileth it. O famous and renowned Greece, behold now thy end, now thou
art dead, alas, how many mighty and wealthy cities have heretofore bin
extinguished? what is become of Thebes? of Athens? of Micene? of Larissa? of
Lacedemon? of Corinth? of other memorable towns? whose walls if thou seek
for thou can not find so much as their ruins: no man ca^ show the ground
werein they are are laid along, our me^ do oftentimes look for Greece in Greece
it self; only Co^sta^tinople is no remaining of the carcasses of so many
cities. Such and so lamentabl has ever been the devastation of cities to me^
of any affection, Sola ex t^t c^d^veribus civiratum etc.
and such it seemed to God in this place, shall not I spare Niniveh that great
city? Jonas could have found in his heart to have seen it in the dust, and
corn fields ploughed up where the walls and buildinge stood, or rather an
heap of nettles and salt pits in the place thereof; the smoke of the fire
waving in the air, and hiding away the light of the sun, and the flames
spiring up into heaven the king and his senators, merchants and people, those
that walked with staves for age, and those that were nourished at the breasts
for weakness, their flocks of sheep and herds of cattle, all wasted and
consumed in the sa^e pile, if God would have yielded to the madness of his cruel
appetite. But he answers with more clemency, shall not I spare Niniveh that
great city? Hitherto were but titles and names, the proof follows.

Wherein are six thousand persons that cannot discern etc. It may easily be
ghessed, Hieron. ^* many.
quantus sit numerus alteriu^ aetatis, cum tantus sit parvul^ru^, how great the
number of other ages, when there were so many infants. The prophecy was here
fulfilled which was given to Israel and Judah, Ier. 31. Behold, the days
come, that I will sow the house of Israel, and the house of Judah, with the
seed of man, and the seed of beast. So was the house of Niniveh sown, for
her inhabitants were multiplied as the grasshoppers, her marcha^ts as the stars
of heaven, her princes and captains as the locustes, Nah. 3. Shall not I spare
Niniveh, 2 Infante^
wherein there is such a multitude? Or if thou art not moved with a multitude,
does not the age of infants and suckelings touch thy heart? that cannot speak,
cannot stand, cannot help themselves, that stick to their mothers as apples
to their trees and if thou pluck them away before their time, they perish? Is
this thy welcome of babes into the world? is this the milk thou will feed
them with? Is this thy stilling and pacifying of them to quiet the^ with death?
Is this thy nursing of their tender and vngrown limbs? to wrap the^ up in
flames of fire as in swath-ba^des, and to rock the^ a sleep with pittiles
destruction? can thine ears endure that lamentable and confused harmony of so
many young musitia^s singing in their kind, and as nature has taught them,
crying up together into heaven, and wilt not thou cry for company, and say, O
Lord stay thine hand and forbear the^? or can thine eyes behold the shrinking
of their soft members at every pull of grief, their sprawling upon the ground,
their flesh scorched with heat as a scrole of partchme^t, and not be moved? I
stay not upon this point: but the age of young infants has evermore bin
pitied. The midwives of Egypt, Ex. 1. though strangers and chardged with the
kings commandment, yet would not slay the children of the Hebrews. Even the
daughter of Pharaoh himself Exo. 2. finding Moses hid in the bulrushes, had
compassion on the babe, for it was a goodly child, and wept. One of the
properties of an impudent, barbarous, cruel nation, described Deuteronomy. 28. is, it
shall not regard the person of the old, nor have compassion upon the young.
There is a notable place to this purpose 2. King. 8. where it is said that
Elizaeus looked upon Hazael a servant and messenger unto him from Benhadad the
king, till he was ashamed, and the man of God wept, and Hazael demau^ding why
weepeth my Lord? he au^swered, because I know the evil that thou shall do
unto the children of Israel: for their strong cities shall thou set on fire,
and their young men shall thou slay with the sword, and shall dash their
infants against the stones, and rend in pieces the women with child: then
Hazaell said, what? is thy servant a dog, that I should do this great thing?
So brutish a part he held it, to do such villainy upon the mothers, and their
infants. Or if thou regardest not their age, does not their innocence affect
thee? say that the elder sort have sinned, 3. Innoc^^^
because they have judgment and election in them: but what have these infantes
done, who know not their right hand from their left? nor have attainned to
their years of discretion, nor able to distinguish betvveene straight and
crooked, good and evil, but are altogether innocent? It is a circumlocution of
their ignorance and simplicity: the like whereof we have, Esaias 8. before the
child shall have knowledge to cry my father or my mother: that is, before he
can speak, or discern the one from the other* Which was no more than went
before in the 7. of the same prophecy, before the child shall have knowledge
to eschew the evil and choose the good. Eccle. 10.
The son of Syrach speaks of a fool in the same manner, he knows not
the way into the city, that is, ordinary and common things which every man
knows. We shall read that God has evermore had a special regard to the
infant, because of his harmelesnesse and innocence: he commanded Deuteronomy. 21.
that they should be spared in war: and the women, and the cattle: excepting
those of the Ammonites in the same place, and of those cities which were
altogether execrable in the sight of God, as of Jericho. Josh. ^. and of Edom
and Babylon, Psalm 137. Their innocencye is every where proposed as a pattern
for the riper ages to imitate: Our Savior told his disciples Mat. 18, having
first placed a little child in the midst of them, except ye be converted and
become as this little child ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven.
And in the 19. of the same Evangelist, suffer little children to come unto me,
for to such as these are belongs the kingdom of God. The Apostles of Christ
framed their exhortations from the same presidents: (...).
brethren, be not children in your minds, (...), But in malice be you infants;
1. Cor. 14. 1. Pet. 2.
and as newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word that ye may
grow thereby. But if thou hate the children, together with their parents, as
we destroy the whelps of wolves even for their kind sake, and because the
fathers have eaten the sour grape, the childrens teeth must needs be set on
edge, and the infants smart for their offenses, 4. Cattle.
shall I not spare Niniveh wherein there is much cattle? What have the dumb
beasts deserved, that they should also perish? Solomon in the 12. of the
Proverbs shows what the practice of the just is even in this case, A
righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the mercies of the wicked
are cruel. And his rule agrees with that practice Prove. 27. Be diligent to
kn^w the state of thy flocks, and take heed to thy heardes. Genes. 33.
Jacob has pity upon the children, and upon the ewes, and the kire with young
which were under his hand, for he said to his brother Esau if I should
over-driue them one day, all the flock would die. The errand that he sent
Joseph in, Genes. 37. was, go see whether it be well with thy brethren, and
how the flocks prosper. David 1. Sam. 17. obiecteth his life unto a Lion,
afterward to a bear rather than on sheep should miscarry. Howsoever Philip
complained, cuiusmodt est vita nostra, cum ad as^llorum occasiionem videndum
est? how basely is our life conditioned, when we must live to make provision
for asses? (to one in his army, who told him that there wanted food for their
beasts) yet it is true, that some part of our care and forecast must this way
be employed. We also know that the law of God favors them, Deuteronomy. 25^ Thou
shall not muzzle up the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn; and the
Sabbath, though made for man, yet it extended to the resting of the beast. And
either nature or profit, or something else moved the hard hearted Jews, if
their ox or ass were fallen into a pit, even upon the sabbath day to pull him
out. Moses kept lethroes sheep, Jacob Labans, the Patriarchs his sons were
all sheepheardes, David followed the ewes, Saul sought asses, Amos was taken
from the heardes, that you may know the care of these unreasonable creatures
not to have been small in former times.

The last branch of amplificatio^ which God uses against Jonas, 5. Much
cattle.
was the store of the cattle; the respect whereof did somewhat move him to
withdraw his judgment. And surely the abundance of cattle, is no mean blessing
of God. He promises it unto Israel, Behold, I will multiply upon you man and
beast, and they shall increase and bring forth. Abraham and Lot were very rich
in cattle Genesis 13. so were Jacob and Esau, Ezech. 36
Genesis 36. the land could not bear them both together because of their flocks.
So was Vzzah the king, 2. Chr. 26. he built towers in the wilderness, and
dug many cisternes, for he had much cattle both in the valleys and
plains. The substance of Job, in the first of that book, was seven thousand
sheep, and three thousand cammelles, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five
hunered shee-asses, and toward the end of his days, all these were doubled
unto him.

You see then what reasons the Lord has used in this second member of the
comparison, for the sparing Niniveh. 1. It was populous with all kind of men,
2. there were infants in it, 3. six score thousands, 4. they were innocent, 5.
there was cattle, 6* much cattle. I do not find that Jonas ever answered this
argument; but yielding the victory to God and his blessed truth, he leaves a
testimony of his silence and submission to the whole world in this writing
which he afterward compiled. Such honor did Turnus give to Aeneas when he
vanquished him, vicisti, and victum tendere palmas,
Ausonii videre:
thou have overcome me, and the people can bear witness that I acknowledge thy
victory. With this most sweet and victorious sentence does Jonas conclude, or
rather break of his prophecy, as if he had said, great is thy truth, and
prevails. Thy mercy triumphs against justice, much more shall it triumph
against dust and ashes. Let the corrupt affections of man, give place to thy
righteous judgments, let both great and small, the infant, and dumb beast
sing of thy lovinge kindness, and let every thing that has breath, say, the
Lord be praised. And let this be the end of my labors for this time, The
meditation of that mercy of God, wherein this prophcy is ended, and let the
labors of my whole life know non other end. Thus let me end the day and begin
the night, end the night and begin the day again; whither I read or write,
think or speak, or whatsoever else I do, let me do it all with this
conclusion; and when I have run out the race of my sinful days let me rest at
that happy mark, wherein the Lord does give over his argument, I these pains.

I have at lengrh finished, by the grace of God and your patient audience, my
simple expositions upon the prophecy of Jonas: an argument and narration, you
see, of only mercy: the 4. Chapters whereof, as those 4. beasts in the
Revelation, Revel. 4.
full of eyes both before and behind, I mean in every part opening and
discovering unto us the invisible God in the sweetest propriety of his nature,
that is, in the abundance of his love, cease not day and night, and for all
eternity to sing, gracious gracious, gracious Lord God almighty, which was,
which is and which is to come, thy mercy is over all thy works, and thy
faithfulness endures from generation to generation: but the last of the 4. is
the flying Eagle to all the rest, as the fourth beast there, having an higher
reach, and loftier demonstration than the other had. For where the mercy of God
was then but exemplified in fact, 1. to the mariners, 2. to Jonas, 3. to
Niniveh in the 3. first chapters, here it is pleaded, maintained, propugned
touching the right and reasonablenes thereof, with arguments so strong, as that,
I say not the tongue of man, but not the gates of the nethermost hell shall
ever be able to prevail against it. Whilst there is a difference betwixt day
and night, and when the covenant of day and night shall be broken, this
indifferency betwixt God and man shall stand in force, shall thou spare, and
shall not I spare? or rather this difference, if thou sparest not, yet will I
spare. Though man can be content to see multitudes of his own kind to be
murdered like tatte^ or mice, pitying neither infant in age, neither innocent
in conditions, nor the harmless beast, yet GOD the Creator of all will cast a
merciful eye over all his creatures, and both man and beast, aged and
suckling, maugre the malice of Satan and opposition of his own flesh, shall
find grace in his eyes. If I have profited any man by putting Gods talente to
use in this exercise, and been, as my hearty vvish was, a sweet smelling
sacrifice and a savor of life unto him, let God have the honor, the father
and giver of all good and perfect gifts, there shall none of his glory cleave
to my fingers. I take nothing to my self but weakness and shame; who
though I have broken my masters bread unto you with mine earthly and
unworthy hands, yet was I but the instrumente, the blessing and power his
alone, who gives both seed to the sour, and bread to him that eats.
That I have been chardgeable unto any man, it repents me; it is more
blessed to give than to take; and although it stands with the liberty and
leave of the gospel so to do; (For who feeds a flock, and eats not of
the milk of the flock? And if we have sown unto you spiritual things,
is it a great matter if we reap your carnal?) yet I will modestlye
confess, it hardely stood with the liberty and freedom of mine own
disposition; and I am able to affirm it from a pure conscience as Paul did in
the twentieth of the Acts, though I received some thing, (...), yet I have
not coveted the silver, or gold, or apparel of any man. I speak not in any
sort (my vvitnesses are in heaven and in mine own bosom) to diminishe the
credit of your benevolence toward me. The LORD requite it unto you seven
fold. I hate ingratitude as witch-crafte, my mouth were worthy to be
muzzelled up, if I vvoulde not freely and fully profess your kindness: for
you were unto me as the house of Stephanas was unto Paul and his company,
the first fruits of Achaia, (he meante the first of that region that gave
themselves to minister unto the Saints) so you, 1. Cor. 26.
the first fruits of England that have given me any maintenance by
voluntary contribution. I hope your cruise shall the more abound, and your
cup be the fuller for it. Yet, let me say with patience, whatsoever has be
done in this behalf, I was rather sought and motioned thereunto, than my self
ever sought it. And during the greater time of my continuance therein, if I had
not rather desired to satisfy others than mine own heart, feeling more burden
in my pains, than sweetness in my recompense, I had long since eased both
my self of my labor, and you of your chardges. Though some are ignorant, and
others will not know, and some are loath to feel it; I have both known and
felt what to read a lecture is. For if to read alecture, be not only to read
(as the name sounds) or only to speak by an hour glass, Declama^e ad
clepsydram.
and to spend the time; if more than to talk and confer with some single
commentary; and not only to search translations as the brooks, but to examine
the original as the wel-spring; and both to peruse and compare the expositions
of the learned (for the spirits of prophets are subject to prophets; and we
all prophecy one by one in several ages, that we all may have comfort one by
another labors,) and not as drones to live by the honey which Bees have
gathered, Nam illi quoque no^ inventa* sed quaerenda nobis reliquerunt.
Faciamus amp^iora quae accepimus.
but our selves to make honey, and to add to the travail of others, for the
building and perfecting of Gods church; (for as they have found out many
things, so they have left many to be sought by us) and to play the parts of
thrifty and good husbands in making our patrimony lardger which we have
received from our fathers; together with studious meditation, discreet
application to the time, persons, and place, endless succession of pains
after pains: then I am sure, that to read a lecture is a greater labor than
some in opinion will conceive, others demonstrate and make proof of by
practice. There be that run away with a lecture, as horses with an empty cart;
I cannot do it. It is but a moate with them to read thrice in a week, and
twice in a day sometimes. I will not dissemble my wantes, It was a beam to my
back to make it my weekly exercise. For if ever my hands were manicled, and
my feet bound up before, I say not from taking pleasure, which I little
regard, but from follovving the course of my necessary and gravest studies,
then did I purchase that bondage unto my self, when I offered my neck to
this yoke. How often have I said within my self. Beatus ille qui procul
negotijs Paterna rura bobus exercet suis, as Horace commended a country life;
how happy is that man in comparison (if to live in ease be any part of
happiness) who has a rural chardge? That I leave no man to succeed me as Moses
left Iosuah, Elias Elizaeus, and such like, though it be my grief, yet I
cannot remedy it. It is threatened for a curse in Jeremy, there shall be none
to say, leave thy fatherless children unto me. Ier. 49. Tull. de amiciria.
Mihi non minori curae est qualis Respublica post mortem meam futura sit, quam
qualis body, My care is as great for your church when I am departed, as whilst
I am present. For I hate the improvident and importunate nature of
Heliogabalus, who wished to be heir to himself, and to see an ending and
dying of all things with his own person. But your benevolence is your own,
and I cannot commend it as inheritance to any otherman. Only my comfort is,
Genesis 21.
that which Abraham gave to Isaac when he savv not the sacrifice, Deus
providebit; God will provide for you, if you be not wanting to your selves.
For let me say with your favorable construction; there are many within these
walls, that know not their right hands from the left, children in
understanding, and much cattle, take them in that sense that Peter and Jude
mean them, 2. Pet. 2
beasts without reason, men without humanity, as bad as the horse and the
mule in whom is none understanding. For these, there are not preachers enough,
or rather to say the truth, authority has not edge and vigor enough to
compel them to come in, that the house of God may be filled. They walk in
the fields, in the streets at their pleasure, they lie at their doors, upon
their beds, they sit down to eat and drink and to be drunken, and rise up
to play. They may do worse than all this, in chambering, in wantonness, in
intolerable filthiness, even upon the best days, and in the best hours of the
day, and who suth unto them, what do ye? They have lived a part by themselves
a long time, and sung with their own muses, whom I would have besought now
lastly even in the bowels of Christ, and for conscience toward God, to have
redressed this blot to their city. But so they have lived and dwelt, as if
Jordan had lien between them and us, that they could not come at us. I mislike
not their absence, for they are provided of their own; and as the women said
in Esaias, we will eat our own bread, and wear our own garments, so may
they justly excuse themselves, we have a peculiar vineyard, and a labourer of
our own to see it kept and manured. I say so, but if there were more than
this, (forgive my Christan jealousy) that some of purpose would not, and
others might not come because of offense, God forgive it. I never offended
the^, unless I committed that fault which the Apostle speaks of, 2. Cor. 12.
that I was not chardgeable, or burdensome unto them. (...), he desired them
to forgive him that wrong: and if mine be the same trespass, I ask the same
pardon. I preached not Christ of envy, I preached not Christ for glory. I
preached not Christ for gain, and neither to please, nor justly to offend any
man. I preached Christ in vprightnes and simplicity of heart, and walked with
the evenest foot that I could, by all means labouringe if it were possible to
save some. Which if I have obtained, though it be my great joy, and a crown
unto me, yet I glory in him that has enabled me thereunto, and cast my crown
at his feet by whom I had grace to perform it.

Lastly, it is my comfort, and ever may it be, to see such an happy and
friendly aspect, The Lord Archbish L. Lieutenant. L. Warden.
of so many principal planets together in one place: I hope they shall ever
be found in that mutual correspondence wherein I now leave them. For
whilst I live, I shall pray for the peace of our Jerusalem. Which peace of our
Jerusalem, if either prayers to God, or petitions to men, if travail of body,
or contention of mind, if sheading of tears, or spending of blood may
purchase to our Church or commonwealth, it is not dearly bought. Division had
well-nigh broken of late the heart strings of religion amongst us. O let the
head and the heart with other the sovereign parts evermore accord, that the
inferior members may be the better governed.

Finally, my brethren fare ye well; (It is the Apostles farewell to the
Corinthians, ^. Cor. 16.
) be perfect; stick not always in the rudimentes and first beginnings. Be of
good comfort; you know who has overcome the world. Be of one mind, and live
in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. And so I leave you
to the mercy of God, neither greater nor less, than this prophecy does
record: beseeching the God both of Israel and Niniveh, and all the ends of the
earth, that his blessings may be powered down in as abundant measure upon you
all, your city and people, aged, infants, and cattle, and whatsoever is
within your gates or possession, as my faithful purpose has been, truly
and effectually to preach his mercy, according to the matter and scope of this
present history. To him that is able to keep you that you fall not, and to
present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with joy, that is,
to God only wise and our savior, Inde.
be glory, and majesty, and dominion, and power, both now and for ever, Amen.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FVNERALLES OF THE MOST REVEREND FATHER, JOHN, LATE
Arch-bishoppe of York, Novem. the 17. in the year of our Lord, 1494.

Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes. 1599.

Psalm 146. Trust not i^ Princes, nor in any son of man, for there is no
help in him; his breath departs, and he returns to his earth, then his
thoughts perish.
THat precept of the son of Syrach (though I never were willing to neglect) I
vvoulde most gladly have observed at this time: Eccle. 38.
thou that art young, speak if need be, and yet scarsly when thou art
twice asked. For that which Euripides in Hecuba, Eadem oration aequa non aeque
val^^, Enn.
spoke of a noble and unnoble man, I hold to be true of an old and young
man, delivering the same speech; though it be all one in words, it is not so
in force and authority. The rule I am sure is ever for the most part against
the younger. No man when he has tasted old wine, desires new, Magnum futurum
si senescere^. Bo^ lassus fortius figi^ pedem*
for he says, the old is better. Antigonus gave his judgment of Pyrrhus,
that he would prove to be some great man if he lived to be old. The weary
ox treads surer, a proverb which Jerome used against Augustine being short
of his years. Omnia ferte aetas, animum quoque, Age brings all things, and
with all things wisdom. Surely for mine own part I never thought it
convenie^t, that the gravity of this present business should not be answered
with gravity both of person and speech: and my witnesses are both in heaven and
earth, how justly I can excuse my self, as Elihu did, Job 32 Behold, I did
wait upon the words of the ancient, and harkened for their knowledge; I
stayed the time til some elder and riper judgment might have acquitted me from
this presumption. For as I wished all honor, bounded within sobriety, to the
name of my living master; so this to his memory being dead, that these last
accomplishments of our christian humanity toward him, might have been
honored both with the presence and pains of some honorable person. And that
amongst other his felicities, it might have been one more which Alexander
pronounced at the tomb of Achilles, when he put a garland about his statue, or
pillar, O te foelicem, cui mortuo talis praeco contigerit, O happy Achilles,
who being dead haste gotten thee such a trumpeter of thy praises as Homer
was. Howbeit, under that name and nature where in it comes unto me, being
imposed, not sought, and rather a burden than either suite or desire of mine,
and as an end of my service, which for that virtuous spirits sake, that
sometimes dwelt in it, I owe to the dead corpse; I have adventured the
chardge, that whatsoever my wants otherwise be, no man might say I
vvanted duetye. And as one besides, not unwilling to take this advantage,
though of a most unhappy and unwelcome time, to seal up my former affections,
and to publish to the world what my loss is.

It was said of old time, and in some case it may be true, Animo dolent^,
nihil oportet credere, that a man should never believe a grieved or troubled
mind. I think the contrary: animo dolenti magis oportet credere, a man
should rather believe a mind in the grief thereof. And it is the best excuse
for my bold endeavors at this time, that being no stranger either to his
death, the eyes of whose body (and under God of mine own hope) I help to
close up* either to that sorrow which his death has divided amongst us his
skattered flock, I am able to say that by my hearing, which others but by
heare-saie, and with a tongue fired at the altar of my heart, quickened and
enlived, I mean, from the sense of that inward sorrow which I have conceaved.

I have laid the foundation of my speech from the words of the Psalm; Put
not your trust in Princes, nor in any son of man, for there is no help in
him etc.

1 Princes are an honorable calling, but they are the sons of men.

2 The sons of men are creatures not far inferior to Angels, but there
is no help in them.

3 There is no help in them, because not only their puissaunce and strength,
but also the very breath of their nostrelles departs.

4 When their breath is departed, they are not placed amongst the stars, but
return to their earth.

5 Their devises are not canonized and kept for eternity, for their thoughts
perish. You see the first and the last, highest and lowest of all the sons of
Adam. They may be made honorable, Princes, but they are borne sinful, the
sons of men, borne weak, there is no help in them, borne mortal, their
breath departs, borne corruptible, they return to their earth, and lastly,
that mortalitye and corruption is not only in their flesh, but in some part
or remnaunt of their spirits, for their thou^htes perish. The Prophet (if you
mark it) climbeth up by degrees to the disabling of the best men amongst us,
and in them of all the rest. For if Princes deserve not confidence, the
argument must needs hold by comparison, much less meaner men. The order of
the words is so set, that the members follovving are evermore either the
reason or some confirmation to that that went before. Trust not in Princes,
Why? because they are the sons of men. Why not in the sons of men?
because there is no help in them. Why is there no help in them? because when
their breath goes forth, they turn again to their earth. What if their
flesh be corrupted? Nay their thoughts also come to nothing.

For first, Trust not in princes.
this first order and rank which the Prophet has here placed, the Princes
and GODS of the earth, are, by birth men; secondelie vveake men, and such in
whom no help is; thirdly, not only weak, but dyinge, their breath goes
out; fourthlye, not only dying, but subject to dissolution, they turn to the
earth; fiftelye, if only their bodies were dissolved, and their intendmentes
or acts might stand, there were less cause to distruste them; but their
thoughts are as transitorye as their bodies.

Chrysostom deriveth it thus. Trust not in Princes, either because they are
men, or because helpelesse, or because mortal, or because corruptible, both
in the frames of their bodies, and in the cogitations of their hearts, or
lastelye, Si dicendum est aliquid mirabile, if a man may speak that which
the world may justly vvonder at, Trust not in Princes even for this very
cause because they are Princes, and in least safetye themselves. Mihi crediti
mori malem quam imp^^re. Oath.
O happy governors (says one) if they knevve their miseries, more unhappy
if they know them not. Tam ille timere cogitat quam timeri, it was Cyprians
judgment of one in governmente, that he has as great cause to fear as to
be feared. The authority or pre-eminence of Princes amongst men is great:
if the king say kill, they kill; if spare, they spare: and, but that it is
the ordinance of GOD, a thing which his own right hand has planted, not
possible to stand: for they may all say, It is thou that subduest my people
under me; and their promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the
West, Psalm. 144*
nor from the suffrages of the people, nor from the line of their ancient
progenitors, nor from the conquest of their swords, but from the Lord of
hoastes.

GOD tells Cyrus, Esaias the five and fortieth, his servant, his anointed, to
whom he had opened the doors of the kingdom, and whose hand he held, I
have called thee by thy name, and surnamed thee* though thou have not known
me. I find it noted upon that place, that his name was Spaco before, which by
the testimony of Herodotus and Iustine, in the language of the Medes signifies
a dog: but God chandged that name, and called him Coresch, or Cirus, which in
the Persian language sounds a Lord. Job in his own person describes the
state of Princes and rulers: Job. 29.
That when he went out of the gate, to the seat of judgment, the young
men saw him and hid themselves, the aged arose and stood up, the princes
stayed their talk, and laid their hands upon their mouths; when the ear
heard him, it blessed him, and when the eye saw him, it gave witness unto
him: after his words they replied not, and his talk dropped upon them, and
they waited for him as for the rain: neither did they suffer the light of his
countenance to fall to the ground. This is the reason that men are so willing
to seek the face of the ruler: for, being in the highest places, they are able
to gratify their followers with highest pleasures. They that have power are
called benefactours, Luke 22. Elizaeus asked the woman of Shunem, 2. Kings 4.
in whose house he had lodged, what he might do for her is there any thing for
thee to be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the host? as the
greatest remuneration that his heart could then think upon. Now, as their port
and presence is very glorious upon the earth, so neither is it permanent, and
whilst it has being, it is daily assaulted both with domestical and
foreign dangers. He that created great lights, a greater to rule the day
and a less the night, he has also created great rulers on the earth, some to
be Emperors, some kings, some subordinate governors, some in Continents, some
in Islands, some in provinces etc. And as he shall chandge the glory of the
former, that the sun shall be darkened and lose his shining, and the moon
shall be turned into blood; so he shall stain the beauty of the latter, and
lay their honor in the dust, and those that have been clothed in purple, may
hap to embrace the dunghill. He says in the Psalm, Psalm. 82.
I have said that ye are Gods, and the children of the most High, but ye
shall die like men* and f^ll like the rest of the princes* It is a prerogative
that God has* to call things that are not as if they were: but if they
themselves shall take upon them to be Gods when they are but men, the Lord
will quickly abase them. Zenacharib is in his ruff for a time, Esa. 37.
where is the King of H^math? and the King of Arpad? (Kings which he had
destroyed) and have the Gods of the nations delivered their clients and
orators out of my hands? and Hezechias, let not thy God deceive thee: proud
challendges. But a man might soon have asked him, where is the King of Assure?
and has Nisroch the God of Assyria delivered Zenacharib himself out of the
hands of God? and Zenacharib, let not thy God deceive thee; nay take heed
that thine own sons deceive thee not: thy bowelles, thy flesh and bones
shall murder thee, where thou art most devoute. Herod is content at the first
to admit the persuasion of the people, the ^oice of God, not of man: Act. 1^.
but as he received his glory and pride in a theater, so his shame and
downfall in a theater; the people showted not so fast in his ears, but
another people sent from God, gnaweth as fast within his bowelles, and makes
him alter the style of his oration; I that but lately was called a God, Qui
modo immortalis vocabar etc. Eusebius.
and thought to be immortal by you, am now going to my death. But take them in
their happiest and fortunatest courses, both kings and kingdoms; as they have
their beginnings and their full strength, so they have their climacterical and
dangerous years, (as he spoke of France) so also their periodes and
determinations. La nove.
And these are the lottes they must all dravve in their courses, as I have
found them recited, regnabo, regno, regnavi, sum sine regno, I shall reign, I
do reign, I have reigned, I have now done reigning.

Surely, those that are good princes indeed, whose thrones are established
with mercy and judgment, they have need daily and hourly to be commended
unto God; Good luck have ye with your honor, we wish you prosperity: O
Lord give thy judgments unto the King, and thy righteousness unto the Kings
son: send them help from thy sanctuary, and strengthen them out of Sion; for
their honor is dearly bought, they drink worme-wood in a cup of gold, they
lie in a bed of Ivory, Timeo incustoditos aditus, timeo ipso^ custodet Tiber^us.
trimmed with carpets of Egypt, but over their heads hangs a naked sword,
the point down ward, by a small horse-haire threatening their continual
slaughter. They might al pronounce, but that they are strengthened with the arm
of God, of their honourablest robe, and ensign of their majesty, O nobilem
magis quam foelicem pannum, Stob. ser. 47*
O rather noble than happy garment; if men did thoroughly know, how many
disquietments, dangers, and miseries it is replenished with, if it lay upon
the ground before their face, they would hardly take it up. That which seems
high to others, is steep and headlong to them. Quae alii^ excelsa videnter,
ips^^ praeruptae sunt. Sen^^.
Isboseth never wants a man in his own camp, nor Elah a servant in his own
house, nor David a son from his own loins, besides Doegs, and Shemeis, and
Achitophels, wicked counsailours, blasphemous railers, traitorous spies, to do
them mischief.

To conclude therefore, our duty to princes is not confidence and faith in
them, but faithfulness and obedience toward them. Give unto Caesar that which
is Caesar's, give him tribute, custom, honor, fear, serve him with your
fields and vineyardes for his maintenance, with your lives, and the lives of
your sons for his defense; and pray for the life of Nabuchodonozor or the
king of Babylon, Baruch.
and of Balthazar his son, that their days may be as the days of heaven upon
the earth. This the Apostle requires of us, 1. Tim. ^.
that prayers and supplications be made for all men, namely and especially for
kings, and all that are in authority: and that we be subject, one says, to the
creature or constitution of man, another says, to the ordinance of God, 1.
Pet. 2. Romans 13. Ibid.
because God has ordained it by the hands of man; whither it be to the king or
his officer, higher or lower; One says, for conscience sake, another, for the
Lords sake, because conscience is then assured, when it goes after his
direction. This is their right: but that confidence which my text speaks of,
belongs only to the hope of Israel, and to him is fully reserved.

Will you know a farther reason to exclude both princes and all others who
have their dwellinges with mortal flesh, Not in any son of man.

Augustine.


from this affiance of ours? they are the sons of men. I except but one: in
vno filio hominis salus, in one, and that only son of man there was
salvation: not because he was merely the son of man, but the son of God
also. Amongst those that were begotten of women, there never arose a greater
than John Baptist: yet he told his disciples that claue unto him, Non sum.
I am not he, and sent them away unto a greater, and pointed at him with his
finger, Behold the lamb of God. When Cornelius fell down at the feet of
Peter to vvorshippe him, Acts the tenth, (...).

(...). Act. 1^.


Peter took him up and answered, I my self am also a man. When the priest
of Jupiter brought bulls and garlandes to sacrifice to Paul and Barnabas, it
set them in a passion, they rent their clothes, and ran in amongst the
people, crying and saying, O men, why do ye these things, for we are also
men subject to the like passions that ye be. They might have added for
further explication sake, that which is written Esaias the second, Cease from
the man whose breath is in his nostrelles, for wherein is he to be esteemed?
and in the 51. of the same prophecy, Who art thou that thou should fear a
mortal man, and the son of man that shall be made like grass? and a little
before. The moth shall devour him like a garmente, and the worm devour him
like woll, Jbid.
but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to
generation. A man of what condition so ever he be (says Lactantius) Si sibi
credit, hoc est, fi homini credit, if he trust himself, Lib. 3. cap. 3.
that is, if he trust man, besides his folly in not seeing his error, he is
very arrogant and audicious to challendge that unto himself, which the nature
of man is not capable of* when the Israelites, Esaias 31. waited upon the help
of Egypt, trusting in their chariotes because they were many, and their horses
because they were strong, God gave them none other answer than this, the
Egyptians are men and not God, their horses flesh and not spirit, and therefore
when the Lord shall stretch out his hand, the help shall fall, and he that
is helped, and both shall fail together. The nature of man at the first
creation, before that lump was sowred with the leaven of sin, was full of
glory and grace: as God expostulated with David, 2. Sam. ^^.
I made thee king over Israel, and if that had been too little, I would have
done much more; so man was made king, and put in Lord-like dominion and
possession, not over cantons and corners of the world, but over the air, the
sea, the earth, and every beast and fish, and feathered foul therein created.
All things were made for us: (...). 2. Physic. Propter hominem homo deus
factus est.
for in a manner we are the end and perfection of all things. And if this be
to little, God has yet done more for us. For our sakes were the heavens
created, and for our sakes were the heavens bowed, and God was made man to
pleasure man: so that all is ours, and we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. The
wise men of the world, who never looked so far into the honors of man as we
do, yet evermore advanced that creature above all others. One called him a
little world, the world a great man; another a mortal God, God an immortal
man; another, all things; because he partaketh the nature of plants, of
beasts, and of spiritual creatures. Phavorinus mervailed at nothing in the
world besides man, at nothing in man besides his mind. Abdala the Saracen,
being asked what he most wondered at upon the stage of this world, answered,
man; and Saint Augustine says that man is a greater miracle than all the
miracles that ever have been wrought amongst men. Whatsoever our prerogatives
are (as they have been greater in times past, fuimus Troes, we have been
Trotanes, and it has been an happy thing to be borne man,) we cannot now
forgo our nature, our generation is known to the world, our foundation is in
the dust; we were fashioned beneath in the earth, we were brought together
to be flesh in our mothers wombes in ten months, Wisd. 7.
and when we were borne, we received no more than the common air, and fell
upon the earth, which is of like nature. Our father is prooved to be an
Ammorite, neither Angel nor God, and our mother an Hittite, and we the
unclean children of an unclean seed. Let Alexander persuade himself that he
was the son of Jupiter Hammon, till he see his blood; let Sapor the king of
Persia write himself king of kings, brother to the sun and moon, Rex
regum, frater solis et lunae* particeps syderu^. Nec deus est nec homo.
partner with the stars; let the canonistes of Rome make a new canon to
transfigure their Pope into a new nature, writing him neither God, nor man, but
somewhat between both; let Antiochus think to sail upon the mountains,
Zenacharib to dry up the rivers with the plant of his foot; let Edom exalt
himself like an Eagle, and build his nest amongst the stars, and say in the
swelling of his heart, who shall bring me down to the ground? yet, when they
have all done, Obadiah.
let them look back to their tribe, and their fathers poor house, and the
pit from whence they were hewn, let them examine their pedigree and descent,
and they shall find that they are but the sons of men: and that the Lord has
laid this judgment upon them, man that is borne of a woman has want of days
and store of miseries, I end with that excellent admonition of Scaliger to
Cardan: I would ever have thee remember that thou, Exerc. 148.
and I, and others, are but men, for if thou know what man is, thou will
easily understand thy self to be nothing. For mine own part, I am not wont
to say that we are so much as men, but pieces of man: of al which put
together, Parts hominis.

Pene minus quam nihil. There is no help in them.


something may be made, not great, but of each of them sundred, almost less
than nothing.

If you will now learn the reason why you must not trust in the sons of
men, there is no help in them: that is not so; for Eve was made an helper to
the man: but there is no salvation in them; or salvation there may be, such as
it is, for a moment of time, not final, as Iosuah was a Savior unto Israel;
and salvation of the body, but not of the soul, whereas the salvation of the
Lord is never but salvation; for he is the same God, and his years fail not:
and it reaches to all parts, for his arm is not shortened. Pliny observes
in his natural history, Lib. 7.
that nature has given armor and covering to all other living things;
shelles, crustes, hides, prickles, hairs, feathers, fleeces, skales,
Chrysostom adds, talents, tuskes, horns; only man upon his birth day she
does cast forth naked, Hominem ^antum nudum and nuda humo na^ali die abiicit ad
vagi^um.

Hominem solum sic disposui^ vt vir^us ipsius sit deus ipse.


and upon the naked ground to weeping and howling. Chrysostom gives the
reason, God has so disposed of man, that himself might be his only
protection. He confessed in the person of all mankind, who saw it experienced
in his own, naked I came from my mothers womb, and naked I shall return
thither again. We hear their beginning and their ending. But say, that in
the course of his life, man shall have girded himself with strength, and
decked him with majesty, what is he then more than a vain man? For what did
it help the children of Canaan that the sons of Anak, Giants of the earth,
dwelt amongst them? of whom the children of Israel said, we have seen the
sons of Anak there. They were all destroyed by Iosuah, they and their
cities, Deuteronomy. 1. Iosu. 11. Deuteronomy. 3.
and not one Anakim left in the mountains of Israel and Judah. We read of
Og the King of Basan, the only remnaunt of those Giants, that his bed was a
bed of iron, the length of it 9. cubits, the breadth 4. after the cubite of a
man: yet how often does the Psalmist sing, he has slain mighty kings, Sehon
king of the Amorites, and Og the king of Basan? What did it profit the
Philistines, that the monster Golias was amongst the^? 1. Sam. 17.
or the monster himself, that his stature was so huge, his helmet, his greues,
his corslet, his shield, all of brass? the staff of his spear like a weavers
beam? he was smitten by a child in comparison, who came with a sheepheards
staff, and sling in his hand, and a few smooth stones in his skrippe; but
(that which was the safest munition of all others) in the name of the Lord of
hosts, the God of Israel whom he had rayled upon.

These and the like experimentes made him so bold afterward, that he defied
all men, I will not fear what man can do unto me; Psalm. 56. Psalm. 3.
Psalm. 27. Psalm. 118.
I will not fear for ten thousands of people that shall beset me round
about; though an host were pitched against me, my heart should not be
afraid; all nations compassed me about, but in the name of the Lord will I
destroy them. They have compassed me about, I say, they have compassed me
about, but in the name of the Lord shall I destroy them. They came aebout me
like Bees, and are extinct even as a fire of thorns, for in the name of the
Lord shall I destroy them. The reason is, for thou Lord have helped me, thou
art my strength and my song, thou haste been my deliverance. Exodus 15. Deuteronomy.
26.
The Lord is a man of war, his name is Jehovah: the eternal God is thy
refuge, and under his arms thou art for ever, he shall cast out the enemy
before thee, and will say, destroy them. The one was the song of Moses after
the drowning of Pharaoh and his host; the other a part of his blessing given to
the tribes of Israel not long before his death. It was not the sword of Gedeon
that overthrew the Madianites, Judge. 7. but the sword of the Lord and Gedeon;
and therefore he chose rather to give that overthrow by few, than by many,
least Israel might make their vaunt against him and say, my hand has saved
me. Afterward, when they said to Gedeon, reign thou over us, both thou and
thy son, and thy sons son, for thou haste delivered us out the hand of
Madian; he answered them, I will not reign over you, neither shall my child
reign over you, but the Lord shall reign over you. You hear what our
strength is. And for other helps, seek them far and near, they are so
weak, that they are not able to chandge the color of one hair to our bodies,
nor add one cubite to our stature, nor one minute of time to those days which
God has assigned us. Why then do we flatter our selves that we shall
multiply our days as the sand? or what triacle is there at Gilead, what
Physician there, that can cure the gowte in Asa his legs, or lay a right
plaster to the boil of Ezechias, or ease the king of the head which the
Shunamites child complained of, or heal a fever, a dropsy, an issue of blood,
or any one of a thousand diseases more wherewith the body of man is oppugned,
if the Lord instruct and assist him not? I read that Socrates never needed
physician in his life time; that Pompey a poet, and a noble man borne, was so
sound that he never belched; Anthonia the wife of Drusus never spit, vt
perhibent qui de magnis mayor a loquuntur, as they say who of great matters
use greater words: their times belike were more temperate, and therefore less
rheumatike than ours. We desire to have strong bodies, able to do us service
in our old age, sed prohibent grandes patinae, but we eat and drink so much
that it cannot be. Asclepiades a Physician indented with fortune that if ever
he should happen to fall sick, he would no longer be a Physician: E^ quid
opus Cratero, magnos promittere montes? what need Asclepiades (who with a
sudden fall of a ladder prevented sickness, and ended his days,) or
Craterus, or any other Physician promise such mountains to himself or others?
A Physician is to be honored with that honor that is due unto him, but of the
most High comes healing; his knowledge lifts up the head, Eccles. 38.
he receaveth gifts of the king, and in the sight of great men he shall be
had in admiration, but the Lord has created the medicines of the earth; the
Apothecarie makes a confection, and yet he cannot finish his own work. Let
the Physician do his part with an upright and faithful mind, in the sight of
God who has created him, let him not lie to his patient and thrall, nor draw
him into error, as Abraham did Abemelech in saying that Sara was but his
sister, when she was his wife; he had well-nigh caused him to sin by that
false suggestion: so these may deceive their patientes, and make them the more
careless, by telling them that their disease is further of in degree, when it
is incorporate into them, and lies so near to their body (even like a wife)
that it may not be severed, when the sick man and his sickness are duo in
carne vna, as it were two in one flesh. Some are unskillful in their
profession, such as Pliny speaks of, experimenta per mortes agunt: they kill
men to gain experience. And Seneca notes the like, officiosissime multos
occidunt, they are very busy to cast many men away. Others are unfaithful,
and these in my judgment) are more to be eschewed than the former; evil
cou^sailors, healing the hurts of the people with sweet words, crying peace,
peace, al is well, when behold, Annibal is at the gates, death is entered in at
the windows and at the doors, and has taken the fort of the body into her
hands. Such are very unlikely to make found bodies, because they come with
unsound hearts; and of these is the proverb verified, tituli pharmaca habent,
pyxides venena, al their titles, pretenses, and promises, are health, health,
but their drugges and receiptes are poison; I mean not so much to the bodies
as the souls of men. Trust not in man therefore, neither in his strength, nor
in his skill, and fidelity, for there is no help in him. Why no help?

His spirit departs; not only his strength, his health, his agilitie, His
breath de parts, etc.
his liuelihood; but his breath. I will join the residue of my thxt all in one;
nor only his breath, but his flesh, blood, bones, marrow, sinews, arteries, al
must go. There is a resolution of his whole substance, his last garment, which
is his skin, shall be pulled of: he has here no abiding place, Destrahetu^
novissimum velamentum cutis.

Ad terram suam.


nor any state of perpetuity, but returns; not immediately to heaven, but to
the earth; nor to the earth as a stranger unto him, or an unknown place, but to
his earth, as his familiar friend and of old acquaintance. Neither is there
only an end of these material parts, but part of his inward man also
perishes, so far as his carnal and wordly designements went, which he
fansied to himself in his life time.

Here is the end of al flesh; they soiourne upon the face of the earth, And
the^ his thoughts perish
and their spirit also soiourneth within their bodies. It comes and returns
as a ttavailer by the way, and staieth perhaps for an hour, a day, a year, a
decade of years, more or less, and the^ exit spiritus, our breath departs
from us. And God called Abraham, ^xi de terra tua, go out of thy country
wherein thou were borne and bred; so he calls to our spirits come out of
your houses wherein you have long dwelt. There is but one manner of entering
into the world, Vnus in^roitus inumeri exitus.
but many ways of going out: we are full of holes, we take water at a
thousand breaches; one dies young, another in a good age, some in their full
strength when their breasts are full of milk, some by the hand of God, some
by sickness and infirmity, some by violence. The infants of Bethelem are slain
in their cradles, Eglon in his parlour, Saul in the field, Isboseth upon his
bed, Zenacharib in the temple, Ioab at the very altar; some die by famine as
the cildren of Jerusalem, some by saturitie and surfeiting as the children of
Sodom, some by bears as the boys that mocked Elizeus, some by lio^s as the
disobedient prophet, some by worms as Herod, some by dogs as Euripides, but
Lucian better deserved that death and he also sustained it: The sons and
daughters of Job, in the midst of their leasting with the fall of an house,
Chore and his accomplices with the opening of the arth, the captains and their
fifties with fire from heaven, the coals whereof were never blown, Zimri with
fire from earth which himself kindled; eosdem penates hahuit and regiam, and
rogum, and sepulchrum, as Val. Maximus writes of Tullus Hostilius who was
smitten with lightning, the same house was both his palace, and pile; and
grave to be buried in. I add that which is more admirable: Homer died of
grief, because he could not answer a riddle which fishermen proposed unto
him, Plutar.
Sophocles with joy, because in a prize of learning, after long expectation, he
got the victory of his adversary, but by one voice. Behold ye despisers' and
wonder at the hand of God: you that are in league with death, and make a truce
with the grave, you that say to your souls, take thine ease and be at rest
for many years, and to morrow shall be as this day and much better with who^
there is nothing but as in the days of Noah, eat drink, marry, until the
flood comes; Seeing that both sorrow and joy are able to kill you, and your
life hangs upon so small a thread, that the least gnat in the air can choke
you as it choked a Pope of Rome, a little hair in your milk strangle you as
it did a counsailour in Rome, a stone of a raisin stop your breath as it did
the breath of Anacreon; put not the evil day far from you, which the
ordinance of God has put so near; remember your Creator in time before the
day come wherein you shall say we have no pleasure in them; walk not always
with your faces to the East, sometimes have an eye to the West, where the sun
goes down; sit not ever in the prow of the ship, sometimes go to the stern;
stand in your watch-towres as the creature does Romans 8. and wait for the hour
of your deliverance; provide your armies before that dreadful king comes to
fight against you with his greater forces; order your houses before you die,
that is, dispose of your bodies and souls, and all the implements of them
both; let not your eyes be gadding after pleasure, nor your ear itching after
rumors, nor your minds wandering in the fields, when death is in your houses;
your bodies are not brass, no^ your strength the strength of stones, your life
none inheritance, your breath no more than as the vapor and smoke of the
chimny within your nostrels, or as a stranger within your gates, coming and
going again, not to return any more til the day of final redemption. It is a
wonder that there should be need of any such exhortation after so long
experience. If we were as Adam was, who never saw the example of any precedent
death, Ciprian. de sing. Cleric.
we might the more justly be excused: for as Christ spoke in the gospel, of
the virtues done in Chorazin and Bethsaida, if the virtues wrought amongst you
had been wrought elsewhere etc. So if those innumerable deaths which have bin
showed amongst us, had been showed in the days of Adam before his fall, he
would never have run into that contempt. We know that we must die, and as
Calvus spoke againg Vatinius, Factum esse ambitum scitis, et ho^ vo^ scire
omnes sciun^
you know that he has practiced ambition, and there is no man but knows that
you know so much; so we know the certainety of our death, as we know our
names, and the iointes of our fingers, and yet we regard it not. What are all
the cities and towns of the earth, so far as the line thereof is stretched,
but humanarum cladium miseranda consepta, Valor. Max.
the lamentable pinfoldes of the deaths of men? O pray that the flight and
departure of this spirit which must depart, be not upon the sabbath day, in the
rest and tranquillity of your sins, nor in the winter and frost of your hard
hearts, nor in the midnight of your security when you least look for it. VVoe
worth the man whom the Lord when he comes shall find sleeping. I say the
untimely fruit is better than that man, and it had bin good for that man if he
had never bin borne: the thieves shall break through his house, the dangerous
thieves of the soul, Satan and his Angels, spiritual wickedness shall rob not
his coffers, but his conscience of a treasure which he had, but lost with
carelesnes. The bride-grome shall come by with a noise, but behold, his light is
out, his oil spent, that is, both his matter and opportunity of well-doing is
gone, and he cannot supply either by borrowing or by by buying, though he
would give his heart blood for it. What shall become of him, but that he shall
knock at the gates of heaven while those gates are standing, and cry upon the
Lord while he has his being, to no purpose?

The instruction serves us all. For the prophet was willed to cry, Esa. 40
that those which were farthest of from hearing the sound and believing the
report of the voice, might be made partakers of it, All flesh is grass, and
all the goodlines thereof as the flower of the field. And to shevve how strange
it seemed unto him, that any should be ignorant of their mortal condition,
and strangers in Jerusalem (as the disciple spoke to Christ, Luke 24.) or
rather in the world, not knowing the things which ordinarily come to pass,
from the first creation, till time shall be no more* he continues his cry:
Know ye nothing? have ye not heard it? has it not been told you from the
beginning? Have ye not learned it from the foundations of the earth? That it
is he that sits upon the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants in
comparison of him are but grasshoppers? That he makes the Princes of the earth
as nothing and the judges as vanity? as though they were never planted never
sown, and their stock had taken no root upon the earth? For he does but blow
upon them, and they wither, and the whirle-winde takes them away like straw.
Statutum est omnibus semel mori, Hebr. 9.
It is appointed unto all men once to die, nay twice to die; ( Moriendo mortar
is, God threatened Adam, that he should die the the death,) so the Apostle here
says, first death, and afterward judgment, If we look into it. But the
statute touching the former branch shall never be repealed, till destruction be
thrown into the lake of fire, and it be fulfilled which the Apostle has
revealed unto him, Mors non erit vltra, death shall be no more. Let us take
heed therefore, Revel. 21.
least whilst we are careful to do al other things in time, to set our
trees, ^ow our fields, gather our fruits, we loose or lay up in the napkin
of security, and bury in the earth of forgetfulness, the most precious talent
of time committed unto us, in the ordering and framing of our lives to
salvation, as if nothing were viler unto us than our selves. Let us beware to
offer the dregs of our life, to him that inspired it, least we drink the dregs
of his anger. If we wish with Balaam, that our latter ends may be like the
ends of the righteous, let us not be negligent to fashion our beginnings and
middles like theirs. Vita brevi^ ar^ l^nga.
Let us know that life is short, and the art of salvation requires a long time
of learning, and the way into heaven is long and cannot be trodden in a short
time. Astronomers say, that the space between heaven and earth if one should
climb unto it by ladders, is nine hundredth thousand miles: but the distance
whereof I speak, between corruption and incorruption, mortality and
immortality, wretchedness and glory; can by no measure be comprehended

He returns to the earth Deuteronomy. 28.
Let the proud by name remember that they must turn to the earth which now
they set their feet upon. Rather those tender and dainty women, that never
adventure to set the soul of their foot upon the ground, but as if the face
of the earth were not provided for the daughters of men, they must be always
carried like the fowls of the air between heaven and earth; Let them
remember, that the earth shall set her foot upon their heads, and their
lips shall kiss the dust of the ground, and the very gravel and slime of
the grave shall dwell between their hawty eye-liddes. Why do they kill the
prophets and build up tombs? kill their souls and garnish their bodies? Do
they fore-thinke what shall become of them? when after al their labor and
cost bestowed, in whiting and painting the outward walls, there remains
nothing but putidu^ and putridu^ cadaver, ^ stinking and rotten carkas? when;
though now they say to their sisters in the flesh, Touch me not, I am of purer
mould tha^ thou art, yet the bones of Agamemnon and Thersites, shall be mingled
together, of Vashti the most beautiful Queen, and the blackest Egyptian
bondwoman, shall not be found asunder? I have not leisure to say much unto our
proud dust and ashes. But if purple and fine linen were an opprobrious note
(for lack of an inward clothing) to the rich man in the gospel, if that
parable were to be written in these days, purple and fine linen, were
nothing. And what the burthe^s and cariages of pride in the age of Clemens
Alexandrinus were, I know not: but if it were a wonder to him, that they killed
not themselves under those burdens, Mihi mirabi^e fi^ quod non enec^ntur, cum
t^ntum onus b^iulent. 2 Paedag*
I am sure, if the measure were then full, it is now heaped upon the highest,
and shaken together and pressed down again. We are mad to forget nature. Adam
has wisdom to call all the beasts of the field by their proper names, but he
forgets his own name, that he was called Adam, and that there is an
affinity between the earth and him. For he shall return to the earth, his
earth. He was not made of that substance whereof the Angels and stars, His
earth.
no not of that matter whereof the air and the water, inferior creatures.
The earth was the womb that bredde him, and the earth the womb that must
receive him again. For let him play the Alchymist while he will, and strive to
turn earth into silver and gold and pearls, by making show to the world,
under his glorious adornations, that he is of some better substance, yet the
time is not far of, that the earth shall challendge him for her natural
child, and say, he is my bowelles. Neither can his rich apparel so disguise
him in his life time, nor fear-clothes, spices and balmes, so preserve him
after his death, nor immuring stone or lead, hide him so close, but that his
original mother will both know him again, and take him into her possession.

Let the covetous also remember this. Nature shall as narrowly examine them, at
their going out, as at their first entering. Excutit redeunt^m naturae, sicu^
intrantem* Senec.
They brought nothing with them into this world, but skin over their teeth, and
over the other parts of their body, and it is as certain, they shall carry
away nothing. They join house to house, field to field, by disioyning the
companies and societies of men, they will dwell alone upon the earth, and
leave the inheritance of the world to their babes after them. And as they
were happy commonweals heretofore, wherein these speeches Mine and Thine
were least heard, so are we fallen into these unhappy and unrighteous days,
wherein there is small care taken, what communities be overthrown, and
dispersed, so all may acrue to a few Lords. Socrates carried Alcibiades,
bragging of his lands, to a map of the world, and bade him demonstrate where
his land lay. He could not epsy it, for Athens it self, was but a small thing.
I will not deal so sparingly with you, ye rich men of this world; (for the
Apostle distinguishes you, to show that there are both riches, and a world to
come:) I will tell you where your land lies, Nonne telluris ^res tan^um
cubiti te expecta^t? Basil.
and what is truly mine and thine, and belonging to every man. So much
measure of ground, to the length and breadth of your bodies as may serve to
bury them in, or so many handfulles of dust as your bodies go into after
their consumption. This is terra mea, and terra sua, and terra vestra, my
earth, and his earth, and your earth, and more than this we connot claim.
Therefore as the son of Sirach asked the proud, Quid superbis terra and c^^is?
so I the covetous, quid concupiscis terra and cinis? Why do thou covet,
earth and ashes? when if it were possible for thee, to possess as much
ground as ever the devil showed unto the son of GOD from that high
mountain, yet in the end thou shall be driven from all this, as the people of
Canaan were driven from that land, which they thought their everlasting
inheritance, and thou must betake thy self to thine own earth, to that
little quantity and rod of ground which nature has proportioned unto thee.
Ecce vix totam Hercules Implevit vruam, Behold, great and victorious Hercules,
the subduer of the monsters of the world, when he was dead, and his body
resolved into ashes, scarcely filled an earthen pitcher. Amongst other thy
purchases, forget not to buy a field (as Abraham did) to bury thy dead in; a
potters field, such as they had at Jerusalem, bought with the price of blood
wherein thy bones and the bones of thy sons and nephews may be bestowed^

His thoughte^ perish.
Now the thoughts of man are endless. Above all things, man has an
unfaithful heart, says the Prophet, as deep as the sea, who can find it
out? I leave it to the searcher of all hearts to examine. The ambitious has
his thoughts, as lardge as hell, such as Pyrrhus had, from Macedon to Greece,
from Greece to Italy etc. The voluptuous his thoughts, let us eat and drink.
Better is a living dog than a dead lion. The malicious his thoughts, who
will give me of his flesh to eat? Iam. 4.
The covetous his thoughts; soul, take thy rest: to day or to morrovve we
will go into such a city, and there continue a year, and buy and sell, and
gain. Such are the purposes and supposals of men minding earthly things. But
the Lord knows the thoughts of me^ that they are but vanity. I would they
were not gross impiety. And they imagine such counsels as they are not able
to bring to pass, Psalm. 94. Psalm. 19. Cyprian.
for their thoughts perish. Plus proficitur cum in rem praesentem venitur,
there is more good done by one example than by many precepts. Perhaps I have
told you a tale as to men a sleep, and now I have done, you ask me what is
the matter? This is the matter, if there were none other explication, the
present spectacle before your eyes is the example of this precept, the life of
this letter; and this precept the sentence or moral of this spectacle. For if
you will ask me of the person proposed to your view what he was, surely he was
a Prince, and a great state of the land, and I may say of him as David said
of Abner, hoa^e princeps cecidit in Israele, this day is there a chief man
fallen in England. If you demand further what he was by generation, I au^swer,
one of the sons of men. If, what by impotencie and imperfection; unable to
help either himself or others, there is no salvation in him* If, whither he
were mortal or no; yea. for his spirit is departed from him. If, what
becomes of his body; you see* we have brought it to the earth, and thither
(...) must return. If, what of his mind; his thoughts are also gone. Lastly,
if you will know the use, and take an advise and counsel out of all these, put
not your trust in him, nor in any the like frail and mutable creatures.
Blessed is the man whose help is in the Lord, Non ^lle homo, aut ille homo,
non ille angelus, aut ille ange^u, not this man, or that man, Augustine.
not this Angel nor that Angel, but the God of Jacob the Lord of hosts
which made heaven and earth, the sea and all that therein is, and keeps his
promise for ever. He that not long since, was a glorious tree amongst us, like
the Cedar of Libanus, and his boughs were a shadow to these North parts, has
had the message of the Lord by his angel accomplished upon him, hew down the
tree; and there is but a stumpe left, a remnant of that substance now to be hid
and buried in the earth, till the daiespring from an high, the light of Gods
countenance shall again visit it. Do you doubt of the fall of Princes? handle,
and see his body that here lies, examine his nostrels if there be any breath
in them his eyes, if they have any sight, his cheeks, if any color, his
veins, if any warm blood; and then believe (as the Samaritans did) not
because of my word, but because your selves are witnesses unto it. And as his
body in life has give^ you many an instruction; so let his dead and
breathless corpse, add one more unto you of common and vnevitable mortality.
It has bin the manner of ancient times to co^me^d their dead; rather to
testify their good affection, and bemoane their loss, and to hold out the
lamp of their virtuous lives to others left alive, than to gratify the
deceased. 2. Sam. 1. 2 Samuel 3. 2. King. 2. Jn Monod.
Thus David commended Saul and Abner; Elizaeus Elias; the Apostles those
Saints whom the world was not worthy of; Nazianzen Basil, making his
followers, in comparison with him for his excellent parts, no more than an
Echo to the true voice. Thus Bernard lamented Malachy, complaining that his
very bovvells were pulled from him, S^r. de transi^u Malach.
and he could not but feel the wound. Our Savior praised the living, John
Baptist, the Centurion, Nathanael. Though wisdom it self could not err in
judgment, yet it is safer for us to praise the dead than the living, the
complement and periode of whose days we have seen expired; quando nec
laudantem adulatio movet, August.
nec lavdatum tentat elatio, when neither he that praises is moved with
flattery, nor he that is praised can be ^empted or swell with vain glory.
Praise a seaman when he is come to the haven, and praise a warrior when he is
brought to his triumph, Lauda navigantem cum perveneri^ ad por ^um. Testimonium
veritati non amicitiae. ^ern.
not before. Such are the dead: whom we should favor generally, if there were
none other cause, tantum quia praecesserunt, only because they have led the
way unto us; but those who have been honorable in their life time, we must
follow with our amplest testimonies, not of friendship and affection, but of
truth, and fulfill the blessing of God upon them, what in us lies, that the
righteous may be had in everlasting remembrance. For mine own part, I come not
at this time to give titles to any man either living or dead, contrary to
desert, nor to pronounce a sentence with my lips which mine heart
gaine-saith. I know that the nature of praise is not benigna hominum verba sed
iudicia, the courteous speech of men but their sound judgments; and the seat
of subject thereof, is not the praiser (for then the credit of the just must
stand to the mercy of flatterers) but he that is praised: as Pindarus
answered one, who told him that he deserved thanks for commending him,
Efficio vt vera dicas, the cause is in me not in thy self, that thou speak
truth. According therefore to these rules, I have thought it my duty to break a
box of spikenard amongst you, and to fill the house with some part of that
sweet perfume, which his good name and memory has left behind him.

In few words, this honorable shadow, presented upon this stage of
mortalitye, and now concluding his last act upon the face of the earth, as
he was not great by parentage, so it was his greater commendation that he
became great by virtues. Stemmata quid faciunt? Meu^genus a me incipit, tuum i^
te desinit. ^phicrates.
Ancient and noble pedigrees are of little vvorth, where the line of
well-doing continues not. And it is much more glory to a man to begin the
honor of his house, than either to end or not to increase it. What did it
profit Cham that he was the son of Noah? or hurt. Chrysostom. in illud Math.
Pat^e^ habemus Abrah.
Abraham that Thara his father worshipped Gods of clay? or disparage Timothee,
that he was borne in Gentilitye? Ingenuitas non recepit contumeliam, honesty
and vertuousnesse, how base soever the birth be, is free from disgrace. It
was no prejudice to Socrates, that his father wrought in Marble, and that his
mother was a midwife; to Demosthenes, that his father was a cutler; or
Euripides, that his mother sold garden herbs. Tullus Hostilius spent his
infancy in a cottage, his youth in keeping sheep, his man's estate in governing
the kingdom of Rome, Incunabula Tulli hostilij agreste tugurium cepit. etc.
but his old age was so beautified with most excellent gifts, that it
reached to the top of highest majesty. Moses though he were hid in a
basket of flagges, and cast a side amongst bulrushes, yet became a terror to
Princes. Joseph the son of Jacob, who kept sheep for wives, was exalted to
be the second ruler of Egypt. Saul sought asses, and David followed the ewes
great with young, yet the Lord has lifted them both out of the dust, and set
them amongst the Kings of the earth. It leaves an encouradgement to those that
are left behind, Summos posse viros and magna exempla daturos etc. Iuvenal.
Potest vi^ magnu^ e casa exir^.
that most rare men, and able to bequeath to the world great examples, both of
virtue and learning, may be borne of mean parents.

For the rest of his life, as Caesar in three words abridged that service of
his, veni, vidi, vici, I came, I viewed, I vanquished; so three other words
shall sum and comprehend the whole course of it, Academta, Aula, Ecclesia,
the University, the Court, and the Church of God. The University tried his
learning, The Court his manners, the Church his wisdom.

Touching the first as Petrus Chrysologus said, that if in this present life
there be any where a paradise, it is either in a Cloister, or in satis pauci,
satis vnus, satis nullus, A few are enough, one enough, none enough, to hear
and determine of such matters. Therein how well he proved, let the transplanting
of him from college to college, not by chance, or suite of friends, but
advised choice, and not only his sittieg at the feet of Gamalael to hear,
but his sitting in a chair to teach, be arguments Bonos recipere magis quam
facer^ cons^u^vi^.


The manner of a court is rather to take, than to make goodmen. Therefore
Bernard admonished Eugenius the Pope, to choose men unto him already approoved,
V^r^s probaet^s ^portere deligi, non proband^s 4. de Consid.
not to be approoved after they were come. I will not censure the court of
England. The Lord prosper both the root and branches of it, and cause the
light of his countenance to shine upon the sun and stars of that firmament.
But I am sure, in that Court whilst he lived therein, non fuit vnus e multis,
he was not a common man for his deserts, and yet for his pains, fuit vnus e
multis, he made himself a common man, in keeping as orderly and ordinary a
course of preaching, as whosoever was most bound to do that service. And as
he had an office therein besides to wait upon, so he dischardged it with
fidelity, not bearing the bag like a thief, but with such uprightness of
conscience, that in the sight of GOD and men he might iustlye purdge himself,
witness against me if you can, Whom have I ever defrauded?

Lastly, the Church had a long experience of his government. He Plutar. de
vitios. veres
) Mendemus answered, but I will never be brought to praise Alexius.

Concerning his last service in these his ecclesiastical prefectures, As Paul
told the elders of Ephesus Act. 20. You all know from the first hour that I
came into Asia etc. so from the first hour that he came into this province,
you know his behavior amongst you at al seasons, how he kept nothing back
that was profitable, but taught you openly and throughout every Church,
witnessing both to Jews and Grecians, Protestants and Papists repentance
toward God, and faith toward Jesus Christ.

Shall I yet draw my speech into a narrower compass? As Paul witnesses of
himself 2. Cor. 12. so he both spent and was spent amongst you. You ca^nnot
truly say of him, Ditavimus Abrahamum, we have made Abraham rich, he has not a
shoe-thread, more tha^ he brought at his first coming. He spent. Nihi^ ex ea
quod meum diceretur praeter cognome^ retuli. Val. Max.


P. Scipio being called by the Senate to give an account of his administration
in Af^icke, made answer thus for himself. Whereas I have subdued all Afric
to your government, I have brought away nothing therehence, that may be called
mine, but only a surname. What has this reverend Prelate gained and carried
away with him by continuing amongst you these many years, save only the name
of an Archbishope? In the consideration of whose estate, I cannot but remember
a speech that Cato used in A. Gellius; I have neither house, nor plate, nor any
garment of price in mine hands. If I have any thing I use it; Si quid est quo
v^ar, vtor: si non ego sum, Vitio vertunt quiae multis (...) and ego illis quia
neque^unt egere. Lib. 13. Cap. 22. Hieron.
if not, I know who I am. The world blames me for wantinge many things;
and I them, that they know not how to want. I need not apply the speech. But
will you have the reason of all this? Nepotianus noster aurum calcans,
schedulas consectatur; Our Nepotian conte^ned gold and wholly gave himself to
follow his study. And I am sure the commendation is that which Bernard gave to
Martin in his 4. of consideration: Nonne alterius sec^res est transire per
terram auri sine auro? Is it not an heavenly disposition, and fit for the other
world, to live in a country where a man may be rich, and not gather riches;

Now touching the other member of my speech, his travail and pains in his
function, he dealt both the gospel of Christ and himself amongst you, whose
saying ever was, that which he also took from a famous light of this land,
One that was Iulium sydus, a Jewel of his age, where should a preacher die
but in the pulpit? Oporte^ imperator^m in acie stantem mori, a General must
die in the field upon his feet; and surely he thoroughly performed it. For
when the infirmity of his body was such, that the least moving and stirring
thereof by travail, drew his blood from him, even then he drew out his
breasts, and fed you with the milk of Gods most holy word, whereas the
Dragons of the wilderness are cruel in their best health, and regard not
their young ones. Lastly (which is the last of all, because the end is both
trial and perfection, and in this sense, Vnus dies par omni, One day is as
much as all the rest, for it is aterninatalis; the birth day of eternity: and
as the tree falls, Qua^^^ exi^ris e^ hac vita. talis redde^^ illi vitae.
so it lies, and as we go out of this life, so we shall be restored to that
other) that you may not think he did, as the manner of feasts is, at the
beginning set forth good wine, and then that which is worse; or that he kept
one hoof back from the full sacrifice, I will shortly repeat unto you, what
his end was. Wherein I must use that protestation before, that Seneca somwhere
used; Semper citra veritatem and minor est similitudo.
Nunquam par fuit imitator authori, There is no equality betwixt one that
imitateth and the author himself: and a thing done by way of repetition and
rememoration, must needs come short of the truth. Notwithstanding, this I can
constantly affirm in general, that all other cares and consultations, which
the world might have drawn him unto, laid aside, and not so much as named, he
only applied himself to make some profession and promulgation of his faith.
Which he rathest chose to do, as the Apostle speaks Act. 10. not to all the
people, but (...), to us witnesses. then Chaplains in his house, chosen of
God, to the same dispensation of the faith, wherein himself had been. His
speech was to this effect.

I have sent for you, to this end, that before my departure, I might give some
testimony of that faith wherein I have hitherto lived, and am now to die. What
I have received of the Lord, that I have ever delivered. I have red much,
written much, often disputed, preached often, yet never could I find in the
book of God any ground for Popery: neither have I known any point of doctrine
received in the church of England, that is not consonant unto the word of God.
Wherefore he exhorted me (my colleague being then absent) to continue in that
building, wherein I had already laid my foundation; and because I was now his
ghostly father (which was the unworthy name, a father bestowed upon me a child
in comparison) required that I would not neglect to repair unto him twice or
thrice before his ending. I told him, that having often in his life ministered
so good comfortes to others, he could not want comfort to himself. He granted
it; but because omnis homo mendax, (wherein we took his meaning to be, that a
man might flatter and beguile himself) therefore he a gain required my resort
unto him. I replied, that I thought it the best, and I feared would be the last
service, that ever I should do unto him. Howbeit, the comfortes which I had
to give, I could but power into the outward ears; and that it must be the
spirit of God, which inwardly comfort the conscience. To this his answer
was, The spirit of God does assure my spirit that I am the child of God. I yet
proceeded. You have seen long peace, and many good days in Israel, I hope
also, shall depart in peace, and leave peace behind you; Neither know I any
thing in the world, wherewith your conscience should be troubled. He finally
concluded, I die in perfect peace of conscience both with God and man. So he
licensed me to depart, not willing (he said) to trouble me any more at that
time. Indeed it was the last trouble, that ever in breath he put me unto. For
the next entrance I made, was justly to receive his last and deepest gasp. Of
whom, what concerns mine own private estate, I say no more, but as Phillip
said of Hipparchus being gone; He died in good time for himself, but to me to
soon. Sibi mature, a^ mi^i cito.
Thus he that was ever honorable in the whole race of his life, was not
without honor at his death. For, (...).
as Sophocles commended Philoctetes, at what time he was killed himself, he
killed others gloriously. He fought a good fight both in defense of the faith,
and in expugnation of heresies, schisms, seditions, which infest the Church. I
call that labor of his, because he made none other at that time, his last
will and testament. Wherein the particular legacies which he bequeathed were
these. 1. To my self (which I hold more precious than the finest gold)
fatherly exhortation to go forward in pla^ting the gospel of Christ which I had
begun. 2. To the Papists wholso^e admonition to relinquish their errors having
no ground in the scriptures. And let the^ well advise themselves, that at such a
time, when there is no cause to suspect favor and partiality to the religion
established, no place left to dissemble with God or man, Tanti meriti, tanti
pectoris, ta^ti oris, tantae virtutis episcopu. (as Augustine spoke of Cypria^)
so worthy, so wise, so well spoken, so virtuous, so learned a Byshope, gave
such counsel unto them. 3. To all the members of the Church of England, unity
of soul and heart, to embrace the doctrine authorized. And lastly to himself,
peace and rest in the assured mercies of God. This peace he has plentiful
fruition of with the God of peace. For though he seems in the eyes of the
foolish to be dead, yet is he in peace. And like a true Hebrew, he has eaten
his last passover amongst us, and it is past from death to life, where with
unspeakable joy of heart, he recompteth between himself and his soul, Sicut
audivimus, sic et vidimus, As I have heard, so now have I seeene and felt in
the city of our God; and with the blessed Angels of heaven, and all the
congregation of first borne, sings the songue of Moses, a songue of victory
and thanksgiving, rendering all blessing, honor, glory, and power to him that
sits upon the throne, and the Lamb that was killed, and that undefiled
Spirit which proceeds from them both, by whom he was sealed up at his death
to his everlasting redemption.

A SERMON PREACHED IN YORK THE SEVENTEENTH DAY OF NOVEMBER IN THE YEAR OF our
Lord 1595. being the Queens day.

Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes. 1599.

2. King. 23, 25. Like unto him was there no king before him, that turned to
the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, etc.
THE remembrance of Josias is like the perfume that is made by the art of the
Apothecarie, Eccles. 40.
it is svveete as honey in all mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine: he
behaved himself uprightly in the reformation of the people, and took away all
abominations of iniquity: he directed his heart unto the Lord, and in the
time of the ungodly he established religion: which to have done in a better
season, the zeal of the people, and favor of the time advauntaging him, had
been less praise: The land was sown with none other seed save idolatry
and iniquity, when he came unto it. For by that which is written of him we
may know what he reformed. All idolatrous both Priests and monuments, whether
Chemarims or black friars, Priests of Baal, of the sun, moon, or planets,
though founded and authorized by both ancient and late kings before him; namely
in these records, by Solomon, Ahaz, Manasses, Jeroboam, together with their
high places or valleys, their groves, altars, vessels, wheresoever he
found them, either in Jerusalem, or Judah, in Samaria, or Bethel, in the
temple, or in the courts of the temple, upon the gates, or in the kings
chambers, not sparing the bones of the Priests either living or dead, but
raking them out of their graves, besides the impure Sodomites and their houses,
soothsayers and men of familiar spirits; he destroyed, defiled, cut down,
burnt to ashes, bet to powder, threw into the brook, and left no sign of
them. He followed both a good rule and a good example. His rule is here
specified, 2. Kings ^3.
according to all the law of Moses: his example in the chapter before, he did
uprightly in the sight of the Lord, an^ walked in all the ways of David his
father, and bowed neither to the right hand nor to the left. He was
prophesied of three hundred years and upward, before his birth: a rare and
singular honor, that both his name should be memorable after his death, as
here we find it, and written in the book of GOD before ever his parts were
fashioned. His acts are exactelye set down in this and the former Chapters:
and in the second of Chronicles and four and thirteeth, upon the recital
whereof is this speech brought in by way of an Epiphoneme or acclamation,
advancing Josias above all other kings, and setting his head amongst the stars
of God. The testimony is very ample which is here given unto him, that for the
space almost of five hundred years, from the first erection of the kingdom to
the captivity of Babylon under the government of 40. kings of Judah and
Israel, there was not one found who either gave or took the like example of
perfection. In the catalogue of which kings, though there were some, not many
virtuous and religious, (David, Solomon, Asa, Iehosaphat, Iehu, Ioash, Amasia,
Iothan, Hezekias) yet they have all their stains, and their names are not
mentioned without some touch. The wisdom, honor, riches, happiness of Solomon
every way, were so great, 1. King. 10.
that the Queen of Saba worthily pronounced of him, Blessed be the Lord thy
God which loved thee etc. Will you know his blemish? but Solomon loved many
outlandish women, and they brought him to the love of many outlandish Gods:
so he is noted both for his corporal and spiritual whordomes. Asa, the son of
Abiam did right in the eyes of the Lord as did David his father 1. King. 15.
his heart was upright with the Lord all his days, he put down Maachah his
mother for idolatry? The bitter herb that marreth all this, is, but he put
not down the high places. Iehosaphat did well, he walked in all the ways of
Asa his father, and declined not ther-from, but did that which was right in the
eyes of the Lord, 1. Kin. 22. nevertheless the high places were not taken
away. Iehu did well, God gave him this testimony 2. King. 10. because thou
haste diligently executed that which was right in mine eyes, therefore shall
thy sons unto the fourth generation sit on the seat of Israel: but Iehu
regarded not to walk in the ways of the Lord God of Israel with all his
heart. Amafiah did well, he did vprightlie in the sight of the Lord, 2. King.
14. yet not like David his father. David himself so much renowned as the
principal pattern of that royal line to be imitated by them; yet has a
scarre upon his memory, he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,
and turned from nothing that he commanded him all the days of his life, 1.
King. 15. thus far good, save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittire.
Only Josias is without spotte or vvrinckle, like unto him was there no king.
And as in the number of bad kings, Rehoboam did ill, Jeroboam worse; for he
sinned and made Israel to sin: but Omri worse than all that went before
him, 1. King. 16. and yet Ahab worse than all before him in the same place; so
in the number of the good, though Solomon did well, and Iehosaphat perhaps
better, and David best of al, yet Josias is beyond the whole company which
either went before or came after him.

Like unto him was there no king. It had been a great praise to Josias, to
have had none better than himself: to have matched the virtues and godliness of
his progenitors; but he is better tha^ they all, though they all were equal
in dignity and authority, and had power in their hands, and counsel by their
sides; yet were they inferior unto him in the care of Gods service. To have
compared him with Manasses his grandfather, or Amon his father who went next
before him, and whose steps he declined, contrary to the manner of children,
(for who would have thought when Manasses did ill, and worse than the
Amorites, and Amon no better, that Josias would not have followed them?) or to
have matched him with a few, and given him pre-eminence within some limited
time, say for an age, or two, or three, had sufficiently magnified him. But
all times examined, chronicles and records sought out, the lives and doings of
kings narrowly repeated, Josias has the garland from them all, the paragon to
all that went before him, and a prejudice to as many as came after him. The
reason is, Who turned
because he turned. His father and grandfather went awry, they ran like
Dromedaries in the ways of idolatry, but Josias pulled back his foot. David
turned to his armed men and strength of soldiers, To the Lord.
Solomon to the daughters of Pharao and Moab, Rehoboa^ to his young
cou^sailers, Jeroboam to his golden calves, Ezechias to the treasures of his
house, (contrary to the word of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 17. he shall not provide him
many horses, neither shall he take him many wives, neither shall he gather him
much silver and gold:) Some had even sold themselves to work wickedness, and
had so turned after the lusts of their own hearts, that they asked who is the
Lord? but Josias turned to the Lord, the only strength of Israel, as to the
Cynosure and load-starre of his life, as that which is defective and maimed to
his end and perfection, as to his chiefest good, as to the soul of his soul,
as to his center and proper place to rest in. They said like harlots, we will
go after our lovers that give us bread and water, and wool and flax; but
Josias as a chaste and advised wife, Osee 2*
I will go and return to my first husband.

The manner and measure of his turning to the Lord was with all his heart, and
withal his soul etc. With all his heart etc.
You seem to tell me of an Angel of heaven, not of a man that has his
dwelling with mortal flesh: and that which God spoke in derision of the king
of Tyrus, is true in Josias, thou art that anointed Cherub; for what fault is
there in Josias? Ezech. 28.
or how is he guilty in the breach of any the least commandment of the law,
which requires no more than is here performed? Least you may think Josias
immaculate and without spot, which is the only privilege of the son of
GOD, know that he died for sin, because he co^sulted not with the mouth of
the Lord, he was therefore slain at Megiddo by the king of Egypt. But that
which was possible for flesh and blood to do, in an imperfect perfection, and
rather in habit tha^ act, endevor than accomplishment, or compared with his
forerunners and followers, and not in his private carriage so much as in his
public administration, in governing his people, and reforming religion, all
terrors and difficulties in so weighty a cause as the chandge of religion is
(for chandge it self brings a mischief) all reference to his forefathers,
enmity of the world, love to his quiet set apart, he turns to the Lord with
all his heart etc. So does the law of love require: God is a jealous God, and
cannot endure rivals; he admits no division and par^ing between himself
and Baal, himself and Mammon, himself and Melcho^, his Christ and Beliall,
his table, and the table of devils, his righteousness and the worlds
unrighteousness, his light and hellish darkness. I say more, he that forsakes
not, I say not Baal and Mammon, and Melchom, and Beliall, but father, mother,
wife, brethren, sisters, lands, life, for his sake, loves not sufficiently.
For as God himself ought to be the cause why we love God, so the measure of
our love ought to be without measure: Causa diligendi deum, deus est, modus,
sine modo diligere. Bern. tract. de dilig. Deo. Min^^ te amat qui tecum aliquid
amat. Aug. in solil^q.
For he loves him less than he should, who loves any thing with him.
What? not our wives, children, friends, neighbors, yea and enemies to? Yes,
but in a kind of obliquity; our friends, and the necessaries of this life in
God as his blessings, our enemies for god as his creatures so that whatsoever
we love besides God, may be carried in the stream of his love; our love to
him going in a right line, and as a direct sunbeame bent to a certain scope,
our love to other, either persons or things, coming as broken and reflexed
beams from our love to God. You see the integrity of Josias in every respect,
a perfect anatomy of the whole man; every part he had consenting to honor God:
and that which the Apostle wished to the Thessalonians, 1. These. 5.
that they might be sanctified throughout, and that their whole spirit, soul
and body might be kept blameless unto the coming of Jesus Christ, their
spirit as the reasonable and abstract part, their soul as the sensual, their
body as the ministerial and organicall, is no way wanting in Josias. For
whatsoever was in the heart of Josias, which ^yra upon the sixth of Deuteronomy. and S.
Augustine in his first book of Christian Learning expound the will, because as
the heart moves the members of the body, so the will inclines the parts of
the soul; whatsoever in his soul, understanding, and sense, which Mat. 22. is
helped with another word, for there is soul and mind both; (...).
whatsoever in his strength for outward attempt and performance, all the
affection of his heart, all the election of his soul, all the administration
of his body, the judgment and understanding of the soul as the Lady to the
rest, prosecution of his will, excecution of his strength; he wholly converteth
it to show his service and obedience to almighty God. Bernard in a sermon of
Loving God, and in his 20. upon the Canticles, expounds those words of the
law thus, thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, that is, kindly,
and affectionately; Dulciter. affectuos^. ^r^denter* fortiter, constanter, etc.
with all thy soul, that is, wisely and discreetly; with all thy might, that
is, steadfastly and consta^tly. Let the love of thy heart inflame thy zeal
toward (...), let the knowledge of thy soul guide it, let the constancy of
thy might conf^^me it. Let it be fervent, let it be circumspect, let it be
invincible.

Lastly, the rule which he fastneth his eye upon, was the law of Moses,
According to all the law.
and the whole law of Moses; other rules are crooked and (...), this only is
straight: and as many as mind to please God, must (...) themselves wholly to be
directed thereby, not turning eith^^ to the right hand or to the left.

This history considered, I pray you what hinders the commandment and
government of the king both in causes and over persons of the church? For 1. in
the building of the temple, See the 2. of King. 22. and 23. and the 2. of
Chron. 34. and 35.
Josias gives direction both to Shaphan and Hilkiah what should be done: 2.
the book of the law is presented unto him; he commands both the priests and
princes to enquire of Huldah the prophetess about it; he weepeth, and re^deth
his clothes as the principal person who^ that danger and care does
principally concern: 3. he assembleth all the people both in Judah and
Jerusalem, the Chronicles add Jerusalem and Benjamin and all the countries that
pertained to the children of Israel, throughout his whole dominion, both small
and great, elders, priests, prophets, levites, both laity and Clergy: 4. he
reads the law in the house of the Lord: 5. he makes a covenant himself: 6.
takes a covenant of the people to keep it: 7. he causes al to stand unto it,
2. Chapter 34. and co^pelleth al in Israel to serve the Lord: 8. he ordains and
holds a passover, the like whereof was never seen since the day of the
Judges, nor in all the days of the Kings of Israel, and the kings of Judah, and
he apointeth the priests to their chardges 2. Chr. 35. and cha^dgeth the office
of the levites, that they should not bear the arc any more; so the priests
stood in their places, also the levites in their orders, iuxta regis imperium,
according to the co^mau^demnt of the king: 9. in the purdging of Idolatry, and
removing those swarms of idolatrous priests, with all their abominable service,
he commands Hilkith the high priest, and the priests of the second order to
do thus or thus. Mean while, the levite, the priest, the prophet, are not
wronged by the king in their callings. The king does the office of a king in
commanding, and they their offices in administering. He reads the book of
the covenant, (doubtless in person) and in the house of the Lord, but he
stands not on a pulpit of wood made for preaching, to give the sense of the
law, and to cause the people to understand it: for that belongs to Ezra the
Priest and to the Levites, Neh. 8. Again, he causes a passover to be held,
but he neither kills the passover, nor prepares the people, nor sprinckleth
the blood, nor fleaeth the breast, nor offers burnt offerings: for all this
he leaves to the sons of Aaron, yet is nothing done but iuxta praeceptum
regis Iosiae, according to the commandment of king Josias. Moreover, the
book of the Lord was his counsailour and instructour in all this reformation.
For so is the will of God, Deuteronomie the seventeenth, that a book of the law
should be written to lie by the king, to read therein all the days of his
life, that he might learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all his
laws. And in a matter of scruple he sends to Huldah the prophetess to be
resolved by her: and she does the part of a prophetess, though to her king and
liege Lord, tell the man that sent you unto me, thus says the Lord, behold, I
will bring evil upon this place, 2. King. 22.

By this it is easy to define, if the spirit of peace be not quite gone from
us, a question unnecessary to be moved, dangerous and costly to Christendom,
(the trial whereof has not lien in the ends of men's tongues, but in the
points of swords; and happy were these Western parts of the world, if so
much blood already effused, so many Emperors, Kings, Princes defeated,
deprived, their lives by poison, by treason, and other undutiful means
vnder-mined, their state deturbed and overthrowen, might yet have purchased an
end thereof; but the question still stands, and threatens more tragedies to
the earth,) Whither the king may use his authority in ecclesiastical causes and
persons? Who doubts it, that has an ear to hear the doings of Josias? He
is the first in all this business; his art, faculty, profession, authority,
immediate and next unto God, held from him in capite: not derived from beneath,
is architectonicall, supreme, Queen and co^mau^der of al other functions and
vocations; not reaching so far as to decree against the decrees of God, to make
laws contrary to his law, to erect sacraments or service fighting with his
orders, nor to ^surpe priestly and prophetical offices, nor to stop the
mouths of prophets, and to say unto them prophecy not right things: but
having the book of the law to direct him, himself to direct others by that
rule, and as the Priests instruct, the prophets admonish him in his place, so
himself to apoint and command them in their doings. What should I trouble
you? Josias as their Lord, master and king (...), assembleth, commands,
causes, compels, builds, pulls down, planteth, rooteth up, kills,
burns, destroys. What does Hilkiah in all this but obey? though higher
than all the priests because he was the high priest, yet lower than I^sias. Or
what does Huldah the prophetess, but pronounce the word of the Lord, her
person, possessions, family, liberty, life, all that she had, being otherwise
at the kings commandment? So let Samuel tell Saul of his faults, Nathan tell
David of his, Ahia Jeroboam, Elias and Micheas Ahab, Elizeus Iehoram, Jeremy
Zedekias, John Baptist Herod, Ambrose Theodosius, and al Christian Bishops and
priests their princes offenders. The state of the question (me seems) is
very significantly laid down in that speech of Constantine the Emperor to his
Bishops, you are Bishops within the church, and I a Bishop without the
church. Vo^ intra ecclesiam episcopi, ego extra ecclesia. Eusebius. de vita Constable.
4. (...). Heb. 13. (...). 1 Thessalonians. 5. (...).
They in the proper and internal offices, of the word, sacraments,
ecclesiastical censures, and he for outward authority and presidence; they as
over seers of the flock of Christ, he an over-seer of overseers; they as
pastors and fathers, he as a master and Lord to command their service; they
rulers and superiors in their kind, but it is rather in the Lord, than that
they are Lords over Gods inheritance; and their rule is limited to the soul,
not to the body, and consists in preaching the word, not in bearing the
sword: but he the most excellent, having more to do than any man. Lastly, to
them is due obedience and submission rather offered by their chardges than
enforced; to the other a subjection compelling and ordering the people whither
they will or no.

I will draw the substance of mine intended speech to these two heads: (...).
1. That the greatest honor and happiness to kings is to uphold religion: 2.
That the greatest dishonor and harm to religion is to pull down kings.

The former I need not stand to prove: they are happy realms in the midst
whereof stands not the capitol, The honor of kings is to uphold religion.
but the temple of the Lord. If this lie wast, unfurnished, unregarded, and men
be willing to cry, the time is not yet come, that the house of the Lord
should be builte or beautified, the plagues that ensue are without number:
heaven shall give no dew, earth no fruit, drought shall be upon mountains and
valleys, much shall be sown, little brought in, Hagg. ^.
and that little shall be blown upon and brought to nothing. But where the
prophecy is fulfilled kings shall be thy nursing fathers and Queens thy
nurses, in the nine and fortieth of Esaias, there, as the Queen of Saba blessed
both the people of Solomon and the king himself, so, happy is the church for
drawing her milk and sustenance from such heroical breasts, and happy are
those breasts that foster and nurse up the Church of Christ. They give milk
and receive milk, they maintain the Church and the Church maintains them,
they bestow favor, honor, patronage, protection, they are favored, honored,
patronaged and protected again. I will not stay to allege the fortunate and
happy governments of well disposed kings. The decrees of the king of Persia and
Babylon for repairing the temple, worshipping the God of the three children, or
the God of Daniel, brought more honor unto them than all their other laws.
The piety of Antonius Prus is very commendable for his gracious decree, that
none should accuse a christian because he was a christian. Constantius the
father of Constatifie the great, Si quis christiano quia christi. ^nus and*c
made more reckoning (he said) of those that professed christianity, then
full treasures. Iovianus after Julian, refused to be Emperor, albeit elected
and sought to the Empire, unless he might govern christians. Great
Coustantine and Charles the great, had their names of greatness not so much for
authority as for godliness. But on the other side, the books are full of the
miserable falls ofirreligious princes, their seed, posterity, whole race and
Image for their sakes overturned and wiped from the earth, at one would wipe a
dish, 2. Match 9.
and turn it vpside-downe. The name of Antiochus the tyrant stinketh upon the
earth as his bovveles sometimes stuncke; and as then the worms devoured his
loathsome carcass, so his other worm yet lives and cease not, crying to
all the persecutors under heaven, take heed. He thought to have made the holy
city a burying place, but when he savve his misery, then he vvoulde set it at
liberty. The Jews whom he thought not worthy to be buried, he vvoulde make
like the citizens of Athens, and the temple which he spoiled before, he would
garnish with great gifts. Likewise Galerius lying sick of a wretched disease,
cries to have the Christians spared, and that temples and oratories should be
allowed them, that they might pray for the life of the Emperor. The unripe,
vnseasonabl, unnatural deaths, of men more unnatural in their lives, the
monsters and curses of the earth they trod upon, the bane of the air they
drew, the rulers of the Jews and Romans, high Priests, Princes, Emperors,
and their deputies, that murdered the Lord of the vineyard, the son and the
servantes in the time of Christ and his Apostles, and by the space of three
hundred years, the workers of the ten persecutions, no means plagues to the
Christian faith than those ten plagues were to Egypt, or rather ten times
ten persecutions, for they were multiplied like Hydraes heads, proclaimed to
the Princes of succeeding ages, not to heave at Jerusalem, it is to heavy a
stone, lapis comminuens, a stone that where it falls will bruise to pieces;
nor to war against the Saints, to band themselves against the Lords
anointed, and against his anointed, the Church, unless they take pleasure to
buy it with the same price vvherevvith others have done before them, to have
their flesh stincke* upon their backs, and rotte from their bodies, to be
eaten up with lice and worms, to be slain, strangled, or burnt, some by
their own hands, some of their servantes, children, and wives, as is most
easy to prove in the race of 40. Emperors, the Lord getting honor upon
them, as he did upon Pharaoh by some unwonted and infamous destruction.
Heliogabalus thought by the policy of his head, to have prevented the
extraordinary hand of God, providing him ropes of silk, swords of gold,
poison in Iacinthes, a turtet plated with gold, and bordered with precious
stones: thinking by one of these to have ended his life. Notwithstanding he
died that death which the Lord had appointed.

The 2. thing which I limited my self unto, The dishonor of religion is to
pull down Kings.
that it is the greatest dishonor to religion to pull down princes, is as
easy to be declared. A thing which neither Moses in the old, nor Christ in the
new testament* and neither Priest high nor low, nor Levite, Prophet,
Eva^gelist, Apostle, christian Bishop, ever has taught, counseled, and much
less practiced, I say not against lawful magistrates, but not against
heathenish, infidel, idolatrous, tyrannous rulers, though by the manifest and
express sentence of God reprobated and cast of. Samuel offered it not to
Saul, a castaway, he lived and died a king; after the sentence pronounced
against him of an higher excommunication, than ever came from Rome* Samuel both
honored and mourned for him. 1. Sam. 15. Baruch. ^.
The captive Jews in Babilo^ wrote to their brethren at Jerusalem to pray for
the life of Nabuchodonozor; answerable to that advise which Jeremy gives the
captives in the 29. of his prophecy, though in words somewhat different, seek
the prosperity of the city, whither I have caused you to be carried away
captives, and pray unto the Lord for it, for in the peace thereof shall you
have peace. Daniel never spoke to the king of Babylon, but his speech savoured
of most perfect obedience: my Lord, the dream be to them that hate thee, and
the interpretation thereof to thine enemies: Dan. 4^
his words had none other season to Darius, though having cast him into the
Lions den, O King, live for ever. Dan. ^^
I never could suspect that in the commission of Christ given to his
disciples, there is one word of encouragement to these lawless attemptes; go
into the world, preach, baptize, loose, retain, remit, feed, take the keys,
receive the holy Ghost, what one syllable sounds that way? unless to go into
the world be to go and overrunne the world, to shake the pillars and
foundations thereof with mutinies and seditions, to replenish it with more than
Catilanary conspiracies, to make one Diocese, or rather one dominion and
monarchy subject to the Bishop of Rome; unless preaching may be interpreted
proclaiming of war and hostility, sending out bulls, thundering and lightning
against Caesar and other states; unless to baptize be to wash the people of
the world in their own blood; unless binding and loosing be meant of fetters
and shackles; retaining and remitting of prisons and wards; unless the
feeding of lambs and sheep be fleecing fleaing, murdering the king and the
subject, old and young; taking the keys, be taking of crowns and scepters;
and receiving the holy Ghost, be receiving that fiery and trubulent spirit
which our Saviovr liked not. Yea let them answer that saying (these priests
and successors of Romulus, Giants of the earth, incend^aries of the Christian
world) you shall be brought before governors and kings, and skouraged in
their Councelles, if ever our Savior had mea^ing, governors and kings shall be
brought before you, Emperors shall kiss your feet, wait at your gates in
frost and cold, resign their crowns into your hands, and take their crowns
I say not at your hands but at your feet, and to your feet submit their
necks, and hold your stirrops, or that Princes should eat bread under your
tables like dogs. I shame almost to report, that a skar-crow in an hedge
should thus terrify Eagles. Where was then the effect of that prayer which
David made in the Psalm, O Lord give thy judgment unto the king, when the
kings of the earth were so bewitched and enchanted with that cup of
fornication? Christ, though the judge of the quick and dead, refused to be a
judge in a private inheritance, who made me a judge or divider over you? Luke
12.
these will be judges and disposers of Kingdoms, Empires, Dukedomes, and put
Rodolph for Henry, Pipin for Childericke, one for another at their pleasures.
And when they have so done no man must judge of their actions: why? because the
disciple is not above his master. Let not a priest give an accusation against
a Bishop, not a Deacon against a priest, Mass^nut in vita S^lve. stri. ^.
not a subdeacon against a Deacon, not an Acolyth against a subdeacon, not an
exorcist against an Acolyth, but as for the highest prelate he shall be judged
by no man, because it is written, non est discipulus etc. So did the Devil
apply the scriptures. Romans 13.
The Apostles all concur in one manner of teaching; let every soul be
subject to the higher powers: he means of temporal powers, because they
bear the sword, and require tribute: and Chrysostom expounds it of all
sorts of souls, both secular and religious. Submit your selves to every
ordinance of man, fear God, honor the king: 1. Pet. 1. 1. Tim. 2.
let prayer and supplcation be made for all men, for kings and those that are
in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life under them. This is
the sum of their doctrine. Now either the Bishop of Rome has not a soul to
be subject, or he is a power above all powers, and must command others. And so
in deed he usurps; abusing that place of the Psalm, Omnia subiecisti sub
pedibus eius, thou have put all things in subjection under his feet, all
sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the field. Where by oxen are meant Jews
and heretics, An^oninus*
by beast of the field Pagans and infidelles, by sheep Christian both kings
and subjects, by birds of the air, Angels in heaven, by fishes in the sea,
souls in purgatory. I do wrong to your sober ears to fill them with such
fables; but subjection I am sure they deny, if the whole world should be filled
with books legal and Evangelicall to admonish them. Nay they will take both
the law and gospel, and make them speak vanity, blasphemy, mere
contradiction, rather than want authorities to uphold their kingdom. Thus when
Adrian set his foot in the neck of the Emperor, he alleged the words of the
Psalm, thou shall tread upon the adder and the basiliske etc. The Emperor
highly sinned that he had not a sting to thrust forth against him, and to tame
his pride. John the 22. perverted the words of Christ to this purpose, behold,
I have set theeover kingdoms etc. Innocentius the 3. fetches a prophecy of
his usurped Hierachie from the first creation: God created two light in the
firmament of heaven; so in the firmament of the earth two rulers; a greater
light, and a lesser light, that is, the Pope and the Emperor; the one to
govern the day, the other the night, that is, the Pope to govern the Clergy,
the Emperor the laity: and for this cause, they say, to show the difference,
the Pope has his unction on the head, the Emperor but on his armes^ To leave
their glosses and devises, let us harken to their practice. What a strange
commandment was that which Gregory the 7. sent forth? we command, that no
man of what condition soever he be, Mandanus^ ne quisqua^^ Audeat. Platina i^
his life.
either king or Archbishop, Bishop, Duke, Earl, Marquis, or Knight be so
hardly to resist our legates: if any man do it, we bind him with the bond of a
curse, not only in his spirit, but in his body and all his goods. In
excommunicating the Emperor then being, Imperatoris administratione, regia ^
deiicio etc.
he used this form, Henry the king, son of Henry late Emperor, I throw
down from all both imperial and royal administration: and I absolve from
their oath of obedience all christians subject to his authority: and being
requested to use more mildnes in proceeding to excommunicate him, answered for
himself, when Christ committed his church to Peter, and said, feed my sheep,
did he exempte kings? afterward he calls upon Peter and Paul, Excipitu^ eges?
and says unto them, go to now, and so use the matter, that all men may
understand, if your selves have power to bind and loose in heaven, that we may
have also power on earth, both to take away and to give, Empires, kingdoms,
principalities, and whatsoever mortal men may have. Et quic quid habere
mor^ale^ possunt. Tyraenu^ sacerdotum. Regum ter^^^.
Boniface the 8. whom Benevenutus called the tyrant over Priests. Petrarch the
terror of kings, n^m^d himself the Lord not only of France, but of the whole
world, Philip surnamed the fair, the^ king of France advised him not to use
that kind of speech to the overthrow of his kingdom. Hence grew all those
stirs and tumultes between them. It is a notable admonition which Massonus
there gives in the knitting up of his life, I vvoulde wish the Bishops of
the city not to make kings their enemies, who are willing to be their
friends; for let them not think that they are sent from GOD as bridles unto
kings, Velu^ equos ^^tractatos. Minari, terrefacere. arm^ ciere, episcopos non
dec^t.
to master them at their pleasure as wild and unbroken horses; let them
admonish and pray them and there hearty prayers shall be insteede of commanding:
but to threaten, terrify, raise up arms, is not beseeming Bishops. Platina
concludes him almost to the same effect; thus dies Boniface, whose endeavors
evermore were, rather to bring in terror than religion upon Emperors, kings,
princes, nations, and peoples.

This Platina was a professed catholic, living within a college at Rome,
that you may the less think the author willing to s^aunder them. On a time,
when Paul the second went about to pull down that college, he besought
the Pope that the matter might first be heard before the masters of the
rowels or other like judges: Jn vita Pauli 2.
itane, a^t? nos ad iudices revocas? What? Is it come to this, says he?
do thou call us back unto judges? do thou not knovvs that all the laws
are placed in the shrine of my breast? Innocentius the sixth sends Carilas a
Spanish Cardinal, but withal a cardinal warrior, into Italy to recover
Saint Peter's parrimonie if prayers were vnavaileable, Arma son^ po^^^ificum
pe^fug^a, cu^ p^^ees non servi^nt. Massonut.
by force of arms: for arms are the succors of Popes, when prayers will
not serve. Innocentius the seventh had a meeker spirit, of whom Bap^ista
Fulgosus vvrireth, that such idle hours as he had, he bestowed in pruning his
orcharde, and wishes that other Popes had done the like, who were better
pleased with making war; for it is fitter for the Bishopes of Rome to prune
orchardes than men. Julius the 2. who from Iulianus turned his name to Julius,
Hort^s enim putare non homines epi, Romans decet. Vt referret Julium. Jndignum
Levitas servire etc. Summus pontifex Julius belligeratur, vin cit, triumphat,
etplane Iulium agit. Si Caesaer potius quam Pont. Max. fuisset. Massonus. Summi
pontificatus arcem rego. Solebant primi ex hoc statu ad martyrium peti etc.
Brevis est hominum vita, regum brevior, pontificum brevissima.
that he might somewhat match himself with Julius Caesar, was wont to say, It
is a base thing that the Levites should serve and be in subjection, who
rather are meet to govern other men, Erasmus being at Bonony in his time,
thus writes to his friend; At this present, studies are very cold in Italy,
wars very hot: Julius the highest Bishop, fights, vanquisheth,
triumphs, and plays the part of Julius indeed. Worthy of immortal fame
(says the author of the history) if he had been the Emperor, rather than
the Pope of Rome.

To conclude, I will but add what Petrarch an Italian, and countrie-man of
their own, and one whom Innocentius would feign have had to have been his
secretary, writes of the Pope by way of dialogue. Pope. I hold the tower or
sway the honor of the highest prelacie. Petrarke. The first were wont to be
taken from this estate to Martyrdom, now they think they are called to
pleasure, therefore they strive so much for the place. Pope. I am the Pope of
Rome. Petr. Thou art called the servaunt of servauntes, take heed thou make
not thy self the Lord of Lords, remember thy profession, remember thy debt,
remember thy Lord, who justly is angry with none more than with his Vicar
or deputy: With many other free and friendly exhortations of the like
force. Now if their spirits be so mighty and untamed, let them exercise
them at home, with mutual insidiations, contentions, depositions,
murtheringes, poysonings, and other vnpriestly and violent supplantations
amongst themselves. And if ever that judgment were true which Petrarch gave,
that the life of men is short, of kings shorter, of Popes shortest of all,
let it be true still; yea let all Babylon fall and let the seat of Antichrist
be razed to the ground; but God for his own glory, and for his gospel and
Churches sake, establish the thrones, strengthen the hands, lengthen the
days, preserve the lives, honor the faces of all religious and virtuous
Princes.

Because my text stands wholly in comparison betwixt Josias and other
kings, give me leave, I beseech you, in few words, for the advauncement of
Gods blessed name, whose goodness we are highly bound to acknowledge, a
testimony of mine own dutiful heart, and a further animation, to you my
brethren, and the children of this land to continue your obedience and faith,
to make some little comparison, betwixt good king Josias, and gracious fire of
the Lord, with whose zeal he was enflamed, Elizabeth of his rest, both
because she reposeth her self in his strength, and for that the quiet and
tranquillity of this Land was by her happy government restored. O altar altar
etc. Behold, a child shall be borne to the house of David, Josias by name; and
upon thee shall he offer the priests of the high places etc. and undoubtedly
they presaged much of the abolishinge of altars and priests, under the reign
of Queen Elizabeth, who labored to The king commanded that no account
should be taken of them for they did their work faithfully. It had not
been possible to have repaired the ruins of defaced religion within this
land, without the advice and assistaunce of as faithful a Counsel, and as
zealous Priests: of which though many were cast out for a time from their
native country, into Germany and other foreign parts, as a distempered
stomach cannot endure to keep wholesome meats in it, yet they were brought
home again with honor as banished Ieptha was, and deservedly preferred to the
highest dignities of our Church. Such Nobles and priests, as she then had,
Centum administrant negotia reipsed vix. 5. aut 8. promovent, caeteri impediunt.
the Lord for ever bless her with; least it be said of this kingdom, as
sometimes of the Court of Maximilian, An hundredth have to deal in the affairs
of the common wealth, but skarsely five or but eight at the most help them
forwards, all the rest are hinderers. 6. Josias pulled down altars, priests,
groves, high places, houses of darkness and banishmente the testamentes of her
God, not only hidden and buried in an unknown tongue, but in corners and
holes laid up, and forbidden the light of heaven; restoring both the letter
of the book to a vulgar language, and her people to freedom of conscience,
who might not read before, but privily an^ by stealth, eat stolen bread.
Finally, Josias was directed in al^^is ways by the book of the law: and no
other star guided the heart of our gracious Esther. Josias caused the book
of the law to be openly everlasting gospel to be preached throughout all
her realms and dominions. Josias makes a covenant himself, and turned to the
Lord, with all his heart So whither her beautiful feet have not taken a
contrary course to that wherein others had walked before her, and turned like
the waters of Jordan, when Israel went over it, not only the people of this
land, but almost of whole Christendom swimming away apace in a full flood of
Popish superstition; and vvhither to the Lord alone, Angels and Saints
omitted, who in the consciences and opinions of men had set their seats by the
seat of Almighty God, and said, we will be like unto him in worship; and
vvhither with all her heart and with all her soul, and with all her might
etc. whom neither the curses of Popes, nor the banding of the Princes of the
earth crying a confederarcie, a confedeacie against her, nor practices without
her realm, nor rebellions within, nor the dissoialtie of male-contented
subjects, nor treachery within her Court and almost in her bosom, did ever
affright, at least not shake from her first love, as they have done other
princes, and cause to deal vnfaithfullye with the covenants of God; let all
the people of the earth so far as the fame of her constancy might be blown,
witness with me. Now there are also some differences, heaping more honor and
favor upon the head of our Sovereign Lady, than befell Josias. For albeit
Josias began to reign sooner, yet she has longer continued. And where Josias
reigned but 31. years, she has accomplished the full number of 37. within
few months of her fathers time. And whereas Josias but in the eighthy ear of
his reign, began to seek the God of his father David, in the twelfth to
purdge Jerusalem, and in the eightenth to repare the house of the Lord; this
chosen handmaid of the most High, ^ith the first beginning of her kingdom
began to set up the kingdom of God, and so incontinently proceeded to a full
reformation. Lastly, Josias was slain in battle for not hearkening to the
words of the Lord out of the mouth of Necho the king of Egypt. 2. Chro. 35.22.
But long and long may it be before Her eyes wax dim in her head, (...) her
natural force be abated. And when she is gathered to her fathers, (the
burden and woe whereof, if the will of God be, fall upon an other age) let
her go to rest with greater tokens of his favor, than ever to have fallen
into the hands of the king of Spain, or any the like enemy, as Josias fell
into the hands of the king of Egypt. But when that day shall come, which
God has decreed, and nature his faithful minister written down in her book
justly to observe; then (to go back again to an other member of comparison as
Josias was mourned for by all Judah and Jerusalem, 2. Chro. 35.
and Jeremy mourned for Josias, and all singing men and singing women mourned
for Josias in their lamentations to this day, and made the same lamentations
an ordinance in Israel, and they were also written in their lamentations, and
became a common word amongst them: for whenever afterward, there was
taken up any great lamentation, it was sampled and matched with that of
Hadadrimmon, Zach. 12.
in the field of Megiddo: so look for mourning from all the ends of our
land, complaining in the streets of every city, and crying in the chambers
of every house, alas for the day of the Lord; it is come, it is come; then
shall the kindred of the house of David, Ibid.
and their vviues mourn aparte by themselves. The kindred of the houses of
Nathan and Levi and their wives apart by themselves. Then shall all the orders
and companies of this Realm from the honorable counsailour to him that draws
water to the camp, from the man of gray hairs to the young child, that
knovveth but the right hand from the left, plentifully water their cheeks,
and give as just an occasion of Chronicles and Proverbes to future times, as
the mourning for Josias. For to fold up all other comparisons in one, and to
draw them home to my text, not only betwixt her and Josias, but other her noble
progenitors and Lords of this Island* Like unto her, was there no King or
Queen before her. And those that shall write hereafter in the generations to
come, shall be able as justly to supply the other part, Neither arose there
after her, any that was like unto her. And I verily persuade my self, that as
the Lord was angry with Judah and Jerusalem, and threatened to bring evil upon
them, yet differred to execute that judgment, in the days of Josias, with
promise of a peaceable burial, and that his eyes should not see that evil;
so he spares our country for his anointed sake, and reserveth his just and
determinate plagues against us to the days of some of her successors, and
when he has shut up her eyes in peace, then will begin to open our judgments.

I will not put you in fear with the fatal periode of kingdoms, which many
both Philosophers and Divines more than imagine* conceaving by reason, that as
in the bodies of men and other living creatures, so these politic bodies of
Monarchies, Empires, kingdoms and other states, there is a beginning and a
strong age, a declination and full point; and by many experiments bearing
themselves in hand, that their alterations have commonly fallen out not much
over or under 500. years. From the erecting of the kingdom of Israel under
the hand of Saul, to their going into Babylon, they say, were four hundredth
and nineteen years. The Consuls of Rome continued 462. the Monarchy
flourished 454. Constantinople was the seat of the Roman Emperor 489. La
Noue when he wrote his military and politic discourses observed the like
number of time in their kingdom of France from the days of Hugh Capetz. The
stay of the Saxons in England is esteemed there abouts. And since the time of
the Norman conquest the seventy and seven weeks of Daniell, that is, 70. times
7. years are fulfilled, and God has added thereunto, as the fifteen years
of Ezechias, and as the surplusage of his love, only the happy reign of our
liege Lady and Mistress that now rules. But as the Apostle spoke in his
Revelation, Here is wisdom, If any man may have wisdom enough, let him
account the number of kingdoms in this sort. For it may be the number of
God himself, and he has reserved it to his own knowledge. But in open and
simple terms, I will show you what the periods and stoppes of kingdoms are.
Propter peccata populi erunt multi principes, For the sins of the people the
prince shall often be chandged; Prove. 28.
and in likelyhoode the people it self for the same cause. The Lord has tied
himself no farther to the kings sons and seed after him, than with this
reasonable and dutiful condition, if they shall keep my testimonies. And he
often threatened his people, if they provoked him with strange Gods, to
provoke them again with a strange people and to drive them out of the good
land, vvhither he sent them to dwell, as he had driven out others. All those
remooues and chandges that we read of in the book of God, and in other
histories, the emptying of the land of Canaan from her natural inhabitants,
deposing of one state and setting up an other, deviding the tribes, raising
kingdom against kingdom, the untimely deaths and deprivations of princes,
the disinheriting and displacing of the eighte line, leading into captivity
from country to country as it were povvring from vessel to vessel, sometimes
no king at all, sometimes many, sometimes wicked, sometimes a babe, sometimes a
stranger of a fierce countenance and unknown language, all the commo^ions and
perturbations of kingdoms, invasions of kings one upon the others dominions,
rebellions of subjects, and so much of Christendom at this day buried in the
very bowels of Turcisme and infidelity, yea, the extirpation of the Jews, and
planting of the Gentiles upon their stock, and hereafter the casting out of
the Gentiles, and filling of the Jews again, they are al rightly and orderly
derived from the former cause. For the sins of the people, the princes, the
people themselves, the government, the policy, the religion, the peace, the
plenty of the land shall often be chandged.

We have long and faithfully preached against your sins, the dissolvers, you
see, of kingdoms and commonweals, that if it were possible, we might bring
them also to their periode, and set some number and end of them. Will you not
be made clean? when shall it once be? But if our preachings cannot move you,
he that in times past at sundry times and in sundry manners spoke unto our
fathers, has also sundry voices, and sundry kinds of preachers to speak unto
you. You hear, that the chandge of a Prince is one of his Preachers. It shall
preach more sorrow unto you, more wringing of your hands and rending of your
hearts, than ever erst you were acquainted with. Remember the vision that
Michaeas saw, all Israel scattered like sheep, because their king was taken
from them; and think how woeful a day it will be, when this faithful
shepherd of ours, which has fed her Jacob with a true heart;

Formosi pecoris Custos form^sior ipsa, an happy Queen of an happy people (the
Lord yet saving both her and us with the healthful power of his right hand)
shall be pulled from us. We have hitherto lived in peace, equal to that in
the days of Augustus, such, as our fathers never saw the like, and when we
shall tell our childrens children to come thereof, they will not believe it.
We have sitten at ease under the shaddowe of our vines: nay, under the shadow
of this vine we have shaded and solaced our selves, and lived by her sweetness.
But it may fall out, that as when the Emperor Pertinax was dead, they cried
with redoubled showtes into the air, till they were able to cry no longer,
while Pertinax lived and governed, Vsque ad defectum. Pertina^e Jmperante
securi viximus* neminem timuimus. Aurelius Victor.
we lived in safety, and feared no man; so we may send our late and
helpelesse complaints into heaven, O well were we in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, when perfect peace was the walls of our country, and the malice of
the enemy prevailed not against us. The sword of a foreign foe, bands, and
captivitye is an other of his preachers. Will you not feel the warnings of
Gods wrath, till the iron have entered into your souls and drawn blood after
it? you know who it is that hangs over your heads; of whom and other
princes I may say as they said in Athens of Demades and Demosthenes their
orators, Demosthenes is meet for Athens, Demosthene^ par Atheni^ Demades
mayor.
justly assised and fitted to the city, Demades overgreat; so when other
kings hold themselves contended with their kingdoms, he is too great for
Spain, and many other kingdoms and Dukedomes cannot suffice him, but he yet
devoureth in hope all the dominions of Christendom, and drinks down with
insatiable thirst the conceit of a Monarch: and for this cause there is a
busye spirit gone forth in the mouths of all his Prophets, Vnus Deus, vnus
Papa, vnus rex Christianismi, Magnus rex Catholicus, and vniversalis: There is
but one God, one Po^e, one King of Christendom, the great and Catholic and
universal King. He has once already buckled his harness unto him with
joy, and assured presumption of victory. But they that pulled it of (by
outstretched arm of one more mighty than himself) more rejoiced. God grant
that they be not found in England, who have said upon that happy and
miraculous event in discomfiting his forces, we will trust in our bovves,
and our swords and spears shall hereafter deliver us. There touching of
late in Cornevvale, the utmost skirt of our land, no doubt, was some little
warning from God. But it was no more unto us* than if the skirt of our cloak
had been cut away, as it was to Saul; we say our skin is not yet
rased. The commotion in Irelande, though a quicker and more sensible
admonition, is but a dagger held to our side, and till the point thereof
stick in our heart, till there be firing of our towns, ransackinge of our
houses, dashinge of our infants against the stones in the streets, we will
not regard. O cease to incense the jealous God of heaven. Turn not his grace
and mercy into wantonness. Let not his strength be an occasion unto you to
make you vainly confident; nor his peace, licenciouslye secure, nor the
abundance of his goodness, abundant and intolerable in transgressing his
laws. And if there were no other reason to make you tremble before his face,
yet do it for your own politic good (because you are threatened by a deadly
enemy, 1. Chr. 25.
who accompteth himself the cedar, and us but the thistle in Libanon, and
whose power is not contemptible, though God has often cast him down)
Neveuiant Romani and auferant regnum a nobis, at least that the Romans and
Spaniardes, for they are brethren in this case, come not upon us by the
righteous sufferaunce of our God, and take away our kingdom. Surely our sins
call for a skourdge, and they shall receive one. For they even whip and torment
the patience of God. The arrows of death are prepared against us, and they
shall shine with our gall, if with humble repentance we prevent them not. Our
pride calls for humiliation, she is ascended on high, and asks, who shall
fetch me down? yet I have red of those whose wimples, and calls, and
perewigges have been turned into nakedness and baldnes, and they have run too
and fro, smiting their breasts, and tearing the hair of their heads,
suffering it to be blown about their ears with the wind, and not regarding to
bind it up so much as with an haire-lace. Our clocks are not well kept,
Horologium been ordinatum, camini boni.
nor our chimneyes good (which I have heard to be two signs of a well ordered
common wealth,) that is, our hours are misspent, our callings not followed, and
the breathing of the chimneies is choked up, hospitality and relief to the
poor almost banished. The poorer have had their plagues already, skarsitie of
bread within these few years often renewed. Their teeth have been clean^ and
white through want of food, when yours have been furred with excess of meats
and drinks. But rich men and gentlemen, look also for your draught in the cup
of the Lord, either some mortal sickness to your bodies to eat up your flesh,
as you have eaten others, and then whose shall these things be, which with so
much sweat of your brows, carefulnes of heart, wrack of conscience, breach of
charity, wrong to humane societies, you have laid together ^or some barbarous
and unmerciful souldior, to lay open your hedges, reap your fields, rifle
your coffers, Barbarus has segetes.
level your houses with the ground, and empty you and yours out of all your
possessions, as you have emptied your poor neighbors.

Your merciless money exactions, you the infamous usurers of the North of
England, you the Jews and Iudases of our land that would sell Christ for money
if he were amongst you, you the engrossers of grain in this time of death,
and withal the engrossers of your own woes, on whom the curse of the poor
lights, ratified in heaven, for not bringing forth your corn, you that add
affliction to affliction, and strengthen the hand of penury amongst us, use the
talents of the Lord not your own pounds, to the honorable advauntage of your
master and the durable gain of your souls, least ye become the usurers of
his vengance, and receive the wages of your unfaithfulness, an hundreth-fold.

The land mourns because of other, and they shall mourn that cause her
heaviness. Contempt of God, will take away our Gods of the earth, atheism and
anarchy, confusion of all estates, mingling of head and foot, will go
together.

O pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Pray for the peace of England. Let prayers
and supplications be made for all people, especially for Christian kings, most
especially for our sovereign Lady and Mistress. Let us fear God, and all
the enemies of the world, even the kingdom of darkness, shall fear us. Let not
our sins reign, and our Queen shall long reign over us. Buy the length of
her life with your silver and gold, you that are rich in this world, rich in
this land, distribute to the poor, scatter for Gods sake, and God that sees
from above, will be mindful of your good deeds, and prolong her Majesty's
days. Humble your selves in time you high-minded, and high-lookt, that her
horn may be exalted, and her root flourish amongst us, yet many years.
Traitors, forbear at length to plot your treasons, which have long bred,
never brought forth. The Lord is king, and his hand-maide is Queen, be the
earth never so impatient. Time-serving hypocrites, lay down your
dissimulations. How long will you halt between Rome and England? Rebels,
forsake and resign your unlawful arms. Say not, as those seditious did,
what part have we in the son of David? the son of David shall prevail,
and the daughter of King Henry prosper in all her ways, when your heads
shall lie low enough, and your swords shall have drunk their fill of your
own flesh. Let it suffice, you the untamed brood of our land, to have
blotted your memories with none other censure, than that which is written in
the book of God, that a band of soldiers follovved Saul whose hearts the
Lord had touched, 1. Sam. 10.
but they were wicked that cried, how shall he save us?

And you, my beloved brethren, and the true children of England, knit your
souls and tongues together, as if you were one man, and say with a strong
united cry, and a perfect heart, that God may regard it from above, O Lord
preserve Queen Elizabeth* And let AMEN even the faithful witness of heaven,
the word and truth of his father say Amen unto it. Even so Lord Jesus, Ame^,
Amen, harken to the prayers of they servants that go not our from fained
lips; let her ever be as neam unto thee as the signet upon thy finger, as
dear as the apple of thine eye, as tender as thine own bowels, water her with
the^ deaw of heaven as the goodliest plant that ever our country bare, hide her
like a chosen shafte in the quiver of thy carefullest providence, and give her
a long life ever for ever and ever, Amen.


