A SERMON PREACHED IN St. MARY'S at Oxford the 24. of March being the day of
his sacred Majesty's inauguration and Maundie thursday. BY JOHN KING Doctor of
Divinity, Deane of Christ Church, and Vicechancellor of the University.

At Oxford, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1608.

1. Chron. vlt. v. 26. 27. 28. 26 Thus David the Son of Ishaj reigned over
all Israel.

27 And the space that he reigned over Israel, was forty year: seven year
reigned he in Hebron and three and thirty year reigned he in Jerusalem.

28 And he died in a good age, full of days, riches* and honor, and Solomon
his Son reigned in his steed.


MY text is like the time which the Christian world now sole^nizeth, and shall
to the worlds end. Both are divided, text and time, into two parts* in the
former whereof is death, life in the later, corruption, dissolution in the one,
reparation and resurrection in the other. The difference is, that the subject
of the changes and vicissitudes in my text, are two different persons, David
and Solomon, Father and Son; one dies and gives over reigning, the other
begins his reign and lives on. But the subject of change in this
anniversary and perpetual rememoration is a David to [ inveni Davidem servum
meum, oleo Sancto meo vnxi eum, ver. 9. Psalm. 21.] and the Son of David [
Hosanna filio David, 2^. Math. 9.] and the successor of David, [ Dabit ei
dominus sedem David patris eius, 1. Luke 17.] But this David, and this Son
and successor of David, are one and the same person that both died and lived,
suffered and conquered, lost (in the eye of the world) and recovered his
kingdom.

I think my self happy that the coming so near together, of two such in
their several kinds so great festiuities (the foot of the one, you see,
treads upon the heel of the other, this feast which we now hold is the
vigilles and forerunner to that other feast) the celebration of one of which,
we owe as Christians, of the other, as the children of this Land, and English
subjects, gives me so just an occasion, together with my principal aim at
the one, to have a collateral, sidelong aspect at the other, and in the full
body of the one, which my purpose and task is to describe, to descrie some
shadow, sembla^ce of the other (for in them both, was the falling and rising
of a king, in the^ both, for the time both the bale and bliss of Israel) and
whilst I am casting my treasure (the richest of the riches of Gods spirit that
my sinful soul has received, the best of my meditations and speech) into the
treasury of this happy day, to which we all come to offer from the abundance
of our hearts and bounden duty we ought, and owe, to our David deceased, and
our Solomon that now is, I may also cast in a mite by the way, and for
introduction sake, in honor of my ever-blessed Savior, the king of kings, who
was dead and is alive, and lives for evermore Amen, and in remembrance of his
(...), world-sauing passion the price of our souls, and that his posthum^
immortalitas, conquest over death, after death, the precedent and pledge of our
eternal happiness.

How small an alteration of words will fit the whole frame and tenor of my
text, unto that other King, the antitype of David and Solomon? whose kingdom
was not of this world, he used no legions of Angels or me^, neither chariots
nor horsemen, he had no palace nor Court, not so much as the hole of a Fox to
couch in, no crown, but of thorns, no scepter, but reeds, noe throne, but
his cross; yet was he a king indeed, factus est principatus super humerum
eius, and Constitui regem meum super Sion, and held and styled to be a king,
yea 9. Es. 2. Psalm.
the king of the Jews, and that with a pen of adamant [ quod scripsi, scripsi]
what I have written I have written, and will not go from it. Thus then may we
read his story. Igitur Jesus filius David regnavit, etc. Thus Jesus the son
of David of the root of Js^ai reigned over al Israel (for to the house of
Israel was he sent) and the space that he reigned over Israel was (the later
of the two numbers in my text) three and thirty years. So long as he lived he
reigned simul filius, simul Caesar, a King from his birth where is he that is
BORNE king of the Jews? Thirty years reigned he in Hebron, a pri uate and
retired life under the name and habitt of a carpenters son, and three years
in Jerusalem, in the light and admiration of the whole world. And he died, the
good shepherd for the life of his sheep; J might say, after a pilgrimage of
few and evil days: in aetate non bona; and neither full of days for abscissus
est de terra viuentiu^ 53. Es. He was cut out of the land of the living, David
is said to have slept, because his death was natural, and quiet, this was
violent; nor full of riches, that had not a shroud, but lent him, to be wrapped
in, nor full of honor, that with many a vah, and wagging the head, and fie upon
thee, fie upon thee, crucify him, crucify him, was exiled the world; and so far
of from Solomon his son to reign in his stead, that is, from any hope of
successi^on, that the hearts of very disciples brake and they say one to
another Nos sperabamus, we hoped it had been he that should have restored
Israel 24. Luc. but our hope fails us as the summer waters. But J will keep
the line of my text, and say, in the language thereof, he died, not old, but in
a good age, having lived long enough, satis naturae, because, satis gratiae, to
purchase the good of his people, satis gloriae, to procure the glory of his
own name: full of days, for though he were soon dead ( non dimidiauit dies
suos) he saw not the half of threeskore and te^ years* *which is the life of a
man, yet fulfilled he much time. Full of riches. Lade^ with the spoils of the
Gentiles, and his bosom filled with the souls of his Saints (every soul
richer the^ a world) as a mowers with sheaues: full of honor, when the face of
whole nature changed at his death: the sun being clothed in black, the pillars
of the earth rocking, the veil of the temple rending her garments, and the
rocks not their garments, but their hearts, the graves of the dead opening
their more then bra^en gates, and disclosing their slain: finally death it
self vanquished, principalities and powers triumphed, Satan and his whole
kingdom trodden under foot. And after all this, not Salomo^, his Son, to
reign in his steed, but himself, a greater then Solomon, heir apparent to
his own kingdom, succeeder in his own throne, one and the self same Phoenix,
out of his own ashes rose and reigned over all Israel, and to the ends of the
earth, and of his kingdom shall there never be an end.

I come now to the prototypes, the right David and Solomon which my text
speaks of. Thus David the Division.
Son of Ishai, etc. Where you see there are two persons, David and Solomon;
and accordingly two parts, first the cession or decease of the one, secondly
the succession and supply of the other.

In the person of David, I observe especially the 2. David.
principal verbes, Regnauit, he reigned* and mortuus est, he died; for in these
two, is his whole story comprised.

Of the former it is said, Regnavit super vniversum Israelem. I will not so
much number as weigh my words.

But if super had stood alone in my text, and regnavit 1. Super.
had been away, it had attributed some dignity unto David more then others.
Where man is over but beasts, as the shepherd over his flock (which was
sometimes the case of David) and as Amos over his heardes; nay, where beasts
but over beasts, as the tallest and goodliest Be is over the Bees, and the
armies of Grasshoppers and Ants have their leaders, wheresoever super is found,
it imports a superiority, excellency, pre-eminence, and a kind of ability,
virtue and skill, which the inferiors submit themselves unto. Thus the mind is
over the body, reason over the appetite, the head over the foot, the Sun and
Moon over the rest of the stars, because God has enriched, magnified them,
with some greater measure of grace, and dignified them with a note of honor
more then others.

But here is more then a super in my text: a superiority 2. Regnauit super.
Senec.
supreme, (...), an high commanding authority, man over man [ nullum morosius
animal, nec maiori art tracta^dum] not as a father is over his sons, nor a
Lord over his servants, nor a captain over his hundreths and fifties, over
limited and determinate chardges, not by judicature alone as Samuel and the
Judges, nor by way of Lieutenantship, deputation, subordinate prefecture
whatsoever, but as a King over subjects. Regnavit, he reigned: a proconsul,
viceroy for God, a mortal God, imago (the next, and most glorious upon earth)
administrantis omnia Dei; able to say of himself, Ego ex omnibus mortalibus
placui, electusque sum, qui in terris deorum vice fungerer: I am chosen Id.
out of thousands, to sit in the seat of God, and execute his judgments. 3.
Super Israelem.


There is yet more. Super Israele^. Og was king over Basan, Seon over the
Ammorits, and others over other the kingdoms of Canaan. Infamous kings,
infamous kingdo^s, the names of the one written, the carcasses of the other,
laid and buried in the earth. Great Assuerus over an 127. provinces, the great
Emperor of the Turks over 72 kingdoms, 3. Empires, to omit the rest, were not
comparable to David, reigning over Israel. The August.
rest are populus non populus, by the phrase of the holy ghost; turba that is,
turbata multitude* a body without an ey, Israel is the people, the peculiar,
the inheritance, the beloved treasure, the Son, the first borne of the Lord,
and the king over Israel, primogenitus regum, excelsus 89. Psalm. 27*
praeregibus terrae: where though there be not multiplicata gens, as else
where, yet is there magnificata laetitia, less store of people, more abundance
of grace, not vasta eremus, a wast desert, but ciuitas vnita, ornata Sparta,
hortus aromaticus, ager cui benedixit dominus 27. Genesis 7. a City at unity in
it self, a sanctified Country, a garden of spices, a field that the Lord has
blessed, as having the true worship and fear of the Lord, and the book of the
Law of God to direct both the king as touching his ordinances, and the people
concerning their obedience: where the king is not as in other countries, only
murorum, for outward and bodily 4. Super vniuersu^ Isr*
defense, but sacrorum also, to see to the honor and service of God, Rex idem
hominum Christique sacerdos. There yet remains a fourth point to make up a
quadrate and perfitt honor of the king, and blessing of God upon him* and that
is super vniuersum Isr. over al Israel. There are, that are but reguli, or
regij, (...) as the 4. of Ioh. such as in likelihood were the 31. Kings that
fought against Iosuah 12. Ios. and those other five that Abraham followed and
put to flight only with his household servants, and in the opinion of some
writers, the 3. friends of Job, and those 3. supposed kings of Colen of whom
Caesar Baronius, (the Casar, and Dictator of writers, as one terms him)
reports, that by an accustomable phrase of scripture, they may be termed
Kings, as Lords are wont to be of several towns, and cities. David, far
differently, is king over all Israel* Not as Charles the 7. of France, being
excluded, the rest of his Kingdom, was called in sport Rex Biturigum. Rex sine
terra, not as Saul at the first, when but a band of men followed him, whose
heart, the Lord had touched, the other asked, how shall he save us? Not as David
himself whilst 1. Sa^. 10. 27
Isboseth, usurps against him: David is King over al Israel. So as hitherto
he is, 1. a principal man, a go uernour, and superior, because super; 2. a
principal superior, a King, because regnauit; 3. a principal king, because
super Israelem; 4. an obsolute monarke, a sole and a whole king, because
regnauit super vniuersum Isr. These are the 4. wheels, whereupon the height of
his honor runs: witness the Lord himself, when he capitulateth with him.
2. Sam. 12. 7. after this manner. I have anointed thee king over Israel, and
have given thee the house of Israel and Judah, and siparua sunt ista, if this
be too little (as indeed, it was very great) then J will give thee much more.

Now we have seen the honor, let us a while examine the person, on whom it is
co^ferred. Regnavit super Person.
vniversum Israelem, who? Filius Isai. The Son of Isai. Where is Jonathan the
mean time, or some other of the Sons of Saul, the king his predecessor? at
leastwise, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, from whence their first king was
taken? Who is this Isai, that his Son should be advanced to the kingdom? The
most that I find of him in the book of God is, that he was an Ephrathite of
Bethleem Judah, et erat vir 1. Sa^. ^7 1^. 1. Sa^. 18, 1^
in diebus Sanl senex, and gra^daevus inter viros, that is, at the uttermost
(with the help of the English marginal note,) accounted among them that bare
office. David himself when first the eldest daughter of Saul, Merab, was
profferred unto him at his combat with Goliath, asked, Quis ego sum? Who am I?
or what my condition, or what the kin^ed of my father in Israel, that I should
be son in Law to the King? Afterward when Michel was designed to him and
the servants of the King ^. 23.
were sent to prove him, his answer was, seems it a small thing unto you to
become son in law to the king? Ego autem sum vir pauper and tenuis. To
conclude, The Son of Isai, grew in the end, to be a proverb and word of
reproach, as in the speech of Saul to the Beniamites, Hear now ye sons of
Iemini, will the son 1. Sam. 22. 7
of Isai give every one of you fields and vineyards, etc. that ye have all
conspired against me? So Doeg the Edomite, when he complained of Ahimelech and
the Lords Priests. I saw (said he) the son of Isai there: it was Ibid. 9.
the best title he would vouchsafe him.

But admit, the son of Isai must be king over Israel. David filius Isai.
Why David filius Isai, this son of Isai more then all the rest? If Eliab the
son of Isai, in whom Samuel the Seer saw enough to enable him to the
kingdom, surely the anointed of the Lord is before him, his 1. Sam. 16. 6
primogeniture, stature, many things making thereunto, or if Abinadab the
second, or Shammah the third, or any one of the eldest, it might less have
been wo^dred at. Are there no more but these? said Samuel; the father
answered, Adhuc reliquus est parvulus, and pascit oves. There is yet behind a
little one, that keeps my sheep. But that gleaning, is more then all the
other harvest: reliquiae salvabuntur, and reliquiae regnabunt. This same
reliquus, and parvulus, and pastor ovium, this little, and least, and absent,
neglected, unsanctified, not called to the sacrifice, scarce ever thought upon,
must be king over Jsraell. So the Lord himself puts him in mind of the
best that he saw in him, Ego tulite de pascuis sequentem greges. What shall we
say to this, 2. Sam. 7. 8
but that he who is rex regum, and dominuus dominantium, and Deus Deorum, ens
entium, and causa causarum, God and Lord over all, and as dominus vitae, to
give us breath and being, so dominus gloriae, to bring us to promotion; he
whose throne is the heaven of heavens, and the earth his footstool, whose
garment Majesty, and his diadem perfect beauty, and the scepter of his
kingdom, a scepter of equity, who sits upon the circle of the earth, and
divides this punctum among the sons of men, whose privilege and right
unquestionable, is, per me reges regnant, and his might unconquerable, Dominus
regnavit, ira^cantur populi. The Lord is King be the people never so impatient;
he that puts down the mighty from their seat, and exalts the humble and
meek, that sets servants on horse back, and makes Princes to walk on
foot, which Eccles. 10.
lifts the poor out of the dust, and places them with the Kings of the
earth, which weighs the Kings in a balance, and finds them to light, and
makes the judges of the earth vanity, nothing, as if they had never 40. Esd.
been planted, never sown; Finally, he at whose feet, the Kings in the
Revelation cast down their Crowns, as if in effect they said, Non nobis
Domine non nobis, Lord these are not ours, we took them at thy hands, thine
is the kingdom, and power, and glory, for ever and ever: I say, he that is
all in all, to show the liberty of his actions and soveraigntie of his power,
and that promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, but from
himself alone, chooses the weak things of the world, to confound the
strong, etc: and things that in comparison, are not, to bring to naught things
that are. If Jonathan had been elected to the kingdom, he might have said,
Dignitas mea electa est: if Eliab, at as mea electa est. God respects
neither. With him are old and young, noble and ignoble, weak and strong, all
alike. For as he gives the place, so grace also; annointeth both with oil,
and with his Spirit; inuesteth into honor, and inspireth with ability for
government, both at once. For so it is said, that from that date forward,
(that the oil was powered upon his head) the Spirit of the Lord prospered or
grew exceedingly, upon David. Marvelous is the dispensation of God in the
disposition of earthly kingdoms. Some reign by Usurpation, some by election,
some by succession, some by acquisition and purchase of sword, some by
sortition or augurie, some by imposition from men, as Herod was put upon the
Jews, others from God, as Saul appointed over Jsraell. Some are borne of
Kings, and no Kings: other, Kings, that had not Kings to their Fathers. Some,
nati ad regnum, heirs apparent to the Crown, yet miss it, others, nati
regno* of whom the world never thought. The wheel of Gods providence is ever
in motion, and holds a strange course, according to the verse: Regnavi (says
one King in his declination) regno (says an other in his possession, and at
the height of the wheel) regnabo, (says a third in his ascension) sum sine
regno, the fourth cast out of his kingdom. David was neither, natus ad regnu^,
borne to a kingdom, nor any Son of a king, had no one suffrage in election,
pretended no title to succession in the earth, much less sought to be king by
intrusion, yet by imposition and ordination from God, is appointed king over
Israel. Hitherto you have heard, I that the son of Isai, 2. David the son
of Isai, 3. was over, 4. reigned over, 5. Verse, 27.
Israel, 6. all Israel. It follows. And the space that he reigned over
Israel, was 40. years, seven years reigned he in Hebron, and 33. years
reigned he in Jerusalem. So as, he not only reigned, but reigned long, to
weete, forty years, the time allowed by God, to many, the worthiest Judges and
kings. Gedeon judged Israel 40. years, David was king 40; Solomon his son
40; Asa 40, Queen Elizabeth 40 and vpwardes; our Gracious Sovereign that now
is, over Scotland already 40 with advantage. J hope our Kalenders, and
Chronicles, shall report to posterity, over England, no less. Amen. sic
loquatur dominus Deus domini mei regis. It was the word of Benaias 1. Reg. 1.
36. Saul Act. 13. is also said to have reigned 40. years, but by the judgment
of the learned, twenty of those years must Abulen.
be accounted to the judicature of Samuel. It is a sign that they honored
patre^ saeculi the father of eternity, and with their gouerme^t blessed their
mother, and native contry, that their days were so long, not only of life, but
of reign, in the Land which the Lord their God gave the^. 10. Eccle. Petrarch.
Omnis potent atus vita breuis, says the son of Sirach. Hominum breuis, regum
breuior, and (by later experience it was found) pontificum breuissima. Men live
not long, kings a shorter time, Popes, shortest of al, of some of which might
be verified (as Tully sometimes spoke of their Consul) habuimus vigilantes
pontifices, they skarse ever slept in the room. David by the favor of God,
both lives, and reigns long. For the clearer distinction, and elucidation of
the times, it is added, seven years in Hebron, which was as it were, the 2.
Sam. 5. Abulen.
childhood, and apprentiship of his government; (the story adds 6 months
more, but scriptura non curat de minimis: albeit there were some kings, that
attained not to his 6 months, for Shallum reigned but a month, Iehoiakim,
but three, Zacharias, but six* and J could name you well nigh seven Kings,
that fulfilled not his seven years: and three and thirty years reigned he
in Ieru salem, that is to say, built his tabernacle in the sun, which was but
that just time, that he lived and reigned upon earth, cuius regnum is regnu^ in
145. Psalm.
saeculum, and dominium eius a generatione, in generationem. Et mortuus est,
and he died. J have noted unto you verse. 28.
strange compositions before. The son of Isai rigned, whose family was not so
high; and David the son of Isai reigned, whose person was not so lightly* but
the straingest of all is behind, the composition and conglutination of the 2
principal verbes in my Text, Regnauit and mortuus est* reigned and yet died.
For do kings die? terreni emoriuntur Jove's? whose ears are beaten with daily
acclamations in their courts. O king live for ever! for whom their people power
forth* their continual supplications, God save king David, God save king
Solomon? whose life, and salvation, they swear by ( by the life of Pharao) as
they would swear by the living 42. Genesis 15*
God, viuit dominus? whereof Tertullia^ taxes the Gentiles, Tertul in Apolog.
Citius apud vos per omnes deos quam per vnum genium Caesaris peieratur?
Certain it is, these also die. Regnauit is a reigning word in my Text, as
being four times repeated, in every several member thereof for example, he
reigned over Israel, and the space that he reigned, and seven years, reigned
he in Hebro^, and 33. years reigned he in Jerusalem. If the Latitude of his
rule could not secure him ( super vniuersum) me thinks the Longitude and
continuance, might have prescribed for him (40. annis) if Hebro^, the daughter,
and one of the princesses of Judah, were to weak, yet Jerusalem the mother,
and Empress of the earth, might have protected him. But having reigned thus
far, and thus long, thus quietly in Hebron, and thus gloriously in Jerusalem,
yet mortuus est, he died. Death spares none, Sceptra ligonibus aequat. she
sees no difference, because her eyes are out. One calls her (...) impudent,
for using best and worst alike, 3. Job.
Parvus and magnus ibi sunt* there are the great and small. Constantinus
imperator and famulus meus. said Nazianzene; Ossa Agamemnonis and Thersitis,
high and low, mingled to gether, without difference. If you 9. Trip. hist. 30.
will know the reason, it is that which St Ambrose gives to Theodosius the
Emperor, after the murder of 7000. at Thessalonica, Coaequalium hominum
princeps es o imperator and conseruorum; O Emperor!, thou art Prince over men,
thy equales in nature, and fellowservants: that which Macedonius the Eremite
delivered Ibid. cap. 32
to the officers of the sa^e Emperor, when they were speeding to Antioch,
about a like errand, Dicite imperatori, non es imperator solummodo, sed etiam
homo; Go tell the Emperor, that he is not only an Emperor, but a man also. I
have said you are Gods, but ye shall die like men. Nolite de Rebus mortalibus
immortalia cogitare. 82, Psalm* 6. 7 Orat. 12.
Nazian.

Thus far of these two, regnavit and mortuus est. But is there an end of him?
Quod mortuum, mortuum? Is that that is once dead, ever dead? Perijt memoria cu^
sonitu? Is every living dog better then this dead Lio^? Is he dead and buried
in the land of forgetfulness and his honor laid in the dust with him? Says the
Epicure aright, There is one condition to the wise and foolish, to man and
beast? Or as David asked concerning the death of Abner, Died Abner as a fool
dies? So ask I, on behalf 2. Sam. 3. 33
of David, died he an ignominious and disgraceful death? He died indeed, and
death was advantage unto him. What other rest to the troubles of his life? Post
omnes procellas vnus portus mortis, he died, and precious in the sight of the
Lord, was the death of this Saint. Sancti and vncti, an anointed Saint.
Mortuus est, that is, emeritus est, he has fought his fight, and has had his
pass, Nunc dimittis: but he is spiced with odours and perfumes after his
death, and accompanied to his grave with four or five of his dear friends,
and individual companions, which honor his exequies and funerals, more then
all the solemnities can Naz. Orat. 40.
do, quas mortui mortuis praestant, and make his death as renowned and
celebrious to the world, almost, as ever his life and reign was. These are 1.
Senectus bona, a good age. 2. fulness of days. 3. fulness of riches. 4. fulness
of honor. 5. succession of his own bowels. Mortuus est and quasi non est
mortuus, quia reliquit similem, Solomon his Son is king after him.

Happyly when you heard of his death, you might 2
have imagined some hasty and untimely end. No, but as a ricke of corn, that
is brought into the barn in due season, in his old age, which of good is the
best age. O veneranda Senectus, indignus adte pervenire, quimetuit* indignus
pervenisse, qui accusat. Or, the life 2.
that he led was a wretched and loathed life, according to the saying of the
wise, Non ille multum vixit, sed diu fuit, it was not a vital life, much like
the Mariners at sea, that is tossed up and down, and riddeth little ground,
Non ille multum navigat, sed multum iactatur. No* but in Senectute bona, in a
good, quiet, peaceable old age. Or, the time that he spent upon earth, 3.
was worthless and base: he not empty of days, but his days empty of him. He
past the^ in ease and idleness telluris invtile pondus. No, he was full of
days, bestowed them on the welfare of his people, and service of Gods Church.
Or, it may be he died a beggar, 4.
left his kingdom a province, and tributary, his people servants, and bondmen,
his children eunuchs: No, but rich, and full of riches. Or, he died optantibus
cunctis, 5.
no man lamenting his death, Ah our Lord, Alas for our king: No, but honored,
and full of honor. Or lastly, his candle went quite out at his death, and his 6
memorial became as the dunge: No, for Solomon his son reigned in his
steed. This last, of succession, is the later person and part of my text,
therefore I forbear it to his place. But the other four (for senectus and
bona are both in one) good age, fulness of days, of riches, and honor, are
like those four bearers 2. Marc. 3. Which carried the bed of the palsy man,
so these the coffin and hearse of David, and bring him to his last home, 1.
senectus bona, from nature, he lived long, 2. fulness of days, from virtue, he
lived well: 3. fullness of riches (they will commonly say from fortune, we
say) from providence, 4. fulness of honor, from opinion and estimation of the
world.

Many never see the face of old age, they die young 1. In. Senctute.
and unripe, in the flower and strength of their race. Primogenitus mortis, the
first begotten of death, or some one of his eldest and forwardest sons
assaulteth the^ in their prime. Good Josias died not in his bed, *nor in the
height of his age. But say they reach home to old age, which is, secundum
naturam, and inevitabilis; a man that is suffered to live, grows old by
course, and shall die of age, yet they obtain not senectutem bonam, Bon^*
a good old age, it may be Senectus mala: ipsa morbus, it self without other
sickness, Onus 80. annorum, as she spoke in the Comedy, a burden and lading of
fourscore years, wherein they become sibimetipsis graves, burdensome and
irksome to themselves. It was old Barzillai his complaint to the king, I am
this 2. Sam. 19
day 80. years old: Can I discern between good and 2. Chro. 16 1. Reg, 15
evil? Has thy servant any taste, etc. Why should thy servant be a burden to
my Lord the King? Asa was old, and in his old age diseased in his feet, and his
disease was extreme. Many have senectutem bonam, but not bonum 2. Plenus dierum
senectutis: when the harvest of their years is come, they yield not those
fruits to themselves of patience and piety, to the world of wisdom, and
virtue, they should do: but according to the proverb, senex est, and non est,
they are and are not old, old in years, but pueri sensibus, pueri moribus,
pueri centum annorum, children in understanding, manners, experience,
elementarij senes, old men not out of their first rudime^ts, now beginning to
learn; in whom though there be not pueritia, there is puerilitas, that is,
they are full of days, but empty of goodness. So were, Jeroboam, with many
others, inveterati dierum malorum, old enough, but void of grace.

Allow all this, they are blessed with age, and good age, 3. P^ diuitiarum.
and fullness of days, strength of nature, quickness of sense, vigor of
mind, yet they want the goods (usually and vulgarly called) of fortune. And
what more miserable according to the proverb, then (...), a penurious old
man? Especially a King, that is, affixus fastigio, bound to his state, and must
ever abound as a king? What a dishonorable exigent was Ezekias driven to,
when to perform demandes, 2. Reg. 18.
to the King of Assure, he was enforced to send him the treasure of the Kings
house, yea the treasure of the Lords house, and to pluck of the plates of the
Temple doors, and couerings of the pillars? 2. Reg. 12.
The like did Iehoash before to Hazael King of Aram, Ereptum principi illud in
principatu beatissimum, quod nihil cogitur, thus the liberty of a King, one of
the fairest gemmes of his crown, is taken from him.

But grant them to be rich also. Yet miss they 4 Pl hono^s.
honor, (which was the only thing that Saul requested of Samuel, to honor
him before the people;) and leave their kingdoms, as some of the Popes are
said their Sees, who were then accounted good, when they did nothing
memorable, neither good nor evil. Bonus Benedict^ (...)
Pontifex, nihil memoria dignum reliquit: and alike, Nisi podagram habuisse^
nesciremus, but for the gowte, we should not know that ever he was Pope.
David has all these together, Aristotle's felicity, cumulated and heaped up,
of all kinds of goods, of body, mind, and fortune. He dies old, and in a
good old age, in the iustest point and periode of age, in his threescore and
tenth year, neither sooner, nor later, but the very middle and vmbilicke of
natures prefined time, old, not over old, vetus not vetus, a right capularis
senex, (...), then, and not sooner, ripe for his grave, yet of quick senses,
that he may truly say, cum infirmor, fortior sum: besides full of days,
profitable to his Country, and serviceable to Gods Church all his life long, a
man after Gods own heart, and pleasing to his people, (says the story) in
all that he did. He was full of his nights to, he spent not them amiss:
Every night wash I my my bed: I may add, full of his hours, In the morning,
at middaie, and in the evening, will I praise thee. And, not rich alone, but
full of riches, satur, as one that desired no more; Look upon his offering
toward the Temple of the Lord in this very Chapter, whereof he witnesses,
de peculio meo, all this have I given of mine own store: Verse. 3*
and lastly, full of honor, so that the name of David was used as pattern to
all the good Kings of Judah, that ever succeeded him, he vvalked in the ways
of his Father David. To which you may add, as not the least part of his
honor, that he was solemnly buried, neither in a dunghill as some, nor in a
common field, as others, nor yet in a private garden, nor in the sepulcher of
his father and family, but in the city of David, and in a royal sepulcher,
appointed for the kings of Israel. So far of David. We are now come to the
later person, and part of my Text. Et regnauit Solomon filius eius pro eo. ^.
Part.
1. Filius eius, his son, in bonis eius non luxuriabitur alius, a stranger
shall not revell in his kingdom. 2. filius eius, his son, that is, the son
of a king. Blessed art thou o land, when thy Prince is the son of nobles. 3.
filius Eccles. 10.
eius, his son, the son of a wife, not a concubine, Spuria vitulamina, non
dabunt radices altas. 4. Solomon Sap. 4.
his son, not Ammon, his incestuous, nor Absolon his treacherous, nor Adoniah
his ambitious son: Salomo^ the pacificus, king of Salem prince, of peace;
Salomo^ the wise, able to speak of trees, from the cedar in Libanus, to the
hysope one the wall, and of beasts, and fowls, and creeping things, and fishes,
wiser the^ all the children of the east, and the wisemen of Egypt; 1. Reg. 4.
Solomon the learned, the speaker of sentences, the divine,, the writer of
books, the preacher, the mirror of al earthly princes. 5. No marvel that of
him it is said, regnauit pro eo, he reigned in his stead, not only, post eum,
after him, to take his predecessors place, so did Manasses for Ezechias, a
bramble, for a vine, so Iehoaaz, for Josias, rex magis host nocens, so diverse
the like Kings, the bad, in place of the good, spots, for stars, but pro
eo, for him, to supply the miss, of their former king, to stand up in the gap,
that the loss be not seen, that whither David, or Salomo^, be king, they
find no difference, al seems one to the^, The rule is, Iniquiores sumus erga
relictos, amissorum desiderio: and Sublatum ex oculis quaerimus: as he that
dug, and skraped at the grave of Antiochus, being asked what he did, answered
Antiochum refodio. I would feign dig up Antiochus again, we say, the
former, ever the better, here is it not so, for Solomon filius pro eo, Solomon
the son, is in his fathers stead.

I have not spoken unto you, in the riddle of Samso^, Application.
nor in the parable of the woman of Tekoah. My trumpet has not given an
uncertain sound. The book of my speech was not claspt, he that ran, might
read, and understand, what my meaning was. Mutatis nominibus, Israel, is this
Isle, David, was Elizabeth, and Solomon, is our Sovereign, that now reigns.

It agrees well with my Text, that as the son of Isai, so the daughter of
king Henry (therein she excelled David, she was the daughter of a puissant
king;) 1. The daughter of K. Henry. 2 Elizabeth the daughter.
and as David the son of Isai, so Elizabeth the daughter of King Henry, the
third, the last, the unlikeliest, a brother and sister, between her and the
Crown; and as David from the sheepfold, so Elizabeth from a prison, and from
a state worse then a milk paile in Woodstockparke. -- notwithstanding all this
Reigned, and well worthy 3, Reigned.
to reign, a queen over men, a queen over queens, a queen over her self,
because a maiden-queene: virtus tua meruit imperium and virtuti addidit forma*
suffragium; what wanted she either to body or mind to make her an absolute
queen? and she reigned Over all Israel, over all her dominions at once, 4
Over. all.
without any difference of Hebron or Jerusalem, an absolute Monarke, and
Empress from the first to the last: therein she ouergoeth David. And the
space that she reigned, was above forty years, therein also 5. 40* years.
she exceeds David.

Et mortua est, and she died. And, o ye my senses, and 6. and she died.
meditations, die with her death, think not of it. and the^, the harp of my
tongue, be hung up to the roof of my mouth, and sound not, her being in
Babylon, lying in a strange land. Silence, admire, and adore her, whom noe
speech can Honor. She died, and so did David, and Solomon, before her, so her
father, and Grandfather, so all the kings, and kingdoms, monarkes, and
monarkies, of the earth; so the Phoenix of womanhode, the virgin mother of
Christ, so Christ, the savior of the world, the virgin son, of that virgin
mother. But she died as David did.

In senectute, her old age, the 70th. year of her life, 7. In age.
she wanted but half a step, as it were, 5. or six months to the full end
of her race. And

In Senectute bona. Therein, she, before David. Clothes 8. A good old a ge.
could not warm him, and they were driven to provide him a nurse, to cherish
him. It was not so with her* she died before she was old, her ey was not dymme,
her natural force not abated, which was the blessing of Moses 34. Deuteronomy. and of
Caleb, 14. Joshua; who being foureskore and five years old, was that day as
strong, as 9. Full of days.
when Moses first sent him to view the land. Full of days and Jas full of
matter* My spirit within me, compeleth me to speak, but where shall J first
begin, or how shall J make an end? As those that draw the whole world into a
map, do it aliquanto detrimento magnitudinis, nullo dispendio veritatis, so
all J can do, for this present, is but to point at her principal, and princely,
nay heroical, and heavenly virtues. Her Majesty and presence meet for a
Queen, ((...)) her wisdom, learning, knowledge of tongues, eloquence,
moderation, elemency, justice, temperance (I think as of any prince under the
roof of heaven) chastity, magnanimity, puissance (more then credible in her
sex) piety, love toward her country, her God, were they her true inherent
graces, or are they my enforced glosses and fictions? The very malice of
enemies that sought continually to contract and abbreuiate her days, was an
argument of their fulness, because she was melior quam viuere expediebat, to
good for them to endure, through the abundance of her virtues. All these, J am
forced to pass over, non ingratus sed oppressus vincor magnitudine. I am
ouerborne, with number and greatness.

Singula complecti cuperem, sed densior instat Gestorum series. Riches, is the
least of al others, though she lent her 10. of riches
neighbors abroad, borrowed not, and both kept, and left, a magnificent state,
yea and supported sta^es, help to releive kings, patronized Countries. For
which, and for all the rest, her honor shall be obscured and darkened, 11. And.
honor.
when sun, and moon shall have noe light. Black vapors, and fogges of Egypt,
will rise up against the sun, dead flies, will atteint the swetest ointments of
Apothecaries, and dead dogs, have not spared to revile David himself. Some
have sought to dishonor her, both with lips, and libells, whose tongues have
been ^ed hot at the fire, and their pens, deep dipped in the brimstone of hell.
The Lord rebuke them. But such honor, had this Angel on earth, whilst she
lived and now Saint in heaven, that the ey, that faw her, blessed her, and the
ear that heard her, gave witness to her, and as if Christendom were to ^kant
a bound, for her glory, Turks, and Mores renowned her. To strangers of al
sorts, it seemed some part of their earthly happiness, that they were able to
say, Romam vidi, Theodosium vidi,, vtrumque simul vidi: I saw England, J saw
Q. Elizabeth, I saw them both together, a glorious Queen, a flourishing
kingdom.

Leuior cippus nunc imprimat ossa. Her body is in the sepulcher of kings, her
bones in their chamber of rest, her soul with her God, her name in the book
of life, her crown in heaven, her inheritance with Saints, her remembrance on
earth, her glory with her people, and the sweet perfume, of her fame and
renown, shall fill the whole house of this land, to day, and to morrow, and in
the days, of our childre^s children.

Upon the death of our David, there were that had prophesied of us, as
sometimes they did of the Christians, Ad certum tempus sunt Christiani, postea
peribunt and redibunt idola. Protestants shall not long be. The Gospel shall
down, and the Mass up again. St. Auctin answers them, Verum tu cum expect
as miser infidelis, vt tran seant Christiani, transis ipse sine In Psalm. 70.
Christianis. Thou perishest (wretched dog) the Christians abide will. Inimici
Deimentiti sunt ei, thus the ^1. Psalm.
haters of God are found liers unto him. When God and nature had wrought their
work, in closing up her eyes that was the eye and spark of Israel, what
could God and Grace have done more, to have closed up our wounds whereof we
were bleeding, and might have bled to death, then that Solomon her Son should
reign Mortuus est and regn.
in bir stead?

My text makes have to succession, David dies, and Solomon reigns, no
interregnum, or space between: both are embraced in the same periode, only a
small point to distinguish them. Ruit super imperatorem imperium. A kingdom
cannot stand without a King. The ever waking providence of God, hasted no
less for us, Mortua est, and regnavit: One and the selfsame morning about
the third watch of the night, saw the falling of a great Prince in Israel,
within an hour or two of the sun, saw not the dawning, but the fair rising
and appearing of an other. Sol occubuit, nox nulla sequuta est. Her Son
reigned, No stranger unto us, no son nor 2. Reg, filius.
daughter of Spain, nor Son from that Son of perdition, no Catholic King
(as they falsely usurp the name) but borne in the same continent, descended of
the same blood, known by the same language, bred in the same religion. And
though not filius vteri (for her pignora were her merita, her virtues her
issue) yet filius regni, the next to inherit the kingdom. I have heard from an
honorable person (whose wisdom and fidelity I rest upon) though she were
ever tender 3. Salomo^* filius.
and sparing in that point, because solemn Orientem omnes, we are all prone to
worship the sun rising, and ambulant omnes cum adolescente secundo, qui
consurgit PRO ^O, that being asked not many hours before her death, who should
succeed her, in her throne, she answered, 4. Eccles.
No filius terrae: who then? None but a King: what king? Who but the king of
Scots, the right was his, as much as to say, Solomon filius meus, as when
Bethshabe came to David, not long before his end, and 1. Reg 2.
said unto him, My Lord o King, the eyes of al Israel are upon thee, vt indices
eis, quis sedere debeat in solio tuo; and Nathan seconded her, My Lord o King,
have thou said, Let Adonias reign after me? the king answered Bethshabe,
Solomon filius tuus regnabit post me: 4. Pro ea.
post me, and pro me. after me, and for me, that J be not mist. It is true,
that through the use of so many Halcyon years, we were grown to a great
daintiness. Sic imbuti, vt non possemus nisi optimu^ far, so long inv^ed
with an excellent Queen, that none could have liked us, but as excellent a
King. What shall I then say Mortua est and quasi no^ est mortua, quia reliquit
simile^? plus quam similis hic. preteritis melior, venientibus author, a
paragon to those that are past, a pattern to all that shall come after.

I could leave my Text behind in a number of circumstances. 5.
For Solomon filius, in my Text, was Solomon 1. Chr. 29.
puer, Solomon very young: Salomonem filium meum elegit deus adhuc puerum and
tenellum, and you know what that means, Dabo pueros principes eorum 3. Esaias,
but Solomon filius in my application is Solomon vir, Solomon a man, in the
pe^fit aequilibrium and stablest state of his age, and both (...) and (...) a
man, and a king, of ripest perfection, as having sitten so long at the stern
of a mighty 6.
kingdom. Solomon filius in my Text, was but filius, a son, no other son
from him, but Solomon filius in my application, is Solomon pater, a father of
many children, of either sex, whom he may live by the will of God, to make
princes over diverse nations. Loquutus es Domine Deus de domo servi tui in
longinquum. 2. Sam. 7.
We trust Lord thou haste spoken of the house of thy servant, for many
generations to come, Et coept is non deerit fascibus haeres that Shiloh shall
come again before the scepter of our Israel shall depart from one of this
line.

Solomon filius in my text, regnavit pro eo, a man for 7.
a man. Solomon filius in my application pro ea, a man for a woman. Is that
nothing? Though, nec Censum nec sexum eligit Deus, God is not tied to sex nor
substance, and we shall never repent us that our leader so many years was a
Deborah, not a Barak, and amongst the daughters of men, I think the earth
never bare a worthier, but her, that bare the Lord of heaven and earth, yet
cateris paribus; (...) Arist. Pol,
(...), nature has more enabled the stronger sex to undergo this burden.

But the sum and comprehension of all is, that this filius is Solomon filius,
Solomon her Son. That 8. Salomo^.
is, Rex pacificus, a very vinculum pacis, communis terminus, betwixt nation
and nation, that has pulled down the wall of partition, and is come over on
this side of Jordan, and planted the Tribes of his Jsraell, his people on both
sides the river, and joined not Roses, but Realms together, the Augustus of
this latter world, that has broken swords into sithes, and spears into
Mattocks, the stiller of wars and extinguisher of rebellions, nec timens bella
nec provocans, seeking after peace, not shunning his enemies. Again, Salomo^
the wise, a Prince of incomparable wisdom. As that queen of the South came to
the other, so this Queen of the North (her self the wonder of the world)
might have stood and wondered at the wisdom of this Salomo^. Has he never
spoken sentences, and parables, and reasoned of trees, and beasts, and birds,
like an other Chrysippus, de qualibet re proposita, rather a right Salomo^
indeed? has he never opened his mouth in Parliament, and held the ears of his
Nobles, and Commons, with the cheine of his tongue, not less then some hours
together, without intermission, and that with truer and purer eloquence then
ever Tertullus did, and delivered not opinions, but oracles, of the most
important affairs? Never sitten in counsel and overlooked his eyes? Never
been present, as great Constantine, at the conferences of his Bishops, not an
hearer, but a judge and decider of controversies? Have we not heard him in this
place assoiling arguments, defining states of questions, in both your
Philosophies, law, physic, divinity, not without astonishme^t of your selves
the professors? Js there almost a worthier and prompter textuary in the world
(witness his daily and howrely eiaculations) in that book of the Law, which by
the law of the Lord ought never depart from the hand of 17. Deuteronomy*
a king, and for which he should ever be calling Da magistrum? has he never
written books, yea and interpreted, commented upon the holy scriptures
themselves? What can I add O Solomon the learned, the Philosopher, the
Divine, the Writer, the Ecclesiastes, a Solomon in all points.

To omit his theories, with many experiments and proofs, of his practick
wisdom, wherein he has abou^ded, since he came into this land; the
interpreting of that Caiphas-like prophecy (in the heart of him that wrote) but
happy and eva^gelicall letters (as the goodness of God disposed the^) against
those bloody days of Pur, (it was a (...) indeed, wherein puluis pyrius, had
the chief part) and out of a blase of paper, collecting a blast of that never
enough abhorred, abominated powder treason, I take not to be less, if not
much more, then Salomons doom betwixt, the 2. harlots.

Postremo adhuc nemo extitit, cuius virtutes nullo vitiorum confinio
laederentur. At principi nostro quant^ Plin 2. of Traian*
concordia, quantusque concentus omniu^l audum, omnisque gloriae contigit? Of
those many vices, wherein Princes take a liberty, and sin by authority, qua
iuvat reges eant, for will thou say to a king, thou art wicked? Or to Princes,
ye are ungodly? The very worms that grow 34. Job.
out of their fulness and affluence, the mothes that breed in their robes, what
one can you reckon, that leaves an aspersion of scandal upon his sacred and
intemerated name? As for his many virtues, on the contrary, meet for a most
honorable person and a thrice heroical king, if the tongues of men be silent,
the trumpes of God and Angels shall sound the^ forth. But, they say, we should
praise a king, as we honor God, sentiendo Copiosius quam loquendo, that is, the
best defense I can make of my silence or shortness of speech. I will therefore
spare your ears, and trust your hearts to make my ditch a sea, and out of your
conscience and knowledge of his invaluable worthiness, each man in his private
soul to fill up the volume of his condign praises.

For an end of all. Vellem si rerum natura pateretur, Auson. of Gratian.
Xenophon Attice in aeuum nostru^ venires, tu qui ad Cyri virtutes exequendas
votum potius, quam historiam commodasti, cum diceres non qualis esset sed
qualis esse deberet. Si nunc in te^pora ista procederes, in nostro Iacobo
cerneres quod in Cyro tuo uon vider as, sed optar as. If Xenophon were now
alive, to write the story, he should see that in King James, which he rather
wished, the^ saw in his Cyrus. He should see enough, and blessed be the name of
God, we see so much, that we are well contented to say, Nihil his bonis
accidere posset, nisi vt perpetua sint. Amen, amen faueas beneficijs tuis, be
favorable, o Lord! to thine own favors, and add continuance, and
perpetuity, to thy blessings. Fiat manus tua super virum dextrae tuae, and
super filium hominis quem confirmasti tibi. Thy hand be ever upon the man 80.
Psalm.
of thy right hand, thine anointed, chosen servant, and upon the son of man,
the son of ancient kings, who^ thou have made so strong for thy self, thy
Christ, thy Church, thy Gospel, thy People. Bless him with all thy blessings
of heaven and earth; bless him at his going out, and his coming in, waking,
and sleeping; bless his house, and the house of his Kingdom; bless his vine
and his olive branches, his Lands, and his Seas, his wars, and his peace, his
body, and his soul, his life, and his death; and blessed be thy glorious
name, from this time forth, to the worlds end. Amen.

FINIS

