THE SPIRITVALL ARCHITECTVRE.

OR, The Balance of Gods Sanctuary to discern the weight and solidity of a
true and sincere, from the Leuitie, and vanity of a false and counterfeit
profession of Christianity.

Wherein also the sandy foundations of the Papisticall faith are briefly
discovered.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the 16. of November, 1623. by ROBERT
BARREL, Master of Arts, and Minister of Gods word at Maidstone in Kent.

For we are laborers together with God, ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods
building. 1. Cor. 3.9. Si audire vis and non facere, adificas, sed ruinam
aedificas, and ruina tua te tollit: ergo vna est securitas, and aedificare, and
supra Petram aedificare. Aug. Tract. 7. in Iohannem: Printed at London by
Augustine Matthewes, and John Norton. 1624.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, GEORGE BY THE divine Providence
Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan,
one of the Lords of his Maiestes most Honorable Privy Council, my very
singular good Lord.
Most Reverend Father in God;
IT may be thought too high a praesumption (and that not altogether unjustly,)
that I should seek to shroud these my poor Labors under the roof of your
Gracious Patronage: which I do not out of any confidence of the worth of them
(for alas I am too conscious to my own wants to be so arrogantly
presumptuous) but out of the Conscience of that great obligation wherein I
stand bound unto your Grace for your Graces manifold undeserved favors,
whereof I humbly desire to make this public acknowledgement. It is a ruled
case in the Civil Law, mancipato Patre mancipantur and filii, the Children are
inuolued with their Father in the same engagement: and the Fruits do of best
right appertain to him that is owner of the Field. To whom then should this my
poor Orphant, and these fruits of my poor Labors more rightly appereain then
to your Grace; upon whom I have such an especial dependence in the Place where
I live, and to whom I most deservedly owe my self, and the best of my poor
Service. Moreover the whole English Clergy (whereof I am a poor unworthy
member) and the whole Church of England, and Cause of Religion owes much unto
your Grace: whereof (under our most Religious, Learned and gracious Sovereign)
you are a maine Pillar and Sppor^er; not only by your vigilant eye of
circumspection, in governing this Church (according to your high place) but by
your zealous tongue in Preaching, and learned Pen in writing. I write not this
to flatter your Grace, for (besides that my nature abhorres such baseness) he
needs no false and flattering praises, that abounds with true: and St. Cyprian
says truly; A good Conscience neither desires praise nor fears accusations.
Epist. 31. For my part, I should not have presumed to publish to the world
these my poor Labors, (which does occasion me humbly to crave your Graces
Patronage) but that in these days, wherein so many Babilonish Tobiahs and
Sanballats, seek by all means to hinder, and (if they could) to ruin it,
every true hearted Israelite that can lay but one stone to further the building
of Gods Temple, and the walls of his Jerusalem, must not sit idle. Seeing
therefore your Grace is herein a Maister-builder; vouchsafe (I beseech you)
your gracious approbation of this little Stone that I have hewn to lay in this
Building: and your Noble Patronage of me and my poor Labors, though the
meanest of those that serve at Gods Altar: (for even the Sun in the Firmament
shines as well on the low Shrub as the tall Cedar, and sends his bright and
glorious beams, as well into the pooremans Cottage, as the Noble-mans Palace)
which if your Grace shall vouchsafe to do, you shall thereby encourage me (to
the utmost of my poor power and skill) to be still hewing more Stones for
this Building; and bind me ever, as already you have done, to be a daily
Suitor, and earnest Solicitor, to the highest Throne of grace and mercy, that
the confluence of all wished temporal blessings and spiritual graces, may be
powered down upon your Graces head most abundantly in this Life; with the
everlasting addition of a Crown of Glory in the Life to come.

Your Graces most bounden and devoted Servant. ROBERT BARREL.

The Authors Preface to the Christian Reader.
COurteous and charitable Reader; not so much the importunity of my friends,
(though I have been much solicited thereunto) has caused me to publish this
Sermon to the view of the world, as that Eye which I had therein to Gods glory
and thy good: for being pressed by some of my especial friends to publish it
as a Sermon, which in these days, of too much tottering inconstancy in
Religion, might be some stay to wavering and unstable souls, and so do some
good in the Church of God: I thought my self most unworthy to receive a mite,
(much less a talent) from the Lord, if I should not most willingly and
cheerfully cast it into Gods treasury: for although of late, many other
worthies of our Israel have Luc. 21.1 etc
out of the superfluity and abundant riches of their knowledge, cast in much
more: yet I hope this mite (which I have cast in with as good an intention as
any, though much more able than my self to do good in the Church of God,
(will be accepted of him who loves a cheerful giver, and whither it be little
or much) 2. Cor. 8.12.
accepts the gift according to the ability which himself has given. The
Apostle says: (...), Let all things be done to aedification: 1. Cor. 14.26. My
scope therefore in this sermon is to teach thee the art of Spiritual
Architecture: that is, how to build up thy self to be an house or temple for
the Lord, an habitation of God by the spirit: which J teach thee as my self
have learned it from that greatest, and chiefest Architect Christ Jesus. by the
direction of his holy word. For all that be in Christ are likewise 1 Cor. 16,
19.
Temples of the holy Ghost to be built in this world, but to be dedicated in
the world to come: (where the glory of the Lord shall fill thee with joy
unspeakable and glorious, as erst his glory filled the material Temple.
Exodus: 40.34) And as the building of these spiritual Temples here is painful
and laborious to flesh and blood, so the dedication of them there, shall be
most joyful and glorious. To encourage thee to build, God himself has laid
the chief corner stone, yea 1 Pet 5.6.
himself is the chief corner stone, elect and precious: and all the faithful
are living stones to be laid upon this foundation, and to be built a
spiritual house: Aug. Tom in dedicat Templi.
Fide formati, ^pe formali, charitate compacti: squared by faith, laid fast by
hope, and cemented together by charity. Build therefore, or rather be built
upon this firm foundation, both by hearing and practicing: for if thou build
not at all, thou shall be left destitute of a Esa 32.2.
shelter from the wind, and a cover from the tempest: and if thou build on any
other foundation, thou buildest thine own ruin. Aug. in Psalm. 101.
Eia ergo (lapides viui) instructuram currite, non in ruinam, etc. Go to
therefore (ye living stones) come, yea run to this building, and not to your
own ruin: B^e contented to be hewn and squared by that Ier. 23.29.
hammer that heweth the stones, the law of God: and to be polished with the
strokes of temptatious, afflictions, and persecutions here without, for as
much as there shall not be any noise or stroke of that hammer heard when he
shall be perfectly polished in the heavenly Sanctuary. Lay the pauement of your
building low by contrite humility: fasten your selves and your faith upon the
maine Ephesians ^ 19.
foundation stones of the Prophetical and Apostolical doctrines: raise the
walls of your building by fervent prayers, and devout meditations: and adorn
your building with good works, which may be conspicuous to the eye of the
world (as with turrets and battlements: be pillars to support the weak, and
roofes to shroud and shelter the poor and needy from the tempests of their
several calamities, and necessities: so shall ye be possessed of the Lord (as
temples built for his honor and service:) by his spirit of grace here, and
fulness of glory hereafter. That both thou, (Gentle Reader, whosoever thou
be) and I may thus build, and be built, let us help one another by the mutual
commerce of our fervent, and faithful prayers.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, ROBERT BARREL.

Faults escaped in Printing.
PAge 2. line 33 for employ read imply. page 3. line 22. for walls read
waters: page 4. line 14, for man read Mammon, page 5 line 30, for certifying
read rectifying, page 6, line 13, read, I wish that my words, etc. and page
ead. line 28, for conneyed, read conveyed: page 8 line 22, for usullarum
vnita, read multarum vnitas and page ead. line 28, for startling, read
starting: page 9, line 13, leave out thereof page 10. line 6. read acknowledge
him, etc. page ead. line 28. for Epitom read Epitome and line 29, for section,
read perfection. and line 37. between see, and smell, insert but: page 12,
line 6, for Lo read Hoe, etc and page ead. line 26, for Solius read solus.
page 13, line 2, for mine, read ruin page 14, line 2, for way, read wander.
page 15, line 2, for phrases, read praises: ibid. line 18, for criricall, aeade
critical. ibid. line 19, for word, read words, page 23, line 27, for till,
read while page 30, line 1, for verity, read unity, and line 23, for unity,
read unite. page 31, line 6, for Catholics, read Cacolikes, and page ead. line
35, for supply, read supple. page 33, line 26, for sectuntur, read secta^tur,
ibid. line 30, for (...) read (...). page 34, line 38, for Costerius, read
Costerus. and page 36, line 28, ibid. line 26, for sun read son. page 40.
line 14, for vt, read vel. page 41. in Annot. marg. for Anno 3033, read 303,
ibid. page 35, for whhle, read whole, page 45, line 21, for flaida, read
fluida. ibid line 35, for (...) read (...), page 48. line 9, read Si restitui
potest, ibid. line 14, for Colloguintida, read Colloquintida, ibid. line 27,
for mind, conscience, read my conscience Page 50 line vlt, for overthrow,
read ouerflow, page 5^, line 15, for thee read them, page 61, line 18. for
irrecouerable. read irreuocable. ibid line 33, for Sancte, read Sancta, ibid.
line 38, for wasted, read roasted, page 64, line 5, for right, read
righteousness, ibid. in marg for Cypr. read Opus, page 65. line 25, for mine,
read ruin, page 67, line 27, for me read one, page 68, line 2, for malorum,
read magorum.

If thou find (Gentle Reader) any other faults, either in Orthography or
otherwise, I pray thee correct them with thy pen: and let not the Printers
errors be imputed to the Author.

THE SPIRITVALL ARCHITECTVRE.
Text. MATH. Chap. 7. Verse. 24.25.26.27. 24 Therefore whosoever hears these
sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man which built his
house upon a Rock.

25 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that House; and it fell not, for it was founded on a Rock.

26 And every one that hears these sayings of mine, and does them not, shall
be likened unto a foolish man which built his House upon the Sand.

27 And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat
upon that house, and it fell, and the fall thereof was great.


THe blessed Apostle S. Paul terms the new Jerusalem (which is the Christian
Church) Gal. 4.26.
the Mother of us all: and this mother of all Christians (like Mary the mother
of Christ) is Ser. 119. de temp.
both a mother and a Virgin. A Virgin in respect of her most pure and unspotted
verity, which though it be often assaulted by cursed haeretiques (the devils
offspring) yet it never was, nor shall be wholly corrupted: Mat. 16.18.
for the gates of hell cannot prevail against it, being built on the rock
Christ Jesus. A mother in respect of her copious faecunditie: for she is Cypr.
de vnitate. Eccl. Sect. 4. and 5.
Faecunditatis successibus copiosa, a fruitful mother of children, bringing
forth by her purity of doctrine many sons and daughters to the Lord
Almighty; Illius faetu nascimur, lacte nutrimur, spiritu animamur In her womb
we are bred, by her soul or spirit we are quickened, by her milk we are
nourished: and her two breasts that yields us this sweet milk ( Psalm. 19.10.
sweeter to believing souls than the honey and the honey comb:) are the two
Testaments.

The same Church is compared by that holy Father, and blessed Martyr S. Cyprian
Cypr. Epist. 73. Sect. 9.
unto Paradise: the trees whereof are the faithful: which are Esa 61.3.
Germina plantationis Domini, Trees of the Lords own planting: and (like the
trees planted by the rivers of Waters: Psa. 1.3.
) bring forth their fruits in due season; and the four rivers of this
Paradise (wherewith these trees are watered) are the four Evangelists.

These rivers (like Tagus) have many golden streams: of which this sermon of
Christ on the Mount is one of the chois^st: for it may be called Concio
concionum (as Salomons sweet Epithalamium between Christ and his Church is
called Canticum Canticorum) as being the key of the whole Bible, wherein Christ
opens those treasures of Wisdom and knowledge which are hid in the old and
new Testament. Therefore we find none of Christ's sermons so largly registered
by the Evangelists Ioh. 14.15, 16.
as this except his consolatarie sermon to his Disciples before his passion:
this being his Primum salve, or first welcome to his Apostles after their
election to the Apostleship: and that his vltimum vale, or last Farewell unto
them immediately before his passion.

1. Praef. Conc.
How excellent a sermon this was it is evident. First, by the Preface or
exordium thereunto: for it was delivered, In a selected place ( Mat. 5.1.
namely, a mountain,) that the sublimitie of the place might show the
excellency of the matter: Ver. 2.
2. To selected auditors (namely his twelve Apostles, and the choicest
Disciples,) and in an especial and singular manner, intimated: First, by his
preparation thereunto Luc 6.12.
: for he spent the whole night before in prayer, which must needs employ some
consequence of great importance. Secondly, By his gesture of sitting Aug de
Ser. Dom. in Monte.
, Quod pertinet ad dignitatem magisterij, implying both the dignity of the
speaker (who is Mat. 23.8.
(...), the great Doctor of his Church) and the weight of the matter. Thirdly,
by the Evangelists phrase of opening his mouth: which implies not only our
Saviors earnestness and intention both of heart and voice in speaking, but
the excellency and divine perfection of his doctrine.

He who is 1. Ier. 24.6.
The eye of God, by which he looks down upon his Church for good and not for
evil. 2. Esaias 53.1.
The Arm of God, whereby he does both sustain and embrace it. 3. Esaias 48.13.
1 Pet. 5.8.
The hand of God, whereby he has laid the foundation of the earth in the work
of Creation, and plucked his sheep out of the mouth of that roaring Lion the
Devil (as David did his fathers sheep out of the jaws of the Lion, 1 Samuel
17.35.
and paw of the bear) in the work of Redemption. 4. The Face of God, in whom
(as in a Crystal glass) we may behold Heb. 1.3.
the brightness of his fathers glory, and ^xpresse Character of his person;
Ioh. 14.9.
He that has seen me has seen the father. 5. The mouth of God, whereby he
does both Cant. 1.2.
kiss his Church with the kisses of his love, and instruct it with his
heavenly Doctrine: here opens his mouth (as a fountain of living waters) to
refresh the thirsting souls of his Disciples, as erst he opened the rock of
stone for the refreshing of the fainting bodies of his Jsrael, Psalm. 105.31.
so that the walls gushed out, and rivers ran in dry places.

2 Materia: conc.
2 By the substance or matter of this Sermon; which whosoever shall
considerately read and mark, shall find therein Aug. in loc.
perfectum vitae Christianae modum, a perfect rule or direction for a Christian
life, tending to true happiness and perfection; Mat. 5.48. Analisis Conc: V.
3. A. v. 3. ad 13.
Be ye perfect, etc.

For therein Christ shows us; first, the Mark at which we must aim, namely,
true blessedness in Gods Kingdom. 2. The Steps or Degrees whereby we must
ascend unto it; namely, humility, mourning for sin, meeknes, etc. for the eight
beatitudes are as so many steps of that Genesis 28.12.
mystical Ladder of Jaacob, whereby we must climb up unto Heaven. 3. The
Guides to conduct us thither; namely, A. v. 1. ad 17.
the Ministers of the Gospel, who are both the Salt of the earth, to season us
with the heavenly Salt of Grace, and the Light of the World, to guide our feet
into the way of peace, that we may make straight steps to the Apoc. 21.2.
new Jerusalem and heavenly Sion. 4 The Norme or Squire, to rule out this way
unto us, namely the Law of God, (the rule of Charity and Col 3.14.
band of perfection) which our Savior by his divine exposition cleeres from
Pharisaicall glosses and corruptions. A. v. 17. ad fin^m Cap. 5.


5 The crooked by-pathes which we must shun, if we will keep us in the
right way to true blessedness, and not turn to the right hand or the left;
and th^se are many: (as t^ere is but one right way to a place, but many
by-wa^es) namely; Cap. 6. a. v. ad 19. A. v. 19. ad finem, cap. 6.
1. Hypocrisy in doing our good works to be seen of men. 2. Worldly
Solicitude, in laying up our treasure in Earth not in Heaven; preferring the
service of man before the service of God; and caring more for the perishing
vanities of this life, then the Kingdom of God and his righteousness. C 7 a.
v. 1. ad 6.
3. Uncharitable censuring of our Brethren, and ouercurious prying into their
motes, V. 6.
whilst we see not our own beams. 4 Profane trampling under our feet (like
dogs and Swine) the precious pearls of Gods holy word and Sacraments, and
rending those that bring them unto us with the cruel teeth of malicious
obloquy. A. v. 15. ad 21.
5. Listening to false Prophets (which are ravening wolves in sheep clothing)
s^eking under the fair pretenses of humility, truth, simplicity and sincerity,
to prey upon, and devour the souls of Christ's sheep. 6. Omission of holy
duties, namely, of fervent prayer, whereby we should ask, A. v. ^. ad 13.
seek and knock at the gate of mercy: and a serious endeavor to enter in at
the straight gate, and go on in the narrow way that leads unto salvation: v.
21. etc.
for as much as a bare verbal profession will not serve the turn at the last
day: Not every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven,
etc.

3 Conclus. conc.
3 By the conclusion, wherein there is an Emphaticall (...) seeming to limit
these words of my Text to this Sermon only (as containing the sum and
substance of the whole Bible) but they may fitly have a more general reference
to all the words of Christ's heavenly doctrine delivered to his Church, and
recorded in the sacred Scriptures.

And the Evangelist adds; V. 28.29.
when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were astonished at his
Doctrine, etc. for he was the true Orpheus, who by the melodious harmo^y of
his heavenly Doctrine drew the rocks, and woods, and wild beasts after him;
that is, men of rocky and hard hearts (as the Pharisees) and as savage in
sinfulness as the wild beasts, namely, Sadduces and Publicans: Luke 6.17.
Ioh. 6.2.
who flocked from all quarters of Judea, Samaria, Galile, etc. to hear his
divine doctrine, and behold his Almighty miracles; which they saw and heard
with astonishment and admiration, saying; never man spoke like this man Cap.
7.46.
. These words are the conclusion, and application of this divine Sermon; for
this wise master builder does not only lay the foundation and raise the
walls, but roofes the top, and perfects the building: this heavenly Husbandman
does not only plant and sow by doctrine, but water by Application, that the
seed may yield the more copious increase, as he does elsewhere; Ioh. 13.17.
Jf ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them.

Wherein the 1 Pet. 2.25.
chief Shepherd and supreme Bishop of our souls teaches all his
subordinate Pastors, (especially in these days wherein there is Beza.
much science but little conscience) to bend their endeauours rather Bern.
ad imbuenda corda, quam exprim^nda verba, to reform men's lives, then either
to tickle their itching ears or inform their curious understandings: and to
seek, not so much Phil 2.21.
the things that are their own (that is, their own vai^ glorious applause by
curious strains of wit, or painting over their Sermons with the Vermillion of
humane Eloquence:) as the things that are Jesus Christ's, by certefying m^ns
Consciences and conuersations; and seeking to bring home many sheep to Christ
his fold, many souls to his Kingdom. Otherwise those croking Frogs of Rome,
(I mean the Jesuits and Seminary Priests) which now more then ever swarm in
our Coasts, like the Grasshoppers and Caterpillars of Ex. 10.12.
Egypt will still get ground of us, while we seek to please men's ears, and
they to work upon their consciences (the strongest band to tie men fast to God
and his sacred truth) and so in time the Israelitish Proverb may be inuerted
to our great shame and the scandal of our Religion: h 1 Samuel 18.7.
David has but his 1000. and Saul his 10000.

Pardon therefore my plainness (Right Honorable, etc.) If I strive that my
doctrine may be delivered 1 Cor. 2.4.
rather with the evidence of the spirit and power, then with the enticing words
of man's wisdom and eloquence: for my desire is not to please carnally, nor to
tickle the ears of the curious; but to win those that are truly religious to
a constant perseverance in truth and godliness: and I wish that words may be
unto you as nails and goads fastened by the masters of the Assemblies to prick
you forward to good works, Eccles. 12.11.
and make you cleave fast to Christ and his truth continually.

Concerning the sense of the Text, I find a difference among Interpretors.

1 Some by this house built on a rock, understand the Christian Church in
General, built on the rock of Christian Doctrine, which is called, 1 Timothy 3.15.
The House of the living God.

Of this House 1. Christ Jesus is the chief corner stone Ephesians. 2.19.20.
.

2 The Prophets and Apostles foundation stones, and

3 The faithful living stones made a spiritual house ^ Pet. 2.5.
.

4 The two opposite walls are the Jews and Gentiles.

5 The four corners of the House, are the four Evangelists.

6 The Pillars are the Prelates of the Church.

7 The Windows wher^by the light is conneyed unto it, are the Pastors and
Doctors of the Church.

8 The Door is Christ Jesus, the door of the sheep Io^. 10.7.
.

9 The Curtains wherewith this House, or holy Tabernacle of God is adorned are
the Precepts of the Law, and Promises of the Gospel.

10 The Table of this House is the sacred Scripture and holy Eucharist.

12 The spiritual meat set upon this Table, is Christ Ioh. 6.31.
the celestial Manna, the bread of life broken to us in the Word and
Sacraments.

13 The Vessels of honor appertaining to this House, are Romans 9.22, 23
the Vessels of mercy prepared unto glory; and the Vessels of dishonor, are
the Vessels of wrath prepared to destruction.

For the visible Church is like Genesis 7.2. and 8.7.8.
Noah's Arc, which contained both clean and unclean Beasts; and had in it as
well the greedy Raven, that flying out of it never returned again, as the
harmless Done, which out of the Arc found no rest for the soale of her foot,
but with an Olive branch in her mouth returned to the Arc again.

This was figured in Genesis 4.1.
Adams family, Typ Eccl: visib.
which had in it a bloody Cain as well as an innocent Abel; and 9.18: etc.
in Noah's, which had a cursed Cham as well as a blessed Shem and Japheth; and
21.9.
in Abraham's, which had a persecuting Jshmael as well as a persecuted Isaac:
and in Isaacks, and 25.33.
which had a profane Esau selling his Birthright for a mess of Pottage, as
well as a godly Jacob that obtained the Blessing and 27.27.
.

But the wicked, Jn vnitate Ecclesiae non corporis Eccl. Alexan: de Hales.
although they be in the unity of the Church visible; yet not in the unity of
the Churches body mystical: or if they be, it is but as corrupt humors are in
the body natural; (which must be purged out before the body can be healthy and
strong) but not as sound, sollid and substantial parts of the same body.

For of those that live in the visible Church there are three sorts: 1 Some are
members thereof by Profession only, 2 Others both by profession and affection
for the present, but not in resolution, 3 Others both by profession, affection
and resolution, having their hearts fast knit unto God for ever. And of
Professors there be four sorts. 1 Some profess the Cnristian faith but not
wholly and entirely, as Heretics: 2 Others profess the whole saving truth,
but not in unity; as Scismaticks. 3 Others profess the whole truth in unity,
but not in sincerity, nor with a resolute and undaunted constancy: as
temporizing hyppocrites; Mat 25.2.


Mat 25.2.
they are compared unto wise and foolish Virgins.

1 The wise Builders are they, that both by hearing and practicing build their
faith on the rock Christ, and his sacred truth; whose faith, neither the rain
of prosperity can corrupt or ^eaken, nor the floods of adversity undermine, nor
the winds of diabolical suggestions shake down and overthrow; because the
foundation on which they are built is immovable; namely, the rock Christ, and
his sacred truth.

2 The foolish builders are they that by bare hearing without due practicing,
build their false and temporary faith, upon the sands of humane traditions, or
their own vain fancies and superstitions, which every win of vain doctrine,
storm of affliction, or tempest of temptation may easily overthrow, because it
is built on the sand, and the fall of such buldings and builders will be great,
because they fall finally, totally, irrecouerably from Gods grace and glory,
into the bottomless pit of perdition and destruction.

But this difference seems to me rather verbal then real: because the Church
is nothing else but a Mullarum vnita vel potius vnanimitas animarum; Bern: Sermon:
61: in Cant:
a collectiue, consisting of many particular men conjoined in the general
Profession of the same Christian faith: though some be true Israelites, some
cursed Edomites, some professing the truth in sincerity, others in hypocrisy;
some constantly cleaving thereto even in the mouth of danger, others quickly
startling aside from it like a broken bow.

This Text therefore is Gods fan, to discern this corn from that chafe:
His true touchstone to try this pure gold from that counterfeit copper: and
the just balance of his Sanctuary to discern the weight of a sound, sollid,
and sincere profession of Christianity, from that which is deceitful upon the
weights, and lighter then vanity it self.

threefold difference between wise and foolish builders.

manner of their building: for the wise builders perfect their building both by
hearing and practicing: but the foolish builders leave it imperfect, hearing,
but not practicing.



Psalm. 125.1.
, etc. the other thereof falls down flat, and the fall thereof is great.

Both begin w^ll, and consent in the first act, namely, of hearing Christ's
words, ((...), V. 24. and 26.
etc.) Whosoever hears, etc. but in the latter, they differ as farrre as the
East is from the West, or the heaven from the earth: for the one conioynes
hearing and doing: ((...)) hears and does them, v. 24. the other disioynes
what God would have conjoined ((...)) hearing, but not doing, v. 26. And this
is that which makes such a (...), or wide distance between them: First, in
their properties: the one sort being termed wise, the other, foolish builders:
Secondly, in their work: the one building on the rock: the other on the sand:
Thirdly, In the success of both: for the issue of the one building is firm
stability; but of the other utter ruin.

The first difference between these wise and foolish builders, is in the
manner of their building: the first, by hearing only: the second, by hearing
and practicing. But both hear: for the ears are the open doors by which the
knowledge of those things enters into the soul which have no visible species
for the eyes to apprehend: Romans 10.17.
faith comes by hearing; which is the Heb. 11.1.
evidence of things not seen. Insomuch as the Centurion (who saw Christ
crucified) believed not on him by seeing, but by hearing: for hearing him give
up the ghost with a loud cry (contrary to the nature of that lingering death:)
he concluded Mar. 15.36.
, Surely this was the Son of God Ber. Ser: 28. in Cant.
. Auditus iuuenit quod non visus: oculum species fefellit, auri veritas se
infudit: His eyes saw him Esa. 53 2, 3.
despised and rejected of men, a man full of sorrows, having no form nor
beauty that he should be desired: but by his voice he believed, and
acknowledged to be the Son of God, not by his face: being herein a pattern
for all Christ's sheep, and an Idea of them all Ioh. 10.27.
, My sheep hear my voice, etc.

Aquin. 1.2. Q. 12.
The Scholemen say there is a threefold book wherein we know God: First, of
nature: secondly, of Scripture: thirdly, of life. By the two first we know him
in this life, (but in part and as it were in a gl^sse darkely:) but by the
third, we shall know him in the life to come, when we shall see him face to
face. 1. Cor. 13.9.


For the learning of the first book we need use nothing but our eyes Romans
1.20.
, for the invisible things of God (to wit his eternal power and Godhead) are
by the creation of the world made visible.

Aug 5.55. in Joh Tom. 10.
Ask the ornament of the heavens: namely, the brightness of the Sun (the
beauty of the day, and the eye of the world:) and the splendor of the Moon,
and order of the Stars: (the solace and ornament of the night:) ask the air
replenished with birds (natures quiristers) who by their pleasing notes, and
chirping voices daily chaunt out the praises of their Creator: ask the earth
adorned with trees, and plants, and replenished with foure-footed beasts and
creeping things, and made the'receptacle and habitatio^ of (Man the little
world, the epitom of Gods workmanship, and idea of divine section.) Lastly,
ask the sea, (the profound volume of Gods wonders, swarming with admirable and
innumerable sorts of Fishes:) ask them all, and they will really answer thee:
The Almighty has created us: Vniuersus mundusn^l aliud est quam deus
explicatus. Athenag.
for the whole world is nothing else but a large book wherein God is expressed:
whose creatures are such fair Characters that we may read them running. We
need but look and learn, see and perceive: yea, we may not only see, Cypr.
de card. C^^. operibus.
smell, taste, and feel how gracious the Lord is, when we smell, taste, and
feel his creatures.

For the learning of the second book, we must use both our eyes and ears, in
reading and hearing: but especially our ears; for although reading of the
Scripture be no small edifying: (as appears by the fruit thereof in the
Israelites 2. Reg 33.2. etc
when the book of the law was read by Hilkiah the Priest, in the days of
Josiah, and Neh. 8.31. etc.
by Ezra the Scribe, in the time of Nehemia): yet hearing of the Scriptures
opened and applied by preaching is a more powerful means to aedification and
salvation: for many Act. 8.3^.
(with the Eunuch) may read the Scriptures, and not understand them, until
the lively voice of some Philip be as a key to open the closet of Gods hidden
treasures, (that is, the mysteries of the Gospel) unto them.

Dignum esset per superiores oculorum fenestras veritatem intrare in animam,
etc. Ber. Ser. 38: in cant.
It were to be wished that the light of truth might enter into our souls by
the windows of our eyes: but this is reserved for us in the life to come, when
we shall with most pure and perfect eyes read in the book of life, and see
God face to face. But now we receive the remedy as the disease first crept in
upon us. Genesis 3.4.
Euah was seduced by harkening to the voice of the devil, we must be
converted by harkening to the voice of God, Nunc vnde irrepsit morbus inde
remedium intrat: vt per eandem vestigia sequatur vita mortem; tenebras lux:
venenum serpentis antidotum veritatis. Jbid.
that so life may enter into our souls by the same gate, by which death
entered, and light come into the houses of our souls by the same windows, by
which darkness did: and the antidote of truth (Christ's own confection) may be
taken of us in the same cup wherein we first drank the poison of that old
serpent: namely, by hearing.

The sacred Scriptures are the mystical Paradise of God, in the midst whereof
grow the two trees of knowledge and life: the fruits whereof are to be
gathered of us by these two hands of reading and hearing: but hearing is the
right hand: that is, the more active and effectual. The word of God is the
well of salvation, whence flow rivers of waters of life, that make glad the
city of God, (.i. his true Church) and our ears are the channels by which the
streams of these living waters do flow into our souls. It is also 1. Pet.
2.2.
sincere milk to nourish us, flowing from the two breasts of Christ (.i. the
two Testaments:) and our hearing is as the mouth whereby we suck this sincere
milk that we may grow thereby.

Wherefore let us hearken to that great proclamation of the King of Kings Esa.
55.^, etc.
: Lo, every one that thirsts come to the waters, etc. Let us not spend our
money (as too many do) for that which is not bread, and our labor for that
which satisfies not: (preferring like swine, husks, and acornes before better
food:) but let us come unto God, and incline our ears to him, that our souls
may live, etc. Psalm. 119.24.
Let his statutes be our delight, and our counsailors. Luc. 1^.39.42.
Let us choose Mary's better part (namely to sit at Christ's feet, and hear his
preaching:) saying with S. Peter, Ioh. 6.68.
Master, whither should we go from thee? thou have the words of eternal life.

For if we leave him and his sacred word to hearken to unwritten traditions,
Popes decretalls, Schoolemens labyrinths, Jesuits Pamphlets, or Seminary
Priests buzzing suggestions, inciting us to set up the 1. Sam. 5.3.
Idol Dagon with the Ark of God in the temple of our souls, or 2 Reg. 18.21
to divide our hearts between God and Baal (joining with the worship of the
true God and his Son Christ, the worship of Saints, Angels, Bread, Images,
Relics, etc.) we commit a double evil, we leave the fountain of living
Waters, and dig to our selves broken cesternes that can hold no water, Ier.
2.13.

Ber Ser. ^8. in Cant.
Solius habet auditus verum qui percipit verbum: None hears the truth but he
that hearkens to the word of truth: for the word of God alone is that Apoc. 1
16.
two-edged-sword, which comes out of the mouth of Christ: which is Heb. 4.12.
mighty in operation, and sharper than any two edged sword (to cut down
error, and kill sin in us,) entering into the dividing asunder of the soul,
and spirit, etc. Io^. 6.20.
As the sound of the ^ammes horns (Gods power accompanying it) made the walls
of Jericho to fall: so the mighty voice of Gods word (if rightly heard of all,
by the virtue of his spirit accompanying the same) would make the walls, not
only, of mystical Babell, but of hell it self to reele and totter, and fall
flat down, and the whole kingdom of Satan to come to mine: for it is Romans 1
6.
the power of God unto salvation: and it will make the Prince of hell recoyle
and give back, and fall to the ground Ioh. 28.6.
, as the powerful voice of Christ made Judas and his confederates go
backward and fall to the ground. Ber. Dom. 7. post Pent.
. And this glass of truth deceiues no man, flatters no man, but truly and
impartially shows every man what he is, that no man be cast down with
needless fears, nor lifted up with vain presumptions. Also it supplants
vice, and implants virtue in us: banisheth our vain, and cherishes our good
desires: lays our sins before our faces, and so humbles our proud and lofty
looks, and throws us down before Gods footstool, with godly sorrow and true
compunction for them, and then raises us up again with precious promises, and
unspeakable comforts in the tender mercies of a compassionate father, and
sovereign merits of a soule-sauing Savior.

These effects has this powerful word of Christ in all attentive, devout, and
religious hearers: if it have not in all, it is because many hear amiss: (as
Iac. 4.3.
many ask and receive not because they ask amiss:) for some have Mat. 13.9.
hearing, others vnhearing ears: some hear the word and keep it, others
hear and slight it c. 7.6.
; treading this precious pearl (like filthy Swine) under their feet, in the
mire of their sins; and rending those with the teeth of malice and obloquy that
bring it unto them: therefore Christ makes this first maine difference or
opposition between the hearers of the word: that the one sort are Romans 2.13.
not hearers only, but doers of the word (who are the wise builders and shall
be justified:) but the other sort are Iac. 1.22.
not doers of the word, but hearers only, deceiving their own souls: who are
foolish builders, and shall be condemned, for they with their building shall
come to ruin.

There be diverse sorts of unprofitable hearers.

1. Some have dull ears, Mat. 13, ^4.
hearing they hear, but do not understand. These are no better for their
being in the Church than the Churches pillars: for either ( Act 20 9.
with Eutichus) they sit sleeping while the minister is preaching: or if their
eyes wake, their hearts are a sleep: for (like men in a dream) their hearts
wave after their fancies, and are so firmly fixed on their worldly profits and
carnal pleasures that (like Idols in the Temple) Psa. 115 5, 6.
they have eyes and see not, ears and hear not: and although the sound of the
word beat their ears never so much, yet the sound of the world, and the flesh
beats it back again.

These although they can hunt Mammon dry-foote in their shops all the week,
and never be weary: or spend whole days and nights in a Tavern, sacrificing
to Bacchus: yet they think one hour too much to be spent in the Temple,
whereby those Mat. 8.34.
Gadarenes make it apparent that in their account hara domestica is preferred
before ara dominica, their Mammon before Christ, the world before the word, and
their own Swinesties before Gods Sanctuary.

2 Some have curious ears listening (like Athenians) after novelties: and
harkening after quaint phrases, and curious strains of wit, more than after
wholesome doctrine: like a child who desires to drink out of a painted glass,
more to please his fancy than to quench his thirst: or an Epicure at a feast,
who makes choice of such meats as are most delicious, not most wholesome: as
if they accounted the word of God no better than Ezec 33 31, 32
a Fiddlers song, wherein men regard more the pleasantness of the voice, and
sweetness of the music, than the soundness of the matter.

Yet when I condemn a curious and ouerdelicate ear, I do not commend a
barbarous rusticke ear which will not have wholesome doctrine adorned with fit
and significant phrases Psa 45.14.
which are the spouses embroydered garment of needle work to cloth and adorn
her. The mean between both is to be held: 1. That we desire not to hear
fine words without matter (which are like a gilded box that has nothing in
it:) nor rude and idle battologies (which are like the Chaos Ovid Metaph, li. 1.
, Rudis indigestaque moles, a confused and disordered heap of words, without
either method or matter: but sound doctrine adorned with fit and significant
phrases, free from the enticing words of man's wisdom, and yet 1. Cor. 2.4.
in the evidence of the spirit and power: which is like Ioh. 12.3.
Maryes Alablaster Box full of precious ointment.

3. Some have 2. Tim. 4.3.
itching ears, and they must be clawed first either with their own phrases:
for they must be Sainted, and marked out for Gods children, and the Sheep of
Christ, (as if their names alone were enrolled in the book of life:) and all
the Apostles and Martyrs (whose names and memories the Church has ever held
reverend) must be vnsainted again to please their humors: or else secondly
with Inuectiues against others whom they malign: and to this end they
magnify, cherish, and desire to hear only such preachers whom (like Parrats)
they may teach their (...), Persius Sat. 1.
and who may be as hollow Trunkes to carry through them the bullets of
reproaches which they shoot at others.

These have Eagles eyes to observe the defects of others, (easily espying their
Mat. 7.3.
brethrens moles, but not discerning their own beams ( criricall tongues to
censure the best word and actions: hypocritical looks to bleare the eyes of
the world: but Harpies hands, or claws, to hook all that comes near them;
and their ears (like Mindaes gates) are wider than the whole body of Religion
within them, so that it does easily run out at their ears (as Diogenes
supposed) Minda would do at the gates) and expires in hearing only.

4. Some have Act. 7.51.
uncircumcised ears and hearts: either forestalled with malice and praeiudice
against the Preacher, whom they hate (as Reg. 22.8.
Ahab did Michaiah) because he does not prophecye good unto them but evil:
and those wrest all that is well spoken to an ill sense: (as the spider turns
the juice of the sweetest flowers into poison:) or else so blockt, and barred up
with their own hearts lusts, and rebellious obstinacy, that although the Lord
Apoc. 3.21.
knock never so loud and often at the doors of their hearts, they cannot,
they will not open to him; for they have made their Zach. 7.10.
faces like a flint stone, and their hearts like an adamant stone, that they
might not hear the voice of the Lord by the mouths of his Prophets, etc.

For the Lord (as a just punishment of their former sins and rebellions) has
given them Romans 11.8.
the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they
should not hear: so that they be possessed with such a senseless stupiditie,
stupid security, and stiff-necked obstinacy, that like the bears which
Solinu^ c. 39.
Solinus writes of (though they be wounded they cannot be wakened: or those
fishes (which Arist. li. 4. de hist Aeia^ium c. 10.
Aristotle mentions,) which sleep so soundly, that although they have spears
thrust into their sides, they stir not a^ all.

Thus many sorts are there of unprofitable hearers (compared by Christ to
foolish builders) but there is only one sort of good and profitable hearers
(compared here to wise builders) namely those who hear the word of God and
keep it: firmly in their memories, and faithfully in their conuersations.

No man builds wisely and firmly in this spiritual building, but he that puts
in practice what he hears: Aug de Sermon. dom. in monte.
Non quisque firmat quae audit nisi faciendo: No man can well keep in memory
what he hears but by practizing: but if he forthwith put in practice what he
hears, those actions will be so many common places to confirm what he has
heard in his memory.

(...). v. 24.
Therefore hearing and doing, knowledge and obedience, faith, and charity,
truth and sanctity, must go hand in hand together in our Christian
profession: for Lact. de vero cultu. c. 5.
virtue without knowledge, is like a body without an head, and knowledge
without virtue like an head without a body: both monstrous and abominable.

Ioh. 10.27, 28.
My sheep hear my voice (says Christ) and I know them, and they follew me,
and I give unto them eternal life, etc. Behold here the five principal Linkes
of the golden chain of our salvation: 1, Election (my Sheep,) 2 Vocation:
(hear my voice:) 3. Justification, (and I know them) 4. Sanctification, (and
they follow me:) 5. Glorification; and I give unto them eternal life, etc.
Therefore he that will confirm to his own conscience his election, and be a
partaker of Justification, and a possessor of glorification, must have an
effectual vocation, and a sinccre sanctification, hearing the voice of Christ,
and following him.

To hear aright, Tu recte viuis si curas esse quod audis.
is to be what a man hears out of the word of God he should be: This is the
hearing which God requires: Deuteronomy. 6.3.
Hear therefore (O Israel) and observe to do it, that it may be well with
thee, etc. And that Samuel offers to the Lord, 1. Sam. 1.9.
(Speak Lord for thy servant hears:) And that David promises, Psalm. 858.
I will hear what the Lord will say concerning me: And that devout S. Bern.
prays for, Ber: Ser. 28. in Cant.
Vtinam and mihi aperiat aurem dominus vt intret ad cor meum sermo veritatis,
etc. Oh that the Lord would open mine ear, that the word of truth may enter
into mine heart, and clear the eye of my understanding, and cleanse my will
and affections, etc. For if we thus hear, Faith will clear that eye of the
soul which infidelity has troubled: and obedience open that hard and flinty
heart, which disobedience and rebellion had shut up and closed.

This doing of Gods word consists in two things: Esa. 1.16, 17. Romans 15.8. Ephesians.
4.22, 23, 24.


1. In ceasing to do evil; and 2. In learning to do well: In casting off the
works of darkness, and putting on the armor of light: In putting off the old
man, and putting on the new, etc.

1. We must mortify sin in our earthly members, etc. ( Col. 3.5.) and
crucify the flesh with the affections and lusts: Gal. 5.24. Ber. Ser. 30. in
Cant.
which is a kind of Spiritual Martyrdom. And this must be done: 1. Speedily,
Luc. 12.40.
because we know not what day or hour the Son of man will come to call us to
an account 2. Cor. 5.10.
for the deeds done in the body, whether they be good or evil. 2. Totally, 1.
Sam. 15, 9, etc.
for in destroying these spiritual Amalekites we must not spare one Agag:
neither may we foster one Iud. 16.4. etc.
Dalila, or Mat. 14.4.
Herodias in our bosoms, (.i. one darling or beloved sin) least that one
(though we think it but a little one, as Genesis 19.20.
Lot said of Zoar) incense Gods just wrath, and work our deserved destruction:
for if any of these Iud. 2. and 3.
Canaanites remain within our borders, they will be pricks in our eyes, and
thorns in our sides, wounds in our souls, and ulcers in our conscienences,
giving our souls no rest, but still vexing and molesting us.

3. Finally, that we return no more 2. Pet. 2.21, ^2.
with the dog to his vomit, or the sow that is washed to her wallowing in the
mire: for it had been better for us never to have known the way of
righteousness, than having known it, to turn from the holy commandment
given unto us. A true poenitent hates sin once repented of, more mortally
than 2 Samuel 13.15.
Ammon did Thamar after he had defloured her: or Genesis 27 35.
Esau did Jacob after he had supplanted him twice, and deceived him both of his
birthright and blessing. For sin is in this respect a true Jacob, a
supplanter indeed. 1. It supplants us and depriues us of our birthright, or
interest unto the kingdom of heaven, which we should have had by Christ Jesus
the true heir of heaven: 2. It depriues us of all Gods blessings, temporal,
spiritual, and eternal: and therefore is to be mortally hated, and utterly
rejected.

2. We must do good, Mat 3.8.
bringing forth fruits worthy amendment of life: and Col. 1.10.
walking worthy of the Lord, endeavoring to please him in all things, being
fruitful in all good works and abounding in the knowledge of God.

And to the end our works may be truly good, and such as God accepts, we
must observe these conditions.

1. That our selves be in Christ, ingraffed into him as branches into the
stock, and incorporated as members with their head by the bond of the spirit,
and hand of faith ^. Cor. 5.17.
If any man be in Christ let him be a new creature: First, he must be in
Christ, and then a new creature. It is the axiom of the School Divines:
Regula Scholast.
Complacentia operis praesupponit complacentiam personae: The work can never
be accepted, except the person be first accepted: Genesis 4.4.5.
as we see in Cain and Abel. Therefore S. Aug. says of the virtues of the
Heathens, (as the justice of Aristides, the temperance of Fabritius, etc.) that
they are but Aug in Ps. 31.
Splendida peccata,.i. Glistring or glorious sins: and Et Ser. 55. de ver.
dom. in Ioh.
Cursus celerimus praeter viam,.i. a most swift course, but out of the way: and
says moreover, Et in Psalm. 83.
That their chickens were trodden under foot by God, because they were not
hatched in the nest of the Church: meaning that their good works were rejected
of God, because themselves were not members of the Christian Church.

2. That our good works proceed 1. Tim. 1.5.
from a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned: for the spirit of
grace is the father, and faith the mother of good works: the one the root, and
the other the juice of that tree that brings forth good fruit, Ber. Ser. 30.
in Cant.
Nec palmites absque vite, nec virtus absque fide; True virtue can be no more
without true faith, than the branches without the vine in which they grow and
by which they live, and are nourished.

1. Reg. 6.34.
The two doors of the Sanctum Sanctorum had folding leaves clasping in each
other: to teach us that the two doors of faith and charity (by which Christ
enters into our souls, as his holy Temples) must never be separated, but Se
inuicem tenere,.i. Fold in one the other, and claspe hands together. Leo magnus.
Sicut enim in fide est operum ratio, sic in operibus fidei fortitudo: As faith
is the norme or squire to rule out our good workees, so good works are the
proppe or pillar to uphold and strengthen our faith. For faith and good works
be fundamental stones in the spiritual building of our souls, to be an holy
Temple in the Lord, Ephesians, 2. vlt.
an habitation of God by the spirit: but they both lean upon, rely upon, and
are borne up, and sustained by the greatest and chiefest cornerstone, Christ
Jesus.

Maldonate Mald. in loc.
therefore, the Jesuit, does falsely tax us (in his Commentaries upon this
text) for building on the sand, because we teach (with S. Paul) That Romans 3.28.
faith alone does justify without the works of the law: seeing we teach
withal, that charity is the life and soul of faith: and that a true
justifying faith must needs be operative, and fruitful in charity: Iac. 2. vlt.
for as the body without the soul, so faith without charity is dead.

We teach indeed (and that according to the Scriptures) that in the act of
Justification faith is alone: Thesis nostra. Fides est sola quoad actum
iustificandi, non solitaria quoad actum existendi.
because we believe that not any merit of our own works, but the merit of
Christ his perfect obedience active and passive does purchase at Gods hands the
remission of our sins, and makes our peace and reconciliation with him: and
faith alone is the eye whereby we behold Christ, and the hand of the soul
which we stretch out to lay hold on him, and to apply the plasture of his
precious merits to our wounded souls, and to open the rich treasury or
caskenet of his spiritual graces unto us: thereforethough we teach, that faith
is alone in that act (as most proper thereunto) as the eye is alone in the act
of seeing, the ear in the act of hearing, and the hand in the act of receiving
(for these members perform those offices and no other:) yet we say that faith
is not alone in the act of existing, but does coexist in the soul of the
justified man with other graces, (namely, hope, charity, obedience, patience,
etc.) as the eye, ear, and hand are not alone in the body, but do coexist
with other members.

2. And Bellarmin does but fight with his own shadow when Bellur. li. 4. de
Iustificat. ac. 1. ad 15.
he labors in 14. several chapters to prove against the Protestants the
necessity of good works unto salvation, which we never denied, either
directly, or by necessary consequence, as he does there falsely accuse us.

For we teach them to be necessary unto salvation, Non necessitate causalitatis
sed consequentiae: not as meritorious causes of our Justification, but as
necessary effects, concomitances, Thesis nostra.
and consequents thereof: (as S. Aug. taught long since Aug. de fide and
operibus cap. 14
Sequuntur Iustificatum ^on praecedunt iustificandum): for this queen of all
graces, (a true justifying faith) is ever accompanied, and attended on with
other graces, and good works: as Psalm. 45.9.
the spouse with her honorable women.

Also we teach them to be necessary to salvation: 1. Necessitate praecepti:
because God has commanded us to perform them: Opera sunt necessaria ad
salutem necessitate precepti, and me dii, sed non meriti.
for we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus, unto good works which
God has ordained that we should walk in them, Ephesians. 2.10.2. Necessitate medij:
because they are the mean and pathway to salvation, but not Necessitate
meriti: as if they were not only the Ber. Ser. 61. in Cant.
way to the kingdom, but the cause of our reigning there.

For we utterly disclaim that Popish doctrine of the merit of works. 1. As
derogatory to the grace of God, and 2. to the merits of Christ Jesus.

1 As derogatory to the grace of God: because as Saint Ber. says truly, Ber.
Ser. 67. in Cant.
Non est quo gratia intret vbi iam meritum occupauit: Deest gratiae quicquid
meritis deputatur,.i. Grace is shut out of doors where merit has got
posession: whatsoever we add or ascribe to merit, we substract from grace,
according to that of S. Paul, Rom, 11.6.
If it be of grace it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no more grace:
But if it be of works then it is no more of grace, or else were works no more
works. Now it is the grace of God alone that works all good in us: Phil. 2.13.
He works in us both the will and the deed, etc. and he finds nothing in us
which of it self (without the help of grace) can concur with his grace in
the doing of good: or which may increase or add unto, but rather decrease and
blemish the perfection of our well doing: Aug. ep. 105. ad Sixtum.
Cum non liberat nisi gratia, nil iustum inuenit in eo quem liberat: non
voluntatem, non operationem, non saltem ipsam excusationem. (Whereas says S.
Aug.) the grace of God alone frees us from the bondage of sin, it finds
nothing good or righteous in him whom it, does free, not a good will, or a good
work, yea not so much as an excuse for sin, Hom. 93 de temp.
Non enim in te placet nisi quod habes ex deo: quod autem habes ex te displicet
Deo. There is nothing in thee (O man) which does please God, but what thou have
from God: whatsoever thou have from thy self does displease God.

2. Justitia duplex promissi and debiti. Aug. ep. 105.
And it is the mere grace of God that rewards our well doing: for it is merces
indebita, (an vndes^rued reward) or if any way due, it is by the justice of
Gods promise, not of our desert: for God when he rewards our good works,
crowns his own gifts not our merits. So S. Cyprian, Cypr. epist. 77.
When God beholds our fortitude and constancy in our conflicts with our
spiritual or temporal enemies, he approoues of our willingness, and helps
our weakness in the fight, and crowns us when we have overcome: wherein he
does reward in us what himself has done, and honors what himself has
performed.

2. We disclaim the merits of works, as derogatory to the all-sufficient
merits of Christ Jesus: as if these alone were not sufficient to justify and
save us, but that they must be pieced out with our own merits: whereas S. Ber.
says Ber. Ser. 61. i^ Cant.
, That the righteousness of Christ is not pallium breue, (.i. a short, or
scanty cloak that cannot cover two, namely, himself and us) but largitur
larga, and aeterna iustitia:.i. a most ample, large, and aeternall
righteousness covering in him the treasures of his mercies, and riches of his
goodness, and in us the multitude of our sins.

Therefore the Saints of God will ascribe nothing to their own merits, Aug. in
Psalm. 39
but all to Gods only grace and mercy. Ber. 5. Ser. in Cant.
Nolo meritum quod gratiam excludat: horreo quicquid de meo est, vt meus s^m,
etc I will have no merit (says S. Ber.) which may exclude grace: I tremble at
any thing that comes from my self, that I should be my self alone, and stand
upon mine own feet: It is the grace of God that does justify me freely: my
merit is the mercy of the Lord, if he be rich in mercy, I am rich in merit.

I conclude this point with S. August, Aug. de praedestinat. sanct. Tom. 7.
Conticescant ergo merita quae periere per Adam, and regnet dei gratia per
Iesum Christum: Let merits therefore be silent, and not dare to plead for
themselves before the bar of Gods justice, which are lost in Adam: and let
the Rom, 5.17.
grace of God reign by Christ Jesus.

Mich. 6.8.
He has showed thee (o man) what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee,
namely, to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. As
in the building of the Tabernacle. Moses was commanded to do all things
according to the Exodus 25. vlt.
patt^rne showed him in the Mount: so in this our spiritual building of our
souls and bodies to be the ^. Cor. 6.1^.
Temples of the Holy Ghost, we must have ^n eye to the pattern that God has
showed us in the holy m^untaine of his heavenly word or else our building will
prove Babell, and turn to our own confusion.

For if the good works we do be after the Col. 2.8 and 23
traditions of men, and the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ: (as
many Popish devotions are) namely, their pilgrimages, inuocations of Saints and
Angels, adorations of Saints, relics, and Images, and building of
Monasteries for lazy Monks, (which are Tit. 1.12.
(...), evil beasts, slow bellies:) then they are at the best but (...), a will
worship, and bodily exercise, and profit nothing: of which God may truly say
Esa. 1.12.
who has required these things at your hand?

But if they be such as God has commanded, Lact. Jnstit. 15
such as have true Religion for their root; and piety, and charity for the two
maine branches whereon they grow, then they be accepted of God, and approved
of men, Romans 14.18. And such have been the good works of this honorable
city: (namely, founding of Hospitalls for poor Orphans, decayed Gentlemen,
and Tradesmen, maimed Soldiers, etc. that their Ihb 21.20.
Loins and souls may bless you, and bless God for you:) and erecting of
Grammar Schools for the training up of youth in good letters, and such like,
in which kind of good works, I dare be bold to say, that our beautiful
Rachel, (.i. true Religion) has been more fruitful in one age; See Willets
Catalogue of the Protestants good works, annexed to his Synopsi. Papis.
than their bleare-eyed Leah (.i. blind Popish superstition) has been in many
ages. And I heartily pray that in all such good works ye may abound yet more
and more, and that your charity may be like the good 2. Reg. 4.6.
Shunamites oil, ever flowing till there be empty vessels to receive it.

God:) Nor that they may be trumpets to proclaim, and blow our fame abroad in
the world: (as Mat. 6.2.
the Pharisees in giving their alms, caused a trumpet to be blown before them;
Ber. Ser. 30. in Cant.
Quot enim and quales piorum botros operum, aut tulit iactantia, aut faedauit
inanis gloria? for how many clusters of the grapes of good works has pride
and vaineglory corrupted, and plucked off from the vines that bare them? Bonorum
operum fines.
) but the ends of our good works must be these.

1. Gods glory: Mat. 5.16. c. 6.9.
Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your works, and
glorify your father which is in heaven: for that must be the prime end of our
actions which Christ has taught us to make the first of our petitions: namely,
that Gods name may be glorified. And if we glorify God by the fruits of
righteousness here on earth, he will glorify us with a crown of
righteousness hereafter in heaven.

2. The good of his Church, and our Christian brethren, whose good we must
tender as our own, as fellow soldiers of the same camp, fellow Citizens of
the same city of God, fellow-seruants of the same family, and fellow members of
the same mystical body.

3. The salvation of our own souls, which we must prize more then the whole
world. Mat. 16.26. Aug. in Psalm: 120.
Noli facere nisi propter vitam aeternam, ideo fac, and securus facies. Have no
sinister intention in the doing of thy good works, but aim therein at thine
own salvation, do them to that end, and thou shall deal securely. For a true
Christian (though he must renounce his own merit in his well doing and
suffering for Christ's sake: yet he may have an Heb. 11.26.
eye to the recompense of reward, (with Moses:) 2. Tim. 4.8.
to the crown of righteousness, (with Saint Paul:) and Heb. 12.2.
to the glory set before him (with Christ himself:) as a spur to prick him
forward to well doing, and a cordial to comfort him in his suffering. Yea, he
may safely expect it also without all pride and praesumption: yet not as due by
his own desert, but by Gods faithful promise: Psalm. 146.6.
who keeps his fidelity for ever, and Romans 2.6.
rewards every man according to his works.

The good works done to those ends, may absolutely, and in every respect be
termed good: Bonu^ triplex. 1. In se, and cui fit, sed non facienti.
for the Schoolmen distinguish of a threefold good work. 1. Good in it self,
and to him unto whom it is done, but not to the doer: (as when a man gives an
alms to a needy person, not out of charity, but out of pride and vain glory
to be seen of men.) 2. 2. Jn se, and facienti, sed non cui fii.
In it self, and to the doer, but not unto him to whom it is done: as when out
of our charity we bestow an alms upon an idle person: 3. 3 In se, and cui fii,
and facienti.
In it self, and to the doer, and to him also to whom it is done: as when we
give an alms to one that truly wants, not for our own but Christ his sake: 2.
Sam. 9.7.
As David did good to poor Mephiboseth for Jonathans sake.

Dorcas) Act. 9.36.
are full of good works and alms which ye do, not Mat. 6.1, 2.
Pharisaically to cause a trumpet to be blown before you when ye give your
alms, or to do your good work^ to be seen of men: for then although ye have
the reward ye now look for, and hunt after upon earth, ye shall loose the
reward which ye should look for in heaven, Verse. 3.
your temporal vaineglory will rob you of eternal true glory: but do them in
secret, and for the ends before specified, and your Father which sees you in
secret will reward you openly. Verse 4.


And the less ye seek for your own glory on earth, the more ye shall obtain
it: the faster ye fly from it, the faster it will pursue you (as the shadow
the body:) for a good name is the inseparable companion of well doing.

And by doing bona, been, Fructus bonerum operum. 1. Am^r.
( i. Good works to good ends) ye shall undoubtedly reap these fruits: 1.
Love, honor, and reverence among men: so that they will rejoice to enjoy, and
grieve to loose you, ( 2 Reg. 2.12.
as Elisha did for Elias at his assumption, My father, my father, the chariot
of Jsraell, and horsemen thereof, and Act. 9 39.
the poor Widows who stood weeping for the death of charitable Dorcas.) 2. 2.
Conscien. pa^.
Peace, joy, and solace in your own souls: which is the continual feast that
God himself makes for them that feed the hungry, etc. 3. 3. Hon^r.
A good name: which while ye live shall be Pro. 3.8.
health to your nauells, and marrow to your bones: and when ye dye it shall be
a precious ointment to embaulme your bodies in the grave, and 15.1.
as Ioh. 12.3.7.
Mary's spikenard embaulmed Christ's body at his funeral. 4. 4 Gloria aeterna.
An 1 Pet. 1.4. etc. 5. v 4.
inheritance immortal, and undefiled, reserved in heaven for you, and an
immarciscible crown of glory.

Gal. 6 9.
Be not weary therefore of well doing, for if ye faint not, ye shall reap
without weariness: namely, love, honor, joy, peace, and glory both in earth
and heaven. Chrysostom. in loc.
Qui deficit in semine non gaudebit in mess, sed si homo non imponat finem
operi, deus non imponet finem remunerationi. He that faints in seed time shall
fail in harvest: but if a man put no period to his perseverance in well doing,
God will put no end to the reward of his well doing.

The 2. general part.
The second difference between these wise and foolish builders is in the
choice of their foundation: the first building on a rock, the other on the
sand.

The principal care of a wise builder is to make choice of a firm foundation
to build upon: for if the foundation be immooueable, the whole building will
stand fast and firm: but if the foundation fail, all the building (though
never so laboriously framed, and artificially composed, will fall to the
ground, and come to ruin. Now, no foundation is so firm and immooueable as a
Rock, and therefore no building so strong as that which is raised on a rocky
foundation: which will not fail how great a weight soever be laid upon it, nor
be moved, much less be removed with any gusts of wind, force of storms, or
violence of torrents whatsoever.

A true Christian therefore that hears Gods word, and does it, is fitly
compared to such a wise builder that builds his house upon a rock: Verse 24.
I will liken him, etc.

Aug. Hier. Basil, etc. in loc.
some interpreters understand Christ himself: because by the power of his
might, the righteous that cleave unto him by faith and obedience, are protected
and strengthened against the violence of all temptations, afflictions, and
persecutions: In which sense David says, Psalm. 18.2.
The Lord is my rock and my fortress, etc.

2. Others, by this rock understand the inviolable and immooueable divine
truth of his Sacred word: So Chrysostom. upon this text, Chrysostom. in loc.
(...): He calls the firm security of his own doctrine a Rock: because upon
a rock a man may build securely: and hereby he mooues all his Disciples to
embrace his divine doctrine: (...). Jbid.
showing the firm soliditie and immutability thereof, by the solidity and
immobility of a rock: which who so builds his faith upon, shall stand fast
Psa. 125.1.
like Mount Sion that cannot be removed, but stands fast for ever.

But I think both these expositions may be conjoined, and by this rock we
may understand both Christ, and his Sacred truth: for Ioh. 14.16. c 17.17.
as he is the truth, so his word is truth: as he is the life, and that
aeternall, so his words are c. 6.68.
the words of aeternall life. And the whole word of truth is nothing else but
the revelation and manifestation of that aeternall word, that increated truth
Christ Jesus. For he is the pith and kernel of the whole Bible, Apoc. 1.8.
the (...) of the law, and (...) of the Gospel: Aug. Q. in Ex. 73. and 15. de
ciu. dei c. 18.
Velatus in veteri Testamento, reuelatus in nouo, in illo praedictus, in isto
praedicatus: veiled and clasped up in the old Testament under obscure
Prophesies, promises, types: and figures, and opened or reueiled in the new:
for Exodus 73.9.
as the two Cherubins had their faces each to other, and both to the
Propitiatory, or mercy-seat, so the two Testaments have relation each to other,
and are mutually confirmed one by the other, and have both an eye to one and
the same Christ, 1 Ioh. 2.2,
who is the Propitiation for our sins.

As Christ only is that foundation whereon the spiritual building of the
Church is raised in some respects: 1 Christus Petra
namely first, because he alone is the beginning and fountain, whence all
spiritual good originally flows: Iac. 1 17.
Every good and perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father
of lights, etc. and the foundation whereon our confidence, hope, and
expectation of any good which we expect from God groundeth it self: 2 Cor
1.20.
for in him all the promises of God are yea and Amen, to the glory of God the
Father.

Secondly, because all our persuasion of the most Sacred and irrefragable
authority of divine truth stays it self on him alone, as being the only
Mal. 2.5.
Angel of that great covenant of life and peace, which God has made with his
Church in him, and revealed it to his Church by him: ( Ephesians. 2.14.16, 17.
who is our peacemaker, and peace-preacher, and our peace: and the only
inditer of the Sacred Scripture, Luc. 1.70.
who spoke by the mouths of all his holy Prophets, which were but P^al. 45.1.
the pens of this ready Writer:) in which respects the Apostle says truly, 1
Cor. 3.11.
Other foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, namely Christ Jesus:
and on this rock or foundation the Apostles themselves, and their doctrine
were founded, or else Act 5.37.
(as Gamaliel says) both they and it would quickly have come to naught, and
fallen to ruin.

2. Doctr. Apost.
So in some other respects Ephesians. 2.19, 20.
the doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is called the Churches foundation,
Christ Jesus being the chief corner stone.

First, because they were the first that by their doctrine laid the Churches
foundation, and converted Infidells to the Christian faith.

Secondly, because their doctrine (received immediately from God by most
undoubted revelation, without mixture of error, and now left recorded unto us
in the Sacred Scripture) is the infallible rule of faith to all succeeding
generations, and that most sure, immooueable, and rocky foundation, upon which
the faith of all Christians may, and does most s^curely stay it self.
Therefore Saint John says, Apoc. 21.^4.
The wall of the city of God has twelve foundation stones, and in them were
written the names of the Lambs twelve Apostles.

And herein Peter had no pre-eminence above the rest, except a primacy of order
only: for Su^er omnes ^quo Eccles fortitudo solidatu^ (...). in Jo^. li. 1
Saint Hierome says, the Church is aequally founded on the doctrine of all the
Apostles: for these words, Mat. 16.18.
Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam: were not spoken
personally to Peter, but generally to all the Apostles, (who as well as Peter
did believe and confess the same faith,) though in token of unity they were
uttered to one which in unity did appertain to all the Apostles, Vnus pro
multis vnitas, pro ^niuersis. Aug. in Psalm. 88.
in whose names Peter alone made this confession. Moreover, not Peter's person,
or place, but the faith which he confessed, is that rock on which the Church
is built: as both the whole stream of the Fathers, and the general counsel
of Chalcedon do testify. Vide Aug. de ver. dom. Ser. 13. Hill. de Trin li. 6.
Chrysostom. inc. 16 Mat. Theod. in Cant. Page 235. Ambros. in cap. 2. ad Ephesians.
Epist. in Appendice, Conc. Chalced. 13.

Seeing therefore he was called Aug Retract. li. 1. c. 21.
Petrus a petra, from that rock of faith which he confessed, Thou art the
Christ the Son of the living God: which faith the rest of the Apostles held,
taught, and confessed as well as he, and sealed it with their blood, we may
truly infer (with S. Jerome) Hieron. in Amos, li. 3. c. 6.
that in this respect they were rocks (as well as he) whereon the Church is
founded.

Yea Petrus gessit personam Ecclesicut Judas inimicorum Christi. Aug. in Psalm
108.
S. Aug. says farther, that Peter in confessing Christ: and receiving the
power of the keys sustained the person, not only of the Apostles, but of the
whole Church Militant, as Judas did of the Church malignant: Jdem. 50. in Ioh
c. 12.
Vnus malus corpus malorum significat quomodo Petrus corpus bonorum, corpus
ecclesiae: As one Judas signified the whole society of the wicked, so one
Peter, the whole company of good men, the body of the Church. Therefore from
those words of Christ to Peter, (Thou art Peter, etc.) (who represented not the
Apostles only, but the whole Christian Church confessing the same faith:) it
cannot be inferred, that S. Peter and his successors are that rock on which
the Church is founded.

Those therefore that build their faith on that foundation of the Prophets and
Apostles, whereof Christ is the chief cornerstone, by believing, confessing,
and practizing, are those wise builders here specified which build their houses
on a rock.

For the entire and sincere belief, profession, Nota Eccles. infa^^biler^
and practice of those supernatural verities which God has revealed in his
Son Christ by the ministry of the Prophets and Apostles, (and that in
verity) is an infallible note of the true Church, and of a true member of the
true Church.

All other notes without this are false, and counterfeite, and may deceive us.
Notae fall^biles.


1 Antiquitas.
1. Antiquity without truth is nothing else but Cypr. epist 74. and 63
Vetustas erroris: for we must not so much attend unto, or consider what others
have done or thought fit to be done before us, as what Christ has done who is
before all: we must not follow the custom of man, but the truth of God: for
the true antiquity is truth it self derived from Christ Esa. 9.6.
the Father of aeternitie.

2. Successio.
2. Personal succession without doctrinall is but as Mat. 26.1. etc.
Caiaphas succeeded Aaron, and yet was an enemy to the true High Priest Christ
Jesus. Naz in laudem Athanasis.
Such false Pastors, or bad members of the visible Church succeeded the true,
and good, as darkness succeedes the light, or sickness, health, or a tempest,
fair weather, or madness the right use of reason.

3. Vnitas.
3. Unity without truth is but a devilish faction, and like that of thieues and
rebels) an accu^sed confederacy, and wicked conspiracy against the God of
truth, Apoc. 19 16.
Who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: Such though they combine and v^
themselves never so strongly, are but like Genesis 49.5.
Simeon and Leui, brethren in evil; or like Luc. 23 12.
Herod and Pilate, that united themselves in a league of friendship to
persecute Christ Jesus.

4. Vniuersalitas
Universality or multitude without truth is nothing: for one 1 Reg. 18.19.
Elias teaching and professing Gods truth, and truly worshipping the true God
of Israel, is to be preferred before four hundred Proph^ts of Baal, though
brought up in Ahabs Court, and eating bread at Iezabells table: and one Luc. 23
42.
poenitent thief confessi^g Christ before the high Priests and Elders,
Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces, and thousands of Jews persecuting him.

5. Nom^n Catho.
Nor the specious titles of holy, Catholic, Apostolic, etc for that Church
which has these titles without truth, is like a box in an Apothecaries shop,
which without has the title of a sovereign antidote written in fair
Characters, and within is full of deadly poison.

Bare titles will not serve the turn: for those haeretikes in Saint Bernards
time, who in truth were Apostatici (because they revolted from the Catholic
faith) termed themselves Apostolici (though they could show no sign of their
Apostleship: Ber. Ser. 64. in Cant.
) and in our days Popish Catholics term themselves Catholics, and
Iebusites, Jesuits, and the Synagogue of lust, the family of love.

2 Reg. 9.30.
painted face of that whorish Iezabell, or her Apoc. 17.4.
golden cup glistering without, but within full of the wine of her
abominations, and filthiness of her fornications: the truth of Gods word
alone, is that firm and immnoueable rock on which every wise Christian must
build the spiritual aedifice of his soul and conscience.

1 Petra regenerat.
1. This is that rock out of which we are spiritually hewn: ( Esa. 51.2) that
is, the Rock of our regeneration: for 1 Pet. 1.23.
we are borne again not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, by the word of
God which lives and abides for ever.

2 Nutrit.
2. The rock of our spiritual nourishment unto salvation: whence do flow 1.
the waters of life to refresh our fainting souls, as Exodus 17 16.
streams of Waters flowed from the rock in Rephidim to refresh the thirsting
bodies of the Israelites. 2. The honey of spiritual consolation, which does
comfort the souls of Gods Saints in their spiritual Warfarre, more than the
honey that 1 Samuel 14.27.
Jonathan tasted comforted his fainting Spirits in his warfare against the
Philistims: for Gods word is sweeter to the souls of his children than the
Psalm. 19.10.
honey and honey comb. 3. The oil of denotion: for this rock poures us out
Ioh. 29.6.
rivers of oil, to supply our hard hearts, and stiff knees, that our souls
and bodies may be flexible to the will of God.

3. Protectionis.
3. The rock that shelters us from the tempests of temptation, and floudes of
affliction and persecution: Psalm. 104.18.
as the stony rocks are a refuge for the conies: for whither should we fly
in all these for shelter but to Christ and his word? The Prophet Esaias says of
Christ: Esa 32.11
This man shall be an hiding place from the wind, and a cover from the tempest,
as rivers of Water in a dry place, or as the shadow of a great rock in a weary
land.

And David of his word, Psalm 56.10.
In thy word will I rejoice, in thy word will I comfort me.

4. Salutis.
4. The rock wherein we may repose us for rest and safety, (as the Cant. 2 14.
Doves in the clefts of the rock:) or as Moses did Exodus 33.22. v. 23.
who was put by God into the cleft of the rock in Horeb, and covered with his
hand while his glory passed by: and in this rock we may hehold (with Moses)
not only posteriora dei, 5. Contemplat.
the backe-parts of God, (that is, his wondrous works, and the acts of his
power and justice:) but anteriora dei, the foreparts of God, (that is, the face
of his mercy, and Psalm. 4.6.
light of his countenance:) and that in him which is the Heb. 1.3.
express character of his fathers substance, or image of his person, namely,
Christ Jesus. And with 1 Reg. 19.11, 1^.
Elias standing in the cave of the rock in Horeb:) we may behold God himself
passing by us, not only in a strong wind, violent earthquake, and consuming
fire of justice by the threatenings of the law, but in a soft still voice of
mercy by the promises of the Gospel.

Seeing therefore Christ and his holy word is the only rock.

First, of our regeneration: without which we lie Ephesians. 2.1.
dead in sins and trespasses.

Secondly, of our spiritual nourishment and consolation: without which we can
never grow to a c. 42 3.
perfect man in Christ Jesus.

Thirdly, of our supportation: without which we fall to ruin.

Fourthly, of our shelter and protection, without which we lie open to the
storms of all miseries, temptations, afflictions, and persecutions.

Fifthly, of our divine contemplation: wherein we may see God and his Sacred
mysteries by the eye of faith Cor 2.14.
which can nor be discerned by the eye of reason: and without which we are
Apoc. 3.17.
miserable, and wretched, poor, and blind, and naked: let us build our faith
and obedience on this blessed rock, which is immooueable, and cannot be
shaken, and then we shall have a Heb. 12.28.
kingdom that cannot be shaken, that is, of aeternall glory in heaven.

All that build not on this rock are foolish builders, and build upon the
sand, or superficies of the earth without a foundation.

By the sand is here meant, 2 Super arenam aedificare.
Faber. Stap. in Loc. 1.
Aliud a petra fundamentum; that is, any other foundation of our spiritual
building besides Christ and his Sacred word: namely, men's traditions, or our
own opinions, or false miracles, or lying legends, or the worlds baits, or
the devils suggestions, etc. all which are fitly compared unto sand: 1. Rat.
Simil.
for their worthlesnesse: for sand is of small or no value: 2. their
fruitlesnesse; for sand is barraine:) 3. their discohaerent incongruity, for
ye cannot make a rope of sand, the parts whereof will not hang together: 4.
their inconstant instabilitie, floating like a quick sand.

Every Haeretike therefore (as Hilar. in Loc
Hilary says) builds upon the sand: because Haereticall doctrines had no
firmer ground than men's fancies, and have no cohaerence either with the truth,
or among themselves. Therefore Iren. li. 1. c. 13.
Ireneus compares haeretikes to men laboring of a frenzy: Quia vmbras pro
rebus sectuntur: They pursue their own shadows, and feed themselves with
their own fancies. And Beda in Loc.
Beda says, That every sinner builds on the sand, because sin has no
foundation to stay it self upon, nor any real entity or subsistence in it
self: for it is (...), a mere irregularitie, or deflexion from the law of
God.

1 Papists.
First, Superstitious Papists: secondly, Profane Belials: thirdly, Greedy
Mammonists: fourthly, Masqued Hypocrites.

First, Superstitious Papists (though they would be accounted the only true
Church, and that none built upon the rock of truth but they:) build their
faith upon sandy foundations. I will not meddle with those sandy foundations
whereon they build the hope of their salvation: namely, their own merits and
satisfactions, the merits and intercessions of Saints and Angels, and the
Popes indulgences, whereby he exhausteth the Churches treasury (as they term
it) to fill his own coffers: but will only speak of those whereon (as maine
foundations) they build their faith, forsaking the sole immooueable rock on
which they should build it, namely, Christ and his Sacred truth recorded in the
Scriptures.

Papist. Fidei fundamenta tria.
And these are three: 1. the Churches traditions: 2. the Churches authority: 3.
the Popes infallibility: yet these three meet in one center, and are deuolued
by them into one and the same ground or principle of their faith: for they make
the Popes mouth the Delphos, that delivers to the present Church the Oracles of
the ancient Churches traditions.

And their Canon Law set forth under Gregory the 13. says, D 40. Si Papa.
That men do with such reverence respect the Apostolical sea of Rome, that
they rather desire to know the institutions of Christian Religion from the
Popes mouth, than from the holy Scriptures.

But let us consider these sandy foundations of their faith severally.

1 Tradit
1. For Traditions, their council of Trent made a carnal decree Hist. Conc.
Trid:
(at the time of a Carnouall) that Sess. 4 Decr 1.
they should be received with the same reverence and affection wherewith we
receive the Sacred Scriptures: yea Costeri L^^chirid. c. 10.
Costerius a Jesuit goes farther, and will have them received with more
reverence, because they are the epistle of the King of heaven, written with his
own finger in the heart of the Church, (that is, the Pope, and Popish
Prelates) whereas the Scriptures are written but with ink and paper.

These traditions they make of three sorts: D. Bysb. contra P^rk. de Trad.
1. Divine, delivered by Christ himself: 2. Apostolical, delivered by the
Apostles: 3. Ecclesiastical, delivered by the Church.

1 Divine.
1. Concerning divine traditions (if they be truly such) we most reverently
and religiously receive them: but we acknowledge none for such but only those
doctrines of faith, and of Gods worship which are either expressly, or by
necessary consequence contained in the old and new Testament.

For although we know and acknowledge that Bulling. de ver. Dei.
the substance of the old Testament was delivered among the Patriarchs from
hand to hand by tradition from Adam to Moses: and of the new, till it was
penned by the Apostles and Evangelists ( D. Abbot. cont Bysh. de Trad.
as some think for eight, as others for twenty, as others for fourscore
years:) yet we teach that when God had taken the custody of his own
tradition to himself by selecting and inspiring choice vessels of grace to
commit them to writing (least the streams of truth should have been polluted
by running through the muddy channells of men's mouths) then the Church was
bound to receive nothing for divine truth but what is contained in the
Scriptures, or necessarily deduced therefrom, and firmly grounded thereupon.

As when God had conueighed the whole light of the world ( Genesis 1.3
which before was dispersed in the first days creation) into the body of the
Sun ( and v. 14. etc.
created the fourth day:) then he would have the Moon and Stars to derive
their light from thence, and the whole earth to be therewith enlightened: so
though in his first plantation of his Church, God did for a time continue the
knowledge of his truth by immediate revelation thereof unto some chosen men
which might deliver it to his Church from hand to hand: yet now, since he has
conueighed the whole light of divine truth into the Canon of the Scripture, he
will have all the Pastors and members of the Church to derive their light of
saving knowledge and true faith from thence only: so that the doctrine of the
Scriptures is now the only divine Tradition.

2. Touching Apostolical Traditions we acknowledge them likewise for divine;
if they understand thereby, 2 Apost Trad.
that divine doctrine which the Apostles first preached, then wrote in the
Scriptures, as the pillar and foundation of our faith: of which S. Paul
speaks, Cor. 11.23.
Accepi a Domino quod tradidi vobis: I have received of the Lord that which I
have also delivered unto you, etc. Gal. 1.11, 12.
for the Gospel which was preached of me I received it not of man, nor was
taught it by man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ

And this is the holy and divine Tradition which Iren. li. 3. c. 1.
Ireneus, Cypr. Epist. 74. etc. Script. est.
Cyprian, and other ancient Fathers speak of, contained in the Evangelists,
Apostolical Epistles, and Acts of the Apostles: (all which are written
Scriptures of the new Testament.) This divine and Apostolical Tradition we
call (with Tertullian) The rule of truth: 1 Regula veritatis Tertul. 2
Doctrinae Cypr. 3 Rectitudinis. Basil. 4 Credendoru^, and agendorum, Dyonis.
Carthus.
and (with Cyprian) The rule of doctrine: (and with Basil) (...), The rule of
right, or straight rule of perfection: (and with their own Carthusian) The
rule of faith and manners, or of all things to be believed and practiced: for
we constantly auerre (with Cyril) Cyril. Catech. Hierosol.
That the security of our faith arises from the evidence and demonstration of
the divine Scripture: so that no man presume above that which is written. 1.
Cor. 4.6.

Also we reverently receive such Apostolical Traditions as have their ground
in Scripture, though not expressly Act. 20.7.
as the celebration of the Sabbath on the first day of the week Apoc. 1.10.
the Baptism of Infants, etc.

3 Eccles. Trad.
3. Touching Ecclesiastical Traditions, we receive for such:

First, those doctrines of faith which the ancient Primitive Counsels have
determined against Haeretikes, having their ground in Scripture: as that there
is a Trinity of persons in the unity of the divine essence, and that the
Sun is (...), that is, consubstantiall and coaequall with the Father, etc.
yet we dare not say (with daring Enchi^ controv c. 1.
Costerius:) That the first four general Counsels are to be received as we
receive the four Gospells.

Secondly, those rules which the Primitive Church has set down for order and
comeliness in the service of God: yea Perk. de Trad.
we acknowledge that the present Church has power to make Canons to that
purpose, so they be consonant to the general Canons of the Scripture: namely
1. That they tend to 1 Cor. 14.26.40.
decency and order. 2. To aedification. 3. That they be free from superstition.
4. That the Church be not ouerburthened with the multitude of them.

Trad. Papist.
But if by the Churches Traditions they understand the Canons of their latter
Counsels (which were but conuenticles or confaederacies against Christ and
his truth, for the maintenance of Papal Hierarchy, and wherein all the Bishops
were the Popes sworn servants, and directed by him as by an Oracle, what to
do, and decree: or the decrees of their Popes (some of which have been
Idolatrous, some haereticall, and some superstitious:) or if under that name,
they would thrust upon us every Friars dream, rotten relics, base costome,
and idle ceremony of the Romish Church: then we reject their unwritten
Traditions as sandy foundations to build our faith upon, and means to lead us
into a sea of errors, and vncertaineties, wherein there is neither bank, nor
bottom.

And such Traditions as these be the sandy foundations whereon they build many
articles of their Romish Creed: namely, private Masses, half Communions,
Transubstantiation, adoration of the host of Images and relics, Innocation of
Saints and Angels, Purgatory, and the Popes transcendent authority in things
Ecclesiastical and temporal. For Andrad in Orthodox Explicat. Conc. Trident.
li. 2.
one of their own plainly confesses, That many points of their Romish faith
would reele and totter if they were not supported by Traditions.

And this is the reason why they refuse their trial by the Scriptures, and
think Conference between Dr. Feately, and M. Fisher.
Christ and his Apostles, both incompetent Judges, and partial witnesses for
the decision of their cause.

Yea Bellarmine (their great Goliath says peremptorily:) Bell. li. 4. de ver.
dei, non scripto. c. 12.
That it was not the proper end of the Scriptures to be rule of our faith, and
that they are at the best but Regula partialis non totalis: that is, a piece of
a rule, but not the whole entire rule of faith. And Enbhir. c. 1. descript.
Costerius affirms, that they were not written to that end that they should
prescribe unto us an absolute and exact rule of faith, and administration of
Sacraments, and other things necessary in the Christian Commonweal: but
occasionally to confute Jews and Haeretikes, and to take away cer^^^^ (...)
which then arose in the Church, and to comfort some that were weak, and
unstable in the faith, etc. as if the Christian Church then upon those
occasions had some need of the Scriptures, but now no need at all. Thus basely
(if I may not say blasphemously) do they think, speak, and write of the
Sacred Scriptures.

And when we confute their errors out of the Scriptures, then (with the
Valentinians of old) they fall to accuse the Scriptures themselves: Iren. li.
3. contra bar. c. 2.
Quasi non recte habeant, nec sint ex authoritate, etc. as if they were ill
translated, or obscure, or imperfect without Traditions, or of no authority in
themselves without the authority of the Church.

2 Authoritas Eccles:
Therefore they make the Churches authority another maine foundation of their
faith: as if it were greater than the authority of scripture, yea as if without
that scripture were no scripture: because the Church gave testimony to the
scriptures, that they were divinely inspired and made them Canonical:
therefore (say they) both the divine, and Canonical authority of the
scriptures relyes upon the Churches authority.

But let me ask them that so say: was John Baptists authority greater than
Christ's, because he gave testimony unto him: 1 Ioh 29.
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: o^ does the
Herald that proclaims the Kings title and authority, give him his title and
authority? or is the gold which the goldsmith touches therefore good, because
he (upon trial thereof by his touchstone) declares it to be so? was it not so
before his trial? would it not have been so if he had never tried it? yes
undoubtedly.

Dilemma.
When the Church did first declare the scriptures to be the word of God, either
they were so before this declaration of the Church, or not: if not, then the
Church erred in declaring them to be so, which were blasphemy, and flat
Atheism to auerre: if they were so, then they received no divine authority
from the Churches testimony.

I know a Jesuit would think to wind himself out of this dilemma with
Bellarm. li. 2. de author. Conc. c. 12.
Bellarmins distinction of in se, and quoad nos: saying, that the scriptures
are of divine authority in themselves, but could not be so acknowledged of us
without the Churches testimony: but this distinction will not serve the turn:
for if they be so in themselves, they would be so if we never acknowledged, or
received them for such: (as the Scriptures of the new Testament are divine even
among the Jews and Turks, though they would never acknowledge them to be so:)
and if they be so in themselves, why should they not be so unto us? why should
we not receive the sacred Scriptures as divine, for the divine authority which
they have in themselves without the Churches authority.

Indeed the Churches authority or testimony may bring Infidells or Haeretikes
to hear the word that they may be converted, Ioh. 1.41.45.
(as Andrew brought Peter, or Philip, Nathaniel unto Christ, or as the woman of
Samaria brought the citizens of Samaria to hear Christ with her testimony of
him: c. 4, 39.
Come see a man which has told me all that ever J did: Is not he the Christ?

And in this sense is that S. Aug. says: Aug. cont. epist fundamenti c. 5
I should not have believed the Gospel, if the authority of the Church had not
moved me thereunto: but when they have heard it, they are converted, and
believe, not for the Churches testimony, but by the divine authority, and
celestial efficacy of the word it self, which is Romans 1.16.
The power of God unto salvation to eueryone that believes: as the Samaritans
said to the woman: Ioh. 4.2.
Now we believe not because of thy words, for we have heard him our selves,
and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world.

3. Jnfallibilitas Papae.
The third sandy foundation of the Romish faith is the Popes infallibility:
which I do not falsely impose upon them as a general ground of their faith,
(though some of their own learned men hold the contrary: because their grand
champion Bellarmine auerres, and proves that it is Bellarm. de Romans Pom. li.
4. c. 2.
Communissima opinio fere omnium Catholicorum: that is, the most common and
general tenet of all those of the Church of Rome, whom he calls Catholics.

For although the Papists brag much of their Catholic Church that it can teach
nothing but Catholic truth: and is not subject unto error, because Christ said
of his true Church built upon him and the rock of his divine truth, Mat. 16.11.
That the gates of hell should not prevail against it: which they falsely
apply to the Church of Rome: Romans ^.8.
whose faith was indeed once famous through the world, though now the Esa. 21,
22.
faithful city be become an harlot, her gold mixed with dross, and her wine
with water: yet ask them what they mean by that Church that cannot err, they
will tell you they mean thereby the Pope (the head of the Church, and Saint
Peter's successor) Luc. 22.32.
for whose faith Christ prayed that it should not fail.

So Bellarmine affirms, That the common opinion of Romish Catholics is
Bellar. ibid.
Ipsam infallibilitatem non esse in coetu Conciliorum, vt in concilio
Episcoporum, sed in solo Pontifice: that the infallibility rests not in the
assembly of Counsels, nor in the counsel of Bishops, but in the Pope alone:
for they hold that any member or Pastor of their Church is subject unto error:
yea all the Bishops and Pastors of the Church assembled in a general Counsel
(if the Pope confirm not their Canons:) only the Pope cannot err when he
defines a matter of faith, Ex Cathedra, (that is, by his Papal authority,) as
if the Popes chair were made of Irish wood, to which no cobweb of error could
possibly cleave.

And therefore all must be Haeretikes that be not within his pale, scripture
must be no scripture without his allowance, and Kings no Kings if he please to
kick their crowns of their heads with his holiness foot, or to bellow out
excommunications, and depositions against them with his Papal Bull. Yea he
may make new articles of faith: (as Pius quartus did add twelve articles to
the Nicene Creed in a Bull of his (sent out about the time of her Tridentine
conuenticle) entitled Bulla Pii 4 super formae profess. fidei.
The public profession of the Orthodoxall faith to be uniformly professed and
observed: and likewise he may add ten commandments of the Church to the ten
commandments of Almighty God (which I have seen in an English Roman
Catechism:) which must be kept with all Religious obedience of all the Popes
Disciples: and dispense against the commandments of God, by allowing
incestuous marriages, and the religious vows of children made without the
consent, yea against the will of their parents, and the deposing and murdering
of Princes for the advancement of the Catholic Religion.

These be strange conclusions to be drawn from Christ's prayer for Peter that
his faith should not fail: which place Aug. de corrept. and gra. 12.
S. Aug. will have to be meant only of Peter's own particular saving faith,
whereby he should after his fall resist the temptations of Satan, and stand
fast unto aeternall life: and comfort and strengthen his brethren (falling as
he did) with the same comforts wherewith himself was comforted of God: which
exposition seems most consonant to the scope of the text. But admit it to be
meant of that doctrine of faith which S. Peter should teach the Christian
Church: shall they therefore derive the effect of Christ's prayer from Peter to
the Popes of Rome, from an holy Apostle (divinely inspired, and directed by
Gods unerring spirit into all truth, Ioh. 16.13.
according to Christ's promise made to his Apostles:) to a rank and succession
of men among whom their own Histories do testify that there have been found
Atheists, Infidells, Idolaters, Heretics, Schismatikes, incarnate devils, and
hateful monsters of mankind? undoubtedly so good praemises will ill bear so
bad conclusions.

Baron. Annal. Anno. 3033.
1. Marcellin. turned Pagan, and sacrificed to heathenish Idols: for which he
was condemned in the counsel of Sinuessa. 2. Idem. An. 357.
Liberius was an Arrian, and subscribed to the unjust condemnation of
Athanasius. 3. Honorius was a Monothelite (holding that Christ had but one
will, and consequently but one nature:) for which he was condemned in Synod. 6.
act. 4.12, 13. and 7. act. vlt. and 8. and act. 7.
three several counsels. 4. Theod Niem. de schism. li. 3. c. 44.
The counsels of Pisa and Constance condemned Greg. 12. and Benedict 13. for
notorious Schismatikes, obstinate Haeretikes, scandalizers of the whhle Church,
and unworthy, the Papacy. 5. and Conc. Constan. 5.73. Bin. Com. Conc. P. 1584.
And the same Counsel of Constance condemned John the twenty three for an
Atheist, because he held as his judgment that there was no immortality of the
soul, nor resurrection of the body, nor life everlasting. 6. Conc. Basil.
sect. 34.
The counsel of Basil deposed Eugenius the fourth, declaring him to be a
Simonist, a perjured wretch, an incorrigible schismatike, and an obstinate
haeretike.

And Watson quod^bet.
Bellarmine being demanded after the death of Sixtus 5. what he thought became
of him, answered: Quantum capio, quantum sapio, quantum intelligo, descendit ad
infernum. As far as I can think, conceive, or understand, he is gone
directly unto hell.

It is strange therefore that those that have no faith themselves should be
such infallible rules to guide the faith of others, and to lead others to
heaven while themselves go to hell: (seeing no norme or squire can make other
things squared thereby straight lf it self be crooked, nor any man iudicially
determine otherwise than himself judges) unless there be such a virtue
annexed to the Papal chair that (be the Pope what he will) when he sits
down therein, he shall be like Number. 23.11.
Balaam to bless where he means to curse, or like Ioh. 11.50.51.
Caiaphas to prophecye and speak truth, not understanding what he says.

Dr. Field of the Church. li. 3. in Append.
Moreover, it is the judgment of many of their own divines, (namely, Bozius,
Gerson, Occam, Almaine, Alphonsus a Castro, and the Sorbonists:) that the Pope
may not only be an Haeretike himself, but write, teach, preach, and define
Haeresie, and that e Cathedra: (.i. by his Papal authority.) And diverse
instances are given by our Dr. White of the Church. sect 36.
learned Divines wherein they have actually erred not only in Church Canons,
dispensations, and Papal decrees, but even in matters of faith defined by them
both in Provincial and general Counsels. And one of their own Canonists
says Apud Great. D. 4. Si Papa.
That if the Pope be found so negligent of his own and his brethrens salvation
that he draw innumerable souls by troops with himself to be damned in hell,
no man may say unto him, why do thou so?

What a lamentable thing is this, that poor seduced souls should thus forsake
the rock of truth to build their faith on such sandy foundations; namely, the
Churches Traditions, as they are delivered by the Pope and the Churches
authority, which is in effect nothing else but the Popes infallibility: (who is
the Church Greg. de Valentia. T. 3. disp. 1. P. 24.
virtually, because all the power of the Church rests wholly in him:) and yet he
a man that may be, and often has been an obstinate Haeretike, Schismatike,
Atheist, etc. and teach, preach, and define error, and lead thousands with
himself headlong unto hell.

But let us renounce such sandy foundations, and build our faith on the rock
of truth, contained in the Scripture: for the sacred Scripture is that Zanc. de
scrip.
Paradise of God, in the midst whereof are: first, the tree of knowledge,
bearing no forbidden fruit: for Deuteronomy. 29.29.
revealed things are for us and our children.

Secondly, Apoc. 2.7.
The tree of life (Christ Jesus, the kernel and pith of the scriptures:) and
no Genesis 3. vlt.
Cherubin set with a flaming sword to keep us from it: but the way left wide
open, and all invited to come unto it: Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me, etc. Thirdly, Psalm. 23.2.
Rivers of living waters to refresh and comfort our souls in temptation,
affliction, and persecution.

Fourthly, A celestial air sweetly breathing in the midst thereof: (
videlicet, 2. Tim. 3.16.
afflatus Spiritus Sancti, the inspiration of the holy Ghost,) inspiring both
the penmen of it, and all that with faith, humility, and reverence, read or
hear it.

Fifthly, God walking in the midst of this Eden: whose voice does teach,
reprove, correct, instruct, and comfort every son of Adam, that does hear,
and do it, making him V. 15.
wise unto salvation through the faith that is in Christ Jesus.

2. A second sort of those that build on the sand are Profane sinners: who
build on the sand of their own security and praesumption of Gods mercy, Romans
6.11.
continuing in sin that grace may abound, as if God were wholly composed of
mercy. This persuasion gives encouragement to the Profane swearer to fly in
the face of God, and threaten heaven with his blasphemies, as if he would
(...), fight with God, and dare him to put on his habergion of justice, and
gird himself with his sword of vengeance: saying in his heart, Mal. 2.17.
Where is the God of judgment? And to the swinish drunkard, and lascivious
adulterer to ouerburthen the earth with their impieties, Ephesians. 4.19.
turning the grace of God into wantonness, and committing all uncleanness
even with greedines: and yet say in their hearts, Psalm. 10, 11.
Tush, God has forgotten, he hides his face and will never see it. (As if
that God that made both day and night, and to whom Psalm. 239.12
the night is as clear as the day) did not as well behold the one walking
secretly in the twilight, Pro. 7.9.
as the other impudently staggering in the streets at no one day.

But those shall one day know that the Psalm. 116.5.
Lord is righteous as well as gracious: and has not only his throane of
grace, but his seat for judgment. Apoc. 4.3.
As there is a rainebow about his throane in sight like unto an Emerald
(representing his mercy, and covenant of grace, which is ever green and fresh,
and most comfortable to his children, and whence he continually streams down
showers of spiritual and temporal blessings upon them: so out of this throane
proceed v. 5.
lightnings, and thunderings, and voices, to signify his judgments denounced
against, and reserved for the wicked. Cypr. de Laps.
Deus enim quantum patris pietate indulgens semper and bonus est, ita iudicis
maiestate metuendus, etc. For God as he has the tender indulgence of a father,
so has he the dreadful majesty of a judge he has prepared both heaven and
hell, as well places of aeternall sorrow and torment as joy and solace; and as
well the pit of infernal darkness as the light that no mortal man can
attain unto.

Let the Profane sinner therefore know for a surety, that if he Leu. 26.21 24.
walk contrary to God (by iniquity, and obstinacy) God will walk contrary to
him in wrath and fury. If he provoke God daily by cursing and swearing, God
will send out a Zach 5.1.2. etc,
flying roll of curses against him, that shall fly into the midst of his
house and consume it with the timber and stones thereof. If he drink without
thirst. and wastfully swallow down flagons of wine here: he shall thirst
without drink, and not have a Luc. 16.24.
drop of cold water to cool his tongue hereafter. And if he burn with the
fire of unlawful lust here, he shall (without serious and seasonable
repentance,) burn hereafter in the Apoc. 21.8.
lake that burns with fire and brimstone for ever: for the Lord does as well
treasure up wrath f^r the Romans 9 22 23
vessels of wrath, as mercy for the vessels of mercy, Ireen. li 3. c 43.
Saluat saluandos, and iudicat iudicio dignos, etc. He saues those that are to
be saved, and condemns those that are worthy to be damned, making the one a
receptacle of his mercy and an organe of salvation, and the other a receptacle
of judgment, and organe of damnation.

3. A third sort are covetous Mammonists: who build their nests in this world:
being herein more foolish than the swallowe Solinus,
that will not build her nest in a ruinous house: for the world is a great
house whose whole fabric shall fall to ruin, 2 Pet. 3.10.
The heavens shall vanish as a scrowle, the elements shall melt with heat, and
the earth with all therein shall be burnt up.

These are rightly said to build on the sand: for the world and worldly things
are like the sand in two respects.

1. Quia flaida: because all things therein flow and floate like a quickesand:
1 Ioh. 2.17.
for the world passes away and the lusts thereof. Whence it is compared to a
Apoc. 4.6.
Sea of glass: To a sea, because it ebbes, and flows, and is tempestuous: and
to a glassie sea, because all things therein are brittle and slippery, sliding,
fading, vanishing in a moment.

2. Quia sterilia: As sand is barraine, so worldly things (especially if
couetously affected, unjustly gotten and basely possessed) are fruitless, and
unprofitable Pro 10.2, 3.
Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, for the Lord casts away the
substance of the wicked.

Therefore, though the world account her darlings Oracles of wisdom, yet in
Gods Dictionary they be termed fools: Lu^. 12.20.
Thou fool, this night will they take away thy soul, etc. The word is (...),
(signifying improuident,) for though worldlings be so wise Mat. 16.26.
to win the world, yet they are so improuident to loose their own souls. And
mark I pray you how many points of extreme folly they commit.

1. They do with great care and pains gather that which they cannot long
enjoy: but it shall be taken from them, or they from it in a moment.

2. They lay up their treasure where all their Praedecessors have lost it.

3. They make their servant their master: that is, serve Mammon which should
serve them.

4. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10
They pierce themselves through with many sorrows.

5. They prefer (which is the greatest folly) gold before God, gain before
godliness, money before mercy, the world before their own souls: and that
when they are nearest their grave, and so drown themselves irrecouerably
inperdition and destruction.

Ahab would think of this, that is 1 Reg. 21.4.
sick for Naboths vineyard, and never weary Esa. 5.8.
joining house to house, and land to land, till there be no room for the poor
in the earth: for certainly he that builds his house as the Job 27.18.
moth, (that is, by spoiling and consuming others) Esa. 53.1.
when he shall cease to spoil, shall himself be spoiled and consumed.

This is the cause of the dec^y of so many great families both in city and
country, because they have built their houses not only vainly on the sand,
but cruelly in an Acheldama, a field of blood: for Syrac. 34.21.
the bread of the needy is the life of the poor, he that robs him thereof is a
murderer. If houses therefore be thus built (though never so high) the Hab.
2.11, 12.
stone out of the wall shall cry, and the beam of the timber shall answer it,
woe to him that builds his house with blood, and erecteth a city by iniquity.

2. O that every Symoniacal Patron, and greedy Impropriator would think of
this, that robs God to enrich himself. ( Mal. 3, ^.
ye have robbed me in tithes, and offerings, etc.) and (like the Eagle) with
the flesh that he takes from Gods altar, carries a coal to burn his own nest.

3. O that every unconscionable Lawyer would think of this: who if he put not
on the Lions skin, will put on the Foxes case, and get by cunning under
praetence of Law what he cannot get by violence. I tax not you (Reverend
Fathers of the Law) I doubt not but you account Godliness your greatest
Gain, and doing every man right your greatest joy: for that will build you
sure houses, and bring you peace at the last.

But let me beseech you in the bowels of Christ, not to suffer those that are
under you to delay causes so long till the silly sheep that goes to law for a
lock of his wool lost in the country, loose his whole fleece in the City
before he end his suit: for it is a common complaint among us poor
Contrymen, that a poor man were better give away his coat than go to law
for it against a rich adversary: for let his cause be never so just, and
honest, if his Adversaries purse be stronger, he shall never have an end of it,
till he has spent himself, and lost his cause.

4. O that griping Usurers would think of this, that secretly eat up men's
estates, as the Moth consumes a garment, or little worms the heart of a great
Oak. Though this sin may plead praescription, (because the root thereof is
covetousness: which is as ancient as the fall of man, and the 1 Timothy 6.10.
root of all evil) yet D. Fenton of Usury.
a learned Divine (late of this Church and City) in a treatise of his against
this sin of Usury, auerres and proves substantially, That never any
Christian Church Orthodoxall, or Haereticall, defended it as lawful (as it is
now practiced among us) fince the world stood,

How then do thou hope to dye a Christian, if thou live and dye an Usurer,
which no Christian Church did ever approve? If it be a condition required of
him that will Psalm. 5.^5.
enter into Gods Tabernacle, that he lend not his money upon usury, how do
thou then that make it thy trade, and do live, and dye, in it hope to
enter?

If ever therefore thou look for remission of thy sins at the hands of God,
and salvation of thy soul, repent speedily, and make restitution: It is the
position of that judicious and learned Father S. Aug. concerning every sin of
this nature, wherein our brother is really wronged by impairing his estate to
increase ours unlawfully: Aug. epist. 54. ad Macedon.
Non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum restitui potest..i. The
sin is not remitted by God, unless that which is wrongfully taken from our
brother be restored, if a man be able to make restitution: for God will never
forgive, nor receive us so long as we unjustly retain what is none of ours. I
know this is Colloguintida to the usurers heart, but he must swallow this
bitter pill, if ever he will be purged from his finne.

But I spend too much time upon those that Psalm. 51.17.
hate to be reformed: and have stopped their ears (like deaf Adders) at the
voices of better charmers: for one says truly of an Usurer: Poenitet expensi
praeterea nihili: He never repents of any thing but of his cost and expenses:
Yet being called to this place (which is reported to be the common Mart for
this sinful trade) I could not but speak something thereof: it may please
God for the conversion of some: (for he does manifest his power in weakness,
and Psalm. 8.2.
out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings has ordained strength:) if not, yet
for the discharge of mind, conscience, and deliverance of mine own soul.

5. O that the covetous Merchant would consider this, that does engrosse
commodities that he may have Monopolies, (that is, none sell but he, and so
sell at his own rates:) whereby he does grind the faces of the poor
Tradesmen, and eat out the bowels of poor buyers, that stand in need of such
commodities And the deceitful artificer or Tradesman: for now single trades
are grown to be double, and in one trade or occupation there be two skills:
the one of doing it truly, the other of doing it deceitfully: called the
mystery of the trade, which for the most part is a mystery of iniquity:) for
now he that knows the falsehood as well as the truth of his trade, and can set
a good glass upon bad wares, is the most skillful tradesman; and he that can
make an excellent counterfeit, and sell it for good, and at as great a price,
is accounted the best artificer. Thus men take money not for wares but for
cosenage, and selling deceit, do buy with the price thereof (if they speedily
repent not) their own most certain damnation.

Thus you see into how many intricate mazes, Mammon does lead men to their
own destruction: Be not therefore the slaves of Mammon, least ye become the
proprietaries of hell and damnation: for as pride shut up heaven against the
devil, and gluttony Paradise against our first parents: so covetousness is
the key to open hell gates to the servants of Mammon. If therefore thou
would shun the Mat. 7.13, 14.
broad way and open gate to destruction, and find the narrow way and straight
gate that leads to salvation. S. Bernard teaches thee how to do it, Ber. in
Cant. sect 35.
Jnuenisti plane sapientiae viam, si prioris vitae peccata defleas, si huius
saeculi desiderabilia parui-pendas, si bona opera exerceas, and aeternam
beatitudinem toto desiderio concupiscas. Thou have found the way of wisdom,
if thou bewail thy sins, contemn the worlds vanities, exercise thy self in
good works, and earnestly mind and desire heavenly happiness.

4. A fourth sort of these foolish builders on the sand, are masqued
Hypocrites: who build their praesuming hope and confidence of their salvation,
upon the sandy foundation of their fained holiness: for they have 2 Timothy 3.5.
form of godliness but deny the power thereof.

These (as a D. Boyce Deane of Cant. in his Postill.
Reverend and learned Divine of our Church has well observed) do mock God
and the world.

1. They mock God and his word, for where God says, Facite iustitiam, work
righteousness, they do, non facere, sed fingere, not do, but feign
righteousness: Mat. 23.25.
making clean the outside of the cup and the platter, but within are full of
rottenness and corruption.

2. They deceive men being Christians in lip only, not in life: making a
masque of Religion: or rather a very vizar, with eyes, nose, and mouth fairly
proportioned to all purposes.

For they will flock and fly to the temples (as doves to the windows) and
lift up the white of the eyes, and sit at the Preachers feet (as Luc. 10.19.
Mary at Christ's) and send out whole vollyes of sighs when the word is
preached, Lact. Institut. l. 5. c. 20.
Sed omnem religionem in templo, and cum templo relinquunt, etc. They leave all
their Religion at the Church, and carry none home with them to express it in
their lives.

If ye deal with them, ye shall find Gen, 27.22.
Jacobs smooth voice, but Esaus rough hands: for the Hypocrite is like
counterfeit gold, fair in show, but false in touch: Intus Nero, foris Cato,
totus ambiguus: a Cato for his outward gravity, but a Nero for his inward
malice and cruelty, a mere aequiuocator: Cypr. Ep 54.
Aliud enim cord occultat, aliud voce pronunciat: He speaks one thing, and
means another.

But most of all he deceiues his own soul building on the sand while he
thinks he builds on the rock, and so builds his own ruin: for when the
floods of persecution arise, they soo^e wash away his painted holiness, and
cast down his rotten building: and the fall thereof is great even to the
bottom of hell: which is the hypocrites proper portion, and haereditary
possession, wherein all other sinners do but share with him: Mat. 24.51.
They shall have their portion with hypocrites, etc.

Pars. 3.
The third difference between these wise and foolish builders, is in the
effect or issue of their building: which in the one is firm stabilitie (...),
If fell not, and in the other, a sudden and fearful ruin. (...), etc. And
it fell, and the fall thereof was great.

v. 25.
1. In the former are employed three things. 1. Tentatio varia: The variety of
the temptations, And the rain fell, etc. 2. Tentationum victoria: The victory
that this firm building had over these temptations: in that (notwithstanding
all these) it stood fast and immooueable, and could not be cast down. (And it
fell not:) 3. Victoria causa: The cause of this victory, and impregnable
stability: because it was built on a rock.

2. In the latter are likewise employed 3. things: 1. Ruinae causa: The cause of
the ruin: And the rain fell, v. 27.
etc. and beat upon that house: 2. Ruina ipsa: The ruin it self: And it fell.
3. Ruinae qualitas seu natura: The nature or quality of that ruin: And the
fall thereof was great.

1. 1. Tent. varia
The ten^ations that assail both these buildings are the same, wherein
observe: 1. Tent. numerum, their number or diversity: ( viz. rain, floods,
wind.) 2. Impetum: their forcible nature, and violence: (...), etc. They beat
upon that house. For these three (rain, floods, and winds) assail a
material house on every side to try whether the building be firm or no: 1.
The rain beats upon the roof of the house. 2. The floods undermine the
foundation: 3. The winds beat on the walls and sides of the house: as that Job
1.15
whirlwind did smite the four corners of Jobs house, and threw it flat to
the ground.



1. Pluuia.
But if ye will have a difference made between them, I think 1. By the rain
is meant the temptation of prosperity: which softens men's minds overmuch with
wantonness and luxury, and so works their ruin: for rain falls guttatim, by
drops, and soakes into the house by little and little, and so rots the
rafters and beams, and brings it to ruin.

2. Flumina.
2. By the floods are meant the Tentations of adversity, (.i. afflictions and
persecutions:) which like Torrents assail this building violently to ouerturne
it from the very foundation: for afflictions are called floods in Scripture.
Psalm. 69.2.
I am come into great waters where the floods overthrow me b And persecutions
also: The floods of ungodly men made me afraid.

3. Venti.
3. By the winds are meant the tentations of persuasion, whereby Satan and his
instruments (which like Elymas the sorcerer are Act. 13.10.
full of all subtletie and mischief, and enemies of all righteousness) cease
not to pervert (as much as in them lies) the straight ways of the Lord.

And this they seek to do two ways.

1. Per blanditias,.i. By their subtle persuasions and fair allurements: for
(as S. Gregory says, Greg. mor. li. 3. c. 19.
Verba molliunt dum virus infundunt: that is, (to use the phrase of the Psalm.)
Psalm. 55.21.
Their words be smoother then oil, yet they be very swords: namely, to pierce,
wound, and kill men's souls. These may be compared to the warm Southwindes,
or pleasing Westwinds: which (with their warm, but strong blasts) may
overthrow an house as soon as the blustering Northwinds.

2. Per minas,.i. Their cruel threatenings, and bloody inquisitions whereby
they endeavor to deter men from truth, and force them to entertain error
for fear, if not for love: and when they cannot persuade, they will enforce
men's consciences. These may be compared to that Ion 1.4.
stormy wind raised upon the sea, when Jonas was in the ship: or S. Paul's
tempestuous wind (called Act. 27, 14, 15
Euroclydon) which drove his ship with such violence, that the Mariners could
not guide it, but were feign to let it drive whither it would.

Cypr. de Lap^ 1.
Militum Christi cohors candida the white band of Christ's soldiers, fighting
under the white ensign of peace: in the other rubicunda the bloody band,
fighting under the bloody banners of persecution: for sometimes, the P. of
peace holds out the white flag of peace to his Church: sometime, the L. of
Hosts holds out unto her the bloody streamer of war bloodshed, and
persecution, and tries as well by the one as the other, whether his soldiers
will cleave close to their captain, and follow their colors.

1 Tent. prosper.
1. Smooth Genesis 27.22.36.
Jacob (the worlds fair son) prosperity may as soon and sooner deceive and
supplant us, than rough Esau (the worlds churlish son) affliction and
persecution: for the poison of adversity is sometimes so tempered in our
souls with the wholesome ingredients of faith, hope, patience, and humility,
that in stead of killing it does cure us, and purge our souls of the corrupt
humors of sin: and so plays the schoolmaster, not only in whipping and
scourging us, but also in teaching and instructing us to know God, and our
selves, and the worlds vanity, and to labor after a more permanent faelicity.
Whereas prosperity many times (like Iud. 16, 19, ^0.
Dalila) lulls many a strong Sampson so long asleep in her lap of carnal
pleasures that she takes from him that wherein his spiritual strength
consists, and betrays him to that uncircumcised Philistim the devil.

So then the worlds music of profits and pleasures is but a Sirens song,
which while it tickles our ears, it wounds our hearts, and splits our souls
upon the rocks of sin, whereby ofttimes we make shippe-wracke of our
salvation, 2 Samuel 11.2. etc.
David who did cleave fast unto God in his troubles, in his prosperity started
aside like a broken bow, and fell into the fearful sins of Adultery and
murder.

And Peter Mat. 26.51. and Io^. 18.10 18
who stoutly defended his master among the swords and staves in the garden,
basely denied him, when he was basting himself by the fire in the high Priests
hall. Aug. in Psalm. 34.
Homo victus in Paradiso, victor in stercore, Ioq 2.8.
Job by his patience was a conqueror on the dunghill, and Genesis 3.6.
Adam by his pride was conquered in Paradise. Also Romes peace and security
after the Carthaginian wars were ended, did her more hurt than all the former
battles.

And Saint Bernard says of the Church: Ber. Ser. 33. in Cant.
Amara fuit prius in nece Martyrum, amarior postea in conflictu haereticorum,
amarissima vero nunc in moribus domesticorum: intimating that she was more hurt
by the licentious lives of her children in the days of her peace, than by the
blood of her Martyrs, or her conflict with haeretikes.

Deborah, and our now peaceful Solomon) has done more hurt to this building,
by rotting many beams, and rafters thereof, than those tempestuous
whirle-winds, and violent torrents of persecution in Queen Mary's days? for
whereas there were then glorious confessions of the truth in the midst of the
fire, now there be daily Apostacies from it in the days of peace. And our
morality is so corrupted with our long peace and prosperity, that there was
never more lying and dissembling in Creta, swearing and forswearing in Carthage
gormandizing in Capua, or Semiplacentia, drunkenness in Germany, pride in
Spain, or wantonness in Italy, than is at this day in our land: as if the
vices of all nations did meet here as in their Center, or as if our land were
the sink or common sewer for the sins of all nations to run into.

Shall we thus repay the Lord for his blessings? shall we now begin to Number:
11.5, 6.
loath our Manna that has thus long fallen daily about our tents, and hanker
again after the fleshpots of the Romish Egypt? shall we surfeit of our
quails? and being full fed with Gods blessings, Deuteronomy. 8.10.
spurn with the heel against him, and turn our backs upon his mercy-seat?
God forbid.

Let us not thus turn Gods grace into wantonness, and repay him with our
foul and crying sins in stead of thankfulness for his blessings: (like the
sea that receives sweet waters from the fountains of the earth, and returns
them salt and bitter:) least we incur the curse of the reprobate Jews. Psalm.
69.22, 23 Romans 11.9, 10.
Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, and a stumbling block, etc. and
the things that should have been for their weal be unto them an ocasion of
falling.

2. Tent. persuas.
2. With this tentation of prosperity, I may conioyne the Churches second
tentation, by the pleasing south-winds of haereticall persuasions: because they
are most rife in the days of the Churches peace. With these winds has the
house of the living God been forcibly beat upon, and the ship of his true
Church been violently tossed, almost in all ages in the troublesome sea of
this world: for haeretikes and schismatikes, (being themselves carried away
with these Iren. li 3. c 13.
three disastrous whirle-winds. 1. With the unclean spirit of error: 2. With
their own frenzy whereof they labor: 3. Magis studio contradicendi, Cypr ad
Demet. sect. prima
quam voto discendi:.i. Rather with an itching humor of singularity to
contradict the truth, than a true zealous humility to learn it, seek to drive
others with them into error, and so they wilfully Mat. 15.14.
blind, lead the woefully blinded with themselves into the ditch of
destruction. But he who is driven of these winds, Aug. Ti. 1. in Ioh. Mat.
25.30.
Non portum sed planctum inueniet, shall in the end arrive at no other harbor,
but where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

2. Tim. 3.6.
creeping into houses, and leading captive silly women laden with diverse lusts,
and silly Idiots apt to believe whatsoever they tell them without further trial
of their doctrine by the touchstone of truth. This kind of fishing they learned
from Satan himfelfe: who first Genesis 3.1.
attempted the woman, that by her he might tempt the man: using the wife as a
trappe to catch her husband. And from the ancient Gnostikes: of whose
ringleader Marcus Jrenaeus reports: Iren. li. 1. c. 9.
Maxim circa mulieres occupatus est. His principal aim and chiefest
business was to seduce silly women.

And as the devil at first, Cypr. de vnitate Eccl. sect. 5
Verbis mendacibus blandiens rudes animas incauta credulitate decepit; deceived
the poor innocent souls of our first parents by his lying and flattering
words, praesuming upon their heedlesse credulity: so they by their lying and
flattering words, (which are Lact Jnstit. li. 5. c ^1.
Mella venenum tegentia, pills of poison lapt in honey:) creep into the souls
of their ouer-credulous Disciples, and blinding them with the false vizar of
the name of the ancient Catholic Church, lead them hoodwinked to their own
destruction.

Ie^uiticaal traps to catch poor souls.
For first, they tell them (and that only truly:) Cypr. de unit. Eccles.
That out of the true Church there is no salvation: but all that are out of it
must needs perish, as all that were out of the arc, were drowned in the deluge.

Secondly, they falsely assume that the Church of Rome (as now it is) is the
only true, ancient, Catholic Church: and the Protestants are haeretikes, and
their Church sprung up but lately since Luthers days.

Thirdly, they teach their disciples, that the Scriptures are obscure, and
dangerous for laymen, and silly women to meddle withal, (because the reading
and misunderstanding of the Scriptures has bred many haeresies:) and therefore
it is enough for them to rely upon the definitions of their mother, the Romish
Church, and directions of their ghostly Fathers, without any further search or
inquiry: thus thieues put out the candle that should discover them.

Fourthly, they tell them that it is haeresie for a layman to dispute in
points of faith, neither must they read any books written against the Romish
Religion, or any part thereof: nor confer with any Protestant minister, or
other able to defend his religion, but in all doubts repair to their ghostly
fathers for resolution.

Fifthly, they extol devout ignorance and implicit faith to the skies: and
tell them, that such ignorantly devout souls shall have the benefit of other
men's knowledge. So they canonize the Colliars faith, and make it their seduced
disciples Creed to believe as the Church believes. Now when silly ignorant
souls have deeply drunk in these principles, what marvel is it, if they
be easily perverted, and hardly converted, when their seducing teachers have
thus hedged in their eyes, ears, and hearts, that they should not hear, nor
understand?

Hortatio.
Wherefore seeing these Mat 7.15.
Wolves in sheep clothing, (who like the wolves of Africa feign the voice of
sheepeheards to devour the flock) be so busy to infect our flocks with
Popery, let us be as vigilant to continue them in the truth: Now (if ever) S.
Bern. exhortation is to be put in practice: Ber. li. 3 de consid c. 10
Danda est opera vt increduli conuertantur, conuersi non auertantur, auersi
reuertantur, etc. We that are Ministers of the word, must sedulously endeavor
that those which do not rightly believe, may be converted, and those that are
turned out of the way, may return into the right way again, and those that
are converted, may not be turned away, and those that are perverse may be
directed into the paths of righteousness, and those that are subverted may be
recalled into the ways of truth, and that the subuerters themselves should
have their errors convinced by the evidence of truth, that either themselves
may be reclaimed, or they may loose all power and authority to subvert others.

1 Ad epist.
Let me therefore beseech you (Reverend Fathers) in the bowels of Christ Jesus
(who am unworthy to counsel you) that as ye are (...), Bishops, or overseers
in name, Act. 20.28.
so ye would indeed (in these dangerous days) with a most vigilant eye ouersee
the flock of Christ committed to your several charges, which Christ has
purchased with his own blood. Ye sit at the stern of this ship of the English
Church, and are skillful in your compass, O let not these disastrous winds
carry it the contrary way, but guide it still (as ye have done) in the way of
truth to the haven of hapines. Ye are the Mar. 13.34.
porters of this house and fold of Christ, and have the keys of jurisdiction
in your hands to let in and out: O watch therefore that these Ioh. 10.2.
thieues and robbers break not in, and steal away the sheep of Christ from
his fold, whose souls are most Psalm. 116.15.
dear and precious in his sight. And see that every Archippus under you in
your several Diocaeses, do both by preaching and catechizing (according to
his Majesty's late pious, and most Christian directions) Col. 4.17.
take heed to the ministry that he has received in the Lord, that he fulfill
it.

2. Ad Mag.
And let all religious Magistrates in their places seek with godly 2 Pa^. 35.5.
Josiah to purge Gods house where it is polluted either with error or sin:
and (with zealous) Neh. 4.1, 9.
Nehemiah, endeavor to reaedifie the ruin of Gods Jerusalem, and to defend
this building against all malicious Tobiahs, and Sanballats that seek to
hinder it.

3 Ad priuatos.
And let all private men take heed, that these wily Serpents creep not into
their bosoms by their subtle insinuations: but let the^ hold fast the truth
that they have received in the Lord, and if any (though an Gal. 1.16.
angel from heaven) bring them any other doctrine, let them hold him accursed.
Cypr. de unit. Eccl. sect. 1.
Nutet enim necesse est and vagetur, and spiritu erroris arreptus (velut
puluis) ventiletur qui salutaris viae non tenet veritatem: for he must needs
totter, and wander, and (being driven with the spirit of error) be carried away
as Psalm. 1.4.
dust or chafe, which the wind scatters away from the face of the earth, that
does not keep the truth of that way that leads to salvation. Ephesians. 4.14.
Be not therefore (like children) wavering, and carried away with every wind of
vain doctrine, but follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up to him
that is the head, namely, Christ Jesus.

^: Tent. persecut.
3. The third sort of temptations wherewith the Church is assaulted, is
affliction and persecution: compared to the blustering Northwinds, and violent
floods which beat upon this house: for the true Church is like Genesis 7.18. and
8.4
Noah's arc: still floating on the waters of trouble, till she come to rest on
Ararat the Mount of God: for Act. 14.22.
through many tribulations we must enter into Gods kingdom. 2 Timothy, 3.12.
And all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution: for Aug
in Ps. 31.
though God had one son without sin, yet he has none without affliction. A
Christians life is like a navigations in a tempestuous sea: the harbor whence we
launch is our mothers womb, the port whereto we are bound is the haven of
heaven, but the interim between, (the whole time of our sailing in the
troublesome sea of this world) is full of tempests, full of Pirates. So that
Reverend Luther said truly: Qui non est crucianus, non est Christianus: no
cross, no Christian: consonant to that of the Apostle: Heb. 12.5.
If ye be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers, then are ye
bastards, and not sons.

And concerning the Churches persecutions, that of Homer concerning Troy, may
most truly be spoken of the true Church Militant, Homer Iliad.
(...). She has but a little breathing time from her continual warfare: for
these two contrary armies ( Israel and Amalech) are always fighting. Ex 17.
vlt.
God will have war with mystical Amalech, (.i. the Church malignant) from
generation to generation. Ser. 92. de Temp.
As soon as the Israelites had drank of the rock, forthwith they warred
against Amalech: to teach us that we no sooner drink of the rock Christ, and
are incorporated into him, but forthwith we must prepare our selves for a
warfare.

For the visible Church is like Genesis 25.22.
Rebeccaes womb: wherein are bred sons of contrary natures (as Jacob and
Esau) and these strive together in her womb from her very conception of thee.
Apoc. 12.5.15
As soon as ever the woman is delivered of a manchild, (that is, the Church
has brought forth a son to God:) presently the dragon does cast out floods
of water out of his mouth to destroy it.

This ancient enmity between the old serpent and the seed of the woman began
in Paradise: Genesis 3.15^
I will put enmity between thy seed and her seed, etc. And forthwith it began
to break out by open persecution: for the persecution of the Church of the old
Testament began with Cap. 48.
Abels murder: Aug. de Ciu. dei. li. 18. c. 51.
( Dedicat Ecclesiam sanguine: He dedicates the Church to God by his blood):
and of the Church of the new Testament with cruel Mat. 2.16.
Herod's bloody butchering the poor Infants of Bethleem: who were Martyrs,
Opere, et si non voluntate in the work it self, or their outward act of
suffering, though not in will or intention: whence S. Aug. called them, Aug. de
sanct. sect. 11.
Primitias Martyrum: The first fruits of the Martyrs of Christ: for they
suffered for Christ, though they knew not for whom they suffered. Pro Christo
occiduntur paruuli pro iustitia moritur innocentia. The little Infants of
Bethleem dyed for Christ: innocence dyed for righteousness: for so Christ is
called, Ier. 23.6.
The Lord our righteousness.

And ever since Genesis 21.9, 10
Ishmael has persecuted Isaac: that is, those who are borne after the flesh,
them that are borne after the spirit. In the ten primitive persecutions, the
furrows of the Churches field were watered with streams of blood, and this
made it the more fertile: for l the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the
Church. Cypr. de duplici. Mart.


And ever since that bloody Whore of Babylon has borne sway in the world, she
has made her self Apoc. 19.6.
drunk with the blood of the Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus: by her bloody
inquisition, cruel massacres, horrid treasons, and open persecutions: for
where she may prevail, she uses no other arguments to maintain her religion,
but whipes, racks, gibbets, strappadoes, fire, and faggot: (as See Fox his Acts
and Monuments of he Church.
here in England in Queen Mary's days,) for she seeks not to persuade, but
to compel: and delights to tyrannize over men's consciences. Their very mercies
are cruel: there is more mercy to be found of the merciless elements (to wit,
the flaming fire, and raging sea) than at their hands where they may prevail,
and therefore from their bloody hands and cruel teeth the Lord deliver us.

For we may safely pray, Vt Cypr. de mort.
Martyriu^ desit anim^, that we his servants being hurt by no persecutions, may
always glorify his holy name in his holy church (as our church prays in our
Letanie: because God requires not our blood, but our faith (as that blessed
Martyr S. Cyprian says:) but if the stormy winds and violent floods of
persecution for the truth should beat upon the house of this Church, we must
also pray and that earnestly, Ne animus desit Martyri^: that our minds be not
wanting unto Martyrdom: but that we may be willing to shed our blood for him
and his truth, that shed his precious blood for us and our salvation: for these
be the winds and storms, that make a true and perfect trial indeed who have
built the spiritual houses of their souls on a sure, and who on a sandy
foundation: and which building will stand, 1 Perfeuerautia a^ctorum.
and which fall to ruin.

First, those that have built the spiritual houses of their souls upon the
^ocke Christ, and his sacred truth, not by hearing or knowing only, but by
believing and practicing, will outstand all these trials of rain, floods, and
stormy winds, and Psalm. 125.1.
stand fast like Mount Sion, which cannot be removed, but stands fast for
ever: for of such a building it is here said, though all these beat upon it, It
fell not, etc.

Saint Chrysostom writing upon this place, says, Chrysostom. in Loc.
Boni firmitatem Petrae constantiae virtute superant, etc. The constancy of
good and faithful men exceedes the firmenes of a rock. Ibid.
A rock though never so much beaten against by the waves and winds, stands
immooueable, and not hurt, as scorning their violence: so a faithful Christian
(because the Lord is his rock, and he is built upon the rock Christ Jesus)
scorns the force and malice of the devil, and all his confaederates: knowing
that though Satan raise up a mighty wind to shake him on every side,) Job 1.10.
as the wind did the four corners of Jobs house), yet he cannot shake him off
his foundation though he vex him with all his storms, yet none of these, nor
the very gates of hell can prevail against him, because he is built upon a
rock.

Such a one was Genesis 37, 39. etc.
Joseph: who served God not only in Potiphars house, and Pharaohs Court, but
in the prison also, when his feet were fast in the stocks, and their o entered
into his soul. And Job 19.25.
Job who (when God set him up as a mark to shoot at) still held fast his
confidence in his redeemer: J know that my redeemer lives, etc. Dan. 3.16, 17.
And the three childeren, whom neither the threats of Nebuchadnezzar, nor his
angry countenance, nor the sight of the fiery furnace, could deter from
worshipping their God, nor cause them to fall down before the golden Image.
And Dan. 6.12, 13.
Daniel: whom neither the favors of Darius could allure, nor his irrecouerable
edict compel to desist from praying to his God, but he chose rather to be cast
into the den of Lions. I could be almost infinite in instances of the like kind
out of the Ecclesiastical histories: where we find S. And. kissing his cross,
and embracing it with a Salve Sancte crux, etc. Ignat. inuiting the wild beasts
to devour him: saying, I am the Lords wheat and must be ground with the teeth
of wild beasts: and S. Laurence upon his fiery gridiro^ (which was to him as a
bed of down) outbrauing the tyrant Decius, and telling him that one side was
wasted enough, he should now turn up the other.

But I shall need no more instances, seeing Saint Paul. in the name of all Gods
Saints, bids open defiance to Satan and his accomplices, Romans 8.35. etc
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, distress,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or swords: no, in all
these we are more than conquerours through him that loved us.

Not that Gods Saints and Martyrs are (...), altogether senseless (like
stoics or stocks rather:) for they feel the smart and pain of their
tortures, else they could not be valiant Martyrs: (seeing true fortitude
consistes in the patient bearing of those things which are most afflictiue to
flesh and blood:) but they are comforted: 1. In the sense of Gods present
mercies: Psalm. 94.19.
whose comforts do refresh their souls: 2. In the certain expectation of
their future glory: 2 Cor. 4.17.
for we know that these light afflictions which are but for a moment, do cause
unto us a far more excellent and aeternall weight of glory: So that in all
their afflictions and persecutions, faith supports them that they fall not:
hope comforts them that they despair not: patience quiets them that they
murmr not, and their inward peace of conscience, sweetens their outward
troubles with comfortable cordials that they faint not.

Chrysostom. in Loc.
As he therefore that beats upon an Adamant, is himself beaten with his own
blows (for he is wearied, but the Adamant not pierced, which is impenetrable:)
And the waves that dash against a rock are themselves broken, but the rock
stands immooueable: and he that Act. 9.5.
kickes as against the pricks is himself wounded with his own strokes: so he
that persecutes Gods faithful children, hurts himself not them: for he makes
them have fellowship with Jesus, in being partakers of his sufferings, and
bearing in their bodies stigmata Christi: that is, the prints of his precious
wounds: while himself has fellowship with Judas in betraying and persecuting
Christ in his members. Phil. 1.8.
Be nothing therefore terrified with your adversaries: which to them is a token
of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.

Ratio.
The reason of this immooueable constancy and stability of Gods Saints is, V. 25.
Because the spiritual aedifice of their souls and bodies is built upon a
rock: for they have these three rocks to support and strengthen them in all
their rroubles: 1. The might and mercy of God the Father: who is the maine
pillar of power, and fountain of goodness: of whose favor they doubt not,
because he has passed it unto them in his holy word by promise, indenture,
covenant, and Heb. 6.13. etc.
oath: and that before immooueable 1 Ioh. 5.7, 8,
witnesses, the best in heaven, and the best on earth. 2. The merits of Christ:
for their true and saving faith does rest it self in the precious wounds of
Christ, (as the Cant. 2.14.
doves in the clefts of the rocks,) that it cannot be removed. 3. The
comforts of the holy Ghost: who dwells in them as in his 1 Cor. 6.19.
temples, and reigns in their hearts as in his kingdom: directing them into
all truth and goodness, and comforting them in all their troubles: as being
the Ephesians. 1.13, 14.
seal of their adoption, and earnest of their aeternall inheritance. And with
these impregnable bulwarks, the fortress of their faith is so strengthened,
that neither rain, floods, nor wind, Romans 8.38, 39
height, nor depth, life, nor death, principalities, nor powers, etc. nor the
gates of hell, nor the whole force and power of the kingdom of darkness can
once shake, much less overthrow it, because it is builded upon a rock. For
though Gods Saints be troubled on every side, yet are they not distressed, 2
Cor. 4.8, 9.
(...),.i. Haesitantes non haerentes, (Arr. Mont.) perplexed, but not in
despair: persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but not cast away, or
destroyed.

But if any build upon the sand of humane Traditions, 1 Casus malorum
or their own fancies, or the worlds vanities, both building and builders fall
together (like Dan. 2.35.
Nebuchadnezzars Image, when the stone hewn out of the mountain without hands
fell upon it:) and become like the chafe of the summer threshing flowers, or
the sand they build upon, or the dust which the wind scatters from the face of
the earth. Just. prim^.


1. He that goes to build up the ruins of Babell in his soul, shall with it
fall to ruin: for as one Angel cried concerning Babylon, Apoc. 14 8, 9, 10
Cecidit cecidit, It is fallen, it is fallen: so another angel immediately
following the former, cried wieh a loud voice: If any man worship the beast,
and receive his mark in his forehead, or his hand, the same shall drink of
the wine of the wrath of God powered out without mixture into the cup of his
indignation, and shall be tormented with fire and brimstone for ever.

Marvel not therefore at the Apostasy of many to Popery in these days: they
are such as never built on the rock of truth and right: but on the sands of
their own fancies, or the world, (by presumption, security, worldliness, or
hypocrisy) and therefore God suffers them to fall into errors, as a just
punishment of their sins: and they shall at length fall into the fiery lake,
as an aeternall punishment, both of their sins, and errors. 2 These. 2.10.21,
12.
Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, for
this cause God shall send them a strong delusion that they should believe a lie,
that they might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

For Cypr. imperfectum in Loc.
how should he abide in Christ that never was in Christ? or how should the
truth hold him that never held the truth? or righteousness preserve him that
never kept the ways of righteousness? No, no, such buildings (though they be
built as high as the tower of Babell, Genesis 11.4.
whose top did even reach to heaven, or as the tomb of Manseolus, or Pyramides
of Egypt: and be as fair, and stately for outward show as the temple of Act
19.27.
Diana at Ephesus (the wonderment of the world:) or the costly palace of
Alcinoous, (the walls whereof were brass, the gates gold, and the entries
silver): yet down they must, they and their builders shall fall: and Iinex. v.
27 Ruina magna.
their fall shall be great.

The fall of an house is great: first, when it falls not in part but totaly:
(that is, not the roof, or a wall, or a room only), but is turned
topsey-turuey from the very foundation: 2. when it falls finally and
irrecouerably never to be raised up again like the walls of Jericho. Ios. 6.26.
Such I am persuaded shall in Gods due time be the fall of Babylon (as a M.
Higgo^s in his mystical Babylon.
learned Divine of ours has of late evidently proved) though the Babilonish
architects labor with all their arr. and industry to repair the ruins of
Babell: but Psalm. 127.1.
except the Lord build the house, their labor is but lost that build it, and
the Lord has decreed and denounced the fall thereof by that Apoc. 14.12.
everlasting Gospel, which the Angel brought into the world: therefore down
it must, and the fall thereof shall be great, and shall crush all that
wittingly, willingly, and wilfully fall with it, and under it, (as the Oct. 26,
1623.
late fall of an house did some adhaerents unto Babylon) and press them down
(if they speedily repent not) to the bottom of hell.

And such also will be the fall of all worldlings, Just secunda,
and other foolish builders on the sand, if they speedily convert not, and
become wise builders, to build on the rock Christ and his Sacred truth, both
by believing and practicing. As here their fall was great, when they wittingly,
and willingly consented unto sin; and greater, when they acted it, and
greatest of all, when they persisted in it: so hereafter their fall shall be
exceeding great: Not like Genesis 3 23.
Adams only, from a paradise of pleasure to a wilderness of wo^: (for so they
fall here when they fall from truth to error, and from righteousness to sin
and wickedness: but like Lucifers, who fell like Luc. 10.11.
lightning, (that is, swiftly and suddenly from the height of heaven to the
depth of hell: and from being an Angel of light, and a pure star of
celestial brightness to be an angel of aeternall night, and the black
Prince of infernal darkness.



We of this land are bound to God for innumerable blessings: namely, a
Religious King, a hopeful Prince, a fruitful land (like Canaan flowing with
milk and honey, or Eden the garden of the Lord:) also goodly and populous
cities and towns, and flourishing Universities, and Innes of Court, (which
like Theopbrastus Persian tree) do at the same time bud, blossom, and bring
forth fruit. So that we may say of England (as one did of Rhodes,) Semper in
Sole sita est: for we have had a long sunshine of prosperity, peace, and
plenty: and withal the sunshine of the Gospel: which (as Luther said) is
Genus generalissimum omnium bonorum, the well head of our happiness: for
hereby we may build on the rock, while other our neighbor nations build on
the sand.

Seeing therefore God has trusted us with such a treasure, let us be
thankful for it: and show our thankfullnes: first, in embracing this Gospel
of peace peaceably, as the subjects of the Prince of peace. Let us not stand
striving (as too many have vainly done already too long) about the swaddling
cloutes of holy Religion (namely Clericall habites, and other comely
Ceremonies) least while we strive about these overmuch, we endanger the body
or substance of true Religion, let us not any longer r^nd in sunder the Cypr.
de unit. Eccles.
seamelesse coat of Christ (the unity of the Church) by our needless con^en
i^n^ about th^se ^h^^gs. ^or if ^ee Gal. 5.15.
bite and devour one another, let us take heed least we be consumed one of
another: and while we ^i^tu^be the Churches peace, we deprive her of her
prosp^r^^ie, an^ make an open wa^ (as this brea^h has already done too much:)
for those proud and cruel Babylonians to ruin our Ierusal^m: who say of it in
their hearts: Psalm. 127.7.
Down with it, down with it even to the ground.

But being ^ll Ministers or members of one Church, (which is Cypr. ibid.
Vna Colu^ba, one Cant. 5.2.
do^e of Christ: let us have all the douelike spirit of humi^itie, charit,
peace, and unity: for the doves of one house live together, love together, fly
together, flock together kiss each other, and in all respects perform the
l^wes of love, peace, and unanimity. So let us live and love together, and
(with the first bel^euers of the Primitive Church) be all of Act. 4.32.
one heart and one soul. Let all ministers preach, and people pray for the
peace of our Jerusalem: Psalm. 122.6, 7.
for if peace be within her walls, plenteousnesse will be within her palaces.

2. Let us that are built on this rock of truth, bring forth the fruits of
holiness and true righteousness. So S. Ier. said of the Christians of his days:
Hieron. Pro^m. Comment. in Ezech.
Scripturarum cupimus verba in opera vertere, and non dicere sancta sed facere:
we desire to turn the words of the Scripture into works, and not to speak
of, but to do the works of holiness.

As the natural life lies hid in the heart (the fountain of the vital
spirits) and yet Physicians judge of it by the pulse in the arm: so the
spiritual life of a Christian (to wit his regeneration) lies hid in the heart
and soul, and yet men judge of it by the motion of the arm (the exercise of
good works) for Mat 7.10.
the tree is known by his fruits. We cannot judge of the life of grace, and
power of true Religion in the souls of men: 1. By the eyes: for many lift up
their eyes to heaven (by seeming shows of sanctity) when their hearts lie
grouel^ng on the earth, yea mudling in the earth by base worldliness, and
gross^ carnalitie. 2. Nor by the ears: for there be many Iam. 1.22.
hearers of the word, but not doers of the same, deceiving their own souls:
3. Nor by the tongu^: for many Mat. 15.8. and 7.21.
draw near to God with their mouths, and honor him with their lips, when
their hearts are far from him, and cry with a zealous ingemination, Lord, Lord,
and yet do not the will of their heavenly Father. But by the arm or hand:
that is, by doing cheerfully, sincerely, and constantly the things that God
commands.

Cant. 5.1. and 6.2.
Christ the bridegroom comes into his garden, not to refresh himself under the
shadow of the trees, or to behold the green lea^es, or to crop the buds, and
blossoms, but to gather the fruits, that his friends may eat abundantly: for
then Christ feeds when his friends feed, the head is nourishe^ in his members.
Mat. 25.40.
In as much as ye have done it unto me of these little ones ye have done it
unto me.

Let therefore the word of God Col. 3.16.
dwell in you (as it dwells among you) plenteously that ye may be 1 Timothy 6.18.
rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate to the poor
and needy Esa. 58 7, 8.
dealing your bread to the hungry, and drink to the thirsty, bringing the
poor that are cast out into your houses, covering the naked with a garment,
and not hiding your selves from your own flesh: then shall your light break
forth as the morning, and your health spring forth speedily, your righteousness
shall go before you, and the glory of the Lord shall be your reward. And then
shall God Apoc. 20.1.
chain up Satan in the bottomless pit, and restrain the force and malice,
of wicked men that they cannot hurt us, Aug in Exodus
Malorum potestas deficit in muscis, The power of the Magitians fails in the
flies: for Satan cannot do the least thing without Gods permission. If
therefore we Eccles. 12. vlt.
fear the Lord and keep his commandments, hear his word and do it, even
those storms, floods and winds, which Satan stirs up to cast down our
spiriruall building, shall blow our happiness, and land the ships of our souls
and bodies at last in the haven of heaven.

Now let every heart stretch forth an hand, and apply what has been spoken to
himself, and pray earnestly for the assistance of Gods Spirit that he may so
do: for we may preach, and you hear, and both loose our labor, except there
be a drawing of the father, a touch of the Son, and an inspiration of the
Holy Ghost; but if these concur, then God himself makes the Sermon, and
builds up thereby the spiritual Edifices of our Souls, and makes them stand
fast for ever: and so the fruit of a few hours hearing shall be eternity of
days.

A Prayer.
Grant us grace therefore (O Lord) to be doers of thy word, not hearers only,
deceiving our own souls: and vouchsafe so to assist us with thy holy Spirit in
this our building, that we may not build the spiritual Edifices of our souls,
either on humane traditions, (with superstitious Papists;) or upon our vain
presumption of thy mercy, (with profane and secure sinners) or upon the
perishing vanities of this world (with foolish Mammonists) or upon our outward
profession of feigned holiness, (with masked Hypocrites:) but upon the rocky
faundation of thy Christ and his sacred truth, both by hearing and practizing:
that no rain of worldly prosperity, nor storms of adversity, winds of
haereticall persuasions, or violent floods of persecutions, overthrow this our
spiritual building: but that it may stand fast like mount Sion till (this
house of our earthly tabernacle being dissolved) we have a building given us
of thee, an house not made with hands but eternal in the Heavens.

FINIS.

