A SERMON PREACHED IN OXFORD: the 5. of November. 1607.

By JOHN KING Doctor of Divinity, Deane of Christ Church, and Vicechancellor
of the University.

At Oxford, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1607.

The Text.
46. Psalm. verse. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 7 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of
Iaakob is our refuge.

8 Come, and behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in
the earth.

9 He makes wars to cease unto the ends of the world: he breaks the bow,
and cutteth the spear, and burns the Chariots with fire.

10 Be still and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the heathen, and I
will be exalted in the earth.

11 The Lord of hosts is with us: the God of Iaakob is our refuge.


MY travail for the choice of my text parallel to this days work, was as the
flying of Noah's dove, or floting of his arc; the one had no footing til it
came to the arc again, the other noe restinge place but on the mountains of
Armenia; nor I where to settle my divided thoughts, til I fell upon this Psalm:
here I met with many vniformities.

God is our hope, and strength, in angustijs auxilium praese^tissimum, or
adiutor in tribulationibus, quae inveneru^t nos nimis, our readiest help in our
sorest dangers. v. 1. We were the children of death, and were even come to the
birth, there wanted a very little strength to bring us forth. Tempus faciendi
domino, it was then time for the Lord to put to his hand, yea the time was
almost past. -- digitis a morte remoti
quatuor aut septem. --
there remained but a few hours to accomplish their mischeife.

The extent of the danger noe less. Theirs was against both their City of
God, and the sanctuary of his Tabernacles. verse. 4. Ours against both city and
sanctuary, the two sisters, the Martha and Marie, policy and piety,
Commonwealth and Church of our Country: The thrones of David and chair of
Moses, golden scepter, and golden candle stick, our (...) 21. Act. 28. and our
(...) also, people, law, place, temple must have been dissolved.

city of God; so with us too. Our city of God* the faierest, the excellentest,
the absolutest that we had (or contiguous to it) our Jerusalem, the Princess
of the thousands, the mother of all the daughters of our land, the Chamber of
our famous Kings and Queens, joy of our English earth, empress of the
Island, and the renouned Emporie and Mart of the whole Kingdom.

And the Sanctuary of our Tabernacles no less as theirs. Our Bethel, our
Siloh, our Hill of Sion; where were our goodliest Temples and Basilikes,
Chapels and oratories, where our very oracles were wont to be given, the
fountain and spring of religion, the arc of the presence of God above al
other places of this land.

Omit not the season verse. 5. Their deliverance was very early. Mane diluculo
ante auroram, ad co^spectu^ aurorae. So was ours. For by four in the morning
of that day, which had bin the evening and long night, the blacknes of darkness
to our state, was the treason discovered, the Lords of the privy Counsel
acquainted, and the King in his bed chamber awaked and advertised. There wanted
but a mornings work, which if it had sped, sufficient unto the day, the year
and many ages of the world had the malice of that morning bin. Betwixt the
midnight of that eve, whereon the Incendiarie kept his vigilles, and the
middaie of their feast, their great Iubilee expected, were but 12 hours* and
on of those twelve, as of the 12. Apostles a devil, so must have been hora and
potestas tenebrarum the hour and power of the devil, the hour of fiery trial,
hora nefasta, nefanda, the blackest that ever the eye of the sun looked upon,
worse then the worst Sodomiticall and Gomorrhean, the most accursed and
infamous, that ever was accounted in any Calendar of time.

Me thinks the whole phrase of the Psalm ground had bin shaken verse. ^. yea
her ioints had bin shiuered in pieces; and our mountains if not of nature, of
art, momuments of age and honor, as stable and stately as mountains, huge
masses and piles of magnificent buildings, royal palaces, religious temples,
Mausolean sepulchers and shrines, which the holy Ghost calls domos seculi*
houses of eternity, 12. Eccl.
had been thrown into the midst of the river, if not the sea; and our waters
had raged and been troubled verse. 3. yea the foundations of their cha^nels had
been discovered: And that River of ours, the streams whereof make glad our
City of God verse. 4. had changed her gladness into mourning, died her crystal
into rubies, and turned as the rivers of Egypt into a river of blood; running
as a Maister-veine with a full tide of blood along the sides of the city: her
carriages in stead of wonted commodities had been dead corpses; many a
thousand discerpted limme both of men and buildings must it have drank down,
and buried within her bosom.

The Lord is our refuge etc. Therefore will we not fear though the earth be
moved etc.

-- Si fractus illabatur orbis.
Notwithstanding al these resemblances, the reed and metwand of that danger
and deliverance of theirs is far to short to be the measure of ours. Ours is
casus omissus, a transcendent of transcendents a (...); our danger a monster of
dangers such as nature never brought forth; our deliverance a mirror, a
miracle of deliverances; such as the finger of God never wrought. But taking my
text as it is, you shall find in the opening of it 1 A proposition, profession,
protestation as it were to the whole world The Lord of hosts is with us v. 7 2
A probation, or demonstration thereof. Come and behold his works. verse. 8. 3
Confirmation, explication, enumeratio^, he makes wars to cease etc. he
breaks the bow etc. v. 9. 4 Exhortation, advise. Be still and know etc. v. 10.
5 Conclusion, acclamatio^. The Lord of hosts etc. verse. vlt.
Which being a repetition of the seventh verse, in the self same words and
syllables, carmen amaebaeum, may seem to stand in the first place as a
challendge and defiance to al adversary forces. Dominus virtutu^ nobiscum, we
will not fear for thousands, and te^ thousands, whole armies of me^, legio^s of
devils, the gates of hell: and when they have proved, demonstrated, cleared the
truth of their assertion, they singe it once more in the last place as their
Paean, their victorious and triumpha^t song, Dominus virtutum nobi scu^* etc.

Look not for much explication and discourse at my hands, you shall find me a
short paraphrast or scholiast application is my end. My text serving me to noe
other use then as a seal, or stamp, or mold, which when J have set to the late
story of our times, you shall find, if not so lively in all points of
collation; yet some liklie expression and form of my text sticking upon it.

For the order then and connection of the words in breife, thus it stands.

1 They propose. The Lord of hosts is with us. How prove they that? 2 Thus.
Come and behold his works. That were an endless task. 3 They give Instance in
a species. What desolations he has wroght. Yet this were to lardg a field to
range in. 4 They exemplify some one kind of them: he makes wars to cease.
How shall that appear? 5 By a sufficient enumeration. He takes away al
instruments of war, breaks the bow etc. 6 Then follows the counsel.
Lastly the conclusion.
Dominus virtutum nobiscum etc. The Proposition.
They not only presume it, and lay it for their surest ground, as a maxim
and principle which they will never be driven from; but assume it unto
themselves in the hypothesis, and appropriate it to their people and persons,
Nobiscum, noster. Which are not only voces charitatis, words of charity, when
by a style of plurality and community they comprehend all the members of their
state but voces fidei, words of faith also, when they make Iehouam exercituum,
the universal Lord of the world, whose power is over al, to be their proper
and peculiar God. Like wise builders, that build upon the rock, all the winds
and storms in the world may beat upon their house either of Church or
Kingdom, but cannot shake them. Wise Mercha^ts that sell all the substance they
have to buy one pearl more valuable and precious then all the rest. Vnus omnia.
And omniam omnibus: Compendiu^ mirabile. One Lord of hosts is more unto them,
then all the arms of flesh and blood, al armies of men and Angels, all the
powers in heaven and earth: One God of Jacob more unto them then all the Gods of
Ammon, Aram, Moab, and whatsoever is named God throughout the whole world.

But that which I observe principally in the proposition is the wisdom and
perfection of their speech. For according to the two members of it, so do they
style God with two titles, and ascribe unto him two attributes Dominus
virtutum, and Deus Jacob. Dominus virtutum: Deus Jacob.
That is to say strong and sweet. The one virium the other voluntatis, the on
of ability, the other of willingness, the on roboris, the other faederis. One of
power, an other of favor, one of majesty, an other of mercy, on of puissa^ce,
another of promise: in a word, one universal, the other more special. J
remember the counsel of the Son of Syrach: Facito verbis tuis stateram. 28.
Eccl. 25.
Balance thy words eue^. Was there ever speech in the book of God more
equally balanced? In the one skale you have the Lord of Hosts, 15. Exodus
viru^, or rather Deum bellatorem, with whom it is al one to save with many
or with few, the God of Gods with his out. streched arm of power, and his
right hand bringing terrible things to pass; whose throne is the heaven of
heavens, the earth his footstool, the sea his washpot, Angels his ministering
spirits, men his vessels of claie, Devils the vassals of his wrath, and all the
creatures in the world, even the poor insectes and flies, the scorns of
nature, executioners of his vengance, and able by his appointment to lay one
sure strokes. O this is a glorious and fearful skale, who can abide it? Who
ever saw God in his strength and lived? What pillar of heaven, or what
foundation of the world could stand, if there were not an another skale to
match and mitigate the rigor of his strength?

the God of Jacob: in which name is comprised whatsoever belongs to mercy*
favor, compassion, whatsoever to election, dilection, purchase, inheritance,
promise, covenant, word, sacrament. Nay, the prescription and antiquity of his
love is expressed herein, for Deus Jacob bears an ancient date. And these two
together (Lord of hosts, and God of Jacob) make a just aequi-libriu^ between
greatness and grace, and bring al things to a fair medlie, a sweet and
acceptable harmony, like that in the 34. of Exodus The Lord, the Lord Strong,
there is the root of all, afterward merciful, gracious etc. a number of
goodly branches springing from that root.

The actions ascribed unto him are likewise two. The one of presence Nobi scum;
Nobiscum, susceptor noster.
the other of protection, susceptor noster, arx, exaltatio, locus editus, the
latter is an auxesis, increase to the former.

Dominus nobiscum is not so much (unless you understand that great mystery
which was hidden from the beginning of the world, and revealed in fulness of
time, that is Emanuel, Dominus nobiscum, God in our nature, God in our flesh)
for God is present to al his creatures. Iouis omnia plena: caelum and terram
impleo I fill heaven and earth. Whether shall I fly from thy spirit? if I
climb up into heaven etc. He is present with those that shun his presence,
that say unto him (depart from us) and think they are safe from his sight:
Tush, none sees, the God of Jacob regards not. But when it is added, that
God is not only with us, but for us, nobiscum, and pro nobis, then are we safe
and secure from all possible dangers.

The assertion, 2. Probation
I confess, is very audacious, if it be not well warranted. Many have trusted
in lying words, as the Prophet Jeremy speaks: Templum Domini, Templum Domini:
and why not these as well brachium, Domini, brachiu^ Domini, the arm of the
Lord is with us, and perhaps noe such matter. They are not the first that have
been deceived. There were that called the^ selves, the children of Abraham, the
disciples of Moses, the sons of the most High, and were nothing less. You
say, the Lord of hosts is with you, and the God of Iaakob your defense. How
prove you it? Or why yours more then the whole world's besides?

Assured it is, there were noe outward, apparent, transient work from God to
persuade us of his presence and defense, if besides his promises (which
promises are yea and amen) besides his word and oath (which word and oath are
2. immutable things) we had nothing to stand upon; if he made as if he slept,
and had thrust his hand of working into his bosom, and would not draw it out,
but might seem to have forgotten to be gracious, and to have buried his
mercies in everlasting forgetfulness: more the^ this, if his works were quite
contrary (as we might conceive) to his works of mercy, not diuersa, but
aduersa, which the Prophet calls opera peregrina, 28. Es. 21.
strange and improper works, aliene almost from his nature, I mean of
troubling and afflicting his people so far forth, that the very heathen
should say of us, where is now their God? Yet should we live by our faith, and
possess our souls in patience, and wait for the time when the vision should
speak, for it shall certainly speak, and shall not lie unto us.

But there are that believe not unless they may see. plus oculo quam oraculo.
Non videmus signa. An adulterous and wicked generation, carnal at least,
seeks a sign. Unless we may see with our eyes (say they) and handle with
our hands, and thrust our very fingers and nails into the prints of Gods
works, we will not believe; it must be brachium reuelatum, demonstrated to
sense, or it cannot move them. For the satisfaction therefore of them and the
whole world, they join potenter and patenter together, the works and the
evidence of the^: Venite and videte opera. Come and behold his works; we feed
you not with deceaueable fables. Sensus assensus sunt. See them, touch them,
handle them, they are not spirits, fancies, speculations, they are true bodies
and have the flesh and bones of real, acted, accomplished works. It is justly
that answer that Philip shaped to Nathanael 1. John. when he asked him,
comes there any good thing out of Nazareth? Come and see. Let thy foot
bring thine eye to behold that which thou beleeuest not. Yea our blessed
Savior himself vouchsafed to persuade with this argument ^o John. If you
believe not me, believe my works; opera testantur de me, for my works bear
witness of me. Now though the noblest demonstration of things be from their
causes and principles, yet the nearest to us ward and most apprehensible is
from effects and performances.

But what are the works they tell us of? The works Quam magnificata, o how
manifold are thy works o Lord! In wisdom have thou made them al. The earth is
full of thy goodness. So is the great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, both great and small beasts. etc. Manifold are they and
maruaillous, from the huge Leuiathan to the little worm. Omnia in sapientia.
But that as St, Austin speaks, Consuetudinis perseuerantia amisit
admirationem: we marvel not, because they are common. The like Tertullian,
Semper abundantia contumelio sain semetipsam est. Of fulness comes lothing, at
least neglect. We see nothing but this Man. Assiduitate oculorum (says
Tully) assues cunt animi. It is use that beguileth us, and it is not magnitudo
but nouitas, the greatness but newnes of the thing that draws us after it.
Otherwise (to go noe farther) how admirable are the works of God, eue^ upon
ourselves? It is he that has made us wonderfully in our mothers wombes, and
took us forth of our mothers bellies, and when father and mother forsook us,
took us up, that gives us our daily bread to feed us, and our daily
breath to quicken us with many the like blessings. Al which show, that he is
not far of from every one of us, Act. 15. but watches continually over us
with his heavenly and fatherly providence. But of the works of God there is
noe end, if we think to take a view of the whole su^me of the^. Come therefore
to some particular.

Qua^ solitudi^es.
Solitudines desolations Some read mirabilia wonders, not ordinary works:
some prodigia prodiges, not ordinary wonders. The most solitudines.

So then by the light of my Text J perceive the works of God are two fold.

Genes.
and quicquid me diu^ cum ipsis finibus exortum est, Basil.
al things contained with in them; of supportation, and government. (...) 1.
Heb. He carries althings with the word of his power: of redemption, purchase,
reconciliation (...); 2. Cor 5. 10. of restitution, reparation, renouation. 3.
Act. 20. there shall be (...), times of the restauratio^ of al things. These be
his positive works (...), whatsoever, I mean, either gives, or maintains,
or bettereth, and amendeth the being of things; of which we may read
ple^tifully the mean time in the book of nature, more happily in the books of
grace, but hereafter most blessedlie and contentedlie in the lardge volumes of
glory.

2 Other are his works of corruption, dissolution, and as my text calls them
desolation. The Scripture testifies of both, viuifico, occido* I quicken, I
kill. Creans lucem, 32. Deuteronomy.
formans tenebras, Creating the light, and forming darkness. 45. Esaias.
These works of desolation are not such, the only end whereof (without farther
good) is to mar and destroy, and deprive of being, as the drowning of the
old world, the burning of Sodom with her sisters, the sacking of Jerusalem;
where the scope proposed to God was to overturne, ouerturne, overturne, without
sparing they are desolations to our enemies, but consolations to us, ruins to
them, to us resurrections, 20. Psalm.
(they are falen down, says the Psalm, we stand upright) corruptions to
them, generations, creations, recreations to us. And without these corruptiue,
destructive, works of God (to let pass the other member) we could not be, or
at least wise not so happy. Take for example. God never made death. Inuidia
diaboli intrauit. 2. Wis. through the envy of the devil it entered into the
world; through sin the inspiratio^ of the devil 5. Romans and not only (...),
entered, but (...), went over al, as a gangraine and infection; and more the^
that, (...), as Alexander the great, a triumphant conqueror Curt.
[peruenimus ad solis ortum and occasum] reigned over all the sonns of Adam. Now
under this accursed brat thus entering and borne by equiuocal and spurious
generation, under this epidemical and ecumenical contagion possessing all the
corners of the earth, and not a King, but a tyrant usurping and bearing swaie
over al flesh, what flesh could ever have been saved (for what man had lived
and not sinned, or sinned and should have lived, and not died the second
death?) but for a work of desolation coming between, to desolate and
disapoint the works of death? Of this work you may read I. Ioh. 3. 8. To this
end was the son of God manifested (...) that he might dissolve the works of
the devil, that is to say, sin, and death, 2. Heb. 14. (...), that through
his death he might euacuate, abolish him that had power of death to weet, the
devil. ^. Col. 14. it is most amply described (...) a word of desolation, he
has razed out the hand writing against us (...) a phrase of desolatio^ took
it away, (...), fastened it to his cross: (...) etc. And has spoiled,
vnharnessed principallities and powers, and made a show of them openly, and
triumphed over them upon his cross. Al are terms of desolation; so that now
the Prince of this world is cast out, and the children (that were appointed) of
death and gehe^na singe a song of tha^sgiuing, O death where is thy sting? O
hell where is thy victory? This is the great and wonderful work of desolation
above al others, and appertains to souls as well as bodies, and to our
deliverances both from first and second death, our redemption from spiritual
wickednesses rather then corporal, from our immortal foes, and endless
calamities.

David is content to insist in one of the works of God, but of temporal, and
corporal desolation, and that is the ending of war.

He causes wars to cease unto the ends of the earth. 5. Auferens bella.
That he proves by sufficient induction, a recital of instruments and weapons
of war. He breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear etc. As when the
Philistines took the Smithes out of Israel, 1. Sam. 13.
they could not fight. No smithes, noe armor; noe armor, noe war.

War of it self is opus de solationis, a work of desolation, havoc, wast,
ruin, it turns a land in solitudine^, into a desert, an habitatio^ for foxes,
and wild beasts. Let it be sowed with the seed both of man and beast, as a
field with wheat, war will consume it and eat it out. Bellum si natural
spectes, minine bonum. rather, in vicinity to the name, mos bellurum, fitter
for beasts then men. Liuy.
As for men, iustum quibus necessarium, never just but when they cannot avoid
it; nor ever to be waged by a christian, 205* Epist,
but obseruinge St. Austins rule, Esto bellando pacificus, though thy hand be
bloody, thy heart must be peaceable. Pacem habere debet volu^tas, bellum
necessitas. You see the instruments na^ed in my text, are not mattocks and
spades, tools of husbandry, or manuarie crafts, but instruments of murder and
spoil: the bow to do mischeife eminus, Arcus, hasta, Currus
a far of, the spear cominus, near at hand: the chariots especially ferrati,
falcati, shod and prepared with iron, and whinged like birds, with their siths
and hooks on both sides, to mow down all that they met with: they rage in the
streets, their burning is like lamps, and their shooting like lightning. 2.
Nahum.

Now in the heat and height of these desolations, when an enemy of a feirce
looks, and truculent heart, who neither reuerenceth the person of the aged, nor
pittieth the sucking babe, dasheth the infants against the stones in the
streets, and rippeth up the women with child, (as the book of God describes
him) one whose breath is slaughter and destruction, whose number is as the
locusts hiding the face of the earth, able to devour a country, as an ox
licketh up grass; all whose purposes and designs are, Down with the^, down
with them, let us cut them of from being a people, and root out their name;
al whose promises to himself, Thy silver and gold is mine, thy women and
fair children be mine, 1. Reg. 20.
and if any be denied, the Gods do so unto me and more too, if the dust of
thy land be enough for my people, every man to take an ha^dful: whose
threatenings rest not in men, but their insolences and blasphemies ascend
against God himself Let not thy God deceive thee, in whom thou trustest (you
know whose word it was and it is thought by the learned, that that victory
gave occasion to the writing of this Psalm:) think with your selves how
strange and prodigious a thing it is, by the unexpected help of this Lord
alone, often by improbable means, sometimes by the hand of the weaker sex, all this intended desolation, to be desolated, disapointed, defeated, al their
warlike provision dissolved, their companies, and troops scattered,
discomfited, the eater himself to be made meat, the spoiler to be spoiled;
for not only bridles to be put into their lips, and hooks into their nostrels
to turn them back to their home, but their swords and spears to be turned
each man's into his fellows bowels, till they become drunck with their own
blood, as with new wine.

Many such wonderful works of desolation has the Lord wrought; upon Pharao
and his host, when they sunck like stones to the bottom of the sea, upon Iabin
and Sisera, and all the Kings and people of Canaan, upon Zenacherib and Rab
saketh (which is thought to be the story here aimed at) where Judah hunge
down his head, and covered his face for shame, and rent his clothes, and there
was nothing left unto the^, but Domine inclina aure^, and audi, aperioculos and
vide. O Lord bow down thine ear and hear, open thy eye and consider, save us
out of the hands of our enemies: O how memorable, and renowned is it to al
posterity, that in that exigent of theirs, by an angel of the Lord, an
invisible hand, there should be slain in one night an hundred fowrescore and
five thousand; 2, Reg. 19. 16.
when the morning arose, they were al found to be dead corpses? -- Octoge simus
octauus mirabilis annus; for as strange a delivery, from as proud an enemy,
with as unquenchable fury, and a most invincible navy, they bare the ensigns
of victory, as others of Castor and Pollux, upon their ships, brought with
the^ instruments of slaughter and torture against our bodies, and swallowed a
plentiful hope of ouer-running and desolating the whole Kingdom. But they that
went down at that time into the sea with ships, ipsi videru^t opera Domini,
Psalm. 107.
and mirabilia, [prodigia, solitudines] eius in profundo. They saw, we al
know. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare
his wonderful works before the sons of men! That our childrens children to
the last point and period of any generation within this Island, may be able
to say, O God we have hard with our ears, and our fathers and grandfathers
have declared unto us that noble work of deliverance, which thou wroughtest
for them in forepassed times.

Having sufficiently proved, demonstrated, evicted Counsel:
and stopped the mouths of all gainesaiers, vt iustificetur in sermonibus, at
length he falls to aduising, or rather by a prosopopaeia, brings in God
persuading in his own person.

Be still and know. Vacate and videte.
Before, when they were absent and not come, then was it venite and videte,
come and see: Vacate.
now they are present vacate (...), stand still, or sit down, as Mary did,
take leisure, make not have to depart from it. Before it was videte, to those
that were ignorant, Videte.
see, that is, understand, and learn, and know that which you know not: now
it is videte of an higher reach, you that know already, acknowledge consider,
apply, make use of that you know. What shall they know? that you your selves
are but men (put the^ in mind o Lord, that they may know they are but men)
worms, vanity, nothing, Ego Deus: it is I that am God: Ego, Ego Deus.
ego, I even I, et non est alius praeter me, and there is none besides me. And
not a popular, idle, abject God, like the Gods of the gentiles, which are not
able to wipe the dust from their eyes: Exaltabor.
I will be exalted:

Not only amongst my people of Israel* but in gentibus, amongst the nations*
if they receive me, volentibus, with their good contents; if they reject me,
inuitis, In gentibus
maugre their wills.

And if there be any ground* the lines whereof are extended farther then
people and nations inhabit, J will be exalted there also. In terra vniuersa.
Exaltabor and exaltabor, I will be exalted, J say again I will in the whole
earth.

It may be spoken to two sorts of me^. 1. to friends, and then it carries the
same sense that the speech of Moses to the children of Israel 14. Exodus 13.
Fear ye not, stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord, which he will
show on you. The Lord shall fight for you, therefore hold you your peace.
Trouble not you your selves with your enemies, neither trust in your own
strength, nor say to your selves Manus nostra excelsa, our own high hand
shall deliver us. These were David's conclusions 44. Psalm. etc. I will not trust
in my bow, my sword shall not save me. And, an horse is but a vain thing to
save a man: And, some trust in horses, other in chariots, but we will remember
the name of the Lord of hosts. 3. it may be applied to enemies after this
sort: vacate, that is desistite, cessate, give over your wicked purposes and
plottinges, it is hard for you to kick against the pricks of Gods providence;
there is noe counsel, noe strength against his decrees.

Last of al follows the conclusion, a repetition of Conclusion.
the (...) and (...), like the iteru^ dic^, I say again 4. Philip. Serving in
the first place for the prooeme, in this last for an epiphone^e; the Key of my
whole speech, it opened me a door of entrance at the beginning, and now at my
giving over, it closes and locketh up all again. The Lord of hosts is our
refuge.

This is the seal or sta^p whereof I told you before. Application.
Spare me a while to apply it, and to effigiate, and shape forth to the
pattern and tipe of my text that most prodigious de solation intended by the
adversary, but intercepted by God, which this fifth of November, so long as the
sun and moon last, shall be both famous and infamous for.

1 First as touching the proposition and conclusion being both the same, the
carceres and metam, head and foot of my text, as it were voice and echo, a
circular annular, serpentine verse, winding into it self again, like that in
the 8. Psalm. O Lord our God how excellent is thy name in all the world? The
two tropicks and points between which the whole motion of this scripture
goes, and like the two Cherubins over the mercieseate, which turned their
faces each to other, your selves give sentence, if ever any nation or language
under heaven had iuster cause to say, and say again, once in their hearts by
beeleeuing, and once more with their mouths by confessing, to make it both
their morning and evening, sacrifice, the proram and puppim, beginning and
ending of their daily meditations, to common it in private with their own
spirits, and to publish it forth in the greatest congregations and assemblies,
Dominus virtutum nobiscum, The Lord of hosts is with us, with the presence of
his power when there was opus Deo, a work even of the deity to be wrought, a
knot worthy the finger of God: and Deus Iacobi, the God of Jacob assisted us
with his grace; Iacobi and seminis, Iacobi and populieius, even the God of the
seed and people of Jacob. Say whither he loved not the tents and habitations
of Jacob, more then all the taber nacles and conuenticles of Mesek, ungodliness,
superstition, idolatry: whether he gave not ample testimony to the world that
he loved Jacob, his house, his issue, and hated Esau, and the whole
Esauitical, hairie, rough, barbarous, sauadge generation of me^, which said,
The days of mourning are come, venite, occidamus IACOBVM, let us kill Jacob and
subvert his Kingdom.

And whether we may not add in the end of our prayers and thanksgiving,
Salah.
as the strength and sting of the be that lies behind, as a goad to awake us,
and stir us up, a nail to fasten it in our hearts as in a sure place, a
diapsalma and rest to our song, a pawse to our meditaons, that we pass not
lightly away (for qui credit no^ festinet) and lastly the amen, the fiat,
the closure of al our devotion, Selah, as much as to say, o rempraeclara^ and
admirabilem, Deum habere defensorem! o magnum and inexpugnabilem defensorem! O
happy, thrice happy we that are in such a case! Blessed thrice blessed people
that have the Lord of hosts, the God of Jacob for our defense!

Does any man doubt of this? Come.
or is any ignorant? Venite and videte opera* Come from the uttermost ends of
the earth, as far as the four winds blow one against the other, if you will
see a work, a strange work, whereof you will say when you see it, we never
saw it after this sort, and when it shall be told you, you will not believe it,
Come.

And you that turn your backs to the temple of the Lord, and are ever
departing from us and our congregations, you whose motion is not coming. Eamus
in domum Domini, but going, our feet shall stand within thy gates o thou
sinagogue of Room, you that cannot persuade your selves that God is the God of
Protestants. Tush (say you) God has forsaken them, God and man have concurred
to punish the wickedness of this time (you know the text) and you prophesied
against us terrible things quandocunque contingeret miseram illam faeminam e
vita excedere, and saw in the visions of your heads our streets flowing with
blood etc. And magnu^ annum Platonis, a return and revolution of al things,
your temples, altars, sacrifices, restored, reformed secundum vsum after the
form of Romish superstition, Come and be not incredulous but believe, harden
not your hearts as in the days of idolatry and blindness, Behold.
behold the mighty hand of the Lord, and the works he has wrought for us:
we follow not deceauable fables, we have seen them with our eyes, and handled
them with our hands; nor were they done in a corner, but in the light of the
sun, that all the world may take notice of them. O that my words were now
written, Job. 19.
O that they were written in a book, and engraue^ with an iron pen in lead or
stone for ever! I know that my Redeemer lives, said Job. We know our
Protector lived, and you your selves know it, and heaven and earth know, King
and captive know, yea the stones in the walls, and timber in the beams know
that our Protector lived, and that the Lord of hosts was with us, and the God
of Jacob was our defense, when me^ were so furiously set against us, and meant
to have destroyed flesh and arm, head and members in one day, and at one
instant.

I could lead you by a long tract of the works of God in the days of that
glorious Saint, our late sovereign of happy memory Queen Elizabeth* a woman
after Gods heart, who walked in the ways, and ouerliued the days of her father
David, and led her people as a flock forty and five years through a wilderness
of many distresful dangers; a Queen of Queens, a Paragon (whilst she lived)
of mortal Princes, the diamond in the ring of the monarchs of the earth, the
glory of her sex, the pleasure of mankind, the miracle of the christian, and
the mark and scope eue^ of the infidel world, (for they had an eye after her)
who notwithstanding all the rorings of the bulls of Basan, Centaures, and
Minotaures of Rome, their thundrings, lightnings, excommunications,
execrations, incantations, conspiracies, rebellions, drugges, daggers, dagges,
yet lived to out-liue the malice of her enemies, drew up her feet unto her in
her bed of peace, had her eyes closed with the fingers of her servants, and
friends, and was buried with Regal burial in the sepulchers of the Kings and
Queens of England her noble Progenitors.

When we had excha^ged her for our gracious Sovereign that now is, --
Luciferum roseo cum sole, how glorious were the works of God in his most
peaceable entrance, not so much as a fly moving the whinge or hissing against
him? Besides many unexpected escapes of many unsuspected dangers. Al these
were his works of desolatio^. But there is one behind above all the rest, which
I may call the desolation of abomination, (in the heart and purpose of the
enemy) the most abominable, detestable, unmatchable, that ever was thought
upon. It was not solitudo in terra with them, but subter terram -- itum est in
viscera terrae, for the perpetration of it they went down into the bowels of
the earth, but for the invention to the very vmbilicke, and center of the
earth. I had almost asked -- qui gurges, aut quis tartarus hoc scelus
-- est ausus attrectare?
since in so many thousa^ds of years from the fall of the reprobate and
faithless angels it never came into the head of any devil to suggest to the
heart of any man before this time so nefarious, flagitius, portentuous a
wickedness, as this was?

Actors it had upon the earth, with whom I must acquaint you. 1. that Lateran
Jupiter, that Balaam, Caiphas, high-preist of Rome, the great Antichrist, the
maine Alastor, Abaddon, destroier of the christian world, whose first prize in
the Church of God was that he might be Episcopus episcoporum, chief and
universal Bishop, (a proud, profane, sacrilegious, Luciferian name) afterward
Rex regum, King of Kings; and Terror regum, terror of Kings, and the hammer of
nations; turning the keys of the Kingdom of heaven into the keys of the
kingdoms of the earth: and not meddling with the crimes and sins of the
people, but crowns of Princes, not souls but scepters; nor contenting
himself with his first commission (though corrupted with false glosses) pasce
oues, 21. Ioh.
unless there were added occide, 10. Act.
and mandu^ca, that is excommunicate, depose dispoliate, Eagle and Falkons,
Emperor and inferior Kings, not only of their dominions and possessions, but
of their lives too. It were infinite to follow histories. They were not so
ready to chandge their names at their first inuestiture into their sees, and
to be called Vrbanes, Bonifaces, and the like, as afterward the christian
world to change them again, and to call their Vrbanes, Turbanes, Bonifaces
Malefaces, Eugenies Dusgenies, Hildebrandes, titiones infernales, hell brandes
indeed, Pios Impios, Clementes Inclementes; instead of Caput Ecclesiae to
term him Caudam Ecclesiae, and fu^dame^tum detrimentu^; they proved so
pernicious both to Church and Christian policies.

2 Al other ministers of this man of sin, pillars and props of his Chair of
pestilence I let pass. There is a generation of men more degenerate then ever
Nabuchodonoser was, not men into beasts, but very devils incarnate, of all the
sects in that Popish Sodom, which have been multiplied as the monsters of
Afric, the most pestilent. You call them Jesuits, Bar-Iesuites, you well may,
of that damned Sorcerer Act. 13. or Iebusites, Esauites, Suites, as some have
done, the disloiall brood of Ignatius Loiola, the notorious Incendiaries,
Bustuaries, of Christian states, In eo nimium sapientes, quod se putant caelo
vel ipsi quandoque imperaturos. Pap. Mat. in Paul, 4.
they think one day to be rulers even over heaven it self; satanicum genus
(one styled them) the offspring of Satan; the fallest Sinons, impostors,
couzeners of the world, (...), Stelliones, Bispelliones, you know not what to
make them; their lives, their tongues, their hearts, their habits all are so
false.

(...) as he said of the Spartanes, and Nulla fides nisi quantu^ expedit, as
the rule of the Parthians was. The new Priscilianistes of our age, of whom St
Austin complained, soli inuenti sunt dogmatizare mendacium, the only men that
are found to dogmatize and defend lying; yea and perjury also, and that in the
worship of God, Cu^ Dei nomen, Deus testis, Dei sacramentum interponitur.
Whereof St Austin added, o vbi est is fo^tes lacrymaru^? quo ibimus? vbi occult
abimus nos a facie veritatis? O where are you fountains of tears! whether
shall we go, or where shall we hide our selves from the face of truth? whose
mixed, Hermaphroditical, epicaene, half-borne, and half-vnborne propositions are
like J say not there seruations of the Gentiles -- Iuraui lingua, but the
oracles of the deuiles themselves. Jn a word, they are the marow, and spirit
of the mystery of iniquity, the trumpets of sedition and rebellion (...),
their cry is, dirumpamus vincula, proijciamus funes let us break their bonds,
and cast away their cords: Noe bond of nature, consanguinitie, allegia^ce,
allia^ce, affiance, wedlock, oath, sacrament stands good, if they list to
dissolve it. Of all the religions in the world J denounce unto you (let me a
little inuert the words of the Psalm) Nolite fieri sicut equus and mulus
(they differ not much in kind) in quibus non est intellectus. Be not like
Jesuit and Priest (they are not far a sunder) in who^ there is noe conscience,
no religion: whose mouths thou can not hold in with bit or bridle of any,
either civil or sacred restraint, but they will euade thee.

-- Dij talem terris auertite pestem,
Nec louis imperium, nec Phlegetonta timent.
And therefore as they said in Rome, Exeat ex vrbe Catilina, Catiline must be
spewed out before the City could have quiet; so may we say, if we wish peace
to the Kingdoms and Countries of the earth, Exe at ex vrbe and ex orb
Iesuita, from whom there is noe peace, but rebus sic stantibus, and dum vires
suppetunt* til they be able to make their parts good.

-- Sed tua praecipue non intret limina qui squam
-- Frater, vel monachus, vel quavis lege sacerdos:
And above al things take heed that you admit neither Priest, nor Jesuit, nor
Iesuited busy Papist within your houses.

Of these there were sundry in this bloody attempt: Some of them fixed as it
were in their orbs, staple and Legier Jesuits, like principal bad angels set
over provinces, Baldwin over Flanders, Creswel over Spain, Garnet over
England; other planetory, cursorie, moveable from place to place, as Gerard,
Tesmond, Hammo^d, Hal, with the like. Their offices were* to animate,
authorize, warrant, absolve, sacrifice, pray, yea and prophecy too. You
remember their psalmodie, The memory of novelties shall perish with a CRACK;
and he shall come as a flame that bursteth out beyond the furnace, and, his
fury shall fly forth as a thunder, and in a moment shall he crush their
bones: that when it had come to pass according to these predictions, they
might have said, dixit dominus, os domini loquutum est, The Lord has said it,
the mouth of the Lord foretold it.

There wants yet a third sort for execution. Ulysses Diomedes must through
with it. There must be hands as well as heads. Behold a number of Gentlemen,
(with others their followers) some of noble and worthy descent (sed quantae
tenebrae a quo fulmine?) al our countriemen and patriotes, all fed with the fat
of the land (but a viperous generation, not sparing the bowels of their mother
that breed them) some that are the salt of the palace, and beheld the face of
the King in place of near attendance, al dru^ck with the dregs of the cup of
Babylon, and full as the spider with Iesuitical poison; they ouerflow with the
gal of bitterness, and want but means and matter wherein to disgordg themselves:
to the attaining whereof they lay their heads together, and according to the
word of the Psalm scrutati sunt iniquitates, and defecerunt scrutantes
scrutinio, they beat and weary their brains to devise to some purpose: At
length they draw together into a knot as an impostume to an head, and close
like the skales of Leuiathan that the breath cannot get between, they take
oath of secrecy and persistance, (was ever the name of God so fowlie
dishonored?) they confirm it with the blessed sacrament (o more then Jewish
impiety; they vowed they would neither eat nor drink (at their common
tables) till they had the head of Paul, they would fast it out! These eat and
drink at the table of the Lord, the body and blood of our blessed Savior
upon a bargain of blood, to have the heads both of head and members, and to
make a poole, a flood, a whole red sea of blood, with the slaughter of many
thousands. (Busirides arae clementes.) Are these their sacrifices? these their
sacraments? In a word, they undertake, they resolve, they swear, they deuouer
and execrate themselves with that tragic instigation, Excede pietas away ye
bowels of compassion, natural affection begone, thoughts of humanity,
prickles of conscience, sparks of reason, bars of religion, fear of God,
reverence of men, difference of persons, high, low, old, young, nocent,
innocent, al depart,

-- Sic sic iuvat ire, our hearts are fixed, our hearts are fixed to undergo a
work, opus solitudinis, a work of desolation opus mirabiliter singular and
singulariter mirabile, a work, which whosoever hears of, his two ears shall
tingle, and his hart-strings shall tremble; one for all, a work that contains
in it* -- mill actus vetitos and mill piacula: to become paricides,
Reginides, Regnicides at once, and with on catholic, that is universal, blow
to cut of all the heads of the land as it were upon one and the same shoulders.

The kind of desolation that David gives instance in, is auferens bella, he
makes Wars to cease. Ours is not species but monstrum, cannot be defined
within any kind. Their first project was war whilst our Debora was yet
living: to that purpose they had a treaty with Spain for an other invasion.
But then we would have buckled our armor unto us, and have girt our swords
upon our thighs, we would have brought into the field. pares aquilas, alike
forces, and have opposed, bow unto bow, spear unto spear, chariot unto
chariot. But mayor mihi metus ex leone quam ex vulpe, I ever feared their
frauds more then forces, their wars never did, never could anoy us --. Astus
polenti or armis. Their trust is in stratagemes and trecheries. Insidiantur in
abscondito, quasi leones in spelunca sua. They lie in wait in their the euish
corners, as a lion lurketh in his den. They say to the ground cover us, and to
a subterraneous vault, keep us close. Vt sagittent in occultis immaculatum,
that they may shoot at the innocent in secret; 64. Psalm.
and if their occultum speed, it follows in the Psalm, subito sagittabunt
eum, they will also do it suddenly. They shall receive a terrible blow, and not
see who hurt them. They begin their work with a mine under ground (Romish
pioners, Antichistia^ molewarps, hellish Tenebrios) and with improbitie of
labor to speed the impiety of their hearts, half dig through a wale of three
yards in thicknes. Cursed be their rage, for it was cruel, and their malice
for it was very painful. They might have plowed upon the rock as well. From the
mine to a cellar, as fit for a de^ of theeus as the mine was just under the
Capitol, the higher house of Parliament, that where the laws had been made
(said they) there the lawmakers might receive their punishment. This cellar
they store with 36. barrels (great and small) of gunpowder (the invention of a
Monk, a devil, the daughter of salt and sulphur, mother of the first borne
of death; nothing makes a quicker end) together with billets, and fagots, and
pieces of timber, and bars of iron, and massy stones, al deadly and
murdering artillery, and are now even ready with match and touchwood in the
hand of FAVX a firebrand indeed, against the 5. of Noue^ber was two year; at
what time these smokie Locustes out of their merciless pit of more then
Neronian and Catilinarie dispositions, crying (...), and incendium ruina
extinguam, let heaven and earth burn, and let nothing quench the fire but the
ruin and downfall of al, these audacious Phaeto^s running a desperate and
dreadful course, meant to have made a general combustion, commune^ rogum, a
common bonefire not only of mortal men, but of immortal monuments, trophies
and pillars, yea charters and records of eternity; and to have offered
holocaustum a whole burnt offering of us, to have caused to pass through the
fire to their Moloch of Rome, our sons and our daughters, our King, Queen,
and Prince, Nobles, Senators, and Priests, with the flower and people of our
Land, without distinction of Majesty, dignity, degree, sex, age, merit, yea
or religion it self in some part: which what had it else been but a type of
the deflagration of Sodom and Gomorre, an image of Tophet. 30. Esaias. the
burning whereof was much fire and wood, a very represe^tatio^ (the nearest on
earth that ca^ be) of that ignitu^ diluuiu^ that shall be at the end of the world
of that Gehenna ignis, which God has prepared for the wicked; when both root
and branch, flesh and arm, father and son and nephew, damme and young in a
neast together, al had been blown away with a blast, a whirlewind of
destruction, and the whole state of Kingdom and policy dissolved, as a man
turns a platter vpside down; and that in an instant of time, before we
could have swallowed down our spittle, or in remembrance or remorse for our
sins have said, Miserere Deus, O Lord have mercy upon us. Like to the
destruction threatened to the house of Jeroboam. 1. Kings 14. The house of
Jeroboam shall be destroyed in that day. What? Even now, as you would say in
a moment, before they had leisure to think of it.

This was the work of desolation meant and proiected, whereof J have told you
so often. Ask now from one end of heaven to the other, and throughout all the
generations of the earth if ever the like were. Herein J must confess, my text
fails me, and scripture, and al nature fails me. There never was example in
the world of so facinorous a fact, a sin so exceedingly sinful, the primum
genus of al sin, and not a crying, but a roaring, thundering sin (as his
excellent Majesty termed) it) nor of blood, but of fire and brimstone, a
whole penuarie and storehouse of sin, wherein was proditio^, perdition,
deperdition, al congested and heaped up in on.

But the goodwil of him that sat in the bush (as Moses spoke) (the bush that
flamed but consumed not) and the compassion of his son, who waded in the midst
of the fiery furnace of Babylon, delivered us as the bush, and the three
children from the Stygia^ lake, and the mouth of hell freed us from their
Catholic dooms-daie, and in a parable brought us back from death to life: and
as for those Salmonea^ artificial fireworkes, he confounded many of them by
their own skill, and brought their intended mischeefes upon their own heads.

Now (according to my text) come and behold the works of the Lord, what
desolatio^s he has wrought upon the earth: shall J say he causes wars to
cease? Or breaks the bow? It was far worse. For at that very time when they
said of our souls, There is noe help for them in their God, there there thus
would we have it, their stratageme being as ripe as the mellowest summer*
fruit, there wanting nothing in the world but the last hand to act it, at that
very time (that God may be al in all, and that the honor may be wholly his
without any thought of copartnership) were al these machinations of theirs
desolated, discomfited, and defeated: And notwithstanding their vowed and
dejerated secrecy, their threefold bond of keeping counsel, religion, oath,
sacrament, [You shall swear by the blessed Trinity, and the holy sacrament,
that neither directly nor indirectlie, by word nor circumstance etc] Yet was
their work of darkness discovered, their Trojan horse of the most barbarous
villainy that ever ear hard opened, their Labyrint, their dungeon, their hell
of secresy, yea the deep and unsearchable hell of their hearts (who ca^ find
them out says the Prophet?) eviscerated, ra^sacked, and manifested to the
light of the world.

Then were we as men that drempt, when the Lord waked over us, we sat under
our vines and suspected nothing, peace, peace, and al is well, the noise of
milstones and light of ca^dles, bride and bridgroome was our song: at what time
(that the word of the Psalm may ever be verified, dedisti metue^tibus te
significatione^ ut fugiant a facie arcus, that he will ever give warning to his
servants to fly from a flash of powder before it comes) from one of this
Plutoes band is a letter sent to a Noble, thrice noble Lord (whose memory be
euerblest) that letter not kept but imparted where it was fit, examined,
skanned over again and again; and afterward by One wise as the Angel of the
Lord to know good and bad, a regius propheta, who spoke not by private motion,
but as he was inspired by the holy ghost, interpreted against the rules of
art. Whereupon those penetralia mortis, in most chambers of death were narrowly
searched, the last designed actor of the bloody tragedy deprehe^ded, and the
whole matter detected, with such amaseme^t to the actor himself, that he said
it was not God, but the devil that discovered it. J now ask in the language of
the 9. Psalm rendered by Tremelius, Oinimice absolutae nesu^t vastitates in
aeternum? an civitates extirpasti? Have thy desolations sped? (so may they
ever speed, and thus be thy handie* works always prospered) have thou
spoiled, and gotten possession? Quies cite and videte, if there be any spark
of grace left in you, give over your deuilish practisings.

-- Si genus humanum et mortalia temnitis arma,
-- At sperate Deum memorem fandi atque nefandi
If you think that the Laws of Princes be to weak against you, and their
punishments too easy, yet fear the judgments of the dreadful Lord of hosts.

And you the faithful servants of God and subjects of your Sovereign
whersoeuer, delivered, as the scapgoat in the law, from the danger of death,
and pulled out of the gulf and bottomless pit of imminent destruction; quie
site et videte, put your trust in the Lord, hang up your votiuas tabulas,
tables of bounde^ thankfulness in the open sight of the world.

And let the scription of those tables be, Non nobis domine, no^ nobis, sed
nomini tuo. O Lord al wisdom goodness, salvation in disclosing and dispersing
the hole of those aspes belongs unto thee, thine is the honor and thanks,
we take to our selves noe part of thy glory.

I know you have long looked for an end. Much speaking is wearines to the
flesh, and long hearing is offense to patience. Will you hear the end of al?
Thus began, thus ends my text. The Lord of hosts is with us that Dominus
virtutum, with and for whom the stars in their courses fight. -- Et
coniurati veniunt in praelia venti, the winds and waves fight, and pugnat orbis
terrarum, all the creatures in the world fight to take vengance of his enemies;
himself fights for us: and Deus IACOBI (of whom I trust he has sworn by
his holiness, that he will never fail him, and has made an everlasting
covenant with him and his seed, his image our hopeful Prince, and his whole
happy race (si custodierint, if they will keep his testimonies, and walk after
his laws) this God of Jacob is our defense.

To this God, the author and finisher of al our welfare, Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, be ascribed almight and Majesty, praise and thanksgiving, this
day and all the days of our life, in our Chambers at home, and abroad in our
Churches, for our time and throughout all the generations of our Childrens
children after us, til Christ's coming in the clouds. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

