A SERMON OF DELIVERANCE. Preached at the Spittle on Easter Monday, 1626.

Upon Entreatie of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen. Published by Authority. And
Dedicated to the City of London.

By HENRY KING D. D. One of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND, for John Marriot. 1626.

A SERMON OF Deliverance.
PSALM. 91. 3. For he shall deliver thee from the snare of the Hunters, and from
the noisome Pestilence.
I Stay not upon unneedful Preface, to show with what accord the Text suits
this Time. The Israelites Passover, and the Christians Easter, wherein Christ
our Passover was slain, bear record that this Festival was founded on two
most memorable Deliverances, the first from Egypt, the last from Sin. To
which General Deliverance what Title you make, common Religion and Faith must
teach. But the particular Interest you have in the latter part of my Text: Your
Cities happy recovery from her late mortal Sickness, and your Gratitude
instruct you.

The Argument of the Text is Deliverance. Division.
Liberabit, Shall deliver.

The Author. He shall deliver.

The Subject on whom it is wrought, Thee.

The Danger from which He delivers, which is twofold: 1. From the Snare of the
Hunters. 2. From the Noisome Pestilence.


I take the Text in the Method it lies.

It is no flat or low expression to discipher God by a Pronoune rather than a
Name, 1. He.
but the most eminent form of speech that may be. He that can take the just
dimensions of this (...), He, shall find it a word of an exalted sense,
capable of none but the worthiest constructions: A word fit to blazon Honor
without diminution of the least title, and able to reach the highest
superlatiue, Him that sits above the Heavens. I find no higher glory at which
Pythagoras sometimes aimed but to possess himself of this poor Pronoune, nor
could his Scholars who so much admired him, speak his worth in a fuller
style, or make a nobler mention of him in any Attribute then (...), He. That
Pythagorean (...), He said it, being of as indubitable truth as the Pythian
Oracle, not to be doubted or disputed but believed. What ever claim He or his
Scholars for him could lay to this word, I am sure was only usurpation, since
the right belongs properly to God, who is He (...), that prime Active power who
made Heaven and Earth: whose Ipse dixit, was of such Authority, that it
proclaimed Him not only the God of Truth but Power too: For you see the whole
Creation waited on his word, Dixit and facta sunt, He said the word, and all
which he said was done. We need not then search for other Attributes to speak
Him. In this one syllable He, all that we can think of Him, is spoken. If the
whole World be a Book penned and composed by God: If all the several sorts of
Creatures be the Pages of that Book, this (...), He, is the Index that points
and directs us unto every Leaf It Was He that made this firm Mass on which we
tread, laying the foundations so sure, it cannot be moved: It Was He that lighted
those great Tapers in the firmament, whose successiue government distinguishes
our Times, our Days, and our Nights. It Was He that levied those bright Powers
in Heaven, which like a ranged Battle march and move in their order: It Is He
that regulates the Influence of the Stars, restraining the Pleiades, Job 38.
31.
or enlarging them as he thinks good. It Is He that brings the winds out of his
treasures, Arise O North, Cant. 4. 16.
and come O South, and blow upon this garden of the Earth. It Is He who keeps the
Snow and Hail as it were in Bank, and has a Magazin in the Clouds, where his
Munition, his Artillery, the Thunder, and the Lightning, which he darts against
his Enemies, are laid up. It Is He that shuts up the Sea with doors, bounding
the Wave with a Bank. Hitherto shall thou come, but no further, Job 38. 8. 11.
Here shall it stay thy proud wave. It was He that epitomized this large
Volume of his Creation, abridging the greater World in the lesser World, which
is Man, his Masterpiece, drawn from no meaner Copy than the Original, God
himself, whose Image he bears. And last, It was He that when the workmanship
of the Devil upon a persuasion to make him better, had blurred the Image of
God which was pourtrayed in Man, renewed this defaced Picture, and by a
gracious Deliverance freed him from that hand unto which his own Disobedience
had surrendered him.

See how just a Report this (...) makes of him, how it trackes and follows him
through the whole catalogue of his works, even to my text. All which though it
be perfectly able to name, yet it is not able to name Him. In Job 38. where God
acquaints that servant of his with his greatest Works, yet when He comes to
discover himself that did all those, He speaks out of the Whirlewind that
which Job no more understands, than he sees the speaker, that which rather
poseth then resolves him, Quis est? Who is He that has done all this? And
certainly when the busiest search has been made after Him, the best
information is taken from this (...), It Is He, that Almighty, Verse 1.
most high, that Cause of Causes, Primitive Essence, from whence all Being is
derived: That He whom we can express in no English but God: nor can we define
that sacred Style by any thing but Himself. He that is Himself, according to
his own Message, I am that I am. He who from our inability to utter Him raises
this Trophee to Himself, that He is too great for our expression, an Argument
fitter for our Faith than our Words, with more ease believed then spoken.

Thrice happy we, if we had still looked on Him at that holy Distance, if
profanation had not trenched upon his Honor so far, as to dare inuoke that
Sacred Power, whom all Attributes are too narrow to contain, in an
Imprecation, or an Oath, who never should be mentioned but in our prayers. And
in stead of offering a devout violence to Heaven in those prayers, offered a
literal violence, setting our mouths against Heaven, like Cannons planted for
Battery, to discharge nothing but Blasphemies against the Lord of Heaven and
Earth, from whence we purchase a lucklesse victory, whilst we thus besiege
Heaven, we win Hell. The Jews bare that reverence to their Tetragrammaton,
the Name of God, that they never named it but in the Temple: But how many are
there amongst us, who are more familiar with God in a Tavern than a Temple,
where the intemperate heat of Wine inflames those Tongues to violate Him, which
ought to be inflamed with holy zeal to confess and praise Him? How many be
there whose sins are their best Catechismes, that apprehend no knowledge of
God, but to swear by; that never Take that Name into their mouths, but to
break a Law by taking it in vain, Inuerting their Creed, in stead of Credo in
Deum, I believe in God, into Iuro per Deum, I swear by God.

O wretched familiarity of man with his Maker, where God is grown so cheap to
be despised! Such acquaintance as it begins in an ungracious boldness, so must
it end in forgetting; For as Christ told those that intruded upon his
knowledge, with a Domine in nomine, Matthew. 7. 12.
Lord in thy name we have cast out Devils, so shall he dismiss those who by
their Diabolical Blasphemies have cast out God; Depart from me, I know you not.
Never must they be acquainted with any other kind of Deliverance than that in
the Gospel, to be delivered over to Judgment. Act. 25. 12.
Festus told Paul He should go that way his Appeal lay. They have Appealed
unto Judgment, in calling God as a Witness to their Oaths, and therefore
cannot without a speedy repentance make title to his Mercy, or lay claim to
that Deliverance which speaks him a loving Father, as well as a powerful God,
Liberabit, He shall deliver etc.

There needs no Comment, Shall Deliver.
nor does this Deliverance, as at a Labell, the Seals of Gods love to Mankind
are affixed. Seals so authenticke, that they need no hand to sign the
Instrument. This word like a loud Herald proclaims the Author. Mercy speaks
God in a shriller, more audible accent, than Power. For His mercy is above all
his works, or attributes. The pennons of the Cherubins that stretched their
wings over the Propitiatory, Exodus 25. 20.
and were a covering to the Mercy-seat, would want Extension to shadow the
vnconfined Mercy of their Maker, which couers them, and like a cool
comfortable shadow, shelters us from the scorches of the last Judgment, which
will break out in fire and brimstone. The Creation of Man was a large Evidence
of his Power, but the Deliverance he wrought in repairing the Decays of
Nature, a work beyond the Sphere of Power, Leo Ser. 11. de Pass.
Quia plus est reparasse quod perierat, quam a Principio creasse quod non erat,
It was a harder task to save a sinner, than to make a Man.

He that before might doubt what person this (...) denoted, in the next word
Liberabit, He shall deliver, takes his full resolution. Gods Titles are his
Works, and the best of those Titles is his best Work, Deliverance. It Is Gods
fashion (says Saint Ambrose) Non respondere nomen sed negotium, rather to
declare himself by the business he Acts, than a Name; which is of little use,
when the Description is Radical, and so essential as this Liberabit, He shall
deliver. I find several Readings of the word, He has delivered, so the
Arabique, and Aethiopick, which Lorinus professes to follow. Others read it in
the Present, He does deliver; but the Septuagint is (...), He shall, or he will
deliver. From which I only note unto you, that Gods favors are not
circumscribed within the limits of any Time. Salvation belongs to our God in
all Places at all Times, and in every Tense, wherein the Grammar can form, or
Religion inuoke it. We must not so interpret the word, as if his Deliverance
lay yet under Promise, not wrought, nor performed amongst us; as if it were
only future, expected, but not come, He shall deliver: nor yet Liberauit, He
has delivered, take it as a past act now out of Date, which he has once done,
but will no more. Though his Judgments stand as single Presidents, recorded to
have bin once done, but disauowed for ever being done again, as does the
Deluge after which God is said to repent Him, and then contracts with Man never
to destroy him again by water; yet his Mercies are Leading cases, which God is
well content we should still urge: They are Patterns by which He is often
pleased to work. Like fruitful Copies that multiply by Imitation, they
disperse themselves through all successiue generations of Time. And though men
allow it not, God gives us leave to draw his favors into Example, emboldning
us to prescribe upon his goodness; bidding us be assured that if He did
formerly bestow his blessings on us, He is still able to pair and fellow those
blessings again. That He is the God of Succession, as well as of our
Forefathers; unto whom if his hand of bounty were liberally extended, it is
not closed to us. His mercy is not shortened, nor the Arm of his Deliverance
reseruedly shut up within his Bosom: That Arm is stretched out still, Esaias
43. 6.
ready to embrace Filios e longinquo, The Children from far, that is, the
last remotest Generations of the World, as well as the first. What in the
Method of his Goodness He has Once Done, He did it to act over again, Sicut
erat in Principio semper erit: There is no change in his Mercy no more than in
Himself, who is Yesterday and to day, Hebr. 13. 8.
and the same for evermore. He has, He does still, He will deliver.

It was a speech of Seneca, being to treat of an Argument, though unlike this,
Rem faciam non difficilem causam agens Dei. It was an easy task to report
Gods Story; We have heard with our Ears, and our Fathers have declared the
Mercies he has wrought for his people. Knowledge, Experience report, Tradition
and Histories are full fraighted with the Annals of his Deliverance.
Deliverance of all kinds by an Inuasiue Army, or single combat, as in the
Duel betwixt David and Goliath. Deliverance in all Sexes, wrought by the hands
of women as well as men. Iaels hammer was no less victorious than Gedeons
sword; and the Nail she drove into the Temples of Sisera, as deadly as the
spear of Jonathan: Judith the widow of Bethulia, stands in the triumphant list
of Conquerors as well as Judas Maccabeus, who like a Lion, never turned his
back to the pursuit of any Enemy: And the head of Holofernes by her struck
off, proved as terrible to the Assirian Host, as the head of the Gorgon worn
in the shield of Perseus, which turned all that looked upon it, into amazement
and stone.

And since I am in the Catalogue of female Wonders, let it not seem a
Digression, but a glory both to our Nation and our God whose Instrument she
was, to say that our Elizabeth, that vnpatterned Mirror of her Sex, that only
Example of masculine hereoick Virtue, which the latter or indeed any times
produced, has as many Pennons, as many Streamers hung about her Hearse, as
many Trophies of Conquest to adorn her precious memory, as any of those
names, who whilst they lived were wedded to victory, the Edwards or the
Henry's; They that ran the hazard of so many dreadful Battles, they that stood
the shocke of War against so many enemies, foreign and domesticke, making
from every place their Retreits with Honor to themselves and advantage to
their Kingdom.

But I lose my self in this vast subject of Gods mercy, acted in so many
shapes and by such various ways, that they require a Chronicle to give you
information rather than a short discourse. Let me carry you once more back,
and leave you upon the holy Story of the Scriptures, and from thence you will
soon conclude, that Deliverance is Gods Title, confirmed to Him, not only by
the confession of those records, but by the Obedience of every Element.

Which to serve his purposes have changed and altered their properties. The
fire has laid by his heat, and the churlish element of water grown tame, that
it might be a preservative to such as God was pleased to save. Dan. 3.
His three servants walked in that Vault of flames as in an Arbor, the fire
having no more power to hurt them, than the gentlest breath of Air that
nourishes, not kills those that take it in. When He led his people out of Egypt
He was not only their Leader but their Host too, both their Captain and their
Army. He was their Vaunt and He was their Reregard. Whilst they were under
March He went before them in the Pillar of Smoke and Fire, Exodus 13. 21.
both to discover and clear their passage. But when Egypt had them in Chase
He came behind them, interposing Himself betwixt the Armies as a trench or
stronger Bulwark to keep them asunder. And when He brought them to the Red
Sea, the obedient Flood recoiled against its own stream, flowed back against
it self to give them way, making the waves a solid Wall, whilst they recovered
the other Shore.

Which Deliverance referred to an higher. For Egypt was figuratively the
Captivity of Sin, and Christ our Savior was typed by the Paschall Lamb. So
that the whole story of that deliverance was not consummate till Christ's
passion, whose Consummatum est concluded all the preceding types, fulfilled the
Law and the Prophets, and put a Period to the great work by Him undertook for
Mankind.

To warrant which Digression of mine from the first Person of the Trinity to
the Second; it is the Opinion of some, Petr. Galatin* de Arcanis Cathol. verit.
l. 3. c. 14.
that this whole Psalm pointed at the Incarnation of the Son of God; taking
that Habitabit in vmbra etc. Psalm. 90. 1.
to signify the womb of the blessed Virgin, where the Divinity lay veyled
and shadowed in flesh. And Sadai in the Hebrew mentioned verse. 1. to be one of
the Names of the Messiah, denoting Him, as the sense of the word carries it.
Qui solus pro humano genere satisfacere sufficit, who was the only sufficient
sacrifice for the sin of Mankind.

But my purpose is not to dispute his Title to this Psalm; I only plead his
right to my Text, so far as the Title of Deliverance enforces it. Which was His
by the full allowance of Faith and Scripture. It is a Rule in Divinity, that
Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt Indiuisa, in an external consideration; The
works of the whole Trinity which look outward are vndistinguished and common.
What one Person does, all do, because all are but one and the same God. Our
Creed attributes the Creation properly to God the Father, and yet you see Genesis
1. the whole Trinity exercised both in the Act and in the Consultation when
Man was created. Faciamus, Let us make man. By the same latitude of speech we
communicate Salvation to the whole Trinity, though the peculiar right and
strict propriety of the Idiome belong to the Second Person, at whose coming
Salvation arrived upon the Earth. (...), Habac. 3. 8.
(says the Prophet) His Chariot brought Deliverance into the World, Himself
being not only (...), a Savior, but Salvation in the Abstract; Who of God is
made unto us wisdom and righteousness and sanctification and redemption. 1
Cor. 1. 30.
He that was a Deliverer by an early promise, so soon as the first Man's ruin
made him capable of Redemption, being that Seed of the woman which should
bruise the Serpents head. Genesis 3. 15.
He that was the Soul of every Sacrifice, all which were but Hostages of that
greatest Propitiation by his blood. The Prophet Esaias gave him Liuerie and
Seizin in this Title; Ecce Saluator tuus venit: Esa. 62. 11.
Behold thy Savior comes. And Luc. 1. the Angel which proclaimed Him puts
Him in the full possession, To you a Savior is borne.

A Title unto which He was justly fitted, in every Action of his Life declaring
that He was not only the Savior of the Soul in forgiving sins, but of the
Body too, in curing the diseased, in cleansing the Leprous, in dispossessing
such as were possessed of Devils; In opening the doors of every sense, Ears
barred up with deafenes, and Eyes that had never bin acquainted with any thing
but Night and Darkness. He was a Savior Actiuely and Passiuely; a Deliverer by
way of Purchase and Redemption; a Deliverer by way of Rescue, and a Deliverer
by way of Conquest too: He purchased us from the wrath of God, and rescued us
from the jaws of Death and Hell in his Passion; and He triumphed over those
Enemies in the victorious Act of his Resurrection.

When the first Man had sold himself to sin, and in that luckles bargain
concluded us his wretched posterity, passed us away into the power of the
Devil, who bought him from all Obedience* He then stood forfaited to the wrath
and justice of God, as having violated the conditions unto which God at first
bound him: For so runs the Indenture, Genesis 2. 17.
Quo die comederis etc. In that day thou eatest of it thou shall die the Death.

Upon which trespass his Charter was cancelled, and the privilege of his
birth reuersed, God now seizing back into his hands the possession of that
happiness wherein at first he was instated. Genesis 3.
The Earth was cursed out of her plenty into weeds and barrennes, his wife
doomed unto the sorrows of travel, and himself bound to preserve life by a
perpetuity of sweat and labor. So that since his happiness and whole being was
now confiscate, he had no possibility to discharge the debt, but like a
miserable Debtor, must have languished in his imprisonment, had not the Son of
God become his Surety; had not he undertaken to satisfy the offended Creditor.
Which He did, and with no meaner Sum than the unvalued drops of his blood,
tendered at six several payments. The first at his Circumcision, which was the
opening of that Exchequer, which never shut up till the full ransom was paid.
The second in the Garden, where in his painful Agony He sweat more blood for
us, than we ever wept tears for our selves. The third at his Scourging, Psalm.
129. 3.
when his back was plowed up in furrows, and his whole flesh which was now
Caro discontinua, indeed (as Caietan calls it) had not so much skin to fence
it, as would distinguish one wound from another, the heavy chastisement of our
peace now upon him, Esaias 53. 5.
having made his whole body but one wound. The fourth was at his sad
Coronation, which proclaimed Him not only virum dolorum, Esaias 53. 3.
a man of sorrows, but a King of sorrows; when the sharp thorny Crown, not
fitted, but beaten to his head, opened so many weeping issues at his Temples,
that He was now vnctus sanguine vulneratorum (as David spoke of Saul) anointed
with his own blood in stead of Oil. The fifth was on the Cross, where upon a
most unjust Statute enacted by the clamor and importunity of the Jews, who
still cried Crucify him, Crucify him, his whole body was extended for the
Debt, his hands and feet forcibly entered by hammers and nails, which
possessed themselves of his whole stock of life, and almost all the treasure
of his blood, saving only so much as was reserved for the Sixth and last
payment, which his side pierced with the Spear powered out when he was dead.
Wherein to show that he had fully perfected his bloody Audit, without collusion
or reservation, that he had paid (...), the utmost farthing, even to the last
drop, That he was not only Exinanitus, emptied and deuested of his Divine
Attributes, but Euacuatus, in a literal, corporeal sense Euacuated and Powered
out, He sent forth that thin watrish moisture which lodges with the blood, in
so much that his witness saw at one Wound a double current of water and blood
flowing out. Ioh. 19. 34.


This was the fearful Method of his Redemption, at this bloody Rate did he
repurchase Gods favor which we had lost. Col. 1. 20.
Pacificans per sanguinem suum, making our peace with God, and redeeming us to
God by his blood Reu. 5 9.
(that is) as well re-enstating God in us, as us in His Favor. Which was a
true Redemption, a payment so full, that the Apostle auowes the bargain, as
purchased for a valuable Consideration, Pretio empti estis magno, 1 Cor. 6. 20.
Ye are bought at an high rate.

But yet, though by this payment the justice of God was satisfied, the malice
of the Devil, more unsatiate then Hell or Death, under whose arrest's Man now
lay, would not be satisfied, nor would he give consent that the Prisoner
should be released, though the Ransom were paid. Therefore our blessed Savior
by way of Rescue, as well as Purchase, was feign to deliver him from his unjust
Iaylor.

Pharaoh held out an obstinat siege against Gods Commands, and in that
Rebellion stood the danger of Nine Plagues. He did not think the Destruction
of his Cattle, or Famine of his Land valuable Plagues to ransom such a Nation
as Israel from his bondage, and therefore would not be induced to let them go,
till the immediate Arm of God rescued them, and then forced to it by his
sword, that had the whole Land upon an Execution Exodus 12. 30.
( for there was no house wherein there was not one dead.) He did not only
dismiss, but urge them to a departure: Of such Rescue as this did man stand
need of, Treaty or Composition would not prevail with the deaf Grave, which
uses not to let out any that lie under his silent ward, but still calls for
more. And therefore see how our Savior prepares himself for this Combat,
encountering the Enemy upon the euenest terms that might be, for he engaged
only his Humanity in this quarrel, not bringing his Divinity in sight till
the Battle was won. Leo Sermon. 5. de Pass.
Si, pro peccatoribus sola se opponeret Deitas no^ tam ratio Diabolum vinceret
quam potestas (says Leo.) To let them see He did not contest with them upon
apparent disadvantage, He would not fight against them with the Power of his
Godhead, which must needs ouer-match them, and keep himself unhurt, but
entered the lists for Man, as Man, not Impassible, not Invulnerable, but with a
body subject to all that man is, Sin and Corruption only excepted. Psalm. 15.
10.
This holy one could not taste corruption (says David) though He was wounded
and killed for us; Esaias 53. 5.
as Esaias and Daniel prophesied of Him. And that they might not complain of the
disadvantage of ground, He invaded Death in his own Quarters. Matthew. 27. 33.
In Golgotha was his Battle pitched, which is the Field of death. In which
Field the most emine^t but indifferent piece of ground was chosen out, Mount
Caluary; which by the opinion of some Fathers, Justin Martyr and others, was the
very grave where Adams body was interred. Matthew. 24. 28.
Vbi Cadauer ibi Aquilae: where should Eagles congregate but where the Carkase
lies? Where could Christ better combat for Adams Liberty, than at the Prison
door, upon the Tomb where Adams Body was shut up? There did our Savior meet
Death, and in a Passive Defensive War, suffered him to prevail upon his
Body, seeming to give ground at first, that so he might foil him by a greater
Stratagem.

He knew that Caluary was but the Outworkes of Death, from which slight Fort,
raised only with dead men's bones, if He should have beaten Him, He well
understood there were other lower works, stronger Redoubts unto which Death
might have retired, and therefore that He might be sure to get within him, to
be admitted into the strongest of Deaths fortifications, like Soldiers that
sometimes surprise an Adverse Town by putting themselves into the Enemies
Colors, He disguised Himself in the wan pale Colors of Death, He died, that
so getting his Access into the Grave, He might beat Death in his own Trenches.

Which he performed, and having by this defeat rescued the Prisoners from
their bondage, the third day proclaimed his Victory and Resurrection. Three
days he lay in Earth, like sleeping Samson in the lap of Dalilah, Ioh. 19. 40.
linteis inuolutus, manicled and bound with linen clothes, as you read in
the Gospel. He might truly say, Cinxerant me funes Mortis, Psalm. 116. 3.
The snares or cords of Death compassed me, Act. 2. 24.
but it was impossible for him to be holden with those cords (says another
Scripture.) And therefore (...), loosing the sorrows or Bands of Death Lorinus.
(so the Syriack reads it) he came out. His incorruptible body lay indeed like
a dangerous surfeit in the Stomach of Earth, which was unable to digest it, or
by assimilation to turn it into its own substance, as by that common chyle of
putrefaction ordinary courses convert into Earth; and therefore it must needs
cast Him up again, or perish by that distemper.

And cast Him up it did, as Egypt ejected Israel, laden with their own
spoils. In that Triumph He disarmed Death, broke off the sharp point of his
dart, took out his sting. O mors vbi aculeus? He led captivity captive, and
by this Ascent, gave gifts, liberty and enfranchisement, to Men.

His glorious resurrection which most properly we now commemorate, styled his
Deliverance in the loftiest key, that glory or conquest could be strained up
to; A Deliverance wrought by a high hand to manifest his Godhead and clear our
Faith; which though it were sorely shaken by his Death, (Before that we trusted
(says Cleopas) that it had bin He who should have delivered Luc. 24. 21.
Israel) yet it recovered again and was established by his resurrection. A
Deliverance by which he quitted Himself as well as us, Ephesians. 5. 23.
Saluator corporis sui (that I may use S. Paul's phrase, though in another
sense) by repossessing the power he put off, as well as by releeuing us* His
Passion spoke him Man, His Resurrection God; Every circumstance of his Arising,
raising us by so many steps and stairs to the confession of his Divinity. How
well did He interpret that Text of S. John, John 2. 20.
Habeo potestatem ponendi animam and reassumendi, when in a most powerful
manner He reassumed that life which was not rauish't from Him by the Jews
Tyranny, but laid down by Himself. Mat. 27* 66.
The strong guard that was set to make good his Monument, nor the Monument
which was sealed up to make Him safe, being unable to resist his passage. In a
God-like disdain of the vigilant Malice of the Jews, He made a dead sleep,
like that which fell upon the first Man when his Rib was taken forth, Genesis 2.
21.
lock up the senses of his drowzie watchmen, that thought to have locked Him up,
and kept his Body like a Relike cased up in Marble. And though the jaws of his
Tomb were close shut upon Him, without any external help to wrench them
open, or to remove that weighty stone which lay at the mouth of the Grave, Mat.
27. 60.
He issued out, making his Escape as subtle, as inconceivable.

For Air to breath out at the least cranny and vent it self when it is
imprisoned, is Natural; but for one body to pass through an other (I say not
by Penetration of the Dimensions, but a Miraculous Cession) is above the Power
of Nature. For flesh and bones thus to make way through the solid Rock, is even
more then Miracle, and not less than Divinity; Cui peruium est omne solidum,
to which Nature, Leo Sermon. de Quadrages.
though to her own prejudice, gives way.

It was very much, I confess, Propria virtute, by his own Power to raise His
Body from Death, but to raise it in this fashion by such a proud unpracticed
experiment, for a close Prisoner to Bail Himself, to quit the Iayle, yet be
beholding to no Key to let Him out, save his own Power, which is the True Key
of David, must needs advance the Dignity of the Deliverance, and of Him that
wrought it. Thus did our blessed Savior arise from his Grave, Gregor.
Nazianzon.
(...), He came forth of Himself, when the Vault was shut. For though we read
that the stone was rolled away from the mouth of the Grave by the Angel; Mat.
28. 2.
Yet says Hierome, Non putamus Angelum ideo venisse vt aperiret sepulchrum
Christo; Hieron.
We must not think the Angel came to open the Sepulcher and help Christ out:
That stone was not removed by the Angel till he was gone, (says Justin
Martyr) and the cause why it was removed this only, vt declararetur
spectantibus Resurrectio, Justin. Mart.
to declare the truth of his Resurrection. An Action worthy of Him, and most
suitable to his Birth (as Athanasius infers) Athanasius.
Ille qui per portam clausam Matris suae virginis Mariae in carne natus fuit,
salua virginitate Matris, Ille ex visceribus Terrae per sigilla viuus and
corporaliter surgit. He that through the Virgin doors of his Mothers womb
came into the world without impeachment to her Virginity; He at his second
Birth came from the Womb of the Earth without any violation of the Seals that
closed Him in. This glorious, though scornful Triumph, did He make over His
Enemies, to let them see that it was His own sentence, not their Power, which
made them His Executioners; and that when He was pleased to revoke their
Commission, no Fetters could bind, or Prisons immure Him, being, Psalm. 87. 6.
as the Psalmist speaks, Solus inter mortuos liber: And also to confirm us,
that He who being bound was without other help able to unloose Himself, is
much more able to enlarge us when He is free.

This Act of His Resurrection was but as a Tutor to indoctrinate our Faith, an
Exemplary Act to assure our Arising; Resurrexit in exemplum spei nostrae.
Tertullian.
And not only to be the Example of our Rising, but the Cause too. For His own
dignity was He Primitiae Mortuorum, 1 Cor. 15. 20.
the first fruits of the Dead, the first that rose, it was fit His sacred Body
should have the Precedence from Death to Life: and it was necessary for us,
that He should be first, vt nostrae Resurrectionis causa esset, Tho. Aquin.
part. 3. quaest. 53. art. 1.
that so He might be the cause of our Resurrection: according to that rule
given us by Aristotle, Arist. Metaph. 2.
Illud quod est primum in quolibet genere est causa omnium quae sunt post.

As therefore the fruit of this Deliverance by his Resurrection was wholly
ours, so should the acknowledgment too; as it was the greatest victory, so it
should have the largest Panegyric. I read that the Grecian Churches, in memory
of our Saviors Resurrection, were continually wont from Easter to Whitsontide,
to use no complement when they met but only this, (...), Christ is risen from
the dead. It was the salutation which past betwixt them, in stead of a God
save, or giving the good time of the day, Christ is risen. And the others were
wont to make no Reply, to thank them in no other Phrase then this, (...), it is
true, to his Glory, and our Comfort, Christ is risen. O that this happy
Meditation might so incorporate with our thoughts, that our sleeps and our
wakings, our days and our nights, our studies and whole discourse might be
nothing else but Resurrection.

We cannot in any lower gratitude discharge the obligation we owe Him, then to
remember and mention this his Deliverance hourly, which was performed for his
Glory, but our Good. God said he would get him honor upon Pharaoh, but Israel
had the spoil, the fruit, the Deliverance: so Christ's was the War, but ours
the Peace settled by that War. Peace with God, and Peace within our selves, to
calm all those distractions which from the apprehension of Death might arise
to trouble us. Quare tumultuaris anima? Wherefore then should thou be
disquieted, O my soul? trust in God, for He is thy Defender, thy Salvation.
Why should thou be afraid to meet with that death which thy Savior has so
tamed and corrected for thy sake, that Debemus mortem peccato primi hominis,
sed per eam perueniemus ad vitam aeternam. Aug. Tom. 10.
it is not now so much a punishment, as an Entrance to a better Life. -- Lex
est, non paena perire. Thou can now no sooner cry with Saint Paul, Romans 7. 24.
Quis liberabit? Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of
this Death? but thy Faith will make a sweet reply from this Text, Ipse
liberabit, He shall deliver thee.

Mercy presupposes Misery, 3. Thee.
for Mala est causa quae misericordiam requirit, Augustine.
and a Deliverance presumes a danger. Both which misfortunes met in this one
subject, to make Man's condition wretched and hazardous at once. I stand not to
repeat the privileges which Man lost. Since the ruin of our first Father, we
have no Story that is memorable but our Woes, wherein as we have much to
grieve, so we have somewhat to boast of even from them. For they qualified us,
they gave us a capacity to exercise the mercy of our Savior. Filium Dei de
Coelo traxerunt non nostra bona merita sed mala. Leo ser. 3. de Pentecost.
They were our miseries, our sins which drew down Christ from Heaven to Earth.
O happy Day, when such a blessing as the Son of God arrived! and (I had almost
said) Happy misfortune, which occasioned that Arrival! It had bin a kind of
pity (pardon the speech, which not envy to our well-being, but Honor to my
Redeemer vrges) for Man not to have bin miserable, for then the rich mines of
Christ's love never had bin discovered, but like hid treasures, lain buried in
ignorance, whereas now their discovery has enriched Man's Fall with that
Privilege, which the Angels that fell were denied. Those collapsed Spirits,
like dying Stars, vanished into sulphur and darkness. Their ruined condition had
no help from Christ to raise them up again; Whether it were because their sin
was more inexcusable then Man's, who was Passive in his Mischance, being seduced
by the Serpent, whereas they had no Seducers but Ambition, and Themselves: Or
whether because as Pet. Lombard out of S. Augustine gives the reason, Petr.
Lom. lib. 2. did. 21.
Quia Angelica Natura non tota perierat, because the whole Angelical Nature
fell not; though many fell in that Apostasy, yet many stood: whereas the whole
Nature of Man was lost in Adams deprauation, I will not dispute. Certain I am
Christ suffered not for the Angels that fell, but only for us Men and for our
Salvation. The Angels that stood had this benefit by Christ's Passion, that they
were confirmed in their blessed State, so that they could not fall (as some
hold.) Passio Christi hominibus redemptionem, Angelis confirmationem in suo
statu dedit. Homo lapsus erigitur, Angelus stabilitur ne cadat. But those that
fell away received none at all. Psalm. 8. 6.
The Psalmist says, God in his Creation made Man a little inferior to the
Angels; but Christ by his Redemption advanced Him above many that once were
Angels. He suffered those that fell to convert into Devils, choosing out of
Man's ruins to repair and make up their Number again. As he took not Angels,
but the seed of Abraham; Hebr. 2. 12.
so he delivered not Them but Man. Hebr. 1. 13.
For unto which of the Angels did he at any time say, that which he daily
speaks to the meanest soul that sues to Him, He shall deliver thee from the
snare of the Hunters.

From Snares and from Hunters? From the Snare of the Hunters.
Ergone nos Bestiae? It Is Saint Bernards Quaere, Are we turned Beasts? Bestiae
prorsus, yea (says he) undoubtedly Beasts, both by the confession of the
Psalmist, who compares Man to the Beasts which perish; and by the evidence of
our own Nature. The Verdict of our own Sins finds and concludes us Beasts.
Our wild untamed Appetite which never yet could be empaled within the bounds of
Reason or Religion, by any Laws of God or Man: Our brutish Affections, and
headstrong Passions have transformed us into all the Savage shapes which the
world ever produced. (...) etc. Isidor. Pelus. l. 2. Ep. 135.
Rebellious as the vnyoaked Ox, and like the Horse (in Jeremy) neighing after
forbidden Beds; like the Lion in Fury, the Ape in Affection, the Wolf in
Rapacitie, the Bear in Gluttony, and the Swine in Drunkenness. Certainly when
man has thus metamorphosed himself, when He is become a wilderness stored with
such strange beasts, it is not strange, when his Vices have made him such store
of game, if Toils be pitched to take, or Hunters pursue him.

It Is Hieroms Observation that this word Hunter is ever taken in the worst sense
through the Scripture: They were the worst Men who were reputed the best
Hunters, Nemrod whose style is a Great Hunter, Esaias 32. 2.
and Lamech, and Ishmael, and Esau. The Prophet could not find a fitter
Appellation for Tyrants, then to call them Hunters, and in Jeremy God threatens
his disobeying people that he would submit them to many Hunters. Ierem. 16.
The Ringleader of which Band is the Devil. He is the chief Ranger, and his
circuit or walk the whole World, 1 Pet. 5.
which he compasses, seeking whom he may devour. The Prey he hunts for is the
very best and choicest the world yields, Cibus eius electus, Abacuc. 1. 16.
the souls of Men, whose destruction is his Sport. A Murtherous sport, John 8.
44.
worthy of him who was a Murderer from the beginning. To which purpose his
Bows are bent, and his Arrows ready upon the string to shoot at such as are
upright in heart. Psalm. 10. 2.
The Dogs accustomed to this Chase, are, the same that worryed Actaeon, our
own violent passions and Sins. Saint Ambrose names the whole Pack: Ambros.
Ser. 11. in Psalm. 118.
Persequitur auaritia, persequitur Ambitio, Luxuria, Superbia, Fornicatio:
Ambition, Riot, Pride, Lasciuiousnes, and Avarice; These are the Dogs of Chase
that never suffer us to rest. To make good which Metaphor, he brings the
Apostles Text, Flee Fornication, Nam qua causa fugeres, si nullus te
persequeretur? Saint Paul would never bid thee Flee, 1 Cor. 6. 18.
did not these make hot pursuit after thee, being still maintained and
encouraged by the Devil as their Huntsman.

It was this same Hunter, who upon the old quarrel betwixt the Serpent and the
Seed of the Woman, followed our blessed Savior from the day of his birth,
first casting off Herod's Bloudhounds, that drew all Iudaea for Him; to avoid
whose cruel Inquisition, He was feign to fly to Egypt, and take cover there:
By which auoidance, when that Cry was at fault, when that Persecution ended
with Herod, upon whose death He returned from Egypt into his own Country,
the Devil singled him out again in the Wilderness, where Three days he
tempted him, Matthew. 3. 1.
seeking to surprise or win Him by promises. Which failing, he attempted to
circumuent Him by the wit and fallacy of the Rabbis, Matthew. 22. 15.
Sophisters of his own instruction. But when both these, and all else he could
do, was defeated, He finally vnkennelled the whole multitude of the Jews;
Psalm. 21. 17.
Circu^dederunt me canes multi, Many Dogs then came about Him, whose mad,
insensible malice being set on by the Priests and Scribes, never gave Him over,
but like Hounds in full cry, whose mouths had learned no note but Crucifige,
Crucify him, Crucify him, they ran Him from the Common Hall to Caluary, where
they killed Him in view; Hanging Him upon the accursed Tree, as a sad Spectacle
to God, and Angels, and Men.

The very same Hunter who in this manner Butchered Him, seeks hourly to make
his Prey of us, arming the hand of every Persecution, and suborning all the
Temptations, Wit or Invention can press, to make us, who are the members of
Christ, taste the same Cup of bitterness which He our Head then did. Only here is
our comfort, that as the Devil in pursuing Him, foiled himself, was taken in
his own malicious snare, so the Protection of God will arm us so, that all
his fiery Darts, like harmeles drops of dew, shall fall from us; that He, who
has sealed his servants in their foreheads, Reu. 7. 3.
has imprinted also that victorious Motto on their souls, Non preualebunt,
The gates of Hell shall not prevail against you. Matthew. 16. 18.


Do but observe how in every Action performed upon our Savior, the Devil
wounds himself: In admitting His Body into the Earth, he contrived and let in
his own ruin. As the Troianes made themselves guilty of their Cities Sack,
by receiving the Horse within their Walls, which powered out so many armed Bands
into their streets. In wounding Him he healed us: Esaias 53. 5.
For by his stripes are we healed. In that bargain and sale which Judas made,
he signed the Acquittance for Receipt of our Ransom. In the Crown of Thorns,
and Robe of Purple He delcared our Triumph. In giving him the Vinegar tempered
with Gall, Psalm. 69. 21.
He fulfilled the Prophecy. And with the Spear piercing his side, let out two
Sacraments, Baptism, and the Sacrament of his Blood, as sure Seals to
confirm unto our souls the Truth of our Deliverance. Magna potestas, magna
gratia, quae imperat Diabolo vt se ipse destruat! Ambros. lib. 1. de Poenit.
cap. 15.
It Is Saint Ambrose his holy Ecstasy. O wonderful power, but more wonderful
mercy of our Redeemer, who thus retorts the Devils malice, making him in his
own Assaults destroy himself! Well may he persist to invade our frailty by
his Temptations, which we cannot decline, our whole life being nothing but a
long temptation (as Saint Chrysostom calls it,) but yet he shall not
captiuate, or conquer us by them, Gods grace having instilled this fortitude
into us, that we may say Disrumpamus vincula eorum, We will break the bands
in sunder, Psalm. 2.
wherewith he would entangle us, He shall deliver Thee from the Snare of the
Hunters.

This Snare Snare.
is our sins, and those sins Marc. Eremita.
One calls it (...), a Net wrought with many subtle threads, made of as many
cords as there are Vices. Funibus peccatorum suorum vnusquisque constringitur.
These are Cords (says Solomon) Cords to bind us hand and foot, Prou. 5. 22.
and make us sacrifices for the pit of Darkness. It is the misery of Man that in
no place is he secure from these Snares. Destruction like a warder lies at his
doors, and rather then He will want danger, he lies in ambush for Himself,
for Corpus ipsum laqueus, Bern. in Psalm. 90.
His own body is like a Net cast over the soul, which intangles her, and
restraines the freedom of her faculties. When Man sins, and by excuse strives
to diminish or defend the sin, like a Fly caught in the Spiders web, the
more he struggles to get out, the more he implicates himself; He that hopes to
make good one sin by another, does ill, and seeks to mend it by a lie, draws
Esayes woe upon himself, Esaias 5.
Iniquity with Cords, and ties the knot so fast, that nothing but Judgment
and the Sword can cut it asunder.

A beleaguered City is not so streitly hemmed in, as Man is environed at every
Port of his Five Senses, which are attempted by several Assaults of the
Devil. Ligat omni vitiorum genere, ebrietatis, consuetudine voluptatum
desiderijs etc. Hilarious in Psalm. 118. page 47.
He seeks to inuolue us, not only by habitual sins, whose long custom has
made us familiar with them, but upon all emergent Occasions brings us
acquainted with new Crimes. He bribes the Eye to wound the Heart, and by those
windows of our bodies He throws in Lust like wildfire; For the cure of which
Fever in the blood, he sends us to such a strange Physician, whose remedy is
worse then the Disease. You may find her Character taken by the Wiseman,
Ecclesiastes 7. 28.
Inueni amariorem morte mulierem etc. A woman whose Heart is a snare, and her
Arms like chains, to captiuate the sinner; Thus the bed is a snare, and the
board too, Mensa laqueus, Our Table is become a snare, Psalm. 69. 22.
to betray us to riot and excess: Our Ambition intangles us in those affairs
which oft-times ruin us. And our Abundance, our Wealth, is but a vicious
Steward to take up sin at any rate. Tho. Aquin. in 1 Timothy 6.
Tentant and inducunt in alia peccata: Riches ill employed are but like Bauds,
to procure those costly Vices which meaner fortunes cannot purchase.

It was not therefore without just cause that Solomon termed Riches a Snare.
The Apostle calls them a Temptation, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
and a Snare too. The desire of them bewitches and ensnares the soul in the
cares of the world, and the indirect ways by which they are oft-times
compassed, are as Gives and Fetters to clog the Conscience.

How many be there, that to compass an inheritance on Earth to bequeath to
their Posterity, sell away their interest in Heaven? How many be there that
live by Cosenage, and thrive by Oppression, that like Plagiaries make it their
trade to hunt and catch men; building their own fortune, like a City founded
in Blood, upon the ruin of others? yet are so far from recognition of their
sin, that with those in the Prophet, They sacrifice unto their Net. Habac. 1.
15.
They glory in their Art of Circumuention, taking all ways that lead to profit
for safe and Legal.

I pray God that within this City there be not too many of this sort, that
there be not amongst her several Mysteries too many Nets of this making. It Is
Saint Ambrose his rule, Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Ser. 14.
Laquei sunt vbi est vsura and dolus; Wheresoever Extortion or Deceit harbor,
there are Snares. (A learned Spaniard interprets the Snare here to be nothing
else but Cosenage E^ganno.) And the Prophet David makes his Report, Psalm. 54.
Vidi laqueos iniquitatis and contradictionis in Ciuitate; I have seen these
Snares of Iniquity and Deceit in the City. I would feign believe (as I wish)
this City were no part of his Survey. For I come not to vpbraid, much less to
accuse you, no not so much as upon the common fame. Though some may be guilty,
God forbid I should preiudicate all; I dare say many are not. The utmost of my
scope is only Admonition, that they, which practice such Arts, desist. Et
Resipiscant a Diaboli laqueis, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
and by a Repentance untwist those Nets which the ancient Deceiuer of Mankind
has wrought to deceive them with.

I am glad for your sakes (as Christ told the Disciples upon the death of
Lazarus,) that I may truly use that language to your City, which the Spirit
did to the Church of Thiatira, Though I could say some things against Thee, Yet
I can say some things for Thee too, Reu. 2. 20.
Noui opera, I know thy works, and thy love, and thy service, and thy deeds of
piety, that they are more at the last, then at the first. Your good works
daily amplified by the addition of Benefactors, stand to your Honor, not only
upon Record, but public view, all eyes being able to bear you witness, that
you have not been only careful to see the bounty of your Predecessors
employed the right way, according to the pious meaning of the Doners, but as
Heirs to their goodness, as well as to their fortunes, you have adorned their
Monuments, and provoked by their happy Examples, upon their foundations you
have raised more stories of Charity, enlarging your own fame no less then you
have enlarged your Munificence.

Your Bridewels for the employment of idle persons.

Your Hospitals for the entertainment of the Aged and Nurserie of Orphans.

Your Spittles for cure of the diseased.

Your Bethelem for the distracted.

Your Pesthouse for the separation of the sick: as necessary a servant to
your City as any; though the narrowest piece of all your Beneficence,
considering the number which in an infected time throng thither.

All these, as they have ennobled you to the whole Christian world, so, I
trust, they have endeared you and your City to the care and preservation of
God, who no doubt will largely repay upon your succeeding Generations the
charity in these kinds expended for his sake.

Since therefore your goodness is imprinted in so fair a letter, that men not
only may see and read, but have cause to glorify Him who is the Author of all
goodness, for you his Instruments, since your good deeds are grown into such a
story, twere much pity, but more shame, that any foul notorious sin should
deface or blot so fair a Catalogue; That any loud clamorous sin of Oppression,
or the cries of Men undone by Extortion, should drown the prayers of those
many Orphans, and distressed people, unto whom your liberal Alimony gives just
cause to solicit Heaven for all blessings upon you.

Let me then beseech you for your own sakes, as you regard your own peace and
the prosperity of this City, that if any where amongst your treasures you
find Pretium sanguinis, any unjust unconscionable gain, wrung from the
throats, or extorted from the calamities of others; If you there find the
Orphans Patrimony, or the Widows Dower, throw it out, as the Priests did the
wages of Judas, for these are also the price of blood. Mat. 27. 5, 6.
The living of the poor is his life. Ambros. lib. 2. offic. cap. 16.
Cave ergo ne intra loculos tuos includas vitam pauperum, and tanquam in
tumulis sepelias. Take heed therefore how you make your chests Cemeteries to
bury men quick, lest they become Gulfes to swallow you too; and like true
Tombs, cause the golden body of that Saint which lies there enshrined to
crumble into Dust, and become nothing before the next Generation comes to
possess it. Upon such Tombs as these S. James has wrote the Epitaph,
Diuitiae vestrae corruptae; Howl and lament ye rich, Iac. 5. 2, 3.
for your riches are corrupt, your gold is cankerd. There is a secret Judgment
which like an East wind blasts the Owners and dissipates ill gotten gains:
like a worm at the Root, it smites both the Tree and the Branch, causing the
fruit to become like the Apples of Gomorrah, which posterity shall no sooner
touch but it shall fall into ashes. For to speak truth, how can that Father
think the inheritance he leaves should be long lived, when together with the
estate, the sin by which he got it is entaild upon his Heir?

And again, Not as a Party, but merely an Aduiser, let me beseech you upon no
less obligations then God and your Souls; as you tender the favor of God and
peace of your Souls; If when with Peter, you let slip your Nets upon those
waters, where you may freely trade for profit, you chance to enwrap amongst the
common Shoale of gain, Quae Dei sunt, (as Christ calls them) any thing that
belongs to God, any part of his or his Churches due, let not any such gain
land at your houses, enter it not into your Audit, nor account that amongst
your Supers, which is your Onus, and will prove a burden to your Conscience.
If by mishap any such light into your Net, throw it out again, it is Merces
operarij, Iac. 5. 4.
The hire of the Labourer, the wages of your Minister, restore it back to its
own natural current. As Fishers when they have taken any Royal game present
it to the King, Luc. 20. 25.
so Reddite Deo, redeliuer it to God, for -- Res fisciest vbicunque natat. The
deteining of it may prove dangerous, Iuvenal.
and in the end confiscate you. Certainly, the advantage by it is not
sufficient to counterballance the damage. A little of this leaven may sour
your whole lump; and but one foot of Churchland taken into your estate, like
the Kings Waste, may alter your Tenure in Gods blessings, and bring your whole
fortune into Wardship. Those that be peccants in this kind, let them not ever
trust to their smooth sailing. Though their advanced Prow beat off all suits
that dash against them, like water, yet let them know, the least defraudation
of God is Sacrilege, and Sacrilege is a lading which in the end will sink
the best and ablest Bottom. Undoubtedly as God for the just payment of his
Tithes promises a plentiful Harvest and full blessings, Inferte omnem Decimam
etc. Malac. 3. 10.
and probate; Bring ye all the Tithes and prove me etc. so the wilful
deteining may exasperate Him, in stead of freeing you from Snares, Psalm. 10. 6.
Ezec. 38. 22.
to rain Snares upon you, and to plead against you with Pestilence and blood,
(as he threatens by Ezekiel) bringing that danger upon you, which else he will
surely deliver you from, the Snare and the Noisome Pestilence.

The Greek is (...), literally Symmachus reads, And from the Noisome
Pestilence.
Calumniarum sermonem, the speech of Calumny; and Euthymius, verbum
perturbationum, for there is no greater perturbation to the mind then slander.
Death attired in his vgliest shape appears lovely to Detraction. How many be
there that with more equal temper could endure the sword of the Executioner,
then the sword of the Tongue to wound and traduce their Fame? How many be there
unto whom a burning Fever is not so torrid, as (...), the scalding tongue of a
Rayler? Iac. 3. 6.
The sting of the Scorpion is mercy to the black tooth of a Backbiter, whose
fangs are like enuenomed Arrows, and under whose lips the poison of Asps. No
disease is so incurable as this, no Plague more dangerous. S. Augustine plainly
calls a Detractor the Pestilence. Pestilentia est hamo malus detractor. Aug.
Hom. 10.
The burnt unwholesome Air which corrupts the blood whilst the Dogstar reigns,
is not so pernicious as the rotten breath of slander, which casts a leprous
skurfe upon the whitest reputation, and bespeckles even Innocence it self.

Hoc verbum asperum tu sustinuisti Domine. (It Is S. Bernards sweet Meditation.)
Bernard. in Psalm. 90. Ser. 3.
This sharp killing word did Thou blessed Savior sustain for our sakes. By
falsehood wast thou betrayed, and by periurious witnesses belied to the most
shameful Death, that Thou might deliver our souls from that which is
verbum asperrimum, the most killing word, the voice of Judgment pronounced
upon impenitent sinners, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire.

I fix not upon this Interpretation, though very warrantable, but follow our
English Translation, which justly agrees with the Hebrew, From the noisome
pestilence; which literally imports that contagion a Schooleman defines to be
Morbus venenosus vel lues bominum, a sickness which usually is to all and has
lately bin to us so mortal. Thus Lormus also out of Authentic Copies reads
it, A peste pessima seu qualibet pestilenti, or de peste aerumniosissima. The
Chaldee paraphrase is, Chald. Paraphr.
de Morte atque Tumultu, from Death and Tumult, which I take to be a just
Periphrasis of the Plague, that being of all others the most tumultuous kind of
Death. Since, like a furious Torrent that bears down trees and houses, it
sweeps whole Families, whole streets, nay whole Cities, insomuch that the
living have not bin sufficient to bury the dead. Tho Walsing. Hist. Angl. Ed.
2. p. ^^8. A^nal. Stow page 218.
Such a Mortality as this was there in the ninth year of Edward the second.
Nor is it only tumultuous in regard of the Numbers that die, but in regard of
their Burial too. When every Churchyard is made vallis Mortis, the valley of
Death, and the bodies piled and built one upon another, Job 5. 26.
make (in Jobs phrase) a rick rather then a Grave, where, for want of earth,
one coarse is covered with another.

Which must needs beget this Epithet, Noisome, putrify the Air so much, that
(as Solinus reports of the Lake Avernus and the dead Sea, whose steame kills
all that draw it in) birds flying over those Cemeteries have dropped down, and
Men that sucked it up, like children ouerlayed by their Nurses, have bin
impoysoned by that Air which nourished them.

Kingdoms and States are called Bodies, because Metaphorically they are so: The
King is the Heart, the Counsel the Brain, the Magistrate the Hand. And there
is this true Accord betwixt those Political and the Natural Bodies, that they
have distempers like us, their Agues that shake them, their sicknesses and
their Deaths too. As there is an appointed Time for Man upon Earth, so for all
Man is Lord of. Empires have their Periods, and those Periods to them as Graves
to us. Babylon, and Persia, and Greece, and Rome, which successively buried one
another, the last Suruiuer, as Executor to the rest, inheriting all that the
Three first had, show that Monarchies sicken, and like Men die, sometimes of
Age, oftener of Wounds. It has bin observed that one whole part of the Earth
has bin sick at once. For in the years Walsingham Histor. Aug. Ed. 3. page 168.
1349. and Stow Annal. page 664. Euagrius Histor. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 29.
1579. an Epidemicall sickness ran through all Europe. But Euagrius writes of a
Plague that ouerspread the whole World. To speak more directly, some diligent
Obseruers have delivered it as Dogmaticall, that particular Cities have their
Critical Days, their Climactericall Years, and that most constantly.

Every third year (says Boterus) is a Boterus de orig. Vrbium lib. 2. cap. 7*
and 11.
climacterick, dangerous and fatal to the Grand Cairo in Egypt, in which
three hundred thousand commonly die of the Plague: And the fifth or seventh to
Constantinople, the Mortality costing her scarcely fewer then two hundred
thousand. Our Land, and in it our Metropolis, London, our Mother City has,
like Jerusalem, mourned in the Dust for the calamity of her Children, and
death of her Inhabitants. We have had our Climactericall years, as well as
other places. Some have noted the Twentieth or thereabouts to have bin mortal
to us, which though it has held current for these two last Visitations, I draw
not into conclusion that it should still hold. I think rather the whole Land
sensible of the loss of her DEBORAH, and our late most gracious SOLOMON of
ever blessed Memory, whose Exequies deserved a lamentation not less then that
which was made for Josiah in the valley of Hadadremmon, Zach. 12. 11.
to perform rites worthy such Funerals mourned in Death, shedding Lives in
stead of Tears.

For any other cause, certainly I am persuaded, it is not in the discretion of
Nature to diet her self, to set out her sick days, no more then to appoint
her well, but merely in the direction of God, who uses her but as his handmaid,
to effect his purposes, when and how He pleases.

It was one of Manes his Phanaticall Epiphan.
dreams amongst many others, that a certain Spirit in the air called Messor,
diffuses that contagion which breeds the Pestilence. His drift was only to
establish that Diabolical conclusion of his concerning his Two beginnings, Aug.
one whereof produces good, the other bad, and so to join an other Power in
commission with God. And surely they that impute Gods judgments to Nature, and
because they are able to trace an Infection to the first Body that died, or can
distinguish betwixt a contagion received Per contactum, from other bodies, or
occasioned by an infected Air, conclude a Pestilence to be nothing else but a
Malignitie of course, proceeding from an ill conjunction of Planets, or the
concurrence of some other disaffected causes in Nature, derogate from God, and
are in a fair way to Atheism.

I can by the help of Philosophy and observation assign some probable reason
of the Earthquake or Thunder, defining the one to be a vapor included in the
body of Earth, which with struggling to get out shakes it; and the other to be
but the collision of two Clouds, and in them the contestation of two repugnant
qualities, whose strife begets that fearful Blow. But yet if I look not
beyond Nature, if I apprehend no Power beyond these that directs and forms
those fearful Judgments, I might justly fear to be the next mark at which
those Judgments should aim, to be swallowed up, or to be Thunderstrooke. Let
not Sophistry or Philosophy deceive you, let them not lull you into a
security to make you feareles of Gods anger, by fathering his Judgments upon
Chance and Nature. There is no Judgment, as there is no Mercy, wherein you may
not discern Digitum Dei, the hand of God directing it, be it Wind, or Storm,
or Hail, Psalm. 103. 21.
or Lightning, or Infection, all are but his ministers to fulfill his will.

The Pestilence is his Arrow. It Is called Sagitta noctu volans; Verse. 6.
directed against his People either for disobedience and breach of his Laws,
as Deuteron. 28. 21. or for Pride. For David's presumption to number the people,
2. Sam. 24. 15.
God abated Seventy Thousand of his number by the Pestilence. Or for unjust
Avarice, Ezekiel. 7. 15.
for Extortion or Simony. Or for Lasciuiousnes, by the example of Sodom drowned
in Mari pestilentico, and turned into a Lake. Or for Gluttony and Excess, as
Numb. 11. 33. Whilst the flesh was yet between their teeth, the wrath of the
Lord kindled, and smote the people with an exceeding great Plague.

Nay it has yet a nearer dependence upon His will, insomuch that it is called
Manus Dei, the hand of God; so Exodus 9. 3. 15. and Jeremy the 21. 5, 6. 2 Samuel
24. 14.
And David making choice of the Pestilence rather then of any of the two other
punishments there proposed unto him by the Prophet Gad, accepts it in this
Phrase, Let us fall into the hand of the Lord. Now as none but his bow can
shoot this Arrow, none but his hand manage this heavy Judgment, so no hand but
His can cure the Wound which it makes: He wounds, Job 5. 18.
and he binds up again: Ipse liberabit, He shall deliver Thee from the
Noisome Pestilence.

Pliny writes that Locris and Crotone were never infected with any Plague;
other Historians and Travelers, Mr. G. Sands Relation, lib. 2. page 97.
that as the Plague in Egypt and Barbary rage their fixed Time, so also they
decrease at their day. It commonly slakes in Egypt when Nilus ouerflowes, at
Aleppo, when the Sun is entering into Leo. Dier. Genial. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Alexander ab Alexandro reports, That a great Mortality was stayed in Rome by
the Inuesting of a Dictator. And Thucidides says, Thucid. lib 2. Bell.
Pelopones.
the greatest Contagion which ever brake out in Greece, was cured by the advice
of Hippocrates the Physician, who caused them to cut down all their woods and
burn them, by which Action the Air was purified, and upon that success they
would have made Hippocrates a God. Lactant. lib. 2. de Orig. Erroris. cap. 8.
Lactantius mentions a like Cure performed by Aesculapius the Physician, upon
Rome, sick of this Mortality.

I know Physic and Industry have wrought admirable effects amongst the
Heathen, and amongst us. But I shall never Deifie the Physician for the
Medecines sake. It Is Gods permission to the one, Gods Blessing upon the other
which enables all means of recovery. Salubrity of Air is His Gift; shift of
Places, smells to prepossesse the Senses, but for Him had been vnbeneficiall.
Our best Cordialls and Antidotes, should His Mercy contribute nothing to their
working, would inuert their Nature, and become Poisons. Help I am sure they
could not, nor had they helped us, we had still languished under the tyranny
of this Noisome Disease, had not He made Man's industry prosperous for
recovering of some, and for the general safety of all, 2 Samuel 24. 16.
said unto his Angel, It is enough, stay now thy Hand. Just cause then have we
all to praise Him in this Panegyric, Ipse liberauit, He has delivered us from
the snare of the Hunters, and from the Noisome Pestilence.

That I may now look toward my Conclusion. Conclusion.


You see how copious the Redemption of the Lord is, how his Deliverance extends
it self over all dangers; there is no Buckler either to bear off the Darts of
Satan, or fury of an Enemy but this: there is no Amulet to resist or cure
infection but this. So that Deliverance is a title of which God has just cause
to be jealous. No Rival must share in this glory; He is the prime Actor, other
Men or Means but merely his Instruments, his subordinate Ministers. Mihi
vindicta, Hebr. 10. 30.
is Gods Motto, Vengeance is mine, I will recompense, and He speaks it in as
loud a phrase, Mihi misericordia, Mercy is mine, Romans 9. 15.
I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. I can never then sufficiently
wonder at that Church, who has not only Mangled His Titles to distribute them
amongst the Saints, but have done that which the barbarous Soldiers would not,
Divided the seamles Coat of his Passion, and with Saints Merits Patch't the
entire Garment of our Salvation. Imparting the highest Deliverance that ever
was wrought, that Deliverance to effect which He was delivered into the hands
of sinners; That Deliverance which with many stripes and wounds He purchased;
That Deliverance which He earned as Adam did his bread, by the sweat of his
brow, and the labor of his hands: He sweat for it in the Garden, and He bled
for it upon the Cross. This Act of Deliverance have they maimed, some amongst
them daring to affirm, that Christ has not so satisfied for all, Rhem. Test.
Annot. in Romans 8. ^7.
but that each Man must suffer and satisfy for himself in particular, so the
Rhemists, which must either conclude Inualiditie and Insufficiency in Christ's
sufferings, or injustice in God, who for one Offense will be paid twice, first
by the Surety which is Christ, and then by us who are the Principal Debtors.
Jesuit. Catechis. lib. 1. cap. 10.
Others broching it for truth that Christ died not for both Sexes, was not the
Savior of Women, but Men only. An Assertion of Postellus the Jesuit, who in
Paris put forth a book entitled the Victory of Women, wherein he writes that
one Jane was sent from God to be the Savior of Women. Contrary to the purpose
of Christ, who Died for All, gave himself for All: and directly opposite to
the meaning of God, Leuit. 14.
who at the cleansing of the Leaper commanded them to offer Lambs of both
kinds, Isych. lib. 4. in Leu. cap. 14.
Male and Female: Ex vtroque genere propterea sacrificium Offerri praecepit vt
ostendat quia Christus pro nobis occisus simul Masculum Foeminamque saluabit:
To show (as Isychius excellently inferres) that Christ died for both Sexes,
Women no less then Men. But a third sort to justify their praying unto
Saints, by a learned trick Divide the Office of Christ's Mediation amongst them,
and by this Distinction of Mediator, Intercessionis and Redemptionis, defeat
Him of half his right. They confess that Christ only died for us, and so
became our Redeemer, but every Saint is an Intercessor to solicit God on our
behalf. A Position which the Apostle plainly contradicts. Our Redeemer and
Intercessor are both one. 1 Ioh. 2. 2.
We have but one Intercessor (says he) one Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the Righteous, and he is our Redeemer, the Propitiation for our Sins.

If they have parted this great Stream of Deliverance, which concerns the
salvation of our Souls, you cannot wonder if with more confidence they
multiply Deliuerers for the Body, if they cut that River by which Health and
Temporal safety are conveyed unto us, into as many lesser Currents as the
Thorns opened Riuelets of blood in our Saviors head, certainly I think they
have exceeded the comparison. Old Rome had Tutelar Gods for every Province, and
Household Gods for every Family. Gods for every Office, for the Farm and for
the Field, for War and Peace, for Sea and Land, for Disease and Health. And
New Rome has created as many Hinc non minor fere extitit Diuorum famulantium
turba, quam Deorum quondam apud Romanus. Riuius l. 1. ae Superf^it.
Saints to fill those Offices, as formerly they had Gods. They have a Guardian
Saint for every place; for their Sellar and the oversight of their Ale, Lewis a
Minorite Riuius loc. cit.
: for every Season, for every Trade, for Fullers and Cobblers. For every
Creature, even for their Heur. Steph. Apolog. Herocot. cap. 38.
Hogs. For every Sohn. de Cultu Dei These. 90.
Disease, even to the Toothache, for that cure Apollonia: for the
Falling-sicknes S. Valentine. And as if there were no Balm in Gilead, they fly
to S. Roche and Sebastian for remedy from the Pestilence

Blessed be God that neither their Saviors, nor Sauiouresses, nor the
efficacy of strange Mediation is any part of our Creed. We dig no new
Cisternes (like those in Jeremiah) but fill our Pitchers at the Well of Life
Christ Jesus: Imputing our Mediation and Redemption, our Deliverances Temporal
and Eternal to Him alone.

Though by many seducements Rome like the Bramble in Iothams Parable, Iudic. 9.
15.
has invited us to repose under Her Shadow, yet by the mercy of God we have
not yet betaken our selves to any other shelter but of Him and His Christ. We
yet dwell (and I beseech God we still may) sub vmbra Altissimi, under the
shadow of the most High. Psalm. 90. verse. 1.
Blessed is that People that abide under it. Thou shall not be afraid for any
Terror by Night, Verse. 5.
nor for the Arrow that flies by Day; Verse. 6.
for the Pestilence that walks in Darkness, Quoniam Ipse Liberabit etc. For He
shall Deliver Thee.

Should we forsake this Shelter, of all other Nations we were the most
unthankful. Never did any People, since his Elect Israel, receive such
liberal Testimonies of his Love, or taste so many Deliverances as we have.
Whether I understand by the Snare, Clancularias inimicorum machinas (as
Marlorat Marlorat.
interprets it) Privy Conspiracies plotted by Domesticke Traitors to supplant
us; or public Invasions by foreign Enemies, the Literal Plague of Disease
and Noisome Pestilence, or the Metaphorical Plague of Sin, Dangers of the
Body, or of the Soul, Calvin.
Sieve clam occultis artibus insidietur nobis Satan, sieve aperto Mart nos
oppugnet paratum fore Dei auxilium. Amidst all these difficulties we have found
that his Faithfulness and Truth has been our Shield and Buckler. Verse. 4.


We may justly engraue upon the Pillars of our State, the Prophets Inscription;
When thou passest through the waters I will be with Thee, Esaias 43. 2.
that they do not ouer-flow Thee, and when thou walk through the very fire,
Thou shall not be burnt, nor shall the flame kindle upon thee.

When Spain rose up like a Flood (as Jeremy Ierem. 46. 8.
speaks of Egypt) and like a Dragon in the Sea (it is Ezekiels comparison)
troubled the waters with his Fleet; Ezekiel. 32. 2.
when every ship was ballasted with destruction, and the pregnant sails
swelled with fury more then wind. Esaias 43. 14.
Thus says the Lord your Redeemer, the holy One of Israel; for your sakes have
I brought down (that Sea-built) Babel. They were all fugitives, and the
Chaldaeans cried in their Ships. He smote that Multitude, whose pride was
higher wrought then the Seas that bare them, and by the Breath of his rebuke
made them fly like dust before the Whirlwind. Esaias 17. 13.
Every Billow chasing them, and as it were, having them upon the Execution,
till at last the Rocks became their Monument, and the fierce Northern Sea,
their Grave.

Again, when the malice of some English Iesuited Pioners sought to undermine
the Kingdom, to blow up both Prince and People with Gunpowder, He snatched us
like Brands from the mouth of the Furnace, and by discovering the bloody Trap,
Delivered us from the snare of those Fowlers, Psalm. 124. 7.
The Net is broken, and we are escaped.

And now lastly, when a contagious Sickness, like a vultur, fed on many parts of
the Land, but chiefly on your City, a Disease which I cannot better describe
then in Cyrils words, Cyrill. Alexandr. Glaphyr. lib. 3. de Lepra.
(...). A Disease greedy and cruel, that devoured all ages and Sexes without
pity or distinction; making a promiscuous Prey upon the Shepherd as well as
the Flock; and in contempt of Cure, with the same wound striking the Physician
into the grave with the Patient. In this late dreadful Time when Death held
his solemn Triumphs amongst you, and the Grave eue^ glutted with the dead,
like a bad stomach, sent up unwholesome smells to annoy the Air, finding her
self unable to overcome the bodies she had swallowed, so narrow was the
stomach (I mean the burying Places) and so great the Multitude that daily
cloyed it. When every house was endorsed with Death or Desolation, the
Inhabitants either extinguished, or fled; and the Sanguine Cross set upon the
door, Not like the sprinckling of the Paschall Lambs blood upon the
Israelites gates, Exodus 14.
in Egypt, for that was a Covenant of life, but like a fatal Calendar bare
witness of the sad days, which the miserable dwellers were forced to compute,
shut up from the comforts and society of Men, and Lying at the Mercy of such an
Enemy as would allow no Quarter; but oft-times emptied the whole house. Who
was it that Delivered you from this Enemy? Was it an Arm of Flesh, or was it
any other then that Power in my Text? No. Ipse liberauit, He was the Deliverer.

He delivered you from that Danger, and that beyond Hope; A very few weeks saw
Deaths Computation abated from Five Thousand Two hundred and five to One.
Though the storm were very violent, yet it lasted not long. Though it took
away Great Numbers, yet compared with what it had done formerly, and (unless
thus happily prevented by God) might have done now; it will appear a gentle
Visitation. Our Chronicles mention a Plague An. 21. of Edw. 3rd, Tho.
Walfingham Histor. Anglic. Edw. 3. page 168. Annal. Stow. page 245.
so violent that it made the Country quite void of Inhabitants, there being
scarcely any left alive: -- Funestos reddidit agros Virgil. Georg. 3.

Vastauitque vias exhausit ciuibus vrbem.
Neither did He accompany this Visitation with those Calamities which have
wasted other parts. Eusebius relates a Plague in Greece, in the Time of
Maximinus, which bred such Desolation, that the empouerish't Country endured a
Famine more grievous then the Plague, Eusebius. Eccles. Histor. l. 9. c. 8.
such a Famine, as constrained the Noble Matrons to go a begging for relief,
and so enfeebled the woeful Inhabitants, that they lay gasping in every Angle
of the Streets, Ad solam hanc vocem proferendam validi, Esurio, Having no
strength, nor voice, nor spirits left, but only to profess their Hunger.
Histor. Angl. Edw. 2. page 108.
Tho. Walfingham mentions such a Famine that accompanied the Plague in this
Land.

But God was more merciful then to scourge You with Whips strung with these
Two Scorpions at once, Plague and Famine. Neither did he prolong your
punishment, making you Lie long under his fearful strokes, as other Places
have done. Philostratus reports a Plague in his Time, which lasted Fifteen
years; Euagrius lib 4. Histor. cap. 28.
but Euagrius trebles the Time. He writes of one that continued Two and fifty
years. I may ask with the Prophet, Nah. 3. 8.
Numquid melior est Alexandria? Is London better then Alexandria? or England
less sinful then Greece? No, but Gods Mercy was more abundant, more speedy to
us, Dating his heavy Judgments to as few weeks, as the least of those
Contagions lasted years. He has Delivered you, And He has Delivered you so
soon.

Not to weary you (yet how should you grow weary at the Repetition of Gods
Deliverance toward you) He Delivered many of you that stayed at home. And
whereas Volateran treating of the Cures of Pestilence out of Titus Liuius,
Volateran. l. 24. page 579.
delivers this Maxim, Nullum huic vnquam remedium adhibitu^ praeterquam fugae
atque secessus; That nothing could keep off the Plague but shift of Place; He
controlled that Position, making your own infected houses safer to you, then
others Country houses, or the clearest Air to which they could retire.

And yet He Delivered you that fled too, by staying the hot pursuit of your
Enemy. For though you went from the infected place, you could not have outgone
his Judgment, that could have overtaken you. I told you the Pestilence was
called the hand of God, and Gods hand could have reached you at any distance,
had not He sanctified your flight. Euagrius loc. cit.
It was observed that in the great Plague at Greece, if any to avoid the
Infection had removed into some City of safety and better Air, they only died
that thought by flight to shun it. But God dealt not so with you, He blessed your
Flight, your Secession, your Remoues.

Neither has He in them only blessed you, but in your return also, bringing
your Tribes back again into your City, uniting all her scattered Lines unto
their proper Center; and assembling them in this very place, from whence the
growing sickness this last year frighted you, making you translate the
solemnity to another Place.

And He does still deliver you by continuing this His Deliverance, whose fruits
are Health and Safety unto us all. For though the Mortality be now happily
stayed, yet let me tell you, it is rather as yet Slumbred then Extinguished.
Seneca.
Non desunt venena sed torpent. There are bad relics enough to awake it
again. In bedding or garments infected there is Contagio residua, a lurking,
residuous contagion, able to cause a Relapse no less fearful then the late
Disease. Though it be raked up in Ashes, yet amongst these Ashes there be some
sparks, which now and then discover themselves, that may raise the Flame as
high as ever. God grant that either our own Security, in aduenturing too
soon upon Things or Places that yet may retain Infection, or especially our
foul sins, which show we have forgot God so soon as his Rod is taken off us,
do not kindle His Anger freshly against us, lest we be utterly consumed.

Last of all, that I may trace Gods merciful Deliverance even as low as the
Grave, He has delivered those that died by this contagion; some of them from
their pressing wants and exigencies, more grievous then Death, A peste
aerumnarum, (as Iunius and Tremelius read it.) Others from Toil and Servitude,
but all of them from a wretched sinful life, so putting a Period to many
calamities, many forrowes, many discontentments, by one Death.

And He has yet a future Deliverance for us, later then that which was their
last; not only from Disease, which is the Bayliffe of the first Death, but from
Sin which exposes us to the danger of the second Death. That greatest
Deliverance in whose purchase He bled, and for whose Assurance He rose again.
The Deliverance first of our Souls from our sinful Bodies, when Death by
giving Nature a Bill of Divorce, shall sever them from each other, and they
must take several Sanctuaries, one above in the Bosom of Abraham, the other
in the Bosom of Earth. And then the final Deliverance of those Bodies from
the Earth again, unto whose custody they were committed, when by a new
indissoluble union, they shall be remarried one to another, and both together
united to their Head Christ Jesus, by which union they shall be married to the
Joys of His Kingdom, unto which in their Election they were contracted.

On this Assurance, as on a Rock, rest all our comforts. We shall not need to
fear, what can become of this Earthy stuff we bear about us in our Bodies,
since our Souls like Gedeons lamps shall burn bright when these earthen
Pitchers are broken. And what ever Fate shall break these Pitchers, these
Bodies of ours, whether the violent hand of an Enemy, or a fiercer Disease, an
Higher hand will recollect the scattered Relics of our Frailty, and by
infusing nobler qualities of Glory and Incorruption, 1 Cor. 15. 33.
( for this corruptible must be invested with incorruption) make them in stead
of Clay, vessels of Honor, fit for his Kingdom. So long as by our Faith we
are allowed a recourse unto this precious Balsam, Death can look grim in no
dress, nor Deaths most fearful Executioners affright us. The very name of
Resurrection so sweetens the bitterness of Death, that enamoured on the Joys it
leads to, we have rather cause to court, then fear it. Whether we perish by
the sword, a Peace softer then Rest shall close our Wounds: Or whether by the
Pestilence, this thought shall abate the horror of that Noisome Disease.
Petrarch. de Remed. vtriusque fortu: lib. 2. Dialeg. 92.
Quid est quod pestis nomen exhorreas? cum potius solatij genus sit vt
comitatior moriaris. It may appear a Comfort, rather then a Calamity, to fall
with a Multitude. That company, that communion in Death shows us, through a
sad Perspectiue, the joyful communion of Saints, unto which we in the next
life shall be admitted. And although like a tempestuous Autumn, it shakes us
by heaps into our Graves, our Extraction will be more orderly, in better Method
then was our Burial. For vnusquisque suo ordine, we shall Arise in Order. 1
Cor. 15. 23.
That confused tumultuous kind of Death, shall not disguise us from the
knowledge of our Maker, who will distinguish each Bone, and give it to the
right Owner. Nor can the deepest dungeon of Earth, the lowest Grave deteine us,
since our Deliverer will be our Bail. He that has the Keys of David, keeps
also the Key of our Prison. By that Master-key He will unlock our Graves,
those doors of Mortality, and with it will He open the everlasting doors,
giving us our entrance into Heaven. After which happy Resurrection, we shall
live, not sub vmbra altissimi, under the shadow, but in the bright Sunshine of
Gods presence, and the comforts of his Spirit, and the fruition of our
Redeemer, who is both our Resurrection and our Life. Amen.

FINIS.

