THE Seven Champions of Christendom.

Acted at the Cocke-pit, and at the Red-Bull in St. John's Street, with a
general liking.

And never Printed till this Year 1638.

Written by J. K.

LONDON: Printed by J. Oaks, and are to be sold by James Becket at his Shop in
the Inner Temple Gate. 1638.

To his much respected and worthy Friend Master JOHN WAIT.
Sir,
THinking of amends to expres my gratefulnes for those many Favors You have
shown me, I could pitch on no other more fit than this my Genius prompted me,
it was well thought on, if Yours give it the like acceptance I am happy: for
Works of this Nature, I dare affirm, have been acceptable to most men,
contemned by few, unless it be those of the more Stoicall disposition, whose
rigid Fronts cry down all things, but what themselves approve of. For this
Work of it self, I may say thus much without blushing, it received the rights
of a good Play, when it was Acted, which were Applauses and Commendations,
whether it merited them or not, I leave to your Judgment: the Nature of the
Work, being History; it consists of many parts, not walking in one direct
path, of Comedy, or Tragedy, but having a larger field to trace, which me
thinks should yield more pleasure to the Reader, Novelty and Variety being the
only Objects these our Times are taken with: the Tragedy may be too dull and
solid, the Comedy too sharp and bitter; but a well mixed portion of either,
doubtless would make the sweetest harmony. But this Work as it is, and my
wishes that all defects in it, to my desires, and your content were supplide, I
commend to your perusal, my self, it, and resting, to be commanded by you in
all friendly Offices,

John Kirk.

The Actors Names.
The seven Champions.
St. George of England. James of Spain. Anthony of Italy. Andrew of Scotland.
Patrick of Ireland. David of Wales. Denis of France.
Tarpax the Devil. The Emperor of Trebozand.
Three Lords.
Ancetes. Almeno. Lenon.
The King of Tartary. Ormandine, a Magician. 2 Lords his friends, Argalio, an
Inchanter. Leonides, his friend. Brandron, the Giant. King of Macedon.
Suckabus, the Clown. Violeta, the Princess. Carintha her maid. Three
Daughters to Macedon. Calib, the Witch. Three Spirits. Three attendants on the
Emperor. Three Shepherds. A priest of Pan. Three messengers. Two armed
Knights. Three Ghosts; the Father, Mother, and Sister of Leonides.
The seven Champions of Christendom.
ACTUS PRIMUS.
Thunder and Lightning: Enter Calib the Witch. Calib. HA, louder a little; so,
that burst was well:
Again, ha, ha; house, house your heads you fear*
Stroke mortal fools; when Calibs consort plays
A Huntse-up to her, how rarely does it languell
In mine ears? these are mine Organs,
The Toad, the Batte, the Raven, and the fell whisling bird,
Are all my anthum singing Quiresters;
Such saplesse roots, and livelesse witherd woods
Are pleasanter to me, than to behold the jocund
Month of May, in whose green head of youth,
The amorous Flora strowes her various flowers,
And smiles to see how brave she has de^kt her girl:
But pass we May, as game for fangled fools,
That dares not set a foot in Arts dark secret,
And bewitching path as Calib has.
Here is my mansion, within the rugged bowels of this Cave,
This c^ agge, his Cliffe, this den, which to behold
Would freeze to Ice the hissing tramels of Medusa:
Yet here enthroned I sit, more richer in my spells
And potent charms, than is the stately mountain
Queen, dressed with the beauty of her sparkling jems,
To vie a luster against the heavenly Lamps:
But we are funke in these Antipades, so choakt
With darkness in great Calibs Cave, that it can
Stifle day, it can and shall, for we do loath
The light, and as our deed es are black we hug the night.
But where is this boy, my George, my love, my life,
Whom Calib lately doates on more than life:
I must not have him wander from my love, further than
Sommons of my eye or beck can call him back again:
But it is my fiend gotten, and deformed issue that misleads him,
For which, I Will rappe him in a storm of hail, and dash him
Against the pavement on the rocky den:
He must not lead my joy astray from me;
The Parents of that boy begetting him,
Begot and boar the issue of their deaths, which done,
The child e Istole, thinking alone to triumph in his death,
And bathe my body in his popular gore:
But Dove-like nature favored so the child, that Calibs killing
Knife fell from her hand, and stead of stabs I kissed
I kissed there I lipt boy, and since have brought him up,
Cope mate, and fellow with my own sweet son:
And now the boy desires to know, what Calib
Has so long concealed from him, his parentage,
Which still I must, as I have done, put off,
And cast some pleasing game to file that question
Out of his thoughts:
His heart soars high, fame on his temple plays,
And Calib fears her death by Autumes day,
For which my light winged spirit of the Air
Grand Tarpax, prince of the gristy North:
What, ho Tarpax, obey my charms,
And with the steel tipped pinions of thy wings,
Cut through the Clouds and fly unto thy Calib.

Thunder and Lightning: Tarpax descends. Tar. No more my Calib, see thy Tarpax
comes,
More swifter than the motive of an eye,
Mounted on wings swift as a thought
I fly unto my Mistress: now, what would thou?

Calib. Be full resolved of fear, struck sudden doubts:
Age makes my spanne of days seem but an inch,
And snowes, like cold December, on my heart:
See how I tremble Tarpax, as does the listening Heart,
When he hears the feathered arrows sing his funeral dirge.

Tar. Name what afflicts my love.

Calib. But will my Tarpax tell me?

Tar. Both must and will.

Calib. When must I dye then? when must Calibs life
Be back surrenderd by the hands of death?
Age can no longer to me subsistence give:
My Taper has watched long, when will it out?
Perform no flattering part for to delude me:
When? ha, when my Tarpax?

Tar. Fates keep unknown from spirits those last times
Of days and hours: yet can I riddle out a prophefie,
Which if my Calib well observe and keep
Thy time may farther run, death stay his sleep.

Calib. Say on sweet Tarpax.

Tar. Whilst Calib in her powerful hand
Holds fast her powerful art,
So long may Calib by her power,
Command Death hold his Dart.
But when fond Love by dotage shall,
Blindfold wise Calibs eyes,
With that great power she did command,
The great Inchantresse dies.

Call. Ha, ha, ha; and when will that be Tarpax?
Vanish like smoke, my fear, come kiss me my Love,
Thou have earned thy breakefast Chuck; here suck thy fill.

Clown within. Clow. Illo ho, ho Illo.

Tar. What mortall's that disturbs us?
Shall I blast him?

Call. Hold my Love, it is Suckabus our son; fall off.

Tar. The fool nere saw his Father yet,
Make us acquainted.

Enter fool bloody. Clow. So ho, ho; Mother, Mother.

Call. Defend me Tarpax: what does ayle the boy?

Clow. Ale? no mother; I am neither in Ale nor Beer,
Nor no such graine-tub, peasanticall Element:
My Hogshead runs Alegant, and your Nursling broacht it.

Call. Has George done this? Slave, thou lie:
Go call him hither.

Clow. Mother, no more such words, my blood's up,
And I am apt for Rebellion; and you know
A Soldiers Latin for the Lie, is the stab.

Tar. Hold villain, what resist thy mother?

Clow. Oh Lord, help me George, George, nursling George.

Call. Villain come back,
l'le toss thee in a whirle-winde in the air else:
Come back I say, and learn to put on duty.
There stands your sire, you Cur; kneel for a benediction.

Clow. Hold your hand Mother, I have no mind to be made a Buzzard, nor fly
like an Owl in the air, or mount like a Kite over Towns and Cities for
carrion, without any biding place. Where my father is I know not, but the
likeness of our persons shows me a Pig of your own farrow.

Tar. I am thy Father Suckabus.

Clow. You may be the Devil for ought I know,
For you are neither like my Mother, nor me.

Call. Cast fear and wonder off my boy,
This is thy Father, and a potent spirit,
Prince of the grisly North, that muffles us, and ties,
And also unties the fiery rude band og Boreas:
Then, as becomes thee, show thy reverence to him.

Clow. Why now I am satisfied; could not you have said this before, Pray
father, pray the devil to bless me, and make me a man like my mother: So be
it.

Both. Our blessings on our Child.

Clow. But do you hear Father, if you be a Prince, I must be a Lord, or an
Earl, or a devilish Duke, or somewhat.

Tar. Thou art by birth Duke of Styx, Sulpher, and Helvetia.

Clow. O brave, o brave, Duke of Styx, Sulpher, and Helvetia?
Pray father, what Title has my Mother?

Tar. Queen of Limbony, and Duchess of Witchcordia.

Clow. I thought so, I told my Mother she looked like a Witch a great while
ago: a pox on it, I knew it: but do you hear mother, were not you one of the
Cats that drunk up the Millers Ale in Lancashire Wind-mills?

Call. Peace sir, begone, go seek out George,
And bring him to me presently.

Clow. Must I call George again? Then (I fear) I shall get another broken pate,
before I get a plaster for this: for we do nothing in the world but fight;
he kills me two or three times in an hour: he plays a Knight in Armor, and I
a Lady; that he fights with a great Tree for, and winnes me from it: then I
play a Giant, and he kills me; then a Boar, and he kills me again; then an
enchanted Castle, and then my stones go to 'rack; then a Lion, and then he
pulls out my heart.

Call. Then an Ass sir.

Horn within. Clow. Right, and there he kills me again:
But Mother, George is come, I hear his Horn.

Call. Into my Cave my Tarpax, take my some with thee,
I Will have a little conference with George.

Exit. Enter George. Welcome my George, my joy, my love, my life,
My souls sole darling, and my fancies dotage
Commander of great Calib, and her power;
Why does those eyes, the lights of Calibs Cell,
Shoot their illustrious splendour on the Earth,
And not shine upwards as they were wont to do?
Why do those Arms thus twine into a lock,
As if despair had seized upon thy thoughts,
And b'lasted quite the flower of thy youth?
Speak my loved Nursling, can Calib give thee ease?
Geo. You may, you can.

Call. Why then besure I will:
Let daylight shine then, and expel those clouds,
For here I vow, by that infernal power,
By whom I may command to grant what ere it be,
Thy full demand, not dangering of our self.

Geo. I wish it not, but so much love
To my kind Nurse, as shows a tender mother
To her Child, when she first blesses him
After a long absence.

Call. This stronger ties our love; thy demand?

Geo. Then thus: Although I want no Parent in your self,
By your kind fostring and indulgency:
Be not offended, that I here renew my former suite,
Which though so long put by,
Your Oath stands now unto me for to grant.

Call. Say on.

Geo. The knowledge of my Parents, that by them
I may not be a stranger to my self.

Call. That string's not out of Tune, yet still it is touched,
And I no longer now can put him off:
George, you shall, your suit is granted;
But this condition I must have ye s^ale to,
And then we will deliver eithers deed.

Geo. It Is granted.

Calib. Then know sweet boy that Calib loves thee dear,
Witness my pity on thee at thy birth,
When thy adultrous mother cast thee off,
As fearful least their close lascivious sin
Should play the tell-tale of them to the world:
Wherefore thy Mother strove by Art to kill thee,
Even in thy first conception, but still my charms
I mixed amongst her drugges, whose greater poison
Proved thy Antidotes, killed what should kill,
And in the Casket safe preserved my jemme.

Georg. O my unhappy Fate! am I a Bastard then?

Calib. Giv't not so gross a title, but list a little more:
Thy mother saw the more she strove to kill,
The more thou quicknest, and grewst stronger still,
Gave ore the child-bane pills, and from the worlds
Quick censuring, screend up the knowledge by obscurity,
Save unto me the closet of her thoughts,
And an attendant handmaid. But to be brief,
Maturity being to ripeness grown,
I plaide Luci^aes part, and snatched thee
From the knife, aimed at thy heart; thus having saved
Thee, going from thy unnatural Damme
I bore thee to life's safety; and since
Thou have a tongue to speak how I have used thee.

George. Both Nurse and Mother, my duty,
With my thanks gives it acknowledgement:
But could my mother, finding painful throws,
Through which I hastened to give her ease,
Before my tender eyes did open to see the world,
Seek to intombe me up again?

Calib. Urge it no more she did.

George. Were they ashamed of their own work?
How were they titled, Base or Noble pray?

Calib. Base, and Noble too:
Both base by thee, but noble by descent;
And thou got base, yet may thou write true gent:
No further satisfaction seek to know,
I call thee George, thy sur-name I must not show.

George. I have enough:
I Am glad I soar above the common wing,
Both base and noble too, they are bloods that keep
Two currents in my veins, but they must meet:
Smile honor and assist me,
Let me thy foote-steppes trace,
My noble deeds shall purge the blood that is base.

Calib. I fear I have said too much:
Come George for me.

George. I am ready mother; farewell the name of Nurse:
Speak, and I grant.

Calib. Then thus my George;
Thou yet art but an April tender bud:
Before that Month in thee be quite expired
Look for thy Mother here, an Autumn shaken
Leaf, and fallen to the earth, dead and forgot;
Now if thou love me, as I hope thou do,
Stay but a little, next puff of wind makes me but kiss the earth,
And thou have freedom; say, is it done?

Georg. My tears deliver't as my deed; it is done.

Calib. That Is my sweet boy; and now to give thee further
Trial of my love, to thee alone the ransom shall belong
Of six obscured Champions in my cave, a sight
Thou never yet beheldst, my loving boy:
Tarpax bring forth those daring Champions
That were sent to kill great Calib,
And confound my charm.
Oh they are come: This is, my George, the fiery youth of Spain,
Called by the name of James: this Anthony of Italy:
This the brave Northern Knight, brave Andrew:
This Irelands Patricke: Britains David this:
And this the lively brisk cross capring French man Denis:
There take 'em to thee, use em as thou please;
Their armor and their weapons too are thine:
With which the scare-crowes came to fright us hence.

Georg. A sight would pierce a rock,
Goodly shapt persons, how I suffer for them?
But yet I must dissemble love and pity:
Are these 'em Mother? take them away,
They have been used too well; we will think
Of harder pain and courser fare.

Calib. That's my best George, take this charming wand;
Make trial of it then against this rock,
And with once waving it about thy head,
The mortis sinnewed stones shall cleave in sunder,
And gape like an insatiate grave, to swalow up what is thereon:
And do but wish that it should close again,
Give but the other wave, and it is done:
There George I give it thee.
Thunder and lightning, a groan, Tarpax laughes.
Georg. Thanks loving Mother.

Calib. Ha, 'twas Tarpax voice.

Tar. Fool, fool, Calib fool.

Calib. O my fear struck shaken heart.

Georg. What ailes my mother?

Calib. Nay, nothing George: I must a while retire;
Be not you absent, a minutes
Space shall send me back again.
Exit.
George. Though borne in bastardy, how happy was my fate,
In this good Calib; she is cruel unto others,
And few or none, whose foot do chance to stray
Near the abiding of this great inchantresse,
But deaths therein, to which they travail to.
A world of fancies dance about my brains.
And shapes me thoughts, which says I am no bastard:
Or what a war my self has with my self,
And spurs me on to know what Fate denies me:
She told me too my Parentage was noble,
But name and Title she obscured from me:
How, or which way; oh I hav't, I will make trial
Of her sorcery: she said, what I desired to see or know,
This rod wave 'bout my head should amplify:
Take courage George then, though they loved not thee,
Yet thus I do desire their shapes to see.
Defend me all you ministers of grace.

Thunder and Lightning, then soft music: Enter the ghost of Georges father
and mother. Fath. George. Moth. George. Geo. J answer to that name: say on.

Fath. Then first to settle these thy wandering thoughts,
Thou art our son, truly legitimate;
Vomit the thought of Bastard, thou art none,
But heir to the Earl of Coventry.

Geo. O say, resolve me complete shadows of my Parents,
Upon my knees with Reverence I bow, tell me, oh tell me,
Since from your ayrie shapes I hear both sound and voice
Add to distressed George a second birth and life,
In saying that ye live.

Fath. O no.

Mo. O No.

Geo. How soon fresh flowers fall, which now did grow.

Fath. Delay not long thy Parents rest my George,
Hear a brief story, and then send me hence:
Know then that cursed Calib, which now doates on thee,
Did not at first do so, but poisoned us,
And fled with thee away unto that Cell of honor,
Secured by her enchantments from all danger,
Then her intents not satisfied with both our lives,
Began to prey on thine; but pity, spite of Hell,
Flew from thine eyes, and overthrew the Murdresse black intent*
That since thou have lived in love and favor with her.
But now be wise, her power is in thy hand.
Oh then be swift, be swift to execute
Thy Parents murder on the damned witch:
That done, redeem the Christian Champions, go with them,
Her Cave is not unfurnisht of rich Arms;
Fame holds the Christian Trophy thou must bear,
Englands Red Cross shall George, then St. George wear,
That summond us, back sends us: George waft thy wand.

Geo. Farewell.
Exit.
Both. Farewell dear son.
Thunder and lightning.
Geo. Go rest, go rest sweet shadows, be no more disturbed,
All my sick passions, that late were scattered with
My troubled thoughts, are reunited in this little Orb:
But for this Calib, this accursed Hagge,
Whose deeds are blacker than her tempting tutors,
Revenge has filled her cup unto the brim,
And she shall quaffe her foul souls black perdition.

Both. Protract not George, we rest not till she dies.

Geo. No more, no more, revenge like lightning flies.

Exit. A noise within: Enter Witch, Tarpax, with other spirits armed, Clown
with them, Thundering and Lightning. Call. Shield me my Tarpax from the furious
boy,
That hurries to my death more swifter
Than the hot fiery Steeds, that threw
Ambitious Phaeton from his pride: defend me then.

Tar. Calib, we cannot.
Thy power's extinct, and thou thy self must fall:
Did dotage on thy Deaths-man blind thee so,
To give thy safe protection and thy power to him?
Now armed with both, comes to destroy thee.
Fie Calib, fie, could not the Riddle which I read to thee,
When thou desired'st the knowledge of thy doom,
Forewarne thee then? Prepare, he comes.

Call. Hell and confusion.

Tar. I, confusion comes.

Call. How comes he? armed?

Tar. One hand thy power, the other bears a Falchion.

Call. Oh gentle Tarpax, numbe his senses so,
That he forget the power of his wand, we may be safe.

Tar. He comes, he comes.

Call. Circle me round, and keep him off a while,
Whilst on the outside of this Rock I climb
Up by the crags unto the top.

Thundering and lightning: Enter George in a fury, the spirits keep him back.
Geo. Have I found thee witch?
I Will not be long from thy accursed heart;
The bastard, hagge, is proved legitimate heir
To great Coventry, whom thou, thou devil,
Worse than those that guard thee, murdered.
But in despite of all thy hellish host,
Who faint against the justice of my cause,
I thus assay thee.

Tar. Thus we defend her.

Call. Fight sweet spirits, fight, kill but that boy,
I Will let open Rivers of my blood to you,
And you shall drink your fill.

Geo. This instrument is not of power to deal with fiends.

Call. Destroy him Tarpax, let not the villain breath.

Geo. I will make trial of this other tool.

Tar. Calib farewell, we can no longer stay,
We Will meet thee strait in flames, our joviall day.

Call. Now cleaves the Rock, and I do sink to Hell;
Roar wind, clap Thunder for great Calibs knell.
Music: the Rock cleaves, she sinkes; thunder and lightning.
Geo. Sink down unto thy black infernal fellows hagge.
This messenger assures me Heaven's pleased,
At whose sweet air the other air dissolves,
And all the black enchanted vapors hell cast up,
Descends to make her night more horrid there:
And now those woods that were so long choked up
With Hells black sulpher and disastrous fumes,
Give welcome to the golden eye of day,
As a most cheerful and blessed visitant.
But stay a little, all is not firmly finished,
There is an unlickt lump of hers remains,
Suckabus her son: oh are ye there sir? Come, prepare ye.

Clow. Alas sir, what to do?

Geo. To make a brand for the devils fire:
I Will cut your throat, and send you thither strait.

Clow. I do beseech you sir, have no compassion on me,
And let me live with you:
There be Cooks enough in hell without me,
Their roast-meate is too hot for my fingers,
I shall never be able to lick 'em; I had rather be
Your Scullian here, than Cook Ruffian there:
I beseech you take pity on me a Motherlesse child,
Let me live with you sir, and Suckabus shall suck
Out his own heart to do you any pleasure.

Geo. Well, take thy life, be faithful in my service,
Thy Mothers sin has perished with her life:
Learn thou by her example then to shun it,
Be my attendant still and follow me.

Clown. I thank you sir, and for this life that you have saved,
Think it no life, for it is not; you may command,
And have it when you please; and I Will be as firm to you
As fire in water, as tender as the Fox over the Goose,
Or the Wolf over the Lamb; when you are most
In any danger, I Will be farthest off from ye;
Disobey your commands, and keep your secrets like a crier,
Or any thing else I can do for you.

Geo. Well sir, we will conster your good meaning,
I long to be in armor, mounted on a Steed,
To scuffle with black danger and her bug-beares:
First I Will set free those Knights, and cherish them;
Then see how long lost armor sits upon their backs,
That done to Arms, to hunt out Honors game,
For George is no George till I purchase fame.

Exit. As they go off, Tarpax comes in, and beckons to the Clown. Tar. Illo
hist, Suckabus come hither.

Clown. I cannot; do not you see my Master gone before?
I am now bound, and must obey, must follow after:
You have fried my mother in stekes by this time,
And you would have my Lamb stones and sweetbread
To inch out your commons.

Tar. Come back, or I will force thee.

Clown. Sfoote I Will set all the prentises in the house about your ears if you
strike me, besides the Law my Master shall take of ye; but now I remember Club
Law is better: for they love your Angels so well there is no pleading against you.


Tarp. My Angels slave?

Clown. Why any bodies, yours, or the Devils, all is one to them, so they have
'em: but now the humor has took me to come back; what is your pleasure?

Tar. Only a short remembrance of your duty, With an acknowledgement you have
a father, and all is done: My blessing shall attend thee.

Clown. Let me first know, whether I have a mother or no, for mothers have so
often belide the childs father, that I am very doubtful whether ever I had
any.

Tar. Cast off those doubts then, I am thy Father,

Calib was thy mother, was? nay is,
Though strange it seems to thee,
Earth was too base to hold so great a Queen:
Did thou not note the love 'twixt George and she?

Clown. Nay truly Father I did note something, but I cannot say directly what
it was.

Tar. 'Twas love, great love betwixt 'em boy,
But in the bottom of their honey cup I mixed
A little dregs of bitter gall, which straight
Converted all their love to hate, and in that hate,
That George, thy master, sought her death:
But by my power I clave the rock in twain,
Whose careful subjects underneath were ready
To catch her in their arms, who when they had her;
Those flames ascending up, which put such horror into her,
Were Bone-fires of their joy and loving hearts.

Clown. O that I were there to leap over one of them.

Tar. I, they would make thee leap.

Clown. And I am old dog at that 'yfaith.

Tar. And now thy mother's in my Kingdom, boy,
By this time crowned with their applausive
Shouts, Queen of Helvetia.

Clown. O my sweet Mother:
Well, I Will but serve my time out, and come home to you: you have staid me some
thing long Father, I must go eat a dish of Trotters to my breakfast, I shall
hardly overtake my Master else.

Tar. Observe this fatherly instruction first:
Thou art to travail with thy Master, boy,
Through perrilous adventures, all sorts of
Countries, fashions, garbes and manners,
Thou must observe thou art effeminate in shape and favor,
Just thy sweet mothers, sweet hu'd fair Effigies,
Framed to make women do ate and fly
To thee; refuse 'em not, take all that comes,
Increase the world like one of Tarpax sons.

Clown. As long as my back will hold let me alone.

Tarp. And when thou come in company of men,
What ere they be, refuse not what they do;
If they quaffe Wine by Gallons, do so too:
Or cloud the air with India's precious weed,
Kindle that fuel; let thy Chimny smoke too.

Clown. Like a Fury.

Tarp. Swallow no wrong, stabbe if they give the lie;
Swear and forswear; the rules of galantry.

Clown. If e're a Knight of the Post mend me for that, hang me.

Tar. Lie to get profit; borrow, pay no debts,
Cheat and purloyne, thy are gaming Dicers bets.

Clown. If Cottington out do me I Will be whipped.

Tar. Love ease and sleep, it ripes the memory:
But in each sleep have several sleepers by thee:
Females, no men, I charge thee on my blessing.

Clown. I Will take my choice here if you will.

Tar. No, no, go travail farther first;
These rules if thou observ'st and keep'st,
Thou soon shall see thy mother.

Clown. It shall be my daily practice Father:
Farewell if I see you no more.

Tar. O we must meet again nere feare't:
Obey but my commands; so farewell son,
Blessing on my boy.

Clown. Father farewell:
I were an ungracious boy if I would not obey.
Now wenches look to yourselves.

Exit. Enter Andrew, David, Patricke, George, Denis, James, Anthony, all armed
and plumed. George. Renowned Christian Knights welcome to liberty,
The black Inchantresse, by whose hell-bred power,
Bright honor was subdued, and pinniond up dark,
Is now her self fettered and manicl'd in the storehouse
Where her accursed crimes can never
Pay the sum that ransomes her.

All. Our loves, our honors, and our lives
Rest pawnes to George of England for this favor.

David. Which we acknowledge with a general thanks.

Georg. Thus do I cancel all those bonds but love,
There rest my debtor still, as I will yours:
The lazy dust, that long has hid your guilt,
Is now brush't off, and you new polish't to the world again:
Sift the dead Ashes ere they kill the sparks,
And let Fames wings fan 'em to glorious flames;
Shine bright my Christian Comets of the world,
And English George, whom these your loves has made
Seventh brother with you, in the School of Arms
Shall prove no truant, Noble Christian Knights.

And. Let Scotlands Andrew be the mount, brave youth,
From whence thy beams may take a prospective,
To see, to wish, to have, to rule the same.

David. Brave maiden Knight, raise me another hill
Upon his mount, a Beacon upon that,
Which kindled, all the world may see the flame,
And Fame cry out, I Am wearied with thy Fame.

Denis. The Sybels have foretold no more but seven,
The odd man now is come, and all is even.

Pat. Even in our loves, even in what heaven us sends;
Still Pagans scourges, and still Christians friends:

Den. Then let us seven defend the Christians name:
And let George bear the Trophy of our fame.

James. Advance it youth; let thy white standard bear
A bloody Cross, to fill the world with fear.

Georg. I crave a general voice, are all so pleased?

All. We are.

George. Let us embrace, and seal it with each breast:
And here behold your maiden Knight does draw
Defense to all that wrong insultion treads on:
First in our cause against those fell miscreants,
That trample on the Christians sacred Cross,
Lifting aloft the Mahometane Moon,
Dishonor both to heaven and Christendom:
Next to maintain by force and dint of Arms
Opressed Ladies wrongs, widows, and Orphans, or who else,
Which wrongfully dares tread within a List;
And further let this Christian power extend
Against black Enchantments, witchcraft, and the like,
That Arts foul potency may meet us with.

All. All this we swear too on thy maiden sword.

Georg. It shall suffice; the Brazen Piller's not far,
Unto whose circuits knits the heads and paths
Of seven fair several ways:
Honor we altogether win, is not to one;
Then let us part, and as we part proclaim,
Whose Champions we go forth to purchase fame.
George for brave England stands.

Den. Denis for brave France.

And. The bony Scotland Andrew will advance.

Iam. James stands for Spain.

Pat. Patricke for Ireland.

David. And David will the Britains name defend.

Anton. The Rear is brought up by Anthony,
Who goes a Champion forth for Italy.

Georg. Bravely resolved, at all the world we will play,
But Christendom that is our tiring house,
The rest our stage.
On which our buskin seames must wade in blood,
But time no trifling loves, nor stays for none,
Lets mount, and part, honor is yet unwonne.

Exeunt omnes. ACTUS SECUNDUS.
Enter Emperor of Trebizond, Carinthia the Princess, Ancetes a Lord, Violeta,
and attendance. Emp. The Gods are angry with us, and their arrows
Stick in our bosoms, though we have inhausted
The glory of our Isles, and paid oblations on their Altars,
We remain regardlesse and forsaken.

Princess. O Sacred Pallas, protector of the Virgin votary;
Thou in whose well mixed soul
Judgment and worth holds equal balance;
From those Sphere-like eyes that shoot forth terror
To the amazed world, send piercing lightning
To consume these Monsters that o're-whelme our kingdom.

Emp. Ancetes are our Proclamations forth,
And a reward proposed to those bold men
Dare undertake their ruin?

Ancet. They are my Lord; and unto him, by whose
Unequaled power the monstrous Dragon falls,
There is allotted the glorious shield,
Whose Verdge is studded round with Pearl,
Diamonds, Rubies, and Saphires, Carbuncles,
And other stones fetched from the Orient:
That Shield which from the Indian Provinces
Was sent as tribute to abate your wrath,
And stay your army from invasion.

Empr. It Is well.

Ancet. And to his valor that shall quell the pride
Of that fierce Lion forraging these fields,
That does devour the harmless passengers,
Great Mars his Armor, and his Ebon Lance,
A hot Barbarian Steed, whose fiery pace
Darts terror through the trembling enemies,
With such majesticke footing strikes the earth,
As if he did disdain the touch of it;
This as a donative is freely given
To him whose valor shall confound that beast.

Princess. How many Knights, even in their spring of youth,
The pride and riches of this populous land,
Has his vast bowels made their Sepulcher?

Empr. Tears not avail, but gives woes balance weight,
Which of himselfe's too heavy: this last Edict
Will spur our youthful Gallants to the Chase
Of this untamed Monster: oh we want those
Gretian youths those former Ages bred;
A bold Alcides, whole unequaled strength
Tired a Step-mothers sharp invention:
Deeds, whose relation frighted other men,
Were but his pleasure and his pastime then:
What Knights this morning are prepared
To encounter the dreadful Dragon?

Ancet. The sprightly youths, Niger, Pallemon, and Antigonus;
Niger well mounted on a sable horse,
His armor of the same resemblance,
Discovered in him actions stern, and high,
Past through the City with Magesticke pace:
His outward form prefigur'd to the eye,
Future presages of bold victory.
Next Pallemon gave our eyes view
Of Knightly prowess, his armor russet,
Round beset with flames; though artificial,
Seemed to consume the youthful wearer,
True emblem of unpittied light brain pride;
A fiery Sorrel bore the noble youth,
Who chewed the ringled bit, as in disdain,
To be o're-master'd by so weak a Rain:
And as the Sun forsook his Mistress lap,
He left the City. Last of all appeared
Antigonus, in a sure armor clad;
A milk white Courser bare him through the streets:
His Plume agreed with it, and at all points
White, like the cause he went for:
When he set forth, me thought he looked like Justice
Dropped from heaven, to take revenge on wrong
And cruelty, the peoples prayers
Went with him, and their eyes
Dropped tears, o're-masterd with their ecstasies.

Empr. Oh be propitious heaven to their designs,
Give double vigor to their able nerves,
Inflame their hearts with matchless charity.
Ancetes haste you to the Temple strait,
Give order to Apollo's sacred Priests,
To make his Altars smoke with hallowed fumes,
Let neither prayers nor Sacrifice be scant,
To move the Gods to hear our just complaint,

Ancet. I shall my Lord.

Empr. Good daughter be it your charge to summon all
The Virgin Votaries of Dianaes train,
Attired in all the choice habiliments,
To gratulate these warlike youths return,
It Is our last hazard, and like Gamesters now,
We venture all at one uncertain throw:
If we prevail, immortal Verse shall crown
And memorize their happy victory;
But if they fall, their ruins shall be song
In Elegiacke strains, recorded fit
For such untimely fatal overthrowes:
How ever, honor shall adorn their Hearse,
And they still live by never dying Verse.

Exeunt. Enter Country Swains. 1 Sw. Wit must not be advanced then?

2. No, all is dust.

3. Must not the May Pole up?
What will this come to at length?

1. God Pan will never endure it.

2. He must endure it, an he were a god of Tustaffety:
I am in a fustian-fume to see it,
But all will do no good.
Well fellow well-braine, do I live to see,
The May Pole slighted, I could be drunk
By privilege in those days, and had
A stay to lean on: now it is past,
And who can help it?

3. That we shall presently know:
Here comes the Priest of Pan,
And he will dissolve us, it is all to nothing else.

Enter Priest. Priest. Lay by your idle sports and vanities,
And send up vows and sad repentant tears:
These offend, and pull down ruins on us,
To provoke the gods, ready to destroy us.

1. What news Baptisto there?

Enter Baptisto. Bap. Oh sir, I cannot speak and tell ye,
Let me weep out mine eyes first,
And then I may chance find the way to it.

Priest. Prithee whither, out with it?

Bap. Betimes this morning unfolding my sheep,
Some half a mile off the Dragons den:
For he is no night-walker, take that by the way,
And in the day time I Will keep out of's company.

2. Come forward.

Bap. Comes me a Gentleman all in black armor,
To inquire of me where was the Dragons lodging:
I told him where he kept house, but wished him,
If he would be welcome, to bring his stool with him;
For he was very churlish, and as most
Of our great men now a days, devour all his neighbors:
He smiled, and on he rode; I followed to see
What would follow, and into a tree I got me:
The trampling of his Horse awak't the Monster,
And forth comes the devil out of his den,
The Knight runs at him with his Lance,
Pierced through one of his ugly wings,
But by fatal chance his Courser stumbl'd,
And by unfortunate hap threw him between
The Monsters jaws, who in a trice
With his large devilish teeth crushed him in pieces.

All. Alas poor Gentleman!

Bap. He had not hardly breathed himself alittle,
When suddenly two gallant Knights assaild him,
Who long held combat with him, till the Lion,
His devilish dear companion, came to help him;
Who presently then sent 'em
To accompany their fellows fate.

All. Unhappy chance!

Bap. They having done their work, went to their dens,
To lick their wounds, I think for want
Of better Surgeans: I took the opportunity,
And hither stole to relate the news.

Loud Music. Priest. But soft, what Musick's this? surely there are
Some great ones abroad, and here they come:
Let Us stand aside awhile.

Flourish: Enter Emperor Ancetes, Andrew, and Anthony, his daughter, three
other Virgins, Bows, Arrows, and Quivers by their sides; attendants. Emp.
Ancetes, thou have told us deeds of wonder,
And, but our eyes convince our doubtful thoughts,
We could not give belief to it: Now their deaths,
That ran on danger for their Countries good,
Have ample recompense: what power, for none
But a Celestial one, could arm your hands,
And give your spirits vigor to overcome
So much of danger?

Anth. No other sir, but our true borne loves
To noble actions, pity of others wronged,
And fair renown, are all the spurs
Should put on noble spirits to warlike actions,
And in that to fall, or rise with glory:
Who would not venture this weak piece
Of flesh, which every Ague beats?
Nor ever held I life at such a rate,
But to get fame, I dare and will tempt Fate.

Emp. What a bold spirit he moves with!
Noble youths; we glory that our Countries earth
Now bears so much of man upon her.

Prin. Sir, by my fathers leave I do pronounce
You Are freely welcome, not to us alone, but to all,
All faithful subjects to my Father, and their loud joys
Shall speak it; one work of gratitude
We owe the gods, the other to your valors.
What remains, but that you bless our eyes
With the true figures of our dear lives preserver?
Therefore unarme your selves, your dangerous combat,
The heat and dust, and the fast closure of
Your Armours strictness may much impair your healths;
Let me prevail with you.

And. Bright Lady, where necessity implies an act of duty,
Manly virtue should clap on spurs to hasten piety:
These goodly parts, they were not made alone to serve
Our selves, but like pure fountains, freely to dispense
Our streams to others wants: and so fair Lady,
Urgent affairs call on our swords and valors,
To revenge the wrongs of some few Virgins,
That have long expected our wished for presence.

Anth. This, I hope, may plead in our excuse,
And no way render us discourteous or unworthy
For departing unarmed, or else unmanned
From this fair presence, and so we take our leaves.

Emp. Make me not so unworthy by your absence,
To my own subjects, and to foreign Nations,
Who shall read the story of your deeds,
And my requital, but they will brand me with ingratitude.
Can you maintain the good of charity
In your own actions, yet tie mine in bonds,
When she should stretch her silver wings,
And pay back thanks for so large benefits:
No, take the meed your valors have deserved,
And let us crown our hopes, in that we long
Have wished your fair aspects:
Nor shall your stay exceed our one nights welcome,
And then a fair farewell.

And. Where Majesty and beauty both command,
In vain were our resistance: Brother, your hands
And mine shall be imployd; to unbuckle yours
I Will quickly ease your shoulders of a burden.

Omn. Nay, we will be helpers all.
Vnarmes them.
Emp. You make sure work sirs,
Every light justle leaves you not defencelesse,
And I commend your care in it.

Anth. He that encounters danger, must not think
His skin of Armor proof: tho but young scholars,
We have learned that discipline.

Prin. Of goodly presence both, and far exceeds
The youths our Country breeds, in form and stature;
Speak my Carintha, what judge ye of them?

Car. Madam, so well, that had I leave to wed,
One of these Knights should bless my Marriage Bed.

Prin. Then you are indifferent, your love is equal?

Car. In troth it is.

Prin. So is not mine; but thoughts a while conceal,
What passion might unwisely now reveal.

Ance. They are both unarmed.

Emp. Now worthy Knights, mine eye is pleased
In viewing your fair presence,
I would gladly know what Country owes ye,
For the place is happy that first gave ye being.

And. Not one my Lord:
We owe our lives first light to several Nations,
An Island far removed from Grecian shores,
Whose lovely waste proud Neptune circles round,
Her craggy clifts ambitiously threat Heaven,
And strikes pale terror to the Mariner,
When unadvisedly he falls on them.
The inhabitants proportioned like our selves,
Well skilled in Science, and all humane Arts;
A government of peace and unity,
For plenty, far exceeding all the Isles
Europes vast bounds or wealthy Asia yields,
The name Britannia, which includes within it
Fair England, Wales, and Scotland;
The last of which I fetched my birth from.
Thus have you heard at full
What I can give you of relation.

Emp. It pleases us: but now sir we must crave
The like from you, and then to Court we hie
To gratulate your welcome.

Anth. Then know my Lord, Italian earth I claim,
Mother of Arts, and Nurse of noble spirits;
And in that Country, Rome, my place of birth,
Great Mistress of the world, whose large-stretcht arms
Over Land and Sea holds domination:
Renowned for government in peace or war
Even to the shore of scorching India,
Their arms strike terror through the world:
Kings were their vassals, and their awful swords
Brought the known world to their subjection.
Nor wonder not great King, that we should leave
A Court that is fraughted with such happiness,
For Christians glory and our Countries fame
We have adventured life and honor too.

Emp. And both are lost I fear, unhappy men:
Whom in my piety I should respect,
The gods in justice causes me reject.
Lay hands on 'em.

Both. On us? for what?

Empr. Perform our will, in the delay is death.

Both. Is this your welcome, love, and gratitude?

Emp. Your honor or your valor now will be of small assurance:
What ill-fated star guided your hapless feet
Into this land? these eyes that shot forth welcome,
Now must send Ambassadors of death to your cold hearts,
No acclamations now must fill your ears
With joyful conquest: Apollos Garland,
That should grace your brows,
Must deck your Coffins, the grave your chambers,
And the worms must be
The sad companions of your destiny.
Boldly then prepare,
For in your journey you have equal share.

Anton. We mist your aims in this;
It Is a strange turning from courteous welcome,
To black threats of death.

Empr. I Will ease your doubts, though not your misery;
You both are Christians?

Both. We are.

Empr. In being so, you post to your own ruin:
The holy Gods, whom piety commands us to obey,
Have from their Oracles sent this decree,
What ever Christian sets his hapless foot
On this forbidden ground unless he instantly
Recant his faith, let him be made
A bloody sacrifice to appease our wrath:
Now here lies before ye the riches
Of our kingdom, glory, and honor,
The benefits of sweet and happy life,
All the most choice delights, that with our love
May be proposed to you; even these our beauties,
Turn your amorous eyes, please your own fancies,
And enrich your selves where you best affect,
Only relinquish the religion which now you hold,
And turn unto our Gods; that done,
As we are Emperor of Trebizon,
All these shall be performed: but if through
Pride, and hated wilfulness, you shall refuse
Our proffer, a present death attends you.

Both. We are prepared.

Emp. Then in your death this favor we will show,
Because your valor has so showed you both,
To be borne High and Noble, we give this privilege,
To choose your executioners.

Andr. Thou have redeemed thy honor, and this sentence
Speaks thee a royal Tyrant: Come my friend,
We two, like Travelers that are enforced
To venture on a lodging filled with horrors in outward show,
Threatening no way but ruin, the black preparatives
Of sad decay, being Vshers to the entrance;
But once being in, then think, my constant partner,
What endless welcome follows; pleasures unspeakable,
Beyond the sublimary thoughts of our poor natures:
If but the thought of this advance the soul,
And drives our sense to admiration:
Oh then how glorious is that wished for seat,
Where all these benefits shall be complete.

Anthon. I need no armor, but my constant heart,
And thou have given new life to it
In our deaths; our innocence shall make our
After story be worth all knowing judgments:
Nor shall our bloods be shed by vulgar hands,
Since we have power in the disposing it.
Come beauteous Ladies, now express your arts,
Make your Apollo wonder at your skill,
And with more glory than he did ascend
Olimpus top, after black Pythons fall:
With more shall you salute your peoples eyes,
Rejoicing in our hapless Tragedies.

Princess. Unhappy Violeta.

Car. Lost Carintha.

Emp. Bind them fast: Now Violeta, arm thy feeble hand,
Strike sure and fearelesse, for thou sendst the gods
A pleasing Sacrifice.

Prin. O unhappy maid, lost in my best of wishes!
Was I borne to ruin virtue, and gain by it a name
Hateful to all posterity? Royal Sir,
Have you no other to employ, than her
That you gave life too? must I become an executioner?
Or do you think me Marble? oh that I were,
That I might ever weep for your injustice:
For ever may my hand forget its motion
If it give way to this: Know I dare dye,
Rather than act this mischief.

Emp. Are you of that opinion too Carintha?

Car. Sir I am, and rather will I choose a noble death,
Than live with such dishonor.

Emp. Oh my unbounded passions, give 'em vent,
The flame will else consume me:
Fall from me all respects of nature;
I will forget that I had such a thought,
As to believe thee mine: farewell the hours
I often spent in contemplation of thy beauty,
Youth, and breeding; thou and these shall be like things
Forgotten, and if thy hand refuse to act our will,
Expect the utmost of all sad afflictions
Our hate can cast upon thee.

Princess. I am prepared, and glory in my sufferings.

Emp. Bind them then, since you are so resolved,
We Will give you cause to express your fortitude:
They shall suffer first.

Anthon. Give us a hearing Sir:
We do not wish to pull on others ruins
With our own; nor would we make you guilty
Of a crime so soul, least after ages should traduce
Your name for this impiety; give us then
Your first and voluntary promise that your
Tongue alowd, and we will quit these
Ladies from the act.

Emp. We agree to it, and by our Gods I swear my promise
To perform without all doubt or fraud.

Anton. Unbind us then, and give us in our hands
Our well tried swords, and you shall see how quickly
We will charm a passage to our wished
For expirations, we will embrace in steel:
And worthy friend, do but strike home,
And thou shall soon perceive how quickly we will have
Freedom; thou shall see how I will meet thy wishes,
And woe thy backward sword to give to me
A passage to yon blessed Kingdom.

Emp. Unbind 'em strait, and arm 'em.

Princess. This is cruel; sink mine eyes into your
Hollow cavernes, do not see an act so full of horror.

Emp. Are ye prepared?

Both. Yes, for your eternal ruins.

Anthon. We are free, and like untamed Lions,
We now will forage, and bath us in your bloods.

And. So, they are all dispersed and fled; never before
Stood life on such a fickle point with us:
Lets leave this cursed Kingdom,
Mount our Steeds, which through negligence,
Our enemies have faild to sieze on;
Leave them to curse their stars;
And still be sure, in all our actions,
That heavens mighty hand,
Can men's devices easy countermand.

Exeunt. ACTUS TERTIUS.
Enter Almona and Lenon, being thrown by David. Almon. No more, no more, your
words are feathers
For the wind to play with.

Lenon. Will you not join with me to be revenged?
When was it known that Lenon and Almona
Parted with victories tryumphant, which now flies
With a disdained applause from us unto a stranger?
When did these Bulwarks which has stood till now
The shock of all the Knights our parts has seen,
Ere shrink under the sinews of an Army?

Al. Why now, just now we have;
Have we not still by daring challenges opposed our selves
The round worlds opposites? Have not our prowesses
In stately lifts tossed up the golden ball, and won it?
Is not bright honor free in Princes Courts?
We have overcome, and now we are overcome,
And shall we envy what we ever loved,
And were loved for? so thinks the Adder,
When his sting is gone, his hissing has the power to venom too.
Cast off that coat, it not becomes thee Lenon;
'Twill wear thy honor threadbare to the bones,
And make death seize on thee with infamy.

Le. Let Death come how he will,
And do you tamely suffer what you will,
This British Knight shall never boast in Wales,
That ere he triumphed Victor over me.

Al. Another charge:
A charge and a shout cry Arbasto.
What over desperate and life-weary fool
Dares meet the couched Lance of this brave Knight,
Seeing the foil we took?

Le. The cry went in our Prince Arbasto's name:
Hark another charge gives 'em a second meeting:
It Is well he kept his saddle at the first:
A charge, a cry Arbasto. Look to the Prince there some, and take him:
For fallen I Am sure he is before this time.

Al. I now admire and love this venture in him:
Well done young twig of a most Royal bough,
Thou have won our losses, which we must allow.

Le. Hark, the third charge is begun.

A charge, a cry, save the Prince. Al. I do not like that sound, what ever
accident
Betides, Arbasto has not lost but won renown:
Now, what news bringst thou?

Enter Messenger. Mes. Set open your ears to entertain sad news,
I sing the latest Requiem of our Prince, he is slain.

Al. Fallen I believe, but yet I hope not slain.

Le. This whet-stone makes revenges edge more keen:
Go forward good mischance.

Mes. Twice met this brave young Prince the British Knights,
And bore his body stiff against his shock,
Vnmov'd of either stirrup or of saddle,
Their shivered Lances quarreled as they brake,
And as they upward flew, clasht strong together,
And he unmoved, undanted twice appeared
As fair for Victor as his stout opponent,
And had he rested there, he had equal shared
The days bright honor with him.

Le. Well, the disaster.

Mes. Bowing his plumed head unto his Sire,
Who sent him smiles of joys encouragement,
Addressed him for the third, and last Careere:
The Christian Knight likewise 'gan couch his Lance,
But as he graspt it in his manly fist,
An angry fire circled about his eyes,
And from the furrows of his brows Revenge
Leapt forth, and seizes on the Prince:
They charged, he fell, and in the fall his neck
He broke; so ends my heavy Nuntius.

Both. The Prince!

Al. So Honor sprung a bud, and blasted it
Before it grew to his maturity;
Noble Prince, I pity thy misfortune, more, the Knights;
And I for this condemn nimble mischance,
But not the Knight at all.

Le. Murderous villain, if my brains can invent torture
Sufficient, sufficient; here begins thy hell,
And I thy first devil.

Al. And I will second be how to prevent ye.

Enter the King of Tartary, two Knights in armor, the body of the Prince
Arbasto in a Hearse. King. Set down the broken column of mine age,
The golden Anchor, Hope, once showed to me,
Has split and sunk the vessel held my wealth:
Oh my Arbasto.

Alm. Take comfort Royal sir,
Fame stories few are living; more the dead,
Death has but rockt him then on honors bed:
Then let him sleep.

King. He Is a good Physician that can quite kill grief,
That has but newly made his patient of me:
Tear^s must give vent first to the oppressed heart,
And Time lay drawing plasters to the sore,
Before he can find ease, but yet I thank ye.

Le. Most Noble Sir,
Tears shows effeminate in noble spirits,
Those aged sluices want that Rain that falls,
Bewail him not with tears, but with revenge;
If drops must needs be spilt, let 'em be blood.
His blood that wilfully sheds blood,
The Law of Nations wisely did allow
All Iusts and Tournaments in Princes Courts,
For honors cause to break a friendly staff,
But not to make a butchery or shambles in Court lists:
Therefore if I might of his jury be,
My Verdict should be given up, he must dye.

Alm. Lord Lenon, it is most certain he must dye:
I love my Sovereign well, I loved his son,
But dare not say that he deserves to dye:
This stranger here, came here in honors cause,
Stak't honor down, and bravely bore it hence:
Your self, silence but envies tongue, can witness with me,
I have spoke but truth: where lives the Nobleness
But in the mind? wild beasts have strength, irrational
And rude, but want the sense of reasons government:
Let rage hot raines bite upon temperance:
The Iron handed Fates wars hard at game,
And threw a cast at brave Arbastoes life;
But let your sentence pass my Lord, have done,

Len. Spoke like no lover of his Sovereigns son

Alm. Replied not like a lover unto either:
Your valours's horse-like, and it must be tamed,

Len. Twill break the Riders neck dares but to back him*

King. Forbear I say, on your allegiance:
Had my Arbasto dyed in our defense,
Against the pride of the hot Persian Host,
That seeks to pale his Temple with our wreath,
And name Tartary new Persia,
Our cares had been but slight, but in a friendly
Breathing exercise, when honor goes a feasting but for show,
A jesting practice in the School of Arms,
There for to lose him.

Len. An ill intent armed Executions hand.

King. I know not that; why should he ruin him,
Showing more kind innated friendship to him,
Than brother shows to brother.

Len. Remus and Romulus, my Lord, one sucked more
Harder on the Wolf than the other,
Think what a game Hope lost.

Alm. Upon my soul, my Lord, the Knight is clear
Of any foul intent against your son.

Len. Why Almaine, Almaine, dare you stand to this?

Alm. Lenon I dare, and in thy venom blood write
He Is not guilty.

King. No more I say, upon your lives no more:
Too hard it is for me to give a true descidence to the cause,
The Knight was ever courteous, fair, and free,
And against the Persian in my just defense,
Ransomed my son from multitudes of loss,
And brought home conquest to our very gate,
I cannot then in honor take his life,
Our neighbor Kings would say, I dealt not fair,
And quite disclaim in us all brotherhood:
To banish him, were but the more to enlarge his fame;
All kingdoms are but Knight errands native home.

Len. In private be it spoke my Liege, I like not
Almonas love to this same Knight:
It little shows love to the deceased Prince:
What was he but a young strait tender plant;
The sturdy Oak might well have spared him then:
His toward hopes were ruined and cut down:
Had he done this in any other Court, to any Prince
So toward as your Son, he had ere this been attomes:
Your son has suffered, let him suffer too,
Who ever wilfully committed murder,
And was without excuse? but can that save?
No more should this my Liege, I have but said.

King. And wisely Lenon, go bring forth the Knight;
We are determined that he shall not live;
Exit for him. Nor shall he suffer here within our Courts,
We Will kill him in a nobler gentile way:
O here he comes.

Enter Knight bound. Alm. You Are gone; false Lenon has betrayed ye to your
death.

David. Welcome my Fate.

King. Sir Knight, you have not fairly dealt with us;
Though against my foes you brought me honor home,
My dear sons life you have took for your reward;
But you shall find it is treasure stole, not bounty given,
And for that theft your life must satisfy.

David. King of Tartary, hear sad David speak.

Len. Now the excuse my Lord.

David. Those honors I have brought you home,
It seems this accident has canceled,
And stifles all my merits in your love:
Yet let 'em hang like pendants on my hearse,
That I did love the unfortunate deceased,
These drops of tears, true sorrows, testify;
And what has happend to that life's dear loss,
Was not by will, but fatal accident:
I hold my hand up at the hand of heaven, not guilty:
King, think not I speak to have thee spare my life,
For half my life lies dead there with thy Son,
And here the other half is ready too, to testify,
How well I loved the Prince, though now I dye.

Lenon. A Heads man and an Axe there.

King. For him that calls him.

Alm. I that was well said King; Spannell no more.

King. Thy hand once more brave English Knight,
We are at peace, and will not what we may:
But let me now one thing enjoyne you to,
Not as a penance for my dear sons loss,
But as a further safety of my Kingdom,
And larger interest of your love to me.

David. Give me the danger, I can meet but death.

King. My hopes are better of thee, noble Knight;
Hear then thy task, thou shall then hence
In Knightly order ride, against him, not only
Aided Persia against our power, but shakes our
Kingdom with the power of hell, blake Ormandine,
The enchanted Garden-keeper; if that thou dare
Attempt, and bring his head, I will not only
Quittance this mischance, which makes me wretched,
But half my part of this large Crown
Is thine, and when I dye,
David of Wales reigns King of Tartary;
Speak comfortable words of the attempt.

David. It is the oath of Knighthood I have taken, and here
Again before you I will take, from hence being
parted, never to make stay more than a nights
Repose till I am there, and being there,
By all the honors of a Knight I vow
Black Ormandines head, and lay it at your feet:
This, by the honor of a Knight, I Will do, or dye in the attempt.

King. It Is enough; rise noble David,
So, n^w shall I be revenged for my sons life,
Without the clamor of the world for it:
Thou bring his head, poor Knight, thou may as well
Rob love of lightning, or claspe a hand Garnado,
Being fired: to morrow morning you shall forward set;
On with the Hearse till you return
We sorrows path shall tread,
And bury grief when thou bringst Ar^ands head.

A dead March within. Exeunt. Chorus.
Our Britain Knight we leave in his hard journey
But more hard attempt, yet all the other have not idle been,
For since their parting at the brazen Pillar,
Each has shared strange and perilous adventures,
Which here in several acts to personate, would in the
Meanest fill a larger Scene than on this Stage
An Action would contain;
But to the shortness of the time we will sort,
Each Champion in it shall bear a little part
Of their more larger History:
Then let your fancies deem upon a stage,
One man a thousand, and one hour an age.
And now with patience bear your kind attents to the
Red Cross bearer, English George, your high renowned
Knight, who since the hand of Christendom parted her
Seven fair Knights, the dangers he has seen and past,
Would make the brightest day look pale and tremble,
Nay death himself, that ends mortality,
To think of death, and that himself must dye.
After renowned George from the fell Dragons jaws,
Redeemed Sabrina, P^mils only heir, with slaughter
Of the Hell-produced fiend; his wife he won,
Had Pomil promise kept; but in a large requital
Of her life, incensed by the Moroco King, our Champions rival,
Cast George in prison, in a hateful Dungeon;
He that deserved his Crown, and daughters bed,
He ingratefully with branne and water fed 7 years together,
Which time expired, the miserable Knight found once
That opportunity showed him a little favor,
For by the breaking of the Laylers neck,
He gaind the keys which gave him liberty:
When being freed, and out of dangers port,
You his kind Countrymen shall see
For Englands honor, Georges Chivaldry.
Enter Clown like a poor shepherd. Clow. Oh most astonishable hunger! thou
that do pinch worse than any Fairies, or the gummes of old women: thou that
do freeze the mortal gouts of a man more than the R^zom'd stick of a Base
Violl, what shall be said? what shall be done to thee? Oh my glorious Mother,
what a time of eating had I in thy days, nay, my magnanimous Master, whom I
lost in the devils arse of Peake: what a plentiful progress had I with thee,
when we did nothing but kill Giants and wild beasts, then the golden gobbets of
Beef and Bacon, whose shining fat would cry clash in spite of my teeth, now I
may compare with Ploydens law, the case is al^^r'd; A shepherd, a sheep-biter;
nay, I were happy then, I would wish no better bitings than Mutton; the Cobs of
Herring, and parings of Cheese is now a Sundays diet, and yet they cry out of
my abominable feeding, my unsatisfied gut, with a Wolf at the end on it: I
have eat up my Tarrebox for hunger already, what will be next troe? Soft, who
comes here, my fellow Swain withsome pitiful provant for my dinner?


Enter Shepherd. Shep. Suckabus, where art thou?


Clow. Here, where the bare bones of him will be very shortly: what have thou
brought me there?


Shep. A feast, a feast; here is princely cheer for thee: here is two Carrots
and a Turnip, and a little morsel of Beanebread, that I stole to hearten thee
up withal.


Clow. Sweet fellow Coridon, give me't, I shall grow a Phiosopher shortly if I
fare of this fashion: O the very steame of the three fat Oxen that my Master
found boiling for the Giants dinner, which we killed, would have filled both
our bellies for a Fortnight.


Shep. Ha, three Oxen for one Giants dinner?
Thou art mistaken sure; thou art not old enough to see a Giant,
And could thy Master and thee kill him?

Clow. Why there is the wit of a Bell-weather; one? we killed a hundred: but
talk I to thee, that were never no Traveller since thou will not believe a
truth, I Will hold my tongue, and fall to my teeth.


Shep. Nay good fellow Suckabus be not angry,
I do believe: What are those Giants? Prithee tell me?

Clow. No Iackalents, no Pigmies, no Dwarfes.

Shep. Nay, I do believe they are lusty fellows,
And men of tall stomachs, they could never eat so much else,
Three Oxen at one meal.

Clow. Tush, a Fasting-dayes Medicum; but when he makes a Feast to stuff his
abominable gut, three hundred Acres of Oats will scarce make Oate-meale to
thicken his porridge-pot.


Shep. Now the Devil choke him,
For he is fitter farrefor hell, than to live here.

Clow. Hell? what should he do there? he would piss out their fire, and drown
all the devils in his urine.


Shep. O monstrous! marry bless me from him, I had thought
They had not been much taller than some of our Guard.

Clow. The Guard? Hum, still like a Bell-weather? why he will chop up two yeomen
of the Guard like pocht eggs at a spoonefull: there is not a meal that he
makes, but he will load ye two Dung-carts with the picking of his teeth.


Shep. Bless us!

Clow. Bless thee? why do thou know what thou speak?

Shep. No hurt I hope good fellow Suckabus:
But how could you two kill this monstrous man?

Clow. Why as we killd a great many more of 'em; we rid a Horseback into their
bellies, made a Quintin of their hearts, and rod out at the But-hole end.


Shep. That may be done indeed, this carries some show of truth.

Clow. Why, did thou think the rest were lies?

Shep. No, no; Lord, what indiscretion people learn by Travail! I have heard
my Master say, he was Page to a Knight erant they called old Dick, who has
bin six days together in the bottom of the Sea, and took Tobacko amongst
the sharkes and such adventures, but none like this you speak of: Traveled
you e're with him?


Clow. I had more wit in faith; I deal in no water-workes.


Shep. But pray tell me now, what stature might this man be you killed?


Clow. His stature? Let me not lie, he was not the biggest that e're we killed,
let me tell ye that, he was just about that stature that Tuttle-field would
fitly make a Grave for: I have told ye of a place before; it is near London in
England, where men go a Trayning to get 'em good stomachs.


Shep. That Is more than e're I heard of in faith, that soldiers want stomachs:
what enemies do they meet with there?


Clow. Why Barrels of Beer, bottles of Sack, Costerdmongers, Cakes, and
Cream, and their wives that bring 'em their dinner.


Shep. I marry sir, I would willingly be put into such service; sure, their
Commanders are brave fellows.


Clow. The bravest can be picked out in each parish, and the ablest too, yet I
heard one man in the shape of a Monster, put a Captain and his Company to
slight.


Shep. O monstrous!


Clow. Come, no more of that; let me entreat thy absence till I have eat my
vittails, and I will tell thee more.


Shep. Good Suckabus do, and I Will see if I can tell thee of a Dwarf shall be
all as little.


Exit. Clow. Well, say and hold; come master Carret and mistress Turnup, I want
but Beef and Porke for sauce to ye, but ^unger bids me fall to merrily, and I
shall not want for ^awe.


Eats. Enter George in poor habit. Geo. Thanks to my great preserver, by
whose sacred power
Poor George of England is set free agen^
From death, danger, and imprisonment;
I bow with duty to thy Deity; seven years
Has Famine under bolts and bars dungeon'd me up,
Accompanied with my tears in the dark bowels
Of a loathsome Den, a place so far remote from comfort,
That not the smallest chinke or crany
Could let the Sunbeams in to point on me;
Yet thou, in whose foundation stands my building,
Have given me freedom and my hope again,
Those sweet companions that despair shut out.
Now George again may wear a plumed crest,
And wave the Standard of great Christendom
In the defiance of her opposites: I Am poor in show,
Yet since my freedom has thus long lain rusty,
And unoyl'd loins unarmed, are grown a strength immutable
And from the pinching pangs of famines jaws
A second time ransomed my pining life;
But since I have left those desert woods behind,
Let me behold this goodly prospective.

Clow. So my panniar's pretty well sussifi'de, and the whelps in my belly
muzzeld from barking any more this two hours: How now what proper stripling's
this stands gaping about him? let me survey him.


Geo. A goodly place, pleasant, and full of air.


Clow. I cannot for my guts call to mind where I have seen this fellow.


Geo. Inricht with plenties hand.


Clow. But that he had a horse and Armor, he does resemble my long lost
Master George of England.


Geo. Ha? what Eccho's that gives me my name,
Without a summons which it answers to?
What fellow's this that walks and stares about me?
I am no wonder that I know of;
And but that time makes me to doubt, I should suppose
Him for to be my servant Suckabus I lost.

Clow. The same, the same; I am your servant, and fellow Suckabus: Oh my sweet
Master * have we found one another? I could e'ne kiss thee round about for joy.


Geo. IN me glad to see thee;
It seems you have alterd fortune with your Master:
Where have thou lived and wandered since I lost thee?

Clow. Oh sir, I have had such a company of Masters in law since I left you:
First sir, I served a Lord till he entertained a Cook, and then I must stay no
longer: Then I was Gentleman Usher to a young Lady, but she hating new
fashions, I hated her service. Then sir, I served a young Heir newly come to
his Living, and because he opened his gates, and let Hospitality enter, I bid
^lanlet to him: then I served a Usurer, and because he would often be drunk,
and let his Angels fly gratis, I gave him the bag too: Then I dwelt with a
Procter, and he every day would bid conscience to dinner, so there was no
staying with him: Then I served a Scrivener, but he was so taken up with his
Orator the Pillary, that I was feign to leave him too; and then I came here a
sheep-biting, as you see sir.


Geo. It Is very well sir; but will you leave your sheep and your sheepe-hooke,
and follow me without leesing?


Clow. Follow thee? that I will, till I find no land to tread on, nor water to
swim on: Shepherd farewell, Fox, look to the Lambs, Wolf, keep the sheep
safe: now shall we kill Giants, and eat meat again.


Geo. Be true to me, once more you are entertained,
'T shall not be long before thou see
This low dejected state shining in complete steel:
He that in pursuit of adventures goes,
Must not shun danger, though he meet with blows:
Come Suckabus.

Exeunt. Loud Music: Enter the Inchanter Ormandine with some selected friends
that live with him in his Magic Arts, with his spirits Canopy borne over his
head. Orm. This is the state of Princely Ormandine;
Tho once dejected, and low trodden down
Under the feet of Fortunes petty Kings,
Above her envy re-advanc'd again; and you my friends
And partners in her frowns, shall now deride her petty Deity,
Laugh at those Kings, which like to gilded moats!
Dance in the Sun-beame of her various smile:
And when we have laughed our fills, my fury then
Shall rise, and like a Torrent in the Ocean raised
By swelling spring-tides driven from their bounds,
So shall the rage of Oxmandines swift vengeance
At once overflow the cruel Tartar and Arabian Kings.

Lord. Great Ormandine has given us satisfaction;
We were your subjects first, so are we now,
Yet never lived in that tranquillity,
When we did bow under your Scepter as now we do:
Then cares of Countries safety, and your person,
Care of our wives, our substance, and our selves, expelled
Our stomachs, took our sleeps away, and made our eyes
Fears watchmen; here art thou crowned with Arts
Rich, potent, and commanding power;
There sat a golden hoope tempered with fear,
That tatt or 'd on thy head, here with a wand thou call'st,
And art obeyed; there by the Tartars cruelty dismayed,
Thy pleasures mixed with store of misery,
Vndor the pride of Tartars tyranny.
Then let me speak, but far from contradiction,
Your hand has laid her actions wait on well.

Orm. Rest you contended with content, our will admits
No counsel but our own; here lives no pity of our Enemy*
We have bought vengeance at a mightier rate,
Than you, or can, or must be privy to.
Learning by time and industry are bought,
But he that barters for revengefull Arts,
Must with his best pri'zd jewel from depart:
I have yet showed tricks to make 'em laugh,
But long it shall not be ere I smite home
To make us pastimes by their general ruins:
And now my friends and subjects shall behold
The indented time and riddle of our safety: Ho Tarpax,
The chiefest which attends upon our acts.

Tar. What would my Master? Tarpax must obey.

Orm. Set forth my brazen pillar.

Tar. It Is done.

Orm. Now wonder at the Tablet I shall read,
Which while it comes to pass, live in more pleasures
And voluptuous state, than does the Roman Potentates.
He Reads. ORmand be bold, seeare, and free,
Revell thou in Arts potency,
Till from the cold and Northern Clime,
A Knight post on the wings of time,
Being lighted on Tartaries ground,
Of Fame spoke loud by honor crowned:
From Brute descended, and his breast
Is with a sanguine Cross be blessed:
Then shall this Sword, thy Art here closed,
By him be drawn, thy Art opposed;
Thy life, thy Arts, thy potent power
Expire, dissolve that instant hour.

Orm. This bug-beare frights us not, and yet my fall must come
From Brute descended, and on his breast
The Emblem of our hate, a sanguine Cross:
Must Ormandines great power be shaken down
By a chill Northern Ague-shaken Knight,
A lump of snow, a frosty I sickle? this saying damps me,
And the thin pure blood, which but even now
Flowed through the azure branches of my veins,
Is run to cherish my feare-trembling heart,
Who, there affrighted at its horrid ruin,
Mixed with cold comfort, is congealed to clods,
And I a blood less substance do remain.

Lord. Why is our King and governor dismayed?

Orm. Walk in I pray, I Am very much disturbed:
Exeunt Lords. Aswarthy passion harrows up my sense: Ho Tarpax.

Tar. Your call must be obeyed: I Am here.

Orm. Fetch me my Characters, my calculation, and my glass.

Tar. They are here.

Orm. My ever-ready servant, fly to the first Aeriall degree,
Snatch thee a cloud, and wrap thy self intoo't;
Fly to Tartaria, look within his Court, confines, and Country,
If any Christian Knight there be arrived,
I fear me Tarpax; bring me answer swift,
Whilst I survy my Book and magic glass.

Tar. I Am gone; ten minutes hence expect me back.

Orm. Ha? what is here?
The Tartars son slain by a British Knight,
Who, as a penance for this heinous fact,
Sent here to fetch my head, by Oath enjoined to it:
A British Knight, the same my Tablet speaks of:
Now Ormandine must fall. Ho Tarpax!
What sees my Tarpax?

Enter Tarpax. Tar. Great Ormand, haste unto thy powerful charms,
We will assist thee in what Hell can do,
With strength, with horror, and detested shapes,
To daunt the courage of this Northern Knight,
That comes to fetch the head of Ormandine.

Orm. I read the same here too; be swift my Tarpax,
Summon up Hells host to be my Guardians
Against this Northern Knight: put out the golden Candle
Of the day with horrid darkness from the night below:
Vnchain the winds, send out our fiery raines,
Break Atlas back with Thunder through the clouds,
And dart your quick-past lightning at his face:
Raise Earthquakes shaking round about his steps,
To bandy him from one place to another;
Let horror empty all her storehouse:
If Ormandine can vanquish but this Knight,
Secure and firm still stand our power and might.

Exit* Enter David armed Cap-a-pe. Dav. How shall I style this Tartar?
I cannot say he is noble, nor yet base: h'as given me life,
But with that strange adventure,
That he himself is confident I perish:
My Knighly Oath assures him I will on, and setting on,
Am sure enough to fall: unhappy David in that Princes death,
Whom Fates, no will of mine, gave so unkind a meeting;
For which the sable plume and Corslet I do wear,
As a true Emblem of my inward sorrow:
Rest Princely ashes in a golden Vrne,
Whilst wretched David in a work is sent,
To his own sad Requiems bitterment,
And be mine own destroyer: take courage yet,
Let not base fear steal from thy heart the name of man away,
Death cannot dress himself in such a shape,
But I dare meet him; on then in pursuit of a Knightly vow,
If 't chance Dice run so, that we must fall,
Fame shall wear black at David's Funeral.

Enter above Ormandine, his friends, Tarpax, and spirits. Orm. He Is now within
a Mile and less of us;
Spirits away, each fall unto his task,
Enter David. Whilst I raise storms which may dismay the Knight.

Dav. Yonder Is the place, mine eye has reached it:
Now Ormandine, our bloody game begins,
Heads are our stakes, and there is but one can win.
Protect me Heaven, what sudden strange Eclipse do I behold
Thunder and lightning The golden Sun that now smiled in my face,
Draws in his beams, and robes himself in black:
In what a dark veil is the clear azur'd sky!
You do begin to entertain me Ormandy,
But we will have better welcome e're we part:
I, let your thunder come, we dread it not;
What send ye Fire-drakes too to meet with us?
Your worst of horror is best welcome to me:
Your ministers rather invite me on, than like to bug-beares
Fright me back again: more visitants of hell-bred sorcery?
I must needs through, or sink.

Tar. There Is nothing we can do,
Can quell the valor of this Christian Knight.

Orm. My fears devine this is the man,
By whom great Ormand falls: he is come unto the gates,
And now stick fast my sword, and we are yet secure:
So, in spite of all the tampring of your Arts
We are got something near you now.
This is the gate; what have we here? a Brazen Pillar,
In it a golden sword, immured and rivited;
A golden Tablet with inscriptions on it,
Let me discourse with you a little first.
Ormand be bold, secure, and free,
Revell in arts strong potency,
Till from the cold and Northern Clime,
A Knight poast on the wings of time.
Ha, what is here? Till from the Northern Clime,
A Knight poast on the wings of time.
A Northern Knight! why that is my self:
Let Us see a little farther.
Being lighted on Tarta y's ground,
Of fame bel^v'd by honor crowned.
I am arrived here in Tartary, a Northern Knight,
And for my same and deeds of Chivaldry, with honor
Has been crowned in Princes Courts: a little farther yet.
From Brute descended, and his breast
Is with a sanguine Cross be blessed.
I have enough; David of Wales from Brute descended is,
A Christian Knight, that we res the sanguine Cross,
That must dissolve this black Enchantment here:
Come let me clutch thy temper in my hand,
Thus draw thee forth, and thus: will you not come?

Orm. O you are not the man, ha, ha,
Fear Vanish once again; go Spirits, sieze that Knight,
And bring him straight.
Ormand and all laugh: Spirits with fiery Clubs, they fight.

Enter Ormandine. Orm. Knight, Knight forbear,
In vain thy strokes are dealt against our power:
Thou may as well number those briny drops,
As cope with these, or escape with life, did not we pity thee;
Spirits away.

Dav. Art not thou Ormandine?

Orm. The same; thy friend and Ormandine.

Dav. That head I come for, and must have it.
Runs at him with his sword, he puts it by with his wand.

Orm. The body will not yet so part with it;
This is the Tartars cruelty not thine;
I know thy oath stands gagged to bring this head,
Or not return; thus shall thou save thy oath,
Here shall thou live, with Ormandine thy friend,
Here spend thy days, crowned with delight and mirth,
Pleasure shall be thy vassell to command,
With new inventions, fresh varieties,
And when thy dalliance would consort with love,
Queens shall infold thee in their Ivory arms,
Which to affirm, and give thee love and liking,
This waving of my wand above thy head,
Dissolves this horror, and does give thee cause
To change thy mind.

The day cleares, enchantments cease: Sweet Music. Dav. What alteration's
here! your pardon mighty Sir;
Oh let me never, never part from hence.

Orm. Be Master of your wish: come sit here by me,
I Will rape your care, and captivate your eye.

soft Music. Enter free Excess, immodest Mirth, Delight, Desire, Lust
satied, and sickness, they dance; after the dance Excess, Delight, and Desire
embrace him to a lazy tune, they touch him, he falls into their arms, so carry
him away. Orm. How happy now is Ormandine in this; I will no more
Credit the Tablet I shall for ever rain, as now I do:
Eternity shall seal my habitation here,
The Britain Knight is now within my power,
Charm hangs a drousie rest upon his eyes,
And he shall sleep his youth to a full age.
As for the Arabian bird, and the proud Tartar,
Revenge armed with destruction to them slies;
Who seeks my life, without my pity dies.

Exeunt. Enter George armed, and Clown with him. Geo. Come on sir Suckabus,
how do you like this alteration?

Clow. Nay, we are come to wear good cloth again, and we fill our bellies at
other folks cost: marry we part with cracked Crowns for our Ordinaries. They
that in the low Countrey-garrisons kill men for three shillings a week, are
punies to us; by that time I have served but half my time, I shall be able to
play with all the Fencers in Christendom.

Geo. Leave your folly sir.

Clow. Leave your prating sir, and then we will leave our livings both together.

Geo. Villain no more;
How pleasant is this place, how fresh and clear,
As when the last of April offers to sweet May
The pride and glory of the youthful Spring,
The lovers coupling time! the farther that I go,
The more Elysium like it does appear.

Clow. Good Master let us go back again: I do not like this talking of Elysium;
it is a place where good and honest men come in, and for mine own part, I am
in the mind never to trouble it.

Geo. I think so too:
What Is here the platform of a Garden?
If that the Sun robbed in his brightest glory,
Dazell not mine eyes, it is the richest that I ever saw,
The Paradise of some Deity: -- Music too.

Clow. Ey, two Taylers are a dancing for a buttered bunne.

Geo. List Suckabus, hear'st thou no Music?

Clow. I think I hear the Horse-head and the Tongs.

Geo. Most heavenly Music, follow me close,
We Will see the guider of this heavenly sphere,
For sure no mortal ownes it.

Clown. Pray Sir lets back again, I have no mind to 't,
the Sun shines so hot, I fear we shall have some rain.

Geor. What Is here, a wonder past the other beauties far?
A Brazen Pillar, through whose impregnable body
Sticks a Sword, a Tablet, and Inscriptions
Writ upon it, wonder falls on me!
Be thou enchantment, thou art the loveliest shape
That ever hels Art strove to tempt withal:
By your leave a little, it seems these are no secrets,
You Are open breasted, I must know your mind:
We will not stand on doubts.

He reads, pulls out the sword: Thunder and Lightning: a great cry within. I am
the man, for England, oh you are welcome Sir.
Clown. Did not I tell ye? now shall I be roasted for Devils, and my bones
scorcht into small-coales: Where Is the goodly weather that we had even now?
where is the tongs and the Tailers a dancing.

Georg. Follow me slave, we will in, and with this Immured blade, that I set
free, cut out my passage through the Gates of horror: the inchantment's done,
and Georges happy fate Some Christians may redeem from Tyrants hate.

Exit George. Clown. Well, I were best run away, while I have legs to carry
me: he is a good loving Master, this same honest George, but he does lead me
into more quarrels and dangers than all the roaring David's in the world; but
they are cowardly rascals, and I will stay no longer, my accounts are made even,
and I will back again; hay day, they are at it.

Thunder and Lightning, Devils run laughing over the stage: Tarpax with 'em.
Tar. Come, we are freed, lets now prepare his death, That being done, give
welcome to him in confusion.

Clown. O brave, that by his likeness and voice should be my Sire Suckabus,
it is he; I Will take acquaintance of him.

Tar. Who Is that, the issue of my Calib?
Begone before I Will follow.

Exeunt spirits. Clow. He sees me, and stays a purpose to talk with me: I
will put on my mothers good face, and salute him: pray sir, hoping that the
like is the same, Father give me your blessing.

Tar. What Suekabus? O let me kiss my boy:
A blessing on my Princely son and heir.

Clow. Thank you Father, I have not known my self a long time: but now your
blood royal begins to plumpe up my veins. Have you brought me never a Letter
from my Mother Queen?

Tar. None my sweet son.

Clow. Why that shows now, she is in her Pontificalities, in my kingdom after
your decease, she never minds the sweet heir of her body, she casts me
backward, as if I were unworthy to be Prince of her joys: but I shall think
on it.

Tar. Be patient son.

Clow. You talk you know not what; have you no Carriers in your kingdom?

Tar. Yes, diverse.

Clow. Is Hobson there, or Dawson, or Tom Long?

Tar. I know not till I make inquiry.

Clow. Well, do so Father;
And if you find 'em, send to me by 'em; they are honest men. Not a Letter? Can
Limbonias Queen, and Duchess of Witchfordia so much forget her self, and
that royal blood of hers, as not to send a Letter to me?

Tar. List to me my son, and I Will show thee the cause,
Why so thy mother and our royal self sent not unto thee:
For had thou but obeyed the charge I left,
Just at the parting of thy mother from thee,
Thou had e're this been with us gentle boy,
Enthroned and honored as thy Mother is:
Welcomed with tryumphs, shows, and fire-workes:
Of what we want, we shall be furnished shortly.

Clow. I would you had 'em, they would give much content; Oh I do love those
things a life in faith. Have you any squibs in your Country? any Green-men in
your shows, and Whizers upon lines, Jack Pudding upon Rope, or Sis in
fire-workes? But pray father let me know why you did not send.


Tar. Then thus: I did not bid thee unsolace thy mind
Like a dejected low-begotten slave,
But revell, drink, laugh, and carowse, quarrel, and stab,
Game, wench, swear and curse, and if thy master offend thee,
Watch him asleep, and kindly cut his throat;
So doing, had thou long e're this come to us.

Clow. Forgive me this, and if the obeying of your will, will bring me to you,
let me alone; I Will not be long from home: But Father, what, no trick, no
invention to make me famous e're I come to you? why, my Mother could juggle as
well as any Hocus Pocus i'th'world, and shall I do nothing?


Tar. Here, take this paper, learn these nino words in it;
At reading the first three, I will appear to thee,
To satisfy what ever thou demand'st.
The virtue of the other three is this:
Look, in what place soever thou wish thy self,
Or company should meet thee to thy mind,
Speak but the middle three, it is done:
The best and last three words carry this property;
Which once rehearst by thee,
Whom thou shall please, shall straightwaies dote on thee,
Love thee entirely, nay, would dye for thee,
If that in pity thou not comfortst them:
There Is a jewel for my princely boy.

Clow. Oh sweet father, now thou love thy boy: but you know father, I never
was so well learned, as to say God by my speed.


Tar. The better, I would not have thee boy:
I will infuse that learning in thy brain,
That thou shall read that whensoere thou please.

Clow. Pray read em over to me father.

Tar. Observe the first three words: Hulcha, pulch, palcha;
These three being spok, I straight appear.
The next is Runi^, rant, runto; then art thou
Where thou please, and in what company,
The last and best Plagmanitis, squirtis, pampistis,
Thy love lies in thine arms.

Clown. What a gift is here! I will Cuckold the great Turk, love all his
Concubines, and lie with all over and over: I will beget a thousand of Giants,
fill the world full of Basterds, march with an Army Royal of 'em into my
Kingdom, depose my Father, and live like a Monarch.


Tarp. Come bring me a little on my way my son,
I Will tell thee braver things than these that thou shall do.

Clown. Oh my sweet father, what a man art thou!

Enter George, bringing out Ormand and his friends. Geor. What is the cause,
you ten times worse than devils,
That thus, like Traitors, you deface and spoil
So fair a stamp as your great Makers is?
Why have you sold your endless bliss for bane?
Had they the hopes man has shining on them,
Worlds would not gain a life of thousand years,
And in those lives reign Kings and Emperors,
Change those Celestial joys you might have had:
Ever lost wretches, where is your power now?

Orm. Vanquished by thee: that sanguine Cross my Tablet foretold,
Blood-sheds mine eyes for to behold it worn
And thou that Christian Knight confounds my state:
Yet as thou honourst what I fear to see,
As thou art hopeful of what is past in me,
And as thou art a Knight sworn to honor,
Grant me one small request.

Geor. If thy request in honors grant stands fair,
Give us the knowledge, we will see it performed,

Orm. Then spare the lives of these two harmless men.
Which I secured by safety of my charms.

Geor. Are they not practiced in thy horrid Art?

Orm. Christian no.

Geo. The happier men: rise, we have no hate against ye.

Both. Live still in honor, courteous Christian Knight.

Geor. Now Ormandine quit this my grant*
With one request from me.

Orm. it is yours; say on.

Georg. I crave the knowledge of your former being,
Before you found the path of your destruction.

Orm. Know then* that Island seated in the Maine,
Whose crosticke sides points to Barbaries kingdom,
Was I once Duke of, the nearest parts to it is this
Of Tartary, the other is Arabia, whose Kings disturbed
My peace and government: Briefly, by flight we saved our
Lives; and to revenge those wrongs I practiced on this Art,
And since have lived scourges to both those Kings:
My Tablet and Pillar then erected, through whose hardness
Stuck that tempered blade; the riddles date on it did so strange appear,
That I thought ever, ever to live here.
And now you shall behold another Christian Knight,
Sent from the Tartar King, by oath enjoynd to fetch my
Head, this did I deem the man, has brought what you have,
My confusion, but missing of my fears, I entertaind him fair,
Yet dreading still least he might prove the man,
My Art hung on his eyes these charms of sleep,
Which till I expiate, can never wake:
His name is David, and a Britain Knight.

Geo. Ha, my brother! Prepare thee Ormand, this shall wake him.

Orm. Hold, do not with crimson purple your white blade
With such a hancell: give me but leave to mount
Yon storied steps, and you shall see brave Archers hit me sure:
Think not that I must live, would you life give,
Be good unto my friends: I fallen, take up your friend and hence.

Geor. Well to your Fate: farewell.

Thunder. Orm. Oh are you aiming, it was time I came, you had
Fetched me else: so, so, we are met.
Thunder strikes him. He that sels bliss, and would in this Art shine,
At last shall pay for it, as did Ormandine.

Geor. So, farewell Ormandine; wake David, wake.

Dav. Is the Enchantment past? where is this fiend, this devil?
Ormandine, your charms no longer shall prevail on me.

Geor. No more, they shall not noble Britain Knight,
See who with joy embrace thee in his arms.

Dav. Brother of England, farre-renowned George,
Am I a second time enlarged by thee?
I shall pay Time a death indebted to thy valor.

Geo. Do not engage so far,
Who knows what haps attend our next adventure?

Dav. Brother, where is Ormand?

Geo. Dead!

Dav. Oh I am lost, for ever lost and gone,
For ever bearing Knightly Arms again: oh, oh --

Geo. Brave Britain Knight with patience hear,
I Will tell over your own Story.

Dav. Say on my Oracle, I will attend.

Geo. This Sword you see is mine, enchantments done,
You wakened from deaths sleep, think it not strange,
Ormand did declare before his death,
Your Oaths adventure for to fetch his head:
By the Tartarian King, your Oath shall be performed,
We Will take it off; these harmless men
That hither fled, only to save their lives,
Shall you get favored of their King again;
I Will bear you company unto the King,
Where we again must part: you shall be further satisfied
In all what appears dark, I Will open as we ride.
Come brother David, we the world that range,
Must not admire at accidents or change.

Exeunt. ACTUS QUARTUS.
Enter Argalio, Leonides, and spirits. Arg. Come dear Leonides, My loves sole
minion,
That like the powerful ruler of the Fates,
Turns my restless Negr^mantick charms
Into what form best fitts thy apperite:
Speak my Leonides, prithee smile, and speak it,
Could Earth or Hell invent a guard
To shield black crimes from direful punishment?
Walls are by Wars strong Engines razed and torn,
And Center-reaching cavernes of the earth,
Have often bin made the inhabitants sad graves:
But to build thee a stronger Barracado,
I have fetched force from underneath the Poles,
The slimy mists of dark Avernus Lake,
Cocitus pitchy steems are mixed with that,
And black compounded smoke the Cyclops send
From the foul sulpher of hot Aetna's Forge,
All which I have compounded in a lump,
To make this Isle obscure and tenebrous.
I Will tell thee friend, those furious Giants that did war with heaven,
Had they effected their great enterprise,
Could not more glory in their usurpation,
Than I do in this Masterpiece of Art.

Leon. True great Argalio,
Yet here I live as a reprieved prisoner,
In hope of life, sure of imprisonment,
Losing the benefit of life's repast.

Arg. In what?

Leon. In the grand loss of the all-pleasing light,
Without the which life is a misery too hard to be inflicted.

Arg. Wrong not thy judgment with that fond opinion,
Night, why it is the proper sphere, the Orb of pleasure;
When do those heirs of pleasure, Cupids Lords,
The active Courtiers and attractive Dames,
Choose to express their quintessence of mirth
In sports and revells, is it not in the Night?
Night and the pleasures that she brings with her,
Shall make thee scorn day, as unnecessary:
My several spirits in an active dance
Shall now present themselves.

Enter spirits, and dance; thunder and lightning. Leon. Why are these terrors
mixed with our delights?

Arg. The angry heavens with common destiny, Thunder,
Reprove my sports.

Leon. As they would oppose my sins:
Enter Leopides with father and sister. See, see where those poor souls,
Their murdering hands pulled from the mortal
Motion of their flesh, come back to give
The Ferry-man his hire, I am behind hand in that
Fatal debt: but now in spite of his black churlish Oar,
We Will waft ourselves unto the hoped shore.

Arg. Correct thy fear affrighted fantasy
Against these fond illusions, see they are vanished;
Come unto pleasures turn, they but abuse thy thoughts.

Enter Spirits. Spir. O great Argalio, call thy ablest charms,
Never had Art more need to help her Mistress:
Three bold adventerous Knights prepare themselves
To ruin thee* and thy Leonides:
Aurela, Queen of this unhappy Kingdom,
Has given her best advice to further them.

Arg. Be careful of your charge,
Down to the infernal vaults, call up
The Legion of the lower World, and throw
Hels vengeance on them:
Come my Leonides, away with fear,
Should these charms fail, which to mistrust were poor,
My Art should help thee with ten thousand more.

Exeunt. Enter James. Iam. Sure I have lost mine eyes, or else am walked
Into eternal darkness: I have read how wise
Ulysses saw the under world, conversed with bold
Achylles and the Greeks, and then returned alive
To earth again, but Fables help but weakly,
Imitate what really I feel I have lost,
My fellows in this endless night; till now
Their voyees kept me company. Ho Denis, Denis.

Within. Here, here.

Iam. Where art thou man?

Den. Wading through fire, and buffetting with air.

James. Where Is Patricke?

Within. Here, here.

Enter Patr. Pat. Where Is my noble Spaniard?

Enter Iam. Iam. Here, my friend.

Pat. We all came several ways then?

Den. But a worse than I have ventured, never
Man set foot to: first through a Lake that
Lybias Deserts yield not more hot contagions,
Venom that has struck confused terror
Throughout all my limbs, and pierced my armours
Closure, then was I feign to enterpose my shield,
Betwixt me and that pondrous weight, that fell,
As if some Castles ruins had fallen down,
To crush me into nothing.

Pat. Mulciber like I walked through fire,
And as the Salamander bathed in the flames,
Winding his body in a stream of sulphur,
So the devouring heat incompast me.

Iam. But I had music in my passage friends,
The Whistler and the Screech-Owle joined their songs,
The boding Ravens made the consort up,
And with their multitudes pressed me to earth;
But here the air breaths cold and gently on us:
Is not yon light? or being inured to darkness,
Have not our eyes forgot their faculties?
It Is light; what is here, a Pillar, and a Tablet on it?
The lively Taper, which not only cleares our eyes,
So long invaded with Cimerian mists, but gives
Us light, by viewing this Inscription, thereby
For to unfold this dark Aenigma.
Read Denis.

Denis Reads.
Read, and wonder, you that be not be
Not borne to end this prodigy.
The golden Fleece, which Jason sought,
In emblem must be hither brought,
The Flower de Luce and Harp must join,
Before the Riddle you untwine.
Iberi^s earth must yield a Knight,
That must extinguish this great light.
By the same water must be found,
That borne was on unvenom'd ground.
A gallion Helmet, that must hold
The water that these Charms unfold;
That done, this land resumes her rest,
And all Enchantments here deprest.
Either my Genius flatters my best thoughts,
Or else we three were borne to consummate
This great adventure.
Iam. It Is most plain, Spain gave me birth,
The Golden Fleece mine Arms,
The figure of that prize which Jason brought,
And to make perfect the Inscription,
Here is a Helmet framed in Normandy,
Which I have worn in all my travailes since.

Den. No more of doubts; Argalio and Leonides
Prepare to meet your ruin, your all potent Charms,
Me thinks I see them fly from room to room,
Searching the Cavernes and obscurest Vaults
To hide their guilty heads from vengeance:
And this strong Charm, once thought invincible,
When it shall vanish like an idle dream,
Their confidence will plague their Conscience more,
Than if they had mistrusted it before.

Iam. No more delays, but boldly lets assail,
Our cause is good, and justice must prevail.

Exit. Enter Argalio, and Leonides. Leon. It cleares, it cleares:
What does thy Art avail thee,
Thou that have said for to obscure the Sun,
Where are they fled? hide thy self now Argalio,
And hide my errors with thee, they are vain,
As my beleefes are, that thou have a knowledge
Above my mischieves: horse us on the Clouds,
For naught else can prevent our imminent ruin.

Arg. Art thou yet doubtful, unbeleeving boy?
Remember the large stretched thoughts
I have employed to arm thee, could I cause
Darkness? could my powerful Art hide the
Bright Sun in his most royal progress?
And shall it be confined by these opposers?

Leon. I cannot have a faith in these delusions:
Let me despair and dye; here is a sword
Can quickly ease my torments, and set free
A burthend Conscience: how freely will my spirit
Greet the air of hells black kingdom:
There the Thracian sits, hard by the sullen
Waters of black Styx, fingring his Lute;
To hear whose pleasing strains, hells Ministers
Forget their offices, the wearied souls their torments,
The whole Vault resounds his echoes;
Thither will I hie, and lay my troubled head
Upon his lap, and he shall charm me
Into endless slumbers.

Arg. Hold braine-sicke man, look up for thy safety;
See thou this Throne by sable spirits borne,
In it we will mount, so unbeleev'd a height,
Earth shall appear an attome to thine eye:
Thou shall view Cynthia in her silver sphere,
Couched by Aurora on her Rosy bed; and make
The Sunne-God jealous of your loves:
We Will progress over the Celestial Orbs,
Thence to the Winds, and view the hollow cave,
Where Aeol fetters up the unruly brood;
Then by descentions pleasing to our thoughts,
We Will take survey of Neptunes watery rule,
Ride over the bosom of the Ocean
On crooked Dolphins,
Amphion like, striking a well tuned Harp,
And then to the earth again.

Leon. Thou have given me a new life,
I feel a new unwonted joy assail me,
And all my sorrows vanish like those clouds,
That even but now invirond us with darkness.

Arg. Mount then my Son, and as we reach the sky,
My Spirits shall salute us with sweet bays,
Jove shall bow down his head to hear their lays,
And wish himself commander of their skill:
Will this delight thee?

Leon. Oh my happy friend.

Enter Champions. Pat. Earth, nor her strongest hold shall not secure 'em.

Den. O act of wonder, we in vain pursue:
Look how they raise themselves unto the clouds:
Oh had I wings but to ore'take
The Villain, Devil, Inchanter.

Arg. Ha, ha, ha; fools to imagine you could wrong Argalio,
I pity you, or else my powerful hand
Should crush you into air:
Stand, and admire, whilst we ascend a height
'Bove your weak thoughts.

Pat. Yet are we happy, though they escaped
Our justice, that we have freed
The Country from contagion. The people
Find this benefit already;
Shouts within. And hark, with shouts applaud this act
Of wonder: Lets to the Queen,
And fully give relations of all these accidents,
Then are we free for other Warlike deeds.
Virtue should still be active, apt to right
Those which are wronged, and good deeds to requite.

ACTUS QUINTUS.
Enter Suckabus with bread and meat in his hand. Clown. Ah sirrah, the world
is pretty well amended with me now, thanks to my Kingly father, and his
Charms, 'twas time for me to leave the domineering Rascal, and his beggarly
crew of wanderers, Grooms I may term them, for if they had been Knights
they would never have used a Prince amongst 'em so. I have travailed five times
through the world, and not a Town, City, or Borough in England but I carried
the marks on my shoulders to show for it. The best days that ever I saw with
'em, was when we hired Charles Waine, and rid about the elements, that was the
best twelve days journey that e're I had: and I remember we had good lodging
at the twelve Signs, and nobly used, for they would not take one Penny, and to
say the truth we had no money to give: but how we got up, or how the devil we
got down again I know not: and then we fell to our old course again, to kill
every one that we met: which course I not liking, in regard we must fight for
our victuals, I begged this charm of my Father, where hearing of a famous
Castle of Brandrons, and what a brave house he kept for Victuals, I out with
my Spell, and straight wished me there; which being no sooner uttered, but a
Hawke or a Buzard flew betwixt my legs, mounted me in the Air, and set me
down here, where I find whole Oxen, boyld in a Pottage-pot will hold more
water than the Thames, and now having pretty well stuffed my Pannier, I Will e'ne
take a He sleeps. nap, and so wish my self somewhere else.


Enter Brandron. Bran. How weary am I with this forraging,
Yet cannot find my hunted prey come in:
Have I a truce granted to a fruitful Kingdom,
And her chief City, not a mile from hence
Upon condition I should spare his City,
Self, and people, to have my quick provision hunted
Into my Iron nets, and do they break and baffle thus?
Is Bear and Lion food too good for me?
Why then I see I must take pains to march,
And with my Iron Mace, pound, pash, and mortar them
And City too: oh the net is fallen,
It Is well you keep your league.
How now, what scare-Crow's that?
A sleeping Dormouse in my Castle walls: how got he in?
I have no other Porter than my self,
And through the keyhole sure he could not craule;
How or which way should this small spy get in?
Sirrah awake, or with one phillip of my Iron Mace,
I Will send eternal sleep to sieze on thee:
Awake you dog.

Clown. I, I, you say very well Father, it is true indeed,
And then watch him asleep, and kindly cut his throat.

Bran. How? cut my throat? I shall prevent ye slave:
Wren of deformity awake I say.

Clown. I hear a rumbling noise, I Will e'ne pack up my trinkets, and begone: Oh
Lord what will become of me! I have wished my self to have my brains beat out.

Bran. What art thou worm?

Clown. An't please you Sir, I am a Prince, a sweet young Prince, my Fathers
name is Tarpax, Prince of the grisly North, my mothers name was Calib, Queen
of Limbonia, and Duchess of Witchfordia.

Bran. Perish thy father and thy mother, as thy self shall:
Slave how gotst thou in?

Clown. I flew over the Castle wall.

Bran. Bird of the Devil, where is your wings to fly?

Clown. If you will give me leave, you shall see me fly the same way back
again.

Bran. No my fin^ Pidgeon, I will clip your wings:
Come to my Caldron, come I Will see how finely you can
Flutter there, it reekes and bubbles, there
I Will plunge thee in, there shall thou play my Pige.
Till thou art fine, soft, plumpe, and tender sod*
And then I Will pick thy bones my dainty bird.

Clown. O Lord, what shall become of me? boyld, O Lord, the very terror of
that word, has thrust the charm quite from my head, that Charm would save
me; oh sweet father now or never help me, and save a Prince from boiling, a
boyld Prince is his meat else.


Bran. Dispatch my bird.

Clown. O sweet father, now, now, now I go else,
Boyld: oh the thought of that word: O ^ha't,
Sweet Father I thank thee,
Has put that Charm into my head
Shall make 'em all in love with me:
Now I care not.

Bran. Why when I say?

Clown. Splagnalis squirtis p^mpistis.
The Giant in a maze lets fall his Club.

Bran. Ha! The beams of wonder shootes into mine eyes,
And love and pity has surpised my heart.

Clown. Oh sweet father, now he is mine sure, and I will domineere.

Bran. The mornings majesty does not so fresh break forth,
When she does usher the Altitionate from forth his bed
Of spices, here to shine: how were mine eyes deluded,
My sweet boy, when that I thought
Deformity hung here? for which upon my knees
I beg thy gracious pardon, and with submission,
And contrition, do desire that favor,
But to kiss thy foot.

Clown. My foot? no you shall kiss somewhere else,
My backside of this hand is yours.

Bran. I merit not that favor, heavenly boy.

Clown. Go too, I Will have my will, my hand is yours I say.

Bran. And for that hand my whole heart is thy slave;
Demand, and take the life of Brandron.
Then say, my dotage darling, can thou love me?

Clown. As well as I love roast Beef:
Have any victuals love? I am a hungry.

Bran. Enough, my dainty boy; the banquet of the Gods,
To which flew Saturn, once in thirty years,
Tastes not there of more delightsome Cates,
Than I Will have for my love: come in my boy,
Walk with me hand in hand,
Thou shall not ask, but have thy full demand.

Exeunt. Enter the six Champions. Iam. Brothers, you are welcome all to
Brandrons Castle.

Iam. Not Brandron nor his Castle
Long shall bear that name.

Pat. A strong and sumptuous habitation.

Jam. To good a Palace for a Tyrants rain.

Andr. What, shall we knock, and rouse the Monster up?

Ant. Lets walk the round, and take a view
Of this strong Castle first; happily we may find
A passage in, for to surprise him
E're he think of us; lets strike upon occasion,
But advantage, in Law of Arms, deserves this
Hateful Traitor.

Pat. Your counsel we will allow, on, let be so:
Come Gentlemen, lets walk, but not too near
The Castle pray, least treasons bounty
Should drop down upon us.

Iam. What if we find no entrance,
And he refuse our summons, and not come?

And. That cannot be, we then might sterve the fiend;
His food is daily hunted to these nets,
And once a day we are sure to meet with him:
Then let us careful pass about these walls.

Exit. Enter Clown and Brandron. Bran. How like thou Brandron, and his
Castle boy?

Clown. As I am a Prince,
I was never better pleased in all my life.

Bran. Music to Brandrons ear that thou art so.

Clown. Now you talk of Music, will you hear me sing?

Bran. A contradiction to thy will, were poison
To my thoughts: on my souls harmony.

Clown sings.
I have a Love, as white as a Raven,
Excelling for blackness the snow,
She will scould, scratch, and bite
Like a Fury or Spright,
And yet she was counted no shrow.
The hair of her head was like Cobblers thread,
Which Sow-haires do draw through so,
Her Legs on each foot
Is so sweld with the gout,
That my love is not able tog^e.
Her face bares a front, like to Wear water-spout.
Which brought was from thence by great cunning,
With a Mill in her bum,
That did roar like a drum,
Which did set her fair nose still a running.
How like you this love? Bran. Orion, that o're-strid the Dolphine with his
Harp,
Nere song nor played such chanting melody:
Thou have made me drousie love with thy sweet air.

Clown. I carry air at both ends of my Pipe,
But this is the sweeter: come what shall we do?

Bran. Walk with thy Jove, my lovely Ganymede,
And once a day survey my Castle round,
Then will I play with these thy silken locks,
Kiss that sweet Venus Mole upon thy Cheek,
And smell unto thy sweet Sabean breath,
Then will we walk and view my silver fountain,
And my silver Swans, whom next to thee,
I take most pleasure in.

Clown. I like that Fountain very well,
And the three Swans that swimmes about it:
I was wishing for a Goose-pye made
Made of one of 'em but the the other day.

Bran. Little do thou know what those Swans be.

Clown. Why, what are they?

Bran. List, and I Will tell thee:
Those Swans are daughters to the King of Macedon,
Whom I surpised, and kept within my Castle,
Till at the length, so scorcht with loves hot flames*
That Brandron needs must dye, if not enjoy:
So thinking to deflowre 'em one by one,
Each by her prayers converted to a Swanne,
And flew for safety in my golden fountain,
And there for ever shall my Ledas Birds
Remain, unharm'd by Brandron, or any.

Clown. Oh monstrous, I have heard indeed that wenches have turned pretty
Conies, Ducks, or Pigeons; but Swans, O brave: Come whither shall we go now
love?

Leon. Up to the promontary top of my fair Castle,
There take thy pleasure of the mornings air,
Breathed from Aurora's care the Sun does wake,
From thence to banquet upon Lions hearts,
I Will feast the hye and strong, my Ganymed:
Come let us mount, pleasure's to us a toy,
My happiness consists in thee my boy.

Exeunt. Enter the Six Champions. Den. As yet we cannot find a sitting place,
Where we may make a breach for entrance.

Pat. What shall we rouse him then?

Iam. A little stay, we have not yet begirt the Castle walls,
The time of his approach will not be long,
For all his Iron nets are stored you see.

Anth. I long to see, and grapple with the monster.

Andr. Here Is no man here but has the same desire.
Come let us walk.

Enter Brandron and Clown above. Bran. Where art thou love?

Clown. Here, here, as close as beggary to a Prodigal,
I Will never forsake ye I Will warrant.

Bran. It Is well; now we have attaind the highest top: ha!

Clown. What Is the matter Sir?

Bran. See, see, six straggling spies, wandering fugitives
Are lurking 'bout my Walls to make a breach,
And steal my Swans away; but I will down,
And with my Iron Mace send 'em a welcome,
That their powder bones shall seem a pastime
For the wind to play with.

Clown. Go to love, no more such words,
No more I say, I know 'em well enough.

Bran. Do thou my love?

Clown. Yes, and I am afraid you will know 'em to your
Cost: there is not a man of these, but is able to cope
With a whole army.

Bran. Ha, ha, ha.

Clown. You were best tell me I lie:
Have you not heard of seven roaring boys,
That made such a damnable thunder through the world,
Making Gallimafries of all came in their way?

Bran. O the Christian curres, what then?

Clown. These are six of 'em, and I Am afraid the seventh,
And that is my Master, George of England.

Bran. Are these the men? beshrew me heart
The largeness of their fame makes Brandron shrug.

Clown. Do not you fear for all this;
What will you say if I betray all these Champions to ye,
And bring 'em all unarmed unto your mercy?

Bran. I cannot love thee dearer if thou do,
But I am loath to venture thee my love.

Clown. Take you no care for that, I Will do it,
Give me the keys, and Then when i have got them in
Unarmed, if we cannot make our parties good with 'em,
Would you were hanged in faith.

Bran. Go and befortunate, I long till thou returnst.

Exit. Enter Champions. Dav. There is no hope of entrance till he comes.

And. Shall we obscure our selves till then,
Or face the Monster at his coming out?

Dav. Obscure, no brother Andrew, here is not a man of us
But singly dares both meet and cope with him:
But soft, I hear the gates unlocke,
Each stand upon his guard, the Giant comes.

Enter Clown. Iam. Who this?
This the mighty Brandron?

Den. If black Enchantments do not blind mine eyes,
I well should know that habit and that person:
Send me your judgments, know you not that face?

Anth. It Is Suckabus, our brother Georges man.

Clown. You are not deceived Sir, I Am the very same.

All. What Suckabus?

Clown. Gentlemen, it is no wonder for us that are Champions to meet at tho
worlds end: my master's in the Castle.

All. How?

Clown. It Is as I tell ye; we saw ye out of a window look about the Castle
walls, and laughed heartily at ye, and ^o did the Ladies too.


All. How, Ladies?

Clown. Yes faith Ladies: my master has killed the Giant, a foul great lubberly
knave he was I Am sure a that: we had much a do with him ere he fell: but now
have we the bravest life with the Ladies, we do nothing but dance with 'em al
day long. You must come up unto my Master presently.


All. With all our hearts;
Lead the way good Suckabus.

Clown. Nay not so hasty neither: my Master does earnestly desire you, that
you would deliver all your weapons to me, for fear of frighting the Ladies;
there must no sign of a Soldier now appear, all must be lovers that do
enter there.


All. With all our hearts; take 'em, and lead the way.

Clown. Why now it is as it should be;
I Will bring you sweet linen and water to refresh you, and then into your
pantables, and pump up the Ladies.

All. Excellent Suckabus.

Exeunt. Enter Brandron. Bran. Ha, ha, ha; how happy am I in this faithful boy?
I have beheld through a chinke, the Knights
Brought in unarmed and weaponlesse:
Oh my prosperous politician how I love thee:
These were the Knights whom I did ever fear,
And now I have 'em all mine own but one:
Oh here comes my boy; the news, the news?
My eyes best object; what are they spring'd my love?

Clown. I, they are my own, fast locked in a pitfold:
But I have stranger news to tell thee than this.

Bran. Say on, we are secure frhm fear and danger now.

Clown. After my slight had fetched 'em in unarmed,
And Cag'd my birds fast under lock and key,
I went to fetch some weapons that I left
Behind me at the gate porch: where peeping
Through a keyhole, by more chance I spide my Master
George of England, prancing his steed about the walls.

Bran. What Is he the seventh?

Clown. I, and the veriest kill-cow of 'em all,
These are but very punies to him.

Bran. Go and betray him as thou did the rest.

Clown. Nay soft, some wiser than some: he is no such fellow as ye take him
for; he may hear me, but he will see me hanged ere he trust me; for indeed I
have been so trusty to him, that he will be sure to trusse, if he catch me.

Bran. I will not venture thee* come, lets to these Knights,
If they will yield unto our fair demands,
And by that Christian power they do adore,
Swear fealty and faithful love to us,
To fight our battles, and our Champions prove,
Against those that shall oppose our might and power,
We are their friends, and they shall live in favor;
But if denial breath from ones lip,
He and the rest shall perish instantly:
Follow me love.

Exeunt. Enter George. Geor. Through black Enchantments, misbeleeving men,
Wild beasts and monsters, and through death himself,
Has George of England made his passage, to the desire
Of my longing thoughts; and by my
Tedious travailes have I now obtained,
And here I am arrived, where ends my fame,
Or deeper shall insculpe my honored name.
The Castle bears a foul usurped title,
Which I will read out of the Tyrants heart,
And back deliver injured honors due,
Or dye in the attempt.
A rich and stately building*
How fast it is rivited into the Rock,
As if the sure foundations and the walls were one,
How gaind'd the monster such a policy to vanquish,
And still hold it as his own?
I have no other way but one, and this is it,
This sword must play the Pioner for me,
Which through Brandrons platted coat of brass,
Shall cut his passage to his heart:
And thus I ring deaths larum at his gate.

Enter Brandron aloft. Bra. Ha, what hare-braind frantic Vrchin have we there?
Do come to meet the Crows and chatting Pyes?
They Will make a banquet of thy carcass:
Reserve your smooth-faced brow to play with Ladies,
Begone I say, and do not make reply,
For if thou urge me to a Porters pains,
The strong nerv'd Cyclops, who by pondrous weight,
Forged out the gates of steel, near laid such strokes,
(...) I will on thy childish Burgonet.
(...) thou see I Am pitiful.
(...) be accepted at thy hand by such as fear
Thy bug-beare terms, were thy deeds as much:
Therefore descend, and to my hands deliver up the keys,
With it those Virgins, undeflowr'd and wronged,
The daughters to the King of Macedon,
Or by the sacred Cross of Christendom,
Under whose Banner George of England fights,
I Will pitch thy head upon the wall thoustandst,
And Traitor like thy hateful limbs beside.

Bra. O, we have heard of you before, but since you are so hot*
I Will fetch a Iulip for to cool your blood,
You shall be fought, and fought, and fought with too:
Betake you to your tools, that valor tries,
For never till now you played your Master-prize,

Exit. Georg. I do accept it: Brandron in this alone
Do I find thee honorable: mean time,
I will prepare to entertain them.

Enter Brandron aloft, with all the Champions and Clown. Bran. Hollow once
more, look up and see,
If these thou conquerst, then thou copst with me,
But not before: nay, never start, I know thou know 'em well,
You never so strange were, as you must be now:
I keep those bonds which yoakt your amities,
And I have broke those bonds:these, once what ere they were,
Are now my subjects, and all sworn to fight
In Brandrons quarrel, be it wrong or right.
I, and to dye in it: question them I pray.

Geor. Amazement throws his wonders on my head:
Brother resolve me, is it so, or no?
I see you are prisoners to his power and will,
But let me know the means that makes you so,
Lives there no foul enchantment in this place?

Dav. Brother not any.

Georg. Monster, I know thou took'st 'em not in fight;
The meanest of them them there that stands by thee,
But with the quick flames of his resolution,
Had scorcht thee into ashes: give reason then
How this should come to pass?

Bran. One of you tell him, if you please you may.

Dav. We all arrived at one Court, the Macedonian Kings,
And coming hither in his wrongs behalf,
Met with your Hell-borne Suckabus,
Who was before by Brandron entertaind;
No sooner we approacht the Castle here,
And made a gentle walk about the walls,
But running to us with great signs of joy, that slave
Came to us, told us your self was here,
And how the mighty Brandron by your hand was slain.

Bran. Ha, ha, ha; oh my dainty boy, stand near my love,
Here Is none dares injure thee.

Clown. Look how Master George on foote-backe frowns
on me, but I care not.

Dav. Further he told us 'twas your fair request,
Having sweet Music and fair Ladies with you,
We should come in unarmed and weaponlesse:
We being joyful, thinking truth he spoke,
Were all betrayed, and so to Brandron led,
And so our lives were granted, on condition,
His wrong or right to guard against the world.

Geor. Brood of the Devil thou shall pay for this.

Clown. Thy worst, I defy thee.

Geor. What we must fight then?

Omn. Brother we must.

Geor. Well then, what remedy?
But tell me Brandron, ere we begin,
Since thou have set this quarrel on our heads,
Shall I have fair and single opposition?

Bran. Champion thou shall.

Geor. Seal it with your oath, and then it is firm.

Bran. Why by the Ethiopes stamp, yon burning ball,
I vow; and this I furthermore will promise,
That each several Combatant shall bear several arms;
And to thy self, from our rich Armory,
Weapons I Will send complete, although mine enemy:
Here, take the keys, my boy, and see each weapon fitted
Both for him and them: mean time, hear will we sit
Spectators of their deeds: Oh they are met.

Enter Champions severally, armed; weapons brought for George. Da. You Are welcome
to our castle: I Am your first man brother

Geor. You are welcome.

Dav. For Brandron, and his right.

Geor. For England, and the Britains do I fight.
fight. Brother you are mine, your quarrel is not good.
David is overcome.
Da. What I have lost, then call it Brandrons blood.

Geor. You are noble. Come the next.

And. That Is I for Brandron.

fight. Geor. I stand for Scotland now.

And. You have won it fairly; take it as your own.

Geor. You Are welcome home.

And. And I am glad it is so well fallen out.

Each fight their several Combats: George overcomes them all: Brandron
stampes. Geor. Let us unite our brother-hoods again.
You are welcome to your liberty.

Omn. We joy to see it.

Iam. There are the keys* enter, and sieze on Brandron.

Bran. Am I betrayed?

Dav. Each has the best done to defend your state,
Then yield thee to the mercy of our brother.

Bran. First will I head long throw me from this Tower,
And dash my brains against the craggy rocks,
That murmures at the fall of Brandron:
No, Christian slaves, you shall not write
Your glories in my blood, to say,
The mighty Brandron fell by you:
Brandron wins glory to himself to yield,
And thus will conquer Brandron in the field,

He beats out his own brains. Geor. One ruin ends for to begin another:
Enter the Castle, seek the slave his man.
And give his guerdon for his treachery.

Dav. That will we do; follow me Anthony.

Exit. Geor. What drum is that? lets in, and stand upon our guard,

Pat. It is our friend, the King of Macedon.
That comes to gratify our victory.

Geor. We Will greet him with a token of our loves.

Enter the King, Drum, Colors, and Soldiers. Mac. I come in loving quest of
you, brave Christian Knights,
Who since your absence from our mournful Court,
In this adventure took in our behalfes,
Fear made us doubt your safety and your lives:
Wherefore resolved, in quittance of your loss,
More than the wrongs I did sustain before,
Made us thus change our mournful black for steel,
And armed with dread less danger of our lives,
Came thus resolved, to fight, and dye for you.

Pat. You have outdone us in your noble mind:
Brother of England, embrace this aged King:
And reverend Sir, do you the like by him;
This the seventh, which in this enterprise,
Redeemed us from the hateful hands of treachery.

Mac. I joy to see such worth abound in man,
May honors spring send Garlands for thy brow,
And victory still dwell on thy triumphant arm:
I glory in your conquest.

Geor. Which glory once more shines upon thy head;
The hateful monster, that usurpt so long,
And kept poor Tenopas in dread and aw,
Has Justice from his own hand done himself,
And you are honor of your loss again:
Therefore reserve it as our loving deed,
And wear it as our favor.

Mac. You so enrich me with your love and bounty,
My life and kingdom is too poor to thank ye.
Were I assured of my daughters lives,
I were ascended to my height of joy.

Geor. Of that these gentlemen can more resolve ye.

Omn. We never knew, nor saw no Ladies there.

Mac. Why then they are dead:
Sweet peace rest with their souls.

Enter with the Clown. Clown. As you are gentlemen use not a Prince so
hardly: what I have done was merely out of love; because I would have you
staid men, men of biding, to be forth coming, though not every hour coming
forth: Master George, for my Queen mothers sake, that killed your father and
mother, and kept you in a Cave, have compassion upon me.


Geo. Dispatch, and hang the slave.

Clown. What shall I do now? I have been calling to my father for help, and he
does nothing, but stands and laughes at me, and will not put my charm in my
head.

Dav. Nay come away good Suckabus.

Clown. Which is the King of Macedon, I pray?

Mac. I am my friend, but cannot save thy life,
Because thou did betray these gentlemen.

Clown. I do beseech thy Kingly worship to save my lifs, and
I will bring you where your daughters are.

Clown. Thou powrest fresh blood into our empty veins,
And melts the snow that lay upon my heart:
Victorious Knights, as much renownd for pity,
As for valor, upon my aged knees I beg the life
Of this condemned wretch.

Geor. You must not kneel:upon condition that thou do perform,
Thy words, we will not only give thee life,
But guard on thee with rich rewards, and love:
But if thy fear delude us, hoping to save thy life --

Clown. Why you may hang me then, that is all the care I take.

Mac. And will thou bring me to my daughters friend?

Clown. Come follow me, I Will lead you a dance.
Sings. Three whitings they cockle, and set in their luddle,
Sing bay Cock without a comb, sing cock a duddle.
Look you, do you see those three Swans? these Swans were once the Daughters,
Ducks and Darlings to the King of Macedon.

Geor. Those were the Swans that in the fountain lived:
Did not I tell you what this slave would do?
Dispatch and hang him straight.

Mac. I do beseech ye spare him;
And noble Knights, thus for to let you know,
I do give faithful credit to his words;
Hear me relate what once my daughters told me;
The eldest having privilege of Birth,
Came to me first for to relate her dream,
And asked me if I could interpret it;
I answered, as I had small faith in dreams,
So I had less knowledge to expound the meaning.
Yet went she on; I dreamt, said she, my sisters and my self
Were playing round about your golden fountain,
When suddenly we all three were-surpris'd,
By a fierce savage and inhumane Monster,
And as his flaming Lust did us pursue,
We turned to Swans, and in the fountain flew.
As she related so did both the rest,
And all three had one dream.

Clown. I Will assure you, the Giant that is dead told me the self same tale, and
how he would have done something to 'em, but having three Eeles by the tail
they slipped out of his fingers, and flew like Swans into the golden fountain.

Mac. This does confirm it more: oh my Swans, my girls!
Come shall we sing our Requiem together?
And at the stretching out your silver wings,
Your aged father falls and dies with you.

Geo. Take comfort, royal Macedon, as heaven for to preserve
Their honors, changed their shapes it may be pleased
For to restore't again, for after prescripts to believing men,
And would you but become --

Mac. In that I Will interrupt ye: hold I pray,
Let me embrace you all; nay, take sure hold:
Though clouds of darkness did my clear shine smother,
I am converted to each here a brother.

Omn. A happy conversion.

Geor. Blessed Macedon, thou have sent a gift to heaven,
Borne upon Angels wings;
The swans turn. And is by us on earth here ratified,
Which without this could never have been done.

Omn. O father, father, happy are we now.

Mac. My blessing on my Swans, my new found joys:
We all are Christians now.

Omn. Oh happy state!

Georg. Each Lady does deserve a Monarchs bed.

Mas. Renowned Knights, may we desire to know,
Which of you are unmarried?

An. De. Pat. We are.

Geor. Then here is three Ladies, take 'em to your beds.

Mac. George highly honors aged Macedon.

3 Knig. But can the Ladies love accord with us?

3 Lad. Most willingly.

3 King. We thus then seal our contracts.

Geor. Which thus we ratify:
Sit with the Brides, most noble Macedon,
And since kind fortune sent such happy chance,
We Will grace your Nuptials with a soldiers dance.

They dance. Mac. True noble Knights, how am I honored in you?

Georg. No more good Macedon: pray lead the way,
We Will see your Nuptial Rites,
That task once done,
We must abroad for same of Christendom.

FINIS.

