A VIEW OF man's estate, wherein the great mercy of God in man's free
justification by Christ, is very comfortably declared.

By Andrewe Kingesmill.

Divided into Chapters in such sort as may best serve for the commodity of
the Reader.

Whereunto is annexed a godly advise given by the Author touching marriage.

Seen and allowed according to the order appointed.

Imprinted at London by H. Bynneman, for Lucas Harison and George Bishop. Anno.
1574.

To the Reader.
THe author hereof, being a very young Gentleman, so applied the study and
exercises of the civil law in the University of Oxford, that he attained as
much knowledge therein as any of his time, and professed the same in keeping of
public exercises with great commendation. Yet did he not forget (as many do)
to seek the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof: but so earnestly
traveled to understand the mysteries of Christian religion, that he thought
himself never well satisfied in any thing touching the same, until he could by
word and writing give account of the truth, which he conceived. Wherefore he
endeavored to commit to memory the text of holy Scripture with such diligence
in learning, and often repeating thereof, that he could readily without book
rehearse in the greek tongue Paul's Epistles to the Romans and Galat. S. John's first
canonical epistle, besides other Psalms and chapters of the old and new
Testament. Also he exercised himself by writing of sundry matters, that he
might grow in judgment, readiness and aptness to teach other if at any time
God should call him thereunto. VVherof this treatise yeldeth some proof, which
he writ being about. 22. years of age: by which thou may conceive, what fruit
the Church of God in time might have reaped of his towardnes, if it had pleased
god in this vntovvarde world to prolong his days. He esteemed not so much the
preferment and profit, whereunto many ways he might easily have attained by
profession of law, as the comfortable assurance, and blessed hope of life
eternal, which he might enjoy by the truth of the Gospel and the sincerity
of Gods holy religion. Therefore to further himself herein, he sought not only
the exact knowledge of the greek and hebrewe tongs, but also for a time to
live in some one of the best reformed Churches, where he might, both by the
doctrine and discipline of the gospel, be daily confirmed in the true
worshipping of God, and well prepared to the ministry of the church. So he
settled himself at Geneua, where he remained, being well liked of the learned
and godly, the space of three years. From whence he removed to Lausanna, where
being too good for this corrupt world, he ended this mortal life in the
month of September, Anno. 1569 when he had lived about. 31. years: a Phoenix
among Lawyers, a rare example of godliness amongst gentlemen.

John. 3. God so loved the world that he has given his only begotten son,
that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life.


The first Chapter.
That many seek the kingdom of God, and that men are directed to the
knowledge thereof only by the word of God.
IN the.xiij. of Mathewe, Christ our Savior by diverse Parables sets forth
and preaches unto us the everlasting Kingdom of his heavenly father: and
amongst other uses these similitudes, saying: The kingdom of heaven is like
unto a treasure hid in the field, which when a man has found, he hides it,
and for joy thereof departs and sells all that he has, and buieth that
field. Again the kingdom of heaven is like to a merchant man that seeks
good pearls, who having found a pearl of great price went and sold all that
he had, and bought it. Now I think there is none in so desperate a state, or
so far fallen out with himself, but that he is very feign of the finding of
such a field as is here spoken of: neither is there any so unhappy a
merchant but that he would venture far so that he might come to the purchase
of so precious a pearl, as to have part in the inheritance of the kingdom of
heaven to enjoy the rest of God, and to dwell on his holy hill: yea many will
say, they will be glad to walk and wander forth the vttermoste compass of the
earth, so that they might at length track and try out the field where in
lies hidden so great a treasure: and all men will profess this merchandise,
not refusing the pains to travail through the whole seas, so that they might
in the end assure themselves to arrive at the heavenly haven of the kingdom of
God: and who is he which so far sets the body before the soul, that be he
never so rich, will not sell all to purchase that glorious jewel of eternal
joy? But (a lamentable case) few there are of those fayning folk that know
the right way which should lead them to that pleasant place of eternal
rest: so that their questions are such and the like: Which is the way? Where
lies the pathe, that we may walk therein? so Christ talking of a redeemer and
a Savior unto the blind man: John. 9.
he thus questioneth: who is the Lord that I may believe in him? So Philip
standing yet in that doubt said unto Christ: Master, show us the father. John.
14.
Therefore concerning that question David the anointed of God speaks by
experience: Thy word is a lantern to my feet, Psalm. 119.
and a light unto my footesteps. So David found the way even by the lightsome
lantern of Gods word: wherefore he makes often and earnest request that that
light might shine still before him: thus he says: O that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes: open mine eyes that I may see the wonders of
thy law, make me understand the way of thy precepts, teach me O Lord the way
of thy statutes. Direct me in the path of thy commaunments: These were the
light and the lantern, the feet and the footesteps, the way and the path
whereby David was directed and conducted into the field which we are now to
seek: and even that commodity whereof David protests so generally that he
found in the word of God, shall be proved true in special experience, of
those, that shall diligently mark and with earnest zeal seek to understand
this short sentence spoken of our Savior, and written by S. John for our
learning, God so loved the world etc.

The second Chapter.
How pleasantly and plainly one text of Scripture shows the way to life
eternal.
THis is a flower containing in it such pleasant juice, that who so like a
diligent Be, should suck the same for his store and learning, he shall say
with admiration as the Prophet does: O Lord how sweet are thy words to my
mouth? Yea he shall find that they are far sweeter than the honey or the honey
comb: for behold in these words is that precious pearl to be found, I mean
the promise, not to perish, here is that inestimable treasure hidden and
closed up, as in these words, but have life everlasting: here is poynted out
the field of faith, where we have to fetch that treasure: here is also a
light set up unto us, that we do not wander in darkness, and so leese our
way, Number. 24. Apoc. 22.
I mean Christ that bright blasing star, the true light of the world:
finally here is as it were in a plot drawn out, the work of our redemption,
and in a knot knit up the whole mystery of our salvation: and in handling
hereof, I think it good to use that means that those do, which when they have
an hard knot given them to knit the like, straight they undo the same, and so
make it up again with less ado: you may say then here is a goodly warning,
not to perish: a large promise, a rich pearl, a worthy treasure, to have
life everlasting: but the next question is, how we may obtain those promises?
here is an ordinary means expressed, aunswering that question, who so
believes in him. This is the field to walk in, the foot we must trust to,
even the field and foot of faith: But whom? in whom shall we believe? here
can we not be to seek neither. For Christ sets up himself here as a
mark for our faith to shoot at: who so believes in him. Why should we
believe in him? Here is answer to that also: because he is that Prophet sent
of God, the son, the only begotten son of the father, therefore ought our
faith to work, and rest on him. What moved God to send that Ambassador, not
to spare his dear, his only son? that cause also is not omitted: God so
loved the world etc. it was his own love, his free mercy that brought this to
pass: now (I think) there are no more questions to be made, no more doubts
to be moved: For if all were said and understood, which concerns these
points, it were sufficient to save a soul, and to make a perfect man of God.
For believe thou in Christ, as sent of God, as the son of God, considering
thoroughly the love of God by him declared, then as truly as Christ is the
truth and may not lie, thou stand in the state of salvation, thou have
found the field, and possessest that treasure, not to perish, but to have
life everlasting.

The third Chapter.
That the especial love of God is the chief cause of man's salvation, and that
to the right knowledge thereof man's estate must be considered.
THus the knot being undone, let us severally consider the parts and pieces
thereof, that the very bowels of the matter being searched, there may a more
perfect understanding grow thereof: Therefore the first step, the first
entry, toward the work of our salvation, is the love of God: God so loved
the world. And to consider how this love is declared toward man, therein
consists the whole sum of our redemption. And the first consideration
herein to be had, is this, as whose love it is we speak of, for it is no
vain or light love of man, but an assured and steadfast love, the love of God:
1. Epist. 4.
who is (as S. John says) love it self. Then what love it is that is here
mentioned. For God declares his love toward us in diverse sorts, and many
are the benefits of God toward man, as that by him we live, we move, and have
our being, he satisfies the thirsty soul, Psalm. 107.
and fills the hungrye soul with good things: And the servant of Abraham
when he went a wooing for Isaac, told his tale unto Laban the brother of
Rebecca in this wife: Gene. 24.
I am Abraham's servant, and the Lord has blessed my master wonderfully, that
he is become great: for he has given him sheep and Beeues, and silver and
gold, and men servants and maid servants, and Camels and asses. This was a
blessing and a great toke^ of Gods love, but there was a better blessing and a
greater love, wherewith God embraced Abraham and his posterity, and that is it
whereof S. John speaks: God so loved the world. etc. It is a special love
that is here meant, and it needs a special consideration. Therefore that we
may the better acknowledge the goodness of God in this behalf, it shall not
be from the purpose to remember our first state, how God did then show
himself a loving Lord toward us: then to set before us our fall, that we
might understand what we are, whom God so loves, as S. John here speaks of
love, that God should send his only begotten son to be a pledge of his
love: then how the love of God did work and appear in him: fynallye how
that love might have his full effect in us, by receiving that worthy
Ambassador Christ, which is (as S. John says) by believing in him. These
being treated, in whose hearts it shall happen to take root, it will be a seed
that shall spring to that flower that withers not, and fruit that fades
not, as to have life everlasting.

The fourth Chapter.
How the love of God appears in the creation of the world, and in man's
first estate.
FIrst therefore the love of God did maruelously appear in our first creation,
yea before our creation: he made all things for the benefit of man, and man
for his own glory, he bestowed six days labor upon man and his necessaries,
as the book of Genesis reports: He laid the foundations of the earth, and
stretched out the heavens like a curtain, he gathered the waters together,
that the dry land might appear. This he did for the benefit of man,
bringing all things into an uniformity, that there might be a place of
habitation for man: but yet were not all things provided necessary for the
maintenance of man, wherefore he stayed his creation until all such things
were provided as his heavenly wisdom thought best to serve his turn, and out
of these three his first creatures, ye earth the firmament, and the waters, he
drew out his other creatures necessary for the use and preservation of man. To
the earth God said: Let the earth budde forth the bud of the herb that
seedeth seed, and the fruitful trees bearing fruit according to his kind:
God said that word, and it came to pass, and God saw it was good, it was
good forth glory of God principally, and it was good for the commodity of
man. Moreover God let the earth bring forth the living thing according to his
kind, cattle and that which creeps, and the beast of the earth, according
to his kind: it was done, it was good in the sight of God, and it was good for
the profit of man: of the firmament God said, let there be lights in the
firmament of heaven, to give light upon the earth: Then God made two great
lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the less light to rule the
night, he made the stars also and set them in the firmament of the heaven
to shine upon the earth: God saw that it was good, first for his own glory,
then for the benefit of man. Of the waters God created the great Whales and
every thing living and moving which the waters brought forth in abundance
according to their kind, and every fethered foul according to his kind, and
God saw all that he had made, and lo it was very good, and al these things were
made, as good for the necessity of man. God made these creatures for man, yea
and he made them blissed for man: saying, bring forth fruit and multiply. Now
when God had thus provided all things to man's hand, and set them in so blissed
estate, then came the course of our creation, then he said let us make man: and
how? after what form? in what moulde was he cast? In our Image (says the
almighty) according to our own likeness, not as other his creatures, and
therefore that this high point of Gods love, might with the deeper consideration
enter our hearts, Moses repeateth it double. Thus God created man in his image,
in the image of God created he him, neither did he make him sole and
comfortless, but male and female created he them: neither when he had made
man, straight he cast him of, and set him as it were a grasing with other his
creatures, so taking no further care of him, but without long delay, he gave
him his heavenly blessing, he made him a sovereign, and a ruler over all other
his creatures, and straight gave him possession of them: God blessed them and
said, bring forth fruit and multiply and fill the earth, and subdue it, and
rule over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the heaven, and over every
beast that moves on the earth. Now behold the love of God toward man in his
first creation, God viewed all the glorious works of his fingers, and they
were all pleasant in his sight, but he did most glory in man, as the
perfection of all his works, wherefore he could not but delight in him,
while he kept himself in that estate: man was now a blessed man when God had
blessed him, and blessed every thing about him, wherefore David ravished in
manner with the consideration hereof, bursteth out in vehemency of spirit,
and says: what is man (O Lord) that thou art mindful of him, Psalm. 8.
or what is the son of man that thou visitest him? for thou have made him a
little lower than God, thou haste crouned him with glory and worship, thou
make him to have dominion over the works of thy hands, thou have put all
things under his feet, all sheep and Oxen, yea, and the beasts of the
field, the fowls of the air, and the fish of the Sea, and that which passes
through the paths of the Seas: besides all this, he made him a Prince of
Paradise, and placed him in a garden of pleasure, where he turned him on no
side, but every eye was full of the blessing and love of God.

The fifth Chapter.
The fall of Adam, and his miserable estate by occasion thereof.
THus God loved the world even in his first foundation, wherein he showed
manifold tokens of a fatherlye favor toward man, but this was not that
special love here meante, there was yet no need of that love: let us
therefore now consider the occasion of this our necessity, why God should so
show his mercy toward us as is here mentioned: let us search the sore, so
shall the salve seem more precious. He that can not in himself find what he
is of himself, let him look upon Adam, as the child on the father, and the
true image of us all, so justly valewing our selves, what we are whom God so
loves, we shall have occasion to set the greater price on that love, and it
may be as a spur unto us, stirring us unto a further thankfulness. Now
therefore when God had so mercifully dealte with Adam, settling him in that
place of pleasure, giving him such liberty as these words do import: Gene. 2.
Thou shalt eat freely of every tree of the Garden: yet least the pot might
set up himself against the potter, least by presumption man should advance
and equal himself with his creator, it was the good pleasure of the almighty
God to give him this bridle to byte on, and to keep down that stomach which he
foresawe would shortly swell with pride, so to restrain his liberty, as in
those words is expressed. But as touching the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, thou shalt not eat of it, for whenever thou eatest thereof, thou
shalt dye the death. This was the holy commandment of our heavenly father,
which it had been the part of man willingly to have obeyed, always to have
observed, never to have resisted: so might he have kept his possession in
Paradise. For all the benefits which God had most plentifully bestowed upon
man, he desired but this one thing, that is, 1. Sam. 15.
obedience to his will. This was a sacrifice wherewith he would be pleased: he
has always cried for obedience, even from the first man hither unto: but he
could never get it at any man's hands, excepting Christ the righteous. For
Adam how did he behave himself? what obedience showed he? he stopped his ear
at the voice of the living God his loving Lord, who dealte so mercifully and
liberally with him, it was forgotten which God said, thou shalt dye, and
that voice of the serpent, ye shall not dye, how soon did that enter the ear?
For the man he gave ear to the Woman, the Woman to the Serpent, they brake the
commandment, they eat of the excepted tree: so the blind led the blind, and
they fell together into the ditch, they became subject to the curse of God, who
called them to account for their disobedience, and gave to every one his
several curse: here is the point, here lies the matter a bleeding: this is the
old sore (as they say) bred in the bone, that will never be gotten out of the
flesh, passing man's cunning to cure, without a special remedy provided of
God. O Adam how were thou bewitched? thou were once in an high and heavenly
estate, but thou art fallen flat to the earth: thou werte sure in Paradise,
but now thou art endaungered to become a firebrand of hell: it was sweet meat
perchance thou tastedst, but thou should have remembered the sour sause that
followed. Could not these blessings and manifold benefits, received of thy
creator, cool thy presumptuous courage? could not the fear of falling into
the contrary plagues and calamities stay thy wilful appetite? O how did
thou forget that threatening, thou shall dye the death, that double death, the
due reward of thy sin? But thou should have been obedient: obedience had
been the way to have kept thee upright, but now thou have received thy
wages, the wages for sin is death. Romans 6.
Whilst thou keptst thy self within the bounds which thy loving Lord had
appointed for thee, then waste thou an happy Adam: O thank God for that: now
art thou unhappy and in misery, thank thy self, thy self will sin for
that. Thou waste once in the favor of God, he showed himself a most
favorable father unto thee, whilst thou behauedst thy self as an obedient
child: but now has he justly turned thee of. Thou wast once the free friend
of God, but now art become the sworn servant of sin, and bondslaue of
Satan: this is spoken as by the mouth of God. John. 15.
Then are you my friends, if you do what I command you: now therefore art
thou an enemy unto God because thou have neglected his holy commandment:
whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin: John. 8.
therefore art thou Adam out of Gods service: he that sins is of the
Devil: thou haste sinned Adam, 1. John. 3.
therefore art thou not of God. Thou did once receive a blessing at Gods
hand, thou did feel no part of pain, God cared altogyther for thee, thou
tookest no care for thy self, thou wast warm without clothes, naked without
shame, satisfied without travel, thy meat was put into thy mouth, God had so
blessed every thing for thee, that the earth, the herbs, the trees, the
cattle, the fowls, the fish, they gave thee their fruit and yielded their
increase of their own accord, in the mean while might thou take thy
pleasure in thy garden: but now thou haste sinned Adam, therefore must thou
harden thy hands to labor, thou must set thy shoulders to heavy burdens,
thou must buie thy bread dearly with the sweat of thy face: this might have
been foreseen: had thou not sinned, thou need not have sweated: but there
is no remedy that man may find. Thou art sick Adam, thou art sick unto
death, thou have provoked the wrath of God, thou have caused him to pour out
his vengeance, and to open his cup of curses. O behold how the wrath of God
being once kindled, ouerrunneth the whole world, for the disobedience of man:
see what a flame rises of the burning spark of sin: John. 9.
As before in obedience man was blessed, so in disobedience, of the justice of
God must he needs be cursed: harken therefore unto the dreadful judgment
and hard sentence pronounced upon disobedience Adam, thus says the Lord,
Gene. 3.
because thou have eaten of the tree which I commanded thee thou should
not eat of, Cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sorrow shalt thou eat of
it, all the days of thy life, thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth
unto thee, in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return
to the earth, thou art dust, and to dust thou shall return again. O
lamentable fall, O pitiful case, wherein thou now stand (Adam) so cladde
and clogged with the intolerable burden of sin, so overwhelmed with the
bloody floudes of Gods vengeance and curses, so pitifully and plentifully
poured out upon thy head, and besides this he may no longen enjoy his
paradise, he is dispossessed thereof, he is banished, he is turned abroad into
the wide world, whereas now he might not so much as come near the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, for the which he ventred so far, neither might any
longer enjoy any part of that liberty, as to eat of all other the trees and
fruits of the garden, and lost also the fight of the tree of life. These are
the wages of sin paid as debte due unto a sinful and disobedient man: Let
us therefore by this know our selves what we are: What is Adam? he is but dust,
he is hated of GOD, he is ashamed of himself, he is cursed, he is sick with
sin, he is dead, he is twice dead, subject to mortality, and subject to
eternal damnation. Cry out then (Adam) give thy Children warning, that they
may know themselves, tell them in what case thou stand, and what an
inheritance thou have purchased for them. Thus says your father (O children of
men) he that has cares to hear, let him hear. I was once a man, a free man,
a blessed man, full of life as God had breathed into me, the light shining
round about me, the mercy of God embrasing me on every side: if I beheld
the earth, there was blessing for me, ingraued as it were in the herbs, the
flowrs and the fruits thereof, turning me to the firmament, there I saw the
sun, the moon, the stars, in them was God to be seen a blessed God,
likewise in the waters there were innumerable tokens of Gods tender mercy
toward me: so far was I in the favor of my creator, I might stand in his
presence enjoying his joyful countenance, yea, he made me like unto his own
Image: Psalm. 49.
But alas wretch that I am, when I was in honor knew not my self, forgot my
duty, and became far unlike to my God, not like to my self, but altogether
like unto a beast, yea, rather worse tha^ a beast, for behold ye dull ore he
knows his owner, Esaias. 1.
and the simple Ass he knows his masters crib: but I man, nay the shadow of
man, a very worm and no man, I could not bear the yoke of my creator, I would
not harken unto his voice, I denied him my service, I have sinned I have
sinned, therefore I am worthily rewarded: I presumed and am therefore brought
low: I advanced my self, and therefore I am thrown down: I have eaten without
need, and therefore I am subject to hunger, I pine away for desire of the fruit
of that pleasant garden, I thirste as the Heart after the waters of those
sweet running rivers, I am become of the son of God the child of wrath, I
am clean altered, I have lost the light, I walk in darkness, of a blessed
creature I am become a cursed caitife: Where may I rest myself? I have sinned,
and my sin is ever before me, against thee alone, against thee (Lord) have I
sinned: I dare not present, my self in thy presence, I tremble at thy voice, I
am ashamed of my self. Whither then may I flee? what stay may I find? I sink
in sin. O that sting of death, how it pierces me. O death, O grave, yours
is the victory, and thou Satan mine enemy how ruefully thou roarest? thou
stand with open mouth ready to devour me, and I find yet no defense: Thou
subtle serpent that drewest me into this net, how thou spettest thy poison,
how busy art thou about my heel? how fast hangest thou? how suckest thou
my blood? O that I could shake thee of, or that I might bruise thy head: And
thou Eve, which should be my comfort, thou have as much need of comfort
thy self, thou should have comforted me, but thou have deceived me, and thy
self also, we are become a cursed couple, and with my creator I find this
comfort, thou shall die the death: verily it had been better for me never to
have been made, than so to have fallen into the hands of the living God. This
might be a true confession of Adams follye, and the description of his estate
after his fall: wherein we have to consider what we are of our selves without
Christ, even as it were sworn enemies, and at utter defiance with God.

The sixth Chapter.
That all Adams posterity are joined with him in the same guiltiness of
sin, and so stand in the same miserable estate.
NOw the matter standing at this stay, if God did so stretch his mercy, as
that he would voutsafe to take us into his favor again, and to make
atonement with us, if we may perceive him notwithstanding our frowardness to
receive us as his children, then if we did not worthily esteem that love, we
were worthy double damnation. But let every man be thus minded that he stands
in case like with Adam. Let every one consider his necessity and search his
wound, and see what need he has of such a medicine: for some peradventure
there be, having so little taste of the truth, that they will say: what tell
ye me of Adam? what have I to do with him? Other not considering their own
infirmity, in whom the inposthume of sin lies so hidden, that they will
bear themselves as whole and sound, whereas within like painted Sepulchers,
they are full of corruption, having nothing in them to show when they shall
come to be opened, but rustie and rotten bones, and such sayings proceed from
them as do declare their hollow hearts puffed up with painted hypocrisy and
double dissimulation: These men will say I am not like Adam, or if I had been
in Adams case, I would have looked better before I had made so rash a leap:
But, O thou man, dissemble not with God, judge thy self least thou be judged
of the Lord: search the bottom of thy conscience, take thy glass in thine
hand: is it a true glass? what then find thou there but ye very face of
Adam, be it never so well colored? It is true, it is to true, every one of us
are fallen, we have sinned every mothers child, as truly as we are the seed
of sinful Eue^, it is but vain to say this, if I had been in Adams coat, for
we have each one of us in our coats clothed a sinful Adam: or to say, if I
had been in his case, for every man's skin is the case of a sinner: Nay we
may not so rid our hands, we can not wash our fingers so clean but that
pitche of sin will stick fast what soever face be set on the matter. O thou
man that yet know not thy self, that art so benumbed of thy senses, that
thou feel not the serpent which lies gnawing at thy heel, which sleep
in a dead slumber, and feel not the sting of death fast fired in thy
flesh, which breedest in thy breast the consuming worm of sin: awake out
of thy slumber, stand up and hearken to the cry of Esdras in his disputation
with the Angel: 2. Esdr. 7.
O Adam (says he) what haste thou done? for in that thou haste sinned, thou
art not fallen alone, but thy fall also redoundeth unto us that come of thee:
and so says the Apostle: that by one man sin entered into the world, and
death by sin, and so went death over all men, for as much as al men have
sinned: this floude of sin, it goes with a higher stream tha^ the flood of
Noe, that went even over the top of the Arc, for so says S. John, the whole
world is set on wickedness. Thus do they say of us, and we can make no better
of our selves: we are lost, every one of us have gone astray, we have lost our
selves in the wild wood of worldly wickedness, following that blind guide
our own wilful appetite, Adam he gave the first onset, and we brake not the
array: he brake the ice, and we are lept into the ditch: we are all hong on one
hook like fish taken with the bait, for we have tasted of the cup of short
sweet concupiscence: and as Esdras says, 2. Esdr. 8.
we and our fathers have all one disease, meaning sin that shrewe amongst the
sheep of Gods pasture: we are al sick of sin, that is, the grief that
Esdras complains of. Jeremy. 31. The fathers have eaten a sour grape, and
the childrens teeth are set on edge withal. This Proverb did the people use
in the time of Jeremy, murmuring against God, as though they were punished
for the offense of their fathers: But thus says the Lord: every one shall die
for his own iniquity, every man that eats the sour grape, his teeth shall
be set on edge. Now what father, what child is it that has not tasted of the
sour grape of sin? David makes thy confession: we have sinned, we have done
wickedly with our fathers: reckon all the children to the last, all the fathers
to the first, who is it that has not eaten with Adam? the Apple, that grape,
it sticks yet in our teeth, we are all choked with the core of carnal
concupiscence: that subtle counsel of the Serpent which deceived the first
man, it will also deceive the last, that venime has infected the whole race,
the whole brood of Adams birds: David he thus says, of no worse man than
himself, I was borne in iniquity, Psalm. 51.
and in sin has my mother conceived me: Behold no sooner conceived in Eve,
but as soon deceived of the Serpent: and this has God to lay against us as he
does against the Israelites: Thy first father has sinned, Esaias* 43.
and thy teachers have transgressed against me. Seeing then we have tasted one
meat, seeing that we have sucked sin of the forbidden fruit, what may we
look for but to be served of the same sauce, even that bitter gall the
dreadful curse of God to turn to duste, and to dye the death: In this state
stand we, unless God take pity on us, we are fallen, we lie flat on our
faces, we are become dustie and deadly, we can not help our selves, but as the
byrd taken in the net, we lie fast fettered, our own eyes not serving us to
epsy any way to wind out, we are not able to move our feeble legs, nor to
stretch forth our weary hands, our souls are sick, our hearts are faint, we
must needs yield to our enemy, and be taken as prisoners of Satan that fierce
Serpent and fiery Dragon.

The seventh Chapter.
That the sin wherewith God may charge every one of us can neither be bidden
by us, nor excused by blaming any other.
Now by this we may consider our fall, that we are lost without some special
remedy, and that we have no part in Paradise, we are in darkness without
light, sick for sin, panting for breath, and bleeding to death. But yet before
we despair, let us look about us, and see whither we can epsy any hook to
hang our hope on, let us confer and take counsel with our father Adam what
is to be done: if there appear any staff to stay on let us there catch
hold, if we have any thing to say for our selves, it is good to speak in time.
What then shall we say? how shall we begin with God? let him that thinks
himself best speak first: will he say thus: I am righteous, I walk uprightly, I
have recovered my self with good works: either I am not fallen, either I have
deserved to be restored again? Such indeed was the saying of the Pharisie
justifying himself, Luke. 18.
so he laid out before God his fardle of fastings, his rustie pack of alms
and tithes: but how sped he? the nearer the Church he made himself to be,
the further he was from GOD, he departed home righteous in his own eyes, but
so much the more unrighteous before GOD. O play not the Pharisees, forget not
your selves whose children you are, what else but the child of perdition, O
earth, earth, that thou should make so much of thy self. Nay this is not the
way to recover the lost Paradise: this was that fools Paradise whereinto the
Galathians were brought, and wherefore S. Paul rebukes them: O ye foolish
Galathians, who has bewitched you? Gala. 3.
are ye foolish (says he) to seek your perfection in your flesh? Take heed
then. S. Paul counts thee but for a fool, if thou go that way to work, as
to say mine own deserts shall raise me up from my fall: no it will be but a
vain brag in thee, and the increase of thy sin, to say, I have no sin,
1. John. 1.
that were but to prove thy self a lier: for if we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, nay, in so saying we make God a
liar, so far as lies in us: this therefore is but a stolen feather,
belonging to a better bird, it is the arms of our heavenly king Christ, it is
his ensign wherewith he triumphs over his enemies to say this: who of you
is able to reprove me of any sin? let us not rob Christ of his honor, let
us not make Gods of our selves: for who is good but God? To say that we are
guiltless before the judgment seat of God, in that we shall have a thousand
witnesses against us, even our own conscience crying and conuincing us: it were
a better way to confess our selves sinners, for that way there may be some
hope: for if we acknowledge our sins, God is merciful to forgive us, 1.
John. 1.
and to cleanse us from al unrighteousness: This way did the holiest of all
take: for what says David that chosen of God, Psalm. 51.
he cries: against thee, against thee only have I sinned, and my sin is
ever before me: this was the confession of the father, and his wise son
Solomon whom God had endued with such gifts, what has he to say but guilty?
1. King. 9.
wherefore he makes his prayer, and as it were aforehande bespeaketh the mercy
of God for him and his people, for he foresawe (as he says) that there is no
man which sins not: and he makes this question: Prouer. 10.
who can say I have made mine heart clean, I am clean from sin? And Job a
just man (as the markette of man's justice goes) he says unto God holding up
his hand: I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee? Job. 7.
And Paul the elect vessel, does not he also say guilty, when he protests
thus of himself: I know that in me, Romans 7.
that is, in my flesh there dwells no good thing: nay he felt the burden of
sin so heavy on his back, that it causes him to cry with a great groan and
deep sigh: Oh wretch that I am who shall deliver me from this body of death.
And that holy Apostle Peter what said he but guilty, when he said unto our
Savior, depart from me (O Lord) I am a sinful man. Let us therefore follow
the wise counsel of the wise son of Syrach. My son (says he) justify not
thy self before the Lord, Cap. 7.
for he knows thine heart: This account therefore must we make of our selves:
we are bare Adams, and naked Eues, we have nothing to hide our sins, but the
more we seek to cloak them, the more they do appear, our own works they be
but fig leaves, they will not hide our nakedness, we shall be ashamed of
them, and will be feign to hide our heads from the presence of the Lord, when
the cool of the day comes, that he will call us to account. But why do I
compare them to fig leaves? the Prophet has made a meeter comparison of
them: what is our righteousness like unto? it is almost a shame to speak of
them as they deserve: they are (says he) like unto a cloth bespotted with the
flowers of a woman. O shameless hypocrites that can present the most holy
God, with the shameful cloutes and filthy rags of their own righteousness,
and offer that a price of their redemption. Has not God then left a law of
righteousness by the which we shall be judged? Yea verily. But who will stand
to the trial thereof that he has kept that law? he that thinks that
justification comes this way, let him harken a little to the doctrine of
S. Paul. Romans 3.
By the law (says he) comes the knowledge of sin, that is, it proves us
guilty, it conuinceth us of unrighteousness: and there is the office of the
law: but concerning our justification, we know (says he) that what soever
the law says, it says it to them which are under the law, that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world found culpable before GOD. And this is his
conclusion: therefore by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified.
Nay let us not take this way, let us rather crave a pardon than plead the
law: for that we see is a bone that choketh us all: if we stand upon the plea,
we are sure to be cast in the great debte of sin, and after to be thrown in
that prison of darkness, never to be let loose again, no not til we have
paid the uttermost farthing. Yet then we slide, we fall, here is no hold to
be had, no rest to be found: which way then shall we now turn us? Shall we
seek excuses to cloak our offenses? Shall we say this man or that man
provoked me to wickedness? had not this cause been, I had not transgressed:
neither will this cloak serve us, it is not able to keep off the smoking
rain of Gods wrath, which is poured down out of heaven upon all
unrighteousness. This way was first of al said, but it would not prevail
with God: for when God called Adam to reckening and said, why have thou eaten
of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou should not eat? then did
Adam put it over to Eve and so said, the woman which thou gave to me, she
brought of the tree and I did eat: then God called the woman, saying, why have
thou done this, and she laid the blame upon the Serpent, having no more to say
but this: The Serpent beguiled me and I did eat. But God held not Adam
excused by Eve, nor Eve by the Serpente, every one of them bears his
iniquity, and they drink all of one cup, that is, of the curse of God: so he
that gives evil counsel, shall have the reward of evil, and he that
follows evil counsel, because he has sinned, he must be paid with the
wages of sin: here then are we as far to seek as at the first, Without
Christ is naught but desperation.
here then are we as far out of the way as before, here is no sure ground for
us to stand on, yet that sting of death sticks as deep in us as ever it did.

The eight Chapter.
The distress and despair of man, in the view of his own wickedness.
How then? is there no remedy to be found? must we needs lie still sweating
in the grease of our own fleshly wickedness? is there none to deliver us from
this body of death? if it be so, then suck on Serpent, then death take thy
pleasure, then crave thy right: grave open thy mouth: Hell swallowe up thy
portion: for thou God haste forsaken us, thou have yielded up all thy right:
whyther shall we flee then? where may we find rest for our souls? Thy face
(thou mighty one) is always against us: we sweat, we burn, we fry with the
fury of wrath, all places are to hot for man to rest on, so is thine
indignation kindled. If I say I have done justly, then thou reprouest me as a
liar: Psalm. 130.
if I have sinned then thou will straightly look unto me, and will not hold
me guiltless of mine iniquity, and seeing thou markest iniquity straightly,
who shall abide it? Job. 10.
wherefore then has thine hands fashioned me? O that I had perished in my
conception and that none eye had seen me, and that I were as I had not been,
that my grave had been my mother: behold I go and shall not return, even to
the land of darkness, into a land I say dark as darkness it self, into
the shadow of death, where is no order, but the light is there as darkness,
my days are as the smoke, and my life as the shadow. O ye worms I am your
food, O corruption thou art my father, O death thou art my mother, out of thee
was I taken, and into thee I return, to thee I bequeath that which I had
from thee, this lump of earth, this mass of flesh. To whom shall I betake
my spirit? I may not long possess it my self, seeing thou will not have it
(thou holy one) I must needs yield it up as a pray unto mine enemy.

The ninth Chapter.
That Christ from the beginning has been, is, and shall be the only stay and
comfort of all sorts of men.
But thou son of man stay thee a while in patience, do not so give over thy
soul, as to say thy sin is greater than it may be forgiven: humble thy
self, acknowledge thy rebellion, but despair not, cast not thy self headlong
into Hell: is there no remedy to be found on earth? then lift up thine eyes
to heaven: there is a comfort, there is a comfort coming, there is a saving
health in hand: thy wound is great indeed, but there is a strong medicine a
tempering: thy fall was grievous, but thy rising up shall be as wonderful:
many and mighty are thine enemies, but there is one that shall fight for thee,
whose name is the Lord of Hosts, and he shall subdue all power. Behold thy
creator has not utterly cast thee off, thou have found favor in his sight. S.
John says, God loves the world, yea, such store of mercy there is with God,
that although we were his enemies, yet he is become our God again, Gene. 8.
and will stand an enemy against our enemies, and although he sees that the
imagination of man's heart is evil even from his youth, yet he does not utterly
cast us off: Go to then Lord we beseech thee, we have seen thy judgments
how terrible they are, we are full fed with the gall of thy bitter vengeance,
now if it be thy good pleasure, turn thy face from our sins, and blot out
our offenses, create in us a new heart, renew a right spirit in our bowels,
show thy self once again a merciful God, we know we are not worthy to be
called thy children, we have sinned against heaven and against earth, they
bare part of our curse: against thee, against thee have we sinned: but if it
be thy good pleasure, turn thy loving countenance toward us. Surely there
is mercy with God, he has heard the gronings and afflictions of his people,
he is moved with compassion and pity toward us: behold we that were
shattered in pieces, lying still in the sound of sin and buried up in death,
the Lord of his infinite goodness, goth about togather us up and to set us
upright again, he intends to cast Adam in a new mould, and to make him a
new creature, not of earth earthly, but of heaven heavenly. For there is a
Lamb a killing, whose blood shall wash away our sins, there is a stone
framing, it shall be laid in Sion, it shall fall upon our enemy, it shall
grind his head and crushe it in pieces, we are but heel hurted, but he shall
be wounded on the head. And it shall be thine own child (Adam) thine own
seed (Eve) that shall thus subdue the Serpent. So good and gracious is the
Lord, he promises a victory, his own mouth has spoken it, and with his
mighty hand has he brought it to pass: for God so loves the world that he
has sent: what has he sent? even that saving seed, that innocent Lamb
provided from the beginning, he has sent his only begotten son bringing
with him that pearl, not to perish, with that heavenly treasure, to have life
everlasting: here then may we cast anchor, all other remedies failing us,
this is it we must trust unto, this is the sure pledge of Gods favor toward
us, without this comfort we had been altogether comfortless, but now is our
joy full and plenteous. This is that joyful tidings sent from heaven, brought
by the Angel, belonging to all, as well as to those joyful shepherdes: Luke. 2.
be not afraid (says the angel) for behold I bring you tidings of great joy,
that shall be to all the people, that unto you this day is borne a Savior in
the city of David, which is Christ. O glorious day, wherein shines such a
sun, the very sun of God, the bright sun of righteousness: in that day so
bright were the beams of the sun, that they shyned eue^ into the dim eyes of
Abraham: John. 8.
this was the glorious day which he saw with such joy. Now by this is God
truly become the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: here is the performance of
the heavenly promise and blessed bargain made for him and us all betwixt
Abraham and his God: for when it might seem a hope against hope, that aged
Abraham should have any such seed, and the Lord knew that Sara would laugh
and wonder at his word, yet the Lord of his love wherewith he loved the
world, established his covenant with them, that in them sholude all nations
be blessed, (yea, we of England and Irelande, have our part in this blessing)
and of Sara Kings also should come. And to confirm us in opinion that this is
the very true promised seed by the which Abraham should become a blessed
father, and we his happy Children: and by the which Adam should subdue the
Serpent, S. Paul proves unto us arguing of the form of the promise, he
says, Gala. 3.
not to the seeds (as speaking of many) but, and to thy seed, as of one, as
though he had said: of all the Kings coming of Sara, yet was there but one
by whom we shall obtain the kingdom of heaven, of all the seed of Abraham
which was innumerable as the stars of the heaven, and the sand of the Sea
shore, yet was there but one seed which brought this blessing with it, and
that was as he there says, only Christ, and as S. John here speaks, the
only begotten son of God: for it was not that earthly Isaac, that fleshely
son of Sara: but it is this heavenly Isaac, the only begotten son of God,
that brings his blessing on his back, neither was it that Jacob the begotten
of Isaac, but the only begotten of God in whom the promise was performed:
this is that wise wary Jacob, that supplanteth and undermines all envious
Esaus: this is the mighty and sturdie Israel, that subdueth all powers, to
whom al knees (be they never so stiff) shall crouch here beneath and above in
earth, in hell, and in heaven: this is the very seed out of which springs
all blessing, all that are blessed among the begotten of men, it is by this
begotten of God, this seed blesses both the begetting and begotten, the son
and the father, the first as Alpha, and the last as Omega: Alpha. Omega.
without this heavenly Jacob, had that been but a detested Esau, and not a
beloved Jacob: without this Isaac, had that other been in worse case than
wild Ismael, and in this Isaac stood the chief joy of Abraham, yea before
Abraham was, this Isaac was: for but in respect of him had blessed Shem been
an accursed Ham: it is written that Noah found grace in the sight of the Lord:
Gene. 6.
had it not been for this gracious Lord, he had not found such grace, for it
was the hope of this grace given by Christ that bore the Arc, and saved him
from those roaring floudes. And this Isaac stood by Abell shadowing him with
his blessing, while Caine was cursed: and this is the self seed that saves
Adam from the serpent. And that blessed among women the mother of our Savior,
wherein stood her blessedness but in that the Angel said: Thou have found
favor with God, for lo, thou shalt conceive in thy womb and bear a son,
and shall call his name Jesus: Luke. 1.
and she of her self: from henceforth shall all nations call me blessed. From
that time when God had so showed his favor, as that she was ouershadowed by
the power of the highest, and had conceived that fruit of the womb, then from
that time became she blessed, and not she only, but all those nations calling
her blissed have part with her in the blissed seed, in the conceived fruit
Jesus. This therefore is the love, wherewith God so loves us, that he sending
his only begotten son, his dearly beloved Christ, we stand in possibility
to become the blessed sons of blessed Abraham: let us therefore the children
with our father rejoice in this day, whereof the Angel speaks, and whereof
the Lord himself says: Thou art my son, Psalm. 2.
this day have I begotten thee: This day was such, as many Kings and Prophets
desired to see, yea happy were they that were so happy as to hope for this
day: for all the blessed among the fathers rested in this hope? This was the
comfort of Jacobs feeble spirit now entering into ye grave, for thus he
gloryed before his son Joseph visiting him in Egypt in his sickness, and to
him was it joyful tidings to hear that saying at his fathers mouth: Gene. 48.
God almighty appeared unto me at Luze in the land of Canaan and blessed me,
in the which blissing was contained the promise of the hoped and performed
savior: and a little before his last breath, he declares his hope by these
words: O Lord I have waited for thy salvation: Gene. 49.
and this was the comfort wherewith the prophets comforted themselves and the
people of God: declaring it in such sort as though the insensible creatures,
the heavens and the earth, the mountains and the valleys should be refreshed
withal: such was the prophecy of Esaye. Cap. 49.
Rejoice O heavens, and be joyful O earth, burst forth into praise O
mountains, for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy on his
afflicted. And by the prophet Zachary thus said the Lord: Rejoice with great
joy O daughter Sion, Cap. 5.
shoute for joy O daughter Jerusalem, behold thy King comes unto thee, And
by Micheas: And thou Bethleem in the land of Judah art not the least among the
Princes of Judah, for out of thee shall come the governor that shall feed my
people Israel: and to the comfort of the gentiles thus he says, speking as
it were to his Christ: Behold thou shall call a nation that thou know not,
Esaias. 55.
and a nation that knew not thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord
thy God, and the holy one of Israel: thus was Christ always a comfort for
the hope of the fathers to rest upon, and by him was their hope full with joy:
So did God love them his chosen of Israel, that he has sent the^ the governor
that should feed his people, he has sent them the good shepeherd that should
save the lost sheep. But this love is such that it rests not in the compass
of Jerusalem, for S. John says, it is the love wherewyth God loved the world.
God has sent his son and he has sent him, as well for the light and joy of
the Gentile, as for the glory of the Jew: and we that knew not God may now
know him: and now if faith fail not, it shall please God as well to be called
the God of England as the God of Israel: for he has sent the promised seed
of Abraham, that shall bless the one nation as well as the other, and he has
sent his son to bestow his love upon all parts of the world, that in him
all people should be blessed.

The tenth Chapter.
What Christ is, and in what state he wrought the work of our salvation.
Now this hitherunto spoken, we have been thus far in the favor of God, and
have tasted how gracious the Lord is, that we know, even for the love he
bears unto us, he has sent us a redeemer which shall be a reconciliation
for us, and shall quicken us lying in the shadow of death, that we might not
perish, but live for ever: and who it is that he makes our redeemer, as by
the flesh the blessed seed of Abraham, a true man, and yet the only begotten
son of God, him he has not spared to make a Messanger of salvation unto the
world, and this we know that God has not given him to any other, rather than
to us, he is our Savior, if we be so happy as to receive him, for we being
graffed in Christ are members of that world which God so loves: Now adding
to this, the knowledge by what means Christ wrought this reconciliation, how
he has throughlye appeased the wrath of the father which we see was so
kindled against us, and understanding what price he paid for our redemption,
then shall the love of God appear unto us by a brighter light, and as it were
in a clear sun shining. Our Savior says, my father works and I work,
we have seen the work proper to the father, in that he has sent the son,
and thus far forward we see our Savior in his work, as that according to
the determinate will of the father, he is come down into the earth, and has
debased himself to the base estate of our frail flesh, so by this, the work
of our regeneration is in a goodly forwardness, now does Adam begin to move
himself, to wax warm, and to revive with a new spirit: here lies the
Serpent a bleeding, but by this is not the victory gotten. Let us see then
how Christ quitteth himself, and reuengeth our quarrel. What force? what
weapons does he use? far other than man would imagine. He overcomes with
kindness: his armor is preaching, pains, patience, shame, rebuke, reproach,
hard handling, evil entreatie, tauntes in the teeth, and sclaunderous
reports, scorns and scourgings, false accusations, unjust judgment, and in
the end, bitter and bloudye death. This was the marvelous working of God,
that our Savior should pass those hard pykes to save us from the sword of
the enemy. And behold as soon as he entered into the world, he straight gave
the onset, he felt incontinently of our infirmities: for see the Lord of
David, the King of Kings in his birth how simply he lies wrapped in swaddling
cloutes: Thus is it described in the Gospel. A stable was his best house, and
a cratche his Cradle, Luke. 2.
for (says the Evangelist) there was no room for him in the Inn: whose was
the earth, and the store thereof, at whose commandment were the heavens,
there was no room for him to rest in. Well therefore might that complainte be
made to the confusion of unkind and beastly man. The Foxes have holes, Math. 8.
and the birds of heaven have nests, but the son of man how is he
entreated? he has not whereon to rest his head: Neither was he suffered to
have that little room with rest, but he was feign to flee touch, and to avoid
from Bethleem into Egypt, as when Herod in his fury sent forth his slaughter
men, and bloody butchers, with this commandment, that they should slay all
the male children that were in Bethleem, and in all the coasts thereof, from
two years old and under, seking thereby (as it was forewarned by the Angel)
to murder the child Jesus, whom he heard should be borne King of the Jews.
Such a welcome had our Savior into the world: and afterward in process of
time being conversant in Jerusalem, and the country about, with what travel
preached he the kingdom of God? and how few received that glad tidings? how
many a miracle did he? and what thanks had he? and how small were the number of
such as believed, and would be content to be called the followers of Christ,
not disdayning the name of a Christian? Now when he was most busy about the
work of our salvation, as when he was most occupied in feeding with the
word, and converting by miracles, the report that many made of him, it was no
better, but that his own held him as a stranger, some said he was a sinner,
Luke. 7.
some a seducer of the people, some a glutton and a drinker of wine, some a man
stark mad, yea, and some gave him this good word, that he wroughte by the
power of Beelzebub: Bitter words for the son of God: yet this was his
patience to bear. Of the better sort, some took him for Elias, some for John
Baptist, and some were so good as to call him a Prophet, but few were there
found of faithful Peter's, that judged so right of him, as to say: Thou art the
son of the living God. And with whom had our Savior his conversation here
on earth? he was to be had in such reputation, as of whom the almighty
father forespake by this Prophet, even him that was both a king and a
Prophet: I have set my king upon Sion mine holy mountain: Psalm. 2.
and such a one was he, as David acknowledged to be his Lord and souereygne:
The Lord said unto my Lord, Psalm. 110.
sit thou at my right hand. etc. It had bin therefore the part of Princes to
have bin always in his presence, and the duty of Kings to have kept him
company, or rather to have attended on him, as whose shoe latched they were
not worthy to unloose: But true is the Prophet in his saying. Psalm. 2.
The Kings and Princes of the earth they assembled and bente themselves
against him: there was no company nor comfort with them for the meek King of
Sion and the poor Prince of Jerusalem. For we see how Herod persecuted and
hunted him, as the Fox the sheep, from Bethleem to Egypt, from one place to
another, and it was treason to Cesars person to call Christ a King, he might
not be taken for Cesars friend that would speak on Christ's part to
mainteyne his kingdom. But our Saviors kingdom was not of this world,
John. 19.
therefore no marvel though the kings of the earth were so cruelly set
against him: Our Savior was also the anointed of God, a Prince, and a
princely Priest for ever, of whose body Melchisedech was the shadow, he was
that Doctor admitted and authorized to teach, with that heavenly and
thundering voice of the father, this is my beloved son in whom I am well
pleased, hear him: it would have besemed therefore those high priests, looked
they never so high, that ruffling guard of Pharisees, those great Doctors the
Scribes, to have had their conversation with him, of whom they should receive
their salvation: if they had harkened to him then might they have reckened
themselves wise, if they had followed that good shepehearde, then might they
have gloried truly, as otherwise they did vainly, that they had been the
leaders of the blind. But Christ was not for their tooth, neither any meet
man for their company, he was a stone cast aside of those builders, although
he approved him self the chief corner stone: they could not reprove him, yet
they refused him: they might find no fault with him, yet he could find no
favor with them, he put them many times to silence, and stopped their mouths
in reasoning and argument, yet they spared no words in misreporting him: he
sought all means to win them, yet they disdayned him as one unworthy to
have place amongst them: for when that carnal spiritualitie, the high Priests
and presumptuous Pharisees saw that Christ and his doctrine began somewhat to
be accepted of the people, they thinking that a derogation to their worships,
John. 7.
sent out their officers to take Christ as he was teaching in the temple: but
these officers although they came with full purpose to have apprehended our
savior, yet so were they ravished with his heavenly preachings and wonderful
words flowing from him so plentifully, that they had no power to do their
purpose, but returned again making this answer to their masters, never man
spoke like this man: but so was not the malice of those hypocrites stayed, and
with such words they stormed and stamped against him continually, saying unto
those their messangers: are ye also deceived? does any of the Rulers, and of
the Pharisees believe in him? but this people which know not the law are
cursed: So did the Serpent deceive them that they did still spit their venom
against that unspotted lamb that sought their salvation: they held him
accurssed that followed Christ: this suffered our Savior: the high Priests
could not look so low as to enterteine him amongst them: the Pharisees and
Scribes in their own conceit were to wise, to holy and to good, to take him
into their company, it should have stained their good name to be called
Christians, it was not for their worships to have professed themselves the
disciples of Christ: so was our Savior an abiecte, an outcast, and made of
no reputation, he was disdained both of Priest and Prince, and this is
marvelous in our eyes. But it was the good will of God, so to provide for us,
that we should not perish: for Christ hereby has approved himself the true
anointed, the self Savior and very Messiah, and David also a true Prophet,
Psalm. 118.
saying: that the head stone of the corner should be refused of the builders:
they made no more of Christ than a stone to stumble and to spurn at: where
then had our Savior his conversation? he betook himself (as he disdained
not the name of a physician coming to have the sick) even to be amongst
Publicanes and sinners: there was his company to visit poor Publicanes, and
to save simple sinners that was his comfort. This was the comfortable tidings
that he had to send John Baptist into prison, The blind see, the halt go,
Luke. 7.
the leapers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise again: This was his
guard, he was still busy about these, the blind, the Leaper, the lame, the
deaf and the dead: in the mean space where was the rich, the wise and the
welthy? Nay they would not be taken for Christ's soldiers: but the poor
(says he) receive the glad tidings of the Gospel: and happy it was that all
fell not besides, but that there stood some at receite to receive the precious
seed sown by our Savior: thus we see a great piece of the love of God
working in his son our Savior: for what love is this, that the son of God
should so humble himself to set us in honor with his heavenly father, but yet ye
greatest piece of love, and the chief token of gods mercy toward us, is yet
behind, and that which is unspoken is more than all that hertofore has bin
spoken: and that does S. Paul set forth after a most reverent sort, howbeit no
man may utter it with worthy words: that place which I mean is in the second
to the Philippians whom he exhorts by the example of Christ to humility,
and wherein for our purpose is to be seen the love of God working in his only
begotten, eue^ to the uttermost point that may be imagined within all the
compass of love, and in that he proceeds by degree, gathering up in short
sum all which is spoken in our former words concerning our Savior, that
it might enter into us with a deeper consideration: this is his saying: let
the same mind be in you that was even in Christ Jesus, who being in the form
of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but he made himself of
no reputation, and took upon him the form of a seruante, and was made like
unto men, and was found in shape as a man: Here let us stay a while, and
divide Paul's sentence, keeping back that which follows, until we have
somewhat considered this part of Gods love, Christ the son of God a very
God, a glorious God equal with the father, (and no wrong neither) is come down
from the bright heavens to the bare earth, is content to be made of man's
metal, taking on him very flesh, well pleased to be cast in the mould and
simple shape of man, no whit disdaining the womb of a woman, content to be
called the seed of Eve, and laying aside his glory, and as it were hyding his
godhead, emptied himself of all honor, becoming of the son of God the
son of man, like unto man, a very man, a servant of men, and what else but a
slave, to save men: if there had here a stay been made, yet might not the love
of God but seem marvelous toward man: But that which follows in Saint
Paul, that is much more marvelous, that cannot but inflame the heart of the
Christian with the love of God, and break the stony stomach of the infidel. To
what may I then compare those words following? it is a thunderbolt that me
thinks should sound through the whole heavens, piercing the clouds and shaking
the foundations of the earth, bringing with it a smoking fire, by the heat
whereof the very mountains melte like wax, joined with a wind that hurleth
down the high Ceders of Libanus: Harken then (O heaven) give ear (O earth)
see the love of the almighty: he (says the Apostle) even that glorious God,
beside that he became man, in his manhood he humbled himself and became
obedient: with what humility? how far was he obedient? even to the death:
what death? the death of the cross. This is that special love, God so loves
the world, that he has given his son to be a sacrifice for our sins, to be
slain that we might not perish, and to die that we might have everlasting
life.

The eleventh Chapter.
A description of the passion of Christ and the profit that comes thereby.
But yet that this love might enter deeper, and take a more grounded root in
our hearts, let us somewhat consider the death of the Lord, let us see what a
preparatiue he had to his cup, let us mark the manner of his death, and let us
behold him with our inward eyes in his pangs as he hangs on the cross: this
therefore did our Savior forewarne his disciples what should become of him,
wherein we have also a warning to consider the love of God: Math. 20.
Behold (says he) we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be
delivered into the hands of sinners, unto the chief Priests and unto the
Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to the
Gentiles to mock, and to scourge, and to crucify him. This did our Savior
foresee as a God, and fulfill as a man sent to redeem men: first when the
time of his temptation drew near, his scholars began to scatter and fleet
from him until they left him clean without company and comfort. For some
faynting by default of faith he drove away with a word, John. 6.
when he gave them that lesson concerning ye eating of the flesh and drinking
of the blood of the son of man: this is a hard saying (say they) who can
away with this? so they gave over school and followed their master no
further. Then thought our Savior good to make much of his twelve, and
therefore to hold in them, that they should not start likewise, he turned
unto them as it were grating kindness on them with this pitiful question: and
will you also go from me? Peter's stomach was yet somewhat stout, wherefore he
answered the question with this other: Master to whom shall we go? thou have
the words of eternal life. That was Christ's chief captain: it was to be
thought he would have a bidden the brunt, but of him it shall be said after.
Now by this time Christ had but his chosen twelve with him, and yet one of
them was but a traitor, yea a devil. For in that heavy feast and last supper,
whereat he took his leave as it were of his disciples: then began Satan to
stir himself, to assault and sift the simple soldiers of Christ, and
took full possession of Judas to work by him that horrible treason against
our poor Prince, which sought by kyndnesse to overcome his enemies: for he as
soon as he had received that choking morsel the sour sop, he got him out
about the Devils business, seeking our saviors death and his own destruction.
And for his farewell, says Christ, that thou do, do quicklye, for belyke
he felt panges of temptation already upon him, wherefore upon this his
departure, he comforted himself and the rest of his disciples with those and
the like sayings as did declare the providence of God the Father in this
behalf: Luke. 22.
verily (says he) it goes with the son of man as it is written of him: it
was written, he that eats bread with me, Psalm. 41.
lifts up his heel against me. Whiles that Judas and these blouddie
merchantes were busy about their bargain, valuyng that innocent and saving
soul at.xxx. siluerlings, Christ with part of his Disciples went up into the
Mount Oliuet to make his prayer: where how bitter were his temptations? In
what an agony was he? Luke. 22.
when those bloudye drops of sweat trickled down along that sweet glorious
face? what deep sighs did he fetch? out of how heavy an heart did these
sayings proceed: first to his Disciples, saying, my soul is very heavy unto
death: then in his lamentable prayer: O my father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me? and yet in this distress he humbled him self,
submitting his will to the will of his father. Now after this fit was paste,
and he had ouercommed that temptation, behold those Wolves, that bloody band
appointed by the high Priests and Pharysies comes out with their Lanternes
and lights, as to make search for a thief, with staves and swords, as
against a rebellious traitor, laying hands on him as on a mischievous
murderer. And who was their Captain? even that lost child Judas, he became
their guide: Act. 2
he tracked our Savior in his way, he led those murderers over the brook
Cedron, he brought them into the Garden, John. 18.
where they found that silly sheepehearde with his small flock, that meek
hen having no where to hide his head, with his little brood of Chickens
tremblyng and shaking about him for fear, loking for succor under the shadow
of his wings, who himself was now destitute of all earthly aid: this also
might not but augment his sorrows, that in the same place in that garden, where
they had so often gathered together to their comfort, and where Judas himself
had been diverse times fed at our Sauiors hand with the sweet bread of life,
there he should be given up to the hands of sinners: and how was he betrayed?
Even as that lamentable question imports, Luke. 22.
Judas betrayest thou the son of man with a kiss? Which was to say, thou
whom I have chose^ of many a thousand, one of my twelve familiaes, thou upon
whom I have bestowed so many good turns, to whom I have given freely so many
good lessons, upon whom I have wasted so many words, thou that eatest bread
with me, thou that dippedst in one dish with me, do thou lift up thy heel
against me, and tread me under thy foot? thou that prouidedst for the
sustenance of my body, art thou become the betrayer of my soul? whose
salvation I have sought by so many means, do thou thirst my blood? for
whom I am content to lay down my life, art thou become my hangman? Come
thou unto me with the face of a friend, and give me up to mine enemies?
Call thou me master, and wishest me the curse of the cross? Gyuest thou me
a kiss, and woundest my heart? These sighs no doubt came up with that
question. Now by this time had Judas done his part, he might go hang
himself: In this case then we see our Savior, how he stands as a poor
prisoner delivered into the hands of his mortal enemies, being himself an
immortal God. He that might have had at his call a legion of Angels to
deliver him, is yet contented to become a prisoner, a captive and as a caytiue,
rather than he would break off this work of our redemption which he had
brought so near to perfection. What then followed? the shepeherde was
stricken, and the sheep were scattered: and alas poor Peter what resistance
may thou make? Put up thy sword, and harken what thy Savior says: yea let
us all harken to that voice of humility: shall I not drink of the cup which
my father has given me? John. 18.
So Christ still fights with patience even till he makes his enemies his
footestoole: for behold he is bound with patience, by the hand, the captain
and the officers of the Jews: so as it was appointed of him, he was led as a
sheep brought before the sheerer, to Annas that sharp sheerer: then was he
turned and tossed from one to another, from post to pillar, from the Fox to
the Wolf, from Annas to Cayphas, from Cayphas to Annas again, and still fast
bound for fear of scaping. O what an heavy sight, what a pain was that for
Peter, when he saw his Master standing like a forsaken soul, and a pitiful
prisoner in the hall of the high Priest? Now where was that stout, courage when
he said, though all men be offended for thee, Math. 26.
yet I will not? He followed his master indeed: but a far off for fear.
And when he came to the door of the high Priest, in what a trance, in what a
terroure was he? where was his sword? now where was his heart, when the maid
moved him this question: art not thou one of this man's disciples? what had he
then to answer? he made then a flat denial of his master, he was none of his
disciples, he knew no such man as Christ was: and now was it time for the
cock to crow, for Peter to fall a weeping and a howling: there was Christ
left alone and given over on every side, for the sheep they were all
dispersed. Now that guiltless Lamb with what a sort of wicked wolves was he
beset? There was Annas the first, Caiphas the high Priest, Pilate the
president, there was the assembly of Scribes, the ^ocke of Pharisees: but
thanks be to God the heavenly father, his Christ had patience enough for them
all. There was in that Lamb blood enough for those greedy wolves the rulers
and governors, there were bones enough for those hungry dogs the Scribes,
and flesh to satisfy that swarm of adders the Pharisees: for all those there
was patience enough with our suffering savior, being ready to bear what soever
burden they might devise to oppress him wythall: for they bound him, they
made a scorn and a mock of him, turning him into a strange disguised apparel,
platting a crown of thorns upon his head, adding thereto thorny and gauling
words, being haled and tossed to and fro betwixt Pilate, the Priests and the
people: John. 19.
one crying on this side, behold the man, in dispite of his omnipotent
godheade: on the other side another company crying, hayle King of the Jews, in
contempt of this eternal kingdom: and yet for further trial of his patience
some blindfelded him, some buffetted him, some most shamefullye spued their
spettle on his face: then was he tormented also with Pylates bitter scourge,
and yet no resistance made Christ: remedy was patience: but that was not
thought enough, neither scourging would not serve: therefore he must be
committed again to the hands of Pylate, he must be examined, witness is
sought, and false witness is brought in against the truth it self, yea
although Pylate himself, could not but thus depose for his innocence, saying
and repeating it often: John. 19.
I find no fault in him: wherefore yet this friendship was showed of Pylate,
that the people contented, he should be let loose according to the custom of
the Jews: This was the greatest courtesy that Christ found: he was set
against Barrabas: an holy God compared with a wicked murderer: for so did
Pylate put it to the peoples choice, Math. 27.
saying: Will ye that I let loose unto you Barrabas, or Jesus which is called
Christ? nay, if Christ should have now been let at liberty, then had the
Priests his enemies from the beginning lost al their labor: wherefore Mathewe
reports that they counseled the people to quite Barrabas, and to ask Christ
to be crucified, wherefore the saving and condemnation being referred unto
them, when they cried for Barrabas that he might be saved, then Pylate speaking
somewhat favorably as he durst, on Christ's part, said: what shall I do then
with Jesus? the answer was: let him be crucified. And Pylate demanding again,
what evil has he done? That question might not be heard, because it could
not be answered, but the more they cried, away with him, crucify him. This
was that rufull cry that Christ was content to hear, for all the love of God
that was and should be declared by him toward the world, he had this
reward, crucify him and nothing but crucify him. After this hard sentence,
as a lamb to the slaughter, so was our Savior led out of the City to the
place of his execution, John. 19.
having the company of his Cross, and bearing it part of the way himself:
Number. 21.
Now must our Savior be served as the Serpent in the wilderness, he must be
lift up to the cross: behold he drinks the cup of that curse: (Cursed is
he that hangs on the tree: John. 3. Gene. 22.
) This is the true represented Isaacke, that humbles himself to the altar a
sacrifice for sin, and the Lord suffers that bloody knife withdrawn from
Isaac, to fall upon his only begotten son and to pierce his precious
bowelles that the water might run out which should wash away the sins
of his people. O Christians, O men and brethren, this was ours by right, but
Christ is contented to bear our burden, he is contented to dye, to dye the
death, the shameful death, the cursed death of the bitter cross. Now
behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world: O thou
son of man see what the son of God suffers for thy sake, see how he is
tormented. let his panges enter a little into thy heart, that thou may
consider the love of God toward thee, let that pitiful scricke of our
Savior always ring in thine ear, as when he cried, my God my God why have
thou forsaken me: for so did the sorrows of death gripe him as though he had
indeed been forsaken of his father: wherefore he suffered him to be laid in
the grave also, that he might taste of al our infirmities as well under the
earth as above: howbeit now was it time for the Lord God to gloryfie his son
in the heavens, which had glorified him on ye earth, Psalm. 15.
wherefore he might not leave the soul of his dearly beloved in the grave,
nor suffer his holy one to see corruption: but has raised him up to his right
hand, there to reign with glory until he make his enemies and our enemies,
(if we be true Christians) his footestoole: and thus with the glory of Christ
does the love of God fully appear, toward us: for in all this has God and
his Christ sought our salvation: Math. 18.
for the son of man came for no other purpose, but to save that which was
lost, and by these means in sum has he achieved the end of his message:
Romans 4.
he was delivered to death for our sins, and rose again for our
justification.

The twelfth Chapter.
How only faith wrought in us by the spirit of God, and grounded upon the word
of God, makes us partakers of the fruit of Christ's death.
THus is that worthy work finished. Now may Abraham rejoice with full joy, for
his promised seed is performed, and he has poured out his blessing most
plentifully upon his faithful children: now is Adam truly made up a new
creature, and thus far is he in the favor of God, yt he has sent his only
begotten son to purchase him his pardon: God said in his indignation: thou
shall die the death: (but so has the son pleased him, that he now cries:)
thou shall not perish, but have life everlasting: Now shalt thou live, for
so God loves thee that Christ has dyed in thy stead: now may thou stand
upright, for so God loves thee, that his Christ has fallen for thee: Christ
is risen and behold he so loves thee, that he offers his gentle hand to
raise thee together with himself: he has deceived the serpent that deceived
thee: he shall make his enemies his footestoole, and he has trodden thy
enemies under his feet, for this is thy seed that has crushed his head: he
has obtained a crown of glory, and he makes thee also a glorious
conqueror: All this no doubt did S. John consider in the love of God, when he
wrote this worthy saying of our Savior, God so loves the world, that he has
given his only begotten son, that he should live with us, because we were
dead to him, that he should dye for us, to the end we might live with him,
that he should enter into the earth, to make us an entry into ye heaens. We
have by this seen some shadow of the marvelous work of God concerning our
redemption: we see the loving work of God the father, whose proper praise it
is, that he has sent his son: we have seen also the painful work of God
the son who has suffered as we see: now have we to consider the work of
the holy spirit likewise, whose work it is that we enjoy those benefits
sent us by the father, and brought by the Son: for in whose heart that spirit
works not, to him is the Cross of Christ altogyther fruitless, to him is
Jesus no Jesus, that is, no Savior, and he may enjoy no part of that love of
God which brings life with it: for what? now God has sent his son, is
that sufficient for us? have we without any further ado taken possession of
heaven? are we straight by this in the bosom of Abraham? shall we now take no
further care? is ye Cross of Christ accepted an excuse, indifferently for all?
shall every soul be saved? Nay let no man deceive himself: Christ indeed
has made an entry into Heaven, he has set open a gate unto us: but yet a
straight gate where few shall enter: neither yet is the gate of Hell clean
shut up: no it stands wide open with a gaping mouth, and many shall go that
way. In the general flock, Christ has his sheep, and they are the fewer:
he has also his gotes, and they are the greater part? There is in Gods field
good corn, but that is ouergrowen with evil chafe: there be some likewise
that shall be received with the right hand: O happy are they, for Christ is
theirs altogyther: there are also whose place is provided on the left hand: O
unhappy are they, for they have no part in Christ: let us therefore look
unto our salvation whiles yet the light shines, for as much as there is a
little flock which that good sheephearde has chosen to himself, let us get
into the fold with them, Luke. 13.
and following his council, let us strive to enter in at the strayt gate, and
that in time, least the door be shut against us, when it shall be to late to
knock: Christ is sent unto us, let us beware that we receive him: Christ has
brought this reward with him, to as many of us as do receive him: (that we
should not perish, but live for ever.) Let us therefore provide that we leese
not our part in that precious pearl: what then is there now to be done?
Verily now we have seen the love of God declared by Christ, there is but one
step betwixt us and home, but one word betwixt us and life everlasting:
neither has the holy Evangelist left that out of his place: for those are the
footesteppes he poynteth out unto us, the love of God the father, the patience
and cross of Christ, Galath. 6
finally faith the good gift of the holy Ghost: for this is the condition: who
so believes in Christ sent from God, he should be sure not to perish, but to
have life everlasting. Now then must we make provision for belief, that faith
fail not, this must be all our care: for what shall it profit us though Christ
come into the world, and come again, if he be not received of us. By faith
he must be received, or else he must be refused: his own received him not
says S. John: Cap. 1.
and why, but for lack of faith? for to as many as received him, to them he
gave power to be the sons of God: and what were they? even to them says he,
that believe in his name: accordingly as S. Paul says to the Galathians, Cap.
3.
by faith are ye the sons of God: the believers then they are the beloved
sons of God, they are the right receivers of Christ: when that Christ the
glory of God, first appeared amongst us, then did the Angels proclayme peace
betwixt heaven and earth, and from God goodwill toward men: for Christ
indeed is the true Melchisedech, that is, the King that brought peace with him
into the world. But what shall all this avail us, if we believe not? John. 3.
for so says our Savior himself, he that believes in the son has
everlasting life, and he that obeys not the son, shall not see life, but
the wrath of God abides upon him: so wrath remains for the infidel, what
then for the faithful? there is peace kept in store for him as for a faithful
subject to the king of peace: for we being justified by faith, have peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ: Romans 5. Luke. 2.
that is the saying of the Apostle. Christ is appointed for the fall of many:
who are they but the faythlesse? he is ordained also to be the rising of many:
and who are they but the faithful? for so says our Savior likewise, John. 3.
(who can not belie himself,) he that believes in him, he shall not be
condemned: he that believes not is already condemned, because he believes
not in the name of the only begotten Son of GOD. Christ is also a stone of
diverse operations: 1. Pet. 2.
he is a precious stone, and he is likewise a stumbling stone. To whom then
is it precious but to such, as by joining the jewel of faith thereunto, have
the right use thereof. So says the Scripture. Esaias. 28.
Behold I put in Sion a chief corner stone elect and precious, and he that
believes therein shall not be ashamed: and here Saint Peter makes this
conclusion, saying: to you therefore which believe it is precious, this part is
for the believer, now must the infidel take that which is left: they haulting
for want of the steadie foot of faith, make themselves of Christ a stone to
stumble at, and a rock of offense: although Christ be set up unto them a sign
of salvation, yet they like the Cock on the dunghill, do spurn him aside, not
knowing what virtue there is laid up in that precious stone, for such as by
faith do find him: wherefore that Prophecy is their portion: Esaias. 8. Math.
21.
whosoever shall fall on this stone, he shall be broken: and on whom soever it
falls, it shall grind him to powder: the misbeleeuers they stumble and lie
under the stone, they fall and are fallen on, therefore must they be broken,
and that grinding stone shall grind them to powder. O the rock of infidelity
that makes Christ the rock of offense, that rock it is that shattereth our
ships, that shoots us on the sands, but the anchor of faith fast fixed on
the sure ground Christ, having hold by his word, that never deceyueth him
that hops for help, that saves us sound from storm and tempest, from all
wind and weather, he makes sure work that works by the worthy and sure
instrument of faith, and he builds once for all that has Christ laid for his
foundation, directing himself always by the right rule of his word: for they
that come to that lively stone, they are a spiritual house as Saint Peter
says, 1. Epist. 2.
yea they are the sure grounded and glorious temple of the living God: thus
then we being builded up by faith, and casting anchor on Christ, now let the
floudes arise, let the winds blow, yet stand we sure, for we believe in him
that will see we do not perish, those that are in that raging sea of the wild
wicked world, they seem to stand in great danger of shipwreck, but if we
enter the Arc by faith with Noe, (for S. Paul attributes his favor unto
faith) then let the Pirates come, let Satan assault us, Heb. 11.
yet are we harmless, Christ is on our side, what may prevail against us?
not sands, not Rocks, not storms nor tempests, no winds ne floudes, nor
fire nor water, no not all the power of Satan, not the gaping gates of hell
shall move us a whitte. Such commodity do those find that be so happy as to
enjoy the inestimable jewel of faith: but those that have no experience
hereof, and feel not the force of faith, they make light of the matter, not
seeking Christ by faith, nor faith by his word, and therefore no marueyl though
they be still ouershadowed with death, and being in darkness comprehended not
the light: how should they believe except they hear? Romans 10.
faith comes by hearing, hearing of the word of God. They then that have lost
their hearing, how should they find faith? where the seed of the word is
not sown, how should the fruit of faith spring? how may they enjoy Christ
or any part of his love that receive not his witnesses? John. 5.
The Scriptures (says Christ) they bear witness of me. These things says
S. John, Cap. 20.
meaning the contents of the Gospel, are written, that ye might believe that
Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that in believing ye might have life
through his name. Wherefore understand ye that upon this double point stands
the whole course of our salvation: art thou in the right way? therefore then
it is, because thou have followed the counsel of our savior, saying: John. 5.
search the scriptures. Art thou out of the way? The cause learn of Christ:
ye are deceived, Mat. 22.
not knowing the Scriptures. This is the mark wherewith Christ marketh his
sheep, by the voice we know our shepeheard, and by hearing we are known of
him: John. 19.
my sheep hear my voice (says that good shepeherd) and I know them and they
follow me: Thus know where we have to fetch faith, that we be not to
seek on this sid^, where we find also how God loves the world, in
providing so mercifullye the lively food of his word, that our souls faint
not in faith: but let us tread a little deeper in this matter, and that we
may value faith somewhat near the worthy price it should bear with us,
let us consider how the market goes with us, let us consider in what case we
stand: then shall we see what service faith will do us: first this we know,
that we have but borrowed breath and that lying in our nostrelles, as the
scripture speaks: our life what is it but a plain warfare? wherein we have
either to yield or to overcome? we understand with what enemies we are beset,
as that wily witch the world, the proud swelling flesh ever rebelling against
the spirit: the serpent and his seed daily spetting out his fiery flames and
venomous poison upon us, Satan I mean that ramping roaring Lion continually
seeking and searching how to devour us. Now he that must abide the brunt of
such a battle, and has to encounter with so fierce and cruel adversaries, as
whom we see daily murdering many a soul, it is necessary that such a
soldier should go well appointed to the field. Wherefore in this behalf it
shall be good we follow the counsel of Saint Paul, Ephesians. 6.
who speaks not without book, but of experience (for he fought a good
fight) his council is, that we put on the armor of God, and this is the
furniture that he appoints for to arm such a Soldier as we seek. He
wishes our loins to be gyrded with verity, having on the breastplate of
righteousness, our feet being shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace: But above all (says he) take unto you the shield of faith wherewith ye
may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: and Saint John likewise strong
in the spirit, he gives us good instruction, and warns us which way we
may win the field. All that is borne of God (says he) overcomes the
world, 1. Epist. 5.
and this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith: then he
adds this question with his answer: who is it that overcomes the world,
1. Epist. 5.
but he which believes that Jesus is the son of God? And S. Peter also when
he had declared what an adversary we have of the devil, as that like a
roaring Lion he seeks to devour us, then makes he this exhortation showing
how we may stand against the assaults of Satan: resist him (says he)
steadfast in the faith. Thus is faith commended unto us of all hands, as a
shield to defend us in all assaults, and as a sure tried weapon to conquer
and beat down to the dust, the devil, the world, and all that stand
against us, it is Christ in deed that has gotten the victory, but such is
his love, he does not enjoy it alone, but he gives us part also. Thus he
comfort us like a captain of courage: be of good cheer, John. 16.
for I have ouercommed the world. He fought the fight indeed, he has taken
the fort, but he gives us the spoil, and is content that his victory be
accounted our victory, so speaks Saint Paul, acknowledging the love of God
therein: 1. Cor. 15.
Thanks be to God (says he) which has given us victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ: and how has Christ given us the victory, but as he says,
faith quenches the fiery darts of the wicked, and as Saint John says, our
faith in Christ overcomes the world, and as Saint Peter exhorts, by
steadfastness of faith to resist the Devil? Such is the marvelous virtue of
true belief, that by it we enjoy all the fruits which spring so plenteously
out of that flourishing root of Ishai: for Christ had subdued sin: Esaias. 11.
so have we by faith in Christ: Christ by death has ouercommed death: so
have we by faith: Christ is proved by suffering a Savior, and we by faith are
saved: Christ by his resurrection has purchased to himself an everlasting
kingdom: and we rising in him by faith are joined in that purchase. Christ by
nature is the son of God, so are we of his grace by faith: finally Christ is
altogether ours by faith, which does incorporate all Christians into his
mystical body: Christ (as Saint Paul says) is our peace: how but by faith?
as he says, Ephesians. ^
we being justified by faith have peace with God: and the Apostle says that
the righteousness of Christ is our righteousness, and how is that but by
faith? Christ's holiness is our sanctification, his justice is our
justification: all this comes by none other means: than as Saint Paul
declares when Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.
we are filled with all fullness of God: such then is the force of faith, that
with this one counter we may shortly cast the whole sum of our salvation.
For art thou not dead to God, but lyuest uprightly before him in holiness and
righteousness? Abacuc. 2.
then haste thou faith, for the just lives by faith. Art thou wicked and
sinful: no marueyle if thou have not faith, for whatsoever is not of faith is
sin? this is the root, Romans 14.
we are the trees, the rest as our good works they are but flowers and
fruits. Now such as the root is, such is the tree, and such as the tree
is, such is the fruit: for Christ makes no more differences of trees and
fruits, but as in the Gospel. Either make the tree good and his fruit good,
or else make the tree evil and his fruit evil: and what is that that makes
this difference but faith the root of all righteousness? for unless by this
means we be truly graffed in Christ the true vine, all that we do, it were as
good undone, as good never a whit as never the better, we make but wood for the
fire, John. 15.
it is in effect nothing, but as he says, without me ye can do nothing: and
our works whatsoever show they have, if they be not rooted in Christ by faith,
they are neither figs nor grapes, but very thorns and thistles, well may
they grow for a while, but they may not flourish long: even as herbs that
grow in the shadow, never well weathered with the warm sun: or rather as
the grass on the house top which lacks his root, and therefore although it
springs in the Summer season, yet it soon withers in the Winter, and the
mower never fills his hand withal. Let those then that seem fruitful in good
works, consider of what root that springs: for the believer works well
moved by faith, and his fruit is life everlasting: but the misbeleeuing
hypocrite he works of glory, and he has his reward, missing far of the
right mark of righteousness: all that he makes is marred for lack of
belief, his works are naught but bare leaves of the fruitless fig tree,
they are but paintings and shadows, mockings and apish toies in comparison of
that justice of the just living by faith: for what is he that flourishes never
so much in his painted grapes and well colored fruits, which is able to please
God unless he be a true tree, planted of the heavenly father, in the faith of
christ? what fruit is it that God will allow unless it be fet by faith of the
true vine? do thou fast? well done if it be done in faith: do thou give
alms to the poor? do thou break thy bread to the needy? do thou cloth
the naked, and succor the harbourlesse? Good fruits verily, therefore belike
they come of a good tree, whose root is faith, watered with the precious blood
of our Savior. Do thou withdraw thy hands from injury? then do thou
believe of likelihood: do thou suffer wrong with patience? a good sign it
is that thou art already justified by faith: and all those with such like good
works of men, of themselves they are not meritorious, but with faith they are
acceptable: for so generally speaks the Apostle: without faith it is
impossible to please God. ^^b. 12.
Mark, this infidelity has with it an impossibility: but contrariwise if
thou have faith, fear not, for that brings a possibility: so large is the
promise of Christ speaking to the believers: Nothing shall be impossible unto
you. Math. 18.
O great is the force of faith, as the which to withstand it is impossible: a
little faith is much worth, and will go far, yea, although it be but as much
as a grain of Mustarde seed, it shall pluck up the roots of sin, yea let
the devil cast up Mountains against us, yet will it have his free course, and
may not be severed from Christ, whatsoever stands in the way: it is whole in
sickness, free in bands, strong in torments, it shyneth in darkness, it
dies not with death, it is cast into the waters, and perishes not, it is
tried in the fiery furnace and yet wastes not: it is trodden down, but it
ryseth again, it is assaulted, but never yields: it is wounded, but yet
gets the victory. Such as Christ is, such is the faith of the Christian:
Christ is the body, faith is the shadow: where so Christ goes, there faith
fails not to follow. It is no earthly thing, but as Christ came from the
high heavens, so is that the heavenly gift of the holy Ghost. Where Christ is
occupied, faith is not idle, when Christ works miracles in the body, faith
works salvation in the soul, when Christ uttered the word, faith printed
in the heart, when he fed the body with bread, he fed the soul with faith, ye
spittle was ye mean to heal the eye, but faith the instrument to save ye
soul, faith has his course with Christ in all places to al purposes, it
followed Christ to the temple, to the mountain, it was with him in the field,
in the house, on the Sea, on the land, it abides with him in temptations, in
torments, it suffers the scourge with him, it hangs on him on ye cross, it
goth into ye grave with him, it rises with him, it follows him through ye
clouds, as it were with ye wings of an Eagle, entering the heavens after him and
there finds food to feed on, where Christ suffers her to hang on his
breast, and to suck of his precious blood until she be satisfied. Thus is
faith exalted, that it takes up her place in the high heavens, and is still so
far in favor with God, that it can no rather call, but it is heard, no rather
ask, but it obtains, no sooner seek but it finds, no rather knock, but it
is opened unto her. So does faith work for the believer: for he is the beloved
of god, to him is the son sent, he receives the son: Christ is his
Savior, the death of Christ is his life, Christ takes him up with him in his
Resurrection, Christ is altogether his, and who may resist him? for God so
loves him that by Christ he shall not perish but have life everlasting.

The thirtenth Chapter.
That true faith requires an earnest consideration of man's estate, and the
love of God toward him, appearing in the death of Christ.
THus have we waded in the bottomless sea of Gods love and infinite mercy,
wherewith he loves and embraces the world, not minding to find any end, or
to search the ground thereof (for we confess with the Prophet.) Thy mercy O
Lord reaches unto the heavens, Psalm. 36.
and thy faythfulnesse unto the clouds, thy righteousness is like the mighty
mountains, and thy judgments are like a great deep: but by this which is
said we have assaid somewhat to taste of the goodness of God, following herein
the provocation of the Prophet, which calls men to the consideration of
Gods mercy by this call: O taste and see (says he) how gracious the Lord is:
Blessed is the man that puts his trust in his mercy. And thus far have we
tasted the love of God, as we might, only picking out the sweet marrowe of
that bone which S. John has cast us, for the comfort of our souls to feed
on: God so loved the world, etc. In the which short and sweet sentence duly
considered and weighed as it is worthy, what find we but salvation showing it
self unto us in a bright glass, and that (as is aforesaid) it is a knot
knitting up the whole mystery of our redemption, wherefore in the handling
thereof we have passed to this point, as that we have losed and undone the
same, and as grace was given, have laid out the parts thereof to the view of
the Reader.

Now that we may gather up those pieces and close the knot again, let us stand
a while and see what rocks we have passed, let us look back and view the
wonderful work of God, declaring his love to our salvation: we know therefore
what a loss we had in Adam being deprived utterly of the favor of God, for so
God loved the world, in the first foundation that we stood in the state of
innocence, comparable with the glorious Angels of heaven: we were fashioned of
earth, but not endangered to turn again into earth: we were made men, but
like unto God: ours matter and substance was earthly, but our form and fashion
was heavenly: the pattern whereafter God made us was his own image, being in
subjection to god our creator, but reigning as souereignes over all Gods
creatures, blessed in our selves in our seed walking on a blessed earth,
enjoying at will the fruits and flours of pleasant paradise, that image of
heaven: all our senses they were set upon pleasure without any lothsomenesse:
what sounded in the ear, but the sweet and comfortable voice of Gods
blessing? Gods blessing was always in our eyes, yea what was in our mouth but
Gods blessing? Our labor was rest, our rest was continual, our pains was
pleasure, and our pleasure was eternal: we sweated not, for we had no need
to travel: we were ignorant of evil, tasting of no corruption, free from
infirmities, standing in the presence of God without fear, beholding his
glorious countenance without shame, having health without danger of sickness,
enjoying life without fear of death: the flesh and the spirit never striued,
the body obeyed the soul, and the soul saved the body, they were knit
together with a fast bynding band, so that they might not depart the one from
the other: yea then was the body in better case than is now the soul separate
from Christ, the soul was not subject to death, nor the body in case to be
corrupted of the duste: neither hell nor the grave, nor dust nor death, no not
the fear of them might touch or trouble us, so standing as God had
appointed. And such was the love of God, that he gave all those heavenly
commodities as a state of inheritance to our first father, to him and his
heirs for ever: O goodly gift of God, wherein the date is ever and a day, and
nothing betwixt heaven and earth excepted, but only that the fruit of one tree
might not be tasted: But O frail flesh, O lykerishe lips of earthly Adam,
that knew not himself, and considered not how mercyful and loving a God he
had of his creator, it did not content him to be a man, but he would be a God a
Gods name, he did not content him to rule and reign over the insensible and
unreasonable, but he would set his foot as far forward as his Creator, in
whose hands he was as the brittle claye in the potters fingers. Therefore when
that man had so given over the service of God as rashly to break his holy
commandment, and to devour the forbidden fruit: what then might the
righteous Lord do of his justice but pluck down that presumptuous stomach?
but set his face with fury against rebellious man? but hate him, but curse
him, and clean cast him off, as one that despised his goodness, unworthy of
his favor, and utterly to be rejected as the servant of the Serpent, the slave
of sin, and a meet helhounde for the Devil? Verily so are we without
Christ cursed creatures, children of disobedience, children of perdition, ever
rebelling against the ryghteous God, serving the flesh with his appetites,
given over to concupiscence, the lost sons of the lost father, nothing
heavenly, but altogyther earthly, using the world and the present life, as a
shadow whose end is eternal darkness, and as a course to run headlong to
Hell, being nothing but naked souls, ashamed to stand in the sight of God, no
not the best of all, were we as holy as holy David, but must be feign to say
after him, I have sinned, as whose righteousness are but rotten rags all to
bespotted with the foul blurre of sin, whose hope is desperation, whose life
is without light, and whose desert is death. So are we fallen, and our feet
serves us not to get up again, we are taken prisoners in captivity with the
Devil, and we are not so rich as to redeem our selves: for our deserts are
but such, that when we have reckened all that we can do, yet are we but
unprofitable servants: but who is he that comes so near perfection, as to
perform that duty, to set his brother equal in love with himself, and to
set God before himself, and that in all times, all places, and al respects?
and who then is he that dare adventure the trial hereof, and to stand to the
extremity of the law? S. Paul has tried that way, and gives us a fair
warning, as that, the law stops every mouth, no flesh shall be found
righteous by that rule. Let us then cast aside those fig leaves, which can
not hide our nakedness, that is the deserts of the flesh, the deeds of the
law, for this way we may be sure to meet with that curse: Cursed is he that
abides not in all that is written in the law: Let us not make so little of the
love of Christ, and so much euacuate his cross, as to justify our selves by
any law: for if righteousness be by the law, Galath. 2.
then Christ died with out a cause. Neither will excuses serve to salvation,
for then should the Serpent have been cursed alone, as upon whom all the
blame was laid: but if the Serpent seduce and be followed, if the Devil tempt
and be not withstoode, both Adam and Eve, man and woman, they must needs drink
of the cup of Gods curse. This for the knowledge of our selves, what the world
is which God so loves, and so setting before us our reward by justice, the
terrible torments and intolerable flames of hell fire, with the bitter biting
worm that never dies, which Satan threatens, leading us forward fast
fettered with the chain of sin, what might we do but lie sweating in the
miserable and pitiful pangs of desperation? what comfort might we find one in
another, but tears and torments, sorrows and sighs, crying and howling,
weeping and wayling, groaning and gnashing of teeth? But the merciful God, the
loving Lord, when we stood at this point in manner at defiance with God,
although he saw that al flesh had corrupted his way, although he knew the
imaginations of man's heart to be evil even from his youth, and saw that we
always bare a styffe stomach against him, and his holy will, yet has he not
utterly cast us of, but blessed be his name for ever, he has showed us a glad
and cheerful countenance, he takes pity upon us, it grieueth him we should
deserve his wrath, but it would more grieve him that we should die the
deserved death. Wherefore he has showed us marvelous kindness, and more
mercy than when we stood first in his favor, yea more mercy, I will not say
than man might deserve, but more than we could deuyse to ask. For behold, he
has opened unto us all his treasure and endless riches of his infinite
mercy, choosing out as it were the best jewel of all his store and stock,
even that precious pearl, his own glory, in whom is all his delight, his
only begotten, his best beloved son, Collo. 2.
in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godheade bodily, in whom are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, who is the very express Image of
the invisible God, him he has not spared to make our Messiah, and to send us
a savior, to raise us from that foul fall of our first father, to regenerate
and make us a new, to conquer the world, to slay the seed of the serpent, and
see that we should not perish, but live and reign with him in his kingdom
everlastingly: and how Christ has approved himself a savior, and how he
persited that knotty work of our redemption, and made all sure that it might
not perish, what he suffered before he said, (it is finished) we have seen
some show thereof: but O that we could consider it worthily, and weigh it in a
just balance: then should our hearts undoubtedly wax hot with the fervent
love of God, so maruellously declared in his son our savior, bearing this
in mind always, that whatsoever he suffered, he suffered for us: having still
that voice of our Savior ringing in our ears, and fresh in our hearts: the
zeal of thy house has consumed me: Christ was sick of that consumption,
even of zeal, to make us an holy house to his father: and what soever was done
by Christ on the earth, let us reckon altogyther upon the end whereof he
himself protests, Math. 18.
the son of man came to save that which was lost, and whatsoever was laid
upon him, let us reckon that ours by right, and that we deserved a thousand
fold more than so: Esaias. 52.
for we alas like giddy sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one of us
his own way, we were oppressed with burden of sin, but by him we are eased
and refreshed, for he has laid upon him the iniquity of us all, that are
come unto him with our heavy lode: surely he has borne our infirmities and
carried our sorrows, he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for
our iniquities, the chastizement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed: he came down from the high heavens to raise us that
were fast slipping to the deep dark hell: he refused not to take upon him the
burden of our flesh, that we might by him be quickened in the spirit: he lived
amongst us men, that we by him might live with God: he suffered such evil
entreatie at that Fox Herod's hands, least we might be a portion for Foxes,
and a pray for woolues: he followed that thanklesse office of preaching, that
we might not perish but live by his word: for though the devil say nay, yet
Christ says truly, that man lives by every word proceeding out of the mouth
of God, and therefore rather than he would leave us unprovided of that
necessary food which he brought from heaven, he took well a worth the
misreports of the wicked blasphemers: That we might call on him as a Savior,
he suffered himself to be called a Samaritane, a sinner, a surfetter: and for
our souls h^alt^ it was, that he wrought so many a miracle by the means of one
body cured visibly, saving a thousand souls by invisible operation of faith:
so Christ himself says: unless you see signs and wonders, you will not
believe: therefore to lay that salve to our sore also, he professes himself a
Physician and a Surgion, nothing disdaining the company of such as were in
misery, and despised of men: he shut not his eyes to the blind: he came to
the lame that could not come to him, he looked on the Lepres, he visited the
sick, he wept with the sorrowful, he lamented with Lazarus, fewer times
bidden to feasts, than he was found at burialls. But this is to be accounted
the least part of all the pains and sorrows of our savior. The cup, the cursed
cup of his cross, what heart is so hard that may consider that without great
admiration of Gods mercy? with how bitter temptations did he take the taste
thereof before his hour came? with what heaviness of heart did he utter his
complainte unto his disciples? and again to his father when he sweated that
bloody water? let us hear then our Savior himself uttering his complaints,
by the mouth of the Prophets? Thus says one: Esaias. 53.
he is despised and rejected of men, he is a man full of sorrows, and has
experience of infirmities, we hid our faces from him, we esteemed him not:
this we know how it was accomplished, in that the hanghtie high Priests and
proud Pharisees, regarded not, but utterly dysdayned our Savior: by another
Prophet he says: he that eats bread with me, lifts up his heel against
me: This we saw performed by saucy Judas, who when he had dipped with our
Savior in his dish, straight after got him out and made up his bloody
bargain, and as Christ forewarned his disciples, delivered the son of man
into the hands of sinners: another Scripture is: Esaias. 53.
he is brought as a sheep before his sheerer, that opens not his mouth: so
was he brought before Annas, Cayphas, Herod and Pylate, of whom he heard
evil words enough to move his patience, but it was immovable, therefore he
gave them the hearing, and answered their quarrelling questions with humble
silence: for patience and silence they were two of the sharpest weapons he
mainteyneth his kingdom withal. Another saying of our Savior is this: I
gave my back unto the smyters and my cheeks unto the nippers, Esaias. 50.
I hid not my face from shame and spitting: how that was tried true we know,
when our Savior was so roughly handled of Soldiers under Pilate, now laid on
with fistes, now smitten with rods: and how shamefully he was bespetted, Mar.
14.
the Evangelist does most faithfully report: and how he held his back to
the tormenters, what backbyting he had as well by evil entreatie, as
misreportes, thereof Pylats bitter scurge may be for witness sufficient:
Esaias. 53.
another Scripture says: he is brought as a sheep to the slaughter: in
such manner did our Savior go out of Jerusalem to the place of his execution
called Caluaria, where he was offered up an innocent lamb, and slain as a
sacrifice with blood for our offenses: And so does the Prophet cry in the
person of Christ, pouring out his complaints, and declaring the terrible
pangs that he had on his Cross: I am (says he) become a worm and not a man,
Psalm. 22.
a shame of men, and the contempt of the people, all they that see me, have me
in derision, they make a mow at me, and nod the head, saying, he trusted in the
Lord, let him deliver him, let him save him seeing he loves him: again he
says: I am like water poured out, and all my bones are out of joint, mine
heart is like wax, it is moulten in the midst of my bowels, my strength is
dried up like a potsherde, my tongue cleaves to my jaws, and thou have
brought me into the dust of death, for dogs have compassed me, and the
assembly of the wicked has enclosed me, they pierced my hands and my feet,
they gave me gall in my meat, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink:
they parted my garments amongst them, Psalm. 69. Psalm. 22. Psalm. 69.
and cast lottes upon my vesture: rebuke has broken my heart, and I am full of
heaviness, and I looked for some to have pity on me, but there was none, and
for comfort, but I found none: These were the sighs and sobbes uttered of the
Prophet to be verified of our Savior, whiles he was in that terrible horror
and dreadful anguish of soul, as he lay like a lamb broken to the cross,
and most bitterly bleeding to death: for so far did he submit himself in
the cause of our redemption, that he is made the most perfect pattern of all
patience: so did the love of God work in him, that he was consumed even of very
zeal to his house: so was he turmoyled and tormented, bruised and broken,
racked and rent into pieces for evil deserving servants, for our
disobedience he performed the uttermost point of obedience, as Saint Paul
says, he was obedient to the death, the death of the cross.

The fourtenth Chapter.
The sweetness of Gods love, fealt by a true and lively faith.
THis was the price paid for our redemption, this was the purchase of our
pardon, even the most precious bloudsheeding of the only begotten son of God:
so has the merciful Lord stretched his love toward the world in Christ, even
to the top of the cross, and so to the bowels of the earth, the bottom of the
grave, from whence he is risen to the right hand of the father there to reign,
until he have trodden his enemies clean under his feet. Now we to whom
belonged nothing but shame and reproach, may freely glory without all suspicion
of vanity: we that in ourselves had no cause but to lament, have now good
leave to rejoice, reioicing in ye Lord, now may we without all fear triumph
over our enemies with that sure Soldier of Christ, 1. Corin. 15.
and say: O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? May we now
stay ourselves, but to fall in admiration of gods infinite mercy, and say with
the Apostle: O the deepenesse of the riches of God: with the Prophet, O Lord,
what is man that thou visitest him? or what is the son of man that thou so
regardest him? John. 15.
No man can have greater love than to give his life for his friends. What then
might we now ask more at Gods hands? John. 10.
what piece of love is there now left which god has not fully bestowed upon
us? for Christ is that good shephearde which layth down his life for his
sheep: O Lord what is man that thou should so regard him? O that me^ would
consider this love of God which S. John makes so much of, that he repeateth it
again and again: In this (says he) appeared the love of God toward us,
because God sent his only begotten son into the world, 1. Epist. 4.
that we might live through him. And again, herein is love (says he) not that
we loved him, but that he loved us, and has sent his son to be a
reconciliation for our sins. Let this sentence be well weighed: The love of
God is a well containing the water of life, whose operation is reconciliation,
whose rivers are righteousness, whose streams wipe away the sands of sin,
whose little drops refresh the hot heart of man, flaming and boiling with the
smoking fire of Gods fury: and besides this, it is a fountain not forced but
freely springing of it self: so says S. John: it is not a reward for a
desert, it is not love for love, one for another, but it is love for hatred,
mercy without merit, favor for falshoode, pity for obstinacy, pardon for
rebellion, the payment of honor for the debte of shame, bringing hope for
desperation, and life unlooked for in place of deserved death: thus does S.
John lay forth the love of GOD before us, as it were still harping on this one
string, (God so loves the world) and on this plays S. Paul also, not
without great pleasure, and in such sort that I think where it enters the
ear, it may not but much move the heart: for first he puts the Ephesians in
mind of their old estate, in what case they stood before they were called to
the grace of the gospel, that they so knowing them selves, might the better
know God and his goodness toward them: ye were (says he) dead in
trespasses and in sins, ye in time past walked according to the course of
the world, and after the Prince that rules in the air, even the spirit that
works in the children of disobedience: and here joining himself and his
fellows with the Ephesians, among whom we also had our conversation in times
past in the lusts of our flesh, and were by nature, what were they? the
children of wrath as well as others. Such were they, such children are we all
as we are the children of Adam, without the love and the beloved son of God.
But now Christ is come, what news brings he? But God (says the Apostle)
which is rich in mercy through his great love wherewith he loved us, even
when we were dead by sins, has quickened us together in Christ, by whose
grace ye are saved, and has raised us up together and made us sit together in
the heavenly places in Christ Jesus O what is man that God should so love him,
as thus to pour upon us the whole store and riches of his mercy, and to bestow
upon us his chief jewel, his only begotten son, and by him to exalt us eue^
from the deep hell to the high heavens? Surely God has maruellously showed
his gracious goodness upon the children of men, but in this that he so loved
ye world as to give us his son, eue^ as the heavens, the earth, so does this
far surmount all the prosperity that any people, all the felicity that any man
at any time has ever enjoyed: it was much that God blessed Abraham so as to
give him the deaw of heaven, ye fat of the earth, enriching him with great
store of treasure and flocks of cattle: but what was this to the blessed seed
that blesses all nations? and Salomo^ in all his royalty, what was he but a
lilie in the garden, and a flower in the field, but that he was assured of
that promise made unto his father, that unto David should be raised a righteous
branch and a king should reign and sit upon his seat, whom we should call
the Lord our righteousness? God as he had before the coming of our Messiah,
chosen to himself the Israelites a peculiar people, who^e he tendered as the
husbandman his vine, so his hand wrought maruellously with them, and bestowed
innumerable benefits upon them: goodly and glorious were the fruits and flowers
that God caused to flourish in that vine, but if we be branches well graffed
in the true vine, then may England well compare with Israel. For whatsoever
they received otherwise, we have received as fully and with as large conditions
in Christ the son of God: they had but the figure more than we, we have the
body and substance represented as well as they: theirs was the shales, but we
have part in the kirnell: they had the shadow above us, but we enjoy the true
sun of righteousness equal with them: there was a great jubilee no doubt
among the Israelites, when that voice was first heard on the mount Sinai: I
have seen the affliction of my people which is in Egypt, Exodus 9.
and I am come down to deliver them: but what was this to the joyful tidings
brought of the Angel? unto you is borne in the City of David a Savior, and
by another Angel, Math, 1.
he shall save his people from their sins. Herein was love as Saint John
says: far in deed might that people seem to be in the favor of God,
that he did so mightily by his seruante Moses deliver them out of the hands of
hardharted Pharao and that cruel country of Egypt: But O Lord what is man
that thou so love him, as by the cross of thy Christ, to pluck him out of
the bloody clammes of that roaring and ravening Lion Satan, and to save us from
that hot burning Egypt the fiery furnace of hell? God made Moses a marvel
and a mirroure before his people: but he never gave him this commendation: This
is my beloved son. Heb. 1.
Nay to which of the Angels said he at any time: Thou art my son, this day
begat I thee? yet this beloved son whom the father makes so much of, is
made our Moses to fulfill the law, and our Messiah to fill us full of grace:
he has brought us out of all bondage, John. 8.
it is he that has led captivity captive: and now are we free in deed when
the son has made us free: David refreshes himself maruellously with the
memory of those benefytes of GOD which he bestowed upon his people when they
were now passing from Egypt toward the promised land: wherefore he utters
such sayings in his psalms and songs, Psalm. 78.
recording therein the goodness of God: he divided the Sea and led them
through: In the day also he led them with the cloud. This was their Baptism
under Moses, as Saint Paul says: Now if we be baptized in Christ Jesus
with water and the holy Ghost: then have we drowned Pharao in the flood, and
have buried up Satan safe in the Sea: then are we covered and clothed with the
true cloud, so that the heat of hell may not hurt us: so says S. Paul:
Galath. 3.
All ye that are baptized into Christ have put on Christ, and so says S. John
of the water falling from that cloud: 1. Epist. 2.
The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin: David goes forward
and says: as he led them in the day time with a cloud, so he did all the
night with a light of fire. John. 8.
This was a great token that God was with them: but this was but a shadow of
him that says: I am the light of the world, he that follows me shall not
walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life: This is the light, John.
1.
that is the life of men, this is the light that shines in the darkness:
here has the Gentile gotten as much as the Jew: for this is the true light
that lights every man that comes into the world. Again says David, for
the glory of the Jew he claue the rock in the wilderness, and gave them
drink as of the great depthes: 1. Corin. 10
but Paul says also, for the comfort of the Gentile, the rock was Christ:
for out of the rock rent on the cross gushed out that plentiful aqua vitae
which serves to satisfy the thirst of every soul: that is it, which shall
wash away all our uncleanness. Esaias. 1.
That although our sins were as crimsin, they shall now be made white as snow:
though they were red like Scarlet, Psalm. 68.
they shall be as wool: though they be rusty for sin, as those that have
lain among pottes, yet shall we be as the wings of a Dove that is covered with
silver, and whose feathers are like unto the yellowe gold. Wherefore without
this water, was that nothing in comparison, but as our Savior says in his
reasoning with the woman of Samaria concerning Jacobs well: John. 4.
Whosoever shall drink of this water shall thirst again, but who so drinks
of the water which I shall give him shall never thirst again, and it shall be
unto him a well of water springing up into eternal life. Another marvelous
benefit of God does David glory in, saying: God opened the doors of heaven,
and rayned down Manna upon them for to eat, and gave them of the Wheat of
heaven, and so man did eat Angels food: this was a sure token of Gods
singular love toward them: but this was but a shadow to that which Christ
brings with him: for so he himself makes comparison: I am the bread of
life: your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness and are dead: John. 6.
I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this
bread he shall live for ever: finally that God by the hand of his servant
Joshua conducted his people and set them safe in the possession of Canaa^,
that land so long looked for, so commended, that it should flow with milk and
honey, therein did he show himself, as a mighty so a most merciful God: 1.
Peter. 1.
but blessed be the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection
of our Lord Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance immortal and
undefiled, and that fades not away. This is that eternal possession which
Christ has purchased for us with the price of his precious blood, even the
eternal and glorious kingdom of his heavenly father. O blessed Bees that may
be so happy as to swarm about Christ, and to suck the sweet honey flowing from
the flowers of that Canaan: verily there is heavenly honey, eue^ such as the eye
has not seen, the ear has not heard, neither yet has ever entered into the
heart of man: that is it which God has provided for his beloved: it was
undoubtedly a great loss which we had in Adam. But thanks be unto God we have
found more in Christ than we enjoyed before. Romans 5.
So saint Paul makes conference of both estates: for if by the offense of
one, death reigned through one, much more shall they which receive the
abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through
one, that is Jesus Christ. O Lord what is man that thou should be so
mindful of him? But herein is love, that Christ has purchased us a new
Paradise, and is gone to provide us a kingdom, even of his own kingdom does
he make us fellow heirs, he rayseth us together with him to the heavenly
places, and with his crown of thorns he has gotten us the crown of glory
that ever florisheth and never fades: although we eat not the fruit of the
tree of the knowledge of good and badde, yet may we be sure to avoid ye ch^king
pear (I mean) to perish: although we meet not with the tree of life which
stood in the old Paradise, yet in the high pillar of ye Almighty God, coming
to Christ his heavenly table, we shall not miss ye worthy fruit to have life
everlasting.

The fiftenth Chapter.
The assurance of such as take hold of Gods mercy freely offered in Christ.
THus have we looked on and ouerlooked the beautiful work of God, concerning
our regeneration in Christ Jesus our Lord, we have assayed to draw up that
which was laid abroad: now therefore to knit up the knot and to make a through
styche, let us cast aside all self love, and stick only to the love of the
living God, the true fountain and well of the water of life: bearing still in
mind the saying of S. John: God so loves the world,) and that he says,
herein is love not that we loved him, and that our love is but a fruit of the
root: for so he says: 1. Epist 4.
therefore we love him because he loved us first: let us therefore begin to
reckon there where we have to fetch all good things, whether it be love, light
or life, eue^ from that first fountain which S. John has so set ab^och
before us, saying: he loved us first, remember what he says in whom God
shows all his mercy: (without me ye can do nothing:) and what he says to
them that take part with him: to you nothing shall be impossible: and above
all things let us consider the condition under which that deed of gift
passes: God has given his son, that whosoever believes in him, he should have
love and life with God: So does God draw us unto Christ, as he pronounced by
his Prophet: Esaias. 28.
he that believes on him shall not be ashamed. And Christ calls us unto
him: Romans 8.
come unto me al ye that are heavy laden: how may we come but by the foot of
faith? Romans 5.
for whom he calls, the^ he justifies: and we being justified by faith have
peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also we have
access through faith (says the Apostle) unto this grace wherein we stand:
John. 1.
for want of faith it was that Christ was not received of his own, but the
beloved believers they received him: to them he gave the power to be the sons
of God, they are knit fast to Christ, they are the body, and he is the head,
they are free by him, they are friends in one house, fellows in one inheritance,
and sons of one father with our Lord Jesus O how happy are we if we have
faith: for then are we chosen, we are called, we are justified, we are
glorified: God is on our side: who may stand against us? what shall we now dout
to obtain at Gods hands? for he that spared not his son, but gave him for us
al: how shall he not with him give us all things also? we are Gods chosen: who
shall lay any thing to our charge? Christ is dead, he is risen: even he to
whom all judgment is committed, he makes earnest suit and continual
request, he pleads for us: who shall then condemn us? who shall separate us
now from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation or anguishe, or persecution, or
famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? in all these things (says S.
Paul) we are more than conquerors through him that loved us: And upon this is
he so bold that he says: I am persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. 1. Corin. 15.
O let us set this example of faithful Paul before us, let us hold fast the
love of God with him: how came he by that bold and mighty spirit? by the
grace of God I am that I am (says he) and again: we have boldness and
entrance by faith in him, that is, in Christ Jesus: wherefore his exhortation
shall be most necessary at al times: watch ye (says he) stand fast in the
faith, quit you like men and be strong, let us put on the armor of God, let us
not fear to enter the field having Christ our Captain, and above al, let us
be sure to take with us the shield of faith: that has S. John's warrant, that
therewith we may conquer the world as Christ has done: and S. Paul's, that
therewith we may quench the fiery darts of the wicked: and S. Peter's also,
that with the mighty force of faith we may mousell up the bloody mouth of that
roaring Lion, so we being armed and fortified with faith, we may walk free
without all fear: now we may defy the serpent and his seed with all their
subtlety: let the Devil now rore and rage, let him fret, let him fume, and
foam, Christ is on our side, in whom the Prince of this world has naught to
do: let him as he dare fling upon us his fiery darts, the shield of faith
shall soon quench them: let him cast his blocks and set his trees against
us, yet by faith we shall soon remove and rent them by the roots: let him
throw mountains upon us, let the gates of hell be set open upon us, yet what
is that can prevail against us? what may separat us from the love God? Christ
is risen and we shall not be kept down: for in him as S. Paul says: Collos.
2.
we are raised up together through the faith of the operation of God, which
raised him fro the dead: wherefore I exhort such as love their life and like
the love of God, and say again with S. Paul that which can never be said to
much, stand fast in the faith of Christ: let us hear his warning while it may
profit us: This is the condemnation (says Christ) that light is come into
the world, John. 3.
and men loved darkness more tha^ light: And again on the contrary part, he
calls us unto him on this wise: While ye have light, believe on the light
that ye may be the children of light: let us beware therefore, and as we would
be loath to lose our part in that joyful tidings of the Angel, unto you is
borne a Savior: so let us take that warning of Christ, believe in the light:
upon this point stands the whole cause of our redemption: God he has sent
light into the world, and that light is life to the believer: betwixt believing
and not believing, there now lies the whole matter a bleeding: if we believe
not, then no doubt but we bleed to death: for Christ is come, and this is he
that should come, and we must not look for any other: he is dead, and he dyed
once for all, he offered one sacrifice, and that once for all: let us therefore
now or never beware that Christ be welcome unto us: that he deny us not before
his father, and that we be welcome unto him at his next coming. For he shall
come the second time, not as before, to save that which was lost, but to sit
in his glorious throne, and to judge who is saved and who is lost. Then shall
he use his left hand as well as his right hand, he shall sift the good corn
from the chafe: the one part shall be gathered into the barn, but the other
shall be most terribly burned with unquenchable fire: and it is faith that
makes and marreth in this matter, that is the knyse wherewith Christ shall cut
the parts asunder: if we believe we live, if we believe not, we live not: for
it is decreed that Christ shall deal those two dishes: to perish, and to have
life everlasting: And he has already made the division, and shall as
certainly distribute it. And this is thy portion O unhappy infidel: Christ
bids thee depart from him, for thou have not received him, thou have refused
the love of God offered in Christ, and therefore must thou take thy part with
the Devil and his fellows: thou shall perish and not have life everlasting:
but blessed are you ye faithful believers, you have the right hand, Christ
bids you welcome, you are the beloved of God, you have not been ashamed to
receive Christ on the earth, and he shall receive you in the high heavens, you
shall possess the glorious kingdom prepared for the chosen of God, you shall
not perish, but have life everlasting. The which God grant us of the love
wherewith he so loves the world for his only begotten sons sake. God be
blessed for ever Amen.

By M.A.K.
The year of our Lord. 1562.
A godly advise touching Marriage
Worshipful, as I am not unmindful, so I desire by these not to seem
unthankful for those rewards, not small in my purse, which you have heretofore
of your liberality diverse times bestowed on me. The which my purpose, is not
here to recompense, as Courtiers think sufficient to reward other men's good
works with their fair words: but yet I thought it good manner first to make
this courtesy, before I entered any further matter with you: least I should
seem still to beg, and never to bring, or else that my bringing might seem
nothing else but a colored begging, even as the subtle fawning Spaniell often
times fetches his Masters glove in hope to change it for a better morsel.
Wherefore understand you, that this proceeds not of any such purpose, as
either to pick any thank for an undeserved good turn, for therein you are
before hand with me, either to quite you with like measure as you have met
unto me, for that is also above my reach: but only I wish you to accept this
as a pledge of a grateful mind, confessing unto you a debt, and yet desiring
a pardon of payment. And such is the pledge which I have to commend unto
you, surely without dissimulation, no better than of that which is grown in
mine own ground, no far fet thing, neither dearly bought, and therefore not
meet for you, especially if you be very Lady fine, no greater than that came
out of my pen, not more precious than may be kept and carried in a poor piece
of paper, of no further form and fashion, than mine own hands could frame,
mine own simple wit might work. The fine cook men dight the rude morsel
with some conceyte of their cunning, but I have no other Sugar to grace my
dishe withal, but as I have said. Wherefore as you see, so shall you taste:
as you like the qualities, so accept my present. Whereas therefore your
gentleness is such that it deserves great thankfulness, and otherwise moved
if you had not set me up this mark, I thought it my part (if you should take
it in good part) not to spare pen, paper nor pains at this present in
writing unto you: and although it were more meet for me to treat trysles than
mysteries, things of naught and little force, tha^ matters of weight and great
importance: yet considering your person, whose case requires even in enforced
tryfles to seek a gravity, and I ^eeing loath that lost labor should run
with lost time, (for lost time I account lost lands) have bethought my self to
devise some matter that happily might quite your labor for reading, and not be
altogether fruitless in wit, so that altogether my words might not seem as
wasted wind, and I might be somewhat botter occupied than as one that did
naught else but tell the clockes and watch the sun how he shadoweth the
dial. Considering therefore the state of your life, the case wherein you now
stand: that is, toward me and the world my sister, a woman once a wife, now
a widow, and therefore having of God leave and liberty by marriage to become a
wife again: for when the husband is dead, the woman may lawfully betake her
self unto another. This your case I reckened so far to be mine, that I might
not like a careless stranger stand dumb, but as a well wishing brother open
my mouth, and utter my mind unto you, not yt I mind to persuade or dissuade
marriage with you, for therein you may best be your own judge, for you know best
where you shoe wringeth you: neither need you any counselor to bid you cut
where it wringeth you: But whereas you know it lawful, if you shall think
expedient also, that of a widow you become a wife, then ought you to take good
aduiseme^t how you bestow your self, least you both marie and mar your self
in one day, and of an happy widow become an unhappy wife. For I need not to
seek to show you the dangers that such leapt into, that in this matter
rashly leapt before they wisely looked: because on the one side others have had
experience in you, and on the contrary you have sufficient experience in other,
which may lead you through the consideration hereof even as straight as a line:
and therefore I will not counsel you as needless to aduisement, but rather
commend you that you have hitherto stand so stayed, with such advised
deliberation. Only this point I find in you, which needs a knot, as to
consider how you might do most advisedly, what match were most meet for you
to be made, that repentance follow not: to what mark you ought to direct your
counsel, aduisement, and deliberation, that the success might answer your
hope, that is, that it might turn to your continual comfort, and to the glory
of God. This verily I wot well is a case of such importance to consider, and
has so many hard knots to work on, that it were more fit for gray hears,
sage wits, and deep divines to take in hand, than for my simplicity to
adventure. I think you have read what M. the Emperor said in the like case: I
am of opinion, that if all the wise men were molten together in a furnace, they
could not give one good counsel to make a marriage, what counsel then of
likelihoode may you look to have at my hands, if a wise man, if many wise
men, if all the wise be not wise enough in any point well to advertise you in
this behalf? Wherefore I will ask no pardon of presumption, whereof I trust
there shall be no suspicion betwixt brother and sister. But this desire, you
would rather weigh the will than the wit, which by me here shall be showed: and
if I (as of likelyhoode) shall ouershoote my self by any kind of folly, yet
let such wisdom rest in you, that you make not that open and common, which
betwixt us is private and privy. Therefore to enter my purpose, because that
of many, yet must one join but with one, and because where one is to be
chosen, it is good to see which and all if it might be. I will be so bold as
to send you four such suitors as may represent unto you all the rest that may
happen hereafter to come. Consider all by four, try four and trust one.
Therefore I see three marks generally whereat you may shoot out your game,
and which are to be considered in man. The inward mind of the man, the
outward personage and the state wherein he stands of things apperteyning to
the world. By this rule I will sever and single out the sorts of men, that
after the division you may with less doubt make your choice. And first to
begin with the worst: There are men that live neither well, nor welthily, being
in a desperate state both toward God and the world, past hope, and past shame:
But we may set these aside, as we find them, so let us leave them, for I know
as they are naught worthy, so you will not have to do with them. None of
those I think will come unto you in the name of a suitor. The next man is not
so wise, nor so well favored as welthie, not so courteous as covetous, not so
manered as monied, and he having hope through his wealth peradventure will
attempt you. For what case is desperate in the world to such as fortune
laugheth upon, and as one says: whereunto does not the religious thirst of
gold enforce the hearts of men? This man you may soon epsy, where his
treasure is, there is his heart: even such kind of wowing you shall have of him
as Satan used to our Savior: if thou will fall down and worship me, Math. 4.
I will give you (says he) all these: you shall be maistresse of so many
sheep, so many oxen, thus much money shall be yours as mine own. So harpeth
he upon his halfepenie. But let us set him aside a while, and bring an other in
place, as such a one, that is handsome of personage, either as they say, a tall
gentleman, or a proper man, well borne, graced with some courtly behauior, well
spoken, a pretty natural wit, and graced with other such qualities of the
body, and yet peradventure virtue has taken little or no root in him, he
worshippeth God at leisure, and has some civil godliness in him, and a
religion he has that he uses as the Market serves, and thus does he reckon
his game: I see not (says he to himself) why I should despair, I see not
but I am worthy of as good as she is, I come of as good an house as she,
mine aunceters were all worshipful, and some honorable: I doubt not the
mislyking of my behavior, for I have not been so evil brought up but I know
how to enterteyne a gentlewoman, I shall see well enough too, that my demeanor
be courteous and courtly, as for my countenance, my personage, I force not who
behold it. So to himself he says, when to you he shall commend himself
with such modesty, as to say, he is not disfigured nor maimed: and that he
cannot of shame say him self, some other freende shall set out in playner
terms, his friends peradventure not yours, will so blaze his arms, as
though he should sell him unto you, as though ye should take him at his
word, besetting him with these and the like flowers: if you respect the
personage of a man, if you refuse him, ye shall not be so matched again,
mark him and view him well, see what deformity you may find in him: is
there any part of him out of joint, or out of square? Mark what a ioly
complexion he has, see whether ye may espy any wart, any blemish in his
visage: consider whether he be not a very gentleman in his behavior, and
forget not his qualityes how commendable they are, his actiuitie, his merry
conceytes, his pretty practices: see how cleanly and trim he is in his
apparel, how skillful and neat he is about his horse, his hawks, his
hounds: his exercise also be uses, is gentleman like, abroad he uses his
bow, within doors he can sing to his lute, and so he has wyped clean the
outside of the cup. As for learning he has enough for a Gentleman. Here
peradventure that wise saying shall be wisely alleged. Ecclesiast. 7. Be not
too wise: if he have a good wit in deed, then shall there be great compasses
of comparisons set. If he be but mean in that respect, then yet he is no
fool, no natural: if he be peradventure somewhat stained in fame, as for the
familiarity, you shall have that issue straight stopped with some plaster of
excuse: if it be not manifest, then is it false and forged, no man is able to
charge him so, the best are most subject to corruption, the finest cloth may
be soonest stained, the honestest man may be soonest slaundered. And if it be
not to be denied, yet it shall be excused, as that those are but toys and
pranckes that run in common course among young men, or else you must consider
that we are all sinners, and there is Scripture enough to prove this: There is
not one good, no not one, we have all gone astray like sheep, no man is good
but God, and such the like. Wherefore a man is not to be rejected, but to be
borne withal in such things, for as much as we are al full of imperfections
and infirmities. And so if there appear any good gift it shall be set out as
it were a sunning to behold. But if th^re be any suspicion of vice, or
otherwise any want or defect, that shall either be let slip with silence, or
else the broken pieces shall be glued together in some sort, that which is
unseemly or unsightly shall have a better color set on it with some glosing
tale: the want of wit shall be supplied with abundance of wealth, evil manners
with much money, if his life be suspected you must look in his face, for with
some women the pleasing personage satisfies for it self, and also for virtue:
and good qualities is for learning in a gentleman. If the quiver be well
furnished, if it be well in the stable, in the mue, the kenel, it does not so
much force what is in the house, the chamber and the study. Such verily is
the table talk amongst the Gentiles the gentlemen, such boltes shootes suitors
and suitors friends, and with such traynes some women are entrapped, with
such winlesses some are driven into the net. But I trust your eyesight serves
you better, than to be dimmed with such mystes, or dazed with such short
sunshynings. In the degree of mysuters, the third remains, whom if you by
the eye judge, that discerns no further than the face, and if you weigh the
worth of your marriage with weightes of silver, this man shall soon be put out
of countenance and hope, he shall soon be counteruayled and weyed down to the
ground, as who may sing Peter's song: Silver and Gold have I little or none,
he can not number his lands, his leases, his farms and his tenements: not of
great living, but of good life: he has a living, but competent, not abounding,
not flowing with full stream: peradventure no knight, yet a plain gentleman,
not very well borne, but very well brought up, not worshipful, but worship
worthy, not of great estimation, but of singular honesty, not so long trained
in the Court as conversant in the school, his lands are not so great as his
learning, his chest not so stored with money, but his head and mind possessed
and furnished with the trusty treasure of truth, and the inestimable wealth of
wisdom: his demaynes to others are not comparable, but his demeanor above
others commendable, and amiable countenance, but yet a manly visage, a face in
which appears more grace than favor, more gravity than beauty, his tongue
speeding words no faster than they may seem well bestowed, having his mouth
in his heart, and not his heart in his mouth: not so well friended of men as
favored of God, his body not so handsome of making as his soul well
fashioned and framed to godward, his leg not so clean as his life without spot,
his hand not so white to see, as his heart sure to trust: not high of stature,
yet his wit not short, his body not so straight as his conscience upright, not
so brave in his apparel as grave in his behavior, not curious and neat, but
honest and clenly, not so well faced as well lived, I mean not so well attyred
in the outward man as clothed in the inward man. These are me thinks the
degrees of men to be considered in our purpose: for I can reckon no other
marks whereunto women direct their eyes and thought. She that rests upon
these three first, those which they call the gifts of fortune, the outward
goods as wealth and substance which they possess, their place and state,
their parents and friends concerning worship and estimation, and in the man
himself, the goods of the mind, wherein you may respect shortly life and
learning and wit: then the personage of the man, considering his making and
proportion, his stature, his form and favor, and also his years: and
although these good gifts and graces do not enjoy one the other, but that
sometimes in one person diverse of them may make their habitation: for the
better conference of them to sever them into diverse persons, I would you
could discern them apart in deed: then should you be in less danger of
deceyte: there are to be found I think, if we seek far, in whom virtue,
fortune and favor have made a marriage: and such a one, if my prayer might be
heard you should soon attain. But such stars shoot not often, such
birds fly seldom abroad: but if there happen any such whereupon your
consideration shall stand, my counsel is that you follow the example of the
Physician, who to know the whole state of a man opens and cutteth him up,
and deuideth him into parts, and thereby grows into a greater knowledge: so
I wish you to make an anotomie of him that you have in hand, make no confusion
of wealth, wit, body and soul, life and living: For so you may soon
deceive your self. In one man therefore consider three, of the which you ought
to choose but one, least perhaps you mistake your right mark and leese your
game: least in stead of a man, ye find but the shadow of a man: refer your
self to the pattern of those persons which I have rudely described unto you:
compare unto them, and those betwixt themselves. Wherefore to enter the
comparison, if you ask my judgment: The Poets to lay a foundation of a
further invention, feigned there were three she Gods in contention for their
beauty, who did most excel: Juno, who had the disposition of honor and
dignity, Pallas at whose pleasure were al gifts of wisdom, and Venus the
Lady of love. To end this strife, it pleased Jupiter and other gods, to refer
the judgment hereof to one Paris, a shepehearde, conueying to him a gold
apple with this inscription: Let it be give to the fairest. The foresaid Gods
presented themselves before this their appointed judge, and offered every one
their reward to have sentence on their side: Juno would make him the highest:
Pallas the wisest: and Venus a husband of the fairest Venus here prevailed, she
was pronounced fairest. Paris had his reward, that was the beautiful Helena,
who they say, was the cause and destruction of the Trojans. Now if your
marriage stood upon the gift and delivery of an apple, I trust you could not
play Paris part, that Venus should vanquish you. Wherefore my counsel is, yt
rather you incline to Pallas for some reward of wit: than either to Juno for
her honor, or Venus for pleasure. And besides these, there is one that by right
has greater interest in the apple than any of the other, although she strive
not so much for the matter, I mean the Lady Virtue. Wherefore if she come in
place, wyth-holde not your hand from her for fear of the other, if she offer
not her self at the first, yet be not rash or hasty, but call unto God that
he may send her unto you, and he no doubt, as his ears are always open unto
the prayers of the faithful, shall bring her eue^ home to you, and she, I think,
is for your purpose, to her as you ought, deliver up your apple if you intend
to give it to the fairest, to the best and the most worthy. Wherefore consider
well my last pourtred person, of whom although I have not set so fair a color,
yet if he were to be sold, I would hold as dearest: as who, although he be not
formed of the finest fashion, yet is he made of the purest metal: who^
peradventure Juno may jest at, Venus have little to vaunt of, and Plutus whom
they call the God of riches passes not on: yet if virtue may prevail, you
shall be his, and virtue shall be yours, yea Pallas also pleads on his part.
Wherefore I counsel you as you would give the apple unto virtue, so give your
wedding ring to be worn of the virtuous. For if it be so, as the Philosopher
truly disputes of friendship, that it can not consist but betwixt the good:
how slender a marriage will that be, where virtue knitteth not the knot? where
honesty is not called to counsel, and godliness is not bid to the bridal? I
think there needs no far fette examples in this matter, seeing you have
experience so near you: you know what the son of Syrach says: blessed is that
man that has a virtuous wife, for the number of his years shall be double.
You I think being vertuouslye disposed, entende to make an happy husband: see
then that he do as much for you as you for him: where as you shall make him
happy, foresee that he for want of virtue turn not the course of your state:
whereas you shall double his days, take heed that he cut not off yours by the
middle. Ecclesiastes. 26. You have some good flowers growing, take heed they
be not ouergrowne and choked with ye evil weeds that he shall bring into your
ground: you are, thanks be to god, disposed to godliness, match not with the
contrary disposition: for then shall you be as the yoke of oxen that draws
diverse ways. Vice and virtue were yet never friends, it caused hatred in
brethren, as in Cain and Abel, Esau and Jacob: how can the wolf and the Lamb
agree? no more can the ungodly with the righteous. He that touches pitch shall
be defiled therewith. Think not then that the virtuous and the vicious may make
a good marriage: Can you set fire and water together, but that they shall stir
and strive for the maistrie, and each to consume the other? Stand therefore,
make no have for fear of the worste: it is better to look long than to leap
lightly: rake up the ashes thoroughly, and turn them to and fro, that you be
sure there remain no spark of burning vice, or at the least, leave as little as
you may, and sweep as clean as you can. Therefore mark well, I wish, what
condition S. Paul sets, when he gives you your license to marry 1. Cor.
7. The wife is bound by the law, as long as her husband lives, but if her
husband be dead, she is at liberty to marie only in the Lord. Weigh well that
restraint of your liberty, or rather a sure stay of your liberty, least by
abuse you turn that liberty into a bondage. For unless you have God before
your eyes, you shall change your liberty into a straight bondage: whereas you
seek comfort, you shall find a curse, whereas you hope for ease and rest, you
shall enter into disease and trouble. Above all therefore have a special and a
steadfast eye upon this rule: That you marie in the Lord. He made the first
marriage that ever was made, and I dout not but he made the first that you made:
and if he make the second also, then shall you be sure never to repent you of
your bargain. He did institute marriage as a thing most holy, to his glory,
and to the comfort of man: See therefore that you in your case be void of all
fleshly affection as near as you may, that you profane not that which is
holy to your own discomfort, and the dishonor of God. Christ you know was
present at a marriage in Cana, where besides his presence, he honored it with
his first miracle, as that he turned water into wine. I pray you make Cothring
as like Cana as you can, let Christ be present with you: I mean, to guide your
spirit with his holy spirit, turn not his miracle, make not, I mean, water
of wine, but let that which God has instituted to your comfort, be godly
handled of you to his glory. Whereas Matrimony is honorable amongste all men,
provide that it turn not to your shame and confusion, as you see in some: I
need not here (as it were to long) particularly to give you precepts, to
rehearse she virtues to be embraced, and the vices to be detested in men. But
shortly, as our Savior answered, thou know the commandments, do this
and thou shalt live: So I, you know the commandments, mete the length of
their feet, by that measure shall you well perceive whether his shoe will serve
your foot: yet one thing in this behalf I must add, not of mistrust, but to
make a double knotte of a single, or a treble of a double: for the surer the
better, the warier the wiser. Be wise then and beware, that you put not your
head under the girdle of the ungodly, neither so burden your self as to bear
the yoke with an Infidel. For then it may not seem you kept S. Paul his
rule. As to marry in the Lord, for that is his counsel. 2. Cor. 6. For what
marriage may righteousness make with unrighteousness? light with darkness,
Christ with Beliall, the unfeigned children with the faythlesse Infidel? For
here beside the danger of discord and bodyly trouble thereof ensuing, there
is also apparent peril that may pearce the soul. For so says the Lord to his
people Israel concerning their joining with foreign nations. Deuteronomy. 7. Thou
shall make no covenant with them, neither shall thou make marriages with them,
neither give thy daughter unto his son, nor take his daughter unto thy son,
for they will cause thy son to turn away from me, and to serve other Gods:
Then will the wrath of the Lord wax whote against you and destroy thee
suddenly: You are no Israelite, here might be said, how then? yet a Christian I
trow, and by faith the daughter of Abraham. Then this must you reckon to be
written for your learning. There are no Heathites, no Amorites, no Cananites to
be feared: yet are many in our days both faythlesse and godless, as the
obstinate Papiste and double dealing Gospeller, in whom there is no less
danger of deceit: and although the persons be not one, yet little difference
seems to be in the cause. For first mark the reason, and then apply it. The
marriage of a Cananite was forbidden the Israelite, for fear lest he should be
withdrawn from the true worship of the true God of Israel: and do we not
see in experience that the wicked wife corrupts such men as we judge sometime
most upright in life and steadfast in profession of the truth. And how much
more danger is there least the unbelieving and wicked man alter the good nature
of the honest woman into his own nature, seeing that to him she is subject, as
the body to the head? ye must of necessity be one in flesh with him whom ye
shall choose: foresee therefore by wisdom that his religion be one with yours,
see that you change not your manners with your name: presume not of your self
herin, you are not wiser than Solomon, yet as in the.9. of the.1. of the kings,
his wisdom was so bewitched by the means of those foreign women with who^ he
matched in marriage, that he became a fond Idolater, and so fell into the hands
of god. Of this example I trust you will take sufficient warning, so that
herein I need not make any more words: unless you object to me or any other
to you, the place of S. Paul 1. Cor. 7. The unbelieving husband is sanctified
by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband If we mark
the purpose of Saint Paul, the answer shall not be hard: The verse next before
does contain his purpose, which is that the believing woman already married to
the unbelieving man, should not use his infidelity as an occasion to depart
from him: the words are: The woman which has an husband which believes
not, if he be content to dwell with her, let her not forsake him: and the other
he joins as a reason to confirm this sentence, so that that place serves to
this, that if you and your husband were first both of you unbelievers,
afterward it pleased God to call you to the knowledge of this truth, your
husband continuing in his infidelity, or if now being grounded, you should
adventure the marriage of an Infidel, you ought not yet for the hope of
sanctification to seek a separation For as you should do ill to take on the
yoke of an infidel, so should you do worse to shake it off without some
iuster cause: and although that be not a sufficient cause to break the knot
that is knit, whereas is hope of sanctification, yet is it just and necessary
wherefore to refrain marriage. For the marriage of an ungodly Infidel I grant
is a marriage, and not lightly to be dissolved: but yet an ungodly marriage, and
that which lacks sanctification, which is easy to gather eue^ of the same
words of S. Paul alleged. Wherefore as if your head were fast in the yoke I
would counsel you to continue for the hope of sanctification, that you might
win your husband: so now standing free, tempt not God, presume not, match not
with any that you know to be out of the household of faith for fear of
corruption, least you leese your self before you win an other. Thus I have
spoken hitherto for my last wower, who pleads honesty, virtue and
godliness, and who I doubt not shall speed, because that God is on his side.
Here if ye demand of me, whether I would have you so precise as only to
regard the honesty and virtue, without any further respect. Truly (although
peradventure I shall seem too spiritual in this point) that if you had your
eye fully fixed upon ye mark, without wavering other ways, no doubt but God
would prosper you the better, for as much as he shall thereby have trial that
you depend wholly upon him and his providence, and then shall you be least in
danger of snares And of this, that it ought so to be, we may take a warning of
the manner that God used in the first marriage making in the. 2. of Genesis, as
whilst he was providing for Adam the woman that should be his wife and his
comfort, he caused an heavy sleep to fall upon the man, and whilst he was a
sleep, he took out that ribbe whereof he framed the woman. So verily I would
think that God did most work with you, if you laid Adam a sleep, I mean,
if you removed all carnal affections and worldly respects which proceed as
earthly from Adam, while that this bargain were a driving. This I know is
far wide from worldly wisdom: but this way you shall go nearest to make a
marriage of Paradise, and so shall you seem most to marry in the Lord. And if
you may not abide so strait binding, yet swerve as little as you may: if this
be not your whole building, yet at the least let it be your chief foundation:
if this be your ground, have no doubt but there will grow and follow other
good followers. So then I think you shall gather a good sum if you cast your
accomptes in this wise: if virtue come alone, she is not to be refused: if she
come with the company of such as the world esteems, not as a servant but as
a maistresse, which is hard and seldom, she is also to be embraced. But yet if
you stand on this point, you are in greater danger to slide: for virtue
clothed is not so sure to trust as if it be naked and bare. Then a little
virtue exceeding in one, may not be supplied with great store, and abundance
of other gifts and goods in an other: for we must in our doings first seek
the kingdom of heaven, as for other things, after them seek the Gentiles, if
they be sought with care, even when we think us nearest we are often furthest
off, and shoot to short. If we attain the thing desired, yet we lack the
fruition, as when we wanted the thing. If we enjoy it, yet the space is short.
But if they come as unbidden guestes, then are they most welcome: yea if we
seek them not, the promise is, they shall be cast unto us: and if they be
cast, then come they in their kind. Now then to speak somewhat of other
respects severally, you may remember the suitor whom I commended unto you, I
did so qualify, that as I would not have him godless, so I wish him not to be
witless: for that I reckon a most honest respect, so that you discern the
true wisdom from the false, so that the simplicity of the dove join not with
the wiliness of the serpent: nether shall this hinder my honest and godly
wower in his suite, but rather further. For as fools are fortunate, so the
virtuous commonly have less want of wisdom. The fear of the Lord is wisdom.
Job. 28. Christ is the wisdom of the father: therefore if you make account of
true wisdom, in this behalf you shall be best sped in the true Christian: and
by this I need not to make comparison betwixt the godly and the wise, so that
you use your wisdom to discern and judge aright of wisdom, for as much as
the right wisdom the righteous has obtained. Only if the comparison stand
betwixt the wise and the welthy or handsome, let Solomon be your counselor
here. Prouer. 8. Wisdom is better than precious stones, and al pleasures are
not to be compared unto her: and Prouer. 16. How much better is it to get
wisdom than gold, and to get understanding is more to be desired than
silver. And thus the Preacher makes comparison. cap. 7. Wisdom is good with
an inheritance, and excellent to them that see the same: for a man shall rest
in the shadow of wisdom, and in the shadow of silver. But the excellency of
the knowledge of wisdom gives life to the possessors thereof.

Now if the righteous and the rich stand in comparison, yet I trust my poor
spirited suter shall not be outfaced, you sitting as judge: and such I trust
shall be your sentence, as was Themistocles answer (a Captain among the
Grecians, to this question) whether a man should bestow his daughter upon a
good poor man, or upon a rich man not so honest? his answer was (as Tullie
shows, lib. 2. officiorum) I rather like the man who lacks money, than money
which wants a man. So little thought he that riches and substance did make a
matter of marriage, that she seemed not to him to marry for any regard of the
man, that has such respect of riches: and that she that married not an honest
man, did scarce marie a man. Some in deed have their fancy so led as
though money made men: But let this be your Poesy rather, when you make your
marriage: Manners makes man. Consider the saying of the Prophet. Psalm. 37. and
Prou. 16. A small thing that the just man has, is better than great riches of
the ungodly, wicked and mighty. There is a good piece of counsel in the.13. of
Ecclesiasticus, concerning those with whom we may not win familiarity, for he
says: Burden not thy self above thy power whilst thou live, and company
not with one that is mightier and richer than thy self: for how agree the
Kettle and the earthen pot together? For if the one be smitten against the
other, it shall be broken. Wherefore in this behalf an equality were a goodly
property. That would take away the occasion of such quarrels and complaints as
the unequal matches (we see) lay one in the others dish, which choking
morsels you know are not easy to digest. I wish you wealth and riches, for I
know they are the good gifts of God. But I fear least virtue will be over
whelmed where such floods break out. He that will tarry for the company of a
rich man to go to heaven, it will be long or he come there. For his way is as
streite as the eye of a needle, and he himself as huge as a Camel
Ecclesiasticus makes a marvel of ye rich upright man.20. or.2. Chap. Have
not this mind with you (sister) as to seek a rich marriage For then you miss
of the right mark of marriage ordained for your comfort: there lies not the
way leading to rest and quietness.6. Timo. For they that will be rich, fall
into temptations and snares, and into many foolish and ^oysome lusts which
drown men in perdition and destruction, and repeat that saying with your
self: the desire of money is the root of al evil. Take heed that that root
ouergrow not other good flowers: but hearken unto the sentence that our
Savior pronounces: Woe be unto you that are rich, for you have received your
consolation. Luke.6. These therefore be the bounds that S. Paul appoints
us: If we have, says he, food and raiment, let us therewith be content. Truly
herein consists not true riches to possess this earthly treasure, the meat
of Mothes, and the bayte of thieves: But such as my commended suter
possesses, if you may be partaker thereof, then may you say: my lot is fallen
to me on a fair ground, and that you have a goodlye heritage. Godliness
(says the Apostle) is great gain, if a man be content with that he has:
even that is it which my suter brings, godliness with contentation.
Wherefore then should you desire the marriage of the rich? you see it brings
no rest: you see godliness is the true riches. Do you seek to stablish unto
you and yours an inheritance? Hearken then what the Prophet says. Psalm.37.
The evil doers shall be cut off, and they that wayt upon the Lord, they shall
inherit the land. Agame, the meek men shall possess the earth. And again,
the Lord knows the days of upright men, and their inheritance shall be
perpetual. Do you seek a continuance and perpetuity in things? James says,
as when the sun rises with heat the^ the grass withers and his flower
falls away, and the beauty of the fashion of it perishes: eue^ so shall the
rich man fade away in all his ways. But the just they flourish like the palm
tree, they are like ye Bay tree, even green and fresh like themselves. Pro.12.
The root of the righteous shall not be moved. Do you desire to have such a head
as may best defend you from injuries and oppressions: who is of more might than
the righteous? David says. Psalm. 34. The angel of the Lord pitcheth round
about them that fear him and delivers them. And again: the ears of the
lord are open unto their prayers, and his ears are open unto their cry, yea
he keeps their bones that none of the^ be broken, he numbreth their hears
that none of them be lost. Do you fear peril or penury? of the righteous thus
says ye Prophet. Psa. 37. They shall not be confounded in the perilous time,
and in the days of famine they shall have enough. You will say, for my self I
can hold my self content, but my childrens case moves me. Harke^ how David
speaks of his experience. Psalm. 37. I have bin young and now am old, yet I saw
never ye righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. Doubtless GOD
shall provide for you and yours sufficientlye and abundantly, if you cast
away all such worldly respects, and much more than otherwise. Now I think
these shall suffice to underset and stay you up that you fall not on this
side. The next care concerns my second suter, that he take you not with the
bayte of beauty, whereby many wise women and men have bin deceived, and with a
short pleasure have purchased long and desperate repentance. This caused
Solomon to commit folly.11. of the 1. Kings. This cooled she mighty Sampsons
courage. Iud. 16. Did not the beauty of Bethseba so ravish ye eyes of holy
David, that he committed with her most abominable adultery, and made him
also guilty of bloodshed? So it is written.11. of.2. Samuel. He saw a woman
washing her self, and the woman was very beautiful to look upon. You might
abuse these examples to folly, as to say: These men were notable for strength,
for wisdom, for godliness: marvel not then (might you say) though I be
overcome in that case. Not so sister, but this consider in these examples, that
if such of so excellent graces have been led away with these traynes, you
have hereby a fair warning to beware, and to be very circumspect in so subtle
a point and so dangerous a case: if you give place to such fantasies that
they overcome reason, you may soon slip into those inconveniences that you see
in the examples of others, you may pluck the house on your head as Sampson
did. As you choose your mark so goes your game: as you make your foundation,
so will your building be: if the one be steadfast, the other will not lightly
shake: but if the one be not surely grounded, a little blast marreth much work:
surely the handsome person of man is not of long continuance. Besides that, it
is subject to corruption by innumerable means. Wherefore if your marriage hang
upon that knot, a little force will break it, a little labor will undo it,
and of it self it will decay and wear away. If this fancy be ye leader of
your love, you follow a blind guide, you may soon slide and wander out of
your right way. Many an unsavory weed bears a fair blossom: so under a
fair face, there lies hidden many a foul fault, and with sound look often
is covered the hollow heart, all hatred. (A liuelye example in Absolon. 14.
Sam. 2.) I have read an history of one Paulus Aemilius a noble man of Rome,
matched with a wife called Papiria, both for birth and beauty (to judge)
worthy such an husband. Howbeit he divorced her: and when her friends
entreated for her, demanding of him what should be the cause moving him so to
do, for they saw none, seeing that she was to behold manerly and modest, fair
and fruitful. Then he for answer, thrusts out his foot, and says:
Behold, see my shoe, is it not fair? is it not new? yet none of you woteth
where it wringeth me. Belyke there was some secret fault in that woman not to
be borne withal, which was so loathsome unto the husband, as her beauty
could be pleasant. Be advised therefore least you find that your handsome
husband have that, which this man found in his fair wife. If you will not that
your shoe wring, measure him before you buie, and judge not of him by the
color, but measure him rather within than without, least you wring for it
afterward. The goodly personage without wisdom and virtue, what is it better
than a painted man? Plato ye Philosopher in the person of Socrates thus says
to Alcibiades: He that at any time has loved Alcibiades body, has not loved
Alcibiades himself: but he that loves thee, loves thy mind, nunc tui corpus
amatur. etc. And the wise Tullie says: Man is as his mind is, and not that
form and figure which may be pointed at with ye finger. For this you
understand that man consists of two parts, ye one as ye mind endued with
reason that bears ye image of god: the other as ye body which we have common
with the brute beasts. Wherefore David you know, co^pareth that man that
lacks understanding unto horse and mule: and I me thinks, may well compare
such lusty lads whose commendation is only on their personage, and lacks
learning, wit, and honesty, unto Plato his Man, as Diogenes called. When
that Plato in his school had defined a man in this wise, as to be a living and
twofooted creature, made upright and without any feathers: Diogenes thinking
that he had not well defined or expressed the nature, because he suppressed
that which was most proper to man, and did concern the mind and gift of
reason, he pluckte me a Capon bare and turned him into the schole, saying:
Behold Platos man. Thus is a man if you consider not his mind, a fool, what
is he but an unfeathered foul? A man without manners, what is he better than a
capon without feathers? Wherefore if you meet any such in your dyshe, esteem
him as you list, I have told you the price. Trust not to soon those fair
faces, which come like capons upon soppes and Sugar. That brave apparel, what
is it but Pecockes feathers? the good complexion, the strength of the body, the
white hand, the clean leg, what are these, but fading flattering flowers? what
but baits to deceive the foolish fish? all these serve but to please the
eye, and to satisfy the fantasy of the flesh. Consider what is written in
the.6. of Genesis. The sons of God saw the daughters of me^ that they were
fair, and they took the^ wives of all that they liked. Therefore the Lord
said: my spirit shall not always strive with man. etc. Behold that fleshly
fancy of marriage, for that they thereby abused and polluted the holy
ordinance of God, is expressed there as one of the causes that provoked God so
to power out the rain of his wrath, and to destroy all flesh from the face of
the earth. Wherefore in this point I end with the exhortation of S. John.1.
Epist. 2. chap. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world:
if any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him: for all that is
in the world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride
of life, is not of the father, but is of the world: and the world passes away
and the lust thereof: but he that fulfilleth the will of God abides for ever.
By these, sister, you may consider the true and sure way you have to walk:
you have the bywayes that may cause you to wa^der, in some sort stopped up: you
may see, if it please you, the good and the bad, although set forth but in a
rude glass, Sing not now Medeas song, who said: I see and allow the better,
but yet I follow the worse. Give not Venus your apple, but give ye virtuous your
wedding ring: then see how you have headded your arrow. And then see the
blissed estate you stand in, he is yours for better or for worse, for richer,
for poorer, he shall be to you an husband, to your children a father, to your
friends a fauorer, to your enemies a terror, he shall willingly bear part of
all your blows and burdens, he shall double your prosperity, he shall mourn
when you weep, he shall laugh when you are glad, his love is sure sealed, even
joined by God himself. He is not like the rich of who^ the son of Syrach
says. chap. 13. if thou be for his profit he uses thee, but if thou have
nothing, he will forsake thee. He is not like the light lover for beauty, of
whom the wise Plato says: He that loves thee for thy favor, when that
decays he will give thee over. But he shall be one with you both body and
soul, he shall walk forth with you here your pilgrimage on earth, and shall
lead you the way to eternal rest. He shall be blissed in all his affairs, if
David be a true Prophet. 1. Psalm. His wife also shall be blissed, he shall have
seed and blissed seed: for Psalm. 114. Blissed is the man that fears the
Lord, and delights in his commandments, his seed shall be mighty upon
earth, the generation of the righteous shall be blissed: riches and treasure
shall be in his house, and his righteousness shall endure forever Psalm. 128.
Blissed is every one that fears the Lord and walks in his ways: when thou
eatest the labors of thy hands thou shall be blissed, and it shall be well with
thee, thy wife shall be as the fruitful Vine on the sides of thy house, even
your husbands wife shall be such a one, if your husband be such a one: and thy
children like the Olive branches round about thy table. This David promises
and prophecieth, and confirms it again, saying: Lo surely, thus shall the
man be blissed (in marying) that man that fears the Lord. You will say
peradventure I would think my self well bestowed upon such a man: but the
craft is in the catching, the doubt is in the obteyning. But go you forward in
your race of virtue, and then you shall not go far before you meet with a
mete match, It is an old saying: The like loves the like. The son of Syrach
says chap. 13. All flesh will resort to their like, and every man will keep
company with such as he is himself. A virtuous woman says he chap. 26. is a
good portion and a gift to be given to some just Joseph, or some true Tobias.
You know that every good gift comes from God as the first father and
founder: yet in this case God appears more evidently to strike the stroke to
work as it were immediately within with his own hand: So says Solomon Proverb.
19. House and riches are the inheritance of the fathers, but a prudent wife
comes of the Lord. Wherefore although there be good tokens and marks
whereby to make your choice, as by the fruit to judge the tree: and as Eccl.
says.27. The word declares the heart, the talk is the trial of men: yet
because these are rather probable conjectures than sure demonstrations (for
fame oftentimes lies, the eye deceives, the tongue dissembleth) therefore when
you have cast the whole and the sum, yet God is al in all this matter, and the
only maker of good marriages. Be free then from worldly business, be clear
from carnal affections, cast your hope upon God, depend upon his providence,
commit the matter wholly to his hands, resort and flee to him with often and
earnest prayer. For that when al other ways be tried, is the plainest to seek,
the surest to trust, the rediest to find for such as seek good wives and good
husbands. You have a good example in the.24. of Genesis, how Abraham proceeded
in the marriage of his son Isaac: you have there the prayer that the servant
of Abraham made, to whom this charge was committed, how he entering his journey,
desired God to prosper him, and to show mercy unto his master Abraham, and
that God according to his faithful prayer, gave him a token, whereby he chose ye
fair virtuous virgin Rebecca For her parents, when they perceived that God
wrought with man, could not deny their goodwil unto Isaac, but answered: This
thing is proceeded of the Lord, we can not therefore say unto thee neither evil
nor good. You have there also the exercise of Isaac, how he was occupied in
the mean time, while Rebecca was taken out of his rib. Moses says: He went
out to pray in the field toward the evening, and that Rebecca first found him
so occupied. This is al, sister, that I have now to be said: give your self
over wholly unto God to be your guide. Let your eyes be so earnest bent upon
him, as they were wont to be upon your maistresse whom you have heretofore
served: then shall God, no doubt, give you as a portion to the righteous, he
shall so join you, that man may not separat you: Christ shall be present with
you, as at the marriage of Cana: he shall conducte you with his holy spirit, he
shall turn your water into wine, he shall make the sour sweet, and prosper
all your affairs: In mean time, while God works, be not you idle, but
practice your self in Isaacks exercise, and God shall send you an husband of
his kind, even a faithful son of Abraham, a chosen child of God. God shall
send his Angel to lead that man unto your house, even as he brought Tobias
unto Sara at the house of her father Raguel. And as my poor prayer may help,
the Lord (I beseech him) guide you with his holy spirit, and provide you an
head for your comfort, grant you long to live and ever to love together with
the increase of your godly children.

FINIS.
Certain places of Scripture, touching ungodly matching in Marriage.
1 THe godly, marying with women of a wicked kindred and Religion for worldly
considerations, are reprehended. Genesis chap. 6. verse. 1. and.2.

2 Matching with unbelievers makes the believing parties unready to follow
Gods calling, and wrappeth them in great danger of Gods vengeance when it is
poured on the wicked: as appears Genesis chap. 19. verse. 14. and. 15.

3 Abraham took an oath of his servant, to take no wife for Isaac from amongst
the Idolatrous Cananites. Gen chap. 14. verse.3. and.4.

4 Isaac charged his son Jacob, not to marry a Cananite. Genesis 28. ver. 1
and. 2.

5 Esau trespassed in marying with unbelieving women. Genesis chap. 27. verse. 46.
Also Genesis 28. verse. 6. and.9.

6 Not only maryages with Infidels, but also all other compactes with them are
forbidden: neither may they dwell in our land, or any ydolatrous thing be
brought into our houses. Exodus chap. 34. verse. 12.15. and. 16. Also Exodus 23.
verse. 32. and.33. Also Deuteronomy. chap. 7. verse. 2.3.4.25. and. 26. The reason of
this law and commandment is of continual force, and serves generally for
all the children of God, which is: That the believers be not snared by the
allurements of Infidels, and drawn to Idolatry.

7 By the false Prophet Balaams counsel the idolatrous women of Moab joined
themselves to the Israelites, and so led them to Idolatry, as appears
Numbers chap. 31. verse. 16. Those women therefore by Moses commandment were
put to the sword: in the same chap. verse. 17.

8 The match of Duke Zimrie an Israelite, with Princess Cozbie a Moabite,
with Phincas commendation for steaing them both. Numbers chap. 25.

9 The children of Israel did wickedly in marrying with the Canaanites,
Judges. chap. 3. verse. 6.

10 Sampson reproved by his parents (who considered the general law of God
to the contrary) for seeking a wife amongst the Philistines. Iud. 14. verse.
3. The inconvenience that insued of her betraying his secrecy of his riddle to
the Philistines, in the same chap. verse 17. The ill success of that marriage,
in the same chap. verse. 20.

11 Solomon, the wisest man that ever was, fell away from God to idolatry by
means of his outlandishe idolatrous wives, as appears first of the Kings,
chapter. 11.

12 Iehoram king of Judah, son of godly Iehosaphat, was a wicked King: the
reason also added: For the daughter of wicked and idolatrous King Achab was his
wife. 2. Reg. 8. verse. 18.

13 Ahaziah king of Judah, son of Iehoram, a wicked King: the reason also
added: For he was the son in law of the house of Achab. His mother also was
Athaliah the daughter of Omrie King of Israel, who was Achabs father. 2. Reg.
8. verse. 26.

14 Achab king of Israel married Iesabel the king of the Zidonians daughter, in
the first of the Kings. Chap. 16. verse. 31. He sold himself to sin. 1.
Reg. 20.

15 Esdras reproved the Israelites for marying with infidels, as appears,
Chapter. 9. verse. 1. and 2. Princes and great personages especially there
blamed for this fault.

16 Those ungodly marriages were dissolved by Esdras. cap. 10. verse. 10.9. and.
44.

17 The ceremonies also commanded, in that special permission to the
Israelites of marying an unbelieving woman taken in battle, declare and argue,
that it is not lawful for any of the faithful to match with an unbeliever,
before the unbeliever have renounced whatsoever may be a hinderance to
godliness and true religion. Read Deuteronomy. chap. 21. verse. 12. and. 13.

18 If the husband die, the woman is no otherwise at liberty to marry but in
the Lord. 1. Cor. 7. verse. 39.

19 We are forbidden to be vnequallye yoked with infidels. 2. Cor. 6. verse. 14.

20 Paul showing that he might lawfully charge the congregation, to which he
preached, with a wife, restrayneth this his liberty both of marying and also
burthening those whom he taught, with this condition: That the wife be a
sister, that is, a believing woman. 1. Cor. 9. verse. 5.

21 In wives it is required that they fear their husbands, that they submit
themselves unto them as is comely in the Lord. Ephesians. 5. verse. 33. and Colos.
3. verse. 18. But no hope of this duetifull fear and submission in an
unbelieving woman. For it is commonly seen that the unbelieving wife
ouerruleth the believing husband, and causes him either to make a plain
shipwreck of faith, or so cools his godly zeal, that he may hardly be
discerned from an infidel.

22 Parents are commanded to bring up their children in instruction and
information of the Lord. Ephesians. 6. verse. 4. and. 1. Tim. 3. verse. 12. But
when the husband and wife be of contrary religion, this work of education
can in no wise be well ordered.

23 Peter commands wives to be such manner of women as have hearts
uncorrupted. Epistle. 3. verse. 4. By whose pure conversation the unbelievers
may be won. In the same Chapter. verse. 1. and. 2. They must be faithful
in all things. 1. Tim. 3. verse. 11.

24 As unity and like affection in all prosperity and adversity is required
in all Christians: So especially it is requisite in the godly husband and godly
wife, who ought to dwell together as fellow heirs of the grace of life, that
their prayers he not interrupted. 1. Pet. 3. verse. 7. and. 8. But when a
believer is matched with an unbeliever, no hope of this communion and like
affection in prayer to God.

FINIS.
OMNIA TEMPVS HABENT.



