A SERMON PREACHED AT WHITE HALL THE 5. DAY OF NOvember. ann. 1608.

BY JOHN KING Doctor of Divinity, Deane of Christ-Church in Oxon: and
Vicechauncellor of the University.

Published by commandment.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes Printer to the University. 1608.

11. Psalm. 2. 3. 4. verse. For lo, the wicked bend their bow, and make ready
their arrows upon the string, that they may secretly shoot at them which are
upright in heart. For the foundations are cast down; what has the righteous
done? The Lord, etc.
THe parts are two. 1. the danger, distress; 2. the deliverance. Jn the
danger; 1. the (...), preamble, introduction, quoniam ecce, and some turn
quonia^ into certe; then have you asseveration, certe, and demonstration, ecce:
2. the prosequution, explication, narration it self. The wicked bend, etc. The
preamble notes two things: 1. that the wickedness of the wicked is inseparable
to him Certe, Certe, ecce
verily. His iniquity is bound up in his heart, he cannot part from it. Psalm.
The ungodly can set himself in no good way. Es. 26.
Let mercy be showed to the wicked, Senec.
he cannot learn goodness. And then, quid eo infoelicius, cui iam esse malum
necesse est? Iuv.
-- monstru^ nulla virtute redemptu^. 2. that his wickedness is not only
inseparable, but sensible and notorious, it may be admirable and prodigious,
such and so great as deserves an ecce, behold. So that the very dore-posts of
my text have a sprinkling and blessing upon them: Certe tells you that the
wicked will be wicked, Ier.
Can a Morian chandge his skin? And ecce, that he will be wicked with note, --
vt declamatio fiat, that he may be talked of for it.

But I must with Abraham, not sit still in my tent door, I must go in to make
provision. Jf you walk further with me, you shall see persons and matter worth
your seeing. Peccatores intendunt, etc.
A ternary of persons. 1. the wicked. 2. the upright in heart, or just. 3.
Jehovah. the things, 1. on the part of the wicked, their bow bent, and arrows
prepared on the string, to shoot, and that secretly, and that at the upright
in heart, and till the very foundations be cast down. 2. In the just, I find
nothing but suffering, bearing, for iustus quid fecit? what has the righteous
done? 3. In the Lord, his being in heaven, beholding, examining, and finally
rewarding. But thereof anon. Meanewhile the hand of my text, leads you to
these remarkable particulars. 1. the actors, wicked. 2. the patients, or
spectators, upright in heart. 3. the indoles, disposition, provisio^, furniture
of the wicked, their bow is bent, and their arrows prepared upon the string.
4. their execution, to shoot. 5. the adiunctum, in secret. 6. the extent, till
the foundations be cast down. 7. the reason. I see none, but the wickedness of
the wicked, and in the upright of heart, righteousness it self.

The holy ghost in that door of my text, from which we are already past,
stands at the door of your hearts, and knocks for attentio^ to all these.
They are neither fables, for certe, nor trifles, for ecce; they are both true,
and great, and important. For what is there in the whole body of my text that
deserves not this character ecce to be stamped upon it?

1 Behold, that there should be men upon the face of the earth, styled by the
name of men, endewed with reasonable souls, effigiated to Gods image, the
deliberated workmanship of his own divine hands, his generation, (...), yet
such as are hight in my text impij, improbi, without piety, without probity,
godless, graceless, worthless men, peccatores, (says the vulgar) (...),
sinners exceedingly sinful, sinners with seared consciences, habituated, inured
sinners, from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, inwardly,
outwardly, nothing but sinfulnes.

2 Behold, that their bow is ever bent, that they are strong and studious, to
work mischief, their brains exercised, their labors employed, no contention
of mind, no travail of body denied to the accomplishment of sin: not sins of
ignorance, sins of infirmity, which we all commit, but sins of industry,
purpose, delight; not sins of precipitation, passion (as Gregory calls the^)
but sins of deliberatio^, resolution, (...). 1. Romans they do them, and take
pleasure, liking in so doing: And their arrows are ever prepared upon the
string, there wants but opportunity to loosen, and discharge them; always
full of the strength, and spirit of wickedness, as a vessel of new wine,
laboring as the cloud of a burden of vapor, so they of maliciousnes, and
swelling as the Spider with poison, only awaiting the time when to disgordge
themselves, and burst with most advantage.

Behold, in the third place, that their sins are not sins of pleasure but
horror, not sins of delight, but cruelty, bloodshed, none of those easy, and
gentle, and favorable sins, that touch not life, and hurt but their owners
themselves, as pride, prodigality, and the like, this is an armed, enraged,
military sin, it shoots forth arrows, and darts, to pearce, to wound to
slay, to bring to destruction.

4 Behold, that not content with it self, cruelty I mean with her own
effects, which perturbation of mind often brings forth, and leisure dearly
repents; for the better prospering, and speeding of her bloody hand, she
makes subtilty her assistant: sagittant in obscuro, Val. Max.
(...), in obscurilunio, it is skillful, artificial cruelty. Crudelitatis
horridus habitus, truculenta facies, violentus spiritus, vox terribilis. Let
cruelty look and speak like it self, and men will be warned to avoid it.
Tamberlaine his bloody tents made open profession what his meaning was. Here
are Cruelty and craft coupled together, a smoothed, dissembled, disguised
cruelty. Venite, sapienter opprimamus eum.1. Exodus They will be cruel in
oppressing, yet they will do it wisely.

Or if all these do not move,

5 Behold, it is a wonder, they can find no mark but the upright in heart:

6 Behold, it is a wonder, they can make no end till the foundations be cast
down.

7 Behold, it is a wonder, they can give no cause of their malice, the
righteous never offended them.

Ecce, behold all to gether; wicked, the actors; bending the bow etc. their
diligence, eagernes; to shoot, their cruelty; secretly, their subtilty; The
upright in heart, their mistaken mark; til the foundations be cast down,
their unmeasurable extent; and what has the righteous done? their unreasonable
reason.

The Actors, and Archers in my text are impij, improbi, peccatores, you know
them already, they neither fear God, nor reverence man. They drink wickedness
like water, and add thirst unto drunkenness, that is, when they are drunken
with sin, they thirst after it again. This world of people, since it first had
being, has bin divided into two disparate species and sorts of men, wicked,
and righteous: between which two as between Abraham and the rich man, there
has ever bin (...) a great distance and gulf, not in nature (figmentum vnum,
one blood, one breath, one image,) but in condition, conversation. This
division first began when God set up that wall of partition, Genesis 3.
betwixt the seed of the serpent, and the seed of the woman. The serpent has
had his seed ever since, (...), his viperous generation, dedicated in Cain his
first borne, and thence forth the line continued along in Nimrod, and Cham, and
Ismael, and Esau, and many persons and people of the earth, uncircumcised,
unholy, unclean, the seed of the adulteress and witch, people of the curse,
sons of Belial, children of disobedience, darkened in their understandings,
dishonored in their affections, defiled in their consciences, abominable,
incredulous, and to every good work reprobate. The counter divided members of
this division thus sundred the meanetime, God shall evidently and conspicuously
divide at the end of the world in the open sight of men and Angels, and shall
cut between the^ as by an even thread, with the two-edged sword of his mouth,
when he shall turn the wicked to his left hand, and set the righteous at his
right.

This division I find in my Text, wicked and righteous, these, as commendable
in their order and rank, as the other damned and deplored in theirs. Those are
impij (...), wicked in the highest degree, wickedness gives them nomen and
esse; Eccles. 12.
hoc enim est totu^ hominis, this is all they are. The other, in the aim and
purpose of the holy ghost, seem to have the absolute and full composition of
righteous men. For first they are called recti cord, upright in heart, and
afterward iusti, just men. The former, rectitudo cordis, is the Canon and
rule, The later, iustitia is the application and use of it. Rectus cord
without iustus is not sufficient, but iustus without rectus cord is stark
naught. Rectus cord, 1. Cor. 4.
is good, Nihil mihi conscius sum, but not complete, 2. Cor. 1.
non in hoc iustificatus sum; rectus cord, may say gloria mea testimonium etc.
my reioicing is the testimony of a good conscience; but except he be iustus
also, he has not learned the rule of his master, 5. Math.
sic luceat lux tua, 8. Act.
thy light must shine for the good of others. Simo^ Magus apparently to the eye
of the world was as just as any man, yet the Apostle told him, Non est rectum
cor tuum, thy heart is not right. Here are both, and both must be: heart, and
hand, habit and action, radix and germen, root and propagation, vprightnes of
heart is bonum tuum, thine own good, but justice is (...) the good of others:
the one keeps thee straight and upright in thy self, the other distributeth
suum cutque that unto every calling and every person that rightly belongs to
them.

The wicked have bent their bow and made ready their arrows upon the stringe.
2. Have bent etc.
I need not acquaint you how eager and sollicitous the wicked are to perpetrate
wickedness, as a woman with child has sorrow til she bring forth. Their
artillery is not far to seek. Their bow hangs not up by the walls, Esaias 48.
their arrows sleep not in the quiver, the one is bent, the other are
prepared upon the stringe; in this sense Non est pax impijs. As the sea is ever
working, and boiling like a pott of ointment, so they always hammering, and
fordging, some mischievous act. Mich. 3.
Noctes ducunt iusomnes; operantur malum in cubilibus, they devise mischief in
their beds, and when it is light, they put it in practice. Act. 9. it is said
of Saul (as yet a persequutor) that he went (...), breathing threatenings and
slaughter -- and si non aliqua nocuisset, mortuus esset, unless he had
murthred the Saints, he had wanted breath. The Psalm says, Alienati sunt
peccatores a vulua, Ps. 58
errauernnt ab vtero. They become strange even from the womb. This spurious,
degenerous brood begins to be wicked betimes. Divines well observe, that
original sin and hereditary corruption, has a quicker, stronger vegetation,
and sooner displaieth it self, Sueton.
in them, then in other men. Tiberius would often say of his son Caligula
that he lived for the overthrow of him, and his people, and senatricem populo
Romano, Phaetontem orbi terrarum educare, and that he bred a serpent to the
people of Rome, an incendiary and firebrand to the whole world. There you have
one of that serpents seed, whereof I spoke before. Alexander Aegaus called Nero
his scholar (...) clay not mingled with water as other men's, but, macerated in
blood. He saw a sanguinary disposition in him: To his friends that
congratulated the birth of him, Domitius his father answered, scitote ex me and
Agrippina nihil nisi in faustum, et horrendum, et public nocituru^ potuisse
procrear^. Such egg, such bird; there is alienatus a vulua, one estranged and
corrupted from the womb. Examples are infinite. Saul had ever his bows and
arrows ready against David He sought him as a fly, 1. Sam. 26.
and hunted him is a partrich upon the mountains, as David spoke. A right
archer, and fowler indeed. So were the Scribes and Pharisees against our
Savior. They watched him upon all occasion (...), how they might catch him. So
the Arrians against the Orthodox, Athansius by name, the great Atlas, for
diverse years, of the christian world. It is a world to read, how with their
bows, and arrows, of implacable hatred, and indefatigable deuilish policies
never unbent, never intermitted, they persequuted that Saint.

From their inclination, 3, 4. To Shoot privily.
propension, promptness to mischief, Come we to their practice. They bear
not their bows and arrows as skar-crowes in a garden of cucumbers, to fray,
but to shoot, not at stakes, but men, their arrows are iacula mortifera, 7.
Psalm. deadly arrows, and least they should fail to hit, they take advantage
of the dark, of privacie and secrecy. They shoot privilie. Now this is the
covenant of hell it self. For what created power in the earth is able to
dissolve that work which cruelty and subtlety, like Simeon and Levi, sisters
in evil are combined, and confederate to bring to pass? Where subtilty is
ingenious, insidious to invent, cruelty barbarous to execute. Subtilty gives
counsel, cruelty gives the stroke. Subtilty orders the time, the place,
the means, acco^modateth, co^cinnateth circumstances, cruelty undertakes the
act; subtilty hides the knife, cruelty cutteth the throat; subtilty with a
cunning head lays the ambush, plotteth the train, the stratageme, and
cruelty with as savage an heart, sticks not at the dreadfullest, direfullest
objects, ready to wade up to the anckles, the neck in a whole red sea of
humane, yea country blood; how fearful is their plight that are thus
assaulted? It was the case of our first parents. The Serpent comes unto them
with fair words and fiery darts, subtilty, and cruelty. Proponit quod
delectabile, supponit, quod Exitiale-Vngit, pungit. His, eritis tanqua^dij you
shall be as Gods, made them like devils. Thus righteous Abell was betrayed, and
butchered by his unnatural brother. Egrediamur for as, come brother, Let us go
walk and talk together. Mean time whilst the tongue anointeth him with
oil, the hand murthereth him. Ioab kills not Amasa like an open foe. Estne
pax mifrater, brother is all well? was the unsuspected train to make way for
his fatal weapon. All these shot in obscuro, privilie, and by stealth, it is
the safest and surest shooting. Else what does Judas with a kiss, and all
hail in his mouth, in the very forefront of his treason? What so many wolves
in sheep clothing? or Devils from the blacknes of darkness, in the forms of
Angels of light? Or locusts from the bottomless pit with wome^s faces? Or
Hyaena with the call of a man? Or the Siren with notes of melody? Or the
Crocodile with tears of mourning? Or the whore of Babylon with her cup of
fornications golden without, and sugared within, that the kings of the earth may
be drunk, and die as it were senseles, and sleeping? Or finally why do the
rankest impostors and seducers of the earth, write pharmaca, medicines upon the
outside of the box, when they deliver venena, poisons? You see what metals
the wicked are tempred of^edged with cruelty, and backed with subtlety. They
carry both the Lion and the Fox in their breasts, as Carbo spoke of Sylla (the
Scylla indeed and wrecke of the Roman people) In imitatio^ of whom rather then
of St Peter, they write of Alexander the 6. that intrauit vt vulpes. There is
subtelty, regnauit vt leo, there is cruelty, (for he was termed spongia
sanguinis, a sponge of blood) and to make up the full period of all his acts
and monuments, mortuus vt canis, he died like a dog.

But against whom is this double engine prepared? If they will needs shoot,
5. At the upright.
let them take their mark aright. Let them shoot at him that shoots at
the^, the great Nimrod and hunter before the Lord, the devil 6. Ephesians, he
shoots the arrows of temptation and death, let them shoot the arrows of
prayers, and orisons. Or let them shoot at the wicked the limms of the devil-
Diluculo interficiam, Psalm. 101.
I will make have (says David) to destroy the wicked from the earth. Not so*
Seldom shall you see the wicked against the wicked. Squama squamae
coniungitur, they stick too close together, they symbolize to nearly in
wickedness (unless by an overruling hand of God, and some extraordinary
judgment, sometimes they turn their swords each into others bosom, Iud. 7.
and are drunk with their own blood, as with new wine) But for the most part,
even for that league, and kindred of wickedness, which they all hold, be their
sects and professions of wickedness never no different, their rites, and
religions never so opposite one to the other, Prove. 1.
yet Marsupium (they say) sit vnum omniu^ nostrum, Let us all have one purse,
there is concors discordia, an agreement in their disagreements, an unanimous
consent in them al to band against the innocent: Co^iunctis caudis, though
adversis vultibus: Foxes will make shift to carry firebrands in their tails to
burn the cornefields. Thus Herod, and Pilate notwithstanding their private
iarres, could quickly put themselves in tune to Crucify Christ. And Scribes,
Pharisees, Sadducees, Herodians, Roman soldiers, Jews and Gentiles, though
no^ Coutuntur, they converse not in many things, yet [deponamus hic
inimicitias] leave their quarrels and grudges at home, Niceph.
if the cause be against the righteous. Meletians, and Arrians at the first
were at variance between themselves. At length in the common pursuit of the
church, they became (...) and (...), so knit together in amity, that they
excha^ged names, and Arrians were called Meletians, Meletians Arrians. Ten
several nations, 83. Psalm. faciunt vnitatem contra vnitatem (to use S. Austins
word) make an venitie, or rather a co^spiracy against one people of the Lord.
The reason is, the wicked with the wicked agree in multis tertijs, in many
thirds; but the wicked with the righteous (except in the nature, and shape of
man,) communicates in nothing. Quoniam invtilis est nobis, and contrarius
operibus nostris, etc. The righteous is wholly unprofitable to us, and contrary
to our works. His life is of an other fashion, we cannot abide to look upon
him. 2. Sap.

Let all this have his passage. 6. Til the fou^ dations.
They shoot, and shoot Privily, and that at the upright of heart. But filij
hominum quovsque? How long, O ye sons of men! Is your malice vnexorable as the
grave? Deep and bottomless as hell? O sword of the Lord (cry they in the
Prophet Jeremy) how long will it be ere thou cease? return into thy skabberd
rest, and be still. O ye arrows of the wicked, how long? Return into your
quiuers. Not, till the foundations be cast down, and not a stone standing upon
a sto^e, nor a soul breathing upon the earth, that bears the name of a
righteous man. Truth must first be banished from the earth and righteousness
trodde^ down as mire in the streets, and Christ driven out of his kingdom
amongst us, or else no peace. In this case the wicked is like the beast, no^
numerat, cannot endure a seed, a remnant, a berry here and there in the utmost
boughs, not one that professes to know God, no not one. Vtinam Pop. Romans Vnam
haberet cervice^, was the wish of Caligula, that the people of Rome had but one
neck, that at one blow he might cut it of: so these of the righteous. Venite,
disperdamus eos de gente 83. Ps. Come, let us cut them of from being a nation,
and let the name of Israel be no more in remembrance. 137. Ps. The voice of
Edom was like unto it, in the day of Jerusalem, Exinanite, exinanite vsque ad
fundamenta in ea, Down with it, down with it even unto the ground. It was
Pharao his policy for the rooting out of Israel, Exodus 1
quicquid masculini sexus, all that is borne male cast it into the river. And
Hamans policy in procuring those letters of the King for the killing of the
Jews in all the provinces of his kingdom. The foundations must be cast down.

The last is the cause of all this bitterness, What has the just do^e?
which in the righteous I find none. For what has the righteous done? The
subjection or answer implied must needs be, nihil, just nothing But Aristides
must be banished out of Athens, iustus quia iustus, for no other cause but for
justice, and Christians must be thrown to the Lions, 1. Sa. 26.
Christianus quia Christianus. David's apology to Saul is, wherefore does my
Lord thus persecute his servant? what have I done? Or what evil is in mine
hand? O Lord my God (Psa. 7.) if I have done this thing, etc. nay, if I have
not done the contrary, then let mine enemy persecute my soul, etc. but when
they were sick I put on sackcloth, and mourned for them as for mine own
mothers son; this was all the hurt I ever did them. 1. Sam. 12. Behold (says
Samuel) here am I bear record. Whose Ox have I taken? Or whose Ass have I
taken? Or to whom have I ever done wrong? They answer, Thou have never done us
wrong. Wherefore then do ye call for a king? What iniquity have your fathers
found in me? says God. 2. Ier. Wherein hane I grieved thee? Testify against
me. 6. Mich. Many good deeds have I done amongst you, for which of my good
deeds? Ioh 10.
says our Savior in his Gospel.

The conclusion of all is, Psalm. 35.
Oderunt me gratis. The righteous Lord, and his righteous Christ, and their
righteous servants suffer these wrongs from the wicked without cause.

You see what aggrauateth. Men as innocent as innocency it self, yet
persequuted with mortal, immortal hatred, both by force and fraud, and that to
their utter extinguishment and eradication from the face of the earth. So much
of the distress: the deliverance which was my latter part, I refer to
conclude with.

The wicked bend their bow etc, Application.
Have I spoken all this while as to men that slept? Or does any man ask me in
fine narrationis, at the end of my tale, quis est hic what means the man?
Eccles. 22.
As when the high Priest adjured our blessed Savior, Art thou the Christ, the
son of The living God? and Pilate the like, about his kingdom, Art thou the
King of the Jews? His answer was, Thou say it, what need more words? So
the very words of my text only read and recited in your ears do sufficiently
declare what my meaning is. J say again (which were enough for application)
The wicked had bent his bow, and made ready his arrows upon the string, to
shoot privily at the upright in heart, and our foundations must have bin cast
down and what had the righteous done? Certe; Certe.
it was as sure as that we have breath and being, to praise the name of our
God, who are hear met together. It is no fictio^, Page 34.
as that (they will tell you) of Squire out of Spain, you know the author. It
is no question between them and us: Page 6.
for Catholics (they say) no less then Protestants admit the due detestation,
Ergo the true concession and conviction of it. It was not done in a corner; It
was a spectacle to God and Angels and men. It is not so ancient and
superannate as the story of Pope Iore, which has gained by the age of it, now
skarsly to be believed. This was recenti memoria factum, a matter of yesterday,
this very day three years, the fifth of Noue^ber (blessed be Gods holy name)
did this popish prodigious brat suffer abortion. I must add the Ecce Ecce.
to, Behold. But an ecce of an higher strain the^ any other in the book of
God; not an ecce as at a pyramid, or Pharos, 'or Colossus solis, or any the
like wonderful but with all delectable and pleasing object, rather an ecce, as
at some portentuous comet, or fearful fiery meteor in the air which men
behold, both with wonder and horror, Ecce. I may be bold with the tongue of
Moses Deuteronomy. 4. to say, Ask of the days of old that have been before you,
since the day that God created man upon the earth, and from the one end of
heaven to the other, sifacta est aliquando huiuscemodi res, if ever the like
thing were done: and it may be answered by that of the 12. tribes of Jsraell
concerning the dismembered Levites wise 19. Iud. Nunquam res talis facta est in
Israel ex quo, etc. The like was never done nor heard of in Israel nor
throughout the world since the first day that man was created. When Sixtus
quintus began his encomiasticall oration of the Jacobine that killed the French
King, 1 Habb.
he takes the words of the Prophet Habbacuk for his entrance. Behold, a work
wrought in your days, you will not believe it when it shall be told you, a
poor Friar has slain a king, not a king in paper, a painted king, but the
great king of France, etc. Antisixtus returns them upon him again, Behold a
work wrought in our days: you will not believe it when it shall be told you.
Our holy father the Pope has defended a most nefarious parricide, regicide. I
have more right to the words then they both together with the preface unto
them. Aspicite ingentibus, and videte, and admiramint, and obstupescite, see
and behold and wonder and be astoed, let me adioine from the 13. of the Acts
where the place is alleged, (...), vanish, cease to have power in your selves
to see or think any more, quia opus factum in diebus nostris, shall I say, a
work done? No, it was the work of the Lord in die illa, that it was not done:
but an attempt and parturitio^ of a work brought to the very instant of birth,
such as let strangers hear the report of, they cannot believe it. Behold, that
which so many millions of eyes, since those windows were first opened in the
head of man, to behold the light of heaven, I say so many millions of eyes in
their several generatio^n, now sunk down into their holes, and consumed within
their tabernacles never saw: never those glorious and constant lights of the
firmament, those clear and christalline eyes of nature, which walk through
the whole world, and give no rest to their temples, the sun that wardeth by
day, and the moon that waketh by night, they never saw the like, I say not
for the indiuiduum, but not for the species, though let them not deceive
themselves nor you, this was not species but monstru^. They will bring you
precedents to this from Antwerpe, and the Hage and I know not whence. Gallob.
to. 8
A succedent I grant, nearest unto it of all others, I think from hence it
took light, in the year 1606, when Boris the usurping Duke of Moscua
foreseeing his death, placed in a subterra neous vault of the palace, a statue
with a burning lamp in the hand of it, the burning to continue till it should
take a train of powder, purposly hid there to have blown up the Palace, and
destroyed Demetrius his rightful successor. But it comes far short of this.

The wicked: and what God has ioigned, Impij.
let not me put a sunder ecce, impij, behold the wicked, wicked with an ecce,
demonstrable, rather indemonstrable wicked, we demonstrate not principia, these
were principles and first heads of impiety. They may be articled as the devil
in the gospel (...) the wicked, the most abominably, desolately, deperditely
wicked of all others, in whom was the root of wickedness, and the deepnes of
Satan had possessed their hearts. Me^ of wicked wits, wicked wills, wicked
hands, wicked labors (it was labor improbus indeed) wicked dispositions,
wicked designs, wicked names (some of them) wicked vows, wicked oaths, wicked
sacraments, wicked prayers, wicked religion, wicked all things. Psalm. 16.
Their offerings of blood will I not offer, says the Psalm. Apud Barbaros
(says Lactantius) sacrificatum cum humano cruore. Barbarians sacrificed with
man's blood. He goes a step farther: Lib. 1. de fall. rel. 21.
Latini non expertes. The Latins are not free from it: and adds Latialis
Jupiter etiam nunc sanguine colitur humano. Etiam nunc, even at this day (but
howlong, Lord, righteous and true, before thou avenge it?) the Latin, Laterane
Jupiter, or rather Saturn, the deuourer of his children, or rather Moloch,
must be sacrificed unto with humane blood. O dementiam in sanabilem (the same
father) incurable madness, Cap. 18.
when sacrifices are so sacred and execrable, sacraments for assasinates,
masses for massacres. Quid illis isti dij amplius facere possent si essent
iratissimi, quam faciunt propitij, cum suos cultores parricidijs inquina^t? Is
this religion? Nonne satius est pecudum more viuere, quam deos tam impios, tam
prophanos, tam sa^guinarios colere? were it not better to be without religion?
I say no more of them: Populus Romanus est. Nec breuius potui, Ber. 4. de
Consid.
nec apertius. Bernard spoke of the citizens, I of the members and disciples of
the Church of Rome. They belong to Rome, that Laerna malorum, where Hydra, the
beast with many heads dwells, the Colluuies and common sewer of all infande
wickedness, where no law of God nor man, nature nor nation escapes breaking:
where Dominus Deus noster papa, with a plate of blasphemy nailed on his browe,
the great Archimandrites of the world, and his stables and stalles of
unhallowed breasts, fax sacrificulorum, grex monachorum, armentum Cardinalium,
with their decrees and decretals, canons and glosses, bulls, breues, and
indulgences have concluded and caused to be done, and after the doing
dogmatized, defended more outrageous, exorbitant wickedness then ever has
been red or heard of under the cope of heaven. The woman iniquity Zach. 5.
which was carried into the land of Sennaar, vt aedisicetur ei domus, has bin
long since transported into the city and church of Rome, vt ibi ponatur super
basin suam; there is her surest dwelling.

The wicked bend their bow, Inte^derunt arcum etc.
when they wrest and pervert scripture; and make ready their arrows, when they
end forth sharp and sophistical arguments, witty and wily pamphlets, and shoot
privily at the upright in heart, when with their subdolous and sly
insinuations of reconciling them to the mother church, and converting their
souls they overreach the simple and credulous. This they do daily. But these
are not the archers I now mean. They are of an other band, pyrobolarij, they
shoot wildfire, hellfire. Their arrows have spiritum in alis, Zach. 5.
wind in their feathers, (they should have flowen and blown with a witness) and
miserable destruction in their heads. Such archers, such artillery never was.
No marvel; they were Roman archers, and their artillery was shaped in the
shop of Jesuits and Priests (I sever them not, Ambros
Iannes and Iambres are fellows in sorcery; and the Libbard and Lioness,
though of diverse kinds, will company together to make a Leopard, Jesuits and
Priests, to do a mischief) I say of Jesuits and Priests, the cunning
Pyracmons and Cyclopes, fireworkers in the world, and masters of all
villainies. These shoot not at clowtes, but Crowns, Sceptres, Monarchies,
Empires; not at crows, but men, Kings, Queens, Princes, peoples, states; not
for wagers and pastime, but to make havoc and wast upon the earth, and to
bring all that withsta^deth or offends, to utter destruction.

The bow that the wicked in my chase bent, was neither of iron, nor steel. A
man may flee from the iron weapons Job. 20. and a bow of steel has been
broken by the arm, Psalm. 18. This was a bow of a stronger, tougher making, and
more irresistable stuff, I mean a Cellar of strong sides, and impenetrably
thick walls, dark and deep, closely compact, that is as much as to say,
hard-bent, where little or no vent, and passage was left for the breath and
fury to issue out, like the amphora or pitcher in Zachary, wedged with a
tale^t of lead at the mouth of it to keep in the strength. It was as well and
as strongly strung with 36. barrels of gunpowder great and small, for the more
violenteiaculation, vibration, and speed of the arrows. Their arrows were
fagots, billets, pieces of timber, bars of iron, massy stones, together with
all the timber in the beams and juices, all the tubble and stones in the walls
of that great and glorious pile, rather palace of building, where they framed
their engine. The Campus Martius they were to shoot in, the soil, the seat,
the very center of the parliament house. Their mark the fairest in the field,
the tallest poppies in the garden. Fight neither with great nor small, save
only with the king of Israel, was the chardge, 1. Reg. 22. here otherwise;
shoot not only at the king of Israel, but at reginam a dextris, the Queen at
his right hand, and principem haeredem at his knees, at the counsel both of
secrecy and state, at Moses and Aaron, prelate and potentate, angulos populi,
and angelos domini, at all the worthies of David, the first, second, and third
rank, the great Sanedrim, the strength and flower of the land, the whole land
it self in collection and representation, the 3. estats, 3. essential parts,
like the head, heart, and liver, without either of which no life of policy is.
This was their archery, and this had surely come to pass, (the arrow was even
then upon the string, their doom (day was come, the candle and match were in
the hand) to the utter extirpation of the King and his race, the alienation of
the scepter of Judah, the extinction of Priest and sacrifice, eversion of
Nobles, and their families, extermination of Christ and his Gospel out of the
kingdom, profligation of justice and religion, if our gracious Lord God (by
the revolution and return of years, now publicly and sole^nly thrice
blessed, and to the latest generation of the world to be blessed for ever) had
not given warning to those that feared his name, vt fugerent a facie arcus, to
fly from the rage of this bow, by letters more then hieroglyphicall,
aenigmaticall, interpreted by a wisdom more then humane, Aug.
not less then angelical. But ne glorietur, let not the wiseman glory in his
wisdom. Da veniam imperator, pardon me gracious Sovereign, it was not flesh
and blood that revealed these mysteries and riddles unto you, sed Pater qui in
coelis and angelus magni consilij, your father and Savior that is in heaven.
You have seen their bow and arrows artillery, weapons, engines, ordinance for
battery, more then double, centuple Canon. Iouius writes of Alfonsus D. of
Ferrara, that he made with his own hands 2 pieces of ordinance invsitatae
magnitudinis and violentiae, the one of which had to name terraemotus,
earthquake, the other Cacodaemon, the devil himself, so was this of theirs.

They had bent their bow and made ready their arrows upon the string: and be
not deceived in them. Cry not peace, peace, all is well. Their bow stands
ever bent, and their arrows are ever prepared. Pharetra eorum sepulchrum
patens Ier. 5. their quiver is an open sepulcher. Bern. 4. de Consider.
Gens immitis atque intractabilis, and adhuc snbdinescia, nisicum non valet
resistere. The Aspelyeth in her hole and waits for the warmth of the sun.
The Lion lurketh in his den, and watches for his fit test season. Their quiet
and forbearance is rebus sic stantibus, whilst it is, as it is; but rebus
cadentibus, let some declination of the state be, let the vigor of justice and
rigor of execution cease a while longer, and they multiply and swarm as they
have done, you shall see them betake themselves to their bows and arrows
again. Echidna Excetram, is the proverb, and de radice colubri egreditur
regulus 30. Es. Of a Serpent comes a serpent, and of a viperous and
traitorous brood, look for vipers and traitors. One complained to Phillip of
Macedon whose treason the king had made use of, that his people called him
traitor. The King answered, Rudes sunt Macedones, and scapham vocant Scapham.
The people of Macedo^ are a rude and plain people, and call a traitor a
traitor. Liberaui animam mea^. When such are the Masters, such will the
scholars and disciples be. When such their principles, such will be their
practices. Though one vault be discovered and covered again, yet so long as
that other more deep and dangerous vault remains prauum and inscrutabile
cor, Ier: 17.
a wicked and unsearchable heart, an endless and living vein of powder and
salt-peeter, an everlasting burning Aetna, of rooted, engraffed, settled
maliciousnes against Christ and his members, Look for no better from them.

-- Si fas caedendo caelestia scandere etc. will every Jesuit and Priest,
Iesuited and reconciled apostata, transfuga, mal content say, if this be the
way to the kingdom of heaven, thus I may meritt, and shine as a staire in the
firmament, by embruing and bathing my hands in the blood of a king, I will be
a star. The end of their preparation was, to shoot, and shoot closely. Vt.
Sagitte^t in obscuro.
Cruelty executes for them, suttelty directs. These were cruel enough, when
they shot at all. And they were subtle enough when they said to a vault in
the ground, cover us; and went down into a mine of the earth, as it were
quick into their graves, out of the land of the living into the regio^s of
death, the territories of Satan, the Limbus and border of hell to hide their
wickedness. Whether the one or the other both were transcendents not to be
placed in the classes or ranks of hitherto experienced or practiced
wickedness.

Cruelty is the ensign and badge of that church. the habit of the harlot is
according to her heart, 1. Sagittant.
skarlet and purple, her diet, the diet of the Cannibals. I saw her drunken
(says the Apostle) with the blood of Saints-(...), Apoc. 17.
I wondered to see her so wonderfully drunk. The City was first founded in
blood; the blood of a natural, germa^ brother. And the papacy also founded in
blood, the blood of a natural leidge Lord and Emperor at what time, it was
truly written, -- Suffocas Phoca imperium, stabilisque papatum.

Emperor and Empire must down to advance the popedom. Gul. Stamphurdius.
The issue of blood has run ever since, and cannot be stopped to the worlds
end. It was well observed, that at one and the same time were these three
Bonifacius 3. Vniversalis Episcopus, Phocas Caesaricida, and Mahumetes Arabs.
Mahometisme, and the Popedom, and the murdering of christian Emperors and
Princes began at once. So that as the Pope has gotten to name, domesticus
Turca, a homeborne Turk, so the Turk may as justly be called exterus Papa, a
foreign Pope, they communicate so nearly in cruelty. Now the greatest (...),
festiual cruelty, sole^nity and feast day of sacrificing and slaughtering the
servants of Christ, that Rome ever kept, had been that, without Gods merciful
prevention, which was now intended. It greiueth them to hear it styled
singular from all example. Page 6.
But so it was. Neither shall all the indices expurgatorij in the world, blot
out the memory of the fact, or ease them of this attribute. Detestable I
confess was the mind, and not less the memory of Nero, who caused the city
of Rome to be fired in twelve places at once, that he might see an image of
the burning of Troy. Himself sat singing the mean time. It was the loss but
of houses and goods. Sabellic.
Heliogabalus upon one of their feast days, when the people had taken up their
places in the theater before day, to behold the sports, caused a number of
serpents and venomous worms to be turned in amongst them, to sting them to
death, the acting whereof was much to his comfort; it was the wrack but of
common people. Maximinus for the immanity of his mind and doings, was usually
termed Cyclops, Busiris, Phalaris, Typhon. Al these were Abaddons, Apollyons,
destroiers of nature and mankind. The story says of Annibal, that his virtue
for the most part saevitia constabat, Val. Max.
consisted of cruelty. When it comes to report of L. Sylla, Vix mihi
verisimilia narrare videor, I scarsly seem (says the story) to speak
likelyhoods. He strove to be surnamed Foelix for cruelty. En quibus actis,
says the author. He kept a Register and Calendar of al his bloody acts. Id.
Cuius tamen crudelitatis C. Marius invidiam levat. Yet does C Marius justify
Sylla. You have heard before of the cruelties of Caligula. But of Nero
(Suetonius tells you) debebatur hic partus moribus To. qui Caligulae nomen ac
titulos obscuraret. Nero must be borne to justify Caligula. Nihil extra
humanam figuram Tartarus nisifera bellua. Dubravius affirms it. The Tartarian
is a savage beast in a man's skin. Add unto al these as famous in their times
and generations (if books be true) the Spaniards amongst the poor Indians.
But from the 5. of November was three years henceforth, til time shall be no
more; Let the name of Nero with the rest, rest in peace, and be buried in
silence, and in steed of Syllan, Marian, Scythian, Tartarian, Barbarian
Turkish, Spanish, Let Romish, Popish, Antichristian, Catholic, Catacatholique
cruelty be a proverb, astonishment, hissing for all nations and ages to come.

As for their subtilty, In obscuro.
doubt not of it. Whose very profession is to be false-prophets, seducers,
Antichrists, their religion a mystery of iniquity, and their working
vneffectual without strong illusions, and lying wonders. Especially where the
great Mercurialists of the world for wit and devises, those (...) (as they
called Archimedes) (...), centimani that have a finger in the menaging of al
Christian states, are at one end of the business. J mean the Jesuits, (...)
Iesuitae, falsly-named Jesuits; Jesuits by antiphrasis, (some say) as those
Emperors were called Africani, Asiatici and the like, because they were most
opposite and malign to those countries, so these most contrary and fatal to
the name of Jesus. With others Iesuitae by Aphaeresis, Suitae, as regulares
were named gulares, epicuri de grege porci, for their swinish and impure
lives. with others Iesuitae by diaeresis, as much as to say, Iesum vita, who
in their whole order, institutes, practice, say in effect to Christ as the
devils did, Quid nobis and tibi Jesus? What have we to do with thee o Jesus?
Lastly. Jesuits by (...) agnomination Iebusites: and then whilst the Iebusite
(or his proselite) is in the land look for no good to Israel. Their names are
diverse according to their natures and manners. Ignatiani in Spain, Theatini
in Italy, Iesuini in Ca^pania, Scofiotti in Ferraria, Presbyteri S. Luciae in
Bononia, Reformati sacerdotes in Mutina, aliaque passim nomina habent, together
with sundry other appellations as Pap. Massonus reports, In Paulo. 4o
but commonly best known by the name of Jesuits, And what are those? The
Jesuits catechism tells you, 2. Lib. 17.
not such men as we are. They have 2 seules in their bodies (he might as well
have said, ten souls) a Roman soul in Rome, and a french soul in France, 3.
Lib. 26.
so an english soul in England. They use to make a jest at perfidiousnes and
treachery, for ask them amongst their friends what a Jesuit is, they answer,
everyman.

-- Quoteneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo? what means shall we find to
encounter these cha^dglings, Camaeleons, these Mathaeos tortos, crooked
apostles, Tortuous Leuiathans, as ambiguous in their answers as (...) in his
oracles, this serpent surrepent generation, with their Maeandrian turnings and
windings, their mental reseruations, their amphibolous, amphibious
prepositions, which live, as those creatures part in the land, part in the
water, so these half in the lips, half in the heart and conscience. Of which
I may say, as S Jerome of the letters of Iouinian, has praeter Sybillam leget
nemo.

-- Non lectore tuis opus est sed Apolline scriptis, Martial.
they are not to be understood by any mortal man. what hope of truth and
simplicity from these or their impes, when they have not only practiced through
infirmity of flesh and pusillanimitie, but with the faces of Sodom and
Gomorrhe have patronaged, published, persuaded to the whole world the
lawfullnesse of their heterogeneous, mungrell propositions? From henceforth
therefore let them ease the inhabitants of Crete from that deserved infamy which
the Apostle lays upon them (...); and add unto these the Cilices and
Cappadoces, nations renowned for false hood, Cretes Cilices Cappad.
whereof the proverb was (...), And let those (...) Kings of lies, as
Andromache called the Spartans, and trilingues Siculi, as Apuleius called the
Sicilians, together with all their companions, craftesmasters for fraud and
forgerie, resign to the Jesuits.

Now if ever the word of the Psalm were verified of any, Psalm. 83.
malignaverunt consilium, they devised a pestilent, Prove* 1.
devilish counsel, and that of the Proverbs, Come let us lie in wait for
blood, ponamus tendiculas, let us set snares, the margent says, voraginem, a
very gulf, Deglutiamus eos, Let us swallow them up quick as hell, it was true
of this machination. For mark the excess and height of their fury.

They shoot not at fanes and wethercocks, Fundamenta diruta. Senec.
at pinnacles and pieces of temples. The very foundations must be cast down.
Nolunt solita peccare quibus peccandi praemium infamia est. Ordinary factes
cannot make them famous. In ta^ occupato saeculo fabulas vulgaris nequitia non
invenit, Erostratus must burn the temple of Diana, to get him a name, these
must not rest, til they see the foundations down. The variety of
interpretations frames my just application to my hands.

1 Fundamenta literally. Material foundations indeed had been cast down by
these sons of the earth, which the hands of ancient Kings had laid, Palaces
of incomparable honor and state had been shaken into stones of emptines and
consumed into cinders and dust, if their day had sped. (...) (say the 70)
buildings of absolute, consummate perfection. Positiones (with Genebrard)
settled and pitched in their places, not likely to have stirred, without
violence, till the pillars of heaven and earth had been dissolved. These
foundations had been cast down.

2 Some say, these foundations were Priests. and indeed in the story of Saul
(of whom it is thought this psalm treats) 85 Priests of the Lord which ware
a linen Ephod, were slain by the hands of Doeg in one day. 1 Samuel 22.
Priests are foundations. They are fulcra reip* proppes of the commonwealth.
They bear the ark of the Lord, and their lips are arkes and coffers to
preserve knoweledge. These foundations had bin cast down*

3 Some say, these fou^dations were (...), doctrines; the knowledge of God and
his laws. These are also foundations; fundamentum aliud nemo, No man can lay
any other foundation then that of the Prophets and Apostles etc. It was the law
of the ever living God that brought David into so much hatred; and it is the
Gospel of Christ that brings us. These foundations had also been cast down,
It was the chief mark they aimed at.

4 Fundamenta with others are foedera, covenants, leagues of amity, often made
and often broken by Saul. Now what covenant, what bond, either of nature and
humanity, or of native country, of consanguinity with some, with others of
allia^ce, with others of religion (for on some of either sort had the Lot
fallen) had withheld this false and fedifragous nation of men from this
barbarous action? These foundations had also been cast down.

5 Fundameuta with Symmachus and Jerome are (...). Laws. These are foundations
to, and were then upon the anuile, the assembly was for laws. Laws and
lawmakers, with the reverend Judges and Iusticers, Mutae and Loquentes, al
must have gone; these foundations had been cast down.

6 Kimhi and Aben Ezra say that foundations in this place, are Consilia,
Counsels. Counsels are fou^dations. Prou. 15.
For where the multitude of counsailours is, there is health. Consilia Solonis
were held as behoueful to Athens as trophae a Themistoclis. The ones
counsels, as the others triumphs. And Agamemnon wished that he had had ten
such about him as Nestor was. They are not the eyes of a king, but perspicilla
regis (one calls them) his spectacles through which he looks* The thrice
honored and renowned order of these, were likewise appointed to the slaughter;
these foundations had been cast down.

7 Lastly, fundame^ta with others are (...), vices, successiones, successions,
supplies. Obstupe site coeli, super hoc. Behold, the King, Queen, and their
issue, not adolescens secundus alone, Ecclesast. 4
deliciaegentis Britannicae, but the whole progeny, father and son, damme and
young, root and branch, res and spes, present and to come, all must have
drunk of this deadly cup of woeful desolation. Now to put al together, if
foundations of buildings must have been cast down, and Priests the
foundations, doctrines the foundations, couena^ts the foundatiu^s, laws the
foundations, counsels the foundations, and successions the foundations, we
had been, as one summeth it up, Eversi a fundamentis, quite turned up by the
roots, and razed from the lowest foundations; our church, our commonwealth,
our government, our bodies, our families, our posterity had been utterly
overthrown. When Elizaeus eied Haza^el 2. Reg. 8. with the tears running
down his cheeks, to think of the evil he should do to Jsrael, in burning
their cities with fire, dashing their infants against the stones in the
streets, and ripping up the women with child; Hazael answered, Number enim sum
servus tuus canis, vt faciam rem ista^ magnam? Am I thy servant a dog? can I
be so forsaken of humanity, and loose the bowels of manly compassion? What
then does res ista magna deserve to be thought of? Page 6
not the rash and woeful attempt of unfortunate gentlemen (as our Italionated
Mountebancks seek to salve it) but the most nefarious, facinorous, flagitious,
incogitable fact, of persons (with their proctors and patrones) neither
generous, for what drop of ingenuous blood was in them? Nor men, for what
spark of humanity? Nor dogs, unless of the brood of Cerberus, nor Tigers,
nor Panthers, nor evening Wolves, nor shee-Beares, nor any thing, but by the
vnnaturallest, strangest (...) that ever was feigned by Poets, very incarnated,
transanimated devils? Who that they were unfortunate in it, that God that
sits in heaven, and rules not by fortune or chance, but by an
architectonicall, sovereign art of infallible providence, be praised for ever
and ever. Amen, Amen.

I have yet the cause to demand. Iustus quid?
What has the righteous done? Quid commeruit? What has he deserved? Bucer.
Quid enim mali? At leastwise what evil? Arnob* what had David done? Or what
David's like, who walks in the steps of David? I appeal to the conscience of
your Majesty, that inward reflexe of your Princely heart, and to the open and
broad eye of the world, what harm had you ever done them? Was it because you
eased them of their fines and impositions? Or sent them with life and limme
untouched beyond seas? Or admitted them to your gracious presence, and let the
light of your countenance fall upon them, Hebrews and Egyptians both alike? Or
distributed your favors, honors, aduancements of them and their houses with an
equal hand? Cic. ora. pro Ros. Am.
For which of your good deeds? Or was it because you received not the whole
weapon into your bosom, as C. Fimbria complained of Q. Scaevola? That you
divided not the half of your kingdom to the Pope, as Herod promised half of
his to an harlot? That you allowed not copartnership in supremacy with you
within your own Dominions and Realms? Admitted not altar contra altar, a
linsey wolsey, miscellan, medlyreligion within the land, here an house for the
arc and there a temple, for Dagon? More then this (which as far be from your
sacred Majesty ever to yield unto, as you are near to Christ and christian
simplicity) iustus quid fecit? What has the righteous done? This, this is the
true cause, and ever will be the quarrel whilst the covenant of day and night
stands, that the Gospel of Christ and the faithful professors thereof are
not either wholly expelled the kingdom, or affronted, mated at least with a
pellex, I mean an adulterous, idolatrous religion, to have as firm footing in
the land as the other has. In the days of your predecessor of memorable glory
whilst she lived, and now of as glorious a memory, what was the cause of their
multiplied, variated complotments against her, like the monsters in Africa,
every day almost a new conspiracy, that then they gave her not leave to live,
now not leave to be dead, and to sleep in her dust, but are angry at her very
manes, -- Nec mors mihi finiet iras,
-- Saeua sed in manes manibus arma dabo,
that they have ripped her up from her cradle, run through her life to her
grave, and will needs go down into hell to seek her immortal and now
immaculate, incorruptible soul amongst hobgoblins and infernal spirits (you
know my author) what is the cause? J say Iusta quid fecit. Rather man sueta
quid fecit? Gracious Lady, what had she ever done? Whose finger did she ever
cause to ache, and her heart aked not with him? Only this, that she nursed up
with the milk of her breasts, and hazarded to have done with the dearest blood
in her veins, that evangelical truth, which by the blessing of God and your
Majesty's zeal, this Church yet retains? Sim. metap. in Clem. To
But our comfort is: Si canes nos allatrauerint and consciderint, auferre nobis
no^ possunt quin simus homines rationis participes, illi autem sint canes
latrantes. Men shall be men notwithstanding the barkings of dogs, and dogs
shall be dogs. And therefore avaunt, now not Haza^els dog (whosoever thou art)
but hellish Curre, (...), (for what was the fire of hell prepared, if not for
such tongues?) Go seek thy Popes, and Cardinals, and Cortiza^s, thy Incubos,
and Succubos amongst hobgoblins and infernal spirits; surrexit non est hic,
she is in heaven, she is not there, she shall be a Saint in heaven, when thou
shall be a dog without, and as she sat upon a glorious throne in earth to
judge her people, so shall she sit upon a far more glorious throne in heaven,
to judge such miscreants as thou art. Nullam habet authoritatem illa sententia,
vbi qui damnandus est damnat. Thy tongue cannot hurt her with God nor good men,
though it be as peircing as hot irons, hette like the oven of Babylon
seuentimes red-hot, at the furnace and hearth of hell it self.

Most Gracious Sovereign. You are yet a living Lion. And the Lion of the tribe
of Judah grant you may long and long so be. It may be they fear the Lions
paw, and dare not as yet break forth. But when you shall be a dead Lion (as
that imperial Lioness now is, and Lions must die as well as worms) these
dogs will bark at your manes to, these Aegyptiacal dead flies will cause the
sweet ointment of your precious and glorious name, to stink upon the face of
the earth, what in them lies, with their Leprous, venomous breath, and
libellous, infamous pamphlets, as they do hirs. It is not this plea, Iustus
quid fecit? That can excuse you. I would they had iuster cause to ask, iustus
quid facit? That your Majesty would do them right, and administer justice upon
them, in the timely execution of your Laws, and necessary castigation,
coercion of their vnrestrainable audaciousnesse. That your faithful and good
subjects did not demand with groans of heart, Misericors quid facit? What
means his Majesty to deal so graciously with them: Some justice with mercy
and lenity would do well. Some frostes with the fire that warmeth these
snakes in the bowels of your land. Some pluckes at these thorns and prickles
in our eyes, (the mean time) and wilbee hereafter in our ^ides and hearts.
Least if justice go on to sleep as ^t were her dead sleep, the tares of
disloialty, treasons, and seditions be so thick sown in the field of your
kingdoms, by those envious men, the seedes-me^ of Rome, that it will be
difficulty and maistry afterward to remove them.

The foundations (you have heard before) were in sundry acceptions. 2. Part.
Dominus in te^plo.
I omitted one of all the rest, that fundamenta were retia, nets which the
wicked spread to entrappe the righteous, their crafty and clandestine
cou^sailes, whereupon they built the whole frame of their mischiefs. These were
cast down, al their proiects descried, their purposes frustrated. But by whom?
For iustus quid fecit? What has the righteous done, to break those snares,
and to deliver himself? That is the path which Basil with some others walk
in, so they make the connection. The answer is, Basil
nihil, nothing, less then nothing. Ad dominum ceu anchoram sacram confugit,
he fled to the Lord as his anchor, altar, sanctuary, city of refuge, tower
of defense, mons in vertice montium, mountain above all mountains, that is to
say, helper above all worldelie helpers. The Lord is in his holy temple.
Psalm* 124
The Lords seat is in heaven. Our soul has also escaped as a bird from the
snare of the fowler. The snare is broken, and we are delivered. By whom?
Benedictus d. Blessed be the Lord that has not given us up a pray to their
teeth. That is, Dominus in templo suo sancto. If the Lord had not bin on our
side (may England now say) if the Lord had not been on our side* what then?
Our foundations had been cast down, and theirs had been reared up. But
adiutorium nostrum, Our help stands in the name of the Lord which made
heaven and earth. Dominus in templo sancto suo. But what will the wicked say?
Dominus in templo sancto suo, Dominus in coelo. etc. What is that to us?
populus in scabello, may do what they list. Dominus deseruit terram. The
Lord has forsaken the earth. Not so. It is answered in my text, Oculi eius
recipient, his eyes behold, nay, palpebrae eius interrogant, his very eylidds
consider, he siteth not idly in heaven, as the wicked imagine. There is apertio
oculorum, says S Austin, and opertio. Ope^ning and shutting the eye in God,
his eye and his eielid. God sees with his open eye, when he discovers a
thing at the present, and causes us also to see it, But considers with his
eielid, when he makes as if he slept, winketh at the ways of sinners, takes
leisure and respite before he bring them to light. It is not to be thought but
that oculus respexit, if you consider himself, the bright eye of the Lord was
upon the first thought and imagination of this Salmonean thunder and lighning,
and followed the^ in the whole course thereof, went with them, when they trudged
to Doway, and gadded to Spain, marked the hissing of the be of Egypt to the
fly of Assure, all the intelligence, I mean, that past betwixt the Leiger
Jesuit in England, with the leigers of Flaunders and Spain; yet he bewraied
not this at the first, but palpebrae eius explorarunt, he sat with his eyes
shut, and considered under his eieliddes, bare himself silent and still, and
let them run on, til they had run themselves to perdition. You see what
palpebrae are. I could give you strange examples, perhapps not proper to this
day more then others, yet neither impertinent to my duty, nor unacceptable to
a loiall auditorie, nor strangers to my text, where palpebrae are mentioned,
nor aliene from the work we have in hand, our great Halleluiah, and solemn
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. For do we bless God for preserving the
life of our King, and shall we not bless him for preserving the honor of our
King? I verily assure my self, that discrimen and narrow exigent of life,
which his Majesty was put unto, when he was in the fanges of the Lion, and in
the very arms and gripes of death, did not so much afflict him, as an
undeserved crime and imputation cast upon him, of a dishonorable fact done. Qui
negligit fama^, homicida est. It was 8. years since, upon the fifth of August
last, that the Gowries conspired against the life of the Lords anointed, and
received their deserved meed. There have been oculi nequam in the world,
mistrustfull eyes that have looked awry upon that fact ever since, and would
not believe it. But what has the Lord done the meanetime? Albeit oculus non
respexit, his eye did not open out of hand, and give them present satisfaction,
yet palpebrae explorarunt, his eieliddes considered, he thought upon it in
secret, in the counsel of his own heart, and by a posthumous, penitent
tonfession (after the conspirators were most of them dead, and almost rotten)
of one of the accomplices themselves, laid it as it were in the sunne-beames, and
put it past al question. It were strange to give you a parallele to this,
coetaneous I think in time, and of the same standing. It was eight years
since likewise, in the days of Clement the eighth, that Letters were sent unto
Rome, to the Pope and two Cardinals, Aldobrandine and Bellarmine, wherein the
hand of the King was abused, his heart never could. (I do but touch by the
way: I am vox clamantis, the voice to a famous crier and loud trumpetter of
these things) The matter has long slept, years after years have expired,
and Pope deceased after Pope. But palpebrae eius explorarunt, though the eye of
the Lord has not seemed to stir all this while, his Eie-liddes have
considered, and bethought of the means and opportunity to bring all forth.
And now at length, truth the daughter of time, or rather of the euerliving God,
though not by that miracle in the Psalm Ex ore infantium, yet by an other not
inferior, Ex ore malignantium, out of the mouths and hearts of enemies, which
intended a scandal to his sacred person, has as strangely discovered this as
that other, to the glory of his great name, and the honor both of king and
kingdom. Both these have the eie-liddes of the Lord considered and revealed
the one after eight years, and the other after eight; the one by an actor or
accessarie to the fact, the other by the actour; the one by occasion of papers
and skrolles, the other by occasion of papers and pamphlets. And now to the
service of this happy day, wherein we sing our Hosanna, and commemorate our
great and general iubilee, Let this be added as not the least part of our
Christian joy, that his religious Majesty, so far is it from him, with
other kings of the earth to receive the mark of the beast imprinted in his
forehead, that he is jealous, impatient, cannot endure that any scratch of a
pen, or type of a Printers Press should leave the least note or suspicion upon
him, as if ever he had but a thought in his heart to fall down and worship that
golden calfe. I return where I left. The Lord is in his holy palace, etc.
There he sits, and sees, and considers both with eye and eieliddes, Psalm.
58.
and in the end shall judge. Laetabitur iustus cum viderit vindictam. If the
righteous shall rejoice to behold, much more to escape vengance. If when he
washes his feet in the blood of the wicked, much more that the wicked wash not
their feet in the blood of Saints. Factum est istud a domino: this was the
Lords doing alone. He shut the mouth of that pestilent quiver that not an arrow
was shot against us to hurt one hair of our heads; and stood as a wall of
fire about us, 2. Zach. to keep us from that merciles Tophet of fire, even
ready to have devoured us. And therefore, non nobis domine, non nobis, not unto
us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thine all-onely name, not the names of our
king nor princes, our Sages nor Senators (the greatest names amongst us) but to
thy name alone, if we be so wretched to deny it, da gloriam, give thou the
honor and glory of that days redemption. But let us give it to. Afferte
domino filij Dei, give unto the Lord O ye sons of the mighty; and afferte
domino familiae gentium, give unto the Lord O ye families and tribes of the
people, give unto the Lord that honor that is due unto him. Princes, and
private persons, Prelates and people, Nobles and Commons, high and low, one
with an other, old men and maidens, young men and sucklings, praise the name of
the Lord, sing praises, sing praises unto him whilst you have any being. It is
the cause of our meetings and panegyrickes this day, and it shall be a Law in
Israel and an ordinance in Jacob amongst our childrens children to the last
day. Sit nomen domini benedictum, Let the name of the Lord be blessed from
this time forth world without end, and let all the people say, Amen.

FINIS.

