A DISCOVERY OF THE VNNATVRAL AND Traitorous conspiracy of Scottish Papists,
against God, his Church, their native Country, the Kings Majesty's person and
estate:

Set down, as it was confessed and subscribed by Master George Ker, yet
remaining in prison, and David Grahame of Fentrie, justly executed for his
treason in Edinburgh, the 15. of February. 1592.

Whereunto are annexed, certain intercepted Letters, written by some of that
faction to the same purpose.

First Printed and published in Scotland, at the special commandment of the
Kings Majesty.



LONDON Printed by R. F. for John Norton. 1593.

TO THE READER.
MAny and dangerous points (good Reader) of unnatural and treasonable
practices of Scottish Papists, or (as they will needs be styled) Catholic
Romans, against God* his church, their native country, and the Kings Majesty's
estate and person, being discovered by Gods great and merciful providence,
partly by the depositions and confessions of some of the practisers them
selves, and namely, Master George Ker, who for that cause is imprisoned: and
David Grahame of Fentrie justly executed for the same, in Edinburgh, the 15. of
February. 1592. and partly by diverse letters of sundry of the practisers
intercepted at diverse times. It is thought good by the Kings Majesty and his
honorable Counsel, that the most substantial points of the said
depositions, should be faithfully taken out of the originals, which were
deposed and confessed by the said M. George, and David Grahame of Fentrie,
before the honorable persons deputed by the Kings Majesty and his highness
Counsel to that effect, and subscribed with their own hands, and for the
greater ease of the memory of the Reader, should be summarily gathered into
this form follovving, which otherwise were scattered here and there in their
depositions, according to the occasion of the diverse demaundes at diverse
times: for the readier taking up whereof, the times of the depositions and
persons deposed, severally and coniunctly as the matter craves, should be set
down in marginal quotations: As also, that some of the most remarkable
Letters of the practisers, should be joined hereunto word by word, which were
intercepted with Master George Ker, and the rest decyphered and translated as
after shall appear, and so the whole together to be imprinted, and set forth
unto the view of the world, to the glory of Gods Majesty (the only reuealer
of these secrets) to the comfort and edification of his Church, and the
perpetual detectio^ and shame of the unnatural enemy. All which things are
so faithfully done in this volum following, that no man how impudent soever he
be, can justly challenge it with any falsifying, forging, or changing one
thing for another, to the wresting of the original depositions in any the
least substantial parts thereof, as by conferring this extract with the first
records, which are in the Clerks hands, most evidently shall appear, if any
list to look upon them. Thou art therefore (good Reader) greatly to consider
the goodness of our God in this case, so vvatchfull over his church, for the
good and safety thereof, by discovering such deep and dangerous practices of the
deadly enemy, even the^, when as we thinking nothing less, are ready to be
surprised by their close courses so cunningly and craftily conveyed, as we may
well say with the Prophet, our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the
snare of the Fowlers, etc. As also, thou art to be vvakened up, to the earnest
consideration of the diligence, force and cruelty of our enemies (which yet
is nothing abated, but more eager presently then ever heretofore, to atchieue
their devilish intent) and no ways to trust them or be secure, as though
they were sleeping, and minding no danger to us, while in the mean time, so
deeply and deadly they conspire within and without, with so great force and
craft against our religion, lands and lives, that they dare be bold in their
pride, to assure the Spaniard of no resistance here to their cr^^^ enterprise,
as by their own bragging words hereafter in their letters evidently shall
appear: yea all kindly native Scottish men, and true lovers of the Christian
religion, ought speedily and substanciallie to concur, to the vvithsta^ding and
overthrowing of this our common enemy, within our own bowels, whose
unnaturalness, barbarism and high attempt, ca^ be matched with no example
domesticke or foreign, that we read of, whether we consider the cruel
barbarousnes of the Spaniard, to whom they have sold their country, K. and
people (whereof let the monument vvritte^ by one of their own Friars against
the Spanish cruelty, beside experience vvher they be masters, bear witness)
or whether we consider their most deceitful dealing, covering their most
bloody purposes with cloak of most tender friendship, which most closely they
have cou^terfeited by subscriptio^ to the true religion, by hearing of the
word preached, and common profession thereof with us, and participation of
the Sacraments, by bands finally, affinities, oaths, and all attestations and
laws sacred and humane that might seem to procure credit amongst men, and
many other things to be enlarged in time and place, as men's callings in Church
and policy craves. Consider, and consider again (good Reader) what should
be the estate of all honest and godly men, their vviues and daughters, the
estate of Church, Common weal and Prince, yea and of the miserable vvretches
themselves, if their purpose to make the Spaniard our master (for no man's
servant nor fellovv will that proud beast be) should take effect: O misery,
misery, misery unspeakable, especially to themselves, if their woeful
purpose succeed to their mind and far proceeded practices. Wherefore yet
again, it is high time and more, that all good men, and lovers of their native
country be vvakened up to true repentance to the Lord, who so heavily
threatens, and in a part already strikes: and to a diligent and substantial
concurring every one according to his calling and place, both in land and
Burrovv, to vvithstand these desperate attempts before they pass remedy, and
timely to prevent the farther danger, by assisting the execution of Justice
upon the rest of the detected traitors without respect of persons, that so we
laboring to take evil out of Israel, the Lord who has so notably begun the
work, may bring it to an happy end, to his glory and our comforts, through
Christ our Lord. Amen.

A DISCOVERY OF THE unnatural and traitorous practices of the Scottish
Papists, against God, his Church, their native country, and the Kings
Majesty's person and estate.
BY the confessions and depositions of master George Ker, Deposed by master
George Ker 3.5. and 6. of Febr. 1592.
and David Grahame of Fentrie, it is discovered, That in March 1591. Master
William Creichtoun (who has remained these two years past in Spain) sent to
master James Gordoun Jesuit, brother on the fathers side to George now earl
of Huntlie, a Gentleman called master William Gordoun, son unto the Lord of
Abiryeldie with letters, to let the Catholics here understand what travel
master William Creichtoun had taken with the king of Spain since his coming
thither: and that the said king had opened unto him that he had been deceived
by English men, and would from thenceforth, embrace the advice and way which
the said master William would show him, both for inuading of England, and
alteration of religion within this realm. And for that purpose the said
master William craved by this Gentleman, to be sent to him so many blanks and
procurations, as could be had of Noblemen here, for the assurance of his
traffic.

Upon the sight and receipt of the which blanks, Deposed by master George Ker
the 3.5. and 6 of Febr. 1592.
sent with some other discreet gentlemen, having the Noble-mens commission, to
be filled up with such conditions as should be capitulated and agreeed upon,
betwixt the king of Spain, and master William Creichtoun, And deposed by Dau.
Grahame of Fentrie, the 13. of Feb. 1592.
which should have served as pledges and suerties for the subscribers part, at
the landing here of the Spanish army. It was concluded that there should have
been sent out of Spain about the latter end of the spring, in this present
year 1592. an army of thirty thousand men, Deposed by master George Ker the
3. of Febr. 1592.
to have landed either at Kirkcudbricht, or at the mouth of Clyde, according to
the opportunity of the wind, where they should have entrenched and fortified
themselves for the assurance of them and their ships.

Deposed by master George Ker the 3. of Febr. 1592. And by Fentrie the 14. of
Feb. 1592
And first of all, money should have been sent to the Catholics here, for
raising of forces to supply the said army, whereof, four or five thousand
should have remained within this country, who with the fortification and
assistance of the Noble men Catholics, their friends, and such other forces as
the spanish money would raise, should have immediately after their landing,
begun to alter the religion now professed within this realm, Deposed by
Fentrie the 13 of Feb. 1592.
or at least procured liberty of conscience, and Papistrie to have been
erected here: Deposed by M. George Ker 3. of Feb. 1592.
and the rest of the army should have past toward England the nearest way from
their landing to the border.

Deposed by Fentrie 13 of Feb. 1592.
These letters sent from master William Creichtoun, being given in credit by
master James Gordoun to master Robert Abrecrumby, were shown by him to David
Grahame of Fentrie, at Abirnethie, in April 1592.

And for effecting of this matter, it was once thought most convenient that sir
James Chesholme, Deposed by Da. Grahame of Fentrie the 13 of Feb. 1592.
who was then one of his Majesty's chief servant, should have gone to Spain
with this commission, in respect, he was otherwise to pass toward his Uncle
master William Chesholme (called Bishop of Dumblane) for sir James had the
first credit of this errand with the Noblemen, as he declared to David Grahame
of Fentrie, that he had dealt with the Earls of Huntlie and Errol, and
conferred with master George Ker about this matter, about the time of the last
Parliament holden in Edinburgh in June 1592. as also communed again in his own
house with the same master George Ker, in October 1592. touching the whole
heads of this dispatch: but sir James not being able to be so soon ready, and
master George Ker being bound off the country, it was thought best, Deposed by
Fe^rtie 13. of February. 15^^*
that the same Commission should be given to him, and that he should undertake
the carrying of the said Letters: And so he was employed in that errand, the
rather, because both his grandmothers were Creichtouns.

Afterward, master George being bownd to this journey, and ready to make
sail out of Fairly Road at the West sea bank, upon the 27. of December.
1592. Then (by Gods providence) the said master George was apprehended in the
I Will of Cumray, and with him there was intercepted sundry missiue Letters
directed to this purpose. Amongst which, there was eight blankes, whereof one
is subscribed.

De vostre Majesty tres humble and tresobeisant seruiteur, Guilliame compte de
Anguss. An other blanke is subscribed.

De vostre Majesty, tres humble and tresobeisant seruiteur, Francoys compte de
Erroll. And these two blankes were both procured of them, Deposed by Master
George Ker. 3. of Feb. 1592.
by Sir James Chesholme, in their own lodgings in Edinburgh, at the time of
the last Parliament in June. 1592.

An other blanke is subscribed.

Guilielmus Angusi comes. An other blanke is subscribed.

Franciscus Errolli Comes. Which were both procured of them by master Robert
Abircrumby, who was the chiefest traveler in that matter, Deposed by Fe^trie
13. of February. 1592.
Deposed by master George Ker 3. of Febr. 1592.
in October. 1592.

Another blanke is subscribed.

Georgius Comes de Huntlie. And another is subscribed.

Georgius Comes de Huntlie. Which were both with the whole blankes proposed,
first to the Earl of Hunlie, by master George Ker in Strathbogy, Deposed by
master George Ker, 3. of February. 1592.
at his passing there.

Deposed by master George Ker 3. of Febr. 1592. and by Fentrie, 14. of Fe. 1592.
Which six several blankes before specified, should have bin all filled with
missiue Letters, by the advice of master William Creichtoun.

And the other two blanks, making out the number of eight, were both subscribed
in the midst of two open sheets of paper in this manner.

Guillielmus Angussie Comes. Georgius comes de Huntlie. Franciscus Errollie
Comes. Patricius Gordoun de Auchindoun Miles. Deposed by M. George Ker, 3. of
Febr. 1592.
Which two last blankes, were first subscribed by the Earl of Huntlie, and
Patricke Gordoun in October 1592. And after being sent with master Robert
Abircrumby, to ye Earls of Angus, and Erroll, were subscribed by them in the
same month of October 1592. And these two blankes should have bin filled up
with procurations, and whatsoever should have been thought meet, by the said
master William Creichtoun, for the auouching of that which master George Ker
had in direction and credit of the subscribers, Deposed by M. George Ker. 5. of
Feb. 1592.
which credit he received from the Earl of Huntlie, by the report of master
James Gordoun, and from the Earls of Angus and Erroll, by themselves in
Edinburgh, in the beginning of October. 1592.

And the sum of this his credit, was an assurance, that these Noble men
should raise a power of horsemen, and meet the Spanish Army at their landing,
and reciprocally to assist, accompany, and conuoy them in their passing to
England, Deposed by M. George Ker the 5. and 6. of February. 1592.
by all the forces they could procure upon the King of Spaines charges: And
these Noble men subscribers, took the burden on them, and interposed their
bands, for the concurring of the whole Catholics of Scotland in this cause,
and thought it meet amongst themselves for the better secrecy, that none
other should be craved to bind for this errand, but they three.

With these eight blanks subscribed, as is said, there was intercepted stamps
in wax, of the Earl of Angus seal of Arms six; of the Earl of Huntlies seal
of Arms four; and of the Earl of Errolles seal of Arms three.

David Grahame of Fentrie deposed, Deposed by Fe^trie 13. of Febr. 1492.
that he met sundry times since this purpose was in hand, with master Robert
Abircrumby, as namely, that the first knowledge he had of this purpose was by
the said master Robert in Dunfermling: and afterward in ye Castle of
Striuiling, before master George Ker his preparation to his iourny, where M.
Robert showed him, Deposed by Fe^trie 14 of Febr. 1592.
that this Commission was to be given to the said master George, to cause the
blankes to be filled with master William Creichtouns advise, and that he was
to deliver the same blanks, with the other Letters to him, who was to depart
and carry with him all this message.

Like as the said blankes and Letters, which were procured for that errand,
were all delivered by master James Gourdoun, and master Abircrumby, to
master George Ker, to be carried by him to master William Creichtoun Jesuit:
And to be filled up at the discretion and direction of the said master
William, and of master James Tyrie, who was best acquainted with the affairs
there.

For the understanding of the borrowed and counterfaited names, that occur in
the Letters following, (good Reader) thou shall find them interpreted on the
margent, where they are pointed out by this Mark, * which interpretations are
contained in the original depositions of the practisers, and in some of their
intercepted Letters.

A Letter directed from an English Jesuit, and intercepted with M. George Ker,
the 27. of December, 1592.
Good father, the enclosed to my Lord, I pray you read, and take it as written
to your self: what I write to him, I write to you; what I crave of him, I
crave of you; what I hope of him, I hope of you, as of my Patron and Pedagogue
in spiritualibus; as of a man, whose discretion and moderation I have well
experimented, in all cases, and at all times. If I had so far ouerlashed, and
gone beyond my compass, as some good fellows would imagine, yet I wonder that
some good men, both in their own conceits, and other spiritual means, will
admit no excuse, no satisfaction, no purgation: when S. Paul to the Galathians,
in most evident terms sets down this rule amongst the perfect and
spiritual: Fratres and si praeoccupatus fuerit homo in aliquo delicto, vos qui
spirituales estis hujusmodi instruite in spiritu lenitatis, considerans
teipsum, ne and tu tenteris. If I had spoken with you at my last being in
Italy, as I well hoped, I had perhaps made a better conclusion of my business
there, then I did to my own content and all my friends satisfaction, which
hope, for all these storms, I will never give over, and when I leave by your
means to be under the good habering, I will write to you of that subject. The
Lord Seytoun, in whose house I soiourn sometimes salutes you. Of the affairs
of the Catholics here, I leave it to them to write and relate, by whose means
these letters shall be conueighed. My Lord Seytoun has a haven of his own,
which may be hereafter very commodious for our purpose. Commend me I pray you
to F. Barth. Pere etc. master Dudley Iipher knight, and John Thules, which
upon some sudden pushes of persecution, have made their repair hither, are in
health and salute you. And master Syall a priest dyed here lately in
Edinburgh. Love me and pray for me I beseech you all, solito. And if you send
any into these parts, let them come furnished with as ample faculties as you
may. Let them enquire for one master Jonas, which will be a token betwixt us.
Our Lord bless us and send us to meet once ere we die. Seytoun this 2, of
October 1592.

Yours ever most assured, Joan Cecilio. Blanke on the back.

A letter directed from the Earl of Angus, all written and subscribed with his
own hand, intercepted with master George Ker, the 27. of December, 1592.
MY most affectionat commendations premitted, this present is only to know of
your welfare and friends, and of the estate of matters where you remain, and
to show a testimony of my good affection toward you. For God be praised if
you were in this country, I could do you greater pleasure then I was able to
do before, albeit good will lacked not at any time, as you know. The M. George
Ker.
bearer hereof can inform you of such things as occur with us: for we are
here daily subject to alteration. You may credit him as my self, for so his
virtues do deserve. It is not needful that I trouble you with his
recommendation, seeing he is to you that he is, you know his honesty and good
intention, and the causes of his departing, to whose sufficiency referring the
rest, my hearty salutations, and my bedfellowes with all our company young and
old, remembered unto you and your good company: commits you with them to the
protection of God. Edinburgh the tenth of October after our count, 1592,

Yours ever to his power, Anguss. To M. William Creichtoun.
Blanke on the back.

A Letter directed from master James Gordoun to master William Creichtoun,
intercepted with master George Ker, the 17. of December, 1592.
Trusty friend, after most hearty commendations, your friends that are here,
have directed this present bearer M. George Ker.
to you, for full resolution of all your affairs in these quarters, we have
delayed over long I grant, but he will show you the cause of all. The best is
first ye use all expedition in time coming, against the next summer, otherwise
you will lose credit here with your factors. If ye come, ye will find more
friends then ever ye had, but otherwise ye will find fewer: because the next
summer many are bound to other countries, and will not abide on you no longer.
Have home hither some word to your friends, that we may put them in good hope
of you, and they will tarry the longer. The bearer is an honest man, and very
sufficient, ye may credit him as my self. I should have come with him my
self, were it not I was persuaded that you would remain satisfied with our
answer, and because I had a let out of Flaunders. As the bearer can show you,
ye have gotten all that ye desired, Relation to the blankes.
therefore make have. The bearer is come unto you on his own charge, therefore
ye must have respect to him. The last bearer that ye sent, came behind hand
here, and has gotten no satisfaction as yet, because nothing could be gotten
here, and we could find no man but this, that would pass on his own charge,
and I fear, that if he had not come on his own expenses, ye should not have
received answer so soon, therefore ye should entreat him the better. We look
for your self here shortly, and I would you brought the rest of your friends
with you that are beyond the sea: The Spanish army.
for if your purpose pass forward, they must be also present, otherwise we
must come and visit you. All other affairs of this country, I will commit to
the bearer, who is faithful. Your wife and your children The Catholic Romans
and their confederates.
commend them unto you, and look to see you shortly. If I or Sandesoun M.
Robert Abircrumby.
your friend receive any silver from the bearer, you shall be advertised by an
other ticket, how much it is, and subscribed with both our hands. The rest I
will refer to the bearer. God preserve you ever from all evil. At Dundie the
20 of November, 1592.

Your most affectioned to his power, I. Christesoun. M. James Gordoun.
Directed on the back. To his assured friend George Craufurd. M. William
Creichtoun.


A Letter directed from master Robert Abircrumby to master William
Creichtoun, intercepted with master George Ker, the 27 of December. 1592.
AFter my due and humble salutations and offer of service, I grieve and lament
heavily the sloth and negligence your merchands have used in answering of your
last suit you proposed to them. For apparently, if they had made answer in due
time, our wares had been here in due time, with our great profit and
consolation. The stay and stop of the matter apparently, was lack of expenses,
that no man would of his own charges take that voyage in hand: yea, some
craved a thousand crowns for his expenses. So the matter was once wholly given
over and almost clean forgot, until it pleased God of his divine providence
to stir up this bearer, to take the matter in hand on his own expenses: as he
has been ever bent in that cause, not only to spend his goods, but also the
thing which is more dear to him that is, his life: therefore I think he
should be the more acceptable: as also for the affinity of blood, ^or both his
grandmothers were Creichtones And as for wit and ability, in treating of those
affairs, he is not inferior to any of your merchands which you desired, as ye
will perceive by experience God willing. And albeit that he of his courageous
liberality and zeal to the cause, has taken the matter in hand on his own
charges, yet all your friends in these quarters think it very reasonable,
that al should be repaied to him again, cum vsurs, with promotion till any
other accident should fall out, for the weal and furtherance of this cause,
etc. But now I will say one word of him, and so come to some other purpose of
our own: If I had a thousand tongues, The hyperbolicall and ridiculous
commendation of M. George Ker.
with so many mouths, with C^ceroes eloquence, I could not be worthy enough
to commend this Gentleman, to you and all your company, as I shall let you
understand, God willing, if ever we do chance to meet face to face: and
therefore whenever ye may, prevent him with any benefit, either by your self
or any other, abide not till he crave it of you, for he is the worst asker in
his own cause, that ever ye conversed with, Sed nunc ad alia. If you be well
remembered, at your departing out of this country, you gave master James
Makcartnay a procuratory to intermeddle with master Alexander Homes little
living he has here in East Lowthiane, the which he pleaded and obtained in
law, and took up the yearly rents thereof to his own behoof, and gives his
none of it. In the mean time there falls out such incumbra^ces touching that
land, that we are like to loose the whole. The said master Alexanders nearest
friends and heirs, have in judgment proved him to be dead, and so enter as
heirs to him. In the mean time, the Land of Spot his chief lord is
forfeited, and so the land wairds, so that we are like to lose al if remedy be
not found. Wherefore, falling in consultation with master Alexander King, he
thought best to sell the land unto him, and we to use the silver in a more sure
manner, of the which ye shall receive some writings These writings intercepted
with the rest, are a charter and obligation to be past by M. Alexander Home of
Palywell to M. Alexander King his heirs and assigns of four teame lands in
the Lordship of Spot, with a missiue letter directed by him to that effect.
from this bearer, the which ye will understand better then I. Only I think
if some means be not used, we shall loose all, and better it is to have some
thing, nor loose all. As for the price set ye it down, for he has mentioned
none as yet; but he will give as much as any other, because as he says, he
has some land lying near to it. I pray you answer us with speed. I doubt
not but ye have heard, how the young man, whose father was slain by the Lord
of Ruthvenis slew him again, whose Lady is married to one James Reid. Camnay
is come into the Constables hands; and your Nephew is privy of it, and that by
the mean I trow, of Abraham your brother: but your Maich is little better the^
beggred. Drumkilbo is dead, and Thomas Tyrie is Tutor. I pray you advertise me
by what manner, master Stephen Wilsoun came by my Lord Leuingstons Obligation,
the which you had of the forty Crowns his L. owed you: For master Stephen
has gotten the forty Crowns, rendering the Obligation which ye had: I durst
never make mention of the hundredth Crowns from the father, and forty Crowns
from the son, which ye left me authority to ask, etc. My Lord Leuingstone,
is departed out of this world. Ye heard before, that David Forester David
Grahame of Fentrie.
had one son, and now has an other borne in the Castle of Striueling, where
he is in ward, hardly handled. There is but one of our Nobility here, which
has of the King of Spain any pension well paid of twelve hundredth Crowns.
The which apparently are evil bestowed: For he nor none of his as yet, has
ever done any kind of good in the promotion of the Kings matters: wherefore such
pensions were better bestowed on others, who travel daily and hourly, putting
in hazard both their goods and lives, Envy amongst the Papists themselves.
as this bearer has done and daily does: and others, as he can show you, etc.
Because I have no other thing to write, and have been long enough, I commend me
to your prayers, and you to God. At Scotland the 15. of December. 1592.

Yours at his power Robert Sandesoun. M. Robert Abircrumby.
Directed on the back. To his trusty friend George Cranfurd. M. William
Creichtoun.


A Letter directed to the King of Spain, by three Noble men of Scotland,
whereof, two have since returned to the profession and defense of the truth, by
their oaths and subscriptions, wherefore their names are suppressed, the third
his name expressed (to wit, the Earl of Huntly) because he continues as yet
in his former wicked course. This Letter written by them in the name of the
Catholic Noblemen of Scotland, cyphered in French, was intercepted in
January, 1589. lately before the time of the Rode of the Bridge of Die,
afterward was decyphered word by word, and translated into Scottish as
follows.
They are sorry that the Spanish fleet past by, without landing in Scotland.
SIR, we cannot sufficiently express by speech, the great grief we have
conceived, being frustrate of the hope we have so long had to see this year
past, the desired effects fall out which we attended of your Majesty's
preparations. And our displesures have bin so much ye greater, that your naual
armies should have passed by so near us, vnuisiting us, who expected the same
with sufficient forces for the peaceable receipt and assisting thereof, against
all enemies, in such sort, that it should have had no resistance in this
Country, and with our support should have given enough to do to England. At
least, if it had come here to refresh it, it had preserved a number of vessels
and men, which we know have perished near our Isles, and upon the coast of
Ireland. And had discovered an incredible number of friends, The Spaniard
should have had great assistance in Scotland.
in full readiness to have run the same fortune with it, in such sort, as we
dare well affirm, it should not have found half so many in England, for all
that is spoken by the English Catholics refuged there, who by emulation, or
rather by an unchristian envy extenuate over far our means to aid you, to
magnify their own only, and make themselves to be esteemed able to do all, to
advance themselves thereby, in credit with your Majesty, and such as are about
you: but the experience of this their passage, has sufficiently testified,
they have not shown themselves in such number to assist your forces as we have
done. And therefore your Majesty, as most wise, as ye are, shall if it please
you, make such account of the one, as ye neglect not the other, and so serve
you with them both, to the end ye pretend, without hazarding your forces for
the particular of the one or the other. They have informed the K. of Spaines
subjects wracked here, of the means to do good by landing in Scotland.
We remit to the declaration of some of your own subjects that have been here,
the commodities and advantages of landing in these parts, where the expenses
bestowed upon the equippage of one Galliasse, shall bring more fruit to your
service, then ye may have of ten upon the Sea. And we may assure your Majesty,
that having once six thousand men here of your own with money, ye may leauie
here forces of this Country, as freely as in Spain, who will serve you no
less faithfully then your own natural subjects. And albeit we cannot without
blame of presumption, give your Majesty advise in your affairs there: Always
in that, Advise to the king of Spain how to assault this Island hereafter.
that may concern your service here, we may speak more freely, as being upon
the place, and knowing by ordinary experience many things unknown to any of
yours that are not here. The over late arrival of your Army in our waters,
took from it the commodity, to retire it self in such safety, as it might
have done coming sooner, by reason of the great winds that are ordinary here
in harvest: as also lack of Pylots experimented upon the coasts of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, appears to have bred great harm to the said Army,
whhich we could have remedied concerning Scotland, to have sent Pilots from
this if it had liked your Majesty to have served your self with them. Likewise
(saving better advise) it seems to us altogether unprofitable to fetch the
Army by sea, it may be eschewed for many causes: And amongst others, because
such as shall have fought by sea, shall be unable, being weary to fight again
by land against new forces: so the best should be, to shift by one way or
other, for sparing of your men and vessels, and so the English forces staying
upon ye sea unfought with, shall be disappointed and shall not come in time, to
assist them that shall be assailed by land. Advise to the king of Spain, how to
assault this Island hereafter.
After, sending hither a part of your forces, before the other which should go
the right way to England, and that secretly by the back of Ireland: Your
Majesty should compel the enemy to divide their forces, and it may be,
should cause them send the greatest part hither, where ye might make them
believe the greatest part of your forces were arrived, at least should cause
them disgarnish as much of England, and draw a great part of their forces,
which would resist your landing and invasion on that coast. And we may well
promise, that having here six thousand of your men, With 6000. men sent from
Spain, and money to leauie a power in Scotland, they will in six weeks be
far in Englad. Bruce is the mouth of these Lords, to the King of Spain and
Duke of Parme.
and money to aid others here, we should within six weeks after their
arrival, be a good way within England, to approach and assist the forces which
your Majesty should cause to enter there. The knight William Sempill colonel,
can show your Majesty the whole to whom we leave it. Also, we have caused to
write both before and since his departure, our many such aduises, by master
Robert Bruce, and caused to address the same to my Lord Duke of Parme, to whom
your Majesty remitted us from the beginning in these affairs. And seeing we
hope your Majesty is duly aduertized and informed, we will end the present,
kissing most humbly your Majesty's hand. Praying God with all our affection, to
grant you full accomplishment of all your holy enterprises. From Edinburgh
this 24. of January. 1589.

Your Majesty's most humble and affectioned seruitors. G. Earl Huntlie, etc.
In name of the other Lords Catholics in Scotland.

A Letter directed from the Earl of Huntly, to the Duke of Parme, intercepted
in January, etc.
MY Lord, I have received from John Chesholme, Letters received from the D. of
Parme by John Chesholme. Support of 10000. crowns from the Duke of Parme.
the Letters it pleased your Highness to write, the 13. of October, full of
most Christian affection to the welfare of our cause: for the which, I give
your highness most humble thanks. The support of ten thousand crowns sent to
that end, is received by M. Robert Bruce, which shall not be employed but for
help of the most urgent necessity of the said cause, as it has pleased your
highness to direct. After the departure of Colonel Sempil, I have found my
self so beset on all hands, and pressed in such sort by our King, that it
behooued me to yield to the extreme difficulty of time, and subscribe with
his Majesty, not with my heart, the confession of their faith, He dissembles
his religion for fear and policy.
or otherwise I had been forced immediately to have departed the country, or to
have taken the fields for resisting his forces, and such as he might have drawn
out of England to his aid, which I could not have done, specially then, when
by the returning of your army into Spain, all hope of help was taken from
us, but if on the one part I have faulted, by the apprehension of dangers that
threatened my ruin, I shall on the other part endeavor my self to amend my
fault (whereof I repent me with all my heart) by some effect, tending to the
weal and advancement of the cause of God, who has put me in such credit with
his Majesty, that since my coming to the Court, he has broken his former
Gards, and caused me to establish others about his person of my men, by the
means of whom and their captains, who are also mine, I may ever be master of
his person, He has established gards about the king at his own devotion, to be
master of his person, when occasion shall offer.
and your support being arrived, spoil the heretic of his authority, to
fortify and assure our enterprises: whereupon I beseech your Highness to send
me your advise, and to assure your self of my unchangeable affections in my
former resolutions, albeit the outward actions be forced to conform
themselves, sometime to necessity of occasions, as M. Robert Bruce will more
amply write unto your Highness, to whom I remit me farther. Praying God
after I have most humbly kissed your Highness hand, to give you accomplishment
of your holy enterprises. From Edinburgh the 24 of January, 1592.

Your highness most humble and affectionate seruitour, G. Earl of Huntlie.

A Letter from the Earl of Erroll, to the Duke of Parme, intercepted in
January, etc.
MY Lord, since God of late by the clear light of his holy Catholic faith,
has chased from my understanding the darkness of ignorance and error,
wherein I have been heretofore nourished: I have been as soon persuaded in
acknowledging of so great an effect of his divine grace toward me, that I am
chiefly obliged to procure, since I know the enterprises of his Catholic
Majesty and your highness tend principally to that end, The causes of the
Papists are inseparable, for the king of Spains service.
as also to the advancement of some civil cause which has very great
affinity and conjunction with ours here. That I may testify by this present,
the affection that I have to the weal of the one and the other, having ever
before my conversion been one of the number of your friends and seruitors for
the respect of the last, to the which, the first of religion, which is the
greatest and most important that is in the world, being joined thereto, I am
also become altogether yours, which I most humbly beseech your highness cause
to be signified to his Catholic Majesty, and to promise him in my behalf,
that he has not in this country, a more affectionate servant then I, neither
yet your highness, as ye shall understand more amply of my intention in
particular, by him by whom your highness shall receive this present. To whom,
after I have most humbly kissed your hand, I beseech the Creator to give you
the accomplishment of your holy desires. From Edinburgh, this 24 of January
1589.

Your highness most humble and most affectioned seruitant, Francis earl of
Erroll.

A Letter from Robert Bruce to Monsieur Francisce Aguirre Spaniard, etc.
intercepted in January, 1589, written in French, and translated into Scottish,
as follows.
MOnsieur de Aguirre, I have received your Letter, dated the ninth of November,
written from And werpe, whereby I was glad to understand of your arrival there
and health, and that you have guided your self so wisely in the execution of
all that I committed to you. Your master, who at my request has given you
entertainment, has given me the like testimony of your behavior, and has
promised me by his letters to have you in the favorable commendation I
desired, and to employ you in good occasions. If he send you hither again into
these parts cause your self to be set on land near Seytoun, where I pray you
to enter secretly, and there you shall be kept while I may come and find you,
etc.

The rest of this missiue being set down in obscure terms, is to be seen in
the original.

A Letter from Robert Bruce to the Duke of Parme, intercepted in January 1589.
Lately before the Rode of the bridge of Die, ciphered in French, deciphered
afterward, and translated into Scottish as follows.
MY Lord, Monsieur Chesholme arrived in this country five days after his
departing from thence, and with requisite diligence came to the Earl of Huntlie
in his own house in Dunfermeling, Letters sent by John Chesholme from the Duke
of Parme to the Harle of Huntlie, and received by him at Dunfermeling.
where having presented to him your highness letters, of the 13 of October, be
declared amply unto him the credit given him in charge, conformable to the
tenor of the letters from your highness, wherein they perceived your
highness great humanity and affection, to the advancement of the glory of
God in this country, with other consolations most convenient, to moderat the
dolor and displeasure conceived by the hearts of the Catholics, by reason of
the success of your army, against their hope and expectation. Also some days
afterward, 10000 Crounes received from the Duke of Parma by Bruce, to be
employed for the king of Spain his service in Scotland.
as the commodity offered to me to receive the money, the said Chesholme
delivered to me six thousand two hundred three score and twelve crowns of the
Sun, and three thousand seven hundred Spanish Pistolets, and likewise has
carried himself in all his actions since very wisely, and as becomes a man of
God: chiefly then, when upon the suspicion conceived of his so sudden
returning, the king sent to take him. I shall behave my self by the grace of
God, in the keeping and distribution of the money last sent and of that which
rests yet of the first sum, according to your highness prescription, and
as I ought to answer to God in conscience, and to your highness in credit, and
to the whole world in the reputation of an honest man, and will manage it in
such sort, that by the grace of God there shall be fruit drawn thereof pleasant
to your highness. The money is to be distributed among the Catholic Nobility
of Scotland.
It is true that I find (as all others would do, that would enterprise such a
charge here) my self inuolued in great difficulties: for on the one part I am
in great danger of the heretics, and of them of the faction of England, by
reason of the open profession that I make of the Catholic religion, and of the
suspicion that the last has of my secret practices and dealing against them.
On the other part, I have much ado to moderate the appetite that some Catholic
lords have, to have the money presently, for the hope which they give of some
pretended occasions, which will never fall out as they promise. The Earl of
Huntlie made instance to have the third part of the sum which was sent hither
as soon as it was delivered to me, The Earl of Huntlie would have a third
part to himself.
but he has not touched, nor shall not touch herafter a half penny but upon good
tokens. I have paid him in the mean time with inexpugnable reasons, wherewith
in the end he is co^te^ted. I beseech your highness, by the first letter it
shall please you to write into their parts, to the Catholic Lords, to remove
one error from three, who have written there in name of the residue, that
moves them to think, by reason they were the first that made offer of their
service to the King Catholic, that all the money that comes hither, should be
parted in three, and immediately after the arrival thereof deliver it to them,
without giving part to others, which beside them are in great number to the
King Catholics service, and yours; and also deliberate to hazard after their
power for the advancement of this cause, as they are; of whom the others will
not depend in any sort, in the accepting of the means that comes from your
liberality, both acknowledge them as coming directly from your Highness, to
whom only they will be bound and obliged, and not to the other three. Of the
which, the Earl of Mortoun, has hitherto contented himself with reason: As
also the Earl of Huntlie, has never shown himself subject to money, but
since he has been induced by the third, to wit, my Lord Claud Hammiltoun What
ever this Noble man has been, at this time it is not to be objected to him now
after his faith and subscription given to the contrary.
his uncle, who is somewhat covetous of gain, and thought under such pretext
to make his profit. The said Earl of Huntlie, is constrained to remain at
Court; he is fallen from his constancy in his outward profession of the
Catholic Religion, partly, for having lost all hope of your support before the
returning of the said Chesholme, because of his long stay there, partly by the
persuasion of some politikes, partly to eschew the perils imminent to all them
that call themselves Catholics, partly to keep himself in the favor of his
King, The Earl of Huntly, dissembles his Religion first, for fear and
policy, after to work his matters the better.
who pressed him greatly to subscribe to the confession of the heretics, and
to be at league with England. But for all this, his heart is no whit alienated
from our cause: for he has the soul ever good, albeit he have not such vigor
to persevere and execute so as is requisite in so great an enterprise: but they
may help the defectes, joining with him a man of credit, resolute to assist
him, as we have advised to do, since the Baron of Fentrie is put in ward by the
King, in the Town of Dundie: So that he durst not go out of the gates
thereof, under the pain of a great sum, until occasion may be offered to
depart the Country, within the time limited. And I by the Kings Commandment,
am forbidden to come near the said Earl: because they have attributed to the
said Lord of Fentrie and me, his constancy in the Catholic Religion, and his
absence from Court against the Kings will: His warding has somewhat hindered
our course, and permits me not to move him, as it has pleased you to command
me, and as I desire to dispense the money coniunctly with me: so that for
supplying of the default of him, I have associated to the same end, a very
honest man, and very wise called father William Creichtoun Jesuit, who was
detained some years in the City of London, after he was taken upon the sea,
coming hitherwards from France. Likewise, I shall help my self by the
prudence of Sir James Chesholme, Sir James Chesholme, brother to John Chesholme
a confederate.

The money is in my L. Leuingstones chief house, and at Edinburgh, to serve the
Catholic Noble men's turns that are shortly to assemble.

More money promised by the Duke of Parme.


eldest brother to the said John, who brought the money from your Highness: For
he is a man confident, wise, one on our part, and very little suspect. In the
mean time, the one part of the money, is in the principal house of my Lord
Leuingstoun, a very Catholic Lord, the other here in Edinburgh, in surety
enough, to help as it shall need the Lords Catholics, who will come very
soon hither to resist, to the purposes of them of the faction of England, who
in the same time, are purposed to remain at Court, with forces to raunge all
things at their fantacie. As for the like sum or greater, which your
Highness will is to cause follow the last sent hither: it is good in all
eue^ts, it were very soon sent hither, secretly to help the necessity that
may fall out, and to cause things incline to our side, when they are in
balance, as there is great appearance they will be, by the occasion aforesaid:
And in case that necessity requires no distribution, the said sum shall be
kept, and reserved to better occasions, or till the arrival of your forces in
this I Will. It is meant that Spanish forces should arrive in this Island.
There is suspicion, as also arguments probable enough, that Thomas Tyrie, who
has brought hither your Highness Letters to our King has not behaved himself
according to his duty: For he has accommodat himself in his behavior, more
after the affection of our Chanceller (who is of the faction of England, and
abuses the credit he has with the King) then according to the instructions
given him there. He has not presented nor made mention to the King of Colonel
Sempills Letter, whereof I have caused the copy to be presented to his
Majesty by the Earl Bouthwell, as if it had been sent to him with another of
the said Colonells to himself, which he received from Thomas Tyrie at his
arrival, who has reported to the said Chanceller all that Seigneur don
Bernardino spoke to him in Paris, to the disadvantage of the said Chanceller.
Also, he has reported to the King, that my L. Bishop of Dumblane, being
returned thither, spoke to your Highness, and to others many things, to the
great prejudice of his Highness: And it is believed also, that he is the cause
of the suspision which is conceived of the coming of the said John Chesholm,
newly to the said Bishop. How ever it be, They count our King amongst the
heretics.
the other reports aforesaid, which he has made, have not served to conciliat,
but to alienate the affection of the King, of the Chanceller, and many others
Heretics, from the said Siegneur don Bernardino, the said Bishop, and
Catholics here, that have had to do with them. As for me, albeit I speak not
willingly to the disadvantage of any whatsoever, chiefly of them whom I have
recommended, as I did the said Thomas Tyrie, to the said Don Bernardino, yet I
will prefer the love of the truth to men, and would not in concealing
thereof, bring prejudice to the public weal, nor to the fidelity yt the one
owes to the other; and specially to that we owe all to the King of Spain, and
your highness, to who^ I am presently servant, particularly addicted by the
Obligation of five hundredth crowns of fee, and forty for monthly
entertainment, which it has pleased your highness, to give me freely in name
of the King of Spain, not being required for my part, Bruce servant to the King
of Spain, and to the D. of Parme, has one pension of 40. crowns in the
month, and 500. crowns of ferill.
nor other thing for my particular to this present: by reason whereof, I am the
more bound to give your highness most humble thanks, and to endeavor my self
to deserve by my most humble and faithful services, as well the said
entertainment, as the recompense it has pleased your highness to promise me
of your grace and favor. The said gift of your liberality, came well for my
purpose, seeing by reason of the danger of my person, it behooved me to augment
my ordinary train for my greater surety, which I was not able longer to have
borne out without help. For from all the Lords of Scotland, Bruce has
negotiated in Spain with the K. and in the low countries with the D. of Parme.
A have not retained but a part only of the money, which I spent traveling, for
the weal of this cause in Spain with his Catholic Majesty, and with your
highness in the low countries. As for the four hundredth crowns, imployd for
the deliverance of Colonel Sempill out of prison, I have put it in count with
the residue which I disbursed of the first sum, according as it has pleased
your Highness to command me. The Earl of Mourtoun Whatsoever this Noble man
has been, at this time it is not to be objected to him, now after his oath and
subscription given to the contrary, if he remain constant.
to whom I have given consolation by writing in prison, has instantly prayed
me also by writing, to remember his most affectioned service to your highness.
Finding himself greatly honored, by the care it pleased you to have of him. By
the grace of God, he is no more in danger of his life by way of justice; It not
being possible to his enemies to prove against him any thing which they had
supposed in his accusation: As also the Kings affection not so far alienate
from him, as it has been heretofore: And incase they would noy him, or that it
were presently requisite for the weal of our cause to deliver him, we have ever
means to get him out of prison, and attend in the mean time, but the Kings
will toward his liberty, only to avoid all pursuit that they would make, if
we deliver him extraordinarily. When they offered him in the Kings name his
liberty, if he would subscribe the Confession of the heretics Faith, he
answered, he would not do it for the Kings Crown, nor for a hundredth thousand
lives, if he had them to lose; And has offered to confound the Ministers by
public disputation. I shall solicit the Lords his friends to procure of the
King, his liberty very soon: For he imports more the weal of our cause,
the^ any of the rest, by reason of his forces which are near England, and the
principal Town of Scotland, and the ordinary residence of our King; As also
he is a Lord the most resolute, constant, and of greatest execution of any of
the Catholics. It is no small marvel considering the means the heretics
have to hurt us, and their worldly wits so far passing ours, and their evil
will and intention against us, that we subsist. Truly, we cannot but attribute
the effect thereof to God, who (then when the certain news of the returning
of the Army of Spain by the back of Ireland, were dispersed through this
country, and the heretics of the faction of England triumphed, and the
constancy in the outward profession of the Earl of Huntlie and others was
altered) caused the Earl of Angus to die, who was chief of the English
faction, and the self same time grew some dissension amongst the heretics, by
reason of some offices that some pretended to usurp above others at Court, and
by the instant prayers and holy persuasions of two fathers Jesuits, converted
to our holy faith, two heretic Earls of the chiefest authority amongst them,
the one whereof is called the earl of Erroll, Constable of Scotland, converted
by father Edmund Hay, the other called the Earl of Craufurd, converted by the
said father William Creichtoun. They are both able and wise young Lords, and
most desirous to advance the Catholic faith and your enterprises in this I Will,
which they are determined to testify to his Catholic Majesty and your
highness by their own letters, which by the grace of God I will send by the
first opportunity. The king of Spain and duke of Parma have enterprises to be
executed in Scotland.
In the mean time they have required me to make you offer of their most humble
and most affectioned service, promising to follow whatsoever the same Jesuits
and I shall think good to be done, for the conservation of the Catholics, and
to dispose and facilitat the execution of your enterprises here, The Jesuits
and Priests do great hurt in Scotland.
which they may do more easily then they that are known to be Catholics,
whose actions are ever suspicious to the heretics for their religion, whereof
these two Earls have not yet made outward profession: but in that as in the
rest, they submit themselves to our will, Hereby it is evident that the
declining of papistrie draws with it defectio from our native kings obedience.
to the service of the king of Spain and D. of Parme.
and to that we think most expedient. The said Fathers of that company do
profit very much in Scotland, and so soon as any Lord or other person of
importance is converted by them, they dispose and incline in the very mean
time their affection to the service of the king of Spain and your highness,
as a thing inseparable conioined with the advancement of the true Religion in
this country. If I had commandment from your highness, I would give them
some little alms in your name to help them and eight others, whereof four
are also Jesuits, and the other four are seminary priests of Pontawmoussone
in Lorraine, which are all the Ecclesiastikes that produces so great spiritual
fruit in Scotland, and acquires to you here such augmentation of your friends
and servant. After the parting of Colonel Sempill from hence, the Lords sent
letters with the said father Creichtoun and other Gentlemen after the army of
Spain, The Popish Lords did send by Chreichtoun to move the Spanish fleet to
land in Scotland.
to cause it land in this country, but it had taken the way to Spain few
days before their arrival at the Islands, where it had refreshed it self, so
that it was not possible for them to attend on it. They of this country that
are of the faction of England, were in a marvelous fear during the
incertaintie of the landing of the said army, and confessed plainly, if it had
landed here they had been utterly overcome. The Earl Boithwell, who is
Admiral of Scotland, and as gallant a Lord as any is in the country, albeit
he make profession of the new religion, yet is he extremely desirous to assist
you against England, having waged and entertained all this summer (under
pretense to go daunt the Isles) some troops of men of war, which together
with his ordinary forces, should have joined with yours if they had come
hither. He suffers himself to be peaceably guided by me, notwithstanding the
diversity of our religion, and has often times said, that if the Catholics
would give him surety to possess, after the restitution of the Catholics
religion, two Abbeys which he has, that he would even presently be altogether
one of yours. He intends to send the Colonel Halkerstoun, to accompany
certain Captains and gentlemen to Spain, and almost four hundred soldiers,
all safe from the Naufrage in our Isles. And because they are in great
necessitte, he is purposed to furnish them with ships, vittels, and other
things necessary, to testify thereby to the king of Spain the affection he
has to do him most humble and affectionate service. And if we think it good,
has offered himself to go out of the country, and to go offer himself to
your highness in the low Countries, and by your advise afterward, do the like
to his Catholic Majesty in Spain. But here upon we will advise what is most
expedient. If we may always be assured of him, he will be as profitable for
the weal of our cause, as any Lord in Scotland, for he has great dependence
about this town, which is the principal of Scotland, as also upon the
frontiers of England. He has offered to maintain and defend me against all
that would attempt any thing against me. We have chosen for every Catholic
Lord, A counsel of chosen men, for every Catholic Lord are erected by Bruce,
for the execution of Catholic enterprises.
a gentleman of the wisest and faithfullest Catholics, and best beloved of
their friends, to serve them in counsel, and to meet at all occasions, to
resolve upon the most expedientest courses that may concern the weal of our
cause, according to the will and inte^tion of their Lords, who have obliged
themselves to approve and execute their resolutions, and in no wise to
contradict the same: and by that means we hope to proceed with greater
security and effect then we have done heretofore. Always they shall know
nothing of our intelligences there, nor our final intentions, but according to
the exigence of the affairs which shall be in hand, and that superficially, and
without discovering our selves over far. Your highness shall understand by the
particular letters of the Lords that which rests to be said to you by these
presents: by reason whereof I will make an end most humbly kissing your
highness hands, and praying God to give you all the good hope and felicity
you desire. From Edinburgh, the 24 of January, 1589.

Your Highness most humble and most affectioned seruitour, Robert Bruce.


