THE BVRTHEN OF a laden conscience: OR THE MISERY OF SIN: Set forth by the
confession of a miserable sinner.

Printed by CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1608.

To all Christened people.
I Knowing the great honor which Almighty God has graciously given unto you,
for you are his children, and his holy Ghost is in you; do therefore
acknowledge my bounden duty next after God, unto you, and accordingly with
humble reverence dedicate this my Confession, first to God, and then to you his
dearly beloved children.

I wrote it in deadly disease of body, and in doleful trouble of mind: my
purpose was to glorify God, and to show unto all people the horrible bondage
of sin; that they might plainly see it, truly fear it, and timely prevent
it. Herein if any shall think me ouer-harsh, and too too plain, I beseech
them to weigh in their conscience, what it is to be at the door of death, and
the gate of hell; terrified with the sight of Gods wrathful judgment, and in
continual danger of sudden death. This is no time to cover, or to color my
sins, but to lay them open, that it may please God mercifully to cover them.
To this end, I do humbly crave your Christian furtherance, in earnest prayer
to God for my confession, and for me. For my confession, that it may prosper
against sin: for my self, that I may be delivered out of hell, and received
into your heavenly company: I ask no more, but to be the very lowest of all
people that shall be saved. Which if it shall please the blessed God, through
your prayers in Jesus Christ to vouchsafe unto me most unworthy, then shall I
be in good hope to live, and set forth an Hallelu-ia, that you may praise God
for his mercy, his marvelous mercy toward you and me. Then shall you know
the poor sinners name, that now beggeth the benefit of your prayers.

Hallowed be the name of God, and his blessing be upon Christened people, men,
women, and children for evermore, Amen.

Thus I humbly take my leave.

June 13. 1608.
To the Printer.
IF any thing which I have written, do seem unto godly learned men, not
likely to work well for the destruction of sin, I desire that they will take
the pains to amend it; so as they will answer their doings therein unto the
Lord Jesus Christ, when all purposes and causes shall be brought to light. I
protest before God, that nothing be mitigated concerning me; by turning, I am,
into I was, etc. It is very needful for a man to know what he is. I know none
but my self, I judge none but my self; I entreat others to give me leave to
judge my self, because I fear the judgment of God, and would persuade people
to fear God, that they may escape his judgment, and obtain his mercy: Amen,
Amen. O good Lord Jesus! for thy holy names sake, say thou, Amen.

The burden of a laden conscience.
ALl Christened people, men, women and children, I sinful sinner, having by
long, and woeful experience found the miseries of sin, am desirous to
confess the same, that others may see and speedily turn away from it.
Therefore I humbly beseech you, that for Christ's sake you will charitably read,
or hear this my confession.

When I was a child, and first began to understand and speak, then was the
foundation laid of all my misery. Because I was not by and by, entered into
the faith, and fear of God; but the Devil had leisure to take full possession
of my heart. Who so deeply seasoned me with sin, that I have continued
sinful ever since: yea, I am so hardened in wickedness, that although I
feel death coming upon me; and may look every hour when I shall suddenly
die, and be cast into hell fire, yet I have no power to turn unto God.
Wherefore I beseech all people to take warning by me: let it be your first, and
chiefest care to live in the faith, and fear of God. Believe verily, for it is
most true; you are always in the sight of God. He searches out your thoughts
and affections: he hearkneth to your words, he vieweth your behavior, and
writes up all in a book, with purpose to judge you according to the practice
of your life. Bear this continually in mind, and be afraid to displease God;
who shines over your head with such a glorious brightness, that if it were
his pleasure to show himself openly to the world; the sun that shines in
the sky should be utterly darkened, and no earthly creature could remain
alive, by reason of the terrible sight of his almighty majesty. Blessed are
you if ye have the fear of God before your eyes. But you are in woeful case,
if you fear him not.

O all ye parents, and bringers up of children; great is the account which you
must make unto God. Therefore so soon as your children be able to understand
and speak, accustom them to know and fear God. Take good heed, least the
devil get the first possession of your children: for he knowing that is little
ones are seasoned in the beginning, so they are likely to savor ever after;
will loose no time, nor let pass any occasion to sow his cursed seed in
them. This many parents, and tutors of children do little think of; and
therefore give the devil leave to work his will. But do you mind it, and in
the name of Christ kindly persuade your children to believe in God, and to
fear him; oftentimes telling them what is good, and what is naught: and that
the good comes of God, and naught from the devil: and therefore if they will
love, and practice goodness, God will love them, and keep them safe from the
Devil: but if they love and practice naughtiness, God will forsake them, and
leave them to the Devil.

Why do so many teach little children to say, and to do that which angreth
almighty God? the silly children seeing their parents and others so much
delighted with evil (...) settled in belief that it is good. Thus the devil
is furthered in working the destruction of children.

But some sa^ that unless children be framed to mirthfull wantonness, they
will not prove witty. To which I answer, the children of God are witty to
say, and do good: the children of the devil are witty to say, and do
evil: now consider to whom you do liken your children; to God, or to the
devil? for like will to like.

Children give great heed to that which they see, or hear, especially in
their parents, and governors: therefore all people, as you will answer to God,
be careful what you say or do before children: for they will think, that they
may safely say as you say, and do as you do. Let not children be much among
servants, for many servants love to teach children that which is naught.

O ye godfathers, and godmothers, remember that you are bound unto God for the
good bringing up of your god-children.

In the beginning of Christian religion, people were very careful of bringing
up their children: whereupon a learned Jew was wont to say, that Christians
were called tillers; because they did diligently till the hearts of those that
were under their charge; sowing in them the seeds of godliness.

There are too few such tillers now adays: that heavenly husbandry, and
blessed tillage is laid aside. Our most mighty Lord God for his son Jesus
Christ's sake restore it, and be merciful to young children, that his holy
Ghost may fill their hearts with grace and goodness. Amen, Amen.

AS I grew in age, so I increased in sin, provoking Gods displeasure
continually, who notwithstanding patiently endured me, yea and delivered me out
of many deadly dangers, whereinto I by folly and sin did thrust my self
from time to time. Moreover, of his great goodness he gave me knowledge of his
righteousness, and of mine own sins; moving me oftentimes to leave the
way of damnation, and turn unto his blessed majesty thorough Jesus Christ;
assuring my heart that in so doing I should be blessed, but otherwise cursed,
and condemned. But all this did not prevail with my reprobate heart, which
being utterly hardened in sin, and void of repentance, causes me to heap
up wrath upon wrath, and vengeance upon vengeance, to the increasing of mine
everlasting torments in hell fire.

All manner of people, young and old, take heed by me. Have no more Gods but
one.

Consider well what he has done for you. He made you at the first like unto
himself in wisdom, and holiness; and when you were by sin made like the
devil, and must therefore have been condemned to hell torments, God sent his
only son, who taking unto him a body, and soul, was a man, and suffered
great wrong, and a shameful death to procure your pardon, and to buie you out
of the Devils bondage; that ye might be renewed to the likeness of God. And
now he has sent the holy Ghost to enter, and take possession of your hearts,
clensing you from sin, which is the Devils likeness, and making you
righteous, which is the likeness of God; to the end ye might be fit to keep
company with all Saints in the joys of heaven. Call to mind, how long ye have
entertained the devil, and kept out the holy Ghost; and with how great
patience God has hitherto suffered you, and kept you alive, because he would
not have you perish; but (...), and be saved. O what is the reason that people
do not love this God above all things? yea above their own life? Surely the
(...) is, because they lack faith: for they do not esteem it their only
happiness to be in the favor of God; but like unto bruit beasts give credit
to deceitful shows, and flattering enticements, and so are wilfully snared of
the Devil, who with his alluring baits draws them on to destruction: and
the further he draws them, the surer he is of them. Therefore all people for
Gods sake take heed, do not delaie the time as I have done; thinking to turn
unto God, to morrow, and next day: for the longer you continue in sin, the
harder it will be to repent, because the devil does every day get more and
more power in you, till your heart be fulfilled with wickedness, and so God
do everlastingly forsake you. Never be at quiet with your heart, until you be
in love with God, Study, and strive to compass the love of God, joy in
whatsoever furthereth you unto it; grieve in all that hinders you from it.

How shall I endeavor to love God? love that which is good, and hate that
which is naught: for good comes of God, and evil is of the devil. The
thought is the beginning of your good, and of your evil. An evil thought is
sent from the devil, and if you entertain it, it brings in the devil. A
good thought is sent from the holy Ghost, as a messenger unto your soul; if
you receive it, and make much of it in your heart, the holy Ghost will enter,
and putting out the Devil, will fill you full of heavenly grace. Therefore do
as the Psalm bids you; 4.7.
lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting doors; and
the King of glory will come in. Withdraw your mind from all evil thoughts,
and think upon God, and godliness, cleave thereunto with full purpose of
heart, and study how you may always do his will with diligence, and suffer
his pleasure with patience: assuring your selves, that if you give your mind
to serve him, he will not sail you, nor forsake you; but preserve you to his
everlasting kingdom and glory: do not endure to think, say, or do any
thing against your conscience, but always be careful to please God.

My heart being not knit unto God, but to the world, I framed my religion to
mine affection, and mine affection to imagination: first, I was hot against
the Roman religion, then being much befreinded by some that favored that
religion, I to gratify the^, grew in good liking of it also, yea so far
forth, that I became a recusant, was received into the Church of Rome by a
Seminary Priest, and did what I could to persuade many others to lean that
way. But when trouble was likely to fall upon me, I went to Church again; and
so by little and little fell off: yet so, as wheresoever I found any of that
religion, I was still suitable unto them.

After this, I being kindly used of some, that were commonly called Puritans,
took liking of their opinions; yea and in some points, was ready to run
beyond them; and all this in great show of zeal toward God, so that I made
my self believe, that I was in the right way, and did well.

I do often wonder at my self, how fervent I was, first a Protestant, then a
Roman Catholic, afterward a Precisian, so that I took upon me to rebuke
many, yea and some of high degree; as though I had been a very man of God,
full of the holy Ghost: whereas indeed the devil was in my heart, and
therefore all my ways were sinful, and displeasing unto God.

O all ye Christian people, take heed by me; do not rashly give your mind to
fancy this or that religion: but first of all settle your heart in the fear,
and love of God. Make conscience between God and your soul of all that you
think, say, or do. Serve God in your spirit, unfeignedly turning from sin,
and striving to please him. Till you be thus settled in true godliness, it is
vain, yea and dangerous to hammer and meddle with points of religion: for
your heart being uncleansed, and your affections vnrighted, God is not your
leader, but the devil: who will strangely deceive you, and make you proud of
your doings, when you stink in your sins before the face of God. Therefore
submit your selves humbly to God, weane your souls from sin, that ye may be
wedded to Jesus Christ, and by his spirit bring forth such fruits, as are
pleasing to God: which if you do, God will surely lead you into all truth. Of
what side soever you be, do nothing against your conscience, nor despise the
practice of religion in them that are contrary to your opinion. But if you be
sure that they are in a wrong way, pity them, and pray heartily to God for
them, that he will mercifully inlighten their minds, and turn their hearts.
To which end you must endeavor to serve under God with the holy Ghost; that
you may help to overcome the enemies of Gods truth; not with the weapons of
this world, as reprochful speeches, and bloody practices; but with the armor
of God; as charity, humbleness, meekness, patience, for these are the means
to overcome evil with goodness, and turn men's minds from false opinions to
the true religion.

True Christianity is an holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
wel-pleasing to God thorough Jesus Christ. A true Christian does faithfully
intend to offer first himself, and then others also unto God. In offering
your self, you must begin with your heart: for God says, Prove. 23
My son, give me thine heart. Your heart must be wholly set upon God, always
desiring to enjoy his grace and favor. Secondly, your tongue must be
sacrificed unto God, that it may be as the pen of a ready writer, to glorify
and please God in every word that comes out of your mouth. Thirdly, your
apparel, gesture, eating, drinking, buying, selling, borrowing, lending,
labor, pastime, and all your behavior must be sacrificed to God; that in
nothing you dishonor, or displease him: yea, your body, soul, life, and all
that you have, must be dedicated and given to the service of God. A good
subject does bear the mind to spend both life, and goods in defense of his
Prince, and country; therefore a true Christian ought much more to sacrifice
all his power and possibility to uphold the kingdom of Jesus Christ; first in
maintaining the ministry of his word and Sacraments, (...). 4.18.
which is an offering greatly accepted of God.

Secondly, in succouring his poor: with which kind of sacrifices God is well
pleased; (...). 13.16.
as it may appear by that which the holy Ghost says of a charitable man;

^al. ^12.^.
He has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his righteousness endures for
ever.

Whatsoever mercy is showed to a Christian in necessity, ^atth. 25.
is showed to Christ himself; and he that is any way unmerciful to a
Christian, is unmerciful to Jesus Christ: and so Christ will profess at the
day of judgment.

^v. 25.22.
It is a singular sacrifice to do good against evil, and kindly to succor
your very enemy in necessity: for thereby you do your good will to offer
your enemy unto almighty God, in turning him from enmity and evil, to peace
and goodness.

Saint James says, Iam. 5.1^.
he that turns a sinner from going out of his way, shall save a soul from
death, and shall cover a multitude of sins. In what a fearful case are they
that sacrifice many to the devil, driving them by enmity, or drawing them by
evil allurements, and naughty examples as I have done. He that will offer the
sweet sacrifice of turning others unto God, must first with all diligence
turn himself from sin; that his life and conversation may be holy, and
unblameable: for then others will believe that God is in him, and therefore
they will have a good opinion of him. All people by the light of natural
reason, do honor virtue, and honesty. But if your behavior be faulty, as
mine is, and ever has been, you are unfit to turn others, being not turned
your self.

Secondly, if your conscience be clear, and your conversation faultlesse, you
must not disdain sinners, Luke 28 10, 11.
as the proud Pharisie did; for then you mar all; because pride is of the
devil, and God resists the proud. But you must pity their case that do
evil, and mourn for them, as King David did. Psalm. 115


Thirdly, you must pray devoutly unto God for them, that he will mercifully
ordain some means to deliver them out of the Devils bondage; and that it may
please him to give you the grace, to be one of his workmen in so honorable a
business.

Fourthly, you must wait for any fit occasion that you may humbly and kindly
entreat them to consider well in what a dangerous case they are; displeasing
God, serving the devil, and working their own destruction. If you see, or
hear that any under your government do sin, whether it be your child, or
your servant, you are bound to break them from their sin, by fair means,
if it may be; else by correction, and punishment.

But if you see any such sinners, as are your betters in degree, or such as you
have not the heart to rebuke, you must so much the more earnestly pray unto god
for them, and strive more painefully to show them by the light of your
conversation what they ought to do.

When you go about to tell any one of his fault, take God in your mind, and
humble your heart, that you may do it in the spirit of meekness,
gentleness, peaceablenesse, and patience; carefully keeping out anger: for the
wrath of man works not the righteousness of God.

He that does worthily receive the holy sacrament of Christ's body, and
blood, does offer unto God many sacrifices together: for that sacrament is a
representation and setting forth of the sacrifice of Christ; who upon the
cross offered himself unto God the father to pacify his wrath, and to
purchase his grace for all people: whereupon almighty God does offer his
gracious pardon, and heavenly blessings to all that will worthily receive them.
And if you will worthily receive the body, and blood of Christ, you must
offer unto God, first a sorrowful heart for your sins, confessing them to
his glory and your shame. Secondly, you must offer unto God the sacrifice of
faith in Jesus Christ, believing verily that he is the only son of God, God
and man, and crying unto God for mercy in his name, beseeching God that for
Christ's sake he will forgive you your sins, and cleanse you from all
sinnefulnesse. Thirdly, you must offer unto God a charitable heart toward all
people: for God will not accept your heart, if it be not in charity, yea
settled to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Fourthly, you
must offer your self wholly unto God, to do and to suffer his good pleasure.
Fifthly, you must offer humble and hearty praise unto God, for all his gracious
gifts given unto mankind; specially for giving his only son Jesus Christ to
be our Savior. Sixthly, you must offer of your goods a first fruits unto God,
toward the supplying of bread, and wine for the communion; toward the
relief of the minister, and of the poor.

By baptism ye are graffed into Jesus Christ, as if branches of a wild vine
were graffed into a true vine; and by worthy receiving the holy communion of
Christ's body and blood, ye are fed and filled with the graces of Christ, as
graffes are nourished with the sap of that tree, whereupon they are graffed. I
wicked wretch received first for fashion sake, negligently; afterward inclining
to the Roman religion, I received for fear of the laws of this land, against
my will, disdainfully; reckoning it as a thing of naught, which I received.
Whereby, I do think in my conscience, I did sore displease almighty God. The
Lord Jesus Christ give grace, that no man or woman may hereafter receive his
body and blood unworthily.

I was not given to pray unto God, nor indeed knew how to pray, and
therefore was not blessed in that which I did practice. All people be careful
to pray always, in the beginning, continuance, and ending of all good
emploiment. Whenever you are about to think, to say, or to do any thing,
pray unto God, that he will for Christ's sake give you the grace to think,
say, and do his will; and for every blessing which he gives unto you, be
mindful and forward to give him thanks. When you purpose to pray unto him,
or to praise him, quicken your faith in this manner: first, believe that you are
in the sight, and hearing of God, believe it so verily, as you did see him with
your bodily eyes. Secondly, consider his almighty majesty and your own vile
baseness, being as you are a sinner, dust, and ashes, and thereupon humble
your heart, as if you would cast your self flat upon the ground before him.
Thirdly, with all reverence, and diligent discretion lift up your mind, and
utter your heart unto him. You may well pray to God, or praise him in your
heart, although your mouth speak it not; but you cannot well speak unto him
with your mouth, unless your heart do wholly intend and think upon that
which you say: for it is your heart that God gives heed unto. In your prayer
and thanksgiving shun the pride of words; for God loves plain speech: and
use no needless circumstance; because he loves no idle words. Be very
careful, and fearful, least in any thing, that you say unto him, you
displease him: for we are apt to displease God every way, yea even when we
think to please him. Pray very leisurely: for have makes wast. Because I
wanted instruction how to pray, I am desirous to help others the best that I
can. Let your first prayer be for the forgiveness of your sins, in some such
manner as this: O almighty and most dreadful Lord God, I loathsome sinner
unworthy to live in thy sight, do humbly beseech thee, that for thine only
son Jesus Christ's sake, thou will vouchsafe to forgive me my sins, and to
cleanse me from my sinfulness; that I may be thine humble and true servant: for
unto thee all honor and glory is due world without end. Amen.

When you purpose to think upon, to speak, or to do any thing: pray for
grace, and good speed, O almighty God, Lord of heaven, and earth, the only
giver of all good speed, and prosperity, I beseech thee ^o forgive me my
sins, and so to bless me ^n this business which now I do intend, that it
may be prosperous to thy glory, thorough Jesus Christ thine only son, who
with thee, and the holy Ghost, three persons, and one God, be honored in
heart, word, and deed, henceforth for ever, and ever. Amen.

When you receive any blessing, or prosperity from God, praise him heartily; O
most blessed, and bountiful Lord God; what am I, that thou give such
blessing unto me? I am a vile sinner, worthy of nothing but misery, and
damnation; and therefore it is thy mere mercy, that I am thus blessed. O good
Lord, I humbly beseech thee to continue thy gracious favor toward me, and to
make me every way unfeignedly thankful unto thee for the same, thorough Jesus
Christ thine only son, who with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons and
one God, be unfeignedly praised for ever, and ever. Amen.

When sickness, or any adversity falls upon you, the first thing you do,
humble your self unto God; O most holy, and righteous Lord God, I do confess
that thou may justly destroy me body and soul, for my many and grievous
sins, wherewith I have daily, and hourly displeased thee all my life long;
therefore I am bound to praise thee, because thou have suffered me all this
while, and now do so favorably chasten me, to the end that I should repent,
and not be condemned. O most mighty Lord, nothing can happen unto me without
thine ordinance. Therefore I beseech then, that I may humbly, patiently, and
thankefully take this thy correction, to the amendment of my life, and to the
glory of thy blessed name, thorough Jesus Christ thine only son, who with
thee, and thy holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be rightly worshipped,
obeyed, and praised for ever, and ever. Amen.

When any cross, or adversity does lie so heavy upon you, that you can not
endure it, make humble supplication to God; O father of mercy, and God of all
comfort, I vile wretch am much grieved under the burden of my sins; and thou
have not laid the whole weight of them upon me; I do heartily thank thee,
that thou have not overwhelmed me with thy dreadful wrath, which I have all my
life time deserved; and ^lso I humbly beseech thee, that if it may ^and with
thy good pleasure, thou will ^ouchsafe to ease me of this, which I now ^uffer;
that I may the better be able to do ^hee service; but if it please thee not,
thy will (...) holy, thy will be done; only vouchsafe me ^omfort and patience,
most blessed Lord; that thy holy name may be glorified of me ^n mine obedient
suffering, thorough Jesus Christ thine only son, who with thee and the holy
Ghost, three persons, and one God, be honored and praised for ever, and ^^uer.
Amen.

I was not accustomed to say grace when I was young, but sometime said it for
a ^aine glory, and finding the fashion of the world to be like unto the manner
of bruit ^oastes, following nature, and not grace, I became a beast my self,
falling to meat without any acknowledgement of Gods goodness. Afterward
finding that Jesus Christ himself, and all good Christians, used to say grace,
I was touched in conscience, and meant to use it, but having not the power to
subdue mine own will, nor the heart to contrary the course of them with whom
I lived; I remained as a reprobate, uncouth and vnframable to every good work.

All people, for Gods sake, accustom your selves to have grace before, and
after you eat, and drink. If it seem uncouth unto you, as it does to many
people; be afraid: for it is an ill sign showing that your heart is a
stranger to God, and if you be strange to him he will be strange to you.
Therefore by any means overcome that ill quality, and give your self to
grace. But you may say, it is so out of use with most folk, that if I offer to
say grace among them, they will think scornfully of me, and reckon me a precise
foolish body: I answer; first, if you be the disciple of Christ, you serve a
good master, be not ashamed of him and his service; least he be ashamed of you
at the day of judgment. Secondly, if you for serving God be ill thought of, a
blessed soul are you. ^tth 9.10, ^^.
It is a great favor of God, if he vouchsafe to give you the grace to suffer
any wrong for his sake. For great is their reward in heaven, that are any way
persecuted for righteousness sake.

Grace before meat. O blessed Lord God I humbly beseech thee to pardon my
sins, and to bless the food, which it pleases thee to give me; that I may
be thereby nourished, and made able to do thee true service in my calling,
through Jesus Christ thine only son our Lord, and Savior. Amen.

Grace after you have eaten, and drunken. O most merciful Lord God, I am bound
to give thee humble, and hearty thanks, for thy manifold blessings given unto
me, and to all mankind. Therefore I beseech the to give me grace, that I may
be continually thankful unto thee, thorough Jesus Christ thine only son our
Lord, Amen.

Use often to say the Lords prayer, so called because our Lord Jesus Christ
made it, and taught it his disciples. It is a most heavenly prayer, short and
sweet, containing all that we need in few words. Therefore you must say it
very leisurely, and also understandingly.

According to my weak understanding, I will by the grace of God, briefly open
unto you the meaning of the Lords prayer: O father of Jesus Christ, The L^
pray^ned.
and thorough him the father of all true Christians, of which number I trust,
that by thy grace, I am one. Thy glorious majesty, and powerful greatness
fills heaven and earth; but in heaven thy joyful countenance is to be seen.
Thy name is holy: O let the holiness thereof be every day more and more set
forth, that all the world may honor thee in heart, word, and deed. Thou art the
only rightful King of heaven, and earth; but the Devil by temptation has
made us rebel against thee; O let the kingdom of thy grace come into our
hearts, and put out Satan for evermore. Thine Angels, and Saints in heaven do
altogether obey thy will, O grant that we children of men here upon earth may
likewise be obedient unto thee in all things. Our bodies do daily need the
comfortable supply of food, raiment, lodging, and such like; O give us
therefore such continual comfort, as thou know we cannot be without; and
because it is dangerous to our fowls to have too much, or too little of
worldly goods; we beseech thee to give us neither more, nor less; but just so
much, as by thy grace, may best fit us to serve and please thee. Our sins do
deserve thy wrathful vengeance, and everlasting torment in hell fire; yet of
thy wonderful mercy thou do offer unto us thy gracious pardon thorough
Jesus Christ, with condi^^on, that we shall heartily forgive all that ^ffend
us; O good Lord we do forgive them from the bottom of our hearts, and ^s we
do forgive them, and not seek re^enge against them; so we pray thee to
forgive us, and not to late thy heavy vengeance upon us.

The devil by means of this world, and our own naughty inclination can
easily overcome us, and tempt us to his pleasure; Therefore we beseech thee,
that thou will not give us over into his hands; but by thine almighty
goodness, preserve us from Satan, and all his partakers. For the kingdom of
all blessedness is thine, thou art the right owner of all goodness; all power
comes from thee, and therefore all glory, and praise is due only to thee, O
father almighty, with thy son, and thy holy Ghost, for evermore. Be it even
so. Amen.

Pray often and with great devotion unto God, that all Christian people may be
knit together by the holy Ghost in one faith, and one charity, and show forth
the mighty power of God in their lives, and conuersations; that the Jews,
Turks, and all misbeleeuing people, may thereby take knowledge that Christian
religion is the only true worshipping and service of God, and thereupon turn
to be true Christians. For it is not war, nor worldly conquest that turns
people unto God; but the holy prayers, and heavenly lives of them that serve
God.

IF God will not hold him guiltless that takes his name in vain, what shall
become of me, who have all my life time most grievously taken his name in
vain, every kind of way. For first, I professed my self a Christian; that is,
a child of God, thorough Jesus Christ, but indeed I have been heretofore the
child of the devil: because I have done his will, and not Gods will. Secondly,
I took upon me to be a minister of Christ; that is, a messenger sent of God to
join with the holy Ghost in trayning people to be children of God; but indeed
I joined in work with the devil to make people his children. The very name,
and word of God I used vainly, rashly, irreverently, and indiscreetly, to
glorify and please my self, not to glorify and please him.

All Christians, take heed to your selves; if you wear the Kings liuerie,
serve not the Kings enemy. You were christened in the name of the father, and
of the son, and of the holy Ghost: therefore serve God, and not the Devil,
least it be proved against you at the day of judgment, that ye took Gods
name in vain, and so ye be found guilty. At that day neither shall the only
preaching, nor the only hearing of Gods word be allowed: for both take the
name of God in vain, because the one preaches, and practices not; the other
hears, and does not the will of God; therefore both shall be cast away with
this grievous sentence, I know you not; Matthew. 23. Luke 13 27.
away from me, ye workers of unrighteousness.

Therefore frame your selves to be obedient unto your Lord God, and do not
think, speak, write, hear, or profess his name, or his word without due
discretion, and groat reverence.

Do not make so light reckoning of your God, as to use his name, or his word
in idleness.

It is idle to call upon the name of God without good cause, and reverent
manner; as some will say, O God, what a jest is this! O Jesus! who ever hard the
like! In any such speaking, you are too bold with your God.

It is also a vain taking of Gods name, to praise him in scorning, or blaming
oothers; as some will not be content to say of an idle body, he lives
idlelie; but they will say, God be thanked he lives idlelie. O do not thank
God for any sin, because you should so do him great wrong; and of all things
he cannot abide it to be noted as the cause of sin, which is far from his
most holy nature. Be not a common swearer: for a man given to swearing, shall
be filled with wickedness. You ought not to call God to witness, unless
there be great need, and none other means to make the truth known. O how
grievous it is to hear people, old and young swear by God, without fear of
his displeasure. Some swear not by God, but by their faith, and troth; by the
mass; by some Saint; by gold, and silver, and many others ways. But do not
you so: (...) 7.
for it is displeasing to God to swear by that which is not God.

It is called swearing, when any say, Gods wounds, Gods blood, Gods heart;
Gods nails, Gods foot, etc. but you shall hear what Christ will call it,
when he comes to judgment. In the mean time use no such raging speeches;
for they grievously take the name of God in vain.

Bless your self from cursing and banning: for cursing is the vengeance of
God. Luke 9.51, 52, 53, 54.
He that wishes vengeance to fall upon his very enemy, had need to be well
advised what spirit is within him. Take heed how you hear the word of God,
that you be not negligent, nor contentious, nor dainty, nor vaineglorious; but
diligently hunger and thirst for the pure, and plain word of God, which if you
receive it in meekness, is able to save your soul.

Some make iestes of Gods word; but do not you so. For it is ill jesting with
edge tools.

Do not allege any part of Gods word but to a good, and godly end; and in
the fear of God.

Take heed how you make any vow to God, or how you promise any thing with an
oath; for when you have vowed, or sworn, your soul is bound. Therefore before
you vow, consider whether it be pleasing to God, and in your power to
perform: and when you have made such a vow, rather loose your life, then
break it. Jesus Christ keep you from being a vow-breaker, as I am.

Mock no body with their poverty, lamenes, blindness, or with any thing,
which they cannot help; least you take the name of God in vain. For Solomon
says, he that mocketh the poor, reprocheth his maker.

It is a most horrible thing to blaspheme almighty God; that is, to think, or
utter any thing dishonorable unto him. It is dangerous in some things to
speak that of God, which is true. Because our blind understanding is not able
to see the depth of his wisdom, and righteousness. Therefore it is your
safest way, to be thoroughly persuaded, that God in whatsoever he does, or
suffers to be done, is most perfitly wise, and righteous; and to refrain
your mind from prying into the high questions of Gods foreknowledge, and
predestination: for the more you look upon the sun, the worse you shall see,
and the more you seek into the secrets of God, the weaker will your
understanding be.

Whatsoever calamity, or misery falls upon you, acknowledge your self to
have deserved it, yea, and much more. Submit your heart wholly to God, and
praise him as well for adversity, as for prosperity; for that is meet, and
right; So you shall best please him, and most ease your self. They that
wickedly blame God for any thing which comes to pass, do both wrong his
blessed majesty, and hurt themselves. Although all things go cross, and
contrary unto you, yet praise and bless the name of God continually, yea to
the death, and in dying. Never despair of Gods goodness, but confess his
righteousness, and your own unrighteousness, and so yield your self to his
good pleasure.

I Never kept holy the Sabbath day, and therefore am full of all unholiness. I
forsook the Church to follow every vain pleasure, or worldly profit. I
traueiled upon sondaies in service time. And when I went to Church, the Devil
persuaded me to come late, that I might tarry the less while there. Coming
into Church, I took no heed that I came into the house of God, to pray unto
him, and to learn my duty out of his word: and first I leaned upon a seat,
or kneeled charily upon one knee, hiding my face, or moving my lips, that
others might think I prayed, when indeed I either said nothing, or with no
devotion. I little regarded what the minister prayed, or what he read in the
word of God; and if there were any sermon, I minded not to hear it; but wished
for an end of service, and sermon, that I might go to my dinner, and then to
my vain delights. As for eueing prayer I either lost it, or came short unto
it, or howsoever, I made no reckoning of it, being wholly given to foolish
pastime. Thus I made sunday the worst day of the week, and my self the worst
sinner of all the world. But do you make it the best day of the week, that
you may be every Sabbath day, by the grace of God, made better and better;
till at the length you be fit to enter into the everlasting Sabbath, and rest
of God in heaven. Therefore leaving your worldly affairs, and weaning your
hearts from all pleasures of sin, you must desirously intend to keep holy
the Sabbath day. Arise early in the morning, fall down upon your knees, and
humbly pray unto God, that he will give you grace to keep holy his sabbath
day, according to his will.

Prepare your self so carefully to go unto the Church, as if you were to go
out of this world into heaven. Be not decked in your apparel, as if you were to
play a part in a stage play, or a may game; but come into Gods house, as an
humble suitor, in such Christian plainness of raiment, as decently may show
the lowliness of your heart; least you displease God, and his Angels; and give
much offense to Gods people, yea, and hinder your own devotion; as I have
done. Alas! I have been exceeding vain, and took great pride in coming
gaily to Church, and so I quenched all desire of serving God, desiring chiefly
to see, and to be seen.

Come to Church with the first, and not with the last, least you come too late
to speed. Be more desirous, and more delighted to serve God, then to do any
thing else. For it is he to whom you must trust, all other things will deceive
you, and forsake you. If you be diligent to serve God, he will be careful to
save you, he will love you, he will come unto you, and dwell with you. When you
enter into the Church, humble your hearts, kneel down upon your knees, lift
up your mind to God, cry him mercy for your sins, crave his grace in
Christ Jesus, that you may truly please him in all that you shall think, say,
or do.

When the minister reads the prayers appointed; join you with him: think
that which he reads word by word; and at the end of every prayer, say
heartily, Amen. When any part of Gods word is read, give diligent ear, as
though God himself spoke unto you from heaven. When the Minister or any other
is about to preach, pray earnestly to God in your heart, that God will give him
grace rightly to understand, and well to utter that which is needful to be
preached. Do not desire to hear fine words, or witty conceits: for the word
of God is most powerful to salvation, when it is most plainly preached;
because the mind intending only the will of God, the heart yields wholly to
the working of the holy Ghost. Although the preacher be long in his sermon, yet
be not weary, but give heed to his words until he have made an end: for it
is a dishonor unto God, if you neglect to hear his messenger. Take heed that
you do not give any occasion to other folk, to turn their mind from serving
God, to gaze upon you, or to look upon any thing which you bring into the
Church with you: for so you should do much harm unto them, and wrong unto
God. All the while that you are in the Church, keep your mind steadfastly upon
God: let nothing move you to turn your eyes this way, or that way, but as a
diligent waiting man, attend upon your Lord and master, who will be greatly
pleased to see your heart, and mind earnestly intended unto him. Satan will
practice many devises to turn your heart from God, specially by showing you
fine and beautiful women, who do commonly come glistering into the Church
after service is well begun, and then sit, or stand in the sight of men. When
service is done, betake your self unto God, and depart out of the Church: for
it is no fit place to talk of worldly matters.

If you must needs reckon, or pay, or receive money upon the Sabbath day, yet
let it be after evening prayer.

Were I worthy to give you counsel, you should eat and drink very
measurably at Sondaie at dinner, that you might be the fitter to serve God also
in the afternoon. Many come sieldome in the afternoon, because they cannot
find in their heart to leave their worldly pleasure, or profit: and some
think, they can serve God so well at home, as at Church. But do not you loose
evening prayer, least you loose that which is prayed for. He is no good servant
that will not wait upon his master both at dinner, and at supper. And go you
to Church, for there all the parish joins in prayer with you, wherefore you
shall be heard the sooner. Some that you make least reckoning of may be in
greater favor with God, then your self, and then you shall speed the better
in praying with them. What cause soever you allege of not coming to Church,
others will be ready to follow your example: for they will think they may as
well loose their prayers, as you.

The better day, the better deed; therefore love to do any work of charity
to such as need upon the Sabbath day: to relieve the poor, to visit the
sick, to counsel the counsellesse, to comfort the comfortles, and to make
peace between parties that are in disagreement. Delight not much in worldly
pastime: for it is like the burning of thorns, which make a great crackling
for a little while; but by and by all the noise comes to nothing. O take it
upon mine experience; if you wedde your heart to worldly joy, you shall in the
end be ioilesse. Therefore give your mind to consider rightly of time to
come, and set your love and delight upon God, and a good conscience: for that
is a continual feast, which never will forsake you. And if you had once well
tasted it, you would not excha^ge it for all the worlds good. I say again,
acquaint your heart with heavenly joy betime: for as that cloth which is
thoroughly died black will afterward take none other color, so the heart
which is fully possessed with the love of worldly joy, will very hardly be
turned to love the joy of God.

Our blessed Lord God for Jesus Christ's sake, vouchsafe to give you grace, that
you may rest in him, and joy in him, which is the right keeping holy of the
Sabbath day.

O The terrible wrath of almighty God, I horribly dishonored my father and
mother even from my birth until they were dead, and buried. Therefore I could
never take good root in any place whithersoeuer I came: great means of
happiness have been offered unto me, but thorough want of grace I have
always lived wretchedly, and run into many grievous adversities. I began to
dishonor, grieve, mock, and scorn my dear mother so soon, as I could
speak; and fell into an hellish ungraciousness, wherewith I have disgraced, and
misused my self ever since. In time also I began to dishonor, and grieve my
father; in which cursed sin I continued till his death: Therefore few and
troublesome are the days of my life: and that which is worst of all, an evil
end is falling upon me.

All children take warning by me; honor your parents in heart, in word, and
indeed. Reverence them, obey them diligently, and strive to please them. Then
will God surely bless you, and you shall prosper in body, and soul. But if
you will be lead by the devil to despice your parents, to disobey them, and
grieve them, God will despice you, grieve you, and destroy you. If you have any
way misbehaued yourselues to your parents, cry them mercy upon your knees,
and humbly entreat them to pray unto God, that he will forgive you.

If your parents do need your help, help them to the very uttermost of your
power. When they be sick, go unto them, tarry about them, be ready, and put
forth your self to to do any thing for them. O that children did know what is
the worth of a fathers, or mothers blessing, when their hearts be comforted by
the dutifullnesse of their child. They would rather then fail, creep upon
their hands, and knees to please them.

The Devil knows this to be true, and therefore blinds childrens eyes, and
hardneth their hearts, least they, by honoring their father, and mother should
procure to themselves the manyfold blessings of God. When your parents die,
mourn for them, and bury them in seemly sort.

Never endure to say or hear any word against your father, or mother.

If you have any grandfather, and grandmother, you must honor them as your
father, and mother. Honor your uncles, auntes, brethren, and sisters, yea and
all your kindred, for your fathers, and mothers sake. Moreover honor all them
that have been freindes to your father, and mother. you must honor the King
as your father; for he under God preserves you in peace from injury, and
violence. You must love your country, as your mother: for in it you were borne
and brought up. You must honor them that are in authority under the king, and
all your superiors. For they are means to keep good order; that you may live
a quiet life in all godliness, and honesty. Meddle not with state-matters
above your calling: for it is a spice of a rebellious nature to call the
doeings of higher powers into question, and to find fault with them. If any
thing seem amiss, pray humbly to God, that he will mercifully cause it to be
amended; and do you carefully endeavor to amend your own self. For it may
be that your sin is some part of cause, why there is any want of grace in
your governors. This is your best way; and not to speak evil of those which
are in authority, as I have wickedly done.

You must honor Archbishopps, and Bishops and all Christ's ministers as
fathers. For their office is to feed your souls; specially the minister of
the parish, wherein you live, who in matter of salvation is as a mother to
nurce you, ^s. 2.7. ^11, 12
and as a father to train you, and teach you. Have always a reverent opinion
of your minister; for otherwise you shall greatly endanger your souls; as I
have done.

If your heart be possessed with a dislike of your minister, go to some other
Church to hear the service of God, until you be in a better mind; least the
ill conceit of the minister make you to mistake and be distasted with that
which he preaches, reads, or prays. For then you should be in a fearful
case, and the devil would enter into you, and make you loath the holy service
of God.

Whiles you live, bless your self from saying, and doing any thing, that may
disable the minister of Christ; Luke 10.^
for that were to despice Christ himself.

If you say, he is thus, and thus unfit for his calling. I answer, as before,
if he be so, you are bound to pray that he may be amended. What warrant have
you to judge Gods minister; Take heed.

I was once a naughty servant; and therefore do entreat all servants to
honor them whose servants they are, as if they were their fathers, and
mothers, reuerencing, obeying, and serving them faithfully. Blessed are all
good servants. For whether their masters use them well, or no, God will not
fail to power his blessing upon them. But he will surely punish naughty
servants, and naughty masters.

Honor all your friends, and well willers: for they are, or would be, as your
parents, means to preserve you. Hate my barbarous property, and never be
unkind to any that has been kind to you, although he be turned from a friend
to an enemy.

One unkindness, yea many times a false suspicion of unkindness, has made me
dishonor my kind friends: But if you will please God, practice the contrary,
let not many unkindness cause you to forget one kindness; but let one
kindness put many unkindness quite out of mind.

Reverence your elders, and all that are in any gift or grace of God better
then you, for they are as fathers and mothers unto you to do you some good, at
least by example.

God made all people in his own likeness, and their is none so low but that
he may one way or other do you good; at least by excercising your patience if
he be faulty, or your enemy; much more by praying for you, if you give him
cause so to do: therefore honor all people, even your enemies. And let your
own conversation be wise and virtuous, least you do as I have done,
dishonouring God that made you, your parens that brought you forth and norished
you, your governors that have the ruling of you, your friends that favor, and
further you, for you doing evil are a discredit unto them all: yea, if your
behavior be not good you dishonor all the world, for if you do respect them
as Gods people ought to be respected, you will be ashamed that any should see,
or hear evil of you.

All parents, and bringers up of children nurture them while they be young to
fear God and honor you, for so they will be framed to honor all others. But
if in fond love you make your children your fellows or by ill behavior cause
them to think irreverently of you, how can they kindly perform their duty
unto you.

O that parents did so love their children, that their special care might be
to make them lowely and lovely to God, and to all people; O Lord Jesus, I humbly
beseech thee to say, Amen.

I am a murderer in heart, in tongue, and in outward works, therefore
everlasting life is not in me: my heart is full of uncharitableness, ready to
mislike any body, to surmise evil of them, and so to entertain furious
anger, hellish hatred, and all deadly enmity my tongue is a sharp sword
wounding even my friends; yea, I am like a fool that blindfoldeth himself and
hurts he cares not whom, when I conceive that any is adversary unto me, I
spare no poison but revile him bitterly. I have murdered many with an evil
eye, envying their prosperity; I have stricken and flung at others with a
murderous mind, I have caused quareling and and fighting, I have caused some to
loose the means whereby they lived. I have hindered others from obtaining helps
of preserving their life. I have greedily kept in store, and vainly wasted
that, through the want whereof many poor have pined with hunger and cold. I
have endangered the salvation of others by ill example, living among them as
one infected with the plague; yea many sins like plague sores breaking and
running out co^tinualy. All people take warning by me, if you will not be
guilty of murder, shun all the causes, and occasions thereof. Do not endure
to take any dislike of man, woman, or child, nor be too well conceited of your
self, for then you shall be apt to think ill of any body: O that you knew
into how many dangers you put your self, when you begin to dislike or despise
any body: for even as when your mouth is out of taste you cannot relish any
thing be it never so good; so if your mind be ill conceited of an other,
whatsoever he says or does you condemn it. But you may say, shall I not
dislike such as I do see and hear to be evil? I answer first, you may by
sight, and hearing take your taste amiss, Luke 18.
as the Pharise did in disliking the publican; whose heart was better liked of
God then the Pharisees, that disliked him. Secondly, although an other be
indeed so bad as you see and hear that he is; yet you must dislike him none
otherwise, then for your own sins you dislike your self. Sorry you are and
much displeased with your sins, if you be a true christian; but yet you hate
not your self, you do not rail upon your self; but loving your self you
hide your faults. So must you do to others, for if you love them, love
covers a multitude of sins. But if you hate any of Gods people you are a
murderer: 1. Ioh 3
therefore take heed, Ephesians. 4.2
follow the counsel of the holy Ghost, whatsoever cause is given you to be
angry, pacify your self, and let not wrath stay long in your heart; least you
entertain the devil, who will fill you with hate, and desire of revenge. If
any do hurt you in word or deed, first consider well, whether you have given
any cause either specially touching that party, or by any misbehauiour:
examine your heart before the face of God, as he shall judge your soul, and if
you find your self any way in fault; cry God mercy both for your own
sins, and for his that has thereupon done you harm: for if you had not
given cause, he had not sinned in harming you by word or deed.

But if your conscience be clear, that you be hurt by them, to whom you have
given no cause, then if you can have true patience, you are Gods own child.
If a man were by the laws of the Realm condemned to die a grievous death, and
might escape with condition that his coat should be beaten, and he take it
patiently, it is to be thought that he would be very glad of the condition,
and strive to be patient: you are a sinner, and therefore by the law of God
worthy to suffer death in hell fire, where the damned are ever in extreme
pangs of death, and yet they never die. God of his mercy offers you pardon
through Jesus Christ, upon condition that you shall patiently suffer the
adversities, and injuries of this world. Therefore look well to your self,
and by your patience keep your soul, Matthew. 1 23, 24, 25
least breaking the condition you forfeit your pardon, and so be tormented.
Take heed how you judge of any body, for you may be many ways deceived; even
in that which you see, much more in that which you hear, and most of all in
that which you surmise.

Do not wish, no nor imagine any evil to happen upon any of Gods people; but
think, and wish well to all, yea to your eenemies, pray earnestly to God for
them. Do not rejoice to see, or hear any evil of others, but sorrow and
grieve at it; nor grieve to see or hear of the prosperity of others, but
rejoice at it. Then are you in charity; else not.

Whatsoever adversity happens unto you, humble your self to God, and take
it patiently, least you hurt both body and soul with worldly sorrow, as I
have done. Have a good conscience toward God, and be in charity and peace
with all people; then nothing can overcome you.

Be slow to speak, and when you speak let your speech be gracious, powdered
with heavenly salt, that you may harm none of Gods people in any word that
you utter. Before you speak, be well advised what you say; of whom, and to
whom, what you say? for you must give a reckoning of every idle word. One
needles word draws out an other, and commonly causes much evil
communication. Take heed of whom you speak: for you must not call any bodies
name into question, unless it be to some good and charitable purpose. It is an
hellish property of mine to occasion speech of any in place where they are
likely to be ill spoken of, whereby I set them as a mark for others to shoot
at.

Take heed to whom you speak: for some are of that quality, that you can
hardly say any thing to them, but they will pick some evil out of it.
Therefore let your words be few, and wisely spoken.

Never speak word to reproach any man, woman, or child. It is naught to revile
our enemy, worse to speak ill of him that never did you harm; but an
horrible wickedness to disgrace your friend. Some will say; Is it not lawful
to call a spade, a spade? I answer you by a notable example. S. Jude writes
that Michael the Archangel being in strife with the devil, durst not give any
reproachful word. Why durst he not? Surely for displeasing God. If it be
displeasing to God, that an holy Angel should speak any reproach to the
devil, how can we safely quip, taunt, revile, defame, curse, and banne one an
other?

A word of reproach is grievous to him of whom it is spoken, makes others to
think hardly of him, and may cause his destruction.

Cursers are murderers, for if it please God, to suffer their curse to take
effect, the party cursed is murdered by the devil.

They that sooth and flatter others in evil, are murderers: for they thrust
them forward into destruction.

Never practice any deceit to draw an other into danger: for God hates blood
thirsty and deceitful men.

Be not double tongued, to speak fair to ones face, and foul behind his
back.

Make no debate, nor be a tale-carrier: for all such are set a work by the
devil, to cause mischief, and murder in the world.

Use no man, woman, or child uncharitably: be kind to all, and cruel to none.
Be careful to succor the needy, least they perish through want of that which
you might do for them. Go often to them that are sick, but go with a good
intent, to good purpose. Sickness warns the sick to prepare toward heaven.
Therefore you must not talk much of earthly matters: for a small touch plucketh
him downward that is weakly going up the hill; but help him upward the best
that you can with heavenly communication.

Take heed that you give none evil example in word or deed, for it is like
the poisoned infection of the plague, which may go far, and cause the
destruction of many.

If you would be clear from all bloodguiltynesse, flee from enmity, and
labor to be in peace, and to make peace.

To be in peace; first and foremost with God: for if there be enimitie between
God, and you, you take the way to murder your own soul; Secondly if you can
possibly with a good conscience have peace withal people, yea sue, and seek
for it. Because enmity can hardly be without much uncharitableness. And
grievous is the danger thereof; as I find, and feel by woeful experience. If
your ways please God, as mine did never, he will make your enemies to be in
peace with you. And then you shall prosperously practice to be a make-peace
between God and your neighbor; and between neighbor and neighbor, by your
godly life, and good counsel. When you see or hear that any are in enmity,
pity their case, as if their houses were a fire and they themselves liklie to
be burned; pray unto God for them, that they may be rightly agreed; and
practice what good means you can to quench the fire; but come not to near it,
least you be also fired; meddle not to much with the points in controversy:
for it is a very dangerous business. Keep your self always indifferent, not
holding with one, nor with the other: for a partaker cannot be thought to bear
an even hand between them. Remember well the saying of Solomon, Prove. 10
It is honor for a man to keep himself out of contention; but fools will be
meddling.

Strive to live quietly: So shall you escape many troubles, prevent much
mischief, and enjoy many blessings.

ALas! how shall I do; without holiness none shall see God; I have always
possessed my body in unholiness, and dishonor: for even from my childehoode
I was, and am defiled with fleshly lust, which has consumed my body, and
cancred my soul, so that I am before God a most ougly monster, and a
detestable loathsome wretch. This hellish fire was first kindled in my heart by
seeing lewd behauour, and harkening to filthy talk, whereby I grew to be of
so beastly an imagination; that I could hardly see, or hear any thing, but
presently I turned it to some meaning of lust. To quench this fire I some time
thought upon Origens remedy, sometime I purposed marriage, but all in vain,
for to this day I continue inflamed with it; and never had the grace to be
freed from it.

O all ye children of men, live in the fear of God, and begin betimes to
hate this foolish and filthy sin: for if it once take possession of your
heart, it will haunt you like an evil spirit. Therefore do not endure to see,
hear, or think any uncleanness. If any begin to talk, read, or sing matter
of beastliness, flee out of their compaine: for it is the devil that sets
them a work to fire your hearts. Whatsoever lewd ballet, book, or picture
comes to your hands, tear it all to pieces, or burn it to ashes: for
whosoever made it, the devil devised it for your destruction. If God do see
that you hate all causes of filthiness, he will love you dearly, and many
excellent graces he will give unto you.

Parents, and governors of children, keep them carefully from the delight of
this sin. It is not good that boys, and girls should lie in bed together,
nor play in private places: for the devil watches his time to work his
temptation upon them. It is strange, and I should not believe it, but that I
remember it, since I was a child, how younglings will draw one an other to this
filthy sin.

All people if you desire by the grace of God, to be preserved from this fiery
filthiness, in the name of Jesus Christ, settle your hearts to pray, and to
practice for chastity.

O most holy Lord God, who in the beginning of this world did make man and
woman, and marry them together, ordaining that they should with so undefiled
hearts increase their kind, as in eating and drinking they nourish their
bodies: But ever since Satan by temptation had drawn them away from thee,
thine holy ordinance is broken, for people do rather give themselves to the
delight of beastly lust, then to the desire of blessed increase. Whereupon they
pamper, and paint out themselves, that they may follow their filthiness, and
allure one an other thereunto. Moreover by the procurement of our old enemy
the devil, this world is so full of temptation, that I am continualy in danger
by seeing, hearing, or some one way, or an other to be infected by loathsome
lust: yea, although there were not such abundance of outward alurements, yet
mine own heart is ready to betraie me to the devil. Therefore I do humbly
beseech thy blessed majesty, that it may please thee to preserve me from all
temptations of lust all the days of my life. And if it be thy will that I
shall marry, good Lord give unto me a virtuous wife, that we may christianly
live together, not in the insatiable lust of uncleanness, as they that know thee
not; but in such godly tempera^ce, that our minds may be holy, our bodies
healthie, our children, if thy pleasure be to send us any, holy, and able to
do thee service. Most merciful God, grant me this my prayer for thy son
Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with thee, and the holy Ghost be all honor, and
glory henceforth for evermore, Amen.

Now with daily prayer join diligent practice. Give your selves to some good
exercise and labor, fly from idleness. Pamper not your bodies with
gluttony, and drunkenness, but use very sober diet: abhor all bravery of
apparel, be clothed only as becomes a christian in your degree.

Whatsoever it be that moves you any way to the thought, or desire of lust,
leave it, and turn from it.

I do heartly wish holiness to al people, but being a wreched man I do
specially intend my confession unto men.

All men, young or old, I beseech you give your heart and mind to holy
thoughts, and heavenly desires, detest all motions of filthiness, which tend
to displease God, and destroy you body and soul.

Do not muse of woman, nor let your eyes be delighted in behoulding their
beauty and finenesse; give no regard to their coie behavior, tripping, and
dancing. Take no pleasure in hearing their delicate talking, sweet singing,
and amorous playing, for the devil is ready when you are any way touched with
delight of women, presently to kindle his fire in your heart. Be not much
familiar with any woman, specially alone for it will cause danger to you, and
suspicion to others. If you see a woman to be very fellowly, judge her not,
for she may be good; but be you a stranger unto her, least Satan make you
naught. Do not dally, jest, or play with women, least it happen unto you, as
to the fly that plays about the ca^dle till she have spoiled her flying.

As you must carefully keep your selves from being enflamed with lust, so also
you ought to take great heed, that you give none occasion to inflame any of
Gods people. O what an hellish part it is to join with the devil in tempting
others. A man and his wife should not dally one with an other in the sight of
any, no not of their own children, least it move them to evil thoughts. An
heathen man among heathen people was put to great disgrace, because he kissed
his wife in the sight of his daughter. This is a notable example for christians
that make no conscience to infect others by word, and deed, apparel, gesture,
and every way that can be devised: ^th. 18.6.
you know that Christ says, it were better for a man to be cast into the sea
with a millstone about his neck, then to give any occasion to make an other to
sin.

O ye women, I pray you that for Christ's sake ye will consider, why God was so
displeased with the daughters of Sion, Esa. 3.16.
for their fine attire, and wanton behavior: and also why the holy Ghost does
will christian women to deck themselves with virtues, and not with costly
raiment? Surely it seems to me, that one cause is the great danger of men, who
are enticed to lust by the trimnesse of women. And is not an other cause the
wasting of Gods goods upon vain ornaments? Take heed least God do one day
call you to a reckoning for every penny idly bestowed and for every man by
your means tempted. O the modesty of women, what an heavenly preservative and
remedy it is against lust?

Young men pray humbly, and fervently to God, that you be not stained with lust;
and if you find your bodies dangerously subject thereunto, strive to keep
your minds clean. Rather then yield to any unlawful act of fleshlinesse,
intend your self to marry: for marriage is an honorable calling, and holy
before God. It is far better to be married, and very poor, with honesty;
then to be unmarried, and very rich, with dishonestie. If you mean to marry,
pray unto God that he will give you grace, well and wisely to govern, and
maintain a married life: pray also that he will match you with a godly wife.
And as you pray, so practice by all good means to procure the blessings which
you pray for. Commending your self to the pleasure of God: be well advised
before you make choice of a wife, and when you have once settled your mind, let
nothing cause you to repent, or forsake your choice: I had been a married man,
and freed from the flames of lust, but that I gave ear to those that disliked
the party, whom I had good cause to like and to love, notwithstanding
whatsoever they could say against her: I was accursed, and therefore
vnsteadfast in all good courses.

Being determined to marry a woman, hate the thought of making her your
concubine, before she be your lawful wife: least God in great displeasure do
lay some one plague or an other upon you. O that you knew what a blessedness it
is for a man and a woman to come into the Church before the face of God, and
his Angels, there to be married, being both undefiled.

I Have been a thief many ways: when I was a child, I remember I was given
to steal apples, and afterward I purloined diverse things, yea money from my
father and mother: I bought things, and never paid for them: I did steal
books, and deceived others by many shifts: when I was put in trust to buie any
thing for an other, I made them believe that I paid more for it, then indeed
I did: and commonly took up much commodities for mine own use, and left it
upon their reckoning whom I served; specially when I was a young scholar in
the University, where I did much wrong my good friends.

When I bought any thing, I made much ado to get it better cheap then it was
worth; dispraising it, and promising to help the seller to custom. I have
bought things for half the worth, of such as have wanted money. Contrariwise
if I sold a thing, I falsely praised and prized it at more then it was worth,
professing that I would not have parted from it, but for need of money, or for
love of the buier. I have made them pay extremely that were earnest to buie
any thing which I had.

If I found any thing, I closely kept it to my self; yea, and sometimes I
found things before they were lost.

Once one found certain money, who seeing me go that way, thought it had
been mine, and therefore gave it me, and I took it for mine own, although I
lost none.

I have taken reward for doing many things, which I did not as I ought to have
done.

I have not well rewarded many that did for me, yea I have diverse times done
evil to them, that did good to me.

In matter of reckoning, when some have not remembered so much as I owed unto
them, I paid them according to their remembrance, and kept the residue to my
self against my conscience.

I have taken wages for schooling children, and ministering in the Church, but
did not truly perform my duty, and therefore am a thief.

I have been given to gaming, and therein practiced deceit, which people do
call foule-plaie; but before the face of God it is very theft.

I have by fair words, and pleasing promises gotten many things of others, for
which I made no recompense.

I have set some to work for me, and have paid them too little for their
pains.

I have been a broker to help one to get goods from an other: once I was a
means to make a man give house and land from his kindred to an other. In
performing which work I wrought with the devil, and practiced much deceit.

I have borrowed things, and either not restored them at all, or not in so good
sort, as I received them. I have heartned some to trust others, by whom they
have been deceived.

I have many ways wasted and hurt the goods of other folk carelessly,
couetously, and spitefully.

I have oftentimes been very partial in question touching goods between
party and party; because I have been ill conceited of the one, or well
opinioned of the other, or thought to be a gainer by the business. I have many
ways counseled, aided, and concealed vnrightfulnesse.

By all these ways, and many more, which I can not remember, Zach. 5.1, 2, 3,
4.
I have been a thief, and therefore the huge book of Gods curses written
against thieves, does take hold upon me, and will not leave me till I be
brought to naught.

O ye people of God, for Christ's sake be careful to keep your selves true,
and just. Do not get so much as a pin with an evil conscience: for
howsoever the devil blinds you, yet one day you shall see, that all
naughty gain will have a naughty end. Practice no deceit, nor cruelty in
buying, selling, chopping, changing, borrowing, lending, gaming, or any way
else: for God will surely lay his vengeance upon all that make any unjust
gain, or diminish the goods of others.

Make no commodity by any trade, or practice that hinders your neighbor, or
is against a common good. Do not take, or hold from any that which in
conscience is due unto them: for goods wrongfully gotten, or kept from the
right owner, do continually cry unto God for justice against you.

Therefore if you have by any manner of means hurt, hindered, or diminished the
good of any, yield due recompense upon true repentance, to the party wronged,
or if he be dead, to his heirs; or if he be dead without heirs, or you cannot
find the party to whom restitution is due, give it to the poor. But if you
have no ability to make satisfaction, confess the wrong to the party whom
you have wronged, and pray him to forgive; and at least pray unto God
continually that he will plentifully recompense them, whom you have iniuried,
pouring upon them his blessings in body and soul. If you think that Christ's
religion does not require satisfaction of wrongs, you are deceived: Luke 19.8.
for Zacheus instructed of Christ, offered that if he had done wrong to any
man, he would give to the party wronged four times so much, as the damage
came to.

Therefore needs must single satisfaction be due, a penny, for a penny, and
a pound for a pound.

If you ask, whether I follow this lesson or no? I answer; my conscience does
tie me unto it. Therefore some satisfaction I have made, and some more, by the
grace of God, I will make; and that which I cannot do thorough want of
ability, I must crave of God, that he will supply: I do not speak to honor
my self; but to glorify God, who is my judge, and to benefit you, who are his
people. I have paid twenty shillings at once by way of restitution, to him
that could not claim so much as a penny due; because I had formerly paid him
his own reckoning; who thereupon held himself satisfied; but my conscience
did testify that I owed more unto him.

Some have judged me foolish, and vainglorious, because I appeared to succor
some few poor people: I do not justify my self, for it is God that truly
sees, and judges all things. But my conscience is, that I am bound to give
much, by way of recompense to the poor; because many that I have wronged are
dead, or if they be alive, I know not where to find them; and therefore must
follow S. Paul's direction, ^ph. 4.28.
who says, let him that stole, steal no more, but let him rather labor,
working with his hands that which is good; that he may have to impart unto such
as have need.

All christians ought to put themselves to take any pains, yea such as they
were never brought up unto, rather then to maintain themselves with the
hinderance of other.

Beware of slouthfullnesse, wastfullnes, and unthriftiness: for they will
bring you into necessity; and then you must live like a drone, if not by
wicked shifting, yet by base beggerie. Godly thrift is a great virtue, having
diligence to provide things necessary truly and righteously, and care to save
and keep things gotten, yet without filthy niggardnesse and unmercifulness.

Take heed, least thorough your countenance, counsel, or commendation you
cause one to suffer loss by an other: for if you do, the loss before God
shall be required at your hands.

If the word of God be true, Prove. 19.9
as without doubt it is, that a false witness shall not be unpunished, and he
that speaks lies shall perish; then am I in a fearful case: for I have made
many lies, and borne much false witness, I have signified many things,
otherwise then I thought of them, I take much delight in telling strange
reports: and such as are either altogether untrue, or peeced up with lies, or
at least very uncertain, and not like to be true. Also I love lies, and when I
hear them, I uphold them, some time for my own advantage, some time to please
other, and some time to hurt them that I love not. Hereby it plainly appears
whose child I am: for God is the father of truth, and the Devil father of
lying.

For Gods sake therefore all people I beseech you hate lying, do not signify,
or maintain any word that is untrue, although you might much benifit your
self by it: unless in very conscience you be persuaded and have good reason
to move you that such a thing is true, utter it not. Be no common reporter of
news, nor much given to talk: for such people do utter many lies. In bearing
witness be well advised what you say, and with what intent; for you may be a
false witness many ways, and sometime not perceive it your self. False
witness is a lie in matter or in meaning. The matter testified is false
altogether, or in some part. A testimony altogether false is that, wherein
there is no word true, as they which witnessed against Naboth, ^. king. 21.^2,
13.
that he had spoken against God, and the king: whereas he had not spoken any
thing against God, or the king.

A testimony partly false, is when somewhat is put to, or put out, or some
word altered.

Of putting to, we have an example in the Jews who accused Christ to Pilate
the Emperors deputy, Luke 23.^, 2.
that he did forbid men to pay tribute to the Emperor, saying, Mat. 22.
that he was Christ a king. It is true that he said he was Christ a king; but
false that he forbad men to pay tribute to the Emperor, Mat. 17.25, 26, 2^
for he willed people to pay, yea, and paid for himself.

Of leaving out we have an example in the devil; who, Mat. 4.6 Psalm 91.^
to persuade Christ to throw himself down from the top of the temple, told
him that it is written in the word of God, the angels of God had a charge given
them to keep Christ from hurting himself. Here the devil left out these
words, In all thy ways; which he would not speak, because he intended that
Christ should not take the way to go down by stairs; but tempt God in
falling from the top.

Of altering some word we have an example in the two false witnesses, Mat. 26.^
that accused Christ saying; this man said, I can destroy the temple of God,
Ioh. 2.15
and build it in three days. Whereas Christ said, destroy ye this temple, and
I will build it in three days.

You may testify of an other that which he has said or done, and yet mistake
his meaning. So when Christ said, Ioh. 2.10
destroy ye this temple; he meant his body; but his adversaries took it, that
he meant the temple that was built of lime and stone.

When David fled from the court of King Saul, ^m. 20. (...) 21. (...) 22.
and came to Abimelec the Priest; he knowing none otherwise but that he was
still in the kings favor, gave him intertainment; and was therefore falsely
accused of one Doeg, to have conspired with David against the King; who
thereupon put him to death and all his kindred.

It is a grievous thing to consider, how both words and deeds are commonly
mistaken, to the great wrong of many people, yea that which is more grievous,
when a thing cannot in it self be mistaken we presume to find out some bad
cause that moved the party to say it, or do it.

(...) 2.13.
When the Apostles by the inspiration of the holy Ghost spoke in strange
languages good matter; some said they were drunck. When Christ cast out
devils; ^t. 12.24.
some said he was a coniurer, and wrought with the devil. Job living an
upright life, (...) 1.9, 11.
the devil accused him that in his heart he was a dissember; and would serve
God no longer then God fed him with gifts; and when he was proved a liar in
that, (...) 2.4, 5.
yet he urged, that if Job were bodily punished with diseases, he would show
himself falshearted to God: which also proved a false witness.

Among all the apprentises that the devil has in the trade of false
witnessing and lying, none go beyond them that will accuse men for well doing,
as they that accused Daniel for saying his prayers alleging that therein he
showed an ill mind to the king. Dan. 6.


You may testify against a man that which is true, and yet before the face of
God, be within compass of false witness: as he that accused Moses of killing
an Egyptian, Exodus 2
gave true testimony: for Moses did so indeed, therefore the accuser spoke
the truth, but not truly, that is, not in zeal to the truth, but in malice to
Moses, who told him of his fault.

To keep your self clear from lying and false witnessing, you must first
fear God, for he is a most righteous judge, and will examine whatsoever you
say of any body.

Secondly, you must love the party of who^ you speak, for it is very true,
that evil will cannot speak well, but one way or an other it will outrunne
your conscience. Therefore if your heart be out of charity with any, refrain
your self from meddling with them: because the wrath of man works not the
righteousness of God. (...) 1.20.


Thirdly, whatsoever you see or hear of others, either meddle not with it
according to S. Paul's lesson, Strive to be quiet, and do your business:
^hess. 4.
or if it so concern you, that you must needs think and speak of it, take
good heed that you do not mistake any part of it, for mistaking breeds lies,
and it is a sin to belly the devil, many things are so said and so done, that
they may be taken well or ill, yea what can be said or done, but some one or
other will turn it to an evil meaning, like unto the spider that out of the
best flowers will suck some poison. But be you of the mind to take every thing
the best way, knowing that it is the devils property to make the worst of
every thing.

You may be deceived in that which you have upon your own knowledge, because
you cannot see the heart and meaning of the party, much more in that which you
have by hearesaie: for reports are commonly very faulty, and seldom hold
truth in every point: wherefore almighty God to show us an example what we
ought to do, ^n. 18. (...) 21.
when the cry of the sins of Sodom came up to heaven, came down to see
whether it were true or not, before he would seem to believe it, whereby you
learn to be slow of belief in hearing evil of others.

But if you be well assured that an other has said or done wrongfully, the
wrong is either to you or to others. If any have wronged you, you must by the
commandment of your master Jesus Christ, Mat. 1^
first tell the party of his fault secretly and charitably; 16.
if he so amend, you are satisfied. If he regard not your talk, you must take
one or two with you, and tell him of his fault again in charitable manner: and
if then he amend, you must rest contented: 17.
but if he continue in his fault, you must complain to such as have authority
to judge between you.

If one wrong an other, and you be privy to it, and sure of it, you must be
careful that you wrong neither of them; because they are both your neighbors,
and brethren: therefore first desire the party that does the wrong to right
it, which if he will not do, you must discover it, least before God you be a
partaker in the wrong doing.

I Was never content with that which God gave me, but continually disliked my
state; murmuring, and casting out complaints; envying the prosperity of
others, judging them not so worthy of it as my self: yea, wishing in my heart
that I had their goods. Being promised a living, which I could not have till
the death of him that had it, and has it, I often desired to hear of his
death. Wherefore by the just judgment of God, he is likely to hear of my
death. When I have heard that such, and such were in possibility of
preferment, or had obtained it, I fretted and fumed at it, because I would have
had it my self.

When I saw a man have a wise of good condition, I could find in my heart to
wish him dead, and my self married to his wife. And when one married a wife,
whom I liked, I stomacked it much, because I had her not. I have wished a good
servant from one to another.

Thus, and many other ways I have coueted my neighbors goods, both to my
self and to others, because I had not faith and charity.

O all Christian people, hate this hellish covetousness, the root of all evil.
Be highly content with that which God gives you, and you get by good means:
for that which you get by ill means God gives not, but by the sufferance of
God, the devil helps you to it.

Therefore with goods well gotten quiet your mind, and be very thankful to
God. Covet not to be rich, for when a man is ouerloaded he can hardly travel:
and you are trauailers passing through this world into heaven. But if you
foreslow the time till heaven gate be shut against you, what will all this
worlds good avail you? your body must to the grave, your soul to hell, and
your goods whereupon you have bestowed all your time, study, and labor, must
remain to whom you know not. Therefore have a measure in your worldly cares,
Mat. 6.1^ 20, 21.
and as your dear Lord and Savior wills you, give your minds to grow rich
toward God, laying up treasure in heaven, where it shall be safely kept till
you come, and there you shall enjoy the same for ever.

Desire rather to make sure unto your selves the salvation of your souls, then
the goods of the body: for look what you desire most, you will most intend.
Of the two, it were better to neglect the body, ^^th. 6.33.
then the soul; because he that seeks to assure unto himself the good of
his soul, shall have the good of his body into the bargain.

If this were settled in the hearts of people, they would not covet so
vnmeasurably. This unmeasurable covetousness does show that the heart is not
right set toward God: for if it were turned to him, it would be thoroughly
sufficed with his grace, whether you had much or little of worldly goods.
Like as the needle in a dial will never be quiet until it be set right to the
north star, and then it will rest.

It cannot be, but that a couetouse man is a breaker of this commandment,
because his heart is in the hand of the Devil, and he turns it whither he
will.

But many will say, such, and such have to much, and I have to little; I
answer, how know you, they have to much, and you to little. Because they have
enough, and spare, but we want that which is necessary, yea but yet you live.
We live indeed, but not so well, as they that have more. Ah, you do not fare
so well, nor go so gaie, nor please your eyes with the sight of worldly
wealth: If it be the felicity of this world that you look for; take heed
least you be one of them to whom Christ says, Woe be unto you rich, Luke 6.29.
because you have received your comfort: that is, you have that which you
sought after. Yea, but you will say, we have it not. I answer, God loves you
so much the better. But you will say, why does he not give unto me as well as
to others? A good child rests content with that, which his father gives him.
But if that reason will not serve, why do parents keep knives from little
children? least they should hurt their bodies: so God keeps worldly goods
from you, least you should by the ill using of them harm your own souls. Do
you think that the poor beggar Lazarus does now grieve at the misery wherein
he was, when he lay at the rich man's gate full of sores, and ready to starve
through want of food? No verily: He rejoices, and praises God for his
poverty, and for his patience, wherewith he endured the good pleasure of God:
knowing that if he had contrariwise been rich, he might have thereby lost his
salvation, as Dives did. It is a greater matter to use riches well, then most
people imagine. Else would not our Savior Christ have said, ^th. 19.24, 25,
as he did say; That it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a
needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. And yet least
they to whom God gives riches should be discomforted, he told his Disciples,
that God is able to save the rich. Whereby you understand that to be rich, and
to be saved, requires a most mighty grace of God: for it were a great miracle
to make a camel go through a needles eye.

All this I say, to the end that you should not covet more then you may with a
safe conscience, your soul being first provided for, procure unto your self.

But some say, I could be contented with a little, were it not for my children;
I must needs confess that it is a godly care to provide for your children: but
let it be without covetousness. Let not your children be either brought up, or
settled in the world with goods unconscionably gotten from others. It is better
for them to be poorly brought up, and to have but little left them. Have you
not seen many whose friends have left them much goods, fallen into more
folly, then they that had little, or nothing left the^? But if you say, some
few get all into their hands, and then deal unmercifully with us. Do you
believe in God? Yea. Then you must thoroughly persuade your self, that he is
your father, and in his fatherly care provides that for you, which he well
knows will do you most good: notwithstanding all the covetousness, and
cruelty of this world, yet God, if it please him, could give you plenty: and
because he does not, it appears that he purposes to punish you. Will you
therefore be out of patience, knowing that whom God loves, he corrects?
Surely I had rather be a patient poor man, and Gods child, then a cruel rich
man, and Gods rod: for commonly the child is received into favor, and the rod
is cast into the fire.

Howsoever the world go, be patient, and submit your self to the pleasure of
God. Do not envy, nor condemn those that are any way in more prosperity
then you. For if you do so, ye are not in charity, and if you be not in
charity, Christ is not in you, but the devil. Therefore strive by your
patience to possess your own soul, and by the holy Ghost, contrary to the
nature of flesh and blood, be exceeding glad, that you may be one of Christ's
company, although in the lowest degree that may be; yea, the very foot:
rejoicing at the prosperity of any other, and sorrowing in their adversity,
as if it were your own. This if you can do, you are a Christian indeed; and
although you be in low degree upon earth, yet your Lord and father will highly
advance you in the glory of heaven. Remember what Saint James says, ^m. 1.9.
Let a brother of low degree rejoice in his advancement.

O that I were a brother of that heavenly company, and my name written in the
book of life, although it were with condition to suffer all possible misery
in this world. If you say I give you such counsel, as I could never take my
self, I confess it, but you would not be in my case, if you knew it as I do,
although you might have all the goods of the earth; for death and hell have
taken sure hold upon me, and I am so hardened in sin through long custom in
wickedness, and delay of repentance, that my soul is ready to despair of Gods
mercy. Therefore while time serves, and while grace is offered unto you, make
sure work; Strive by obeying the will of God to enter in at the straight gate:
for Christ says, ^k. 13.^ 24, 25.
many wilt seek to enter, and shall not be able: because they seek not till
it be too late. This is my state, and therefore I perish.

All people young and old, pray daily and devoutly to God, that it will please
him through Jesus Christ to give you the graces of faith, hope, and charity,
that you may clean fast unto him with full purpose of heart, and being
sufficed with that which he vouchsaseth to give you, put him in trust with
soul and body, assuring your selves that he will not fail you, nor forsake
you, and if his pleasure be to try your faith and trust by crosses and
adversities, rejoice therein, for his mind is to crown you therefore in the
world to come, Love all christians as your own self, yea love your very
enemies, pray for them, and practice in word and deed to be kind unto them.

By these graces you shall perform the kingly law of liberty, and so be kings
unto God, ruling and reigning over your thoughts and affections, according to
his pleasure, being set at liberty from the law of sin, and bondage of the
devil. Almighty God for Jesus Christ's sake fulfill you all with the holy
Ghost, Amen, Amen.

NOw I beseech all that give your mind to book learning, patiently to read or
hear this last part of my confession intended to your good.

When I went first to school, I was full of all ungraciousness, and misbehaued
my self to God, to my parents, and to all people: which cursed qualities
poisoned whatsoever learning I could get.

All children that go to school, fear God, and pray unto him heartily that
he will give you the grace to stand in awe of his almighty majesty, and to be
afraid of displeasing him: for the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom.
All learning without the fear of God, is as a sword in the hand of a mad
man, likely to do much mischief and no good. Hate all naughty conditions,
and behave your selves lowely, and gently to every man, woman, and child.
Pray often to God and say, O almighty God, the giver of all good learning
and true wisdom, I sinful wretch do humbly beseech thee, that for thine
only son Jesus Christ's sake, thou will send thine holy ghost into mine
heart, that I may be cleansed from sin, and get so much learning and
knowledge as may best fit me to be thy faithful servant in that state of life,
whereunto it shall please thee to call me, Amen.

Use commonly to praise God in some such manner as this. O most bountiful Lord
God, I do humbly and heartily thank thee, because thou have caused my friends
to set me to school. Good Lord I beseech the so to continue, and bless me in
learning, that I may learn to do my duty to thee and to all thy people, in
what degree soever it shall please thee to place me; through Jesus Christ thine
only son, who with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons and one God, be
honored and praised in heart word and deed, for ever and ever, Amen.

Follow your schooling diligently, and if it please God to give you the gift to
learn, be glad, and give him thanks therefore, but be not proud of it: or if
pride enter into your heart, it will puff you up like a bladder, and although
you prove marueilously learned, yet in the end you shall be nothing but wind. All
scholars take heed of pride: for it will make you like the Devil, and
hateful before God.

When you are allowed to play, then play: for it is healthful to stir your
bodies: Practice no base, and lewd pastime, but exercise yourselues in some
honest sport, which may bring you into strength, and ability.

At no time let any bad or beastly word come out of your mouth. Delight not in
vain talk, mocking, or scorning: for all such things are very displeasing
unto God.

I went to the University very raw: for I had few grounds of grammar, and
none of grace. Therefore I spent much time in getting little learning; but all
manner af vice in me grew up and abounded. I was vain minded, proud hearted,
busiheaded, and full of a bitter, peevish, contentious spirit. Being poor I
found great friendship, and had good allowance of many; but I was singularly
negligent, and unthankful unto them. My study was to make great show of
little learning, and therefore I sought after fine choice words. When I
disputed with any, I was desirous to dismaie them with reprooches, in stead of
reasons; and to that end I had a written phrase-booke stuffed with taunting,
and biting speeches.

All scholars that go to any University, take warning by me. Be careful to
come thither well grounded in learning, and virtue. Give yourselues to be
sober, humble, quiet, mild, and peaceable. Be diligent in your business,
duetifull to all people, and very thankful to your friends. These virtues
will make you gracious in the sight of God, Angels, and men. Be more careful
to get sound learning, for good use, then to stand upon the show of knowledge;
for it is a vainglorious folly. Hunt not after curious minion terms, whereof
comes no good; but speak and write plain ordinary words: for they that
would seem to be worde-wise, are of grave and learned men accounted unwise.

Pride and envy are properties of the devil; and of all other sins most
ready to wait upon scholars. Therefore take great heed of them: If you be
proud, you are Lucifer, high in your own conceit, and therefore shall be
brought low even down into hell. If you envy the learning, estimation, and
prosperity of others, you are Satan, an enemy to the gifts of Gods grace.

Do never dispraise any, nor quip any in your orations, and speeches: for it
shows bitterness, which is very bad in a scholar. When you argue, or dispute
publicly, or privately, fear God, and shun snarling, reproching, and all
furious behavior. Let your reasoning be, as in the hearing and seeing of God,
and Angels, calm, amiable, sweet, and sober. Whenever you prepare any
oration, disputation, or exercise of learning, first humble your self before
God, craving his mercy and grace; that you may so perform it, as best
becomes a Christian scholar; thereby to be fitted for the service of Jesus
Christ in the Church, or common wealth.

If any sin reign in you, strive by all means to subdue it: for where sin
reigns, there the Devil dwells; and the end of that man will be naught.

When I had gotten a shadow, and outside of learning, I left the University,
and took upon me to be a schoolmaster, God forgive me; I was a bad one: for
how could I frame children to godly learning, being ungodly, and ill learned.

I undertook to teach more then I had learned my self, I was newfangled, and
negligent in teaching; and yet tired, and dulled my scholars by keeping them
too long at their books, and by fierce correction, and cruel beating of them.

O ye school masters, I pray you for the reverence of God, be well advised;
The schooling of children is the nurcerie of christians; therefore you ought to
be learned and virtuous; that you may train your scholars to be the disciples
of Christ.

The devil will practice to make you his vnderschoolemasters, that you may fit
your scholars to be his servants.

To prevent this danger, you cannot be to careful of your behavior every way.

Take no more upon you, then you know your self able, by the grace of God, to
perform, follow the common way of teaching commanded by authority.

It is to be wished that the Grammar for the latin tongue, were one whole
book, the rules in english, the examples in latin.

Teach your scholars their lessons very leasurely, and plainly, hear them
their lessons mildely, and patiently, correct them for their faults merciefully
and sparingly. What man fearing God can find in his heart to play the tyrant
among Gods tender children, reuiling, buffeting, striking, scourging, and
terrifying them with thundering speeches, as if they were dogs, yea limbs of
the Devil, no man can with a safe conscience so cursedly use a beast, as I in
word and deed have used my scholars, I pray God forgive me, and grant that
no schoolmaster offend in that point.

Think with your selves how hateful such rigorous usage is to God, and his
holy Angels, who have the charge of children.

Frame your scholars by all means to fear God, and to please him; and then
assure your selves that over and above whatsoever their fathers and friends
give unto you, he will give you a rich reward.

It is not good to hold children too hard, or too long at their books: for
their wits are tender, and therefore ought to be gently used, and often
refreshed. Our Lord Jesus Christ bless all schoolemasters, that they may know,
and do their duties to the continual increase of right Christian learning,
Amen.

I Presumed with all mine abominable vices to enter into the holy Ministry,
and have been a professed minister of Christ; that is, a soule-keeper, and a
soule-feeder almost twelve years: Jesus Christ forgive me. I took upon me to
preach, neither understanding the word of God, nor endued with the power of
godliness. Therefore I have endangered the salvation of many people, eue^ as an
ignorant and dishonest physician does hazard the bodily life of them that take
physic by his appointment.

Although water in the spring head be pure and wholesome, yet if it be carried
from thence in an unclean and poisoned vessel, who can drink it without
danger? The word of God is in it self most pure and wholesome; but my
preaching has defiled it with ignorance, and with the wicked infection of
pride, envy, wrath, covetousness, and all sins; every vice upon occasion
putting it self into my sermons. Moreover if I preached any thing according
to the word of God, I utterly vnpreached and denied it in my life and
conversation. Alas how many souls may justly challenge me before the face of
Jesus Christ, for giving cause of their damnation; I cannot say, upon my
conscience, that in all this time, wherein I have taken upon me to be a
minister; I have done my duty, so much as to the saving of one soul. A true
minister of Christ should be a means to turn all evil from his sheep, and
to procure all blessings unto them. But I contrarily have been a means to
turn blessings from them, and to bring misery upon them. It had bin better
for me to have gotten my living by begging from door to door; yea, less had
bin my sin, if I had lived by stealing and robbing: for he that is a minister
and does not discharge his duty, is a thief and a robber in the highest
degree: because he robs God of his people, and robs people of their
salvation. How is it possible for me to escape the vengeance of hell fire?

All you that purpose to be ministers in the Church, for Christ's sake, take
warning by me. Before you enter into the ministry, examine your heart
according to your conscience in the sight of God; what moves you to be a
minister? and what you principally desire and intend? for look what you mind,
that you will follow, and to compass the same, neglect all other things.
Therefore if you perceive that your mind is chiefly set upon worldly gain, or
glory, take no souls to keep: for you will let them sink or swim: and
notwithstanding what show soever you make, they shall be sorily respected, and
many ways unfitted. But if you do chiefly aim at the glory of Christ in the
salvation of Christians, you are the blessed of the Lord; God increase the
number of you: for you will not stick to loose any worldly commodity, yea your
own life, rather then hazard the loss of one soul. Enter therefore in the
name of Jesus Christ. But before you take a charge of souls upon you, give all
diligence that you may have a good understanding in the word of God, and that
the power of godliness may be in your life and conversation: for if the blind
lead the blind, they fall both into the ditch: and he is graceless, that
having sight, does lead the blind out of the way: because the blind will follow
their leader. The peoples eyes are never well opened until the light of their
minister do so shine before the^, that they may see his good works and
glorify God, in following his ensample. O happy is that minister that ever he
was borne, who before he undertakes a charge of souls, Matthew. 4.
has the grace to overcome the temptations of Satan, as Christ did.

Being made a minister, and having a charge of souls, bear always in mind,
that you must be answearable to Christ for every one of them. So that
whatsoever a minister might possibly do to save them, you shall dearly abuie
it, if you perform it not. This moved S. Paul to warn every one, (...). 28.
and teach every one in all wisdom, that he might present every one perfect in
Christ Jesus.

Therefore you knowing the terriblenes of the Lord, must approve your self
unto God, and to every conscience of man, woman, and child in the sight of God,
carefully and discreetely waiting upon your charge, that you may give to every
one their portion of meat in due time. You must truly teach Gods people the
way of salvation out of his word. Therefore in understanding and expounding
the holy Bible, follow the consent of ancient and learned writers, and those
especially who are reported to have lived an holy life: for God in all ages
does most respect them that fear him, and they have most certain knowledge of
his will. Others although they seem exceedingly learned, yet they are full of
errors, because the spirit of deceit has power in them. Therefore take heed.

Desire not to be singular, nor to differ from others: for it is a sign of a
naughty spirit, which has caused much evil in the world from the beginning.
Teach people that which does necessarily concern their salvation: for it is a
temptation of the devil to busy folks minds with by-matter, that they may
neglect the maine work of saving their souls. A minister ought diligently to
take particular knowledge of his charge: who be young in understanding; who be
ripe in discretion; who be sick in sin, and who be sound in soul, that he
may accordingly diet them. Much preaching and teaching does not take that good
effect which it might, if peoples understanding were ripened to hear it. There
is a certain teaching called the A, b, c, of Gods word; because even as a
scholar must learn to know letters, and to spell them together, before he can
read; Heb. 5.12.
so must a Christian first learn the ground work of religion, before he can
well proceed in the understanding and practice of Gods word. I have found
elderly people, that seemed to be much delighted in hearing the word of God
preached, yet notwithstanding strangely ignorant in the foundation of faith. As
for example, they did believe in the son of God, and yet did not think that
he was in time before the virgin Marie. How is it possible, that people should
be ignorant of such points, commonly preached and printed? Because they are not
instructed orderly, pithily, and plainly: orderly, as children are taught to
read: pithily, for many words and toilesome circumstances do bring an
ignorant hearer into a wood, where he loses himself: plainly, for terms of
art, and fine eloquence are not suitable to the gospel of Christ, because in
darkning the understanding of some, and tickling the ears of others, they
hinder the working of the matter. Fie upon all vain glorious shows: for the
kingdom of God is not in word, 1. Cor. 4.20
but in power.

If you do not so teach the will of God, that the very ignorant may well
understand it, and keep it in rememberance, what answer can you make to Jesus
Christ, when he calls you to a reckoning?

Although a scholar be taught to know his letters, yet many times he is not
well instructed to spell them together: So the foundation points of religion
may be taught, and yet not put well together: for example, Romans 3.28.
Christians are justified by faith in Jesus Christ, without the works of the
law. This is one point. ^at. 16.27 ^. Cor. 5.10
Christ will judge all people according to their works, answerable to the
practice of their lives. This is an other point. Now unless these two points be
rightly joined together, the devil will make some utterly neglect works, and
other altogether to presume upon their own deserts.

Justifying faith is the gift of God, and brings forth good works, whereby
true Christians are justified at the day of judgment.

The capacity of people is like unto a small bottle with a narrow mouth, if
you power in wine hastily, you shall spill much beside, and if you do exceed
their measure they will run over: no work or imploiment in all the world
does require more careful diligence, then the office of a minister.

Although you teach and preach very much, and in plain words, yet your sheep
will specially regard your practice of life, because their nature is to be
lead, rather then to be driven.

I would I had preached less in words, and more in works. Your conversation
must be every way square to your profession: for you cannot so much as speak
a word in jest, but it shall be heeded and considered. Yea, if there be any ill
word spoken in your hearing, people will mark how you take it. Believe me upon
mine experience; if there be gappes in your conversation, your sheep will
thereby run out from Christ; yea they will boldly make gappes themselves,
presuming that they may with as little danger sin in one kind, as you in an
other.

When I as a Curate entered into a charge of souls, the people at the first had
such a reverent opinion of me, by reason of mine earnest plainnes in preaching;
that they were very careful least I should see any fault in their behavior;
but afterward when they perceived that the practice of my life was not
according to my preaching, they grew in a manner careless what they said, or
what they did: whereas if I had not lost that first reputation, I think in my
conscience, that many, yea most of them would have amended their ways.

A minister ought to be grave and mild. Gravity without mildness is
surlinesse, and mildness without gravity is lightness.

Iocond, jesting, and scoffing behavior does not become a minister, for he is
the messenger of God, and weighty is his message.

It is a true saying, that too much familiarity breeds contempt; and so I have
always found it. Therefore use to retire your self, and be no common company
keeper: for howsoever you may preserve your personal reputation, yet the power
of your office, which is much grounded upon a reverent estimation, will be by
company keeping many ways diminished. The appearance of any vice in a
minister does disable his ministry; specially pride, and covetousness. It were
to be wished that ministers would in their apparel, and gesture, use decency,
shunning all vanity and bravery; whereby the humblenes and meekenes of Jesus
Christ might be seen in them.

You that teach others to be content with that which they have, ought to show
your selves free from filthy covetousness.

Keep always within compass of your maintenance, that you may be before
hand; else you shall run into many inconveniences: for first you shall by want
be forced to loose your liberty: for, as Solomon says, the borrower is a
servant to the lender. Then much more is the receiver servant to the giver. An
heathen man said truly, He that takes a gift, loses his liberty. Who has
more cause to keep himself free then a minister? for if he be engaged to any,
the devil will tempt him to sooth them in their sins, or at least to be
tongue-tied, and not to reprove them for their faults. Alas! in what wretched
state are many Curates? for they are driven to seek their commodities, where
they can find them.

An other inconvenience in a hinderly minister is, that he cannot be
beneficial to the poor: which is a very special point in a minister: for how
can it appear that he is zealous to feed men's souls, that has no care to
comfort their bodies. Therefore Christ and his Apostles were very diligent to
provide for the poor. ^ Mar-
An ancient writer testified to an heathen Roman Emperor, that among
Christians the minister is a prouider for all needy people.

Although any other minister seem faulty and have an ill report, yet do not
endure to speak or hear any evil of him: for so you should very much
offend, and encourage to be distasted with the ministry.

Do not envy nor despise any minister whomsoever, not meddle with any man's
charge but your own.

Suffer much wrong rather then enter into strife. Be no party nor partaker in
any contention.

If you be assured that any one does amiss in your parish, I took upon (...)
to find fault rig^^rously with many; yea, and with great men out of my charge;
(...) my great shame.
tell him his fault secretly, and very kindly, beseeching him in Christ's
behalf to turn unto God. Whosoever fall out, do not you appear to be
adversary to any one, nor to uphold the party against him. It will hinder your
ministry, and peradventure put you into more trouble then you can imagine.
Contention and partaking has tormented me very grievously, for I met with
those that ouermatched me, and laid heavy accusations upon me. God forgive me
and them, and God give you the heavenly blessing of quietness. Hate all
iarring, and snarling, for they are dogged properties: as also fawning, and
flattery. He is a right dog, that will one while snarle, and an other while
fawn, as I have foolishly done.

Be a man of wisdom and few words. Be slow to speak, and short and sweet in
speaking. A man full of words is full of many offenses. Last of all, I commend
unto you a notable sentence which the holy Ghost sent to a minister.

No man that is a warrior entangleth himself with worldly business, ^. Tim. ^.
that he may please him who has chosen him to be a (...) beseech the blessed
God, (...) kne^^, that he will for Jesus (...) give unto all ministers the
grace (...) and pe^^^^e the true meaning (...) ^^^^nce.

Amen, Amen.

