Of misrules contending / with gods word by name. And then / of ones Judgment
/ that heard of the same.
I Hear say, that some say, there chaunsed of late
Between one madmisrule, and gods word great hate
The cause of there out fall (as some say) is this
By here say, I hard it, now mark what it is
This misrule, was moved, and mad in his mind
That gods word with great men, such grace should still find
Whereby as an out cast he might be reiecte
This some say, and here say, to be the effect.
But douting where all things, which some say were right
Since some say, by here say, a lie spread be might
I sought, and hard some say, they did it behold
By whose words of credit, my doutes were resolved
But now to my purpose, again for to come
This misrule, through madness, at last frynds had some
Of whom he gat comfort, as it may well seem
His boldness well wayed, who would not so deem.
And being in favor, at last well was he
That could unto mysrule, from good order flee
Who lost not there labor, as some say for that
But were well esteemed, and had, I hard what.
That gods word much lothing, could it not abide
But stepped fourth boldly, and misrule defied
Wyshing from misrule, all men to refrain
As from a thing noisome, to vile, and to vain.
But misrule that hearing, began for to starte
Like one that were vexed, and that to the heart
As it well aperethe, by his subtle shyft
Who so well can ponder, the truth of his dryft.
He knew well, he could not, gods word well withstond
To mete him as men do, that fight hand to hand
But sought his fetch farther, by color to crave
And so under color, gods word to deprave.
But now if in conscience, speak freely I may
In mind I digress not, from that which some say
If mysrule mayntayned be, and seek to ascend
In this casse I doubt much, but mark well the end.
What regions to Ruyn, has there not been brought
Where misrule was chosen, and good rule unsought
Weals public full welthy, to naught brought it has
For mysrule to myschiefe, must needs be the path.
What caused gods wrath, all flesh to distroye
Save only. viii. parsons, with old father Noye
But for that this misrule, gods word did deface
And moved that all men, misrule should embrace.
In Sodom and Gomor, such like stryffe began
Between this mad mysrule, and gods word: but than
Could god long abide it? when he in his fume
With sulphire and brimston, mysrule did consume.
His own Jewish people, as often as they ran
A maddyng with mysrule, with plages God began
To learn us that mysrule, he always did hate
And yet (alas) se you? how he plaith chek mate.
By misrule the subjects, be so far past grace
Their heddes and their rulers, they know not in place
But like to beasts brutall, with ungodly strife
As rebels resyst will, with loss of their life
What law is so strayt made, they fear not to break
What threat can such tounges stop, they fear not to speak
What doctrine can drive them, to know what they be
What myschief may move them, that only they se.
What need mo examples, then this our own realm
To teach us that mysrule, has been to extreme
In preasinge so proudly, to noble welfare
As some say, so boldly, as it were Jack hare
And so, under color, of space, and beware
To taunt at gods prechers, as much as they dare
Saying, such pass not, by here say to go
And preach in there pulpittes, that thus some say so.
Of some say, and here say, this well tell I can
That here say, and some say, the truth now and than
Of such, as both some say, and here say, dysdayne
Because that both here say, and some say, so plain.
But be it, that some say, by here say a miss
And say not (through here say) the truth as it is
Does it therefore follow, for that thing fourth brought
That al things which some say, therefore should be naught.
If it be unlawful, by here say to wade
I meruell what Paull meant, to use the same trade
Who speaking by here say, belyue did the same
Which purges (as some say) the rest from all blame.
But gods word of one thing, has cause to rejoice
For that this sharp taunting, is but mysrules voice
Who being accepted, to much thus I fear
Of right should leave courtinge, and not remain there.
But who shall stand douting, when our noble king
With his faithful counsel, perceive shall the thing
But that they will shortly, mysrule so repress
That glad shall the good be, to se such redress
Finis.
Quod Wyllyam Kethe. Dominus mihi adiutor.

Imprynted at London in Temestrete by Heugh Syngelton dwelling ouergaynst the
Stiliardes.

A PROCLAMATION CONCERNING BOVCHERS.
FOR AS MUCH AS THE KINGS majesty is credibly advertised and infourmed, that
beafes, muttons, and veales, are lykely to be more scarce and dear now against
this holy time of Ester, than in other seasons of the year, by reasone of the
charges of keeping of such cattelle with hey and other stouer, in the winter:
by occasion whereof the bouchers and other that shall sell such beaues muttons
and veales by retayle by weighte, can not bye them of the breders proggers
fermours drouers owners and feders of such cattle at such reasonable prices
in gross, as they may sell the same ayene by weight by retayle at such prices
as are limited in the ace made for ^ynge of flesh by weight, onelesse it
should be to their utter loss and undoing: His highenes therefore willing,
that the same bouchers, and other sellyng flesh by retayle for the time
hereafter lymitted in this proclamation, should be so conveniently provided for
in the premissis, as they should not have any cause reasonable to forbere their
provisions for such vital to be sold by retayle against this holy time of
Easter, for relief and succor of his subiectis, in as ample man^er as
heretofore has been accustomed: Is therefore contented and pleased, that from
henseforth unto the.xxiiii. day of June next coming, bouchers and all other,
that shall sell flesh of the kinds aforesaid by weyghte by retayle, shall
and may sell from time to time, unto the said. xxiiii. day of June enxte
coming, every pound of beef good and wholesome for man's body, for an
halfepeny and one half farthynge and no more: And every pound of mutton for
three farthynges only and no more: And every pound of veale for an halfepeny
and half farthynge, and no more. The said act of provision heretofore had
and made for selling flesh by weight by retayle, or any thing therein
contained, to the contrary hereof not withstondingye.

Provided always, that no bouchers or other shall kylle any calves to selle by
retaylle for the term of two years ensuinge, from the first day of Ianuarye
last, upon the peynes lymitted in the act made for killing of calves, this
proclamation no withstandyng. And his highness has ordained, that if any
boucher or other sellyng by retayle, do selle any of the kinds of vitalles
aforesaid, otherwise then by weight, or at any other prices than is before
lymytted, or refuse to selle according to this proclamation: then every
boucher, or other so offendynge shall suffer lose and forfayte all such peynes
and penalities, and also be ordered in all things as is contained and limited
in the act made for the premises. This proclamation in any wyse-not lettynge.

And futhermore the kings hyghnes straytely charge and commands all and
every the said breders broggers drouers fermours feders and owners of such
cattle, that they and every of them furnysshe the fayres and markettes with
such fat cattle as they have to selle from time to time, in as large and
ample manner as has been accustomed: And to sell their said catell at such
reasonable prices, as the said bouchers or such other, as shall retayle the
same ayene by weight, may utter and sell the same to his loving subjects, at
such prices as are above lymytted, as they will avoid his graces high
dyspleasure, and answer to the same at their vttermoste perils.

AND THAT after the said.xxiiii. day of June, the said bouchers and other
sellyng flesh by retayle, shall from thens forth sell by weight by retayle,
according to the pryces limited in the said act made and provided for the
same, upon the peynes and penalities contained in the said act, without any
abstinence or redress to be had thereof after the said.xxiiii. day.
Wherefore the kings hyghnes straytely charge and commands all and synguler
Maires, Justices of peace, Shireffes, bayliffes, constables, and other his
officers and faithful subjects, to whom it shall or in any manner of wise may
appertain, that they and every of them cause this his proclamation to be put
in due and effectual execution according to the tenor thereof, as they will
answer to his hyghnes at their vttermoste peryls.

GOD SAVE THE KING. Tho. Berthelet. regius impressor excudebat. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

A PROCLAMATION that strangers shall pay like custom and subsydie as the
kings subjects.
FOR AS MUCH as it is the office and duty of chief rulers and governors of
all civil co^mynalties, to study devise and practice by sondrye ways and
means, to auaunce set forth and increase their common welthes, committed to
their cures and charges, and to maintain and observe such ordynaunces and
orders, as by them should be devised for the same, if by the experience of
them, such goodness profit commodity and benefyte succeed thereof in and
among their civility, as they intended, and if not, then to revoke repeal
and refourme their said ordynaunces and orders, and establyshe new from time
to time, as the necessity of their common welthe should require: The kings
most royal majesty, HENRY the VIII. by the grace of god king of England and
of France, defendour of the faith, lord of Ireland, and in earth supreme heed
of the church of England, of his most excellent goodness, depely ponderynge
and considering his kyngely office and charge, and that although in the time
of his most gracious reygne, a great multitude of laws ordinances and
orders, have been devised made and ordained by his most excellent wisdom and
polycie, for auauncement and increase of the commonwealth of his realm, and
the great profit and commodity of his loving subjects of the same, yet his
most graciouse highness, like a most godly and worthy ruler, not minding to
cease, but daily to travail and labor in deuisynge and setting forth orders
and ordynaunces from time to time, as his grace by his most excellent wisdom
may perceive just occasion of necessity in his common welthe, and now
among other things calling to his most graciouse remembrance, that all be
it his highness is justly and laufully entytled in the right of his imperial
crown, to take and perceive for Custom and subsidy of merchants estrangers
conueyenge or transportynge, into this his realm or out of the same, their
wares, goods, and marchandyses, greatter and larger sommes of money, than of
his own loving and natural subjects, and being in good hope and confydence,
that although the moderation thereof should tend to his gracis own detriment
and loss, that yet it shall be a great occasion, to have more plentiful resort
trafyke and commutation with in this his gracis realm, with and among his
loving subjects of the same, for their enrychynge welthes and commodities.
Taking therefore more respect to the auauncement of his gracis common welthe,
than to his own syngular profit, and like the most godly and most worthy
chief ruler of this realm, minding to prove and assaye, whether by the
attemperaunce and moderation of the said custom and subsydie of strangers,
goodness, profit, and commodity, shall succeed, increase and grow to the
common welthe of this his realm, according to his gracis hope and expectation
in that behalf, Is therefore, and for other considerations, mouyng his highness,
pleased and contented for the experymente thereof, that from the. vi. day of
Apryll, in the.xxx. year of his gracis reygne, during the full and hole term
of.vii. years, from thense next following, no person or persons, being
strangers or denysens, conueyeng or transportynge any goods, wares, or
marchandyses into any port creke, or other place of this realm, or out of the
same, shall for and during the same time of.vii. years, pay any other more or
larger custom and subsidy, than the kings own loving and natural
subjects, have used and ben accustomed to do and pay at this present time
(custom and subsidy for wolles only excepted.) And his highness straytely
charge and commands all and syngular Customers, Comptrollers, and other his
mynisters, having charge of receyte of his customs and subsydie, that they ne
any of them, by any manner of color or means, during the said time of seven
years, shall exact take or receive of any stranger or denysen, any other more
or larger custom and subsidy, than is above especified in this his gracis
proclamation, upon pain of forfayture of their offices, and making fine at
his gracis will: And over that upon pain to yield and render to the parties
grieved, ten times so much as they shall exact and take, contrary to this
present proclamation. And his highness also charge and commands, as well
the Treasourer Chancellor Chamberlaynes and Barons of his exchequer, and
every of them, as all other his Auditors, having charge to take accomtes of
his customs and subsidies, that they, ne any of them, from the said syxte
day of Apryll, during the said time of.vii. years, from thens next
following, shall charge any the said customers, comptrollers, and minysters of
any other further or more custom and subsydie, for strangers or denyzens,
then above is expressed, as they woll answer to his highness at their
vttermoste perils. Sygnifienge and declarynge, as well to the said treasorer
chancellor chamberlaynes barons and auditors, and to every of them, as to
all and synguler the said customers comptrollers and mynysters, that they
following and ensuynge this his gracis proclamation, the same shall be to them,
and to every of them, their heirs and executours, and to the heirs and
executours of every of them, a sufficyent warrant and discharge against his
majesty, his heirs and successors for the same, without any other byll,
warraunt, writ, or other commandment to be sued in this behalf.

Provided always, that this present proclamation, ne any thing therein
contained, shall not extend, to give license or liberty to any person or
persons strangers or other, to convey or transporte into this realm or out
of the same, any goods wares or marchaundises, contrary to the form and
effect of the laws and statutes of this Realm: But that it shall be
understand taken and expounded alonely, that custom and subsidy of
strangers and denyzens, shall be agreeable and equal with the custom and
subsidy of the kings own natural subjects, and not above, during the time
of.vii. years before lymitted.

Yeuen at our palace of westin^, the. XXVI. day of February, in the. XXX. year
of our Reygne.GOD SAVE THE KING. Tho. Berthelet Regius impressor excu. CVM
PRIVILEGIO.


