A SERMON made at Blanford Foru^, in the County of Dorset on Wensday the 17.
of Ianuarij last past at the Session holden there, before the honorable and the
worshyppefull of that Shyre, by William Kethe Minister and Preacher of Gods
word.

1571.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

Cum gratia and Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable my very good Lord Ambrose, Earl of Warwike, Baron
Lisle, of the most noble order of the Garter, Knight, general of the Q.
Majesty's Ordinance within her highness Realms and dominions, his most humble
servant William Kethe, wishes grace mercy and peace in the Lord.
WHen as I considered (right honorable) how many godly, and notable works, had been set forth by excellent learned men, to the great vtility, and profit of
such as should with an upright judgment studiously read them: I determined
with my self, and thought it sufficient for discharge of my conscience, if I
wholly employed that simple talent committed unto me, in preathing the word,
(though simply, yet sincerely) according to that function, whereunto I am
called. And so it came to pass by the good providence of God, that on
wednesday, being the 17. day of this month of January. I preached at Bla^dford
Forum, in the County of Dorset, at the Session holden there, where both the
honorable, and many of the worshipful, which hard me, took my simple travels
in very good part, as both then, and sithence I have well perceived.
Nevertheless, sundry, not only of the multitude, but some of higher calling so
much misliked my said Sermon, that they thought I spoke somewhat more then
became me, but yet I praise God that those which take the matter most
grievously, are but pot companions, who think that I have done them an
exceeding great miury for that I opened to the Magistrates, how shamefully the
Saboth day (which God would have to be kept holy) was profaned with drunken
and ungodly reueling, and all kind of iniquity, in so much that some are
cast, (I know not how,) into such a heat therewith, that it seems, they want
but the chaynge and turn of time, to put me in a greater heat then they
themselves would be in willingly, who also by their sinistrall reports of my
Sermon, would very feign cause others which heard me not, to be of their own
corrupt, and perverse judgments. I have therefore thought it expedient and
not without advise and counfaile, to call to my remembrance my said Sermon,
and to commit the same to writing (and to the judgments of the godly) wherein I
have used such diligence if I be not much deceived, that such as heard it shall
find not very many things added, but yet less left out or omitted, certainly,
to my knowledge not one sentence.

And now (right honorable) if I should follow that laudable custom of the
learned, which commonly do dedicate their works to such personages as they
think to be most worthy, and to such as be of honor, or worship, being
desirous to further virtue, and the sincere religion of Jesus Christ, with the
favorers of the same: To whom should I dedicate these my poor simple travels
but to your honor, who being not only my especial good master and Lord, as
full often I have felt, but also under God and the Queens Majesty, one of my
chief protectours and defenders against all such as would offer me injury?

And although I should lay a part all those respects, yet (my case standing
as it does) I know not to whom by better right I should dedicate this my
Sermon then to your honor, who among many other, both honorable and
worshipful ca^ witness with me, that for the time I was with you in Newhauen
the minister and preacher there, and also this last year with you in the North
parts, one of the preachers of the Queens Majesty's army, I used at both
places, when occasion was offered to speak plainly before your honor and the
rest, and yet not forgetting I trust, before whom I spoke, yea and when I saw
that great necessirie so required, and that duty drove me thereto, I
practiced (your honor well knows) a certain kind of discipline, even upon
those, that by birth and parentage were far above me. I do willingly and of
set purpose put your honor in mind of these things (which otherwise might
full well have been buried in oblivion) to the intent, that when such as so
stomach me for telling truth, shall understand, that as well your honor, as a
great many of other, men of high calling in this commonwealth, Gentlemen and
Captains of great worship, actiuitie, courage, and valiantnes, besides the
multitude of common Soldiers, were not only well pleased with my plain
speech among the^, in preaching against abuses, but also willing to redress
the same, and to show them very honorable, and worship full toward me both in
word and deed, for my plainenes with them: It may be that these men (by such a
president before their eyes) will somewhat qualify and content themselves
forasmuch as between such as I have named, and them, (if the question be for
worship, office or dignity) I see not well how there may be any comparison.
Our heavenly father preserve your honor with all yours, and grant you the
continuance of his love and favor.

Amen.
At Childockford this xxix. of January. 1570. Your Lordships most humble
servant, William Keth, minister of Gods word.

A Sermon made at Blanford Foru^, in the County of Dorset on Wensday the 17.
of Ianuari last past at the Session holde^ there. etc.
If I had not come and spoken unto John. 15. verse. 22.
them, they should not have had sin, but now they have no cloak for the yr
sins. etc.
OUr Savior Christ in this xv. of S. John does not only put his Apostles in
mind what great troubles were to come upon them for the profession of his name,
but he also shows, what should move those persecutours so to vex and to
trouble them. Haec omnia facient vobis John. 1^. 13.
propter nome^ meum, quia non nouerunt eum qui misit me: All these things
shall they do unto you, for my names sake, because they have not known him
which sent me. But least any man should think that those wicked persecutours
should under color of ignorance excuse the^ selves, Christ our Savior in
these words that I have read unto you, co^uinceth them, by iij. notable
reasons or Arguments, Three Arguments to convince the Phariseis.
prouyng their ignorance not to be simple, but rather wilful and malicious,
much like unto such as at noone day will of set purpose, close their eyes
because they will not see the light. Christ by his first reason or Argument
proves that they were enemies to his doctrine in these words. Si no^
venissem, and locutus fuissem eis, peccatum non haberent. Nunc aute^ non habent
quod praetexant peccato suo. If I had not come and spoken unto them (says
Christ) they should not have had sin, but now they have no cloak for their
sin.

By the 2. Argument Christ proves that they were the very enemies of God, in
hatyng his person as they did, because of his doctrine taught among the^. There
fore he says. Qui me odit, is and patre^ meu^ odit, he that hates me, hates
Uers. 23.
my father also. For the father and I am one. The third Argument shows how
they contemned his wonderful works, such was their hatred both to his
doctrine and person. Si opera non fecissem Uers. 24.
inter eos, quae nemo alius fecit, peccatum non haberent etc. If I had not done
works among them, which no other man did, they should not have had sin. etc.

But because time will not license me to prosecute these three Arguments of
Christ against them, I will stay only upon the first Argument, requestyng you
to observe three notes that may Three notes gathered of the first Argument.
be gathered of the same. The first is that no man can be excused before God by
ignorance, though he have not heard the word. The 2. is, that where the word
has sounded, there can no man have No cloak where the Gospel is preached.
a cloak for his sin. The third and last note is to show you what startyng
holes the wicked have to avoid their sin, and what shifts they have to put
their sins to other, or to escape punishment for sin, though to their own
confusion. But that I may have grace so to entreat of these things as may be
to the glory of God, and to the edificatio^ of such as are present, I shall
desire you that we all may join together in prayer. And in these our prayers.
etc.

Si no^ venissem, and locutus fuissem. The first thing I wished you to observe
upon this first argument of Christ, was this, that ignorance should excuse no
man before the judgment seat of Christ, which assertion although it may be
confirmed by many places of the scriptures, yet one or two places I trust may
suffice at this present. We read in in the 3. and 33. of Ezechiell, Ezech. 3.
17. and Cap. 33. 1^.
where God using a similitude from the wars says thus. If I bring the sword
upon a land, if the people of that land take a man from among them, and make
him their watchman, if when he sees the sword come upon the land, he blow the
trumpet and warn the people: Then he that hears the sound of the trumpet,
and will not be warned, if the sword come and take him away, his blood shall
be upon his own head: but if the watchman see the sword come and blow not
the trumpet, and the people be not warned, if the sword come and take away any
person from among them, he is taken away for his iniquity, but his blood will
I require at the watchmans hand. The Lord turns from the similitude to the
Prophet, and to all others which should take upon them the office of teaching
his people, The office and duty of Ministers.
putting them in mind of their duties, which is to tell the people their
sins: if being told, Then woe be unto blind and ignorant and slothful
guides.
they repent not, their blood shall be upon their own heads: but if for want of
warning the people perish, the^ shall their bloods (as the Prophet says) be
required at the watchmans hands. S. Paul also in the first to the Romans,
affirms, that for as much as that which may be known of God is manifest in
them (for God has showed it unto them) and that the invisible things of him,
that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the creation of the
world, being considered in his works, to the intent that they should be
without excuse. These and such places of Scripture do take all excuse from the
sons of men, although they have not heard the sound of the Gospel: So that,
if traitors and rebels, rebel against their lawful Magistrates, although they
never heard or red that of Paul in the 13. to the Romans Let every soul be Romans
1. 19. and 20.
subject to the higher powers. etc. Or that of S. Peter the first Epist. Romans
13. 11. 1. Pet. 2.
and 2. chapt. Submit your selves unto all manner of ordinances of man, for the
Lords sake. Yet notwithstanding, like as it cannot excuse the^ before the
judgment seat here in earth to plead ignorance, and that they thought it
not to be so heinous a crime to rebel, no more can it excuse the^ before God.
For the very law of nature shall suffice to condemn them of ingratitude.

The Magistrates in like manner, A warning to Magistrates. (...)*
where as God has placed them in authority to ye end they should defend the
innocent, and punish the wicked, if they, taking their pleasures, never seek
to know their duties, out of Gods word, but for lack of knowledge of God, and
ye laws of the realm, or the common weal wherein they are Magistrates, do
punish the godly and maintain the wicked, can ignorance excuse them, either
before God or man? no, no, for though they never heard that in the law; Thou
shall not in judgment bow to the Exodus 23. 3 Leuiticus. 29. 65. Deu. 1. 178
16. 16. Pro. 24. 23 Psalm. 2. 10. Iam. 2. 2.
right hand, nor to the left hand, and that of the Prophet in the second
Psalm, Be ye learned O ye rulers of the earth. Yet shall the law of nature
condemn them, which teaches them to help others, as they would be helped
the^ selves.

And the same may be said of the ministers of the Church, and The Church is
full of such which would to God they might be thrust out and good men let
alone.
such as ought to be the feeders of Christ's flock, of whom God by the Prophet
Malachy says, that their lips should preserve knowledge. If such should enter
into the ministry, not for any zeal, but for ease, for living, and for
worldly respects (as a number do) being beastly, ignorant, and far from
that knowledge which the Lord requires: certainly, it is so far of, that this
their ignorance shall excuse them before God, that it shall suffice deeply to
condemn them. And thus much shortly touching the first note, upon these words
of our Savior, where he says: If I had not come. etc.

The second note teaches us The second note.
that where the word has sounded in men's ears, there can they not bring
ignorance, or any other thing to excuse them, or to cloak their sin, yet the
words of Christ be such, as some might think the contrary. For Christ says,
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should not have had sin. But
the whole scope of the scriptures do evidently prove, that No man without sin.
no man ever was, is, or can be without sin, the son of God only excepted.

And the holiest men that ever were, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David, Daniell,
and Job, felt their great imperfectio^s, acknowledging them selves to be earth
and ashes, desiring God not to weye their iniquities, nor to enter into
judgment with the^. Christ therefore in this place of S. John, discharges not
men of all sin, though he had not come unto them, but now that he came and
spoke unto them, and they not to make their profit of his coming, he now
charge Wilful sin, obstinate sin, and the sin of infidelity.
them with wilful sin, with obstinate sin, and with the sin of
infidelity.

In the ix. Chap. of John the Disciples ask Christ, who had sinned 1. John. 9.
2. 3. etc.
either he that was borne blind, or his pare^tes? but Christ answers that
neither he, nor his parents had sinned, but that the works of God should be
showed on him. And yet who knows not that both the blind man and his
pare^tes were sinners as other men. But Christ in saying to the Jews they
should not have had sin, said as much as as thus unto them.

If I had not come among you according to the very time appointed, at the place
before spoken of, and of the lineage before prophesied, if I had not preached
unto you, if I had not done such miracles as no other man did, then might you
have pleaded ignorance though it should not altogether have excused you: but
now that I have accomplished all things that were before told you, what so
ever ye now shall allege in the defense of your selves, it shall not clear you,
nor dis charge you of wilful and obstinate sin.

Now I will be so bold before your honors and worships to apply these words of
Christ, as the present time does offer occasion.

There are in this our country many things far out of frame, and though I
can not touch all, yet some of them I purpose to lay before you, besechyng you
to consider of them. And here I mind not to make rehearsal what shameful,
and traiterous libels are cast abroad, or set up in the chief Towns of this
shyre, by seditious and wicked Papists Traiterous libels set up by ye Papists.
against such as profess the Religion, because they are as yet unknown:
neither do I mind to show you how shamefully, and cruelly the poor Ministers
of this country are misused (I mean not the dissemblyng Papists which can
counterfayte to serve the time, for they have to much ease) how some are
threatened, some imprisoned, I know How the Ministers are handled by the
Papists for not consentyng to superstition.
not by what law, and some put in danger of life, because they will not
consent to superstition. As for these things (because they be matters as some
say touching the Church) the ordinaries should reform. But I purpose to open
unto you such abuses as to you the reformation thereof does belong. It has
pleased God to make you Magistrates and fathers of this country, not only to
see that common quietness be kept among the people, but also that God might have
his due honor and glory, so The office of the Minister, and the office of the
Magistrate.
that as the Ministers office is to exhort and reprove by the word, your office
is to defend the good, and to punish by the sword, I mean to execute justice
upon such as transgress the laws of God.

The Lord God has commanded, The abuse of the Saboth day.
and so do the laws of this Realm that the Sabbath day should be kept holy,
that the people should cease from labor, to the end they should hear ye word
of God, and give them selves to godly exercises, but custom and sufferaunce
has brought it to pass that the multitude do most shamefully profane the
Sabbath day, and have altered the very The Sabbath day turned into a Reuelyng
day.
name thereof, so as where god call leth it his holy sabbath, the multitude call
it there reuelyng day, which day is spent in bulbeatings, bearebeatings,
bowlings, dicyng, cardyng, daunsynges, drunkenness, and whoredom.

If these shameful disorders have been kept from your knowledge, yet are you
sinners before god: but if you have heard of the^, and have yet suffered them,
or if ye shall from henceforth now that you have heard of it, suffer it: Then
these words of Christ touch you very near, who speaks yet out of his
Scriptures unto you, and out of my mouth unto you (though a poor minister)
saying, If I had not come and spoken unto you, you should not have had sin,
but now you have no cloak for your sin.

There have been also very good orders set forth as well for the relieuyng of
the poor, as for Sturdy va gabondes not looked unto.
the punishment of sturdy vagabondes which loyter in every corner as though
there were no officers in the country to punish them, and if any rebuke them
for ranging from place to place, they will not fear to shake up such a one,
and say that he takes more upon him then the justice himself, who can see
the^, and suffer them. These are their reports which are not rashly to be
credited. It is a wonder to consider with what difficulty any thing is gotten
toward the relief of ye poor, but how ready a number be to help and relieve
sturdy vagabondes, all the world may see. So that if any tything man, or The
poor neglected and vagabonds relieved.
Constable should according to his duty punish such, or go about to reform
any thing besides within his charge, such (though rare to be found) are
envied, challenged, counted very busy and that they will heap more upon their
heads in one year, then they will put of in vii. etc. If you have not heard
of these things, yet are you sinners before God, but if you have heard of
the^, and suffer that the same unreformed, and now also after that Christ out
of the mouth of his Minister has told you, then these words of Christ touch
you very near, who says of you, If I had not come and spoken unto them they
might seem to have some excuse for their sin, but now have they not to cloak
their sin with all.

What traiterous practices Traiterous practices against the state.
there have been of late among the Papists to overthrow the state, you are not
ignorant, and how busy they be on this side, and on the other side the Seas,
by seditious bills, and books to stir sedition and tumulte. The
consideration whereof has moved the Queens Majesty, and the honorable
Counsel to set forth earnest proclamations for redress of the same. But what
a lamentable case is this (the matter is eue^ now before you) that a poor man
bringyng to light the seditious books of a Papist, and delivering them to the
Lord Lieutenaunt of this shyre, should (being This matter would be looked upon.
stomaked for this fact) be set by the heels for matters 4. or five year old,
to be driued from his house, his house to be rifled, he and his, feign to
forsake the Town for fear, the offe^der to be in manner quiet and untouched,
saving bound to appear now before you. And that that more is: the Lord
Lieutenaunt sendyng his servant and officer (for the time) to take order in
this matter, to be so reviled, and put in fear of his life: if you should
suffer this unpunished (as I know you will not) I leave to the consideration of
your wisdoms, what inconveniences will shortly come to your selves: what
would Ma^lius Torq. that noble Romayne do, if Manlius Torq.
he were now here in this case, who being chief of the army of the Romans,
and having a son of a valiant courage encountryng with the common enemy, and
gettyng the victory, yet, because he attempted the same contrary to his fathers
commandment, his father caused his head to be stricken from his shoulders, to
teach all others how they contemned authority? If any should gather by this
that I have said, that I went about to move the Magistrates to cruelty, let
the^ understand, that they are very much deceived. I know that God from the
beginning has abhorred cruel tyrauntes, and their tyranny, The fearful end
of tyrauntes.
yea the very ends so horrible of Cayn, Saul, Antiochus, Herod* and since
the Ascension of Christ of Nero, Caligula, Domitian, Comodus, Decius,
Maxentius, Aurelian, Dioclesian, with many other tyraunts, may suffice to fear
all others from the like tyranny. My meaning is that lenity should not put
Justice to silence. That same that is written of Domitian and Nerua, can not to
often be called to memory. It is doubted whether the cruelty of the one, or
foolish pity of the other, did more harm in the common wealth. It is a
miserable common weal where it is lawful for a man to do nothing, but yet
more miserable, where every man may do what he list.

To conclude this second part, if Papists, rebels, magistrates, ministers,
etc. can not be excused by ignorance, as ye heard in the first part, how much
more vain shall ye excuses of such be, as have heard the word, and that
Christ out of his scriptures, and out of the mouths of his ministers so often
times have spoken unto them? so that now such may assure themselves that they
shall have no cloak for their sin, but that shall fall upon them which Luke
affirms 12. chap. The servant Luc. 12. 47
which knows his masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many
stripes.

But now it is time that I The third note.
come to the third and last part, and so an end. Our Savior Christ knew how
necessary it was to take from the unbelieving Jews all excuse, and that they
might have nothing to cloak and to color their sin, for he was not ignorant
how prone man was to sin, and yet how hard a thing it was to make him
confess his sin, how ready he would be to lay his sin upon others from
himself, what clokes he would have to color his sin, Man's corruption in
acknowledggyng and confessyng his sin.
and what starting holes to avoid the punishment for his sin. If ye will
learn how hard it was to make the Jews confess their sin, read ye 8. of
S. Ioh. where John. 8.
you may see, how stoutely they stood to the iustifiyng of themselves. And
when Christ at the judgment shall charge the wicked, that when he was hungry,
they gave him no meat. etc. They shall ask him when they Mat. 25. 44.
saw him hungry, or thyrsty, and did not give him, as though Christ unjustly
charged them.

But if the fault be so evident, that it cannot be avoided, yet will we cover
and hide our selves with fig leaves, and in the wods, as did our father Adam
before us, who, when God asked him whether he had eaten of the forbidden
fruit, and that the thickets could no longer hide him, yet he could be
contented to lay the fault to the woman, so Gene. 3.
well as he loved her. And when God asked the like question of ye woman, she
posted it of, to the Serpent, and could not abide that the fault should rest
upon herself.

The most part of men (and The grace of Papists in postyng their faults ever
unto others.
especially the Papists) have a singular grace in this, to shift of faults
from themselves to others, and such as accuse them. And in very deed it is in
all places a thing to common. Let honest men upon their oaths, present great
crimes, either before the temporal Magistrate, or the spiritual officer, it
is often times seen that the offenders go away less discouraged, the^ those
which present them. What encourageme^ts are these to farther justice, when
matters pass so slenderly?

There was of late a papistical Prelate of this shyre, who in the Such fellows
would be had in remembrance.
Pulpit cast out these, or such like words in effect: that where me^ merueyled
he spoke no more against the Pope, he did them to understand, that he knew no
hurt by ye pope, if he were a good man, he prayed God to continue him in his
goodness, if he were an ill man, he prayed God to amend him.

What words were these of a preacher? what subject is there so simple which
knows not, that that vile Italian of Rome is a traitor to this Realm, who
has of late by his beastly Bulls sturred The popes Bulls.
the subjects of this Realm, to rebel against their lawful magistrates, and
has sought what he might, and yet does what he can, to pull the crown from
the Queen Majesty's head: and is this fit that a Papist which shall speak
such words of the Pope as I have recited, or the like in effect, shall yet
continue not only an ordinary over a great multitude, Note this governor of
others.
but also a common preacher (such as he is) in this shyre. Such are the subtle
shyftes of crafty Papists, and such a face or countenance of honesty they
can make with a multitude that shall cleave unto the^ to speak in their cause:
that they are able to cast a myste before the eyes of such, as are to be
reuere^ced both for their wisdom, learning, godlynes and virtue.

But in the time of Queen Mary, if ten Protestants had come against one
Papiste, could they have been heard though their matter had been never so
good? and shall now ten Papists prevail against one Protestant, though their
matter be never so ill? God forbid. And here I have a suit unto you. I beseech
you, ye honorable and A caveat for admitting of witnesses.
worshypfull even for the love of God, that ye will have good regard what
witnesses ye admit in matters of weight, and especially in Gods cause, when the
controversy rises between man and man: that you will consider what the men
be, and not how many they be. I will show you a notable story concerning the
the multitude, or number of witnesses, and how some time they are to be
suspected.

There was within my remembrance a Minister of this shyre, who understanding
what great disorders there were commonly at these Church Ales upon ye Saboth
day, required his flock committed to his charge (as he was preaching unto
them) both in Gods name, ye Queens Majesty's name, and the Lord Lieutenauntes
name of the country, that they should not assemble the people together, to
offend God by their ungodly behauiours, but rather give them selves upon the
Sabbath day to serve God, according to their duties. The people could in no
wise away with this exhortation, but certain of them, went to the Justices to
desire license for the coming together of the people. Sundry of the Justices
both godly and wisely denied them. At le^ght one Justice they found who for
good considerations (as he thought) gave them a license for certain days I
may not say to commit disorders, for we may well think no Justice would be so
indiscreet, but they abused his authority. The Minister seeing ye great
disorders in his Parish, the next Sabbath day after they had obtained license,
wrote to the Justice of yt same, and wrote nothing but that he will yet stand
to. The Justice called those that had abused his authority and reproved them,
but now ye shall see the multitude.

There were (by the Justices report) 36. which offered up unto him their names
(which was as much to say, as that they would have perjured them selves, if
the Justice would have put them to their oaths) to testify against the
Minister, that where he complained of disorder, they to ye contrary affirmed,
that there was no disorder at all. And yet it was manifest that the same
Sabbath day was shamefully profaned, with bulbeatynges, boulynges, drunkenness,
dauncynges, and such like, in so much as men could not keep their servants
from lyinge out of their own houses the same Sabbath day at night, but yet in
the Judgments of. 36. (or there about) there was no hurt, nor disorder at al
committed.

This I have opened unto you, to the end ye may see what credit is some time
to be given to the multitude, if it be a matter with touches the glory of God.
But if ye will credit the multitude, I will show how ye may trust, and
credit them without an oath, and not to be deceived. Where as the Queens
Majesty in the beginning of her reign, commanded and gave charge, that the
Clergy should so plainly read the Scriptures that the people might be
edified; and that the people should so diligently hear the word of God, that
they might make their profit of the same: if we should suppose the case that a
contrary commandment had then been given, but by some mean officer, that the
old popish Priests (who for living sake remain still in their benefices)
should so mumble out their service that none might understand them, or where
there are some which can read plainly, there the multitude to be so negligent
in hearing, that they have for these xij. years, learned nothing, no not the
Lords prayer in English, if the multitude would proteste before you both of
popish Priests, and people, that they had followed and observed this contrary
commandment, assuredly ye might credit them, for neither do a number of the
Popish Clergy so read, that the people may understand them, neither do the
people make their profit of that which they hear, where it is plainly read
unto them. Or, where as the Queens Majesty gave charge in the beginning of
her reign, Disobedient are they that deface not all monumentes of Idolatry.
that all monumentes of Idolatry should be defaced, if but a very mean
officer had then genen a contrary commandment that both the Popish
Priests, and Popish people, should hide these monumentes of Idolatry in
their houses, and secret places, in hope of that day they look and long for,
ye might believe them that they had observed this contrary commandment, with
all diligence as it notably falls out at this present in prooffe.

But in touching the inconstancy of the multitude, I except such among them as
fear God, who notwithstanding be very few compared to the rest.

I will show you but of one startyng hole more, that the wichaue to put of
sin, and to anoyde the punishment of sin, and so will I commit you unto
God.

When the Jews were so convinced in their consciences, that they could not put
of their sin, and turn it to others, the^ they devised a pretty trick to An
other usual trick of the Papists.
quyte them selves, which was to make God (as it were) their feed man. And
for the sins they daily committed, they would be very busy in offryng
Sacrifices, and exercisyng them selves in Ceremonies, thynkyng by the very
work wrought, to bind God to pardon their offenses. A like kind of policy
was practiced by the Papists in the time of Popery to bind GOD to forgive
them their sins. For where as in the time of Christmasse, the disorders were
marvelous in those days, (and how it is now God sees) at Candlemasse, which
some count the end of Christmasse, the papists would be even with God, by
that time they had offered him a bribe, and such a bribe (being a candle or
taper) as a very mean officer, would take foul scorn of, though he could do
a man but small pleasure in his suit.

Shroft Twesday was a day of great glottonie, surffeting, and dronkennes, but
by Ash Wensday at night, they thought God to be in their debt. On Goodfriday,
they offered unto Christ eggs, and bacon to be in his favor till Easter day
was past. The sins committed between Easter, and Whytsontyde they were fullye
discharged by the pleasant walks, and processions in the rogyng, I should
say, Rogation Week. What offenses soever happened from that time to Midsommer,
the fumes of the Friars dedicated to John, Peter, and Thomas Becket the
traitor, consumed them. And as for all disorders from that time to the
beginning of Christmasse again, they were in this country all roonge away,
upon all Hallounday and all Souls day at night last past.

But because the Jews did so shamefully abuse the Sacrifices, and other
Ceremonies which were ordained to put them in mind of the promised seed to
come, therefore he rejects them, and says unto them Esaias. 1. 11. and 12. 13.
in the first of Esaias. What have I to do with the multitude of your Sacrifices?
I am full of the burnte offrynges of Rams, and of the fat offedde beasts:
yea he demands of them, who required those things at their hands, that
they should come and tread in his courts. He requires them to bring no more
oblations to him in vain. He says in the 50. Psalm. That all Psalm. 50. 10. and
11. 12. etc.
the beasts of the forest are his, and the beasts on a thousand mountains,
so that he needs not their bribes, he would have them to offer unto him
laud, and praise, to call upon him. So says God to the brybyng Papists, who
requires these things at your hands which I never commanded, as your
candles at Candlemasse, your Popish penance on Ashewensday, your eggs, and
bacon on Goodfriday, your Gospelles at superstitious crosses, decked like
Idols, your fires at Midsommer, and your ringyng at Allhallountide for all
Christian souls? I require says God a sorrowful and repentaunt heart, to be
merciful to the poor, to show your selves faithful etc.

But as the Jews thought them selves by these their practices sure inoughe
touching the sauegard of their souls: So had they an other shift in a readynes
to avoid such dangers as might come toward their bodies, in offendyng the
politic laws, which was to bribe the Officers, Rulers, and Magistrates, and
to corrupt them with rewards. And in deed the Scriptures affirm that bribes
are of that strength, that they blind the wise. And that the Rulers of the
Jews, were given much to take bribes, is manifest by all the Prophets,
especially in Esaias Esaias. 1. 23.
the first where God says. Thy rulers are companions of thieves, every one
loves gifts, and follows after rewards, they judge not the fatherles,
neither does the widows cause come before the^. The very heathen did abhor
this bribyng, as may appear by Cambises Cyrus son, who Cambises the son of
Cyrus.
though he were a wicked king yet he thought it a very semely sight that a
brybyng Judges skin should be hanged over the Judgment seat: and that wise
and prudent Prince. Alexander Alexander Seuerus.
Seuerus smothered to death one that he made most account of, for the like
offense.

But we do read to the perpetu all praise of Lucius Valerius, who Lucius Va
lerius.
being consul of Rome, and dying whilst he was consul, having by his life
time ye custody of the treasure of Rome, and in his keepyng; was yet so free
from making him rich by unlawful means, yt he was found so poor at his
death, that the charges of his burial was paid by the common people. And that
of Quintus Cincenius Quintus Cincenius.
is not to be passed over, who being taken from the ploughe and made Dictator
of Rome: after that he had gotten many noble victories, and had done marvelous
things for the common weal, returned home to the plough again* from whence
he was taken, so endyng his life with a contented mind as one not desirours to
become rich by bribes and rewards.

Wherefore, if such as be offenders in ye common wealth would assaye to corrupt
those that be in office, and authority, by their bribes and rewards to escape
condign punishment: Such as be officers should use to answer them as GOD
answered the Jews, saying: Who requires these things at your hands? So
should officers say to offenders, who required these bribes at your hands?
God said to the Jews, will I eat the flesh of Bulls? So should they say, have
we not Bull bief enough of our own, but that we must be corrupted by your
bribing Bull bief or Oxen? be not the hills and valies ours? have not we
possessions enough to live by, but that we must bear a port by such unlawful
means to overthrow Justice?

If rulers and officers would thus answer bribe offerers, then should they
avoid those punishments, and plagues which God threatens to fall upon
bribers: and wicked men would not be so bold to sin in hope to escape
punishment by geuyng of bribes.

The time calls upon me to make an end, you have heard upon this first
Argument of Christ these three notes: first that ignorance can excuse no man.
Secondly, that where the word has sounded, there man can have no cloak for his
sin. Thirdly, you have heard how loath man is to acknowledge his sin, how he
puts of his sin to others, and what shifts he has to qualify, and to
escape punishment for his sin.

Now let us beseech almighty God our heavenly Father to illuminate our minds
with his holy spirit, and that you which be the Magistrates, and fathers of
this our country, may so quyte your selves in your offices, that negligence be
not laid to your charges, at that great and dread full day, but rather that you
following the steps of that good steward in the Gospel, unto whom Christ
said, O thou good servant thou have been faithful in little, I will therefore
make thee a ruler over much: so you after that you have passed your lives here,
in holiness and righteousness, the Lord Jesus at his coming may draw you up
unto him, and so reign with him, to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost,
be all praise, honor, and glory.

Amen.

