An Epitaph, or rather a short discourse made upon the life and death of D.
Boner sometimes unworthy Bishop of London, which dyed the v. of September in
the Marshallie.

Imprinted at London at the long Shop adjoining unto S Mildreds Church in the
Pultrie by John Alide

An. do. 1569. Sep. 14.

An Epitaph, upon the life and death of D. Bonner, who died the v. of
September. 1569.
Quam cito de viuis extirpabuntur iniqui?
Fidentum domino pars bonafortis erit:
Per breue te^pus adhuc et non erit impius vltra
Quaeretur, nec erit quo fuit ante loco.
HOw soon are wicked men cut of,
from such as live in fame?
Yet is the Lord the postion good,
of those that love his name.
A little while as yet therefore,
and there shall not remain:
One wicked man hence forth to be,
of all the wicked train.
The wicked man shall then be sought,
but he shall not find grace:
There to be found where he before,
was known to have a place.
And therefore joy all English hearts
that fear the Lord aright
And have the love of native land,
always before your sight.
Lift up your hearts, rejoice in him,
for woork of his own hand:
For I of happy tidings mean,
to let you understand.
Which cheerful wilhe sure to all,
of faithful English blood:
Whose hearts did never hate the truth,
nor Gospel yet with stood.
A man there was a quondam great
of might, of pomp and praise:
Of English blood though English love,
were small in all his ways.
As did appeer by Roomishe acts,
proceeding from his hight:
Which proou'de him not an Englishman
but sure a Romain right.
For never faithful English heart,
was foe to native soil:
Yet he in native land did seek,
Christ's faithful flock to spoil.
And also then he wrought much (...),
to Englands cheifest stays:
He spilt their blood, and mocked Gods word
whereby his gave him praise.
Seducing men from sacred truth,
to walk in Roomishe trade:
Whereby this land was ransackt so,
so spoild and so bare made.
That many yet do feel the smart,
of that unhappy time:
Though God have cle^sed now these parts
from such most ugly crime.
Wherewith this land infected was,
by Balams brood throughout:
Who sought a mischeef huge and great,
as then to bring about.
And more then so, renereace by blood
the great and pining lack:
Of pastors pure and pillars stro^ng,
which then were brought to wrack.
Without remorse his niaces and he,
full sore did them torment:
By seeking of their death and loss,
which loved Christ's testament.
And more then so, of worthy wightes
of whom bereft are we:
Which left their wealth, their ease and life,
that Christ might gained be.
And yet not so, this Cirus was son of Cambises (...) of ye Medes and
Persians, who watring against the Scithians. Tomiris the Queen having by
policy slain Cirus with 100000. Persiians did cut of his head and cast it in a
bole of ma^s blood saying. Be satisfied with blood which thou (...) thirsted
Cyrus left
much humam blood to spil:
And so ceace his devouring rage,
and most blasphemous will.
But more and more he sought outrage,
(as all his mates were bent)
By lies and tales and popish toys,
Gods gospel to prevent.
As one in place by Satan sent,
Gods instrument of ire.
To daunt the pride of England then,
(which did it much require)
And so no dout this He spared none yt he either durst or could be bold to put
to pain for Gods truth.
Boner did,
he spared no degree:
Ne wise, ne grave, ne rich, ne poor,
he pitied no man he.
Ne lame, ne blind, such was his thirst
ne fools, ne wise in name:
Yea * nobles blood as (...) triue,
he sought to bring to flame.
When pastors roum and Bishops (...),
of London See he had:
As beauty then of all his days,
(a Woolf in Lamb skin clad)
His rage (...) the seat with crime,
that nations far could say:
A drunken man does take in hand,
to guide the ship her way.
Not drunk with wine tho judgment might,
declare he loou'd it more:
Then Christ's pasture sheep (...),
he should have set great store.
But bloody drunk since he not one,
did spare of Christ's sheep:
Which did desire their conscience pure,
by Gospel for to keep.
Yet he did watch, though as a Woolf,
Christ's lambs for to devour:
He watched not to feed their souls,
nor yet to preach one hour.
For sure though he had Bishops rowm,
Paul says he was unfit. 1. Tim. 3.

In such a place of Christ's flock,
at any time to sit.
Whose judgment was so small and weak
in Christ's testament:
And learning less to teach the flock,
with that so slow intent.
Should (...) obtain of grace (...),
now for to have a praise? (...). the sow tea cheth Miner. what ye sow is by
nature needs no expressing.

Whose retcheles rage and swinishe life,
shall (...) in all men's days.
His knoweledge was to base no dout,
to sit in Bishops seat:
Though he perhaps in Popes decrees,
through trauail might be great.
And Civil law right prompt he knew, Minerua was daugh. of Jupiter (...)
called of the (...) Gods of wisdom (...) all good (...), now this (...) in
(...) one (...) him of when he might better be taught.

though all for private gain:
And Cannons to, for therein was
his only studeous pain.
And all but to uphold the pride,
of Rome which was to il:
Or else to find away how he,
Gods childrens blood might spil.
But who can boste in Gods decrees,
of Bonners knoweledge now?
In Scriptures force his answers showed
him learned as a Cow.
Or as an Ass which judgment lacks,
in sense of holy writ:
Though he obtaind a bitter space,
in Bishops seat to sit.
Sus taught Mineruam there to long,
which held usurped place:
Til Christ by force of Gospel truth,
this Bufo in a Tode so (...) to Boner because of (...) venomous mind.
Bufo did displace.
Asinus
And took the Ass from his repast,
of playing on the harp:
Whole horned paws in harmony, (...) taken by those that are apt to no goodness
or discipline:

made neither flat nor sharp.
But spilt the sound so long a time,
when mischeef reignd at will:
Til Pallas the greek name of Minerua named before.
Pallas came, who took the Ass
down from Parnassus a (...) Thessalia (...) Aoniae (...), (...) the (...)
Parnassides or Aonides did (...)
Parnassus hill.
And tied him up at maunger yet,
which once did there remain:
Though there he felt not his deserts
nor half deserved pain.
To lodge on boords as he had made,
some other lodge before:
With hands and feet, to starve in stocks,
with gives to be full sore.
No, no, in (...), his torments were
none such nor half so vile:
He (...) has been sure, but yet
not tasted all this while.
Of (...) thrall, of hungers bit,
in dungeon deep to groan:
Yet he of (...) life full often,
to many made his moan.
Not sure for pain which he did feel
but for the greatest greef:
That he could not be fed as yet,
(in slaughter who was cheef)
With blood of Saints and christian flesh,
wherewith his lust was fed:
That he could not exalt the Pope,
still here as supreme head.
That he could not his holy Lambs,
and leaden Bulls bestow:
His Pardons and his obsequies,
men's souls to over throw.
That truth had over thrown with power
his brutishe (...) intent:
Which thought by fire and fagots force,
Gods Gospel to prevent.
This wrought his only greef and woe,
as well it did appeer:
For other cause sure there was none,
that ever I could hear.
He lay full soft and had enough
of Beer, and change of wine:
Both flesh and fish; both fruits and foul,
most delicate and fine.
His table never wanted suits,
at will it to maintain:
He lacked never cators he,
his ayds took always pain.
To keep their God, their hope, their trust,
their staff of Roomishe stay:
Because with him they wished a change,
still looking for a day.
And not with him but with the rest,
of all their hellishe rabble:
Which are in their blind errors still,
most hard and wilful (...).
Who prisoners are as foes to Christ,
to Christian Queen and land:
But cheef this quondam which made boste
if he might have in hand.
His former pour and time again,
to bless and curse at will:
Where one he burnt, on thousands then
he would his lust fulfill.
This was his boste and blooddy thirst,
wherein his ayds did trust:
That once again the Roomishe whore,
might have her filthy lust.
Although since he by due desert,
has been in hold for sin:
Such mercy has been showed him there,
as he showed none I win.
To such as were his betters far,
in knoweledge, birth and (...):
Yea and in life Apostolic,
of much more godly name.
For sure his manners were most (...),
at all times plainly showed:
Why? wa'st not he that sought the tree,
of our increace (...) hewed?
Who shamelesly has stand thus long,
at royal mercyes grace:
Although his deeds and words full (...),
did crave another place.
But what said those of Balams (...),
there is no law whereby:
The sword of Justice could him strike,
nor cause why he should die.
Although when as the Dragon ruled,
right worthy wightes were slain:
But Tho. Cranmer. archbishe. of Cant. who^ by their Cannons they could not put
to death, til ye Pope arayning his Image at Room condemned it burnt it, and
the^ was he burned at Oxford.
one when cannon law could not,
he was adjudged pain.
Without the Cannons councels he,
that Cardinal Pool who could not be arch bish. by the Canons til the other
were dead.
Pool might have his place:
By Popes assent and Roomishe rout,
which ror'd him to deface.
If Popes assent when English laws,
nor Cannons cuold preuail:
Might giltles make so wise a sage,
by fiery flames to quail.
Why might not Princes lawful power
have made a just decrie?
That such, deserving open shame,
might recompensed be.
But only that pure mercy did,
keep back that right did crave:
In recompensing him with death,
as all the rest might have.
Yet he tryumpht as whole and sound,
his purpose whole to make:
Right many yet (if time would serve)
to bring unto the stake.
And once again if fortune stood,
he might have up the Mass:
(But see how now the Lord of hosts
has made his foe like grass)
Who bragd and boasted in his grease,
to wash the tile anew:
And (...) an end to his devise,
which yet he never knew.
And so the rest with cheerful sound,
at every news that came:
Sang as the Proverb old has been
Lauds ante victoriam.
Since monst'rous corpse with delicates,
so monst'rously was blown:
Whose monst'rous mind with poys'ning words
in grave is overthrown
But what? did he repent of all
his blooddy sinful race?
And learn by Gods word to amend,
his life so void of grace?
Nay sure, til time of present death
he changed not his mind:
But as he lived a foe to Christ,
so dyed most wilful blind.
Oh yet though he had lived so il,
Gods mercy is not bace:
To such as think that Ihesus Christ,
can all their sins deface.
But as this Eresich. was (...) of, Thessalia who (...) Ceres and cut down her
woods, at last beig stricken with a (...) was compeld to (...) his (...) flesh.
Eresichthon lived,
in spite and rage to spoil:
So in his end of mighty Jove,
he took a deadly foil.
Not that he died, but that in death
his health he did deniet
For sure non mori turpe est,
sed turpiter mori.
And yet though Exesichthons end,
hapt not unto this foe:
To eat his flesh since Boners mates,
in stie did fat him so.
Yet viler end had he no dout,
Then Eresichthons was:
Because their times were far unlike,
as it did come to pass.
The one a Christian was in name
the other Pagan proud:
Yet in there acts of manners like,
as may be well avowd.
He, Ceres sought, this Thesus Christ,
and his to bring to wrack:
He did starve, this with grease died,
though grace from him went back.
Whereby all such as blinded were,
by fau'ring of his acts
May see what judgment is preparde,
to recompense their factes.
And therefore houle all Balams seed,
and weep both most and least:
Which bear the mark (in such a (...)
of that il fau'red beast.
But English hearts which love Gods (...)
our Queen and English land:
Rejoice, since hope of foes is (...)
by force of Gods right hand.
Since filthy flesh does lie in grave,
though soul I (...) be il:
Which lived and died so stout a foe
to Christ's death and will.
But what though blooddy corpse of his
be forste to lie full low:
His blooddy factes and deeds most vile, and Thoosa a great (...) ster having
but one eye which was in his forehed, he was of the i will of Scicilia into
which Ulysses being cast by (...) of tem pest, and hap, (...) on yt cave of
this Cyclops lost 4. of his men, who would have devoured yt (...) Ulysses mas
hing him (...) had not with a (...) bo red out his eye.

from hence shall no man know?
Shall treason so conspired: shall pride?
shall blasphemy lie dead?
No fame from earth to upper skies,
his wickedness shall spread.
His brutishe tigrishe toil in time,
of his most high renown:
T'extoll the power and pomp of him,
that weres the triple crown.
His rage and currishe cruel spite,
against his cuntrie men:
His butcherly device to waste,
the flesh of Christians then.
His false surmise and murdring spite,
which showed him then to be:
A Poliphe mus or Cyclops was son of Neptune
Poliphemus right, which flue,
in three years hundreds three.
Not of Ulysses soldiers sure,
but Christians truly tried:
Which were devoured while he (...)
the Ruther for to guide.
Shall now Philonides was (...) big (...) Miletae (now (...) Malta) altogether
so folishe and un learned yt (...) him (...) a Proverb.
Philonides lie dead?
shall Serpentinishe rage
So sleep? Nay sure his wickedness,
shall live the worlds age.
His stoutnes shall remain (...) showed,
in time of his conflict:
Who as a subject did deny,
to have his heart adict.
And as a foe to Christ (his word)
and to our gracious Queen:
Wished with his mates most trat'rofluy
some others reign I ween. Indoctior (...) will say (...) was well (...) ned, I
(...) unt, yet in knoweledge of (...) ly (...) Philoni. (...) ding his (...).

Beside his (...) life,
before and in this case:
Though corpse be dead yet death cannot,
these horrors quite deface:
He suffered was full ten years space,
by favor him to win:
(As Gospels nature is) yet he,
could never once begin.
For to repent (though favor he,
deserved had but small:
At those, which now in his distress,
did show him most of all.)
But (...) and mocked those, as yet
which gladly would him teach:
But chiefly in his death, such men
as Gospel soundly preach.
And therefore since in life of his,
no virtue was to praise:
In wealth newo no spark of grace,
which lived and spent his days.
So like a Cyclops in his den,
deserving no good fame:
Since God has cut of such a (...) breeds among Bees much (...) Be, and
always lives in the Hiue neyer com, ming out to gather Honey, but (...)
deuouteth that which the Be does (...). and at last the Be and all.
Drone
can we but praise his name?
And eke beseech th'almigtie Jove,
the number to fulfill:
In cutting of the rest with speed,
that hear the beast good will.
Who sure may shame at his vile race,
but more at his (...) end:
And sore lament his fearful state,
which now did not amend.
Though all his life he had been bent,
yet now to stand so stout:
Denying Christ at his last breath,
Is fearful out of dout.
This may (...) as God has lent,
me grace to rule my pen:
In blasing forth the deeds and fame,
(before all Christian men.)
Of Romans greasy God, whose life
and death (so worthy shame:)
I have displayed, and therefore now,
such shall be much to blame.
Which carry at truth and stomach this
that eury man can tell:
Through out this land and others to,
exe this, which knew it well.
God save our Queen Elizabeth,
and bring her ioys to il:
And root out those with speed from us
which bear the (...) good will.
Amen.
T. Knell. Iu.

A Commemoration or Dirige of Bastard Edmonde Boner, alias Savage, usurped
Bisshoppe of London.

Compiled by Lemeke Auale.

Episcopatum eius accipiet alter.

Anno Domini.

1569.

Imprinted by P. O.

The Preface.
MAtters being yet in doubt, may with questions and reasons, be brought out
of doubt: but things being without doubt, ought not with the subteltie of
words, be brought into doubt. As without all doubt Edmonde Boner late
usurped bishop of London, was a bastard, and also the soonne of a Bastard:
that is a Bastard in gross, and a Bastard can not, neither may not be a
bishop. Boner was a Bastard, ergo no bishop; and this is a true conclusion.
This is not true said an old Dunsticall fellow, sittyng at the table with a
grave learned Lawier of the common Law, and an eloquente Ciuilian, that were
all three together: the one frouned, the second did bite his lip, the third
in a great rage said: men may say what they will now a days, and belie the
truth as you have done, he was a blessed confessor, although a bastard, and a
true bishop, both by Gods Laws, the Canonical laws and the laws of this
realm of England. To this they said all Amen. Prove you the contrary said
they, and we will yield unto you: will you: he, then will I prove him no bishop,
when he lived, which you grant to (...) bastard by these three Laws. Make
proffe said these three, I will by Gods grace quod he, prove that neither
Tunstall, nor Boner, were any bishops of London, but usurped, because they
two were bastardes: and all bastardes be under the same predicament. For the
book of Wisdom in the. iiij. Chapit. making a difference between two
generations of the lawful, and unlawful. Of the lawful it is said: O quam
pulcra, and casta generatio. etc. O how fair is a chaste generation with
virtue: the memorial thereof is immortal, for it is known with God, and with
men: when it is present, men take example thereat, and if it go away, yet
they desire it: it is always crouned, and holden in honor, and wins the
reward of the undefiled (...). But the other generation, that is unknown
among men, that are called the children of the people: thus much is spoken of
in the same book. Multigena autem impioru^ multitudo non erit vtilis, and
spuria vitulamina non dabunt radices altas, nec stabile fundamentum constituit.
That is. The multitude of the ungodly children, are unprofitable children, and
the things that are planted with whoredom, shall take no deep root, nor lay
any fast foundation, though grene for a time in the branches, yet they shall be
shaken with the wind, for they stand not fast, and through the vehemency of
the winds, that is Gods vengance they shall be rooted out, for the imperfect
branches shall be broken, the fruicte shall be unprofitable and sower, mete for
nothing. For why being demanded of their parents, that is, who were their
fathers, or mothers, do witness against them, and declare their abomination,
and do disclose their sins, as did that wicked Cham, the son of Noe,
which (...) his fathers secrets, for which cause, Noe asked vengeance upon
the offenders son, that thereby the offender might be more grieved, then with
his own mishappe. Therefore the law that punishes thoffe^ders issue, does
more prohibit sin, then that which plageth the offender (...): by this it
may be considered, with what zeal the law of England abhors unlawful
conjunctions, depriuyng them not only of lawful parents, but also of
Ecclesiastical dignity, and te^porall inheritance. The Civil Law, speaking
of the birth of children, says: Quod non potest arbor mala fructus bonos
facere. etc. An evil tree, say they, can not bring forth good fruit: nor a
good free bear evil fruits, and by the consent of the laws it is agreed,
that every plant yeldeth to the nature of the ground, wherein it is planted.
The child also has Leges (...) dicu^t (...) tuu^ (...) filium (...).
much more certain, and sure knowledge of the mother, then of the father.
Therefore says the Civil Law, your natural or bastard soonne, is the soonne
of the people: and when such a bastard is, having no certain, or known
assured father at the birthe, (...) it is daily seen, and so judged by law.
Now can he come by a father after: as example. If one woman should bear two
children, of two fornicatours, and one of these fornicatours, after do marie
with this woman, which of these children should this marriage make legitimate:
This would partly help (...) by the Civil (...) a Bastard.
law, because his father reconsiled his mother into marriage but long after his
birth: this is not Boners case (whose father was never married to his mother)
fa^tasy would some what persuade: but reason can not find, seeing the time was
ones, when both these children were bastardes, and the (...) of the people,
and did not know their fathers: it were therefore against all reason, that a
child after ward Genes. 16.
borne in the same Matrimony, being lawfully (...). 4.
borne, should lose the inheritance, and place the bastardie in the same, as
lawful heir. The laws of England agrees with the scriptures. Ismael did
not inherit with (...): So no bastardes do inherit lawfully, by the laws of
England, neither is equal to the lawful begotten in the inheritance, which
by the Civil laws can be divided, but only among the male children. Saint
Augustine in lib. xvi. de Ciuitate dei, says, Abraham gave all his substance
unto Isaac his soonne; but unto the soonnes of the Concubines, he gave gifts,
and sent them away from Isaac his soonne. Whereupon he meant that to
bastardes, there is no inheritance due, but only necessary living, and under
the name of a bastard. Saint Augustine understand all unlawful issues, and
so does holy scripture also, and (...) no small difference between Et eccle
(...) sacris repellit ordi nibus. etc Et si tale (...) rit non (...) tum
permittit (...) bear in (...) dei
the succession of the lawful begotten, and the bastard in te^porall things,
or worldly inheritance, much less in the church of Christ, in that, that it
admits them not into holy Orders: and that is proved in the Popes Laws,
against (...) bastardly Papists: and if the Pope (...) with such a one, yet
he permitted not him to have a dignity, or pre-eminence in the Church, as to
be a bishop. Therefore it is convenient, that man's laws should cut them
short, in the benefit of worldly succession. When the Church do judge the^
unworthy of orders, of ministry, of (...) dignity: (...), whom the holy
scripture do thrust down, and greatly embace for though some, that is, one,
among a thousand is good, yet most are not only given to wickedness, and
persecution. etc. Example of Ismael, some to murder. Example of Abimelech,
(...). ix.
the bastard soonne of Gedion, which Gedion had lawful begotten sons. lxx.
and but one bastard, which bastard Abimelech with one stone, traitorously
killed al his brethren, one excepted. So there is more abominatio^ in one
bastard, then in. lxix. lawful sons. Many examples I can bring for the of
histories, repugnant to bastards, of their filthiness of life, whoredom,
idolatry, extortion, treason, murder, glottonie. etc. For it is thought (...).
that theidoe draw a certain stain from the volupteous lust, mutual of both
their filthy pare^tes, which in lawful chaste marriage takes no place: and
then knowing them selves to be bastardes, hates all them that are lawfully
borne, inuentyng mischief against them as traitors would have all men traitors:
this (...) borne Bocher Boner, like Abimeleche, has (...) a great number of
the legitimate chil (...) of God: whose blood asks the same crewell
vengeance, that holy Abels do still in the (...) of God, against his brother
Cain. So you shall not doubt, but by Gods laws, the laws of England, and
also the Canonical laws, that bastardes are all deprived of lawful parents,
therefore of inheritance Temporal: also not lawful to take Orders, therefore
no ministers of Spiritnall dignity, Ergo.
therefore no bishops. Judge of this your selves, Ergo.
and then make answer, when it shall please you. Sir, we will depart, quod
they, referryng this matter till an other time. Here is one, quod he, with
plain Music Dirge like, in the next chamber, sings to a dull base Lute I
pray you let us hear him, it will not hurt (...), my think he sings of D.
Boner, some merry vanity, of that vain man, which spent his days in vain
Papistrie: we are content said they, to hear this matter, and then to depart
hence, when he has done: we pray God it be merry, for we have talked of sad
matters, peace a little, silence my masters, quod he, agreed said they. Then
the fellow on the other side of the wall, read in the Bible to himself
alone, and that being dooen, he song in rude rhyme, against rude Boner, the
Papist bastard.

The fellow do read.

I will send a curse upon you, and I will Malach. (...)
curse your blessings, yea curse them will I, if ye do not take heed: behold
I shall corrupt Dente. 26
your seed, and cast dunge in your faces, even Markerehell, mark Papiste.
the donge of your solemn feasts, and it shall cleave fast upon you. You are
clean gone out of the way, and have caused the multitude to be offended at
the law of the lord. You have broken the covenant of Leui, says the lord
of the host, therefore also I will make you to Ezech. 13.
be despised, and to be of no reputation among Jerem. 8.
the people, because that you have not kept my ways. My hands shall come upon
the false Prophets, that look out vain things, and preach lies: they shall
not be in the counsel of my people, nor written in the book, because Ezech,
34.
they have deceived my people. The best (that is the martyrs) have ye slain,
the flock have you not nourished: but churlishely and cruelly have you ruled
them. Therefore woe and vengeance be unto you, says the lord God. All these
places of holy writings, cries out against Boner as much as to any false
pastor, that ever has made spoil like a Wolf in Christ's flock: and the
souls of the slain, who^ Apoca. 6.
he burned for the word of God, and for the testimony which they had: do
still cry with a loud voice, saying: How long tariest thou lord, holy and
true, to judge and avenge our blood on the^, that dwell on the earth? Well
ones it will fall out thus: That the righteous shall stand in great
stedfastnes, again such (...). 5.
as have dealt extremely with them, and taken away their labors, when Boner
with his wicked companions shall se it (as they shall in deed) they shall be
(...) with horrible fear, and shall wonder at the hastines of the sudden
health, gronyng for very distress of mind, and shall say within them
selves, having inward sorrow, and mournyng for very anguishe of mind. These
are they, whom we (...) had in derision, and (...) upon, we fools thought
their lives very madness, and their end to be without honor. But lo, how they
are compted among the children of God, and their portion among the (...)?
Therefore we have erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness
have not shined unto us. Tedious ways have we gone, the way of the lord we
have not known: what profit have our pomp brought us: such words shall
such as have (...) their brethren speak in hell. Let the (...) mark this
well. Well, well.

Boner speaks.

My soul have cleaued fast to the ground, (...) pauimento (...) mea.

I have fed like a swine, and lived like a hou^de
My thought it did me much good,
In broilyng the christians, and shedyng blood
I have showed my ways, I have showed my ways
How well I loved the Romish kaies (...)

The relics of Rome were my delight,
I was a maiden priest, and our ladies knight.
Justification I could not abide, (...)

Specially if it came on Christ's side:
I will clime heaven walls with Scala coeli,
And follow Alkoc, quondam bishop of Elie.
My soul now sleep, in dreams and (...) Dormitat aia mea.

My corpse is buried among false thieves:
For my body and soul, th'apointed place,
Abusyng mercy, and refusyng grace.
The way of wickedness, I loved well, Viam iniquitatis.

In missyng of Purgatory, perhaps to hell:
I beshrowe Dorbell, and Dunses heart,
Would I had been (...) bishop, but gone to carte.
The way of truth, I did once take, Viam (...).

Which of malice, I did for sake:
And never since I did repent,
In despisyng the eternal testamente.
I did stick ones unto Gods laws, Adhefit te stimoniis (...).

But to forsake it, I had no cause:
And hardened my heart, and stopped mine (...)
And could not weep repentant tears.
The way of thy co^maundme^t I might not bide Viam (...) tuorum.

After that I was drunk with ye cup of pride,
But wared lothly, foul, and fat,
Like to cardinal Wolsey, with his red hatte.
Boner end.

Deus stetit in Synagoga deorum.
His lordship would play the Justice of (...)
In the place of judgment, it did him good,
To accuse the martyrs, and shed their blood.
O Clemens.
There is no man within the city,
Professyng Christ's Gospel, that he would pity
Much mischief this verlet, did begin
Therefore his prayer is turned to sin.
O Pia.
He had a cancred proud look,
With bell and candell, and Popish book:
In cursyng Gods people with hellishe grace,
A way graundpanche, with thy greasy face.
O Crux.
Now a piece of your Dirige I will begin,
I care not whether, I lose or win:
You were no great state of honor,
A bastard, no bishop, but bloody Boner.
MOurnyng in black, wailyng with care and woo,
Wryngyng of their hands, they began with Placebo.
Dilexique master Papist, I loved well Boner,
That was boshoppe of London, and lived in great honor.
Quia inclinauit aurem suam, to our good father the Pope,
I am iacit ille cinis, alas gone is our hope.
Circumdederunt eum dolores mortis, now rotten in grave,
Well, well, said the protestant, well rid of a. k.
Perhaps cu^ pericula inferni with Chymerus fell,
Or Cerborus the triple hedded dog of hell.
Tribulationem and dolorem inuenit, that bastard thief.
That have spoiled Christ's flock, with (...) and grief.
O domine libera animam meam, from this Basan Bull,
That the innocent lambs did tear and pull.
Custodiens paruulos dominus, the Lord has helped Sion:
And taken away this mad dog, this wolf, and this Lion.
Qui erupit animam de morte, and my heart from sorrow,
Now gentle master Boner, God give you (...) morrow.
(...) surely, thou (...) given the^ eternal rest, Et lux (...).

Whom Boner in prison, most sore (...).
Placebo. Bo. Bo. Bo. Bo. Bo.
Heu me, beware the bugge, out quod Boner alas,
De profundis (...), how is this matter come to pass.
Laeuauioculos meos, from a dark deep place.
Now Lazarus help Dives, with one drop of grace.
Ne quando rapiat vt (...), (...) guard, druggarde,
To defend this matter, came Ihon Avail, and Miles Huggarde.
From the gates of hell, quod the rebels, dedefende B. Boner,
That with S. Fissher and Becket, he (...) have honor.
Amen quod R. C. B. H. and L.
Deliver him from this pains of hell.
R. Do begin the first lesson.
Parce michi domine.

SPare us oh sweet lord, our days are all gone,
Our holy father dear Boner, has left us alone.
Now enclosed in tomb, wrapte in earth and clate,
Ecce nunc in pulucre dormit, do (...) and (...) away
We hoped that he should have done, as he did before,
Come for the of prison ones again, and burned more and more.
Who shall trust temporal powers, in whom is Nolite con fidere in principi.
no health,
Fare well our spiritual father dear, our (...) and wealth.
Now help, Dominicke, Becket, Dunston, and saint Line,
Gregory with thy (...), Antonye with thy swine.
This father was heavenly minded, and never carnal,
Therefore defend him from the flames infernal.
Responde.
Pray for Boner Band D. souls,
You that walk in the Popish ilde of (...)
Ye pray for them, and think no skorne,
The like of Boner was never borne.
Boner.
Et in carne mea videbo, the bones that I have burned.
And also Jesus Christ, against whom I have sporned.
I have not one dog (...) of legarde maine,
Posuisti me tibi contrarium, heu me, great pain.
I cry to man, child, and wife,
I abhorred much the book of life:
And loved most the Popes laws,
And regarded not Christ two strawes.
Ue miserum michi therefore,
Saint Peter have locked the door,
And bid me go the wrong way,
Because I had not the right way.
I will make an other shifte,
Seeing I am driven to this drifte,
Now help holy father the Pope,
With skalyng ladder and rope:
Chance what chance may fall,
Now will I scale heaven wall.
L. Do read the second lesson.
Tedetanimam meam.

OH his soul was weary here, in the life that he had,
His food was bread and water, his lodgyng was to badde.
Clothed in here, slepyng against the hard stones,
That through fasting, his skin claue to the bones.
Watchyng in prayer, lamentyng both day and night:
Subduyng fleshly affection, and walked in the spirit,
Meek in mind as a Wolf, and simple as a Fore:
As chaste as the he Goat, as slender as the (...).
As liberal as the she Bear, as sweet as the Brocke,
Of all kind of linen clothe, he loved well a smock.
As wholesome as a mad Dog, as cleanly as a Bore,
He loved well a fat Pigge, so he did a h.
Paale as the Turkey Cock, as gentle as a Snake.
The like is not in all hell, if you seek hyn with a rake.
Responde.
Speak you of Boner?
God save his honor,
Some said they heard him say,
In bed as he lay,
Noli me condemnare,
Dum veneris (...),
Ante te erubesco,
Comissa mea (...).
Qui Lazarum resuscitasti, from stinking (...)
Farewell, farewell, you Popish k.
Te decet deus hymuus in Syon,
Boner was as cruel as a Lion:
For if he had lived, and the world turned,
Many a good man, he would have burned.
Per ignem with fire,
That was his desire.
T. The third lesson.
Manus tue dn^e fecerunt me.

THe hand of God framed him ones in goodly shape,
Then transformed like a Boore, and conditioned like an Ape:
From a Bishop to a Butcher, most bloody of kind.
Which often in Bastardes, the like you may find:
There is a great decree made by C. the pope
That no Bastard should wear staff, miter or Cope:
Neither has any dignity, under a Cathedral steple,
Because he is fatherless, and the son of the people: Genesi. (...).

Abraham left inheritance, to Isaac his son by right:
To his bastardes he gave gifts, and put (...) from his sight.
So if bastardes be unworthy of Temporal inheritance,
Much less in Christ's Church, to have any pre-eminence:
This Boner was a bastard, of bloudde and condition,
And departed from this life, without contritio^.
Responde.
Lord how he would pullam,
When he was at Fullam,
With fire, rodds, and chains
He put them to pains,
And that was well seen,
By M. and Bartlet green. (...) absco^datfaciam suam.

O Lord I pray thee in what place
Shall bloody E. Boner, past al grace
Hide his greasy block hedde,
When he shall judge the quick and dedde.
Quid hoc rei est?
Mary he shall rise like a beast,
Among the Romish pied coats,
On the left hand among the goats
He would not pray,
Nor say Mattens that day,
But swell and pante,
If (...) were scante.
But red wine and a Pigge,
Would make him lepe and frig
And say diligo vxores vestras,
Ab ortu solis ad vesperas.
The fowerth lesson.
Quantis habuit iniquitas.

(...) sore was this bloody beast, fraught with sin,
So fat was his flesh, (...) would the skin.
Incrassatus, impiguatus, dilatatus, Symoniacus,
Gross, fat, and puffed up with a great patus,
Sacrificium deo nostro, cor contritum
Tu autem argenteos lebetes, was thy delitum,
Cur facia^ tua^ absco^disti like an oule in the night
Refusing the blessed Gospel the word of light
Thy cursed acts, in parchme^t shall be inrolde,
Against God and thy prince, thou were to bold
Thy bloody crimes shall be in mind, now thou art gone and paste,
Thou shalt make a dreadful count to God, for them at the last.
Responde.
I am fetet, quia putrifactus est,
Which made the Papists many a feast
But in his cole house, he gave no (...)
But in Smithfield most cruel heat,
Now death his power do invade,
Like rotten donge, his flesh do fade,
I do not quarrel,
His guts filled a barrel.
Alas quod the Papists and well away,
He was buried in the night, not in the day,
Where were the Papists that hour?
Some in the Flete, some in the Lower,
And many paste all grace,
Be in every Popish place,
God send them such honor,
As has their dadde Boner,
Qui vomuit nigrum, post fata cruorem.
The fifte lesson.
Homo natus.

HOmo natus,
Came to heaven gatus:
Sir you do come to latus,
With your shorn patus.
Frequentia falsa Euangelij,
For the love of your bealie,
Cum auro and argento,
You loved the rules of Lento,
Which the Pope did inuento
You are spurius de muliere,
Not legittimate nor lawful here
O quam venenosa pestis,
Fur, periurus, latro mechus,
Homicidus tantum decus,
De salute animarum,
Of Christ's flock thou hadest small (...).
Thou art filius populi,
Go, go, to Constantinopoli,
To your master the Turk,
There shall you lurk:
Among the Heathen souls,
Sometime your shorn brethren of Poules,
Were as black as Moules,
With their cappes four forked,
Their shoes warm corked,
Nosed like read Grapes,
Constant as she Apes,
In nature like black Monks,
And shoot (...) trunkes
And boule when they have dinde,
And keep them from the wind,
And they which are not able,
Do sit still at the table,
With color Scarlet pale
So small is their good ale,
Thus from God they did turn,
Long before their church did burn
Then when rich men were sick,
Either dedde or quick,
Valde diligenter notant,
Vbi diuites egrotant,
Ibi currunt, nec cessabunt,
Donec ipsos tumilabunt,
Oues alienas tondunt,
Et perochias confundunt.
These fellows pilde as Ganders,
Much like the friars of Fla^ders,
Which serve Satan about the cloisters,
They love red wine and Disters,
Qui vult Satanae seruire
Claustrum debet introire,
And ever have such an hedde,
As bastard Boner that is dedde:
He would for the Pope take pain,
Therefore help you friars of spain:
You enquisiters take pain,
It is a great maine.
Unto the Pope your hedde,
That Boner is thus dedde,
And buried in a misers grave,
Like a common k.
Lo, lo, now is he dedde,
That was so well fed,
And had a soft bed.
Estote fortis in bello.
Good Hardyng and thy fellow:
If you be Papists right,
Come steal him away by night
And put him in a shrine,
He was the Popes divine,
Why, shall he be forgotten,
And lie still and rotten:
Come on and do not fainte,
Translate with speed your (...).
And put him in a tomb,
His heart is now at Rome.
Come forth you loughtes of Loue^
And steal away this (...),
You are so fuil of Ire,
And Popish desire:
And Romish derision,
And hellishe division.
Therefore I am sure,
Your kingdom will not dure.
Crescit rancor, crescit ira,
Crescit and inuidia,
Totus Louen in errorem,
Voluiter in caligine,
Nullus curat obidire,
Verbis Jesus Christi,
Fides i^ Roma no^ apparet,
Totus Louen fide carit.
Thus he must turn to duste,
In Louen there is none to trust.
As slipperie as Eles,
The world do run on wheles,
Now help old friends of Poules
And pray for our souls:
This is our desire,
From these flames of fire.
I am in Purgatorij,
Oh. L. K. G. and F. be sorry,
Breuis eius dies sunt,
He breathed over Poules Funte
Ridiant me inimici,
But all you that be wisie,
Beware of Papistrie all,
The Chequer, and westminster hall
And all the Innes of Court,
I do not scoff nor sport.
And all this great city,
It is great pity:
That I Edmonde Boner,
Against Gods great honor,
Have drawn you from truth,
Oh this is great ruthe.
Comissa mea pauesco,
Et ante te tremesco,
Dum veneris iudicare,
Quarc, quare, quare, quare.
Fremuerunt Gentes.
I beshrowe the Popes dentes
In cathedra Moysiimpij sedent,
Therefore repent, repent, repent
Tempus est vos reuertendi,
Tempus est nobis non penidendi,
Tempus est vos rediundi,
Ab errore falsi mundi
False Papists, and false thieves
Shall ever have pains and greues,
Thus did Boner sore lamente,
Mouyng Christ's to repent.
Responde.
Ne recorderis (...),
He was full of hata
Regardyng non estata,
Et quasi flos,
with his great nose,
Fugit velut vmbra,
They morn for him in northu^bria
The sixte lesson.
Quis michi hoc tribuat.

ONe alas in dreadful dream, poor Boner did behold:
In woeful weed attired foul, sometime was brave in gold.
With fiery stroke sore beaten was, that sometime had smitten other:
He was as sore turmented there, as Cain that slew his brother.
His salt tears ran down apace, with bloody hand he struck his breast:
A worm about his heart bewrapte, that reaued him of his rest.
About this gooste flocked a rablement, of Friars fat and foul:
Then cried out a little spirit, like a shrikyng Oule.
Ve, ve, and out alas, thy vengeance do now begin:
These flames and floudes, and dungeons deep, are wages all for sin.
Come drink thy fill in Lethae flod and then to Styx return:
Forget thy self, denaye thy God, lo, this is a place to burn. Syllius lib.
13. Call this the floudes of hell, that spue for the blood, poyso^, fire. etc

The wicked ones, which ordained were, as chafe cast from the corn:
So in this bloody Cocytus, thou shall be rent and torn.
Quis michi tribuat quod Boner tho shall I in this place dwell:
Let me be cleansed in Purgatory, away you fiendes of hell.
Donec, donec, my trentals are done in the Church of Rome:
Tarry here said the Monks black until the day of dome.
With that he swelde with lothly look, criyng, now have I need:
Where are become my Romish friends, where is good Henry Creed?
Miseremini mei, miseremini mei, if merits may me save:
Such measure as you have measured other men, Satan.
such measure shall you have.
Quis potest facere mundum, a bastard were thou borne:
De immundo conseptum semine, now art thou rent and torn.
Burnt and dround and never deed we have none other place:
Spes impiorum peribit, we are exclude all from grace.
Non remittitur ei in hoc seculo, neque in alio.
You are condemned by the Judge, to dwell still in our gailio.
Et sicut dies marcennarij, thy days are made an end:
An enemy to the Lord thy God, but to the Pope a friend.
Then cast they him in Melas flood most darcke and black in sight
Iu dreadful sleep a man did se, this vision in the night.
Responde.
Ne recorderis peccata,
But open heaven gata
Saint Peter with your kaies,
Show my lord the right ways
He dwelt ones at Poules,
And had cure of our souls:
I wisse he was not a baste,
But holy, meke, and chaste:
It is a great pity,
That he is gone from our city:
A man of great honor,
Oh holy saint Boner,
You blessed Friars,
That never were liers:
And you holy Nuns
That never had sons
Set this child of grace,
In some Angels place.
Dum veneris (...),
Help, help S. Marie
Noli eum condemnare,
He burned many in
the days of Queen Marie.
Sicut Leo querens praedam,
animas deuorauit.
If this was not a blessed deed,
Ask L. K. S. P. and H. Creed.
The seventh lesson.
Spiritus meus.

MY spirit God wotte, is feeble, (...) and sore:
and so shall we Papists, daiely more and more.
Our time of Papistrie shall be short, foolish and vain.
Ab aquilone panditur omne malum, the Papists took pain.
Now Mars our bloody Boner is laid in earth full cold:
Whose life and liberty, would have made us bold.
With bloody hands, and cruel hearts was our desire:
To have burned the Protestants, with hot flaming fire.
Set up shorn crounes (the stews) and Mon kes in boots:
And destroyed Christ's doctrine clean by the roots
Brought in Idols, Latin service, and ryngyng of belles.
(...) Chauntries, Masses, Abbaies, and Celles.
Thus we would have dooen, in Tindall, and Comberlande.
And brought Romish service, again into Northumberlande.
There are a remnaunt left, I may them (...)
The children of Antichrist, and of God Ball.
Rumor super rumorem, while the storm do last,
Antichrist and his, are now at the last cast.
And Boner is rotten, and stinketh in grave:
Well rid is Christ's flock, of so Woluishe (...).
Si veritatem dico, quare non creditis michi?
The Responde.
Dies eius breuiabuntur,
Boner was a great hunter:
Per ignem with fire hot,
N unc in putredine God wotte
Ubi est ergo nunc
Either Friar, Nonne, or Monk,
That can for a little space,
Put him a purging place:
Now good man sir Pope,
What do your worship hope?
In inferno nulla est redemptio.
The eight lesson. (...) it.
Pelle mei consumptus.

MY flesh is consumed, there is (...) skin and bone:
In saint Georges Church yard, my grave and I alone.
My tongue that used lewd words, and lips away are rotten:
Take pity upon me. R. L. and H. let me not be forgotten.
Regester me in with a (...) pen, (...) the Romish roules,
And make some Obsequi for my sake, I (...) it were in Poules.
Say Dirige for me gentle T. H. U. R. L. and B.
Say you the Mass, mourn you in black, W. F. and C.
Ryng you the belles, hold you the lights A. P. S. and N.
A. B. the Crosrowe of Papists, show (...) selves like men.
For if your merits do not help, then come I very late:
Like the foolish virgins five, which knocked at the gate.
To whom he said, I know you not, depart from my sight:
You wanted faith, and watched not, when I came in the night.
Let living wightes, watch therefore, though it be pain and grief:
For suddenly the Lord do come, (...) like to a (...).
O Boner, Boner, ones again, in thy skin thou shall be clad:
And have such members in degree, as in this life thou had.
Then shall thou see the (...) all, in judgment stand upright:
Whom in this world thou did abuse with murder, and with spite.
And called them unlearned all, and now in great honor:
Such was the blindness of Papists hearts, and specially of thee Boner.
The Responde.
Uaine, vain, vain, vain,
All bloody Papists do live in vain.
There is no mean, but heaven and hell
In doing evil, and workyng well.
Each soul shall go unto his place:
The brande of hell, and child of grace.
Scimus quia transit hora,
Redeamus sine mora,
Uitam nostram emendamus,
The (...) of death, drawyng on a (...)
Pray for mercy, joy, and grace:
V ade and non amplius peccare.
The nineth lesson.
Quarede vulua. S. read it.

ALas from my mothers womb, why have thou brought me out:
I have lived like a Butchers (...) and died like a (...).
I stopped mine ears against the truth, Gods word I would not hear:
And hardened my heart against the Prince, in person many a year.
There led my life in hearts delight, my soul did feel no care:
In soft bed, and choice of wine, wantyng no dainty fare.
False hope I had to come forth, as ones I did before;
But still despair, said I should die and persecute no more.
One morn betime I looked forth, as often as I did before:
And did (...) a pulpit, in churches wise, made by my prison door.
A Preacher there was, that Crowlye hight, which preached in that place,
A mean if God had loved me, to call me then to grace.
Hodie si vocem, was his theme, and harden not thine heart:
As did the fathers the rebels old that perished in desarte,
Thus protestants, have me flain with the power of the word:
But if the world had served me, with fire, and with sword.
I would have killed and burned al more then I did before:
But now farewell you papists al from hensforthe evermore.
Would no wight had me known nor eyes me never seen:
Then should I have been in such forte, as I had never been.
The Responde.
In die illa tremenda,
Who shall my lord defenda:
Neither Pe. Was. Nor. Mar.
Traitors Tempest that blow up war,
Slinge. Hill. nor Swineburne,
Or any traitor, that gape for a turn.
They shall have horror inhabitans,
God send them mischaunce.
Omne regnum diuisum. etc.
Against the Queen they risum,
Per aliam viam reuersi sunt.
Papists are traitors, as they are (...).
Rumor super rumorem erit.
Between Doncaster and Perith,
Be many Popish hearts,
Would their heddes were in carts.
And their bodies in graves:
Rebels are thieves and knaves.
Ardiet pugnas vicio parentum,
The rebels beyond Trentham
Shall quickly repentham.
Sepuichrum paten: est venture eorum.
They abhor doctrina Apostolorum
Sepe expugnaueru^t you know it well
Northren storms are sharp and fell
Snow, Hail, Ise, and Froste,
All their hope is but lost.
Dies magnae and amara.
They are now in sorrow and (...)
They will never have such honor
As had this bastard E. Boner.
Although he were a Po. k.
Yet buried he was in a grave,
Pluet super proditores laquios.
The'nde of Boners Dirige. Per ironiam Erat vir ille simplex and rectus, ac
timens deum, and recaedens amalo.
Here after do follow a liniall Pedegres of Boners kindred, by the mind and
judgment of many Doc. a man of a great house, long before the captivity of
Babylon.
Bastard Edmonde Savage, being a (...) lubberly scholar, was supposed to be
the the soonne of one Boner.

Which was the son of a Iugler or wild roge
Which was the son of a villain ingrosse.
Which was the son of a Cutpurse.
Which was the son of a Tom of Bedlam
Which was the son of a (...) of a spitle
Which was the son of a theffe or a (...)
Which was the son of a wild Irishe.
which was the son of a Stoic Philosopher
which was the son of Agarion.
which was tho son of a (...).
which was the son of a Sectuarie.
which was the son of Appelles.
which was the son of (...).
which was the son of Alogy.
which was the son of Almerichus.
which was the son of Aetius.
which was the son of Adamiani.
which was the son of Alepheli.
which was the son of Appolinaris.
which was the son of Ammonus.
which was the son of Aquarij.
which was the son of Arrius.
which was the son of Barbara Sigismundi.
which was the son of Angelici.
which was the son of Anthropomorphius.
which was the son of Beelzebub.
which was the son of Bisylides.
which was the son of Berillus.
which was the son of Carpocratis.
which was the son of Cataphrigius.
which was the son of Caluthus.
which was the son of Cazinzarius.
which was the son of Catharides.
which was the son of Caparnaitis.
which was the son of Cherinthus.
which was the son of Donatus.
which was the son of Ebion.
which was the son of Elindius.
which was the son of Ennopus.
which was the son of Ennomius.
which was the son of Euthices.
Which was the son of Ecrastines.
Which was the son of Gnotiques.
Which was the son of Iesebel.
Which was the son of Faustuti.
Which was the son of Helchesate.
Which was the son of Hymerobasta.
Which was the son of Iouinianus.
Which was the son of Manacheus.
Which was the son of Mahomet.
Which was the son of Martion.
Which was the son of Messalianis.
Which was the son of Montanus.
Which was the son of Monothelete.
Which was the son of Nouatis.
Which was the son of Nestorius.
Which was the son of Nicolaus.
Which was the son of Nectages,
Which was the son of Paulus Samosatenus
Which was the son of Praitas.
Which was the son of Pelagus.
Which was the son of Petrus (...).
Which was the son of Photius.
Which was the son of Pollo.
Which was the son of Sabinus.
Which was the son of Roganus.
Which was the son of Sabellicus.
Which was the son of Sarahatis.
Which was the son of Simachcus.
Which was the son of the (...).
Which was the son of a (...).
Which was the son of Theodorus (...)
Which was the son of Tatian.
Which was the son of Sargius.
Which was the son of a Benedicte monk.
Which was the son of a Carthusian.
Which was the son of a Cistertian.
Which was the son of a Canon Reguler.
Which was the son of a Barnardine.
Which was the son of Cluniacke
Which was the son of Dominicke.
Which was the son of a Celestin.
Which was the son of Jesuit.
Which was the son of an Heremite.
Which was the son of a Minoret.
Which was the son of a Charmilet.
Which was the son of a Bomson.
Which was the son of an Anchor.
Which was the son of a Buggerer.
Which was the son of a Limiter.
Which was the son of a Balamite.
which was the son of a Coniurer.
which was the son of a Dispensator.
which was the son of a (...).
which was the son of a Romish comissary
which was the son of a Doctor Canon.
which was the son of a master of (...).
which was the son of a Suffragham.
which was the son of a Romish bishop.
which was the son of a Courtisan.
which was the daughter of a Cardinal.
which was the mother of the Pope.
which also in the captivity of Babylon, did bear three brethren. Simon
Magus, (...), and Mahomette, by Antichriste the son of the Devil, of
iniquity, and perdicion the cause of al ignorance, infidelity, Simonie,
Treason, Idolatry, persecution, Rebellion, Tumulte, wicked assemble, and
finally everlasting damnation.

A prayer to the holy Trinity, against ignorance of Goddss word, and Wolves.
Almighty and eternal god the father, the soonne, and the holy spirit one
God in trinity, and the trinity in unity, which art always more readier to
hear, then we are apt to pray: and (...) give unto us, more then we can
desire, or deserve. We most humbly pray thee, to have mercy upon us,
according to thy great mercy, and perdon us good Lord for our sins: that we
have rebelled against thy divine Majesty, in thought, word, and deed, (...)
thee to cast upon us sondrie plagues for (...) offenses: As pestilence,
dearthe, rebellion with other grievous calamities, unto our (...) bodies. But oh
my good Lord God, hou haste taken greater (...) upon (...), the which with
mortal eyes ca^ not well (...) seen, but felt: that is, the ignorance of thy
(...) will and commandment. (...) oh Lord GOD, the guide and pathe (...) to
all deadly sins, death, and finally (...), banishement from thy glorious
(...), world without end. Have mercy aue mercy and pity, oh Jesus Gods
only (...) upon thy flock, thou great Shepherd of the Sheep. Regard thy
fold, defend thy flock, whom thou have redeemed in thy most precious blood.
Deliver thy Uineyard of England, from the Bore of Room, and thy Lambs, from
the mouth of Wolves, as bloody Boner was Oh let God a rise, and let his
enemies be scattered, let them also that hate him fly before him: so that we
that are the Sheep of his pasture, may in the (...) of his word, be fed in
the pleasant fields of his holy scriptures, to life everlasting: Through
Jesus Christ our lord.

Amen.

