HALLELV-IAH: Praise ye the Lord, FOR THE VNBVRTHENING of a laden Conscience:
By his grace in Jesus Christ vouchsafed unto the worst sinner of all the whole
world.

I Come, and hear all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has
done for my soul.

O magnify his Name with me, and let us exalt his Name together.

Printed by CANTRELL LEG, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1618. And
are to be sold by MATTHEW LAW in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Fox.

THE DEDICATION. To the right high and mighty Prince, and most valiant
Conqueror, JESUS CHRIST, God and man crucified: My most gracious good Lord,
Savior, and Master.
THou art gone up on high, thou have lead captivity captive, thou have
received gifts for men; yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them.

I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart, and will glorify thy
name for evermore.

For great is thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the
lowest hell.

Let the speaking of my mouth, the writing of mine hand, and the thinking of
mine heart, be pleasing in thy sight, O Lord my strength, and my Redeemer.

Amen. Amen.

To those learned men which in Cambridge have authority to judge of books
before they be there imprinted.
Reverend Masters, my duty premised, I humbly pray you to give way unto the
glorifying of the grace of God in Jesus Christ, as you will answer unto his
glorious majesty, when he shall call you to give account of that your office.
Thus, beseeching God to bless you, and that noble Nurcery of Christianity,
with all abundance of knowledge, and holiness, I rest

At your correction in the Lord Jesus, RICHARD KILBY.

THE VNBVRTHEning of a laden Conscience.
Whosoever you are that shall purpose to read or hear any part of this book,
I beseech you that of your charity, you will grant unto me these two requests:

First, to believe that I in making, and putting forth this book, intended
the glory of my Savior, the good of Christened people, and the hurt of no
creature.

Secondly, to show such favor, compassion, and patience, toward me, as you
your self toward your self expect from the Lord Jesus.

Now I begin.

IT pleased the good Lord God to unburden my conscience by repentance, and
belief in Jesus Christ; whereunto with very much ado I was brought by the
knowledge of Gods word, and the consideration of mine own very miserable, and
most dangerous state.

Among those parts of the holy Bible, which God made me in some measure to
understand, I had special use of his ten Commandments, and therewith also
of the first verse of the 20. chap. of Exodus, as here it follows.

Exo. 20.1.
And, etc. This first word has respect unto some things mentioned in the
chapter next before, specially the Lords coming down from heaven unto the top
of mount Sinai in fire, and the coming of the Israelites out of their camp,
being brought forth by Moses, to meet with God. Touching the coming forth of
the people, I find that they were first prepared by cleansing themselves, and
washing their clothes; secondly, limited, that they should not come too near
unto the hill: thirdly, presented and set before the face of God by Moses.

Hereby I learn, that whenever I am to read or hear Gods word, to pray, or
to sing unto him, I must first prepare my self, by putting away all evil
thoughts, and naughty affections; secondly, I must be very humble, avoiding all
presumption; thirdly, I must present my self before the majesty of God, in
the name of Jesus Christ, even as if he took me by the hand, and brought me
into the presence of his Father, The neglecting of these three necessary
points, I know by mine own experience, is very dangerous: for the doing of
holy services with an vnreuerent heart, is a ready way to make a party most
incapable of Gods grace; because the custom of abusing the means of
salvation, does not only provoke the Lord unto great indignation, but also
hardens the heart, and brings it to that pass, that without some
extraordinary means, it cannot be effectually wrought upon.

And God, etc.] God is the first beginning, as of all good, so specially of
religion: therefore he that will be religious, must first and foremost,
steadfastly believe that there is a God, Heb. 11.6.

And God spoke, etc.] The second ground, or beginning of religion, is the word,
and speech of God, which holy men by his direction, and appointment, did write
in the books of the old and new Testament.

It is a special favor of God to make his word known unto any man, woman, or
child; because the property of it is to make us wise, and holy, fit for
everlasting bliss in heaven. 2. Tim. 3.15.16.

Whereas our Savior Christ made his Apostles Ministers of his word, and gave
them commission to ordain others, and those also to ordain others from time
to time, until the worlds end, is a question how the Ministers of the now
publicly allowed Church of England, can prove their calling from Christ by
the Apostles, etc. seeing that the now church of Rome, is between them and the
Apostles time? I will briefly declare my settled belief in this point by way of
comparison.

A certain noble man did by his will appoint, that a great part of his goods
should be employed to such, and such good uses, so and so, until the worlds
end: for the performance of this, he did choose certain feoffers of trust,
giving order that they should choose others, and those others from age to age.
The first feoffers had in their time, very much ado to keep the noble man's
will from being wronged. Many hundred years after that, it came to pass that
some being orderly chosen feoffers, were fully persuaded that in many things
the will was wronged. Hereupon, they claimed reformation, but others resisted
them, yea, and pursued them to the death, killing diverse of them. Those which
escaped the hands of their adversaries, continued their claim of reformation,
and made choice of others to succeed them in their office.

These be the ministers of the Church of England. If an honest man were asked
what is in this case to be done? he would say, the written will is to be stood
upon, and to be made known.

The Bible is that will; which the Roman feoffers have no mind to make known,
nor can endure the publishing thereof in vulgar languages, that all people
might hear it read in their Churches: alleging this reason, that as they
judge, if common people had Gods word in their own tongue, they would rather
take hurt, then good by it. To my silly understanding, this is a very strange
reason: Of all other books is Gods book so dangerous? Then why did the Lord
give his word, the old Testament, unto his beloved nation the Israelites, in
their own tongue? yea, and lay such charge upon them to read it, and to hear
it? What was the reason that when a woman said unto Christ, Luke 11.27.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the pappes which thou have sucked: I
say, what was the reason that our Lord made her this answer; 28.
Yea rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it? I say
again, why did he say so, if it be better for people not to hear, then to
hear Gods word?

By the way, be it remembered, that the Son of God says, It is a blessedness
to hear Gods word, and the Pope who takes upon him to be the deputy of the
son of God, he says, it is not a blessedness, he forbids it. If any
understanding conscionable Roman catholic, were between God, and his own
soul, to tell what he thinks to be the maine cause, why the Pope does not
allow Gods word to be commonly bought and sold in Italy, Spain, etc. and so
to be read in churches: my conscience gives me, that he would say thus; It is
very likely, that thereby many would be drawn from his obedience, and many
things which are now in great request among the people, should then be
despised. As surely as the Lord God lives, I take this to be the main cause. A
great number of things in that religion could by no means stand, if the book of
God were commonly to be had in the peoples own language: Therefore they are
not suffered to hear God speak.

I appeal to the conscience of every man, whether it be likly that those
things which are of God, shall be put out of request by the word of God? It is
not likely, it is quite contrary.

I do most humbly entreat all English men and women, I entreat them in the
sight of our Lord Jesus Christ, that they will forbear to believe the Roman
religion, until it have Gods word, and church-seruice read, and said in
peoples own languages. When you come to public service, call it mass, or
what you will, are you not of the company that there ought to join in prayer
unto God? why then is not your prayer in your own tongue? why is it in Latin?
Let any man answer, as I ask the question in the fear of God: what reason is
there that people should pray, or join with any, praying in a language which
they understand not? Is it not much to be feared, that Satan the Prince of
darkness has a strong hand in this, to keep poor people in blindness, and
ignorance?

I have upon my conscience, and in charity, without any thought of personal
reproach unto any one, made bold to say thus much. If any in zeal of that
religion have a mind to say so much, yea ten times so much to me, let him
speak in the fear of God, and in charity, and spare not. Or if he list to
fly upon me with words of choler, I will join with him, to say much more
against my self then he can; and yet leave him to judge himself without me.

When I am minded to read any part of Gods book, I must kneel down before
the face of God, and pray thus;

O most gracious and merciful Lord God, thou have of thy great goodness
vouchsafed to give unto me thine holy Bible, which is able to make me wise unto
salvation: I do humbly thank thee for it, and heartily I beseech thy blessed
Majesty to give me the grace that I may fervently read it, rightly understand
it, and diligenty mark it, thorough Jesus Christ thine only Son, my Lord
and Savior. Amen.

Besides the means and helps to understand the Scriptures, as the proportion
of Religion contained in the creed, and commandments, the circumstances of
each several place, and the comparing of one place with other places, reading
of expositions, and hearing other men's judgments; our Savior gives a very
notable direction for the attainement of special aid from the spirit of God,
and it is a ready way for a man to come to the knowledge of the truth touching
any necessary point in controversy. And this it is, To the Jews doubting
whether Christ's doctrine were of God, yea or no: he said, If any man will do
the will of God, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of God, or
whether I speak of my self, Ioh. 7.17. The conscionable practice of those
duties which are very plainly set down in Gods word will, in, and through
Jesus Christ, be a means to procure unto us a gracious, and comfortable
inlightning of our minds, to understand the mind, and meaning of God in his
word daily more and more: for the secret of the Lord is with them that fear
him, and he will show them his covenant, Psalm. 25.14. If I come to a place of
Scripture hard to be understood, I will mark it, and so stay my self, in
hope of grace from God at his good pleasure.

Reading any part of Scripture very leasurely, and heedfully, I must endeavor
to take special knowledge of some principal notable points, and then commend
them unto the blessing of God, thus.

O most mighty, and merciful Lord God, I do most humbly, and heartily thank
thee, for that thou have made me in reading this part of thy Bible, to
understand, and mark this and this, etc. I beseech thee, that if I have
mistake^ any thing, I may have grace to see mine error, and to leave it: I
beseech thee that those things which I have rightly understood, I may well
remember, and as need shall require, profitably use, to thy good pleasure, and
glory in benefiting my self and others, through Jesus Christ thy only Son,
my Lord and Savior; To whom with thee O Father, and with the holy Ghost,
three persons, and one only good Lord God be all praise, honor, and glory,
for evermore. Amen.

Thus much of Gods word.

And God spoke all these words, saying.] He that made one commandment, made
all the rest; therefore I must not presume to break any one of them, but, if I
will not be confounded, I must uprightly intend, and carefully endeavor to
be obedient unto all the commandments of God, Psalm. 119.6.

Exodus 20.2. I am the Lord, etc.] This word Lord, in the Jews language is
called Jehovah, and signifies such a one as is of himself, and gives being
unto all things else, specially unto his own promises, which he most
faithfully, and powerfully performs in due time.

This wonderful Lord is thoroughly known of none but himself; yet under his
gracious correction, I do thus conceive of him: The Lord Jehovah is a spirit,
single, durable, unmeasurable, mighty, wise, holy, blessed, and glorious.

God is a spirit, Ioh. 4.24. A spirit has not flesh and bones, Luke 24.39.
Then how is man said to he like unto God? In the nature, and properties of
the soul. Why does the Bible sometimes speak of God, as if he had eyes,
ears, hands? etc. It speaks according to our capacity, because God would
have us to be plainly and fully persuaded, that he has sight, hearing,
knowledge, power, etc.

God is a single spirit, far excelling the singlenes of any Angel: for an
Angel, as also the soul of man or woman, has three wants of perfect
singleness. First, in every angel there is a being, for it is a certain
several thing. There is also in the same angel a possibility to be changed
into some other thing, yea into nothing: because the angel is under God, and
God can do unto it whatsoever he will. But there is no possibility of change
in God; because he is under none.

Secondly, every angel is that which it is in several, and thereby he
differs and is known from all other angels: And yet the same kind of nature
whereby he is that which he is, is also in other angels. But the nature of
God, whereby he is that which he is, is wholly, and only in himself, and
therefore it is altogether one, and the same with that which he is.

Thirdly, in an Angel unto his spiritual nature, diverse things are added and
joined, which may also be taken or put away, as wisdom, holiness; power,
etc. But all perfections are in God, as in the fountain, and though they seem
diverse unto us, yea. some appear to be quite contrary one to the other, as
most severe justice, and most pitiful mercy, yet all these things in God are
but only one thing, and that is his most single nature, essence, and being.

The truth of this, we may in some sort perceive by the shining sun: for it
appears unto our eyes, to be a very single, pure thing; all that we can see
in it, is nothing else but light, most exceeding pure, clear, and peircing
light: yet many sundry virtues are in this light: It shines, it heateth, it
quickneth man, beast, foul, fish, fruit; yea it seems to work contraries,
as softning wax, hardening clay. These, and many other things, works the
single light of the shining sun. Much more excellent is the God that made the
Sun. In his most single nature is all virtue, ability, and efficacy. His
name be blessed, Amen.

God is a durable spirit: not only without ending; for so has he made Angels,
and souls, yea and so he will make the bodies of men, women, and children, to
be after the resurrection; but also the Lord God is without beginning.
Therefore David says unto him; Psalm. 19.2. From everlasting to everlasting
thou art God.

God is unmeasurable, that is, of such an exceeding infinitenes that he
fills, yea, and surpasses the whole compass of heaven and earth, Ier.
23.24. 2. King. 8.27. Yet not so, that one part of him is one where, and an
other else where; but God is wholly in all the whole world, and wholly in every
part and place of the world.

Then why is it said, that God is in heaven? And why are we willed to lift up
our hearts toward heaven, when we pray unto him? Because his pleasure is to
manifest himself in glory cheifely in heaven, and from heaven. Why does the
Bible say, that God is with good folk, and not with bad? Because he does
graciously acquaint himself with those that serve him; but he will not be
known that he is in the company of naughty people, because he hates their
behavior. Yet he is where they are, and heedfully marketh all that they
think, say, or do; purposing to call them to an account, and to give
judgment upon them, accordding to the practice of their lives.

God is mighty, most mighty, almighty. He is well able to do any work of
power, either by himself without means, as he made the world; or by means,
as he drowned the world with water. Sometime his pleasure is to work by means,
but above the nature, and power of the means: as when he cleansed a man from
the leprosy by the water of the river Jordan. 2. Kin. 5.14.
Sometime he stops the power of the means, as when three of his servants
were by a tyrant cast into a most hot burning fiery furnace; for he took
such order, that the extreme burning heat had no power upon them though it
mischeiued those which put them into the furnace, Dan.3

God can work in what measure of power he will. The least measure of his power,
is stronger then all the power of man: 1. Cor. 1.25. He is able to make the
least bit of bread, to give so much nourishment as a whole loaf. It pleases
him sometime to work more by one man then by another; yea more by some one then
by many other: 1. Cor. 15.10. The power of God is endless, limited only by
his own will: for whatsoever his pleasure is to do, that he does, Psalm.
135.6. This the poor leperous man believed, when he said unto the son of
God, Matthew. 8.2. Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean: whereunto he
graciously answered, saying, I will, be thou clean: and presently the Lord
touching him with his hand the foul disease was clean gone.

God is wise: he only is wise, Romans 16.27. The wisdom of Angels and men is
his gift. It is he that gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge unto them
that know understanding, Dan. 2.21. There is no number of his understanding, it
is endless, Psalm. 147.5. From the beginning of the world he foreknew all things
which should come to pass, even until the end, etc. Act. 15.18. He knew what
was the very best way to be taken in making, continuing, altering, doing, or
suffering any thing, Psalm. 104.24. Though he may do what he will, because he
is the most high Sovereign Lord of all things, yet he does nothing, he
suffers nothing, without most excellent good reason: and yet I must not
thereupon presume to sin; for as he has reason to suffer a man to sin, so
he has reason moving him to punish the party that sins; yea, such
reason, that S. Peter says, the righteous be scarcely saved, 1. Pet. 4.18. God
will beat sin out of them before they die.

God is holy, most holy, altogether holy, pure, clean, and free from any
stain of evil: He cannot be tempted with evil, Iam. 13. Then how came it to
pass that so many angels sinned, and turned to be devils? Also how came man to
be a sinner? God made the Angels, and the first man, and woman, very holy, and
well able to have kept themselves so, if they would. Yea, but why did he suffer
them to sin, seeing that sin is most contrary unto his holy nature?
Because he thereupon took occasion to show his dreadful justice in punishing
some, and the most wonderful joining of mercy and justice in saving others.

The justice of God requires that every Angel, man, woman, and child be tried
and judged by that which is in them, whether it be righteousness or sin;
Romans 2.11.
the righteous to be saved, and the sinner damned. So he condemned all the
sinning Angels; and so he will condemn a great many of Adams children. He
might have cast them al away, because they are a guilty corrupted brood, not
only children of a traitor, but also traitorously inclined.

The joining of Gods mercy and justice together, is thus; First, it pleased him
to be merciful unto such, and such, Exodus 33.19. Secondly, he appointed, that
they unto who^ he purposed to show mercy, should be joined by the holy Ghost
unto his only Son, who for that purpose was at such a time to take unto him a
body, and a soul, and so being both God and man, after a most holy and
guiltless life, to suffer a cruel death, to purchase for them the
forgiveness of sins, and cleansement from their wicked inclination, Tit.
2.14.

God is blessed, fully blessed, exceedingly blessed. He that is fully blessed,
has freedom from all manner of things which may give him any discontent: and
not only so, but also wants nothing that may content or delight him. Such is
the blessedness of Gods chosen servants, not in this world, but in heaven: for
the Bible says, they are blessed which die in the faith, and favor of the
Lord, that so they may rest from their labors, and their works follow them,
Reu. 14.13. Their resting from labors, is their freedom from all causes of
discontent; Their works following them, is the crown of everlasting
contentment, given unto them in regard of their works, and far surpassing
all possible merit in them. This blessedness God gives unto his Saints. The
blessedness which he has in himself differs from this, not only as the
cause from the effect, but also in two other special points. First, God has
his bliss of himself, and therefore it is said of him, that he only has
immortality, that is, absolute, and necessary freedom from death, 1. Tim.
6.16. Also of him it is said, that he has the well of life, Psalm. 36.9. that
is to say, he is the very first cause of life, and of all perfection.
Secondly, the blessedness of God is beyond all measure, most exceedingly
exceeding: for as his understanding is infinite, that is, endless, so are all
his perfections.

If God be most exceedingly blessed, why do we oftentimes say, Blessed be God,
as though we wished blessedness unto him? We do praise and magnify his
blessedness in mind, and in word, by acknowledging and publishing the same; yea
and the party that heartily loves God, is so full of good will toward him,
that he cannot but wish, that if it were possible, God might be a thousand
thousand times more happy and blessed then he is. And such is the most
honorable, and gracious kindness of God, that he takes this wish in very good
part: So the great men of this world accept the good will of their poor
friends.

God is glorious. Glory is properly the goodly show, seeming, sight, or
appearance of any thing. It also many times signifies the famous report of
some notable goodness: In both these meanings, glory is a title most proper
unto God. Touching goodly show, the glory of God appears two ways, in
himself, and in his works. In God himself there is such a shining excellent
majesty, that the very angels are not able to endure the full appearance
thereof; as we may perceive by the vision of the Prophet Esaias, who did see
certain very glorious angels before the face of God covering their faces,
Esa. 6.2.

In all, and every of Gods works, appears a show of some one or more of his
excellent properties, as of wisdom, power, justice, mercy, etc. Esa. 6.3. The
whole earth is full of his glory. Therefore S. Paul says, the very heathen
people knew God by his works, because his eternal power, and divine
properties do in his works by the creation of the world, evidently appear,
Romans 1. ver. 20.

He whose port is truly glorious, is worthy of a glorious report; and that
principally is our Lord God, of whose most stately port, and royal behavior
there is a notable report, Psalm. 104.1. Bless thee Lord, O my soul: O Lord my
God, thou art very great, thou art clothed with honor, and majesty, etc.

God appearing in his works so gloriously, our duty is to take knowledge of
his glory, and to do what we can to make the same known unto others. One
great cause of vndeuotion, and coldness in religion, is the not considering of
Gods works, specially that most admirable work of redemption, manifested in
the Gospel: Psalm. 107.43. Whosoever is wise, and will mark these things, even
they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. 2. Cor. 3.18. But we all
with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same likeness, from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord.
2. Cor. 4.6. For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ.

How shall we make the glory of God known unto others? Two ways: First, by
the holiness of our life, that so others may see the glorious working of Gods
grace in us, Matthew. 5.16. Secondly, by the due praising of God, that others may
hear the report of his glorious acts and doings: Psas. 145.12. To make known
unto the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of his
kingdom.

It is a question, whether such professed Christians, and specially
Church-ministers, as have by open prophanenes, or any unholy behavior,
blemished the glory of God, be not bound to make open confession, that so, what
in them is, they may salve, and remedy the wide wounds which they have given
unto the doctrine, and religion of God and Christ? My judgment in this point,
shall (I trust in God) appear by my practice, both in this book, and also in
the residue of my life. In the mean time this I profess, my poor soul does
vehemently desire to give glory unto God, in the reuengefull abasing of my
self, for the greiuous displeasure, and great dishonor which I have all my
life long caused, and done unto his most holy majesty.

Thus much of the name Jehovah, the Lord.

Thy God, etc.] The language wherein God spoke these words, reads thus, thy
Gods, as speaking of more then one. This, whatsoever the poor Jews say to the
contrary, shows, that in God there are more persons then one: which persons
how many, and who they are, the good Lord Jesus being one of them, does
plainly show, in saying unto his disciples, Matthew. 28.19. -- teach all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost.

The first person is the Father, who begets the Son, O most marvelous
begetting! the Son is as old as the Father: the Son has the very
selfsame nature, and substance with his Father; yea, Ioh. 14.10.
he is within his Father, and his Father is within him.

The second person in the godhead, is the Son, who is begotten of the Father,
as a word is begotten of a man's mind, and therefore he is sometime called the
Word; as also because he makes the Father, and the Fathers will known unto
men, and is that party concerning whom the Father gave his word that he would
send him into the world to save sinners.

The third person in the godhead, is the holy Ghost, who proceeds from the
Father, and from the Son, and therefore is the Spirit of them both, and he is
in either of them both: also both the Father, and the Son are in him. He is
called the Spirit, not so much to signify his nature, as to show his
proceeding; because he is spired that is, as it were breathed from the Father,
and from the Son. He is called holy, not only because of the holiness of his
nature, which is all one with the Father, and with the Son; but because he
does sanctify, that is, makes holy all those which shall be saved, Romans 1.4.

All and every outward work of God comes from the Father, thorough the
Son, and by the holy Ghost. The Father begins every work of himself,
working in, and through the Son, also in, and by the holy Ghost. Therefore
the making and beginning of heaven and earth, is entitled unto him.

The Son works in, and from the Father, in and by the holy Ghost, Therefore
the redemption and Sauiour-ship goes in his name: because he took unto him a
body, and a soul, and so being both God and man, purchased our salvation, and
saves us, in, and from his Father, in and by the holy Ghost; Ioh. 4.19. The
Son can do nothing of himself. Mat. 12.28. But if I cast out devils by the
spirit of God, etc.

The holy Ghost works in, and from the Father, in and from the Son, and so
by himself finisheth every work of God; specially the sanctifying, and
cleansing of them which shall be saved: and therefore he is called the
sanctifier, or the cleanser.

Thus much of the three persons in one God.

Now whereas the Lord says, [I am thy God] the meaning is, I save thee from
all evil, and bring thee to everlasting bliss, Genesis 15.1. But what proof
have I that the Lord is my God? He further says, Which have brought thee out
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

These words were indeed first spoken, and written unto the children of Israel,
whom God delivered out of the slavish bondage, and great misery, which they
had long endured under King Pharaoh in Egypt. Now I ought to take the same
words as spoken of God unto me: for as God made the Isralites to pass through
the red sea, and therein drowned the Egyptians; so he caused me to be baptized,
and sprinkled with water in his name, even in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost: and so by an holy sacramental signification,
made me pass through the red sea of Christ's blood, wherein all the enemies of
my salvation are (as if they were drowned) so disabled, that unless I
foolishly yield unto them, they cannot prevail against me, Romans 6.3. Neither
did God only give unto me that outward sign, and seal of salvation, but also
when I was able to understand, caused me to hear, yea and to read, yea, and
in some good measure, to perceive the gospel of his grace, wherein he
proffered unto me his gracious love, and therewithal such a portion of his
heavenly blessings in Jesus Christ, as should make me to be lovely and pleasing
in his sight.

But upon what condition did God proffer this grace unto me? Upon this
condition, Exodus 20.3. Thou shall have none other God before my face.

These words being considered together with the verse next before, do contain
a double condition. First, that I shall take the Lord to be my God. Secondly,
that I shall have none other to be my God beside him.

How should I take the Lord to be my God? By performing these four duties:

First, to be continually mindful that I am before his face, Genesis 17.1.

Secondly, to esteem his favor to be my only felicity, and therefore above all
things to love him, and desire to enjoy his favorable kindness, Luke 14.26.

Thirdly, to be always very fearful of displeasing him, Prou. 28.14.

Fourthly, to settle all my trust, and confidence in him, Ier. 17.5.6.7.

How have I performed these duties?

First, I have not been mindful of Gods presence: for both being alone, and in
company, my mind has been so far from that duty, as if there had been in my
belief, no God at all.

Secondly, I have all my life long more esteemed, loved, and desired worldly
pleasures and profits, yea vain toies and trifles, then the favor of God. I
have a far off thought upon God, as of a thing at the furthermost end of all
the world, and therefore mine affection was always wedded unto things which
seemed to be nearer unto me; though indeed nothing can be so near unto me as
he is: for in him I live, and move, and have my being.

Thirdly, I had now and then, some small fear of God; but it suddenly vanished
away, and therefore I plunged my self into a sea of sin, not making
conscience of one thought, word, or deed among a thousand.

Fourthly, I had no right trust in God: for that can not be without the fear
of God. I oftentimes used unwarrantable means to help my self: And so do
none that rightly trust in God.

This has been the inside of my life, not only before, but also ever since I
entered into the Ministry. And withal mine heart, I wish that I had no
fellows; for I am afraid that I have very many. If such there be, I humbly
entreat them to take true knowledge in how dangerous a state they are. I trust
that God has pardoned my parents and bringers up. The ground of all my
misery, next after the evil inclination which I brought with me into this
world, was the evil seasoning of mine heart in my tender years. Being a
little boy, I was trained to delight in a dog, and a cat; therefore I remember
the dogs name yet, and have loved dogs, and cattes ever since. Those, and
other vain things I was enured to love, when mine heart should have been taken
up, and filled with the love of God. I was feared with bugg-beares, and sprits,
when I should have been framed to fear God. Also I was accustomed to take a
pride in this, and that, to be angry and reuengefull against some one thing or
other, to mock, scorn, misse-call, and speak naughty words unto such, or
such an one. Thus commonly, for ought that I know, are the hearts of children
seasoned, and thus their souls are died in the black color of hell. Being
inwardly thus behaved, I was a little taught outward religion. That is, to say
the Lords Prayer, and the Creed by rote, to go to Church upon Sabbath days,
and hear service, yea and after that I could read, to answer the Minister in
the saying of Psalms, etc. Having done thus, what? heard service, yea helped
to say service, said the Lords Prayer and the Creed, and so forth? Oh! I
thought I had done enough, and enough, my heart being far from God, and not
once assaying to come near unto him. Here I would ask a question of the
common sort of people, young and old, I would ask you for no harm. Is not
this your religion? I mean, to say your prayers, to hear service, (I will not
put in, to say service) without any special stirring of your heart; not
actually minding that you are in talk with God, nor so affected as they who
perceive themselves to be so near unto, even before the face of that Almighty
King, who is terrible unto the Kings of the earth: they are his seruiters? I
take that blessed God to witness against my soul, if I speak uncharitably or
idly; I am persuaded that I have good reason to fear that a great many of
you have little religion in your hearts, but content your selves with saying
and hearing, and some outward ceremonies. Then I can tell you what religion is
the fittest for you. Even that which you call the old religion: for that will so
furnish you with outward works, and ceremonies, that you shall not dream of
meddling with your heart. You see the deuoutest of them can swallowe down into
their souls, lying, forswearing, murder, and treason. They make no bones of
such matters. And why? Because the ceremonie-law of Rome serves their turn. I
speak upon my conscience for the glory of my Lord God, and for the good of my
country.

It pleased God, that specially by the means of M. William Olney of Tachbrooke
near Warwick, who took me from my poor parents, I was in some sort
continued at school. About fourteen or fifteen years of age, I fell into
acquaintance with diverse that favored the Popes religion, among whom one lent
me a book thus entitled, A defense of the censure given upon two books of
William Charke, and Meredith Hanmer ministers, which they wrote against M.
Edmund Campian priest of the society of Jesus, and against his offer of
disputation. This little book being one of the most dangerous books that
ever I read (for they be little ones that either do good or harm unto the
greatest number of people) did thoroughly distaste me with the
Protestant-religion, before religion was in mine heart. A principal case of my
distaste, was the many evil reports, which with great pretense of truth, it
signifies touching the lives of Luther, Calvin, and Beza, bringing in this
reason withal, that the authors and beginners of an extraordinary reformation
in the Church of God, should at the least be ordinary, honest men in life and
conversation; which those men were not, if that book be true. Here I humbly
entreat all people to take knowledge of two things, which I have found true by
experience.

First, it is not safe for a man to betake himself to this or that side in
controversy of religion, until his heart and life be settled in some
uprightness of obedience unto God. Can a man judge of colors before he be
borne? No. Then how can a man rightly discern the truth in questions touching
the mystery or secret of godliness, he not being renewed by the spirit of God?
Although he have great learning, or depend upon the judgment of great learned
men, yet Satan the devil will have an hand in him, because they which do not
conscionably obey God, are subject to be wrought upon by him, Ephesians. 2.2.

The second thing that I would desire you to take knowledge of, is this: When a
man is well assured, that he is entered into a conscionable course of obeying
the commandments of God, which is the practice of repentance, to settle his
judgment touching this or that controversy in religion: he must not be lead
by the sermons, or books, or lives of men, but principally he must apply
himself unto the grounds of his faith: which are two, God, and Gods word.

How shall he apply himself unto God? By very often, humble, and earnest
prayer, that he will vouchsafe for Jesus Christ's sake to give him the spirit of
revelation, the inlightening of mind to perceive the holy truth. S. Paul
tells us plainly, that the secrets of God cannot be rightly known, but by the
spirit of God, 1. Cor. 2.10.11. And our Lord Jesus has given us this assurance
that if we do earnestly pray unto God for the holy Ghost, he will give him
unto us, Luke 11.5, 6, 7, 8, etc.

How shall a man apply himself to the word of God? In following the example of
the Jews that dwelt at Berea, who when S. Paul preached unto them, received
the word with all readiness. But how? They searched the Scriptures daily,
whether those things which S. Paul delivered unto them were so as he said, yea
or no? Act. 17.11. And for your encouragement, see what followed, Act. 16.12.
Therefore many of them believed.

If any say, he cannot understand the word of God: I answer, he may be
sorry, and ashamed to say so: for to what end has God given his word, but to
be understood, even of very simple folk? for of all the books in the world,
there is none that has more plainness in it then the book of God has. Many
fine scholars have no mind to read Gods word, because it is so plain. It is
certainly one of the maine drifts of Satan the devil, to make people believe
that Gods word is hard to be understood; because he would not have them to
understand it; for he knows that nothing in all the world is so great an
hinderance unto him, as Gods word being understood.

Now I will go forward in my confession. I went first to Oxford, and then to
Cambridge: At Oxford I was in Gloucester Hall about four years first and last:
at Cambridge I was in Emanuel College not so long; but to that College I am
singularly bound. Afterward I took upon me to be a schoolmaster, and then
entered into the ministry in the year of our Lord, one thousand, five
hundred, nintie and six. The next year after, upon the commendation of
diverse reverend Ministers in Kent, namely, my fatherly friend Doctor Milborne
of Seuenoke, M. Bust of Penshurst, M. Deiose of Chiddingstone, M. Smith of
Chelfield, I obtained of Archbishop Whitegift a general license to preach. I
have been a minister eighteen years, and so much more as since the
sixeteenth day of May last; for as upon that day Doctor Young Bishop of
Rochester gave me orders at Bromeley in Kent. All this while until this very
year, one thousand, six hundred, and foureteen, my heart continued in that
inward behavior, wherewith it was first possessed in my childhood.

Now let me go back again, and make report how the Father of mercy has
striuen with me from my youth, yea and now in good and comfortable measure,
blessed be his name, vanquished the settled wickedness of mine heart. Ever
since I had any understanding of Gods will, something has been working upon my
mind, persuading me very earnestly to forsake sin, and wholly to submit my
self unto God: which from time to time I undertook to do; but was always
hindered, both by the setlednes of mine own wicked disposition, and also by the
common course of this world, which so far as I know, will very hardly suffer
a man to keep company with God. I appeal unto their judgment, that be in
awe of God, and make conscience how they behave themselves in his sight. Yet it
pleased the Lord first by little and little to stablish my wavering judgment,
and then to let me run my self into many outward dangers, and diverse bodily
diseases, that so at last I might be broken from sin.

In Queen Elizabeth's time I was in great danger, because I had spoken something
touching the party who should succed her in these kingdoms, whom I well knew
to be in all right his Majesty that now is: (for being given to the reading of
Chronicles, I had drawn a pedigree, and Mr. Doctor Charles Chadwicke my tutor
in Emanuel college showed me another) for something publicly spoken to that
purpose in a sermon at S. Marie Cray in Kent, in the year, as I remember,
nintie eight, I was accused to Doct. Barlow, then chapleine to Archbishop
Whitegift, and Parson of Orpington, and S. Marie Craie. He presently gave order
unto one M. Hamden a Justice of peace, to call me to an account, and examine
both me, and diverse credible persons that heard me. He joining unto him, S.
Robert Bosevile of Anisford, took mine examination in Sir Percivall Hearts
house at Lullingstone. Those men which were examined what they heard me say,
namely M. Francis Haddon, M. Richard Manning of Keuingtowne, and, as I think,
Richard Manning of Kippingden-crowch, etc. did give good testimony of me, and
the minister that accused me was by the Justice found variable. So by the
goodness of God I escaped that danger, but performed not unto him my promise of
reformation. I pass by many dangers, because I will not trouble you with
hearing the several reports of the^: only one I pray you patiently to hear.
Upon S. Steuens day in the year six hundred and eleven, I preached a sermon
in the Church called Alhallowes in Derby, where then I was, and now am the
unworthy Minister. In my prayer before the Sermon, I made a strange fault, and
thus it came about: I in my private prayers, had used in very dear affection
to my Sovereign Lord, (God is witness) to name those kingdoms together
whereof the Lord God has given him possession, and that by it self which yet
he does not possess: very indiscreetly I in my public prayer that day, fell
into that form of words. My text was S. Steuens prayer for his persecutors,
which I urged very far, I will not say discreetly, but I profess before the
God of heaven, that it was without any secret love to Popery: I urged, that
which I shall ever hold to be true, that though the Papists be our dangerous
enemies, as being full of malice and treason, yet we ought to be rather angry
with our sins, then with them: for had we grace to walk worthy of that
glorious light which God by the Gospel of his Son has graciously given unto
us in this land, he would not suffer that mystery of iniquity to prevail
against us. This is most certain: for hitherto he has miraculously defeated
their hellish practices, though we in our own consciences know that we are
unworthy of such marvelous preservation. I came to this parrish against the
will of many. Some of which company took occasion out of my fault about his
Majesty's style-royall, and out of some things spoken both in that and other
sermons, (how conscionably and charitably construed, it concerns them to
ponder,) I say they took occasion to accuse me of Popery, and treason, and
those accusations they urged with much policy, and great strength against me:
I was twice at London about it, and in sore perplexity God knows. It pleased
the Almighty though I was most unworthy of his aid, to be entreated of me,
and therefore he procured me many friends, namely, many reverend ministers,
especially Doct. Neale, then Bishop of Couentrie and Lichfielde, by whose
constant intercession, I obtained of my Sovereign Lord King James a gracious
remission, and of the Lord Archbishop, unto whom I was vehemently complained
of, a very grue and fatherly dismission.

When the trouble came first upon me, all the mouie which I had in all the
world, was between forty, and fifty shillings. But I was much befreinded by
many, specially by Mr. Frauncis Mundie of Marketon near Derbie, who by his
servant sent me a purse, and in it some fifteen, or sixteen pounds, willing
me to take either all, or how much I would freely. Such a friend, yea such
friends, God send every honest poor man in his need. And God who is the
fountain of mercies, vouchsafe to be evermore merciful unto them and theirs,
that show mercy unto poor distressed wretches overtaken between the
straites. Here in all humbleness I crave favorable leave to speak a few
words unto superiors Ecclesiastical, and Civil.

Oh my Lords, and Masters, a poor man pursued by mighty adversaries must needs
be guilty, whether he be guilty, or no; unless you follow his example upon
whom your dignities depend. Please it you therefore to consider what he once
said unto Abraham his friend, Genesis 18.20. And the Lord said, Because the cry
of Sodom, and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very greiuous: 21.
I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to
the cry of it, which is come unto me: and if not, I will know. The Lord our
God unto whom al things are so manifest as possibly they may be, needs not to
examine any accusation; for he knows far more perfectly then either the
accuser, or the accused. But his mind is, that all men, and specially you
should with all moderation, and lawful indifferency take thorough-knowledge
of any, specially of a poor man's cause, before you give sentence; yea, before
you speak any hard word: for a cross term, yea a frown is enough to
astonish many a weake-hearted man, and make him unable to speak for himself.

Also I humbly beseech all Preachers, to take these warnings by me: First, be
ye thoroughly reconciled unto God, that he may vouchsafe to join with you in
that most weighty business. Secondly, so far as possibly with a good
conscience, have peace, and be in freindly terms with all people least some
in bitterness of displeasure mistake your words to their hurt, and your
grief. The holy God is my witness, that some speeches of mine were most
strangely mistaken, by men professing great preciseness of conscience: yea,
mark I pray you, so strangely, that out of a public speech of mine, zealously
intended, and uttered against the Roman religion, one piece of an article was
taken against me to prove me popish. Thirdly, be very careful that in no
sort ye meddle with any matter of Estate: for there is no wisdom, nor
safety in so doing. Fourthly, though in purposing to speak this or that, your
mind be very upright, yet make careful choice of words, and phrase: for that
which being uttered one way can not be ill taken, may in an other suit of
words seem very harsh, and be likely to do more harm then good. O for a
mortified minister! He will not speak thus, and thus, because he will; but
so, and so, because he is willed. This, if I mistake not, may be called the
meekness of wisdom: which whatsoever any man can say to the contrary, does
most befit a minister of the Gospel, specially in these latter days, wherein
natural corruption takes upon it to be zealous, and precise for Gods glory.
You need not ask me, whether in that my great danger, I vowed unto God a
strict reformation of life? I did indeed. But when my danger was over, I
performed not my vow.

Now I must fetch a compass back again to speak of my diseases, and of some
troubles withal. My body has been windy and rheumatike from my childhood
by a natural distemper, as I take it, of my liver; the hotenesse whereof has
caused much evil unto me. In the winter, six hundred, and six, I then
being Curate of Southfleet in Kent, after an extreme cough did sensibly
perceive blindness entered into mine eyes: for diverse moates seemed to fly
before me, which way soever I turned my sight; yea, and specially before my
right eye, a thing in fashion of a kind of chain, sometime folded, or turned
diverse ways, and sometime at length. What infirmity in the eye causes this
appearance, let learned Physicians judge. Thus it has all this while been with
me, increasing more, and more, so that now I have much ado to write, or to
read, and am forced to hold my eyes, and the book very near together. The
next winter after in the great frost, I was taken with a windy disease in the
lower part of my breast, which so grievously vexed me, that I looked for
nothing but death. In the very extremity of this painfulnesse, Doctor Barlow
then Bishop of Rochester, who not long before by the death of Mr. Winter, came
to have the Parsonage of Southfleet, where I was Curat, being by some,
thorough mine own vndiscretion, incensed against me, took an occasion to put
me out of the Curatship. About that time I did set forth a little book,
called The burden of a laden conscience: Which has occasioned many heavy
burdens to be laid upon me, by those whose holiness is known unto God, and
not unto me, a many precise folk, that know not other men's hearts, howsoever
they know their own. Mine old kind Schoole-fellow Mr. William Air fellow in
Emanuel College, (who twice before had been my refuge under God)
understanding that I was without place, did by means of Mr. John Cotton fellow
in the same college, help me to the Curateship of S. Alkmunds in Derby of
Derbyshier. There I was a year, and a quarter very lovingly used. My stipend
was fully so much as ever before. Also M. Robert Bate of little Chester gave
me my diet, and lodging all that time, his wife, a virtuous woman now in
heaven, having a very tender care of me, because of my sickness. Unwisely I
left that place, and put my self into a world of trouble, by taking the
Curateship of Alhallowes in the same town. In this great and burdenous charge,
I have now been almost five years. During this time, my windy disease,
together with a faintness, grew so upon me, that I fell into diverse deadly
fits of the cholike, not only in cold weather, but in the heat of summer. Now
I come to tell you of intolerable torments. Gravel has bred in me from my
youth, and oftentimes I was pained with it: whereupon I used to take a great
deal of small drink, and so avoided it. I remember that my worshipful
friend, M. Richard Sedly of Southfleete, said once unto me; What will you do
when your stomach cannot receive so much drink? Ah gentle. M. Sedly! the time
is now come, and now I can do nothing to help my self but call upon the name
of God.

About the end of July, in the year sixteen hundred and twelve, I was taken
with many fits of cholike and stone, one fit anon after another: Then I cried
God mercy, and promised zealous amendment of life. The fittes left me; but I
amended not. The next su^mer after, I had some three or four several fits.
Now mark I pray you, and believe me I beseech you. The second of November
last, 1613. at night I going to bed, felt a fit of the cholike and stone
coming upon me. Wherefore I being in great anguish, prayed earnestly unto
God, that for his mercies sake, he would then ease me of that pain, with
condition that if I did not presently enter into a very reformed course of
life, the disease should return upon me and kill me. It presently was gone,
and all that night I had quiet rest. The morrow I performed not my promise.
Toward night I felt a threatening of it again, and therefore according to Doct.
Bambrigs direction, I took purging pills to prevent it: which kind of
Physic had formerly eased me. The pills wrought: yet the morrow morning a
violent fit came upon me. How grievously I was that day tormented, some that in
kindness came to see me, namely, M. Thomas Stringer, and M. John Haughton do,
I am sure, very well remember. My breast quaked as a leaf shaken with the
wind. You may think, I had then great cause to fear that the wrath of my Lord
was kindled against me: I humbly besought him to rebuke the disease yet once
more, and then (unless I forced my self to enter in at the strait door of
repentance) no more: He is a gracious Lord, his name be praised. At even he
rebuked the disease, and it left me: yet all that night I was glad to have Mr.
Duxburie sit with me, I was so weakened: one while I was up, an other while
down, and O my good Lord, what I think upon thou know; my soul most
humbly, and lamentably appealeth unto thine infinite mercy.

After this I purposed, as I thought, very steadfastly to reform my self
according to the word of God; yea so far forth, that I wrote unto Cantrell
Leg Printer in Cambridg, a note to be set before the fifth impression of my
former little book. In that note bearing date, Nouemb. 27. 1613. I signified
that my conscience was unburdened, and that I would shortly publish the manner
thereof; whereas God knows I was far short of being unburdened. Now yet
mark I pray you: All my former fits were about the right kidnie. In January
and February, I felt a painful gathering of somewhat about my left kidnie,
which prickingly continued, causing a grievous torment in the water passage out
of my body. Many times my water came drop-meale, with burning pain. That long
practiced religious Physician, Doct. Hunton of Newarke upon Trent, with whom I
had formerly bin for my windy disease, and (by means of M. John Batte Vicar
of Newarke now deceased, my old schoolmaster) had received much favor from
him; he sent me word that as he could conjecture by my letter (for I was not
able to ride unto him) I was in danger of some deadly fretting in my kidneys,
by reason of gravel stones, which was not without difficulty to be prevented
in a settled course of Physic. I had little money to bestow, and no great
mind to take bodily medicine, before my soul were cured by the physic of
Jesus Christ crucified.

The greiuous disease of my water increasing, and mine old splennitiue
windiness filling my body, and head, together with an extreme faintness,
the 19. day of April I did with very fearful conditions, bind my self unto
God, that I would diligently endeavor to order my self according unto these
rules following.

My first rule.
First, I must be always mindful, that I, the worst of all sinners, am
before the face of god, who sees the whole settled wicked behavior of mine
heart, who has all my evil thoughts, words, and deeds in perfect
remembrance, whose holiness extremely hates all manner of sin, whose
righteousness will not suffer any sin to be unpunished, whose prayer is able
to torment me everlastingly with most unspeakable pain in body and soul.
Hereupon I must conceive, that great is the wrath whereunto I have provoked
God, and that therefore great is the vengeance which justly he may power upon
me for ever. I must labor that this double conceit may work in my heart a
double affection, sorrow for the displeasure of God, and fear of his
vengeance. This is the way to break mine heart, and a broken heart is a
sacrifice unto God, Psalm. 51.17. Inward humbleness cannot but outwardly show
it self; and so it will be the more easily settled, and the more deeply
rooted in mine heart and soul. I must very carefully reform my vain mind,
vnsad countenance, and talkatiue tongue: else I cannot be rightly humbled in the
sight of God.

My second rule.
Secondly, I must think upon the great mercy, mighty power, and most joyful
bliss, which God in Jesus Christ, proffereth unto all those, that will forsake
sin, and believe the Gospel: mercy to forgive their sins, power to free
them from the inclination of sin, and bliss to fill them full of all
delightful pleasure for evermore. Hereupon I must strive to have a most hungry
and thirsty desire of the grace of God.

My third rule.
Thirdly, I must give al diligence, that by prayer I may obtain of God the
spirit of grace. To this purpose I must be always prayingly, and crauingly
affected. I must impart my goods unto the poor, that I may have the help of
their prayers. Luke 16.9. Also I must entreat all those which seem to be
acquainted with God, that they will pray for me unto him: Iam. 5.16. Had I any
warrant to entreat the Saints in heaven to pray for me, I would gladly do it.
But I have none. My belief is, that no glorified soul, no, not the blessed
virgin mother, intermedleth with any business in this world. And I am fully
persuaded, that it is the safer way so to believe. It seems unto me that
Roman catholics of the Popes religion, under color of in treating Saints to
pray for them, do indeed worship them, call upon them, make vows, and offer
spiritual sacrifices unto them, as unto so many he-gods and she-gods. I
beseech the Lord God to inlighten their minds, and rectify their affections,
according unto true holiness, and pure devotion. Amen. Amen.

I must duly, and devoutly pray unto God at least three times every day. I
have great need to pray every hour, because of the hardness of mine heart,
and deathfulnesse of my body. I must oftentimes, so far as my weak body
will endure; pray fasting, and so long as I am able, humbly kneeling. I must in
prayer speak unto God very leasurely, and reverently: I must so earnestly mind
that I speak unto him, as I were face to face with him.

When I begin any set prayer, I will worship the Lord my God, most humbly
lifting up my mind toward his glorious majesty in heaven, and bowing down
my body toward the ground, so rest upon my knees.

My prayer early in the morning.
O Almighty, most blessed, and glorious Lord God, I a most wicked sinful
sinner, heartily acknowledging that thou in most wonderful goodness, have
made me a living soul in thine own likeness, have proffered eueralasting
salvation unto me, have long time endured my rebellious wickedness, and
hitherto preserved me alive, do humbly beseech thee to give grace that I may
henceforth until the end, and in the ending of my life, very zealously
glorify thy name in the practice of true repentance. Grant the same grace, I
heartily pray thee, unto every man, woman, and child that wants it; that all
people in all places may joyfully praise thee, thorough thine only Son Jesus
Christ: To whom with thee, o Father, and with the holy Ghost, three persons,
and one only Lord God, be all praise, honor, glory, worship, and humble
service, now, and for evermore. Amen.

About nine of the clock in the forenoone I must pray thus;

Oh Almighty Lord God, who love holiness, and hate sin, and therefore have
prepared everlasting bliss in heaven for thy holy servants, and endless torment
in hell for sinners: I the worst of all sinners, do humbly beseech thee, that
for thy only son Jesus Christ's sake, thou will give me thy grace of true
repentance, and says unfeigned, that so I may obtain of thee forgiveness of
all my sins, and the lowest place among all them which shall be saved. Amen.

O Lord, innumerable sins have come out of mine heart, I have filled the
world with the cursed fruits of my wickedness. I beseech thee to put al my
sins quite away out of thy sight, and out of the minds of all people, that
thou may be no longer displeased, nor any man, woman, or child any more
harmed by means of me.

O Lord, I have caused much evil unto many folk, and the good which I should
have caused, I have wickedly neglected. I beseech thee to give unto every one,
which has been any way harmed or neglected of me, a large recompense, and so
far as may be to work the same recompense unto them by me; the residue by
those means which thou know to be fittest for that purpose.

O Lord, many people have been beneficial unto me; because thy will was that
they should be so, I humbly thank thee for it, beseeching thy gracious
goodness to give a bountiful reward unto every one that has benefited me
in deed, word, or desire, and to make me so thankful unto them, as a right
Christian ought to be.

O Lord, if any have either in way of friendship toward me, or in manner of
enmity against me, or by any means touching me displeased thee, I beseech
thee to pardon them: and also to give such a measure of thy grace into mine
uncharitable heatt, that I may most freely forgive every one that either has
been, or shall be a trespasser against me.

O Lord, I have displeased, and discontented many folk. I beseech thee to
pacify and quiet them. O give grace that I may humbly seek for, and they may
gently yield unto a Christian reconcilement.

O Lord, I am of a froward disposition, apt to displease and disquiet every
one. I beseech thee to break me from this unkind unpeaceable condition: O
keep me from giving cause of displeasure unto any, and keep others from taking
displeasure against me, that so far as is possible with a good conscience, I
may live and die in peace with all thy creatures.

O Lord, thou might justly set all thy creatures to sight against me;
because I am most rebelliously disobedient against thee. But contrariwise, thou
do most mercifully give unto me the comfortable use of many things, and the
favorable amity of many people. O gracious Lord, I humbly thank thee,
beseeching thine Almighty goodness so to sanctify thy blessings unto me,
that I may blessedly employ them to the glory of thy grace, the good of all
people, and the hurt of nothing, but only of sin.

O Lord, I owe a special duty unto my kindred, and acquaintance. I beseech
thee to be gracious unto them, and specially unto those with whom I stand
charged as the minister of their salvation. O give unto every one of them, I
most humbly pray thee all those blessings which a good minister of thy Gospel
should be a means to procure unto them. Amen. Amen.

O Lord, Christened people, who of thy Son Christ's name are named Christians,
be very wretchedly entangled with differences of belief, and wickednesses of
life: I beseech thee to send forth such a power of thy Sons grace, as shall
join them all together in the right Christian faith, and make them to abound
in the fruits thereof, to thy glory, and their mutual benefiting one another.
Specially, O Lord, as duty binds me, I pray for those two Islands, Britain,
and Ireland, beseeching thee to power thy graces continually upon thine
anointed servant King James, and upon his Queen, and Children, and subjects,
that he, and all his may be every way pleasing unto thee, and evermore blessed
of thee. Amen, Amen.

O Lord, many nations, and people are vnchristians; they believe not in thy
Son Christ, and therefore they are in the way of damnation. I beseech thee to
be merciful unto them all, and specially unto the Jews, and Israelites the
natural children of thine old faithful servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. So
soon as it possibly may be, with thine own good pleasure, I humbly pray thee
to convert them unto the true Christian faith, that they may be saved, and
therein thy Son Christ glorified. Amen. Amen.

O Lord, some people are diseased in body, some are troubled in mind, and
some are cumbred with outward adversity. I beseech thee to give them the grace
that they may forsake all manner of sin, and wholly submit themselves unto
thee; O then they shall be most tenderly cherished in all their necessities,
and very timely removed out of all their misery into perpetual blessedness.
Amen. Amen.

For these, and for all other mercies which I, or any child of my father Adam
do, or shall need, my desire is, O Lord, I beseech thee, give me grace, to
pray acceptably unto thy glorious majesty in thine only Son Jesus Christ's
name, as he has taught me, saying, O our Father which art in heaven,
hallowed be thy name, etc.

Glory, and honor, and praise, and thanks, with all divine worship, and
humble service be given unto thee, O God the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost. And unto the poor children of the man Adam be vouchsafed from thee
thorough the man Jesus, deliverance from sin and misery, henceforth for
evermore. Amen. Amen.

That I might sing unto my good Lord in some tuneablenesse, I bought the whole
book of Psalms with tunes in four parts. And I bestowed now and then, a
little time to learn the notes of the tenor part. My skill is very small; but
yet I would not forgo it for a great gain; because it helps my dull
devotion. This, under correction, I say of music, Upon an holy affection, it
has an heavenly working: but contrariwise, contrarily.

My forenoone Psalm,
to the tune of Attend my people, and give ear.
O ^Vt of the deepes of misery, O blessed Lord, I cry to thee: Vouchsafe ^for
thy Son Christ his sake, to hearken graciously to me.

To me the worst of all the folk
which here upon thine earth do dwell;
A wretch most fit to be cut off,
and cast down headlong into hell.
For mercy Lord to thee I cry,
for mercy and for saving grace,
To pardon all my wickedness,
and my corruptions to deface.
Good Lord give me repentance, that
I may indeed unfeignedly
Enforce my self for evermore
my sins to kill and crucify.
Lord guide and lead me all this day,
in every thought, and word, and deed,
To do thy will, and bless thou me
that I may always have good speed.
And when thou shall most mightily
have freed me from sinful thrall,
To praise thy blessed Name with me
I will entreat thy people all.
Both now, and henceforth I will praise
thy Name O God, right thankefully,
Because thou will not suffer me
in graceless state to live and die.
O Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
one only God in persons three,
All glory, honor, praise, and thanks,
be yielded evermore to thee.
Amen.
My noone prayer.
O most holy, most good, and gracious Lord God, I the most unclean, and most
defiled wretch of all the world, do humbly beseech thy most blessed and
glorious majesty, that even for that right dear love which is between thee,
and thine only begotten Son, the Lord Jesus Christ, God and man crucified,
thou will vouchsafe to make known thy wonderful grace, in cleansing me from
the most abominable defilement of my sins. To this end I humbly pray thee
to make me always very mindful of thy presence, fearful of thy
displeasure, and desirous of thy favor. O most merciful Lord, grant me this
mercy, this exceeding great mercy, and then do unto me every way that which
shall be most to thine own good pleasure, and to thy own glory. Yea blessed
Lord God, unto thee be all good pleasure, praise, honor, worship, and glory
in Jesus Christ, now and for evermore. Amen. Amen.

My noone Psalm
to a tune which in Cambridge was called Mr. Perkins tune.
^ O Holy, holy, holy Lord, the purest of all things, the blessefull glorious
Majesty, from whence all goodness springs.

Look down from thy most holy place,
behold good Lord and see
A sinful woeful wretched man
most loathsome unto thee.
Most foul and filthy is my sin,
Ah! fie upon me fie!
O Father of all holiness,
to thee for grace I cry.
For grace to wash, and make me clean,
from this most ugly sin,
That I in heaven among thy Saints,
the lowest place may win.
The last and lowest place of all,
O Lord, of thee I crave:
Give grace to wash, and make me clean,
that I that place may have.
Forgive me all my sins, though they
most grievous be and great;
Forgive me all for Christ his sake,
I humbly thee entreat.
Then I will sing to thee with joy,
my song it shall be this,
No wight so wicked as I was
has place in heavenly bliss.
To Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
All glory be therefore,
Yea honor, worship, praise, and thanks
henceforth for evermore.
About three of the clock in the afternoon, I must say the same prayer which
I said about nine in the forenoone.

O Almighty Lord God, who love holiness, etc.

My afternoon Psalm,
to the Suffolk tune.
^ O Blessed and most glorious God,
^ whose throne is set on high,
^ I sinnfull and most wretched man,
^ to thee for mercy cry.
Confessing that thy great goodness,
thy patience wonderful,
And long forbearance do me move
my sins to disanul.
But woe is me! my naughty heart
to sin is still so bent,
That in my self I find no means
entirely to repent.
This world also wherein I live
with sin does ouerflowe,
And meets me with temptations
which way soever I go.
Satan that mighty evil spirit
so full of subtlety,
Does practice all the means he can,
that I in sin may die.
Therefore I cry to thee O Lord,
whose power is over all,
Beseeching thee to free me from
this sinful deadly thrall.
With true repentance, and right faith,
mine heart and soul fulfill,
That I may hate all wickedness,
and clean fast to thy will.
From all this worlds temptations,
and Satan's practicing,
Keep thou me safe, I humbly pray,
O gracious heavenly King.
Then will I praise with heart and voice,
and magnify thy name,
When thou have saved my poor soul
from endless pain and shame.
All glory, honor, praise, and thanks,
be always given to thee,
O Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
one God in persons three.
My prayer at night before I go to bed.
O most mighty, and most gracious Lord God, I wretched man, the worst of the
world, do cry thee mercy for all the sins which this day, or at any time
before, have come out of my heart, by way of deed, word, or thought. I
heartily thank thee for all the blessings which thou have graciously, and
plentifully given me. I humbly praise thine holy name, for that it has pleased
thee to preserve me from many evils, and to deliver me out of great dangers.
I beseech thee to endue me with such a measure of thy grace, that I may
henceforth foreuermore be acceptably thankful unto thee, through Jesus
Christ.

Be merciful also I humbly pray thee unto all those for whom I ought to pray:
give them, and unto me, I beseech thee, all the graces which thine only son
has taught us to pray for in his name, saying, O our father which art in
heaaen, hallowed be thy name, etc.

When I lay me down in my bed, I will say,
O blessed Lord God, here I lie down, not knowing what shall come unto me this
night: I humbly betake both body and soul unto thee, beseeching thy most
gracious goodness to receive me into thy keeping, through Jesus Christ thine
only Son, my Lord and Savior. Amen.

When I settle my self to sleep, I will say,
O good Lord God, vouchsafe to be merciful unto this feeble body, that it may
have a little comfortable rest, and be thereby made the more serviceable unto
thee, through thine only Son my dear Lord and Savior. Amen.

If I cannot take rest, I will say thus,
O most gracious Lord, this body cannot take rest, because I have wickedly
disordered it: I beseech thee therefore to pardon me all my wickedness, and
now teach my poor soul, how it shall find everlasting rest in thee, thorough
thine only Son, my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Amen.

About midnight, whether I have slept or not, I will pray thus;
O most glorious Lord God, the Father of lights, no darkness can hide me from
thee; for thou see so clearly at midnight, as at midday, yea thou beholdest
all my thoughts: Therefore I humbly present my self before thy blessed
Majesty, beseeching thee to look graciously upon me a most ungracious wretch,
and to save me from the works of darkness, that I may have the lowest place
within the kingdom of thy glory. Grant this most merciful Father, for thine
only Sons sake, in whose name I pray further for my self, and for all other
folk, as he has taught me, saying, O our Father which art in heaven, hallowed
be thy name, etc.

So often as I have had any sleep, when I awake, I will say thus,
O most merciful Father, God almighty, I humbly thank thee for the rest
which thou have now given unto this naughty body. I bequeath both it and my
soul into thine hands, to be disposed of according unto thy will, to the
glory of thy name, through Jesus Christ thine only Son, my Lord and
Savior: Amen.

When I arise in the morning, I will say;
O good Lord God, with all mine heart I thank thy blessed majesty, for that
it has pleased thee mercifully to keep me all this night; now I arise out of
this bed, in thy name O Father, in thy name O Jesus Christ, in thy name O holy
Ghost, O most holy and undivided, inseperable three persons in one God, one God
in three persons, for thy glorious names sake, vouchsafe to be merciful unto
me a sinner. Amen.

This is my third rule.

My last rule.
Fourthly, and lastly, I must in the sight of God, conscionably detest, and
resist my sins, faithfully endeavoring, that I may in very truth sa^ with
David, Psalm. 18.23. I was also upright before him, and I kept my self from
mine iniquity.

First, therefore being always mindful of Gods presence, I must carefully
intend to know and to do his will.

Secondly, when any motion comes unto mine heart, quietly, impartially, and
diligently consider, whether it be good in the sight of God, yea or no? If it
be good, I must willingly yield unto it: But if it be evil, I must steadfastly
purpose to refuse it; yea and remove my self so far as possible from all
danger of being tempted unto it.

If I be strongly tempted to yield unto any sin, I must earnestly pray unto
God for deliverance; thus:

O most holy and blessed Lord God, I the worst of all sinners, being now as
thou see strongly tempted to sin against thee, and not able to resist the
temptation, by reason of the long settled wickedness of my heart, do humbly
beseech thee to be so merciful unto me, as to save me from this great danger,
thorough thy almighty grace in Jesus Christ thine only Son, my Lord and
Savior, Amen.

Having thus prayed, yea, and prayed again and again, if need require, I must
with a good courage put on the mind, that I will rather endure any loss or
damage, then yield unto that sin. And I must assure my self, that how
strongly soever I am tempted, God will most certainly enable me to endure that
temptation, unless I basely consent unto it.

When by the grace of God I am freed from any temptation, I must praise him
thus;

O the Father of mercy, and the fountain of power, I a most weak wretch, not
able to resist the least motion of sin that may be, do heartily thank thee
for this gracious deliverance, which thou have vouchsafed to give unto me. O
good Lord, I beseech thee to continue thy grace toward me, that I may always
be more and more thankful unto thee, thorough Jesus Christ thine only Son my
Lord, and Savior. Amen.

If thorough want of heed, or by weak resistance, I fall into any sin, I
must so soon as I know it, make my confession, and prayer unto God, thus;

O most holy, and righteous Lord God, I most damnable sinner have now sinned
against thee thus, and thus, etc. I cry thee mercy, O most merciful Father,
beseeching thee to give me true repentance, pardon, and freedom from this,
and from all my sins, thorough thine only Son Jesus Christ, my Lord and
Savior. Amen.

Moreover, because I am much given to sin openly, that is, in the sight, or
in the hearing of some one or many of Gods people, which is a great means to
draw them into sin, or to harde^ them in sin, or at least to discourage
those which make conscience of their conversation; unto every one that shall
hear or see me sinning, I must, so soon as I perceive my sin, with all
possible convenient speed, very plainly, and repentingly, confess it thus;
Such a thing you saw me do: or, Such a thing you heard me say: I beseech you
for Gods sake, to take great heed that it cause no evil effect in you: for it
was a sin against God, and therefore I cry God mercy for it.

Thus I must confess any open fault; yea if it be committed in preaching,
writing, or howsoever. A pulpit fault in the same pulpit, and to the same
company, must be confessed. These be my rules for the practice of zealous
reformation, that I may be in very deed a member, and minister of the reformed
Church.

Now I will declare unto you, how I endeavored to bring my self into those
four Rules, and with what success.

All the rest of April I in a manner lost, endeavoring very little or
nothing: but I could have no quietness in mind longer then I intended that
business.

The first of May, died in our parish a gentleman, one M. Villers, of the same
tormenting disease which I have: he had bin long time very greiuously pained
with it.

Every day, specially in the morning, it plagued me. Wherefore to ease the
pain, I drank much small drink: and sometime water, yea now and then, mine
own water; because I was told that so I should be cased. But though I drank
never so much, after it was passed thorough my body, the pain came again.
Yet notwithstanding all this, I could not keep my self in the company of God,
specially when I was together with any body: for then I fell into a deal of
idle unholy communication.

The eight of May, being Sabbath day, in the evening, these four were
together, M. Sidney Zouch, M. Matthew Bate, Philip Aram, Richard Kilby: we
drank at M. Matthew. Bates house, who at the parting said thus unto us; It is
great odds, that not all we four shall be alive this day twelve month. I
roundly took the words to my self, judging that the first which must be gone
was I, and that god had put into his mind to say those words for my monishment.
Yet (see the settled wickedness of mine heart) after my departure from the^, I
met with other company, and so merrily delighted my self with profane talk,
that when I came into my chamber, I was forced to go prayer-lesse to bed,
because my soul was confounded, and ashamed to look up toward God.

The morrow morning, I prayed thus; O blessed Lord God, most marvelous art thou
in goodness, and patience. Is it possible that thou can forbear the pouring
of thy just, and wrathful vengeance upon me? O Lord, it is exceedingly enough
that thou have thus long forborne me: Cut off, I beseech thee, this most
cursed course of my sin, and do unto me that which is most pleasing to thy
holy will. O Lord, is there yet any hope that I should be saved? Yea, with
condition of repentance. Woe is me! there is no possibility of my repentance.
I cannot steadfastly continue in the purpose of resisting my sins: yea so
long as thy pleasure is to preserve me alive, thou call me unto thee; O
God, I would come; but I cannot: I will assaie. O I have no faith. This is that
which comes of long living in sin. Yet who can tell what thou will do, if
I but offer to assay? Without assaying, there is no turning: without turning,
no salvation. Therefore I will assay. Good Lord, I cannot. How uncouth? How
strange? How beyond all possibility does the practice of a conscionable life
seem unto me? O Lord, besides mine own inward unrepentance, the violent
stream of this world hinders me. Most folk further me in sin, some one
way, some another. But a very few holp me to enter in at the little door of
repentance. Men may talk much, and profess great matters; but it is
repentance that shall try what kind of people they be. O how easy a thing it
is to make an outward show, if that would serve the turn? The heart must be
upright with thee, and the spirit must cleave fast unto thee; else it is no
bargain, no covenant between thee, and the party. In the name of Jesus I will
assay. O Jesus help me, for thy most comfortable names sake. Amen.

That very same day, I coming into company, turned from God.

Tuesday I prayed thus; O Lord God, I do plainly perceive, that to pray unto
thee for the grace of repentance, and not to enforce my self to practice the
means, is a kind of mockery, and a fearful provoking of thy displeasure.
Earnest prayer, and diligent practice, will mutually, thorough thy grace,
strengthen each other. But neglect of practice, shows cold devotion.
Therefore I purpose to force my self unto this business. O good Lord, be
merciful unto me. Amen.

My intolerable pain grew worse and worse, yet I could not frame my self to
take any sure hold upon the grace of repentance.

Monday the sixteenth of May, I prayed thus; O Lord God, had I not been a stony
hearted sinner, this deadly windines might have terrified me from sin above
six years a gone. O how blessed should I now have been, had I but these six
last years in singleness of heart served thee! Now my time is gone; mine
heart is dead within me. And though I should live a while, this hellish
strangury quite disableth me: yet were I turned unto thee, thou would be
very gracious unto me, Oh! mine heart is so deuillishly bent to sin, that no
vows, no oaths, nothing can turn it. O Lord, what shall I do? I am as a man
that has most deadly wounded himself, and dying would not die. But woe is
me! There is no remedy. He that is wounded to death, must die; yea, but thou
vouchsafest to raise up some by the grace of thy Son. True, Lord, true it is.
But few of that company be such as have bin dissembling hypocrites. And of all
counterfeits, the most incurable is a counterfeit-preacher of thy righteousness.
My soul can hardly think how such a one should have the grace of repentance.
Of all such, if any such there be beside me, I am the worst. O good Lord be
merciful unto me the worst of all sinners. Amen.

Friday the twentieth of May, I prayed thus; O good Lord, though the hardness of
mine heart be exceedingly great, yet ought I not to despair: for thy Son
likeneth the kingdom of thy grace unto a grain of musterd seed, and unto a
little leaven. O my soul, have thou not a little faith! Look up unto heaven,
and crave of thy maker that the fulness of grace which is in Jesus Christ may
have some little influence, and entrance into thee, by the holy Ghost. O my
good Lord, my soul is full of unbelief. I beseech thee to be merciful unto
mine unbelieving soul. Amen.

About noone the same day, having dined with two strangers (for I lodge, and
table in a vitteling-house) coming into my chamber, I confessed, and prayed
thus; O Lord, what am I that I should undertake to walk uprightly before thy
face? I cannot, for the company, and presence of any one draws my mind down
from thee. O why do thou suffer the poor children of Adam to be thus
carried away? Is it because thou will have it so? fie upon me sinne-blinded
wretch! when a servant for his naughtines is turned out of his service, he
should lay the blame of his misery upon himself, and not ungraciously
exclaim that his lord had a purpose to put him away before ever he offended.
Yea, but seely man thinks, that thou who art so renowned, and famous for
mercy, should be merciful unto every one. Or if not so, because then
justice should not be seen, nor the benefit of mercy so well appear; yet the
greater number should have mercy; specially seeing that the God-man Jesus has
paid so great a ransom for mercy. We do not consider that among many traitors,
it is much if a King pardon one. Sin is treason against thee, yea far more
heinous, then the highest treason can be against Princes; because thy Majesty
is infinitely greater then theirs. Also thy hate of sin is above our
understanding, for it is according to the measure of thy holiness, which is
unmeasurable. Ah! my father Adam little knew, how many thousand thousands of
his own natural children, he did throw into everlasting misery, in
breaking thy commandment. He was well able to have obeyed thy will: So am not
I: for from out of him I have together with my body, received a wicked
inclination, which now is by long custom in sinning, most extremely hardened.
O good Lord, be merciful unto me. Amen.

That afternoon I kept my self within; and the morrow also. But Saturday at
night I by occasion of company, fell into vain mirth, whereunto I am
excessiuely given. There is indeed a good kind of merriment, if we could hit
upon it: for, according to the last, and in my weak judgment, the best
translation of the Bible, He that is of a merry heart, has a continual feast,
Prou. 15.15. But in the Jews language, a merry heart is a good heart; and
therefore there can be no sound safe mirth without the grace of repentance. Can
a subject, though of high degree, be frolike and iocand before the face of the
King, so long as his Majesty is grievously displeased with him? That were a
ready way to discover an vnloyall heart, which unto a prudent Prince is very
abominable. But what if the same subject be upon humble submission received
into his Sovereigns favor? will he not be very moderate in his mirth, so long
as he is in the presence of his Majesty? will it not be joy sufficient unto
him, to be free from giving his Liege Lord any cause of distaste, and to
minister unto him all possible good contentment? yea, else he is not fit to be
in the presence of Majesty, for he eclipseth the royal glory, which cannot
but cause some evil effect one way, or another. So it is between the Lord of
glory, and those which serve in his presence, that is to say, all Christians.

The 22. of May, being Sabbath, I was sore plagued with the strangurie; yet
going to Church, and after divine service coming into the pulpit, I felt my
self to be something cool, and able to speak. So might I have continued, but
that I did as I would wish no man to do, strain my self with a kind of
furiousness; the common behavior of such as are tumultuously, confusedly and
rawly prepared.

The best way for a Preachers self, and the most likely to prevail in
persuading his hearers, is, if I be not much deceived, grave, mild, and
treatable speech.

If a man perceive it in himself, it is a very grievous sight to see corrupted
nature play the part of grace, and with a smoakie flourish, make as though it
would kill the devil, being indeed his base slave, so willing to obey, as he
to command. What a glory is this to Satan, what a dishonor to God?

After I was come home, I praised God thus; O most excellently gracious Lord,
what shall I sinner do? I am neither worthy, nor able to praise thee: yet
exceedingly bound to do it. O Lord, what moves thee to be so good unto the
worst of all sinners? Only thine own goodness: for in me there is nothing
but causes of provocation: Yea a thousand, and a thousand thousand causes which
cry unto thee for vengeance, and continually urge thy justice to power a whole
sea of wrath upon me. And yet thou art gracious unto me. Had I the holiest
soul, and the strongest body of all that live upon the face of the earth, yea
though I could live an hundred holy lives, and die as many right Martyrdomes in
zeal of thee, and of thy truth, I should not come near unto the making of a
sufficient recompense for the goodness, patience, and forbearance which thou
have graciously showed unto me. And yet, lo, most vile wretch that I am! I
still live in sin, and so continue, displeasing and dishonouring thee. O my
good Lord, give me grace to be once broken from this deuillish wickedness,
though it be with condition that I shall be the most refuse man of all the world.
Lay upon me whatsoever thou will, only disburden my conscience of sin, and
ease my body of this unsupportable pain of the strangury. Amen.

At evening prayer, I read and preached again. Afterward being very much
wearied, I had a mind to go and refresh my self in company, (the bane of
Sabbath day keeping) and went first to one house, then to another, ending the
day very heathenishly.

Monday after supper, my mind pretended reason to draw me abroad: and
therefore out I went. To ease my strangurie I drank at one house much beer,
at an other whaie in stead of beer.

Thursday a great heat with a deadly faintness came upon me: my left kidney
was sore pained, and thereupon I was grievously tormented in the passage of my
water.

The 29. of May, being Sabbath, I took a course ^ore easy for my self, and
as I verily believe, more profitable for the parish. In the forenoone I
preached a sermon, and at evening prayer after the second lesson, I asked a
youth, who was well provided to answer, three or four questions touching the
foundation of Religion. Then I made those short answers plain, and proved
them out of the Bible in half an hours space. I humbly advise all young
Preachers that they will not imagine they can build Jerusalem suddenly: for
sudden buildings will soon fall down. I marvel how it comes to pass, that
in some places, even where learned Preachers have killed themselves with sore
labors, the greater number of people are grossly ignorant; yea, I say it
again, and can prove it, very grossly ignorant. I trust I am under protection,
and that makes me the bolder to speak my mind, in the fear of God, and love
of my Country. The common sort is much neglected: for neither matter of
doctrine, nor manner of speech is fitted unto their low and small capacity.
Most people for some three quarters of an hour, if they understand the words,
and perceive the matter concerning their salvation to be plainly proved out
of the book of God, (which for ought I know, is of greater reverence with
them, then with many of higher degree, and greater understanding:) I say, if
they be plainly and briefly taught out of Gods book, they will give very
diligent ear: But if the Preacher confound their understanding, or be longer
then ordinary, they leave all, and think thus; When will yonder man have
done; he has no reason to make an end.

The next Sabbath the fifth of June, I did follow the same order which I took
the Sabbath before.

Thursday following I was drawn to a feast, and so into much sin: for no
sauce is so common at a feast as sin. Sin makes all the company merry:
Satan also has his factors, who begin some one or other ungodly kind of
merriment. I am naturally such a one, yea worse then the worst of them that are
so disposed: yet this I say, While you live, bless you from those which are
special ringleaders in matter of unholy pastime: for the devil himself
sets them a work.

Friday I dined with certain strangers, and so fell into forgetfulness of God:
afterward coming into my chamber, I prayed thus;

O Lord God, how is it possible for him which sees thee not, to keep company
with thee: I believe that I am before thy face, what aileth me then, that I do
not profess and show forth this my belief? because there is no company to be
had with most people, if this belief be acted, and put into practice. I my
self should take it for an uncouth thing, if an other in my company should
appear to present himself before thy face. Our disposition abhors to be
awed, our minds are full of vanity, we are like unto foolish scholars, that
love not to have their schoolmaster in their company: yea, we are worse then
they; for when their master is with them, though it be sore against their will,
yet they acknowledge his presence: and if he be a wise man, tempering masterly
gravity with fatherly gentleness, he shall in time win those rude ones to
be glad of his company, and very reverently to love him, as the parent of
their good education: So would thou graciously work upon us, if we would
acknowledge thy presence; but this is quite contrary to the bent of our
hearts. O good Lord, I beseech thee to be merciful unto us. Amen.

That day in the afternoon, I went to Church to bury an old man, named
Richard Duke, and thence I went into the town, where, being in company, I
forgot God, and what any man perceived in my behavior, I know not. Thence I
came home, and after some idle communication with some which I found in the
house, coming into my chamber, my spirit was so ashamed to speak unto God,
that I went prayerlesse to bed.

The morrow being Whitsunday-eue, I was so grievously tormented that I drank
besides much beer, four quarts of water.

Whitsunday one preached in my place both forenoone and afternoon.

Monday by reason of ouerfull diet taken the day before, the wind cholike
began in my bowels, which held me all day, and all night in sore pain: yea,
though I used both purges and clisters, it hung upon me welnigh all the week
following. I must not tell how impatiently, how abominably I behaved my self,
as I lay tormented with that fit. O most holy Lord, forgive me I beseech
thee, and of thine exceeding great mercy free me from the wicked bondage of my
sins Amen.

Trinity Sunday I should have preached a sermon at Kirk-Ireton, some eight
miles from Derbie, where one M. Storer sometime a baker in London, has given a
sermon to be preached, and certain money distributed that day yearly for
ever: whether, because the town of Derbie is bound to see that work
performed, I had been sent, as I remember, four times. But my filthy
strangurie now so vexed me, that I could not ride: Wherefore tarying at home, I
preached twice to mine own charge. Were I able, I would give so much unto the
parish of Alhallowes in Derbie for ever, as should keep their own Minister at
home among them; for it is a great company of people, and has great need of
continual careful guidance in the way of God.

The six and twentieth of June, being Sabbath, though in the morning I was
sore troubled with the strangury, yet God of his mercy enabled me to preach in
the forenoone, and catechize in the afternoon.

He that had seen how I studied mondaie, and tuesday for matter of prayer, and
Psalms unto God, in desire and hope of deliverance out of the bondage of
sin; and after all that, how quite contrarily I bent my course, would verily
be persuaded that he had seen not one man, but two men in one outward
likeness, the one with many tears pitifully craving mercy at the hands of
God, and the other turning his back to God, and running away from him.

Tuesday evening I was at a place in the town, profanely pleasing my self.
Being returned home, and sitting down in my chamber, my mind left me, and
went back to the same place again. At last with much ado, I started up, and
falling down upon my knees before the face of God, prayed thus;

O my creator, thou see how it is with me. Thy goodness is most wonderful,
my wickedness is most incurable, and insufferable. O make a speedy end of my
sin which way soever it pleases thee, and blessed for evermore be thy Name.
Amen.

The morrow I straggled not abroad, but mine affections were very unruly; yea,
and that which is strange, I could not frame my mind to take any deep conceit
of the wickedness of mine heart. Thus it is when a man's heart is settled in the
love of any evil, he is not able to think so of it as it is.

Friday the first of July, I dined with a guest, a learned friend of mine; who
took occasion to speak somewhat sharply against Precisians. This, I thought,
he did the rather, because some informed him, that I was too familiar with such
people.

Therefore to satisfy both that minister, and all others whom it may concern,
I most humbly crave the benefit of modest liberty, to speak without offense,
what my poor soul in the sight of God, thinks touching this division. It
has bin a means of great advantage both to Popery and profaneness: yea,
this wretchedness is caused by it, Upon either side diverse have nothing else to
commend them, but only this, that they are of that side; yea, and the side is
glad to make use of them. Is it not a lamentable case, that some appear to
have almost no conscience but against ceremonies, others none but for
ceremonies? The Precisian does (in my conscience not without great cause) cry
out against ignorant, idle, and profane ministers. But where is the fault? The
coast had been well cleared by this time of the day, had not Satan caused
church-gouernment to be both by way of sobernes, and in the fashion of
maddenes, very fiercely assailed. But to what end? to reform the Church? No,
to deforme it.

This is my belief concerning Church-gouernment. Can any man truly say, Such
a lord Bishop does not seek his own worldly commodity, but the edifying of
his Diocese, and the glory of Jesus Christ? Does it evidently appear that his
whole bent is in the diligent discharge of his office to approve himself unto
God, and unto every conscience of men in the sight of God? Then will I conclude
upon my souls peril;

There is the Apostolical Church-gouernement of Jesus Christ.

If any such there be, who cannot in some good measure be truly so reported
of, the calamity is great, the judgment very fearful. Yet because of
personal faults, to destroy a divine ordinance, and bring in confusion, the
calamity would be greater, the judgment more fearful.

Indeed, Church Discipline is not reverenced for want of holy severity. The
punishment of fornication and adultery, etc. is little else but large fees: A
filthy gain, fie upon it! I would entreat leave to speak once more. Touching
the ministry, besides what I have by the way signified already, I humbly pray
great Scholars, and all that seek after riches, and advancement in the
Church, to ponder these my words;

The Gospel of the Son of God, must, and will first throw down Pride, and
Covetousness, before it work an universal good in this kingdom.

Those two great sins cannot be vpheld any way, but only by Popery: for they
must be accompanied with a superstitious conceit that pomp is religion: which,
when all have said what they can say, the Gospel will not endure. So, I have
done.

The same friday after that I had dined, it came into my mind to go into the
town, as formerly I had done. But I felt in mine heart no desire to go.
Therefore coming into my chamber, I began to wonder at my self, what should
aile me, fearing least some secret deadliness had seized upon mine heart. At
last, I brake out into these words, Whatsoever is the cause, blessed be the
name of God. O good Lord, let whatsoever come upon me, so that my spirit may be
settled in this disposition: And I shall be bound to praise thee most joyfully
for evermore. Amen.

That day I kept my self within, and the morrow, and the Sabbath day, having
gotten one to supply my place.

All the next week I continued so, and the Sabbath following, my place being
supplied by one preacher in the forenoone, and an other in the afternoon.

Wednesday the thirteenth of July, I still keeping within, prayed thus;

O most holy, and dreadful Lord God, with what face can so heinous a sinner as
I am, dare to speak unto thy most glorious Majesty, or be so bold to ask any
thing of thee? Thy most wonderful goodness emboldeneth me. And yet still me
thinks I am past grace, because sin does so abound in me. O Lord, my sins
are as the sand of the sea vnnumberable, and therefore my soul must needs be
thorougly, and thoroughly stained: for every sin so often as it is yielded
unto, works a black blemish into my soul. Woe is me! my soul is wholly
ouerrun with a most foul filthy leprosy. This is all my comfort, that thy
servant says, Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound. The
more deadly the disease, the more soueraign the medicine, the more excellent
the Physician that cures it. O God, thou art able to do whatsoever powerful
work thou will; yea thou can do infinitely more then thou will. But here is
the greatest wonder, that thou should vouchsafe to work a most admirable
cure upon him unto whom thou may most justly say,

Away from me thou most damnable sinner: Away out of my light: I will not
pardon thee; because thou have most grievously displeased, and vnpardonably
dishonored me, in breaking the laws of my kingdom, in refusing my proffered
grace, in taking upon thee to be a preacher of my righteousness, and denying the
power thereof.

Yet blessed Lord, so long as the Judge does not give order that the condemned
prisoner be taken from the bar, the poor wretch cries for his precious life,
saying, Mercy good my Lord Judge, mercy for Jesus Christ's sake.

The name Jesus, with an earthly Christian Judge, cannot but be of great force,
and must needs move him very much: for it is the name of his dear Savior,
the only name whereby he trusts to be saved. But of all, and above all, the
name Jesus is most precious in thy sight, being not superstitiously parrated,
but mournfully presented unto thee. Therefore though a thousand thousand
several inditements be found against me, and though the laws of thy kingdom
do condemn me; yet seeing that it is thy good pleasure, to suffer me to stand
in thy presence, and not to be taken out of this world, I cry unto thee,
saying; Mercy Lord God almighty, mercy for thine only begotten Sons sake,
Jesus Christ, God and man crucified: for the love of him, blessed Lord be
merciful unto me the worst of all sinners. Amen. Amen.

Toward evening I being punished with the hot passage of my water,
painfulnesse about the left kidnie, and burning of the right foot, was much
afraid of a deadly fit of the stone, and therefore prayed thus;

O my good Lord, it is a most miserable state, for a man having spent his time
in sin, to die before that he have in the way of repentance, done any service
unto thee. This dolorous disease tormenteth me sore, and threatens to kill me.
O Lord, might it please thee in some measure to rebuke it, that I may live a
while, and glorify thy grace in the zealous reformation of life; O how should
I then be bound to praise thy blessed name!

Me thinks I hear thee saying unto me; Thou vain man, that talkest so much,
and make so many doubts, wouldings, and wishings, let me see thee once turn
unto me, and then thou shall know more of my mind: until then, all that thou
say or do is as nothing: Therefore make no more words, but turn speedily
from sin whilst time serves, and say thou have fair warning.

O most gracious Lord, I have long had, and yet have, blessed be thy name, very
fair warning; I will henceforth endeavor to turn unto thee, through Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Thursdaie I began to sing a morning Psalm, which I purposed thence-forth to
sing every morning, having also prepared an evening Psalm, to be sung unto
the Lord God, after that I am once well entered into the practice of repentance.

Mine evening Psalm,
to the Kentish tune.
^ O Lord most high, and mighty God,
^ I sinful wretched man,
^ Confess to thee so heartily,
^ as possibly I can.
That marvelous exceeding great
thy goodness is to me,
Who have been always most unkind,
and grievous unto thee.
These very many years thou have
(a wonder it is to tell)
Preserved my dying life, else I
should now have been in hell.
Even hitherto, O gracious God,
thou have vpheld me still,
Who^ thou most justly might long since
have left to Satan's will.
What shall I therefore say, O Lord,
to thee for thy goodness?
O that my heart and tongue were fit
thy goodness to confess!
O God my poor and sinful soul
most humbly sues to thee:
That from this filthy wickedness,
thou will once set me free.
Now blessed Lord, free me I pray,
free me for Christ his sake,
That of thy mercies in him I
my songs may ever make.
Then will I praise thine holy name,
for ever more and more,
Withal my heart, soul, strength, and might,
I will praise thee therefore.
O Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
All glory be to thee:
To thee three persons in one God,
one God in persons three.
Thursday at dinner, I fell into much uncharitable speech concerning diverse
folk: Therefore coming into my chamber, I confessed and prayed thus;

O Lord, I have sinned against thee in speaking uncharitably of many people.
Thou know that it is a common practice of most companies, in talking to
shoot at rouers, and for lack of other marks, to spare neither the living,
nor the dead. A cruel sin, and very foul in any, specially in a minister of
thy Son Christ: for that gracious Lord was so far from speaking ill of
others, that he had no mind to hear any body ill spoken of. Yea, he chose
rather to busy himself in stooping down, and writing upon the ground with
his finger, then to have nothing else to do, but to give ear unto a bad
report; though it were never so true: Ioh. 8.6. O good Lord, pardon my
wickedness, and give me grace to leave it, through Jesus Christ thine only
Son my Lord, and Savior. Amen.

That evening, I having not been out of doors a whole fortnight before, went
forth to see Philip Aram, who was then new come home from London, and told me
of the good health of my worshipful friend Mr. Richard Sedley of Southfleet in
Kent; a gentleman endued with many virtues, specially devotion toward God, and
charity toward the poor. And because I have taken occasion to speak of
virtues, so rare in these evil, yet good-seeming days, I cannot forbear to
commend unto men of worth, and worship, a very notable pattern of right
gentry, Sir William Sedley the elder brother, whose equal in bountiful
releeuing of Gods poor I never knew, and am much afraid that I never shall
know. Foolish pride, insatiable covetousness, and pampering gluttony, have
banished hospitality, and utterly renounced liberality. Woe is me for them!
How unlike themselves do many great ones live? Hurtful to how many? good to
how few? The world is too too full of petty tyrants, whose judgment lingreth
not, but follows so fast upon them, that it ouertaketh some before they die,
and many in the next generation. If any ask, what reason I have in confessing
my own sins, to ransack the faults of others? Mine answer is, I am, though
most unworthy, a professed Preacher of righteousness, and therefore bound in
conscience to do what I possibly can against sin. The day of mine account
draws very near, I have foolishly lost much precious time. Wherefore I am
desirous to make all the use that may be of this small remnant. I humbly
beseech all people, that in tender compassion of my great loss, and fearful
danger, they will be pleased to bear with me, if I seem unto them to speak
of any thing ouer-harshly, God Almighty knows that I heartily wish all good
unto all people. Now I return to my self: I sat a while with my loving friend
Philip Aram, and certain other, whether they took knowledge of any offense of
mine, I know not. This I know, when I came home, my conscience found much
fault in my behavior, and therefore I was driven to cry God mercy for my
forgetfulness of his all-seeing, all-hearing presence.

Friday, by reason of diverse which came unto me, I lost a great part of the
day. Therefore at night I confessed and prayed thus: O most righteous Lord, I
have this day not only lost my time, but also by occasion of company, indangred
my weak body in drinking much between meals. I have also bin a partaker of
much idle, and uncharitable talk. I beseech thee to give me the grace to be
truly turned from these and from all my sins, that I may be saved. Amen.

Saturday about nine of the clock in the forenoone I prayed, as I think, more
devoutly, and effectually then ever before. Among other words of complaint
touching my state, I spoke thus; There is no possibility, no likelihood of
repentance in me, being within my self so accustomed to sin, and without so
holden unto it by the world. How can I have any hope to arise out of the hell
of sin, seeing that I have these twenty years and more assaied, and assaied
to arise, and still always fallen down again? Yet O Lord, there is hope in
thee, though none in me. Vouchsafe to make an end of my sinning, whatsoever
become of me. My duty is to crave mercy of thee. Good Lord, I crave it: good
Lord vouchsafe to give it for thy tender mercies sake: for thy dear Son
Jesus Christ's sake, etc.

At dinner, I spoke my mind touching a matter which concerned me not. Also I
spoke too far. Therefore coming into my chamber, I confessed, and prayed
thus;

O my good Lord, I have doubly offended, in meddling with other folks business,
and in speaking beyond the compass which any whom it concerns ought to have
kept himself within. Good Lord convert me, and forgive me, Amen.

The 17. of July, being Sabbath, I was in the morning sore tormented with the
strangurie; yet by the goodness of God, in the forenoone I preached. Also after
dinner I went and prayed with an old aged good woman, widow Milborne, the
mother of my faithful friend Raph Milborne deceased. At evening prayer after
the second lesson, I asked a youth three or four questions touching a
foundation-point of religion, and briefly made plain his answers. After all
this, I was in great danger of a relapse; for I was entreated to go thither,
where I should very grievously have displeased God, and that through mine own
wickedness. But by the grace of God, much against mine own will, I refused to
go.

Whereas I made mention of my faithful friend Raph Milborne, I entreat the
gentle reader, and hearer to take knowledge from me of certain notable
properties that were in him very plainly to be seen. He was religious toward
God, and that not by way of schism, dissension I mean, but in peace. He
loved his minister, yea he loved all ministers that were for the present state
of the Church, and of conscionable behavior. He was dutifully kind unto his
aged parents: for he sustained them both until his fathers death, then his
mother until his own death, and by his will took order for her maintenance
so long as it should please God to give her the continuance of life. At his
death he gave portions unto many brothers, and sisters, and to a many of their
children. He was of behavior very temperate, discreet, and patient. He was
far from the disposition to drink, and domineere in tauernes, and
alehouses: he did often chide me, because I was sometimes forward to go, and
other times easy to be drawn unto such places.

It were pity that the memory of these virtues should have bin buried with
him: for I knew hardly any one of his rank every way for goodness matchable with
him. Some may be ready enough to commend themselves, though an indifferent man
shall have much ado to find any thing that is worthy of commendation in them.
Therefore at his burial I took this text, Prou. 20.6. Most men will proclaim
every one his own goodness: but a faithful man who can find?

Wednesday the 20. of Iulie, I was so beyond measure tormented in the water
passage, and so burned in the soles of my feet, that I was forced to stand
barefooted, and barelegged: yea, having a vessel of new drink standing by me,
with a bagg of purging powder in it, (for my body could not else be kept from
deadly costiuenes) I drank glass after glass, kneeling upon my knees, and
calling very lamentably upon the name of God. They that at any time have drunk
healths kneeling, had they seen me upon my knees, weeping and praying, and
drinking, would have bin terrified from that barbarous fashion of theirs.

Friday the 22. of Iulie, I was in the afternoon taken with a deadly pain
upon my left side, and therewithal an extreme windy faintnes oppressed the
lower parts of my breast, so that mine heart was continually ready to fail.
This held me until it was well nigh midnight, I lying full of pain, and calling
upon the name of the Lord. Then had I some rest until morning, and then it
began again. This prayer I oftentimes made unto the Lord while I was in
torment;

O most gracious God, if it be thy good pleasure, that I shall in most humble
and zealous repentance, glorify thy name, vouchsafe for Jesus Christ's sake to
rebuke this my disease. But if it please thee not to make that use of me,
because I am most exceedingly unworthy, and unfit to do thee any acceptable
service; then most blessed Lord, withdraw thine hand from me, and let me die.
For why should we live any longer to displease, and dishonor thee, and to
cause any more evil unto my brother; and sisters the children of Adam? Holy
Lord, yet I heartily wish glory unto thy name, and all good unto thy people. So
I bequeath my self unto thy pleasure. My sin be destroyed, thy will be done,
and blessed for ever be thy name. Amen. Amen.

Toward night I felt some ease in my side, and breast; but was pained in my
kidneys.

The four and twentieth of July, being sabbath, one supplied my place at
Church, and I kept at home. That day some came unto me, with whom I fell in
talk, and by that means forgot both the presence of God, and the holiness of
the day.

Monday morning I was sore tormented, so that my feet burned very painfully;
specially the right foot. I drank great plenty of small beer, and yet burned
still. In this sore torment, I prayed thus;

O the fountain of right goodness, kindness, and mercy, I the most heinous of
all thine enemies upon earth, in this my greiuous misery, have none to fly
unto for help but only thee. O holy Lord, I have sinned against thee: I have
sinned; O I have sinned, and most vnsufferably provoked thine Almighty majesty,
to destroy me with most wrathful vengeance. And do I now in my selfe-wrought
misery come a begging to thee for ease? yea blessed Lord, for I have no whether
else to go: and therefore I throw my self down before thy face humbly crying
thee mercy, and saying; O righteous Lord, here lies thine enemy, a great
traitor to thy kingdom, and glory, craving mercy at thy most merciful hands,
and beseeching thee, not only to pardon me thine own vengeance, but also to
relieve me in this tormenting misery, which I in sinning against thee have
brought upon my self, even by the wicked disordering and distempering of my
body. Again, me thinks thou say unto me; Ah thou wretched man, do not I
show thee great mercy in sustaining thy dying life, and calling thee unto me?
Why do not thou come nearer unto me? why do thou not continually set me
before thy face, and submit thy self unto my pleasure? Thou know thou art
short of this, and therefore if thou expectest grace from me, come nearer unto
me; for thou art yet too far off to receive comfort into thy soul.

O my Lord God, I come; draw me, and I will come: I will continually mind
thee, fear thee, and call upon thee. Amen.

Thursday the 28. of July, I being horribly tormented, prayed thus;

O most gracious God, thou see that this painful, and loathsome disease,
will greatly hinder me in thy service. O therefore that it would please thee to
ease me of it, and to lay some other judgment upon me so great as this, but
not so shameful, and hinderous. Me thinks I hear thee say yet again;

I tell thee thou sinner, when thy service pleases me, my grace shall be every
way sufficient for thee.

Most holy Lord, this I verily believe: therefore in the name of Jesus Christ
henceforth I will wholly endeavor to please thee. Amen.

The last day of Iulie, being Sabbath, though I was sore tormented, I had no
remedy, but needs must preach my self: for neither was I provided of any
supply, and a Churchwarden came to tell me, the parish took it in displeasure
that I my self performed not my duty. That day I preached twice, to the great
hurt of my body, which appeared by many little shreads of skin which came
from me in my water.

Monday the first of August, such a drousie windy weakness hung upon me,
specially in my breast and head, that many times I was ready to fall, and had
much ado to stand: a painful sleepines was still coming upon me, whether I
did read or write. Monday night I being in bed, and fallen into a slumber, I
was so strangely taken as never before: Some thing seemed to be upon my back,
and so to press me down, that my face was held hard to the pillowe, and much
wind brake out at the right ear. Being very troublously waked, I called upon
my good Lord for mercy. I perceived a shiuering windines offering to arise out
of my thighs. I took this by ouerforcing my self in preaching upon the
Sabbath day, if I be not much deceived. It pleased God, that afterward I had
some quiet rest: but toward morning the cruel strangury came upon me. Alas,
that there is no remedy for such a filthy tormenting disease! a Physician
writing unto me, among other words, said thus; Know that your disease is
incurable.

The seventh of August being Sabbath, my disease still tormenting me, I
prayed, and vowed thus;

O most holy, and righteous, good, and gracious Lord God, I the most foul and
filthy sinner of all the world, do here make a complaint of my self unto thy
glorious and blessed majesty, that I am not fit to live in thy sight, much
less to serve thee in the gospel of thy Son; because I do not walk with
thee, nor keep my self in thy company, as thy servants do. O be merciful
unto me I beseech thee: I have heretofore made many vows, that I would enforce
my self to wait upon thee. But woe is me I have not kept them: now I most
humbly pray thee, that all my former vows may be shut up in this which I am
minded to make unto thee. And this it is; This day two several preachers will
supply my place: I beseech thee to bless them with holy matter, hallowed
affections, powerful utterance, and good success. If I do not from this day
forward, very conscionably endeavor to hold my self to the practice of my
four Rules, I will the next Sabbath day quite put my self out of the
ministry; yea, and openly profess unto the world, that therefore I do it,
because my conscience does certainly judge me not to be fit to preach the
Gospel. Good Lord, this is my vow. If I either reform my self from this day
forward, or for default thereof, leave the ministry, I break not my vow. If
I do neither the one, nor the other, let me be everlastingly ^^rsaken of Jesus
Christ. If I conscionably reform my self by thy grace, and so continue with
thy favor in the ministry, O that thou will be merciful unto me touching
this horrible disease. Then shall I holily and wholly betake my self to serve
thee, as mine hearts desire is to do. If I reform not my self, and
therefore, as my vow requires, leave the ministry, I ask no more, but the
destruction of my sin to thy good pleasure and glory. Now blessed Lord, I
offer up this vow unto thee for an everlasting deed, and thereunto
unchangeably say, Amen. Be it never changed, but ever in force between thy
blessed Majesty and me. Amen.

That day some came unto me, and what with one matter, what with an other,
caused me to talk at random, as though I had not been in the company of God.
When they were gone, I cried God mercy, and promised to be more mindful of
his presence, and fearful of his displeasure. At night some came to me
again, and talking of many things, moved me to pass my bounds, but not so
much as before: yet all this while I was not entered into my vowed practice.
This I did fully persuade my self, that if I could in company be mindful of
God, and shun the displeasing of his majesty, I were in a very fair
forwardnes of reformation.

Mondaie the eight of August, I held my self unto my prayers and business
carefully, thinking how I should avoid the great danger of company, and
talking: I prayed unto the Lord thus;

O good Lord, thou see that my disposition is hardened in sin, and most
untoward unto thy service: Thou see also how apt other folk are to further
mine untowardness, to hinder my repentance. I beseech thee, that for thine
only Sons sake, thou will powerfully break me from mine untowardness, and
prepare me in thy fear to shun the manifold wickedness which is one way, or
another caused by companying and talking. Blessed Lord, true it is, as I take
harm by others, so they take harm by me: for thy mercies sake be merciful
unto us, and keep us from causing any harm one to another. Amen. Aman.

Between ten and eleven of the clock, there came some unto me about a matter
of unkindness between certain parties; which had not then been called into
question, if I had concealed a report which in writing was given unto me, and
which I was very confidently willed to show unto whom I would. It is likely
that many an one would have thought himself well warranted to show it,
specially if it had concerned him so nearly as it did me. I showed it not, but
only told a certain part of it, which caused the coming of those men unto
me. After that we had talked of the business, and they were gone, I confessed,
and prayed thus unto God;

O most gracious Lord, I did evil in receiving that paper, and worse in
speaking of any thing written in it. I beseech thee to pardon me, and to give
grace that I may never hereafter speak any thing of that matter, but only my
bounden thanks and praise unto thee, through Jesus Christ thy Son, my Lord
and Savior. Amen.

In the afternoon upon occasion I prayed thus;

O most gracious Lord, thou see that by thy goodness I go not out to seek
company: I perceive it is great folly so to do. If any come unto me, and enter
into frivolous talk, I cannot tell what I should do. Thy spirit says, that
in the multitude of words, there wants not sin, Pro. 10.19. And what great
loss of precious time comes unto men by vain idle communication, I know by
experience to my great grief. Most merciful Lord, thou having brought me thus
far, and broken me from seeking company, from joining in empty words,
vouchsafe to magnify thy mercy, in making me to prevail against this
impediment, and all others, that I may everlastingly praise thy name therefore,
through Jesus Christ thine only Son, my Lord and Savior. Amen.

Tuesdaie morning, the strangury pained me very grievously, and my feet were
in such an extreme heat, that I was forced to stand barefooted. In this
burning torment I prayed, O most mighty, and most merciful Lord God, my
Maker, and Savior, of thy most tender compassion, and most excellent mercy,
vouchsafe I beseech thee, to ease me of this filthy tormenting disease and lay
upon me in stead thereof what cross, what judgment thou will. Me thinks thou
say; Thou foolish man, put away thy folly, draw near unto me, and I will
draw near unto thee.

O good Lord, blessed be thy name. In the name of Jesus Christ I will draw
near unto thee: I will henceforth be always very mindful that I am before
thy face: nothing in the world, no not any company, shall put me out of that
thought. Being in company, so often as I perceive my mind to turn it self
from waiting upon thee, I will presently break out into these words; Fie upon
me! what a forgetful fool am I? Good Lord forgive me, and correct me. Then
if any ask the reason, why I spoke those words, I will very plainly tell it.
Most gracious Lord, give me grace thus to do, and bless me in so doing,
through Jesus Christ thine only Son, my Lord and Savior, Amen.

The stairs to my chamber are the coming up unto three other chambers. So often
as I heard the noise of any bodies feet coming up the stairs, I was very
fearful that some or other were coming unto me, and as glad if I heard them
go by the door to any of the other chambers. How men may judge of this, I
know not; but my conscience does assuredly certify me how the Lord God
judges of it.

That forenoon some company came to me, and stayed long: wherefore though I in
some sort looked to my soul, yet could I not avoid bodily hurt: for I having,
to ease my pain, taken much drink before the company came, being forced
painfully to hold my water, when they were gone, there came such things from
out of my body, as if many skins within were pilled off. Wherefore I fully
persuaded my self, that I was possessed with a windy fretting inflammation,
which of necessity must very shortly kill me; and that, as I thought most
likely, by the perishing of my bladder. In the afternoon I prayed thus:

Most blessed Lord, very true it is, that the door of heaven is in comparison
much less then the eye of a needle. An entrance there is: but most hardly to
be gotten. The beginning of an unfeigned godly life, is the hardest work in all
the world. Then what means Christ in saying that his yoke is easy, and his
burden light? His meaning is, that true repentance, and right faith, do ease,
and lighten a laden conscience. There is no remedy but sin must needs be
put off; else there is no salvation, no heaven to be had. Woe is me! How can a
black-moore put off his blackness? It is impossible. Yea; but thy Son has
told, us, that all things are possible with thee. True it is, O Lord, I believe
it. But the question is, what thou will do? Therefore with the poor leper I
say unto thee, O Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. The Spirit
answers me saying; To day if thou will hear his voice, harden not thy heart.

I must strive to vnharden mine heart in obeying thy word, which word thou have
graciously made known unto me, to the end that I should obey it in putting
off my sin. But if knowing thy will I continue disobedient to thee, O what a
most dreadful measure of everlasting vengeance shall speedily fall upon me! O
Lord, none can vnharden mine heart, but only thou. Then how can I vnbarden it?
If thou ever vnharden it: thou will make me to vnharden it; for thou workest
the will, and the deed in them that shall be saved. They must will, and do
that which is pleasing unto thee. The power to will, and do it, they must have
from thee. Therefore thy servant Paul advises us to work out our salvation
with fear, and trembling; that is, awfully, and carefully to use the means
which thou have appointed, that so thy grace may work in us obedience unto thy
will, which is the only way of salvation. Good Lord, in thy Sons name I will
strive to use the means which thou have appointed for the breaking of mine
hard heart. Blessed be thy name: I think no man, or woman in all the world
can have more warning to deny himself, and hasten repentance then I have. To
thy mercy and good pleasure I wholly betake my self, thorough Jesus Christ.
Amen. Amen.

Wednesday morning I was very tormentingly pained in the water passage, and
therefore prayed thus;

O blessed Lord God, this soul disease tormenteth me very sore: O that it may
be pleasing unto thy most glorious goodness, even in such measure to ease me of
this disease, as by thy grace I will from this time forward deny my self, and
give glory unto thy truth!

Me thinks thou say, Go to then. See that thou conscionably deny thy
self, putting thy whole trust in me. And for thy comfort, thou shall be sure
to find these my words true; I am merciful. My mercy is upon them that fear
me.

Most gracious Lord, blessed be thy name. I believe thy words. And now
thorough the grace of Jesus Christ, I will steadfastly set my self to deny my
self. O Lord, be merciful unto me, that I may thoroughly do it. And then
thy will be done. Amem.

About an hour after I had so prayed unto God, my pain of the spleen came
upon me, in such sort that mine eyes were much dazzled, mine heart deadly
vexed, my limms faintly wearied. Being in this state, I prayed thus;

O good Lord, what shall I do? This my deathfull body cannot possibly hold
out, nor be serviceable unto thee in any good measure, according to my calling.
O my good Lord, what shall I do? I have no warrant to expect any extraordinary
releeuing of my body. And this deadlines puts my poor soul out of comfort.
Me thinks thou say;

Let thy soul be steadfastly, and uprightly bent to serve me, for so it shall
receive comfort from me. Touching thy body, do me what service thou can,
and betake it unto me to dispose thereof, as I see good. By greiuing at thy
diseasednes, thou make it to be worse. Therefore be only zealous againg thy
sins, the cause of all thy misery. But take heart of grace, and sustain thy
weak spirit has assured confidence of my mercy toward thee.

O my good Lord, most wonderful in mercy, and Almighty in power, with all
humble thankefulnes I receive these words from thee. My soul is certainly
persuaded that thy purpose toward me is according to those words. Blessed
Lord, it greiueth me that I hane so long displeased, and dishonored thee, and
now am quite disabled, that I can do thee no service; because my body is full
of death. Yet according to thy commandment, I will thorough thy grace wholly
bend my spirit to serve thee. And what service my dying body can perform, I
will put it unto, betaking my self every way to thy good pleasure, and most
holy will. Amen.

That day in the afternoon I was tormented, yet, let me say the truth, in a
manner, as it were underhand, succored and sustained. My back was about, and
below the kidneys very sore: which made me fearful of a fit of the stone,
which from the last November I had not.

It came many times into my mind, to admonish all sorts of people, to leave the
most common taking of Gods name in vain, in prating, and swearing, and
cursing. O if any that is given unto that horrible sin, knew how dear and
precious use I am driven to make of Gods name, when in hellish torment,
specially at, and after the making of water; I have none other help in all the
world, but to cry out saying, O Lord, o God, o Jesus Christ, etc,

Whosoever you are that shall read, or hear this, stay a little while I pray
you. Bethink your self well, whether the time will not come, you know not how
soon, wherein you shall be forced to call upon God for present help? yea, you
ought to call upon him every day, every hour: for your life, and all that you
have, or hope to have, is at his mercy. In the turning of a hand he can take
all that is good from you, and turn you away into all manner of misery. Then
if it stand upon his pleasure, what shall become of you, and specially when you
are in adversity, or anguish, whether you shall be relieved yea, or no? follow
my counsel, keep his name in store, and by no means endure to write, or
speak it in any idle fashion, much less in swearing, and tearing, and
cursing, like a limme of the devil. What man is so mad, that having a most
precious restoratiue, able to cure him of any disease, will hurl it into the
dust, fling it against the walls, or tread it under his feet? No, you would
lay it most charily, as a most special treasure, whereby you may in time of
need help your self, or your friend. O then consider, that of all
restoratiues, the name of God passes, and excells. For it is a sovereign
remedy against all evils, both of soul, and body. Therefore the Psalm says,
Psalm. 124.8. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

In few words, take this for certain; If you mean to have help in the name of
God, use it like a most precious restoratiue. Make not an idle word of it, take
it not in vain, least when you have need to call upon it; you call in vain,
because the Lord remembers that you made a vain idle word of his name.

That evening, I did but walk a little in my chamber, and it made my water
bloody: what a miserable state am I in?

Thursday morning, a matter that I read gave me occasion, to consider of an
offense which many in Derbie lately took, by the leaving out of the Cross at
the baptising of a child. True it is, that I never left out that sign, nor
ever will leave it, until the Church give warrant: Yet this I must needs
confess,

A many people think that baptism is not perfect without the sign of the
Cross. Yea more, They think that there is some holy virtue in it.

The judgment of God is a great deep. But the commanding will of God, is in
his word very plain. He would not have poor people to believe that holiness
is there to be had, where it is not.

They which first devised any ceremony without ground of Gods word, how good
soever their intent was, little knew what inconvenience would in process of
time grow thereupon.

Did you never see a house so full of smoke that a man might sooner have been
stifled, and blinded, then well warmed? That is typhos superstition, that is
the religon of many rude people.

If any say, it is to be required that such people have good instruction; I say
again, what instruction are they like to have, whose guides are either unable
to instruct themselves, or suffered to be otherwise employed.

I once heard Bishop Barlowe say that, touching higher places, which is too,
too general, and extends, in my simple observation, far further then he
intended it. His speech in effect was thus;

The time was, that fit men were sought for: But now, there is not such need;
because many proffer themselves.

How it is in the higher region, I know not. But in the lower, it is commonly
thus. And so long as it is thus, a fool may prophecy that sound holiness is
not likely to thrive.

In the afternoon my strangurie was very keen, my right foot burned with a
painful heat: yet, see the goodness of God, still a way is made that I may
endure it; even when I am ready to cry out, because of deadly torment. I am
fully persuaded, that had not this disease come upon me, yea and prevailed more
and more, even to the putting of me quite out of all hope of recovery, I should
never have been divorced and separated from the love of this world.
Notwithstanding all that is yet done, sin cleaves unto my soul like birdlime.
I have a world of trouble within my self, to master the old settled rebellious
thoughts of my heart, which are so sturdie, and so deuillish, specially one, my
most natural sin, that were it not for the very grace of God in Jesus
Christ, I should be quite out of all hope of subduing them. Let me come into
company, and there is such an uproar in mine heart, that whatsoever I can do,
is al too little to keep it from breaking out into open rebellion against God.
Whosoever being an old sinner, does put himself into the continual
conscionable practice of repentance, he shall plainly perceive the sins of
his heart, to be like unto a company of desperate rebels besieged in a castle,
yield they will not, until they be famished out. They have succor from the
remembrance, and from corrupted imagination, from the outward senses, specially
the eyes, and the ears: and who can say how full of temptations the world is,
temptations fitted to work upon the sight, and the hearing. It is well worth
observation, for any man that knows white from black, and sin from grace,
to mark when he comes in company with any, how soon the several wicked
corruptions, which are both in him, and in the other, will conspire together to
betray them both, and to make them sin against God, at least in a deal of
idle talk. I cannot call to mind that ever I was in company with any, and
drawn into a familiar communication, but that I was also drawn into sin.
Yea, but some will say, idle talk is a venial sin (wherein they may plead
S. Gregory's authority in his dialogues, lib. 4. cap. 39. and so make a
purgatory matter of it) and therefore shall never be called into question. O
how apt are we to deceive our selves! Does not our Lord Jesus very plainly say
these words? Matthew. 12.36. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of judgment: 37.
For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be
condemnd.

If in the day of judgment we shall be tried, whether we be fit to be saved
or condemned even by our words, and if every idle world shall then be brought in
question, it behooves them that would be saved, to make more conscience of
their talk, then the prating practice of this world affoardeth.

Certainly old Nicholas Denuse said very truly,

Of much speaking, come many evils, specially three, the loss of
consideration, the dulling of devotion, and the multiplying of sin.

I have time, and time perceived the truth of Denuses words in mine own self.
Yea, even in preaching when I have been more word-full then needs, (which such
shallow preachers as I am be driven to, for lack of matter, the more pity,
that people should be fed with wind) those three evils have come upon me.

It may be asked, what counsel I would out of my poor experience give unto
weak ministers? Upon my conscience in the sight of God this I say; Some go
for ministers, which are not capable of that knowledge which a minister of the
Gospel necessarily should have.

The parish where such a one is, should wholly join together, householders,
men-seruants, women-seruants, and all that have any thing in the world to give,
for the allowing of him so much yearly maintenance to leave the Ministry, as
he has by continuing in it; yea and for the assuring of it unto him for the
term of his life. This is much: but the salvation of any one soul in the
parrish, is much more. And where an unable minister is, certainly many a soul
is in great danger. If some should in love of their salvation, put themselves
to this charges, he that has title to give the benefice, may put in such an
other: for it is too well known that many Patrons (so they are called that give
benefices) are very corrupt, and have no feeling of conscience in that
business. O that they knew what a huge measure of Gods vengeance they pull
upon themselves, and upon their house? Sir, whosoever you are, know this for a
certain, the Son of God has a Nisi prius against you, to be tried at the
great assizes of the world. Then shall come forth many poor souls cast away
by means of your corruption, and they shall cry out upon you before the face
of God, Angels, and men, saying, O Lord, this is he that has caused our
damnation; for he put upon us a man to be our minister that had not the grace
of ministration in him.

I undertake upon mine uttermost peril, that if faithful inquiry be made,
diverse such corruptions shall be found in Derbieshier; yea gentlemen sharing
with the minister in things dedicated unto the Gospels maintenance. O base!
more base, and vile then to rob by the high way side.

Those Ministers which are capable of competent knowledge, but yet have it not,
I would humbly entreat, that above all other business whatsoever, they will
give themselves in the fear of God, most hungerly and thirstily to study for
it. Though I entered not into the ministry until the third year after I was
batchelour of art, which I confess was too too soon, and though that learned
College, so I dare say, Emanuel in Cambridge, did in such favorable manner
approve me, that my grace to commence Master of Arts was passed in the house
before I knew it, or thought of it, but I never went to commence; yet was I
glad, God knows, to toil my self night and day; else that lowest degree of
sufficiency, which by Gods mercy I have, I should never have had. I have been
forced to renew my knowledge of logic, the Art of understanding again, and
again, and yet am far short of perfection. He that is ignorant of this Art,
I cannot devise how he may be an understanding Minister. In the Latin tongue
I was not very perfect, yet somewhat ready. But to get a little smacke, in
that learned language the Greek, mine eyes have foregone much sleep, and been
made to smart very often. Into the language of Chanaan, the Hebrew, I have so
little sight as may be; yet it cost me some labor, and expense withal. By
these pains I have obtained, God being merciful unto me, this profit; I can
make a shift to understand many learned Authors that have written books very
helpefull for him which studieth Divinity. Thus I am only able to abide the
Churches trial, and to pass for a sufferable minister; if sanctification be
not wanting. If any unable minister, being capable of knowledge, did but
perceive first his own want, and then the comfort which my soul takes in this
lowest degree of ability, which thorough Gods great mercy I have attained
unto, he would enforce himself night and day, to get knowledge, and so be
quickly gone beyond me. I would withal mine heart that I being no less able
then I am, as sufferably I can not be, were in ability ministerial the very
lowest of all the ministers in this Land. It grieves me to consider, that some
are not only unable, which they shall find to be misery too much, but also,
which is much more miserable, confidently persuaded of their sufficiency.

I kept my self in some small measure of good order all that week, much what
by shunning unnecessary company.

But my terrible disease increased upon me, and so tormented me, that the
foureteenth of August, being Sabbath, by drinking much new ale to ease my
pain, I almost ouerthrewe my self, and was sore afraid least I should have
failed in my ministration. Yet, see thee admirable goodness of God! I preached
in the forenoone: and in the afternoon went sick, and sowning ripe into the
pulpit, so that I betook my self to the pleasure of God by way of preparation
for some dismal success; yea, before I spoke any word, I secretly said thus
unto my Lord,

Blessed Lord God, make way for thine own good pleasure, and glory, and do
what thou will unto me; spare me not: Yet, I say again, see the most
wonderful goodness of God! there were diverse of good judgment, yea and a
Preacher, who, I verily believe, will say, they never heard me preach more
effectully, nor with a more constant voice; I must, and by Gods grace will,
knowing mine own exceeding weakness, acknowledge it to be a gracious favor
of God.

In the morning I being so sore pained, that I could not endure either to
read that which I had prepared to preach, or to think upon it, did devoutly
promise unto the Lord, that in zeal of his glory, I would not fail to put my
self unto open shame, for every sin which thenceforth I should openly commit
in word or deed. Yea, I said thus much unto him,

That open sin which I shall wittingly let pass, without open confession, do
thou never forgive.

I do humbly crave aid of every Christian which shall read, or hear this. As
my disease is very tormenting, so my state is too too uncomfortable. Eccles.
4.10. Woe to him that is alone, when he falls: for he has not another to
help him up.

I must sit, and endure my grief with silence. For to whom shall I complain?
Or what shall I ease my self by complaining? The proverb is not more old
then true; Every man is for himself, and God for all. If the latter part held
not very true, I were woe begone: for the first is too true. But what aid do
I crave of the Reader, or hearer? I beseech you that even for the love of
Christ, and Christianity, you will very earnestly entreat our Lord God to be
merciful unto me, and if it may possibly stand with his holy will, to grant
me ease of this irksome torment. Amen. Amen.

That Sabbath day at night, I having somewhat more conscionably kept that
Sabbath day then ever before, praised God thus;

O most merciful Father, with all mine heart I humbly thank thee for this
very little entracne into the way of salvation. Good Lord, my soul is yet
wretchedly tangled in sin. Free me for thy mercies sake, and humble me to
the very uttermost that may be, thorough Jesus Christ thine only Son, my Lord
and Savior. Amen. Amen.

Then also I began to sing mine evening Psalm: which is not in double
meeter, as that unto whose tune I have set it; because I neither had leisure,
nor mind to be so curious.

Mine evening Psalm,
to the tune of All people that on earth do dwell.
^ O God that art most wonderful,
^ the fountain of all blessedness,
^ I most unfit to sing to thee,
^ yet needs thy mercy must confess.
Needs must I, for I am most bound,
therefore O Lord, I thee entreat,
For to prepare mine heart and tongue,
thy mercies duly to repeat.
So soon as I into this world
by birth was borne, thou causedst me
To be baptized in thy Name
In sign of my delivery.
Delivery from Satan's thrall,
and from the house of bondage hell,
That with thee, and with thy Christ,
in everlasting bliss might dwell.
And when I was of age to learn,
thou did acquaint me with thy grace,
Moving mine heart to turn from sin,
and thy salvation to embrace.
But I most foolishly did love
this world, and gave my self to sin,
Deferring time from day to day,
and to repent would not begin.
Yet notwithstanding all my sin,
and manifold iniquity,
Yea such most heinous wickedness
as always did for vengeance cry.
So great thy mercy was to me,
that thou would not my soul forsake,
But patiently did use all means,
to save me from the burning lake.
And now at last with much ado,
a little I am turned from sin;
A little, very small it is,
I do repentance but begin.
Yet Lord my soul does trust, that thou will small beginning not despise,
But grant me grace turning to thee
by small degrees for to arise.
So be it O most gracious God,
be it even so for Christ his sake,
I do believe, therefore I speak,
thy child, I trust, thou will me make.
O Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
thou only God, and Lord of all,
Thy name be blessed evermore
of all thy creatures great and small.
Amen, Amen, Amen say I,
Gods name for ever blessed be:
O heaven, o earth, o creatures all,
say ye Amen, Amen with me.
I most heartily desire, that every one that has not more experience in
devotion then I, will take this my counsel,

Accustom your self to pray, and to sing oftentimes unto God; let your
prayer, and song, be such matters as is fitting for one in your state to speak
unto God, whether it be confession of sins, begging of pardon, and
cleansement from sin, or thanksgiving, etc. And that which you speak unto
the Lord by way of praying, or singing, let it not only be word of mouth, but
lift up the thought of your heart, and think every word directly unto God, as
you would do, if you did see his glorious majesty with your bodily eyes. Be
well assured, and steadfastly minded that he looks full upon you, and marketh
all your behavior; yea and above all things, takes most heedful insight of
your thought, and affection: for longer then you steadfastly think upon him,
your words in prayer please him not, and unless your desire be very earnest,
he will not regard your petition. Therefore enforce your mind to think very
intendingly upon God, and labor to have an hungry and thirsty desire of that
which you pray for. You see that I have often set down the word, Amen; yea,
and sometime doubled it: My reason is, because I would be very earnest, and
effectually fervent in my desire. Our Savior shows us, how earnest and
importunate we should be in praying unto God: I pray you consider his words,
Luke 11.5. -- Which of you having a friend, and shall go unto him at midnight,
and say unto him, Friend, lend me three loaves:

6. For a friend of mine in his journey is come unto me, and I have nothing to
set before him.

7. And he from within shall answer, and say, Trouble me not, the door is now
shut, and my children are with me in in bed: I cannot rise and give thee.

8. I say unto you, though he will not rise, and give him, because he is his
friend; yet because of his importunity he will rise, and give him so many
loaves as he needs.



Our Lords meaning is, that as many a man in his necessity will have no
denial, but is so importunatly earnest, that the party to whom he makes
suit, has no other way to be quiet, but only by granting his request; so
ought we to behave our selves in prayer to God, most vehemently crying unto him
for mercy, and ever and anon praying again and again, as Christ himself
did in the garden, not ceasing until he do, as certainly he will, show himself
very merciful unto us.

If we ought to pray so earnestly, and so often, woe is my heart for many a poor
soul, that seldom or never prays, but when he is laid down in his bed: and
then says his Paternoster and Creed, between sleeping and waking; making none
other reckoning but this, that the very bare saying of those things, serves the
turn. Surely it is Popery that has brought the world to this senceles state,
by teaching folk to pray in an unknown tongue, and to say prayers by set
number and tale, as folk buy and sell apples and pears.

When I was a child, I now and then lay with some elder body, who being in
bed, would begin to say the Lords prayer, and by and by slumber, then awake
and begin again, and presently fall asleep again. If this be true, as I take
the Lord God to witness that very true it is, what does it show? Surely this,
that the common sort of people run snuggling all day after their worldly
business, and then at night kennell up themselves like so many bruit beasts,
little or never a whit minding that which they should principally intend, their
conversion from sin, and their reasonable understanding, serving of God, in
all that they think, say, or do.

Whosoever is in this slumbring state, I beseech you that for Gods sake, you
will awaken your soul, and do as the Lord Jesus wills you: Matthew. 6.33.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and then all other
necessaries shall be added unto you.

The things of this world, are like unto the vantage which many times is given
into a bargain. Therefore let your chief care be, to make sure your salvation,
and then your good heavenly Father will not suffer you to lack any thing that
is good for you. O I pray you believe it, and build upon it; for he has given
his word and promise: Hear him what he says, Heb. 13.5. -- I will not leave
thee, nor forsake thee.

Accustom your selves, as I said before, to pray often and earnestly unto God,
and by the grace of Jesus Christ, you shall find that he will most graciously
and kindly acquaint himself with your soul. O then, you will remember these
my words; and say, Now Gods blessing light upon that same poor minister, which
gave me this counsel: I would not that I had missed it for all that this whole
world is worth: yea, you will most heartily praise the Lord God, that it
pleased him, by so simple a man as I am, to set you into the way of unutterable
blessedness.

By no means suffer your private prayers to be heard of others: for then it is
a hundred to one, that the devil, and the privy pride of your own heart,
will mar all, and make your devotions loathsome in the sight of God. If you
be an housekeeper, and have a wife, or any child, or servant, use to pray
together with them daily, unless you mean to make them heathen people, such as
have none acquaintance with God. This matter is so far out of request, that
many will laugh them to scorn which pray with their household: whereby a man of
any understanding, may consider into what a wretched state the world is come.

Now Christian soul whosoever you are, the grace and mercy of God be with you
for ever. Thus much I am exceedingly desirous to have printed before I die. If
God vouchsafe to give any increase of life and grace, you may be sure, that I
will do what I can to acquaint you with it. The will of God be done, and
blessed be his Name for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

