RAM-ALLEY: Or Merrie-Trickes. A COMEDY Diverse times here-to-fore acted By the
Children of the Kings Revels.

Written by Lo: Barrey.

AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at his shop
in Holborne, at the new gate of Grayes Inn. 1611.

The Prologue.
Homebred mirth our Muse does sing,
The Satyrs tooth and Waspish sting,
Which most do hurt when least suspected,
By this Play are not affected;
But if Conceit with quick-turn'd Scenes,
Observing all those ancient streams,
Which from the Horse-foot fount do flow,
As Time, Place, Person, and to show,
Things never done with that true life,
That thoughts and wits shall stand at strife,
Whether the things now shown be true,
Or whether we our selves now do
The things we but present: if these
Free from the loathsome stage disease,
(So ouer-worne, so tirde and stale,
Not Satyring but to rail,)
May win your favors, and inherit
But calm acceptance for his merit:
A vows by Paper, Pen and Ink,
And by the learned Sisters drink,
To spend his Time, his Lamps, his Oil,
And never cease his brain to toil,
Till from the silent hours of night,
He does produce for your delight,
Conceits so new, so harmless free,
That Puritanes themselves may see
A Play, yet not in public Preach,
That Players such lewd doctrine teach
That their pure joints do quake and tremble,
When they do see a man resemble
The Picture of a Villain: This
As he a friend to Muses is,
To you by me a gives his word,
Is all his Play does now afford.
FINIS.
Actorum nomina.
Sir Oliver Smale-shankes. Justice Tutchin. Thomas Smale-shankes. William
Smalshankes. Boutcher. Lieftenant Beard. Throat. Captain Face. Dash. Three
Gentlemen. A Drawer. Constable and Officers.
Women.
Lady Sommerfield, Constantia Somerfield. Francis. Taffata. Adriana,
Chamber-maide.
Ramme-Alley.
Actus 1. Scaena 1,
Enter Constantia sola, with a letter in her hand. Constable. IN this disguise,
(ere scarce my mourning robes)
Could have a general note, I have forsook,
My shape, my mother* and those rich demeanes,
Of which I am sole heir, and now resolve,
In this disguise of Page to follow him,
Whose love first caused me to assume this shape.
Lord how my feminine blood stirs at the sight
Of these same breeches, me thinks this cod-peece
Should betray me: well, I will try the worst,
Hither they say he usually does come,
Whom I so much affect, what makes he here
In the skirts of Holborne, so near the field,
And at a garden house, a has some punke
Upon my life: no more here he comes.
Enter Boutcher. God save you sir: your name unless I err,
Is master Thomas Boutcher.

Bou. It Is sweet boy. Con. delivers the let.


Con. I have a letter for you.


Bou. From whom is it,


Con. The inside sir will tell you: I shall see he reads it.
What love he bears me now.

Bou. Thou Art welcome boy.
How does the fair Constantia Somerfield,
My noble mistress.

Con. I left her in health.


Bou. She gives thee here good words, and for her sake,
Thou shall not want a master, be mine for ever.

Con. I thank you sir: now shall I see the Punke. he knocks


Enter William Small-shanke. W. Sm. Who knocks so fast? I thought 'twas you,
what news.


Bout. You know my business well, I sing one song.


W.Sm. Foot, what would you have me do, my land is gone,
My credit of less trust then Courtiers words
To men of judgment, and for my debts
I might deserve a Knighthood; what is to be done?
The Knight my father will not once vouchsafe
To call me son; That little land a gave,
Throat the Lawyer swallowed at one gob,
For less then half the worth, and for the City
There be so many rascals, and tall yeomen
Would hang upon me for their maintenance,
Should I but peep or step within the gates,
That I am forced only to ease my charge,
To live here in the suburbs: or in the town
To walk in Tenebris, I tell you sir,
Your best retierd life is an honest Punke
In a thatcht house with Garlike: tell not me,
My Punk's my Punke, and noble Letchery
Sticks by a man, when all his friends forsake him.

Bou. The Pox it will, art thou so senseless grown,
So much indeared to thy bestiall lust,
That thy original worth should lie extinct
And buried in thy shame? far be such thoughts
From spirits free and noble: begin to live,
Know thy self, and whence thou art derived,
I know that competent state thy father gave,
Cannot be yet consumed.

W.S. It Is gone by Heaven,
Not a denier is left.

Bou. It Is impossible.


W.S. Impossible zart* I have had two suckers,
Able to spend the wealthy Craesus store.

Enter Francis. Bou. What are they?


W.S. Why a Lawyer and a Whore,
See here comes one, do think this petti-coate,
A perfumed smock, and twice a week a bathe,
Can be maintained with half a years reuenews,
No by Heaven, we Annual younger brothers,
Must go to it by hole-sale, by hole-sale man
These creatures are maintaind: her very face
Has cost a hundred pound.

Fra. Sir, thank your self.


Con. They keep this whore betwixt them.


Fra. You know sir,
I did enjoy a quiet country life,
Spotless and free, till you corrupted me,
And brought me to the Court, I never knew,
What sleeking, glazing, or what pressing meant,
Till you preferred me to your Aunt the Lady,
I knew no Iuotie teeth, no caps of heir,
No Mercury water, fucas, or perfumes,
To help a Ladies breath, until your Aunt,
Learnt me the common trick.

W.S. The common trick,
Say you, a pox upon such common tricks,
They will undo us all.

Bou. And knowing this
Art thou so wilful blind, still to persist
In ruin and defame.

W.S. What should I do?
I'aue past my word to keep this Gentlewoman,
Till I can place her to her own content,
And what is a Gentleman but his word.

Bou. Why let her go to service.


W S. To service,
Why so she does, she is my Landeresse,
And by this light, no punie Inn a Court
But keeps a Landresse at his command
To do him service, and shall not I, ha!

Fra. Sir, you are his friend (I love him to)
Propound a course which may advantage him,
And you shall find such real worth in me,
That rather then I Will live his hindrance,
I will assume the most penurious state
The City yields, to give me means of life*

W.S Why there is it, you hear her what she says,
Would not he be damned that should forsake her,
Says she not well, can you propound a course,
To get my forfit land, from yonder rogue,
Parcel Lawyer, parcel Devil, all Knave,
Thrate, throat.

Bou. Not I.


W.S. Why so, I thought as much*
You are like our Citizens to men in need,
Which cry it is pity, a propper Gentleman,
Should want money, yet not an usuring slave,
Will lend him a denier, to help his wants,
Will you lend me forty shillings.

Bou. I will.


W.S. Why God-amercy, there is some goodness in thee,
You Will not repent.

Bou. I will not.


VV.S. With that money
I will redeem my forfit land, and wed
My Coccatrice to a man of worship,
To a man of worship by this light.

Bou. But how?


W.S. Thus in Ramme-alley lies a fellow, by name
Throat: one that professes law, but indeed
Has neither law nor conscience, a fellow
That never saw the bar, but when his life
Was called in question for a coosenage,
The Rogue is rich, to him go you, tell him
That rich Sir John Somerfield.

Con. How Is that?


W. Is lately dead, and that my hopes stand fair
To get his only daughter. If I speed,
And have but means to steal away the wench,
Tell him I reckon him my chiefest friend,
To entertain us till our nuptial rites
May be accomplished, and could you but procure
My elder brother meet me on the way,
And but associate me unto his house,
'Tweare hit in faith, I Would give my cunning Throat
An honest slit for all his tricks in law.

Bou. Why this shall be performed, take there is my store,
To friends all things are common.

W.S. Then at the court
There are none foes, for all things there are common.

Bou. I will as carefully perform thy wish,
As if my fortunes lay upon the attempt.

W.S. When shall I here from you.


Bou. Within this hour


W.S. Let me alone for the rest, if I gull not
And go beyond my open throted lawyer,
For all his book cases of Tricesimo nono
And Quadragessimo octauo: let me
Like waiting Gentlewomen be ever bound,
To sit upon my heels, and pick rushes,
Will you about this geere.

Bou. With my best speed.


W.S. Then fare you well, yole meet me.


Bou. Without fail.


Exit Bouch: and Page. W.S. Adue: now you pernicious Coccatrice,
You see how I must skelder for your good,
I Will bring you where you shall have means to cheat,
If you have grace enough to apprehend it.

Fra. Believe me love, how ere some stricter wits,
Condemn all women which are prone to love,
And think that if their favor fall on any,
By consequence they must be naught with many,
And hold a false position, that a woman
False to her self, can trusty be to no man,
Yet know I say, how ere my life has lost
The fame which my Virginity aspyr'd,
I will be true to thee, my deed shall move,
To win from all men pity, if not love.

W.S. Tut, I know thee a good rascal, lets in,
And on with all your neat and finest rags.
On with your cloak and saue-gard, you arrant drab,
You must cheat without all conscience, filtch for thee and me.
Do but thou act what I shall well contriue,
We Will teach my Lawyer a new way to thrive. Exeunt.

Enter Mistress Tafata, and Adriana her maid above. Taf. Come loved Adriana
here let us sit,
And mark who passes; now for a wager,
What colored bear'd comes next by the window?

Adr. A black man's I think.


Taf. I think not so,
I think a red, for that is most in fashion,
Lord how scarce is the world of propper men
And gallants; sure we never more shall see
A good leg worn in a long silk stocking,
With a long cod-peece, of all fashions
That carried it in faith, what is he goes by?

Enter a Citizen. Adr. A sniueling Citizen, he is carrying ware, Exit.
Unto some Ladies chamber: but whoe's this?

Enter T.Smal-shanke reading a letter. Taf. I know him not, a looks just like
a fool.


Adr. He Is very brave a may be a Courtier,
What Is that a reads.

Taf. Ah how light a treads
For durting his silk stockings, I Will tell thee what,
A witty woman may with ease distinguish,
All men by their noses, as thus: your nose
Tuscan is lovely, large and brawde,
Much like a Goose, your valiant generous nose.
A crooked smoth and a great puffing nose,
Your scholars nose is very fresh and raw
For want of fire in winter, and quickly smells,
His choppes of mutton, in his dish of porrage.
Your Puritan nose is very sharp and long,
And much like your widows, and with ease can smell,
An edefying capon some five streets off,
Enter Boutcher and Constantia.
Adr. O mistress a very proper gentleman,


Tafa. And trust me so it is, I never saw
A man that sooner could captive my thoughts
(Since I writ widow) then this gentleman,
I would a would look up.

Adr. I Will laugh so loud
That he may here me.

Tafa. That's not so good


Bou. And spoke you with Master Smalshanke.


Con. I did.


Bou. Will a meet his brother.


Con. A said a would,
And I believed him, I tell you master
I have done that for many of these gallants
That no man in this town would do but I.

Bo. What Is is that boy.


Con. Why trust them on their words
But will you hear the news which now supplies,
The city with discourse.

Bou. What is it wag


Con. This sir, they say some of our city dames
Were much desirous to see the Baboones
Do their newest tricks, went, saw them, came home,
Went to bed, slept, next morning one of them,
Being to shift a smock, sends down her maid,
To warm her one, mean while she gins to think
On the Babones tricks, and naked in her bed
Begins to practice some, at last she strove,
To get her right leg over her head; thus:
And by her actiuity she got it
Cross he shoulder: but not withal her power,
Could she reduce it, at last much struggling
Tumbles quite from the bed upon the flower,
The maid by this returned with the warm smock,
And seeing her mistress thrown on the ground
Trust up like a foote-ball, exclaimes, calls help,
Runs down amazd, swears that her mistress neck
Is broke up comes her husband and neighbors,
And finding her thus trus'd, some flatly said
She was bewitch, others she was possessed,
A third said for her pride, the Devil had set
Her face where her rumpe should stand, but at last
Her valiant husband steps me boldly to her,
Helps her; she a shamed; her husband amazed,
The neighbors laughing as none forbear,
She tells them of the fatal accident.
To which one answers, that if her husband
Would leave his trade, and carry his wife about
To do this trick in public, she would get more gold
Then all the Babones, Calves with two tails,
Or motions what soever.

Bou. You are a wag,


Taf. He will be gone if we neglect to stay him.


Adr. Shall I cough or sneeze.


Taf. Noe I have it stand a side,
Aye me my handkertcher Adriand, Fabia.

Adr. Mistress,


Taf. Run, run I have let my handkertcher fall,
Gentleman shall I entreat a courtesy,

Bur. Within my power your beauty shall command.
What courtesy is it.

Tas. To stoop and take up,
My handkertcher.

Bou. Your desire is performd.


Taf. Sir most hearty thanks: please you come in
Your welcome shall transcend your expectation.

Bou. I accept your courtesy, ha! what is this?
Assayld by fear and hope in a moment.
Boucher this womanish passion fits not men,
Who know the worth of freedom: shall smyles and eyes
With their lascivious glances conquer him
Has still been Lord of his affections?
Shall simpring nisenesse load-stones but to fools,
Attract a knowing spirrit: ^t shall, it dooes,
Not Phoebus rising from Auroras lap,
Spreds his bright rays with more maiestique grace
Then came the glances from her quickening eye
And what of this.

Con. By my troth I know not


Bou. I will not enter: continued flames burn strong,
I yet am free and reason keeps her seat,
Above all fond affections yet is she fair.

Enter Adriana. Adr. Sir I bring you thanks for this great courtesy,
And if you please to enter I dare presume,
My mistress will afford you gracious welcome,

Bou. How do men call your mistress.


Con. The man's in love.


Adr. Her name sir is Mistress Changeable, late wife
To master Tafata Mercer deceast.

Bour. I have heard she is both rich and beautiful,


Adr. In the eyes of such as love her, judge your self.
Please you but prick forward and enter,

Con. Now will I fall a board the wating maid,


Adr. Fall a board of me, do take me for a ship,


Con. I And will shoot you betwixt wind and water.


Adr. Blurt master gunner your linstocks to short.


Con. Foot how did she know that, do here sweet heart
Should not the page be doing with the maid,
Whilst the master is busy with the mistress,
Please you prick forwards, thou art a wench
Likely to go the way of all flesh shortly

Adr. Whose witty knave art thou.


Con. At your service.


Ad. At mine faith, I should breetch thee.


Con. How breetch me.


Adr. I breetch thee, I have breetch a taler man,
Then you in my time, come in and welcome.

Con. Well I see now a rich well-practis'd baud,
May pursse more fees in a summers progress,
Then a well traded lawier in a whole term,
Pandarisme! why't is grown a liberal science
Or a new sect, and the good professors
Will like the Brownist frequent gravel pits shortly,
For they use woods and obscure holes already.
Enter. Tafata and Boucher. Not marry a widow.

Bou. No.


Taf. And why?
Belike you think it base and seruant-like,
To feed upon reuersion, you hold us widows,
But as a pie thrust to the lower end
That has had many fingers int before,
And is reserved for gross and hungry stomachs.

Bou. You much mistake me.


Taff. Come in faith you do:
And let me tell you that's but ceremony,
For though the Pie be broken up before,
Yet says the proverb, the deeper is the sweeter.
And though a capons wings and legs be carved,
The flesh left with the rumpe I hope is sweet.
I tell you sir, I have been woed, and sued to,
By worthy Knights of fair demeanes: nay more,
They have bin out of debt, yet till this hour,
I neither could endure, to be in love.
Or be beloved, bu^ proferd ware is cheap.
what is lawful that's loathd, and things denied,
Are with more stronger appetite persude.
I am to yielding.

Bou. You mistake my thoughts.
But know thou wonder of this continent,
By one more skyld in unknown fate, then was,
The blind Achaian Prophet, It was foretold,
A widow should endanger both my life,
My soul, my lands, and reputation,
This cheks my thoughs, and cooles th'ssentiall fire,
Of sacred love; more ardent in my breast
Then speech can utter.

Taf. A triuiall Idle jest,
It Is for a man, of your repute, and note,
To credit fortunetellers, a petty rogue,
That never saw five shillings, in a heap
Will take upon him to divine men's fate,
Yet never knows himself, shall die a beggar,
Or be hanged up for pilfering tablecloaths,
Shirts and smocks, hanged out to dry on hedges,
It Is merely base, to trust them, or if there be,
A man in whom the Delphicke, God has breathed,
His true divining fire, that can foretell,
The fixed decree of fate, he likewise knows,
What is within the everlasting book,
Of Desteny decreed cannot by wit,
Or man's Invention be disolued, or shund,
Then give thy love free scope embrace and kiss,
And to the distafe sisters leave the event,

Bou. How powerful are their words whom we affect,
Small force shall need, to win the strongest fort,
If to his state the Captain be perfidious,
I must entreat you license my depart
For some few hours.

Taf. Choose what you will of time,
There lies your way.

Bou. I will entreat her, stay.


Taf. Did you call sir.


Bou. No.


Taf. Then fare you well.


Bou. Who gins to love, needs not a second Hell.


Ent. Adr. Taf. Adriana, makes a no stay.


Adr. Mistress.


Taf. I prithee see if he have left the house,
Peep close, see, but be not seen: is a gone.

Adr. No, has made a stand.


Ta. I prithee keep close.


Ad. Nay, keep you close y'ad best.


Taf. What does he now?


Adr. Now a retiers.


Bou, O you much partial gods!
Why gave you men affections, and not a power
To govern them? what I by fate should shun,
I most affect, a widow, a widow.

Taf. Blows the wind there.


Adr. A ha, h'is in in faith,
Yo'aue drawn him now within your purlews mistress.

Bou. Tut I will not love, my rational
And better parts shall conquer blind affections,
Let passion children, or weak women sway,
My love shall to my judgment still obey.

Taf. What does he now?


Adr. H'is gone.


Taf. Gone Adriana.


Adr. A went his way, and never looked behind him.


Taf. Sure he is taken.


Adr. A little singed or so,
Each thing must have beginning, men must prepare
Before they can come on, and show their loves
In pleasing sort: the man will do in time,
For love good Mistress is much like to wax,
The more it is rubbed, it sticks the safter too,
Or like a bird in bird-lime, or a pit-fall,
The more a labors, still the deeper in.

Taf. Come, thou must help me now, I have a trick
To second this beginning, and in the nick,
To strike it dead in faith, women must woe,
When men forget what Nature leads them too.

Enter Throat the Lawyer from his study books and bags of money on a Table, a
chair and cushion. Thr. Chaste Phoebe, splende; there is that left yet,
Next to my book, Claro micante Auro,
I that is the soul of law: that is it, that is it,
For which the Buckrome bag must trudge all weathers:
Though scarcely filled with one poor replication,
How happy are we that we joy the law,
So freely as we do; not bought and sold,
But clearly given, without all base extorting,
Taking but bareten Angels for a fee,
Or upward: to this renowned estate,
Have I by indirect and cunning means,
In-wouen my self, and now can scratch it out,
Thrust at a bar, and cry my Lord as lowed,
As ere a listed gowne-man of them all.
I never plead before the honored bench,
But bench right-worshipfull of peaceful Justices
And Country-Gentlemen, and yet I'aue found
Good gettings by the Mass, besides od cheates,
Will Small-shankes lands and many garboyles more,

Dash. Dash Sir.


Thr. Is that reioynder done.


Da. Done sir.


Thr. Have you drawn't at length, have you dashed it out,
According to your name.

Das. Some scauen-score sheets.


Thr. Is the demurror drawn twixt Snip and Woodcock,
And what do you say to Peacocks pitiful bill,

Das. I have drawn his answer negative to all.


Thr. Negative to all. The plaintiue says,
That William Goose, was son to Thomas Goose,
And will a swear the general bill is false.

Das. A will.


Thr. Then he forsweares his father, it is well,
Some of our clients will go prig to hell
Before ourselves; has a paid all his fees.

Das. A lest them all with me.


Thr. Then trusse my points,
And how think thou of law?

Das. Most reverently,
Law is the worlds great light, a second sun,
To this terrestrial Globe, by which all things
Have life and being, and without which
Confusion and disorder soon would seize
The general state of men, wars, outrages,
The vlcerous deeds of peace, it curbes and cures,
It is the kingdoms eye, by which she sees
The acts and thoughts of men.

Thr. The kingdoms eye,
I tell thee fool, it is the kingdoms nose,
By which she smells out all these rich transgressors,
Nor is it of flesh but merely made of wax,
And it is, within the power of us Lawiers,
To wrest this nose of wax which way we please.
Or it may be as thou say an eye indeed.
But if it be it is sure a woman's eye knock within.
That's ever rolling.

Das. one knocks.


Thr. Go see who it is,
Stay, my chair, and gown, and then go see who knocks.
Thus must I seem a Lawyer which am indeed,
But merely dregs and offscumme of the Law, En. Bou. Dash. and Consta.
I tricesimo primo Alberti Magni
It Is very clear.

Bou. God save you sir.


Thr. The place is very pregnant, Master Boucher;
Most hearty welcome sir.

Bou. You study hard,


Thr. No I have a cushion.


Bou. You ply this geere,
You are no trewant in the law, I see.

Thr. Faith some hundred books in folio I have
Turned over to better my own knowledge,
But that is nothing for a studient,

Bou. Or a Stationer they turn them over too,
But not as you do gentill Master Throat,
And what? the Law speaks profit does it not?

Thr. Faith some bad angels haunt us now and then,
But what brought you hither.

Bou. Why these small legs,


Thr. You are conceited sir,


Bou. I am in Law.
But let that go, and tell me how you do,
How does Will Smalshankes and his lovely bride,

Th. In Troth you make me blush, I should have ask't,
His health of you, but it is not yet to late.

Bou. Nay good sir Throat forbear your quillets now,


Thr. By Heaven I deal most plain, I saw him not,
Since last I took his Morgage.

Bou. Sir be not nyce,
(Yet I must needs herein commend your love)
To let me see him; for know I know him wed,
And that a stole away Sommerfields heir,
Therefore suspect me not I am his friend,

Thr. How wed to rich Sommerfields only heir,
Is old Sommerfield dead?

Bou. Do you make it strange?


Thr. By heaven I know it nor.


Bou. Then am I grieved.
I spoke so much (but that I know you love him.
And is reserved for gross and hungry stomachs.

Bou. You much mistake me.


Taff. Come in faith you do:
And let me tell you that's but ceremony,
For though the Pie be broken up before,
Yet says the proverb, the deeper is the sweeter.
I should entreat your secrecy sir, fare you well.

Through. Nay good sir stay, if ought you can disclose
Of Master Smale-shankes good, let me partake,
And make me glad in knowing his good hap.

Bou. You much indeere him sir, and from your love,
I dare presume you make your self a fortune
If his fair hopes proceed.

Thr. Say on good sir.


Bou. You will be secret.


Thr. Or be my tongue torn out.


Bouch. Measure for a Lawyer, but to the point
Has stole Somerfields heir hither a brings her
As to a man on whom a may rely
His life and fortunes: you has a named
Already for the Steward of his lands,
To keep his Courts, and to collect his rent,
To let out Leases and to raise his fines,
Nothing that may, or love, or profit bring,
But you are named the man.

Thr. I am his slave
And bound unto his noble courtesy-
Even with my life, I ever said a would thrive,
And I protest I kept his forfeit morgage,
To let him know what it is to live in want.

Bour. I think no less, one word more in private.


Con. Good Master Dash shall I put you now a case.


Dash. Speak on good Master Page.


Con. Then thus it is,
Suppose I am a Page, he is my Master,
My Master goes to bed and cannot tell
What mone^'s in his hose, I ere next day
Have filcht out some, what action lies for this.

Dash. An action boy, called firking the Posteriors,
With us your action sildome comes in question:
For that it is known that most of your Gallants
Are sildome so well stored, that they forget
What mone'is in their hose, but if they have,
There is noe other help then swear the page
And put him to his oath.

Con, Then fecks-law,
Do think that he has conscience to steal,
Has not a conscience likewise to deny.
Then hang him up ifayth.

Bou. I must meet him,


Thr. Commend me to them, come when they will,
My doors stand open and all within is theirs
And though Ram stinks with Cooks and ale,
Yet say there is many a worthy lawyers chamber,
Buts upon Rame-alley, I have still an open throat,
If ought I have which may procure his good,
Bid him command, I, though it be my blod. Ex.

Actus Secundi. Scena Prima.
Enter Oliver Smaleshanke, Thomas Small Shanke. S. Oli. Is this the place you
were appointed to meet him.


Tho. S. So Boutcher sent me word.


Si. O. I find it true,
That wine, good news, and a young wholesome wentch
Chere up an old man's blood, I tell thee boy,
I am right hearty glad, to hear thy brother;
Has got so great an heir; now were my self,
So well bestowed I should rejoice in faith.

Th. S. I hope you shall do well.


S. O. No doubt, no doubt.
A sir has a borne the wentch away,
My son in faith, my very son in faith,
When I was young and had an able back,
And wore the brissell on my upper lipe,
In good Decorum I had as good conuayance,
And could have ferd, and ferkt y'away a wench,
As soon as ear a man a live; tut boy,
I had my winks, my becks treads on the toe,
Wrings by the fingers, smyles and other quirkes,
Noe Courtier like me, your Courtiers all are fools,
To that which I could do, I could have done it boy.
Even to a hare, and that some Ladies know,

Th. S. Sir I am glad this match may reconcile,
Your love unto my brother.

Si. O. It Is more then so.
I Will seem offended still though I am glad,
Enter Willian Smals-shanke Francis, Beard booted. Has got rich Sommer-fields
heir.

Wi. S. Come wench of gold,
For thou shall get me gold, besides od ends
Of silver: we will purchase house and land,
By thy bare gettings, wentch, by thy bare gettings,
How say Lieftenant- Beard, does she not look
Like a wentch newly stole from a window?

Bea. Exceeding well she carries it by Jove;
And if she can forbear her Rampant trick,
And but hold close a while twill take by Mars.

Fra. How now you slave? my rampant tricks you rogue,
Nay fear not me my only fear is still,
Thy filthy face betrays us, for all men know,
Thy nose stands compass like a bow,
Which is three quarters drawn, thy head.
Which is with greasy hair ore-spred,
And being vncurld and black as cole,
Does show some Scullion in a hole
Begot thee on a Gypsy, or
Thy mother was some Colliers whore
My rampant tricks you rogue, thou't be descride
Before our plor be ended.

W, S. What should descry him,
Unless it be his nose? and as for that;
Thou may protest a was thy fathers butler,
And for thy love is likewise run away,
Nay sweet Lieftenant now forbear to puff,
And let the brissells of thy beard grow downe-ward,
Reverence my Punke and Pandarize a little,
There Is many of thy rank that do profess it,
Yet hold it noe disparagment.

Bea. I shall do,
What fits an honest man.

Wi. S. Why that's enough,
Foot my Father and the goose my brother,
Back you two.

Bea. Back.


Wi. S. Retyer sweet Lieftenant,
And come not on, till I shall wave you on.

Si. O. Is not that he.


Th. S. It Is he.


Si. O. But where is the wentch.


W.S. It shall be so, I Will cheat him that's flat.


Sir Ol. You are well met, know ye me good sir,
Belike you think I have no eyes, no ears,
No nose to smell, and wind out all your tricks,
Y'haue stole Sir Somerfields heir, nay we can find,
Your wildest paths, your turnings and returns,
Your traces, squats, the insets, forms and holes,
You yongmen use, if once cursagest wits
Be set a hunting, are you now crept forth,
Have you hid your head within a suburb hole
All this while, and are you now crept forth?

W. S It Is a stark lie.


Sir. Ol. How?


W.S. who told you so did lie,
Foot, a Gentleman cannot leave the City
And keep the suburbs to take a little Physic,
But strait some slave will say he hides his head:
I hide my head within a Suburb hole,
I could have holes at Court to hide my head,
Were I but so disposd.

Sir Ol. Thou varlet knave,
T'hast stolen away Sir John Somerfields heir,
But never look for countenance from me,
Carry her whether thou will.

W.S. Father, father,
Zart will you undo your posterity.
Will you sir undo your posterity?
I can but kill my brother then hang my self,
And where is then your house, make me not dispare,
Foot now I have got a wench, worth by the year
Two thousand pound and upwards, to cross my hopes:
Would ere a clown in Christendom do it but you.

Th. S. Good Father, let him leave this thundering,
And give him grace.

W.S. Why law, my brother knows
Reason, and what an honest man should do.

S. Ol. Well, where is your wife.


W.S. She Is coming here behind,


S. Ol. I Will give her somewhat, though I love not thee.


W.S. My father right, I knew you could not hold
Out long with a woman, but give something
Worthy your gift and her acceptance father,
This chain were excellent by this good-light,
She shall give you as good if once her lands
Enter Frances Beard. Come to my fingring.

S. O. Peace knave, what is she your wife?


W.S. That shall be sir.


S. Ol And what is he.


W.S. My man.


S. Ol. A Ruffian Knave a is.


W.S. A Ruffian sir,
By heaven, as tall a man as ere drew sword,
Not being counted of the damned crew,
A was her fathers Butler, his name is Beard,
Of with your Mask, now shall you find me true,
And that I am a son unto a Knight,
This is my father.

S. Ol. I am indeed fair maid,
My style is Knight: come let me kiss your lips.

W.S. That kiss shall cost your chain.


S. O. It smacks in faith,
I must commend your choice.

Fra. Sir I have given
A longer venture then true modesty
Will well allow, or your more grauer wit
Commend.

W.S. I dare be sworn she has.


S. Ol. Not so,
The foolish knave has been accounted wild,
And so have I, but I am now come home,
And so will he.

Fra. I must believe it now.


W S. Beg his chain wench.


Be. Will you cheat your father?


W.S. I by this light will I.


S. Ol. Nay sigh not.
For you shall find him loving and me thankful.
And were it not a scandal to my honor,
To be consenting to my sons attempt,
You should unto my house, mean while take this,
As pledge and token of my after love:
How long since dyed your father.

W.S. Some six weeks since.
We cannot stay to talk, for slaves pursue,
I have a house shall lodge us till the Priest
May make us sure.

S. Ol. Well sir, love this woman,
And when you are man and wife bring her to me,
She shall be welcome.

W.S. I humbly thank you sir.


S. Ol. I must be gone, I must a wooing too.


W.S. Jove and Priapus speed you, you will return.


Exit Sir Oliver and Thom: Small-shanke. Th. S. Instantly.


W.S. Why this came cleanly off.
Give me the chain, you little Cockatrice,
Why this was luck, foot four hundred crowns
Got at a clap, hold still your own you whore,
And we shall thrive.

Bea. It Was bravely fetched about.


W.S. I, when will your nose and beard perform as much.


Fra. I am glad he is gone, a put me to the blush
When a did ask me of rich Somerfields death.

W S. And took not I my q: wast not good,
Did I not bring you off, you arrant drab,
Without a counterbuffe? look who comes here,
And three merry men, and three merry men,
And three merry men be we a.

Enter Boutcher and Constantia. Bou. Still in this vain, I have done you
service,
The Lawyers house will give you entertainment,
Bountiful and free.

W.S O nay second self,
Come let me busse thy beard, we are all made,
Why are so melancholy, do want money?
Look here is gold, and as we pass along,
I Will tell thee how I got it, not a word
But that she is Somerfields heir, my brother
Swallows it with more ease, then a Dutchman
Does slap-Dragons: a comes, now to my Lawyers:
Enter T. Small-shanke. Kiss my wife, good brother; she is a wench
Was borne to make us all.

Th. S. I hope no less,
Yo'are welcome sister into these our parts,
As I may say.

Fra. Thanks gentle brother.


W.S. Come now to Ram-alley. There shall thou lie,
Till I provide a Priest.

Bou. O villainy!
I think a will gull his whole generation,
I must make one, since it is so well begun,
I Will not forsake him, till his hopes be won. Exeunt.

Enter Throat, and two Citizens. Thr. Then you are friends.


Both. We are, so please your worship.


Thr. It Is well, I am glad, keep your money, for law
Is like a Butlers box: while you two strive,
That picks up all your money, you are friends,

Both. We are so please you, both perfect friends.


Th. Why so,
Now to the next Tap-house, there drink down this,
And by the opperation of the third pot.
Quarrel again, and come to me for law:
Fare you well.

Both. The Gods conserne your wisdom. E. Ci.


Thr. Why so, these are tricks of the long fifteenes,
To give counsel, and to take fees on both sides,
To make 'em friends, and then to laugh at them.
Why this thriues well, this is a common trick:
When men have spent a deal of money in law,
Then Lawyers make them friends: I have a trick
To go beyond all these, if Small-shanke come
And bring rich Somerfields heir, I say no more,
But it is within this skonse to go beyond them.

Enter Dash. Das. Here are Gentlemen in have would speak with you.


Thr. What are they?


Das. I cannot know them sir
They are so wrapped in Cloakes.

Thr. Have they a woman?


Das. Yes sir, but she is Maskt, and in her riding suit.


Thr. Go, make have, bring them up with reverence,
Oh are they in faith, has brought the wealthy heir:
These stools and cushions stand not handsomely.

Enter William Smalshanke, Boutcher. Thomas Smalshanke, Francis, and Beard.
W.S. Bless thee Throat.


Thr. Master Smalshanke welcome.


W.S. Welcome love, kiss this Gentlewoman, Throat.


Thr. Your worship shall command me.


WS. Art not weary.


Bou. Can you blame her since she has rid so hard?


Thr. You are welcome Gentlemen. -- Dash.


Das. Sir.


Thr. A fire in the great chamber, quickly.


W.S. I that is well said, we are almost weary,
But Master Throat, if any come to inquire
For me, my brother, or this Gentlewoman,
We are not here, nor have you heard of us.

Thr. Not a word sir, here you are as safe
As in your fathers house,

T.S. And he shall thank you.


W.S. Thou Art not merry love, good master Throat
Bid this Gentlewoman welcome: she is one
Of whom you may receive some courtesy
In time.

Thr. She is most hearty welcome,
VVilt please you walk into another room*
Where is both bed and fire,

W. Sm. I, I, that that
Good brother lead her in, Master Throat and I
Will follow instantly, now Master Throat Exit.
It rests within your power to pleasure me,
Know that this same is sir John Somerfields Heir,
Now if she chance to question what I am,
Say son unto a Lord, I pray thee tell her
I have a world of land, and stand in hope
To be created Barron, for I protest
I was constrained to swear it forty times
And yet she will scarce believe me.

Through. pauca sapienti,
Let me alone to set you out in length
And breadth:

W. Sm. I prithee do it effectually:
Shat have a quarter share by this good light,
In all she has, I prithee forget not
To tell her the Smal-shankes have been dancers,
Tilters, and very ancient Courtiers,
And in request at Court since sir John Short-hose
With his long silk stockings was beheaded,
Will thou do this?

Through. Refer it to my care.


W. Sm. Excellent, I Will but shift my boots, and then
Go seek a Priest, this night I will be shure,
If we be shure, it cannot be undone,
Can it Master Throat?

Thr. O sir not possible:
You have many Presidents and book Cases for it,
Be you but shure and then let me alone.
Viuat Rex, currat Lex and I Will defend you.

W. Sm. Nay then hang care, come lets in.


Thr. A ha,
Have you stole her, fallere fallentem non est fraus. Exit. W. S,
It shall go hard but I will strippe you boy.
You stole the wench, but I must her enjoy. Exit
Enter Mistress Taffata, Adriana, below. Come Adriana, tell me what thou
think,
I am tickled with conceit of marriage,
And whom think thou (for me) the fittest husband
What say thou to young Bouchor.

Adri. A pretty fellow
But that his back is weak,

Taff. What do thou say
To Throat the Lawier?

Adri. I like that well,
Were the Rogue a Lawyer, but he is none,
He never was of any Inne-of-court;
But Inn of Chancery, where a was known,
But only for a swaggering whyfler,
To keep out rogues, and prentises, I saw him,
When a was stockt for stealing the cooks fees.
A Lawyer I could like, for it is a thing,
Used by you Citizens wives, your husbands dead;
To get French-hoods you straight must Lawyers wed,

Taf. What say thou then to Nimble Sir Oliu. Smal-shanck

Adr. Faith he must hit the hair: a fellow fit,
To make a pretty Cuckold: take an old man,
It Is now the newest fashion, better be
An old man's darling, then a young man's warling,
Take me the old brisk Knight, the fool is rich,
And will be strong enough to father children,
Though, not to get them.

Taf. It Is true he is the man,
Yet will I bear some dozen more in hand,
And make them all my gulls.

Adr. Mistress stand aside.
Enter Boutcher, and Constantia. Young Boutcher comes let me alone to touch him.

Bou. This is the house.


Con. And that's the chambermaide.


Bou. Whers the widow gentle Adriana.


Adr. The widow sir is not to be spooke to,


Bou. Not speak to, I must speak with her.


Adr. Must you!
Come you with authority, or do you come
To sue her with a warrant that you must speak with her.

Bou. I would Entreat it.


Adr. O you would entreat it,
May not I serve your turn, may not I unfold,
Your secrets to my Mistress, love is your suit,

Bou. It is fair creature.


Adr. And why did you fall off
When you perceived my mistress was so cunning,
Do You think she is still the same.

Bou. I do.


Adr. Why so,
I took you for a nouice; and I must think,
You know not yet the inwards of a woman,
Do you not know that women are like fish,
Which must be struck when they are prone to byte,
Or all your labors lost, but sir walk here.
And I Will inform my Mistress your desires.

Con. Master


Bou. boy.


Con. come not you for love,


Bou. I do boy


Con. And you would have ye widow.


Bo. I would


Con. by Jove
I never saw one go about his business
More untowardly: why sir, do not you know
That he which would be inwatd with the Mistress,
Must make a way first through the waiting maid?
If you will know the widows affections
Feel first the waiting Gentlewoman; do it Master,
Some half a dozen kisses were not lost
Upon this Gentlewoman, for you must know
These wayting-maids are to their Mistresses
Like Porches unto doors, you pass the one
Before you can have entrance at the other:
Or like your musterd to your piece of brawne,
If you will have one taste well you must not scorn
To be dipping in the other, I tell you Master
It Is not a few men's tales which they prefer
Unto their Mistress, in compass of a year-
Be ruld by me, untruss your self to her,
Out with all your loue-sicke thoughts to her,
Kiss her and give her an angel to buy pinnes,
And this shall sooner win her Mistress love,
Then all your protestations, sithes and tears.
Enter Taffata, Adriana. Here they come; to her bouldly Master
Do, but dally not, that's the widows phrase,

Bou. Most worthy fair such is the power of love
That now I come t'accept your proffered grace,
And with submissiue thoughts t'entreat a pardon
For my so gross neglect.

Taff. There Is no offense,
My mind is changed.

Adr. I told you as much before.


Con. With a hey pass with a repasse.


Bou. Dearest of women,
The constant virtue of your nobler mind
Speaks in your looks: Nor can you entertain
Both love and hate at once.

Taff. It Is all in vain.


Adr. You strive against the stream.


Con. Fee the waitingmaid Master


Bou. Stand thou propitious, indeere me to thy love


Boutcher gives Adriana his purse secretly. Adr. Dear Mistress turn to this
Gentleman, I protest,
I have some feeling of his constant love,
Cast him not away, try his love.

Taf. Why sir,
With what audatious front can you entreat
To enjoy my love, which yet not two hours since,
You scornfully refusd.

Con. Well sare the waiting maid.


Bou. My fate compeld me, but now farewell fond fear,
My soul, my life, my lands, and reputation,
I Will hazard all, and prize them all beneath thee.

Taf. Which I shall put to trial, lend me thy ear.


Ad. Can you love boy


Co, Yes.


Ad. What or whom.


Co. My victuals.


Adr. A pretty knave, in faith come home to night,
Shall have a posset and candi'd Eringoes,
A bed if need be to, I love a life,
To play with such Babounes as thou.

Con. Indeed,
But do think the widow wi'l have my master.

Adr. I Will tell thee then, wo't come.


Con. I will.


Ad. Remember.


Taf. Will you perform so much.


Bou. Or loose my blood.


Taf. Make him subscribe it, and then I vow,
By sacred Vestaes ever hallowed fire,
To take thee to my bed.

Bou. Till when farewell. Exe.


Taf. He Is worthy love, whose virtues most excel.


Adr. Remember, what is it a match betwixt you Mistress?


Taf. I have set the fool in hope, has undertook
To rid me of that fleshy Captain Face,
Which swears in Tauernes, and all Ordinaries,
I am his lawful wife: he shall allay,
The fury of the Captain, and I secure,
Will laugh at the disgrace they both endure. Ex:

Enter Throat and Francis. Thr. Open your case, and I shall soon resolve you.


Fra. But will you do it truly.


Thr. As I am honest.


Fra. This Gentleman whom I so much affect,
I scarsly yet do know, so blind is love,
In things which most concerns it, as you are honest
Tell me his birth, his state, and farthest hopes.

Thr. He is my friend, and I will speak him truly,
He is by birth, son to a foolish Knight,
His present state I think will be the prison,
And farthest hope to be baild out again,
By sale of all your land.

Fra. O me accursed,
Has a no credit, Lands and Manors.

Thr. That lands he has lies in a fair Churchyard,
And for his manners, they are so rude and vilde,
That scarce an honest man will keep him company.

Fra. I am abused, coosned, and deceived.


Thr. Why that is his occupation, he will cheat
In a cloak lined with Velvet, a will prate
Faster then five Barbers and a Tailor,
Lie faster then ten City occupiers,
Or cunning tradesmen: goes a trust
In every Tavern where has spent a faggot,
Swears love to every whore, squires bawdes,
And takes up houses for them as their husband.
A is a man I love, and have done much
To bring him to preferment.

Fra. Is there no trust,
No honesty in men.

Thr. Faith some there is,
And it is all in the hands of us Lawyers
And women, and those women which have it,
Keep their honesty so close, that not one
Amongst a hundred is perceived to have it.

Fra. Good sir, may I not by law forsake him
And wed another, though my word be past
To be his wife.

Thr. O questionless you may,
You have many Presidents and booke-cases for it,
Nay, though you were married by a booke-case,
Of Milesimo sexantesimo, etc.
You may forsake your husband, and wed another,
Provided that some fault be in the husband,
As none of them are clear.

Fra. I am resolved,
I will not wed him, though I beg my bread.

Thr. All that I have is yours, and were I worthy
To be your husband.

Fra. I thank you sir,
I will rather wed a most persidious Redshanke,
A noted Jew, or some Mechanic slave,
Then let him joy my sheets.

Thr. A comes, a comes,


Enter W Small. Boutcher, T. Small. Beard. W.S. Now my Virago, it is done, all is
cock-sure,
I have a Priest will mumble up a marriage,
Without bell, book, or candle, nimble slave,
A honest Welsh-man that was a Tailor,
But now is made a Curate.

Bea. Nay you are fitted.


Bou. Now master Throat.


T.S. Where Is your spirit sister?


W.S. What all amort? what is the matter? do you here?


Bou. What Is the reason of this melancholy?


Thr. By heaven I know not.


W.S. Has the gudgin bit.


Fra. He has been nibling.


W.S. Hold him to it wench,
And it 'twill hit by heaven: why art so sad?
Foot wench we will be married to night,
We Will sup at th'Myter, and from thence
My brother and we three will to the Sauoy,
Which done, I tell thee girl, we will hand ore head,
Go to it pell mell for a maidenhead,
Come yo'are lusty, you wenches are like bells,
You give no music, till you feel the clapper,
Come Throat a tortch, we must be gone.

Fra. Servant. Ex.


Bea. Mistress.


Fra. We are undone.


Bea. Now Jove forfend.


Fra. This fellow has no land; and which is worse,
He has no credit.

Bear. How are we outstript,
Blown up by wit of man: Let us be gone
Home again, home again, our market now is done.

Fra. That were too great a scandal.


Thr. Most true,
Better to wed another then to return
With scandal and defame* wed me a man
Whose wealth may reconcile your mothers love,
And make the action lawful.

Bea. But where is the man?
I like your council, could you show the man.

Thr. My self am he, might I but dare aspyre
Unto so high a Fortune.

Bea. Mistrisse, take the man,
Shall we be baffled with fair promises,
Or shall we trudge, like beggars back again,
No, take this wise and virtuous man,
Who should a lose his legs, his arms, his ears,
His nose, and all his other members,
Yer if his tongue be left 'twill get his living,
Take me this man.

Thr. Thanks gentle master Beard.


Fra It Is impossible, this night he means to wed me.


Thr. If not by law, we will with power prevent it,
So you but give consent.

Fra. Lets here the means.


Thr. I Will muster up my friends, and thus I cast it,
Whilst they are busy, you and I will hence
Directly to a Chapel, where a Priest
Shall knit the nuptial knot ere they pursue us.

Bea O rare invention, I Will act my part,
A owes me thirteen pound, I say no more,
But there be catch-poles: speake^st a match.

Fra. I give my liking.


Thr. Dash.


Das. Sir.


Thr. Get your sword
And me my buckler, nay you shall know
We are Tam marti quam mercurio,
Bring my cloak, you shall thither, I Will for friends,
Worship and wealth the Lawyers state attends.
Dash, we must bear some brain, to Saint John's street,
Go run, fly: and a far off enquire,
If that the Lady Somerfield be there,
If there, know what news, and meet me strait
At the My^er door in Fleet-streete, away,
"To get rich wives, men must not use delay.

Actus 3. Scaena 1.
Enter Sir Oliver Smalshanke, Justice Tutchim. Iu. Tu. A hunting Sir Oliver and
drye-foote to,


S. Ol. We old men have our cretchets, our conundrums,
Our fegares, quirks and quibibles,
As well as youth, Justice Tutchim I go
To hunt no Buck, but prick a lusty Do,
I go in truth a wooing.

I. Tu. Then ^ide with me,
I Will bring you to my sister Somerfield.

S. Ol. Justice not so: by her there hangs a Tale.


I. Tu. That Is true indeed.


S. Ol. She has a daughter.


I. Tu. And what of that.


S. Ol. I likewise have a son,
A villainous Boy, his father up and down,
What should I say, these Velvet bearded boys,
Will still be doing, say what we old men can,

I. Tu. And what of this Sir Oliver, be plain,


S. Oli. A nimble spirited knave, the villain boy,
Has one trick of his sier, has got the wench.
Stolen your rich Sisters heir.

I. Tu. Somer-fields heir,


S. Ol. Has done the deed, has peirst the vessels head,
And knows by this the vintage.

I. Tu. when should this be,


Si. Ol. As I am by my council well informed,
This very day,

I. Tu. Tut It cannot be,
Some ten miles hence I saw the maid last night.

S. Ol, Maids may be maids to night and not to morrow.
Women are free and sell their maiden-heads,
As men sell cloth, by yard and handful,
But if you chance to see your Sister widow,
Comfort her tears and say her daughters matched,
With one that has a knocker to his Father,
An honest Noble Knight.

I. Tu. Stand close Knight, close,
And mark this Captains humor, his name is Puff,
A dreams as a walks, and thinks no woman
Enter Captain Puff. Sees him but is in love with him.

Pu. Twe^e brave,
If some great Lady, through a window spide me,
And straight should love me, say she should send,
5000 pound unto my Lodging,
And crave my company: with that money,
I would make three several cloakes, and line them
With black, Crimson, and Tawny three pyl'd velvet,
I would eat at Chares Ordinary, and dice
At Antonies: then would I keep my whore,
In beaten velvet and, have two slaves to tend her.

Si. Ol. Ha ha ha.


Puf. What my case of Justices,
What are you eaues-dropping or do you think,
Your tawny coats with gresie facings here,
Shall carry it? Sir Oliver Smal-shankes,
Know my name is Puff, Knight, thee have I sought,
To fright thee from thy wits.

I. Tu. Nay good Sir Puff,
We have to many mad men already,

Pu. How? I tell thee Justice Tuchim, not all
Thy Baylifes, Sergants busy Constables,
Defesants, warrants, or thy Mittimusses,
Shall save his throat from cutting if he presume,
To woe the widow eclipped Tafata,
She is my wife by oath. Therefore take heed,
Let me not catch thee in the widows house,
If I do, I Will pick thy head upon my sword,
And piss in thy very visnomy, beware, beware.
Come there no more, a Captains word,
Flies not so feirce as does his fatal sword, Exit Puff.

Si. O. How like you this, shall we endure this thunder,
Or go no further.

I. Tu. We will on Sir Ol^uer,
We will on, let me aloue to touchim,
I wounder how my spirit did forbear,
To strike him on the face: had this been spoke,
Within my Liberties, had dyed for it.

Enter Cap. Puff. Si. Ol. I was about to draw.


Pu. If you come there,
Thy beard shall serve to stuff, those balls by which
I get me heat at Tenice.

I Tu. Is he gone. Exit Puff.
I would a durst a stood to this awhile,
Well I shall catch him in a narrow rome,
Where neither of us can flinch; If I do,
I Will make him dance a trenchmoor to my sword,
Come I Will along with you to the widow.
We will not be out-braued, take my word,
We Will not be wronged while I can draw a sword. Exit.

Enter Throat and other Gentlemen. Thr. Let the Cotch stay at Showlane end: be
ready,
Let the boot stand open, and when she is in:
Hurry toward Saint Gyles in the field,
As if the Devil himself were wagoner,
Now for an arm of oak, and heart of steel,
To bare away the wench, to get a wife,
A gentlewoman, a maid, nay which is more,
An honest maid, and which is most of all,
A rich and honest maid: O Jove Jove!
For a man to wed such a wife as this,
Is to dwell in the very suburbs of Heaven,

1. Genesis Is she so exquesite.


Thr. Sir she is rich
And a great heir.

2. Genesis It Is the more dangerous,


Thr. Dangerous? Lord where be those gallant spirits,
The time has been when scarce an honest woman,
Much less a wench could pass an Inn of court,
But some of the fry would have been doing
With her: I knew the day when Shreds a Tailor
Coming once late by an Inn of Chancerie,
Was laid a long, and muffled in his cloak,
His wife took in, Stytcht up, turned out again,
And he persuaded all was but in jest,
Tut those brave boys are gone, these which are left,
Are wary lads, live poring on their books,
And give their lynnen to their landresses,
By tail, they now can save their pursses,
I knew when every gallant had his man.
But now a twelpenny weekly Landresse,
Will serve the turn to half a dosen of them,
Enter Dash. Here comes my man, what news.

Das. As you would wish.
The Lady Somer-field is come to town,
Her horses yet are walking, and her men say,
Her only daughter, is conuayd away,
Noe man knows how: now to it mast,
You and your Servant Dash are made for ever
If you but stick to it now.

Thr. Gentlemen,
Now show your selves at full, and not a man,
But shares a fortune with me if I speed.

Enter William Smal-shanke Boutcher. Thomas Smal-shanke, Francis and Bear. with
a torch. 1. Genesis Tut fear not us be shure you run away,
And we will perform the quarrel.

Thr. Stand close, they come,


W.S. Art sure he will be here


Fr. Most sure.


W.S. Beard. Be. Sir.


W.S. Bear up the torch, and keep your way apace
Directly to the Sauoy.

Th.S. Have you a License,
Look to that brother before you marry,
For fear the Parson loose his benifice.

Wi. S. Tut our Curat craves no license, a sweres
His living came to him by a miracle,

Bou. How by miracle?


Wi. S. Why a paid nothing fort,
A swares that few be free from Symony,
But only welchmen, and those a says to,
Are but mountain Priests*

Bou. But hang him fool he lies,
What Is his reason?

Wi. S. His reason is this,
That all their livings are so rude and bare,
That not a man, will venture his damnation
By giving money for them: a does protest,
There is but two pair, of hoose, and shoes,
In all his Parish.

1, Genesis Hold up your light Sir.


Bea. Shall I be taught how to advance my torch,


W.S. What Is the matter Leiftenant.


2. Ge. Your Lieftenants an ass.


Bea. How an ass; die men like dogs.


W, S. hold gentlemen.


Bea. An ass, an ass.


Th. S. Hold brother hold, Lieftenant.
Put up as you are men, your wife is gonne.

W.S. Gone.


Bou. Gone.


W.S. How, which way? this is some plot,


T.S. Down toward Fleet bridge.


All. Follow, follow, follow* Ex*


1. Genesis So has the wentch let us pursue a loofe,
And see the event, this will prove good mirth,
When things vnshapde shall have a perfect birth. Exit.

Enter W. Smal-shancke Boucher, Thom. Small. and Beard, their swords drawn.
W.S. It Is a thing impossible, they should be gone
Thus far and we not see them.

T.S. Upon my life.
They went in by the Greyhound, and so struck,
Into Bridewell.

Bou. What should she make there;


T.S. Take water at the docke.


Bea. Water at Docke,
A fico for her Docke, you will not be ruld.
You Will still be obstinate, I Will pawn my fate,
She took a long shew-lane, and so went home,

W.S. Home.


Bea. I home; how could she chose but go,
Seeing so many naked tools at once,
Drawn in the street?

T.S. What scuruy luck was this,


W.S. Come we will find her, or we will fire the Suburbs,
Put up your tools, letts first along show-lane,
Then strait up Holborne, If we find her not;
We Will thence direct to Throtes, if she be lost
I am undone and all your hopes are crossed. Exit.

Enter Sir Oliver Smaleshankes, Justice Tutchim, Mistress Tafata, Adriana. Sir
Ol. Widow I must be short.


Iu. Tu. Sir Oliver,
Will you shame your self, ha? You must be short,
Why what a word was that to tell a widow?

Sir Ol. I meant I must be brief.


Iu. Tut. Why say so then,
Yet that's almost as ill; go to, speak on.

Sir Ol. Widow I must be brief, what old men do,
They must do quickly.

Taf. Then good sir do it,
Widows are sildome slow to put men to it.

Sir Ol. And old men know their q's, my Love you know,
Has been protested long, and now I come
To make my latest tender, an old grown oak
Can keep you from the rain, and stands as fair
And portly as the best'

Taf. Yet search him well,
And we shall find no pithe or hearty Timber
To underlay a building.

Iu. Tu. I would that Oak
Had been a fire: Forward good sir Oliver,
Your Oak is naught: stick not too much to that.

Sir Ol. If you can like, you shall be Ladified,
Live at the court, and soon be got with child,
What do you think we old men can do nothing?

Iu: Tut: This was somewhat like:


Sir Ol. You shall have Jewels,
A Baboone, Parrat, and an Izeland Dog,
And I my self to bear you company.
Your Ioynter is five hundred pound by year,
Besides your Plate, your Chains and household stuff,
When envious sat shall change this mortal life.

Taf. But shall I not be ouer-cloyde with love?
Will you nor be too busy shall I keep
My chamber by the month, if I be pleased
To take Physic, to send for Visitants,
To have my maid read Amadis de Gaul,
Or Donzel del Phoebo to me? shall I have
A Carotch of the last edition,
The Coatch-mans seat a good way from the Coatch,
That if some other Ladies and my self
Chance to talk bawdy, he may not ouer-heare us.

S. Ol. All this and more.


Taf. Shall we have two chambers?
And will you not presume unto my bed,
Till I shall call you by my waiting maid.

S. Ol. Not I by heaven.


Taf. And when I send her,
Will you not entice her to your lust,
Nor tumble her before you come to me.

Adr. Nay let him do his worst, make your match sure,
And fear not me, I never yet did fear
Any thing my master could do to me. Knock.

Taf. What noise is that, go see Adriana,
And bring me word: I am so haunted
With a swaggering Captain, that swears God bless us
Like a very Tarmagant, a Rascal knave, Enter Adr.
That says he will kill all men which seeks to wed me.

Adr. O Mistrisse! Captain Puff half drunk, is now
Coming up stairs.

S. Ol. O God have you no room
Beyond this Chamber, has sworn to kill me,
And piss in my very visnomy,

Taf. What are you afraid Sir Oliver?


S. Ol Not afraid,
But of all men I love not to meddle with a Drunkard:
Have you any Rome backwards.

Taf. None Sir.


Iu. Tu. Is there nere a Trunk or Cubbert for him,
Is there nere a hole backwards to hide him in.

Cap. Pu. I must speak with her.


S. Ol. O God a comes.


Adr. Creep under my Mistrisse Farthingale Knight,
That Is the best and safest place in the Chamber.

I. Tu. I there, there, that he will never mistrust.


Adr. Enter Knight, keep close, gather your self
Round like a Hedgehog stir not what ere you near,
See or smell Knight, God bless us, here a comes. Ent. C. Puff.

Ca. Pu. Bless thee widow and wife.


Taf. Sir get you gone.
Leave my house, or I will have you coniur'd
With such a spell, you never yet have heard of,
Have you no other place to vent your froth,
But in my house, is this the fittest place,
Your Captaineship can find to puff in: ha!

Ca Pu. How, am I not thy spouse, did thou not say,
These arms should clip thy naked body fast,
Betwixt two linen sheets, and be sole Lord
Of all thy pewter work, thy word is past,
And know that man is powder, dust, and earth,
That shall once dare to think thee for his wife.

Taf. How now you slave, one call the Constable.


C. Puf. No Constable with all his Holberteeres,
Dare once advance his head, or peep up stairs,
If I cry but keep down: have I not lived,
And ma^ched on the sieged walls,
In thunder, lightning, rain, and snow,
And eake in shot of powdered balls,
Whose costly marks are yet to show?

Taf. Captain Face, for my last husbands sake,
With whom you were familiarly acquainted,
I am content to wink at these rude tricks,
But hence, trouble me no more, if you do,
I shall lay you fast, where you shall see
No Sun or Moon.

C, Puf. Nor yet the Northen Pole,
A fico for the Sun and Moon, let me live in a hole,
So these two stars may shine.

Taf. Sir, get you gone,
You swaggering, cheating, Turne-bul-streete rogue,
Or I will hale you to the common-Iayle,
Where Lyce shall eat you.

C. Pu. Go to, I shall spurn
And slash your petti-coate.

Taf. Run to the Counter,
Fetch me a red-bearded Sargeant, I Will make
You Captain think the Devil of hell is come
To fetch you, if he once fasten on you.

C. Pu. Dambe thee and thy Sergeants, thou Mercers Punke.
Thus will I kick thee and thy Farthingales.

S. Ol. Hold Captain.


C Pu. What do you cast your whelps.
What have I found you sir? have not I plast
My Sakers, Culuerings, Demi-culuerings,
My Cannons, Demi-cannons, Basilisks,
Upon her breatch, and do I not stand,
Ready with my Pike to make my entry,
And are you come to man her?

S. Ol. Good Captain hold.


C. Pu. Are not her Bulwarks Parrapets, Trenches,
Scarfes, Counter-scarfes, Fortifications,
Curtains, Shadows, Mines, Counter-mines,
Rampires, Forts, Ditches, Works, Water-workes,
And is not her halfe-moone mine, and do you bring
A rescue good man Knight

Taf. Call up my men, Enter 2. or 3. with clubs.
Where be these knaves, have they no ears or hearts,
Beat hence this rascal, some other fetch a warrant,
I Will teach him know himself.

I. Tu. Down with the slave.


S. Ol. It Is not your beard shall carry it, down with the rogue.


C. Pu. Not Hercules against twenty.


I. Tu. A sir, Ex: Face
I knew my hands no longer could forbear him,
Why did you not strike the Knave, sir Oliver?

S. Ol. Why so I did.


I. Tu. But then it was too late.


S. Ol. What would you have me do when I was down,
And he stood thundering with his weapon drawn,
Enter Adriana. Ready to cut my throat.

Adr. The rogue is gone,
And here is one from the Lady Somerfield,
To entreat you come with all the speed you can,
To Saint John's street.

I. Tu. Which I will do.


Taf. Gentlemen
I am sorry you should be thus disturbed
Within my house, but now all fear is past,
You are most welcome: supper ended,
I Will give a gracious answer to your suit,
Mean while let naught dismay, or keep you mute. Ex.

Enter Throat, Francis, and Dash. Thr. Pay the Coatch-man Dash, pay him well,
And thank him for his speed. Now Viuat Rex,
The knot is knit, which not the law it self,
With all his Hydra heads and strongest nerves,
Is able to disioyne: Now let him hang,
Fret out h^s guts, and swear the stars from Heaven,
A never shall enjoy you, you shall be rich.
Your Lady mother this day came to town
In your pursuit: we will but shift some rags,
And strait go take her blessing.

Fra. That must not be,
Furnish me with Jewels, and then my self,
Attended by you man and honest Beard,
Will thither first, and with my Lady mother
Crave a peace for you.

Thr. I like that well,
Her anger somewhat calmed, I brisk and fine,
Some half hour after will present my self
As son in law unto her, which she must needs
Accept with gracious looks.

Fra. I when she knows
Before by me, from what an eminent plague
Your wisdom has preserved me.

Thr. I, that, that,
That will strike it dead: but here comes Beard.

Enter Beard. Bea What are you sure, tide fast by heart and hand.


Thr. I now do call her wife, she now is mine,
Sealed and delivered by an honest Priest,
At Saint Giles in the field.

Bea. God give you joy sir.


Thr. But where is mad Smal-shanke.


Bea O hard at hand,
And almost mad with loss of his fair bride*
Let not my lovely Mistress be seen,
And see if you can draw him to compound
For all his title to her, I have Sargiants
Ready to do the feate, when time shall serve.

Thr. Stand you aside dear love nay I will firke
My silly nouice, as he was never firkt
Since Midwiues bound his noddle: here they come.

Enter W. Smallsh. Th. Smalsh. and Boucher. W.S. O Master Throat, unless you
speak good news,
My hopes are crossed, and I undone for ever.

Thr. I never thought you would come to other end,
Your courses have been always so profane,
Extrauagant and base.

W.S. Nay good sir hear?
Did not my love return? came she not hither,
For Jove's love speak.

Thr. Sir will you get you gone,
And seek your love elsewhere; for know my house
Is not to entertain such customers
As you and your comrades.

W. S. Is the man mad,
Or drunk, why Master Throat know you to whom
You talk so sawcily?

Thr. Why unto you,
And to your brother Smale-shaneks, will you be gone?

Bou. Nay good sir hold us not in this suspense,
Answer directly, came not the Virgin hither.

Thr. Will you be gone directly, are you mad?
Come you to seek a Virgin in Ram-alley
So near an Inn of Court, and amongst Cooks,
Ale-men and Landresses, why are you fools?

W Sm. Sir leave this firck of law, or by this light
I Will give your throat a slit, came she not hither?
Answer to that point.

Thr. What, have you lost her?
Come do not gull your frinds.

W. Sm. By heaven she is gone
Unless she be returned since we last left you.

Thr. Nay then I cry you mercy, she came not hither
As'am an honest man: Is It possible
A maid so lovely, fair, so well demeand,
Should be took from you? what from you three?
So young, so brave and valliant Gentlemen?
Sure it cannot be.

T. Sm. A fore God it is true.


W. Sm. To our pepetuall shames it is now too true.


Thr. Is she not left behind you in the Tavern*
Are you shure you brought her out? were you not drunk
And so forgot her?

W. Sm. A pox on all such luck,
I will find her, or by this good light
I Will fire all the City, come let us go,
Who ever has her shall not long enjoy her,
I Will prove a contract, lets walk the round,
I Will have her if she keep above the ground. Exit.

Thr. Ha ha ha, a makes me sport. if aith
The gull is mad, stark mad, Dash draw the bond
And a release of all his interest
In this my loved wife,

Bea. I be sure of that,
For I have certain gobblins in buffe Ierkins Enter with the Sargeants.
Lie in ambuscado for him.

Off. I arrest you sir:


W. Sm. Reskue, resku.


Th. O he is caught.


W. Sm. I Will give you bail
Hang off honest catch-poles

M. Thr. good, wise,
Learned, and honest master Throat, now, now,
Now or never help me..

Through. What Is the matter?


W. Sm. Here are two retainers, hangers on sir,
Which will consume more then ten liueries,
If by your means they be not strait shook off:
I am arrested.

Thr. Arested? what is the sum?


W.S. But thirteen pound, due to Beard the Butler,
Do but bail me, and I will save you harmless.

Thr, Why here is the end of Riot, I know the law,
If you be baild by me, the debt is mine,
Which I will undertake.

W.S. Law there; Roagues,
Foot I know he would not let me want
For thirteen pounds.

Thr. Provided, you seal a release,
Of all your claim to Mistress Somerfield.

W.S. Sergeants do your kind, hale me to the hole,
Seal a release, Sargeants come, to prison,
Seal a release for Mistrisse Somerfield,
First I will stinck in Iayle, be eat with Lyce,
Endure an object worse then the Devil himself,
And that is ten Sergeants peeping through the grates
Upon my lousy linen, come to Iayle,
Foot a release.

T.S. There Is no conscience in it.


Bou. It Is a demand uncharitable.


Thr. Nay choose.


Fra. I can hold no longer, impudent man.


W.S. My wife, foot my wife, let me go Sergiants.


Fra. O thou perfidious man dare thou presume
To call her wife, whom thou so much have wronged,
What conquest have thou got, to wrong a maid,
A silly harmless maid? what glory is it
That thou have thus deceived a simple Virgin,
And brought her from her friends? what honor wast
For thee to make the Butler loose his office
And run away with thee. Your tricks are known,
Did thou not swear thou should be Baroniz'd?
And had both lands and fortunes? both which thou wantst.

W.S. Foot that is not my falt, I would have lands
If I could get em.

Fra. I know your trick:,
And know I now am wife unto this man.

Omn. How?


Thr. I thank her sir, she has now voutchsaft
To cast her self on me.

Fra. Therefore subscribe,
Take somewhat of him for a full release,
And pray to God to make you an honest man,
If not, I do protest by earth and Heaven,
Although I starve, thou never shall enjoy me.

Bea. Her vow is past, nor will she break her word*
Look to it mitcher.

Fra. I hope a will compound.


W.S Foot shall I give two thousand pound a year
For nothing.

T.S. Brother come, be ruled by me,
Better to take a little then loose all.

Bou. You see she is resolute, you had best compound.


W.S. I Will first be damned ere I will lose my right,
Unless a give me up my forfit morgage,
And bail me of this action.

Fra. Sir you may choose,
What Is the morgage worth?

W.S. Lets have no whispering.


Thr. Some forty pounds a year.


Fra. Do it, do it,
Come you shall do it, we will be rid of him
At any rate.

Thr. Dash, go fetch his morgage,
See that your friends be bound, you shall not claim
Title, right, possession in part or whole,
In time to come, in this my loved wife:
I will restore the morgage, pay this debt,
And set you free.

W.S. They shall not.


Bou. We will,
Come draw the bonds, and we will soon subscribe them.

Enter Dash. Thr. They Are ready drawn; here is his release,
Sergiants let him go.

Dash. Here Is the morgage sir.


W.S. Was ever man thus cheated of a wife:
Is this my morgage.

Thr. The very same sir.


W.S. Well I will subscribe, God give you joy,
Although I have but little cause to wish it,
My heart will scarce consent unto my hand,
It Is done.

Thr. You give this as your deeds.


Omn. We do,


Thr. Certify them Dash.


W.S. What am I free.


Thr. You are, Sargeants I discharge you,
There Is your fees.

Bea. Not so, I must have money.


Thr. I Will pass my word.


Bea. Foutre, words are wind,
I say I must have money.

Thr. How much sir.


Bea. Three pounds in hand, and all the rest to morrow.


Thr. There Is your sum, now officers begone,
Each take his way, I must to Saint John's street,
And see my Lady-mother: she is now in town,
And we to her shall strait present our duties.

T.S. O Jove shall we loose the wench thus.


W.S. Even thus
Throat farewell, since it is thy luck to have her,
I still shall pray, you long may live together:
Now cach to his affairs.

Thr. Good night to all, Ex:
Dear wife step in, Beard and Dash come hither:
Here take this money: go borrow Jewels
Of the next Goldsmiths: Beard take thou these books,
Go both to the Broakers in Fetter lane,
Lay them in pawn for a Velvet Ierken
And a double Ruff, tell him a shall have
As much for loan to night, as I do give
Usually for a whole circuit, which done
You two shall man her to her mothers: go, Ex.
My fate looks big; me thinks I see already,
Nineteen gold chains, seauenteene great beards, and ten
Reverent bald heads, proclaim my way before me,
My Coatch shall now go prancing through Cheapside,
And not be forced to hurry through the streets,
For fear of Sargeants: nor shall I need to try,
Whether my wel-graft tumbling foot-cloth nag,
Be able to out-runne a wel-breath'd Catchp ole,
I now in pomp will ride, for it is most fit,
He should have state that rises by his wit. Ex.

Actus 4. Scaena. 1.
Sir Oliver, Justice Tutchim, Taffata, Adriana. S. Ol. Good meat the belly
fills, good wine the brain,
Women please men, men pleasure them again,
Ka me, ka thee, one thing must rub another,
English love Scots, Welshman love each other.

I. Tu. You say very right sir Oliver, very right,
I haue't in my noddle in faith, That Is all the fault
Old Justices have, when they are at feasts,
They will bib hard, they will be fine: Sunburned
Sufficient, foxt, or Columberd now and than,
Now could I sit in my charyre at home and nod
A drunkard to the stocks, by virtue of,
The last statute ^arely.

Taf. Sir you are merry,

I. Tu. I am indeed.


Taf. Your supper sir was light.
But I hope you think you welcome.

I. Tu. I do,
A light supper quoth you, pray God it be,
Pray god I carry it cleanly, I am shure it lies,
As heavy in my belly as moult lead,
Yet lle go see my Sister Sommerfield,

Si. O. So late good Justice.


I. Tu. I even so late,
Night is the mother of wit, as you may see,
By Poets or rather Cunstables
In their examinations at midnight,
We Will lie together without marrying,
Save the Curats fees, and the parish a labor,
It Is a thriuing course.

S. Ol. That may not be,
For excomunications then will flee.

I. Tu. That's true, they fly indeed like wild-geese,
In flocks, one in the breech of another.
But the best is a small matter stays them,
And so farewell.

S. O. Farewell good Justice Tutchim, Exit.
Alas good gentleman his brains are erased,
But let that pass: speak widow is it a match,
Shall we clap it up.

Adr. Nay if it come to clapping,
Good night in faith Mistress look before you,
There Is nothing more dangerous to maid or widow,
Then sudden clapings up; nothing has spoyld,
So many proper ladies as clappings up:
Your shittill-cocke, striding from tables to ground,
Only to try the strength of the back,
Your riding a hunting, I though they fall,
With their heels upward, and lay as if
They were taking the height, of some high star
With a cross staff: noe nor your iumlings
In horsslitters, coatches or caroatches,
Have spoyld so many women as clappings up,

Si. Ol. Why then we will chop it up.


Taf. That's not allowed.
Unless you were son to a welsh Curate:
But faith sir Knight I have a kind of itching,
To be a Lady, that I can tell you woes,
And can persuade with better rethorick,
Then oaths, wit, wealth, valor, lands, or person,
I have some debts at court, and marrying you,
I hope the Courtier will not stick to pay me,

Si. Ol. Never fear thy payment. This I will say,
For Courtiers they will be shure to pay each other,
How ere they deal with Citizens.

Ta. Then here is my hand,
I am your wife condition we be joined,
Before to morrows sun.

Si. O. Nay even to night,
So you be pleased with little warning widow,
We old men can be ready, and thou shall see,
Before the time that chanticlere,
Shall call and tell the day is near,
When wentches lying on their backs,
Receive with joy their loue-stolne smacks,
When maids awak't from their first sleep,
Deceived with dreams begin to weep,
And think if dreams, such pleasures know,
What sport the substance them would show,
When Ladies gin white Lymmes to spread,
Her love but new stolen to her bed,
His cotton shows yet scarce put off,
And deares not laugh, speak, sneze, or cough,
When precise dames begin to think,
Why their gross souring husbands stincke,
What pleasure twere then to enjoy,
A nimble vickar, or a boy.
Before this time thou shall behold,
Me quaffing out our brydall bole.

Adr. Then belike before the morning Sun
You will be coupled.

Taf. Yes faith Adriana,


Adr. Well I will look you shall have a clean smock,
Provided that you pay the fee Sir Oliver,
Since my Mistress sir will be a Lady,
I Will loose no fees due to the waiting maid.

S. Ol. Why is there a fee belonging to it.


Adr. A Knight and never heard of smock fees,
I would I had the monopoly of them,
So there were no impost set upon them: Enter W. Sm.

S. Ol. Whom have we here what my mad-headed son
What makes he here so late? say I am gone,
And I the whilst will step behind the hangings.

W.S. God Bless thee parcel of man's flesh,


Ta. How sir.


W.S. Why parcel of man's flesh art not a woman?
But widow whers the old stinkerd my father,
They say widow you dance altogether.
After his pipe.

Ta. What then.


W.S. Thar't a fool,
I Will assure thee there is no music in it.

Ta. Can you play better.


W.S. Better widow?
Blood do think I have not learnt my prick song,
What not the court pricksong? one up and another down,
Why I haue't to a hare by this light.
I hope thou love him not.

Ta. I Will marry him sir,


W.S. How marry him, foot art mad widow,
Woot marry an old crased man,
With meager looks, with visage wan,
With littell legs and cryncled thies,
With Chapfalne gummes and deep sunk eyes,
Why a dog seazd on ten days by death
Stinkes nor so loathsome as his breath,
Nor can a city common jacques,
Which all men's Breeches undertakes,
Yield fasting stomakes such a favor.
As does his breath, and ugly favor.

S. O. Rogue,


Adr. That's all one sir she means to be a Lady,


W.S. Does she so, and thou must be her waiting woman.
Faith thou will make a fine dainty creature,
To sit at a chamber door and look fleas,
In thy Ladies dog while she is showing,
Some slippery britcht Courtier rare faces,
In a by window, foot widow,
Marry me a young and complete gallant,

Taf. How a complete gallant? what? a fellow,
With a hat tuck't up behind, and what we use,
About our hips to keep our coats from dabling,
He wears about his neeke, a farthingale:
A standing collar to keep his neat band clean,
The whilst his shirt does stink, and is more foul,
Then an in of chancery table cloth,
His breeches must be pleyted as if a had
Some thirty pockets, when one poor halpeny purse,
Will carry all his treasure, his knees all points,
As if his legs and hammes were tide together,
A fellow that has noe inside, but prates
By roate, as players, and parrotts use to do,
And to define a complete gallant right,
A mercer formed him, a tailor ma^^^ him,
And a player gives him spright,

Wi. Sm. Why so, in my conscience to be a Countess,
Thou would marry a hedg-hog: I must confess,
It Is state to have a coxe-combe kiss your hands,
While yet the chamberly is scarce wypte off,
To have an upright usher march before you,
Bare headed in a Tuftafata ierkin
Maid of your old cast gown, shows passing well,
But when you feel your husbands pulses, that's hell,
Then you fly out and bid strait smockes farewell,

Taf, I hope sir what ere our husbands be,
We may be honest.

W.S. May be; nay you are,
Women and honesty are as near alyde,
As parsons lives are to their doctrines,
One and the same: but widow now be ruld,
I hope the heavens will give thee better grace,
Then to accept the father and I yet live,
To be bestowed, if you wed the stinckerd,
You shall find the tale of Tantalus
To be noe fable widow.

Si. Ol. How I sweat,
I can hold noe longer, degenerate bastard,
I here disclayme thee, casheere thee, nay more,
I disinherit thee both of my love.
And living, get thee a gray cloak and hat
And walk in Paul's amongst thy casheerd mates
As malancholly as the best:

Taf. Come not near me,
I forbid the my house, my outhouses,
My Garden, Orchard, and my backe-side,
Thou shall not harbor near me.

Sir Ol. Nay to thy grief,
Know varlet I will be wed this morning,
Thou shall not be there, nor once be graced
With a piece of Rosemary: I Will casheere thee,
Do not reply, I will not stay to hear thee. Exit.

W. Sm: Now may I go put me on a clean shirt
And hang my self, foot who would have thought
The Fox had eathed so near me; what is to be done?
What miracle shall I now undertake
To win respective (...) with God and men?
What if I turned Courtier and lived honest?
Sure that would do it: I dare not walk the streets,
For I dwindle at a Sargeant in buffe
Almost as much as a new Player does
At a plague bill certified forty:
Well I like this widow, a lusty plumpe drab
Has substance both in bretch and purse,
And pity and sin it were she should be wed
To a furd cloacke and a nightcap. I Will have her,
This widow I will have: her money
Shall pay my debts and set me up again,
It Is here, it is almost forged, which if it take,
The world shall praise my wit, admire my fate. Exit.

Enter Beard, Dash, Francis, Sargeant, Drawers. Bea. Sargeants beware, be sure
you not mistake,
For If you do.

Dash. She shall be`quickly bayld:
She shall Corpus cum causa be removed,
Your action entered first below, `shall shrincke,
And you shall find sir Sargeant she has friends
Will stick to her in the common place.

Sar. Sir
Will you procure her bail:

Bea. She shall be baylde,
Drawer bring up some wine, use her well,
Her husband is a Gentleman of sort

Sa. A Gentleman of sort, why what care I:
A woman of her fashion shall find
More kindness at a lusty Sargeants hand
Then ten of your Gentlemen of sort.

Dash. Sir use her well, she is wife to Master Throat:


Sar. I Will use her sir as if she were my wife,
Would you have any more.

Bea. Drink upon that
Whilst we go fetch her bail. Dash, fellow Dash,
With all the speed thou have run for our Master,
Make have least he be gone before thou come,
To Lady Somerfields: I Will fetch another,
She shall have bail.

Dash. And a firking writ
Of false imprisonment, she shall be sure
Of twelue-pence damage, and five and twenty pound
For suits in law: I Will go fetch my Master. Exit.

Bea. And I another:


Sar. Drawer leave the Room
Here Mistress a health:

Fra: Let it come sweet Rogue.


Dra: I, say you so: then must I have an eye,
These Sargeants feed on very good reuersions,
On Capons, Teales, and sometimes on a Wodcock
Hot from the shrieues own table, the knaves feed well
Which makes them horrid letchers.

Fra. This health is pledgd
And honest Sargeant how does master Gripe The Drawer stands aside.
The keeper of the Counter, I do protest
I found him always favorable to me,
A is an honest man, has often stood to me,
And been my friend and let me go a trust
For victual when a denied it knights: but come,
Lets pay and then begone, th'arrest you know
Was but a trick to get from nimble Dash
My husbands man:

Sar. True but I have an action
At sure of Mistrisse, Sel-smocke, your quandam Baude,
The sum is eight good pound, for six weeks board,
And five weeks loan for a red Tafata gown
Bound with a silver lace:

Fra. I do protest,
By all the honesty twixt thee and me,
I got her in that gown in six weeks space
Four pound and fourteen pence given by a Clarke
Of an Inn of Chancerie, that night I came
Out of her house, and does the filthy Jade
Send to me for money? but honest Sergeant,
Let me go, and say thou did not see me,
I Will do thee as great a pleasure shortly.

Sar. Shall we embrace to night.


Fra. With all my heart.


Ser. Sit on my knee and kiss, Enter Beard,


Bea. What news boy? why stand you Centinell?


Dra. Do but conceal your self, and we shall catch
My Sergeant napping.

Bea. Shall maids be here deflowred,


Sar. Now kiss again.


Draw. Now, now. Enter Cap. and seeing the hurly burly, runs away.


Bea. Deflower virgins, rogue? auant ye slave,
Are maids fit subjects for a Sargeants mace.
So now are we once more free: there is for the wine. Ex. Ser.
Now to our Randeuow: three pounds in gold
These stops contain; we will quaffe in Venice glasses,
And swear some Lawyers are but silly Asses. Exeunt.

Enter Captain Face. Cap. Is the coast clear, are these combustions ceast,
And may we drink Canary sack in peace?
Shall we have no attendance here you rogues,
Where be these raskals that skip up and down,
Faster then Virginal iacks? drawers.

Dra. Sir.


Cap. On whom wait you sir rogue?


Dra. Faith Captain
I attend a conuenticle of Players.

Ca. How players, what is there ere a Cuckold among them?


Dra. Jove defend else, it stands with policy,
That one should be a notorious Cuckold,
If it be but for the better keeping
The rest of his company together.

Cap. When did you see sir Theophrastus Slop,
The City Dog-maister?

Dra. Not to day sir.


Cap. What have you for my supper.


Dra. Nothing ready
Unless you please to stay the dressing Captain,

Cap. Zownes stay the dressing; you damned rogue,
What shall I wait upon your greasy cook,
And wait his leisure, go down stairs rogue,
Now all her other customers be served,
Ask if your Mistress have a snip of Mutton
Yet left for me.

Dra. Yes sir.


Cap. And good man rogue
See what good thing your Kitchin-maide has left
For me to work upon, my barrow-gutlings grumble
And would have food: Say now the Vintners wife
Should bring me up a Pheasant, Partridge, Quail,
A pleasant banquet, and extremely love me,
Desire me to eat, kiss, and protest,
I should pay nothing for it, say she should drink
Her self three quarters drunk, to win my love,
Then give me a chain, worth some three score pounds,
Say twere worth but forty, say but twenty,
For Citizens do sildome in their wooing,
Give above twenty pounds: say then it is twenty,
I Will go sell some fifteeene pounds worth of the chain,
To buy some clothes, and shift my lousy linen,
And wear the rest as a perpetual favor,
About my arm in fashion of a Bracelet,
Say then her husband should grow iealious,
I Would make him drunk, and then I Will Cuckold him,
But then a Vintners wife, some Rogues will say,
Which sits at Bar for the receipt of custom,
That smells of chippings and of broken fish,
Is love to Captain Face, which to prevent,
I Will never come but when her best stitcht hat,
Her Bowgle gown and best wrought smock is on,
Then does she neither smell of bread, of meat,
Or drappings of the tap, it shall be so.

Enter Boutcher, W. Smalshanke, and Constantia. Bou. Now leave us boy; bless
you Captain Face.


Cap. I Will have no Music?


W.S. Foot do take us for fiddlers


Cap. Then turn straight, Drawer run down the stares,
And thank the Gods a gave me that great patience
Not to strike you.

Bou. Your patience sir is great,
For you dare sildome strike. Sir they say,
You needs will wed the widow Taffata,
Nolens volens.

Cap. Do not urge my patience,
Awake not fury, new rakt up in embers,
I give you leave to live.

W.S. Men say you have tricks,
You Are an admirable Ape, and you can do
More feats then three Babounes, we must have some.

Cap. My patience yet is great, I say be gone,
My tricks are dangerous.

Bou. That Is nothing,
I have brought you furniture, come get up
Up upon this table, do your feats,
Or I will whip you to them, do not I know
You are a lousy knave.

Cap. How? Lousy knave,
Are we not English bred?

Bou. You Are a coward Rogue,
That dares not look a Kitling in the face,
If she but stare or mew.

Cap. My patience yet is great:
Do you bandie troops, by Dis I will be Knight,
Wear a blew coat on great Saint Georges day,
And with my fellows drive you all from Paul's
For this attempt.

Bou. Will you yet gee up,
I must lash you to it,

Cap. By Pluto, Gentlemen,
To do you pleasure, and to make you sport,
I Will do it.

W.S. Come get up then quick.


Bou. I Will dress you sir.


Cap. By Jove it is not for fear,
But for a love I bear unto these tricks,
That I perform it.

Bou. Hold up your snout sir,
Sit handsomely, by heaven, sir you must do it,
Come boy.

W.S. No by this good light, I Will play
Him that goes with the motions.

Dra Where Is the Cap. Gentlemen?


W.S. Stand back boy, and be a spectator, Gentlemen
You shall see the strange nature of an outlandish beast,
That has but two legs, bearded like a man,
Nosd like a Goose, and toungd like a woman,
Lately brought from the land of Catita,
A beast of much understanding, were it not given
Too much to the love of Venery: do I not do it well?

Bou. Admirably.


W.S. Remember noble Captain,
You skip when I shall shake my whip. Now sit,
What can you do for the great Turk?
What can you do for the Pope of Rome?
Hark, he stirs not, he moves not, he waggeth not,
What can you do for the town of Geneua sir?

He holds up his hands instead of praying. Con. Sure this Baboune is a great
Puritan.


Bou. Is not this strange.


W.S. Not a whit by this light,
Banks his horse and he were taught both in a stable.

Dr. O rare.


Cap. Zounes I Will first be dam'nd, shall sport
Be laughed at; by Dis* by Pluto, and great Proserpine,
My fatal blade once drawn, falls but with death,
Yet if you will let me go, I vow by Jove,
No widow, maid, wife, punke, or Cockatrice,
Shall make me haunt your goasts.

Bou. 'Twill not serve sir,
You must show more.

Cap. I Will first be hanged and damned.


W.S. Foot can a iumpe so well.


Bou. Is a so quick?
I hope the slave will haunt no more the widow,

W.S. As for that take no care, for by this light
She Will not have thee.

Bou. Not have me?


W.S. No not have thee,
By this hand, flesh, and blood, she is resolved
To make my father a most fearful Cuckold,
And he is resolved to save his soul by her.

Bou. How by her?


W.S. Thus, all old men which marry
Young wives, shall questionless be saved,
For while they are young, they keep other men's wives,
And when they are old, they keep wives for other men,
And so by satisfaction procure salvation.
Why thou dejected tail of a Crab,
Does not the fair Constantia Somerfield
Doat on thy filthy face; and will thou wed
A wanton widow? what can thou see
To doat on her.

Bou. Only this, I love her.


W.S. Doo'st love her then, take a purgation,
For love I Will assure thee is a binder:
Of all things under heaven, there is no fitter parralells then a Drunkard and a
Lover: for a drunkard looses his senses, so does your lover; your drunkard is
quarrelsome, so is your lover: your drunkard will swear, lie, and speak great
words, so will your lover: your drunkard is most desirous of his letchery, and
so is your lover: Well the night grows old, farewell:

I am so much thy friend, that none shall bed thee,
While fair Constantia is resolved to wed thee. Ex.

Enter Thomas Smal-shank and others. T.S. Foot shall we let the wentch go
thus,
My masters now show your selves Gentlemen
And take a way the Lawiers wife;
Foot though I have noe wit, yet I can,
Love a wentch and choose a wife,

Genesis Why sir, what should you do with a wife, that are
held none of the wisest? you will get none but fools.

Th. S. How fools, why may not I a fool get a wise child
as well as wise men get fools: all lies but in the agillity of
the woman: in troth I think all fools are got when there
mothers a sleep; therefore I Will never ly with my wife but
when she is brawd waking, stand to it honest friends, knock
down the Lieftenant and then hurry the wentch to Fleetstreete,
there my father and I will this morning be married.
Enter Beard and Francis,
Genesis Stand close they come.


Bea. By Jove the night grows dark and Luna looks,
As if this hour some fifty cuckolds were making,
Then let us trudge.

Genesis Down with 'em, down with them, away with her
Master Smal-shankes to Fleetestreet, go the Curate there stays for you.

Bea. And stays the Curat.
What Is here knocked down, and blud of men let out,
Must men in darkness bleed, then Erebus look big,
And Boreas blow the fire of all my rage,
Into his nose. Night thou art a whore,
Smalshanke a rogue: and is my wench took from me,
Sure I am guld, this was no Coccatryce,
I never saw her before this daylight peept,
What dropst thou head, this surely is the heir,
And mad will Smal-shankes lay in Ambuscado,
To get her now from me, Beard: Liefrenant Beard,
Thou art an asses what a dull slave was I,
That all this while smelt not her honesty.
Pate I do not pity thee: had thou brains,
Lieftenant Beard had got this wealthy heir,
From all these rogues, blood to be this orereachd,
In pate and wench: reueng, revenge come up,
And with thy curled locks cling to my beard,
Smale-shamkes I will betray thee: I now will trudge,
To Saint John's street to inform the Lady Sommerfield,
Where thou art: I will prevent the match,
Thou art to Fleetestreet gone, revenge shall follow,
And my incensed wrath shall like great thunder,
Dispersse thy hopes and thy brave wife a sunder.
Enter Lady Sommerfield, and Justice Tutchin.
Tu. Say as I say widow, the wench is gone,
But I know whether, stolen she is, well.
I know by whom, say as I say widow,
I have bin drinking hard, why say so too,
Old men they can be fine, with small a do,
The law is not offended, I had no punke,
Nor in an alehouse, have I made me drunk.
The statute is not broke, I have the skill,
To drink by law, then say as I say still,

La, S. To what extremes does this licentious time,
Hurry unstayed youth, nor Gods nor Laws,
Whose penal scurges are enough to save,
Even damned fiends, can in this looser age,
Confine unbounded youth, who durst presume,
To steal my youths delight, my ages hope,
Her fathers heir, and the last noble stem,
Of all her ancestors: fear they or Gods or laws.

I. Tu. I say as you say sister, but for the laws,
There are so many that men do stand in awe,
Of none at all; take heed they steal not you.
Who woes a widow with a fair full Moon
Shall surely speed, beware of full Moons widow,
Will Smalshankes has your daughter no word but mum,
My warrant you shall have when time shall come.

La. S. your warrant?


I. Tu. I my warrant widow.
My warrant can stretch far; no more but so,
Twill serve to ketch a knave, or fetch a Do.

Enter Seruingmen. Ser. Here Is a gentleman much desirous to see you madam.


La. So. What is a for a man.


Ser. Nothing for a man, but much for a beast,
I think him lunatique for a demannds,
What plate of his is stirring in the house,
A calls your men his Butlers, Cooks, and Steward,
Kisses your woman, and makes exceeding much
Of your Coach-mans wife;

I. Tu. Then he is a gentleman, for it is a true note of a gentleman, to make much
of other men's wives, bring him up, a sir, makes a much of your Choachmans
wife, this geere will run a wheels then shortly, A man may make much more of
a another man's wife, then a can do of's own.


L.S. How much brother?


I Tu. A man may make with ease,
A Punke, a Child, a Bastard, a Cuckold, of another man's wife
all at a clap.
And that is much I think.

Seru. That's my Lady.


Enter Seruingman and Throat. Thr. For that thou first have brought me to her
sight,
I here create thee Clarke a the Kitching, no man shall beg it from thee.

Ser. Sure the fellows mad.


L.S What would you sir? I guess your long profession,
By your scant suite: your habit seems to turn:
Your inside outward to me, you are I think.
Some Turner of the law.

Thr. Law is my living.
And on that ancient mould I wear this outside,
Suite upon suite wastes some yet makes me thrive.
First law, then gold, then love, and then we wiue.

I.T. A man of form like me but what is your business?


La. Be brief good sir: what makes this bold intrusion?


Th. Intrude, I do not, for I know the law,
It is the rule that squares out all our actions,
Those actions bring in coin, coin gets me friends,
Your son in law has law at's fingers ends.

La. My son in law.


Th. Madame your son in law,
Mother I come, (be glad I call you so)
To make a gentle breach into your favor,
And win your approbation of my choice,
Your cherry-ripe sweet daughter (so renownd,
For beauty, virtue, and a wealthy dowre)
I have espousd.

La. How? you espouse my daughter?


Thr. Nouerint vniuersi, the laws of heaven,
Of nature, church, and chance, have made her mine,
Therefore deliver her by these presents.

I. Tu. How Is this? made her yours sir? per quam regulam,
Nay we are lettered sir, as well as you,
Read rationem per quam regulam.

Thr. Femini Iudificantur viros:
By that same rule these lips have taken season,
Tut I do all by Statute law, and reason.

La. Hence you base knave, you petty-fogging groom,
Clad in old ends, and peec'd with Brokery,
You wed my daughter?

I.T. You sir Ambo-dexter,
A Sumners son, and learned in Norfolk wiles,
Some common bail, or Counter Lawyer,
Marry my niece? your half sleeves shall not carry her.

Thr. These Storms will be dissolved in tears of joy,
Mother I doubt it not: Justice to you,
That ierke at my half sleeves, and yet your self
Do never wear but Buckerom out of sight,
A Flannell wast-coate, or a Canuas Trusse,
A shift of thrift, I use it: let us be friends,
You know the law has tricks, ka me, ka thee,
Viderit vtilitas, the mott to these half arms,
Corpus cum causa needs no bumbasting.
We wear small hair yet have we tongue and wit,
Lawyers close breech't have bodies pollitick.

La. Speak, answer me sir Jack: stole you my daughter?


Thr. Short tale to make, I fingered have your daughter,
I have taken livery and season of the wench,
Deliver her then, you know the Statute laws,
She Is mine without exception, bar or clause:
Come, come, restore.

La. The fellow's mad I think,


Thr. I was not mad before I married,
But ipso facto what the act may make me,
That know I not.

I.T. Fellows come in there,
Ent. 2. or 3. Ser. By this sir you confess you stole my Nee^^,
And I attach you here of felony:
Lay hold on him: I Will make my Mittimus,
And send him to the Iayle; have we no bar
Nor clause to hamper you, away with him,
Those claws shall claw you to a bar of shame,
Where thou shall show thy Goll, I Will bar your claim,
If I be Justice Tutchin.

Thr. Hands off you slaves,
Oh! favor my Ierkin, though you tear my flesh,
I set more store by that: my Audita
Querela shall be heard, and with a Certiorare
I Will fetch her from you with a pox. Enter Beard.

Bea. What Is here to do? is all the world in arms?
More tumults, brawles, and insurrections,
Is blood the Theme whereon our time must treat.

Thr. Here Is Beard your Butler: a rescue Beard; draw,

Bea. Draw? not so: my Blad's as ominously drawn
Unto the death of nine or ten such grooms,
As is a knife vnsheath'd with the hungry maw,
Threatening the ruin of a chine of Beef:
But for the restless toil it took of late,
My blade shall sleep awhile.

Th. Help.


Be. Stop thee Throat
And hear me speak, whose bloody Characters,
Will show I have been scuffling: briefly thus,
Thy wife, your daughter, and your lovely Niece,
Is hurried now to Fleet-streete, the damned crew
With glaues and clubs have rapt her from these arms,
Throat thou art bobd, although thou boughtst the heir,
Yet has the slave made a re-entry.

I. Tu. Sir what are you?


Th. My Ladies Butler sir.


Bea. Not I by heaven.


Thr. By this good light he swore it,
And for your daughters love he ran away.

Bea. By love I guld thee Throat.


I.T. More knavery yet,
Lay hands on him, pinion them both,
And guarde them hence toward Fleet-streete, come away,

Bea. Must we be led like thieves, and pinniond walk,
Spent I my blood for this? is this my hyre?
Why then burn rage, set Beard and nose on fire.

I.T. On, on I say.


Thr. Justice, the law shall sirke you.


Actus Quinti. Scaena 1.
Enter William Small-shanke. W.S. On this one hour depends my hopes and
fortunes,
Foot I must have this widow: what should my Dad
Make with a wife, that scarce can wipe his nose,
Untruss his points, or hold a Chamber Pot,
Steady till a pisses: The doors are fast,
It Is now the midst of night; yet shall this chain,
Procure access and conference with the widow:
What though I cheat my father, all men have sins,
Though in their several kinds, all ends in this,
So they get gold, they care not whose it is.
Begging the Court, use bears the City out,
Lawyers their quirkes, thus goes the world about,
So that our villainies have but different shapes,
The Effects all one, and poor men are but Apes,
To imitate their betters, this is the difference,
All great men's sins must still be humored,
And poor men's vices largely punished,
The privilege that great men have in evil,
Is this, they go unpunished to the Devil
Therefore I Will in, this chain I know will move,
Gold and rich stones, wins coyest ladies love. Knocks.

Adr. What would you sir, that you do knock so boldly.


W.S. I must come in to the widow.


Adr. How come in,
The widow has no entrance for such mates.

W.S. Do here sweet Chambermaid, by heaven I come,
With letters from my father, I have brought her stones,
Jewels and chains, which she must use to morrow.

Adr. You Are a needy knave, and will lie:
Your father has casheerd you, nor will a trust you,
Begone, least I do wash you hence.

W.S. Do here,
By this good night, my Father and I are friends,
Take but this cheine for token, give her that,
And tell her I have other things for her,
Which by my fathers will I am commanded
To give to her own hands.

Adr. Say you so,
In Troth I think you will prove an honest man*
Had you once got a beard: let me see the cheine,

W.S, Do think I lie? by this good light Adrian
I love her with my soul, here is letters
And other Jewels sent her from my father,
Is she a bed.

Adr. By my virginity,
She is vncast, and ready to slip in,
Betwixt the sheets, but I will bear her this,
And tell her what you say.

W.S. But make some have,
Why so 'twill take, zart how a waiting maid,
Can shake a fellow up that is casheerd,
And has no money: foot should she keep the chain,
And not come down, I must turn Citizen,
Be banckrout, and crave the Kings protection
But here she comes.

Taf. What would you sir with us,
That on the sudden, and so late you come.

W.S. I have some secrets to acquaint you with,
Please you to let the chamber maid shake off,
And stand as Sentinel.

Taf. It shall not need,
I hope I have not brought her up so ill,
But that she knows how to contain your secrets,
As well as I her Mistress: Therefore on.

W.S. It is not fit forsooth that I should on,
Before she leave the room.

Adr. It Is not indeed*
Therefore I Will wait in the withdrawing room
Until you call.

Taf. Now sir, what is your will?


W.S, Dear widow, pity the state of a young,
Poor, yet propper Gentleman, by Venus pap
Upon my knees I Would creep unto your lap
For one small drop of favor, and though this face
Is not the finest face, yet t'as been praisd
By Ladies of good judgment in faces.

Taf. Are these your secrets?


W.S. You shall have secrets
More pleasing, nay here sweet widow,
Some wantons do delight to see men creep,
And on their knees to woe them.

Taf. I am none of those,
Stand up, I more desire a man should stand,
Then cringe and creep that means to win my love,
I say stand up, and let me go ye'ad best.

W.S. For ever let me creep upon the ground,
Unless you here my suit.

Taf. How now sir sauce,
Would you be capring in your fathers saddle,
Away you casheerd younger brother, begone,
Do not I know the fashions of you all,
When a poor woman has laid open all
Her thoughts to you, then you grow proud and coy,
But when wise maids dissemble and keep close,
Then you poor snakes come creeping on your bellyes,
And with all oyled looks prostrate your selves,
Before our beauties sun, where once but warm,
Like hateful snakes you strike us with your stings,
And then forsake us, I know your tricks begone.

W.S. Foot I Will first be hanged, nay if you go
You shall leave your smock behind you widow,
Keep close your womanish weapon, hold your tongue,
Nor speak, cough, sneeze or stamp, for if you do,
By this good blade I Will cut your throat directly,
Peace, stir not, by Heaven I Will cut your throat
If you but stir: speak not, stand still, go to,
I Will teach coy widows a new way to woe,
Come you shall kiss, why so, I Will stab by Heaven
If you but stir, now here, first kiss again,
Why so, stir not, Now come I to the point,
My hopes are past, nor can my present state,
Afford a single halfe-penny, my father
Hates me deadly; to beg, my birth forbids,
To steal, the law, the hang man, and the Rope
With one consent deny; to go a trust,
The City common council has forbad it,
Therefore my state is desperate, stir not,
And I by much will rather choose to hang,
Then in a ditch or prison-hole to starve,
Resolve, wed me, and take me to your bed,
Or by my soul I Will strait cut off your head,
Then kill my self, for I had rather dye,
Then in a street live poor and lowsily:
Do not I know you cannot love my father.
A widow that has known the quid of things,
To doat upon an old and crased man,
That stinkes at both ends, worsse then an elder pype,
Who when his blood and spirit are at the height,
Has not a member to his palsy body,
But is more limber then a Kings head pudding,
Took from the pot half sod do I not know this?
Have you not wealth enough, to serve us both?
And am not I a pretty handsome fellow,
To do your drudgery, come, come, resolve.
For by my blood, if you deny your bed,
I Will cut your throat, without equivocation,
If you be pleased hold up your finger, if not
By heaven I Will gar my whyniard through your weombe,
Is It a match.

Taf. Here me but speak.


W.S. You Will prate to loud.


Ta. No.


W.S. Nor speak one word against my honest suit.


Ta. No by my worth


W.S. Kiss upon that and speak,


Ta. I dare not wed, men say yare naught you will cheat*
And you do keep a whore.

WS. That is a lie,
She keeps her self and me, yet I protest,
She Is not dishonest.

Ta. How could she then maintain you,


W.S. Why by her commings in, a little thing,
Her friends have left her which with putting to best use.
And often turning yields her a poor living,
But what of that; shes now shook off, to thee
I Will only cleave, I Will be thy merchant.
And to this welthy fair, I Will bring my ware,
And here set up my standing: therefore resolve,
Naught but my sword is left ift be a match,
Clap hands, contract and strait to bed,
If not, pray, forgive and straight goes off your head.

Ta. I take thy love.


W.S. Then strait lets both to bed.


Ta. I Will wed to morrow.


W.S. You shall not sleep vpont.
An honest contract is as good as marriadge.
A bird in hand you know the proverb widow,

Ta. To let me tell thee, I Will love thee while I live,
For this attempt give me that lusty lad,
That winnes his widow with his well drawn blade,
And not with oaths and words: a widows woing,
Not in bare words but should consist in doing,
I take thee to my husband.

W.S. I thee to wife,
Now to thy bed and there we will end this strife.
Enter Sir Oliver and Fiddlers.
S.O. Warm blood the young man's slave, the old man's God
Makes me so stir thus soon, it stirs isayth,
And with a kind of Itching pricks me on,
To bid my bride boun Iour, O this desire,
Is even another filtcht promethian fire,
By which we old men live, performance then,
I that's poor old men's baine, that in old men,
Comes limping off more lame God knows then he,
Which in a close, a hot and dangerous fight,
Has bin dismembered and craves by letter patents,
Yet scarce a woman that considers this,
Women have tricks fi^ks and farthinggales,
A generation are they full of subtilty,
And all most honest where they want the means.
To be otherwise. Therefore I Will have an eye
My widow goes not often to visit kinsfolks,
By birth she is a Ninny, and that I know,
Is not in London held the smalest kindred,
I must have wits and brains, come on my friends,
Out with your tools, and toot, a strane of mirth.
And a pleasant song to wake the widow.

Enter W.S. above in his shirt. W.S. Musitions, mnistrills, foot rogues,
For Gods love leave your filthy squeaking noise
And get you gone, the widow and my self,
Will scamble out the shaking of the sheets,
Without your music, we have no need of fiddlers,
To our dancing, foot have you no manners,
Cannot a man take his natural rest.
For your scraping, I shall wash your gut-strings.
If you but stay a while; yet honest rascals,
If you will let us have the the other crash
The widow and I Will keep time, there is for your pains,

S. O. Hows this? will the widow and you keep time,
What trycke? what quiddit? what figare is this?
My casheerd Son speak from the widows chamber,
And in his shirt ha, sure she is not there,
It Is so she has took him in for pity,
And now remoues her chamber I will home,
On with my neatestrobes, perfume my beard,
Eat cloves, Eringoes and drink some aquauita.
To sweeten breath and keep my weame from wambling.
Then like the month of March, come blustering in,
Marry the widow shake up this springall,
And then as quiet as a sucking lamb,
Close by the widow will I rest al night,
As for my breath I have crotchets and devises,
Ladies rank breaths are often healpt with spices.

Enter Adriana, and another strawing herbs. Adr. Come straw a pace, Lord shall
I never live,
To walk to Church on flowers. O it is fine,
To see a bride tryp it to Church so lightly,
As if her new choppines would scorn to bruze
A silly flower: and now I prithee tell me,
What flower think thou is likest to a woman?

Vi. A marigold I think.


Adr. Why a mary gold:


Vi. Because a little heat makes it to spread,
And open wide his leaves.

Adr. Thart quite wide,
A marigold does open wide all day,
And shuts most close at night; I hope thou know,
All wenches do the contrary: but sir,
How does thy Uncle the old Doctor,
Do think heel be a Bishop?

Vi. O questionless,
For has got him a young wife, and carried her,
To Court already: but now I prithee say,
Why will the widow wedd so old a knight,

Adr. Why for his riches.


Vi. For riches only,
Why riches cannot give her her delight,

Adr. Riches I hope can soon procure her one
Shall give her her delight that's the Devil,
That's it in faith makes us waiting gentlewomen
Live maids so long.

Vi. Think you so.


Adr. Yes infaith,
Married women quite have spoiled the market,
By having secret friends besides their husbands,
For if these married wives would be content
To have but one a piece I think in troth,
There would be doings enough for us all,
And till we get an act of parliament,
For that our states are desperate.
Enter Boucher and Constan. Come straw a piece.

Con. So ho ho, Master.


Bou. Boy,


Con. In Troth I thought y'ad been more fast asleep,
Then a midwife or a Puritan Tailor,
At a sunday euenings Lecture, but sir
Why do you rise so soon?

Bou. To see the widow,


Con. The weaker you, you are forbid a widow,
And it is the first thing you will fall into.
Me thinks a young clear skind country Gentlewoman,
That never saw Babounes, Lions, or Courtiers,
Might prove a handsome wife, or what do you say
To a Citizens daughter, that never was in love
With a Player, that never learnt to dance,
That never dwelt near any Inn a Court,
Might not she in time prove an honest wife?
Faith take a maid, and leave the widow, Master
Of all meats I love not a gaping Oyster,

Bou, God speed your works fair maids.


Ad. You much mistake,
It Is no work.

Bou. What then.


Adr. A preparation
To a work sir.

Bou. What work sweet Ladies?


Adr. Why to a marriage? that's a work I think,


Bou. How? a preparation to a marriage,
Of whom kind maids, of whom?

Adr. And why kind maids?
I hope you have had no kindness at our hand,
To make you say so: but sir understand,
That Sir Oliver Smal-shanke the noble Knight,
And mistress Tafata the rich widow,
Must this day be coupled, conjoined,
Married, espoused, wedded, contracted,
Or as the Puritaine says, put together,
And so sir, to the shifting of our clean smocks,
We leave you.

Bou. Married, and to day,
Dissension, Jealousy, hate, beggary,
With all the dire events which breed dislike
In nuptial beds, attend her bridal steps,
Can vows and oaths, with such protesting action,
As if their hearts were spit forth with their words,
As if their souls were darted through their eyes,
Be of no more validity with women?
Have I for her contem'd my fixed fate.
Neglected my fair hopes, and scorned the love
Of beauteous, virtuous, and honored Constantia.

Con. Now works it with my wish: my hopes are full.


Bou. And I engaged my worth and ventured life
On yonder buffolne face, to have men scorn,
And point at my disgrace: first will I leave to live:
There take my purse, live thou to better fate. Bouch. hangs himself.
Better thus die, then live unfortunate.

Con. Aye me accursed: help, help, murder murder,
Cursed be the day and hour that gave me breath,
Murder, murder: if any Gentleman
Can hear my plaints, come forth and assist me.

W.S. What outcries call me from my naked bed,
Who calls Ieronimo, speak here I am.

Con. Good sir leave your struggling and acting,
And help to save the life of a distressed man,
O help if you be Gentlemen!

W.S. What Is here?
A man hanged up and all the murderers gone?
And at my door to lay the guilt on me.
This place was made to pleasure Citizens wives, Enter Tafata.
And not to hang up honest Gentlemen

Taf. Where be these lazy knaves? some raise the house,
What meant the cry of murder? where is my love?

W.S. Come Isabella, help me to lament,
For sigthes are stopped, and all my tears are spent.
These clothes I often have seen, aye me my friend:
Pursue the murderers, raise all the street

Con. It shall not need, a stirs, give him breath.


W.S. Is there yet life, Horatio my dear boy,
Horatio! Horatio, what have thou mis-done,
To lose thy life when life was new begun?

Bou. Zeart a man had as good be hanged outright,
As to endure this clapping: shame to thy sex,
Perfidious perjured woman, where is thy shame?
How can thy modesty forbear to blush,
And know I know thee an adultresse?
Have not thy vows made thee my lawful wife
Before the face of heaven? where is thy shame?
But why speak I of shame to thee, whose face,
Is steeled with custom'd sin, whose thoughts want grace:
The custom of thy sin so luls thy sense:
Women nere blush, though nere so foul the offense,
To break thy vow to me and straight to wed,
A doting stinckerd.

W. Sm. But hold your tongue,
Or by this light I Will trusse you up again,
Zeart rail on my wife, am I a stinkerd,
Or do I dote? speak such another word,
And up you trusse again, am I a stinkerd?

Bou, The knight your father is:


W.S. Why who denies it.
He supplants thee and I supplanted him.
Come come, you shall be friends come forgive her:
For by this light there is no remedy,
Unless you will betake you to my leauings.

Con, Rather then so I Will help you to a wife:
Rich, well borne, and by some accounted fair,
And for the worth of her Virginity,
I dare presume to pawn my honesty:
What say you to Constantia Somerfield?

W.S. Do know where she is boy?


Con. I do, nay more,
If he but swear to embrace her constant love,
I Will fetch her to this place.

W.S. A shall do it boy,
Enter Sir Oliver and Fiddlers. A shall do it, go fetch her boy, foot my
father,
Stand to it now old wench, stand to it now.

S. Ol. Now fresh and youthful as the month of May,
I Will bid my Bryde good morrow, Musitions on,
Lightly, lightly, and by my knighthoods spur,
This year you shall have my protection,
And yet not buy your livery coats your selves:
God morrow Bride, fresh, fresh, as the month of May,
I come to kiss thee on thy wedding day.

W.S. Saving your tale sir, I Will show you how,
April showers spring May flowers*
So merrily singes the Cucko:
The truth is, I have laid my knife abord,
The widow sir is wedded.

S. Ol. Ha,


W.S. Bedded.


S. Ol. ha:


W.S. Why my good father what should you do with a wife?
Would you be crested? will you needs thrust your head
In on of Vulcans Helmets? will you perforce
Wear a City cappe and a Court feather?

S. Ol. Villain, slave, thou have wronged my wife.


VV.S not so,
Speak my good wench, have I not done thee right.

Taf. I find no fault, and I protest Sir Oliver.
I Would not have lost the last two hours sleep,
I had by him, for all the wealth you have.

S. Ol. Villain slave, I Will hang thee by the statute,
Thou have two wives.

W.S. Be not so furious sir,
I have but this, the other was my whore,
Which now is married to an honest Lawyer.

S. Ol. Thou villain slave thou have abused thy father.


Bou. Your son in faith, your very son in faith,
The villain boy has one trick of his sire,
Has firkt away the wench, has pierst the hogshead,
And knows by this the vintadge.

S. Ol. I am undone.


Bou. You could not love the widow but her wealth.


S. Ol. The devil take my soul but I did love her.


Taf, That oath does show you are a Northen Knight,
And of all men alive, I Will never trust,
A Northen man in love.

S. Ol. And why? and why slut.


Taf. Because the first word he speaks is the Devil
Take his soul, and who will give him trust,
That once has given his soul unto the Diueil.

W.S. She says most true father, the soul once gone,
The best part of a man is gone.

Taf. And in faith
If the best part of a man be once gone,
The rest of the body is not worth a rush,
Though it be nere so handsome.

Enter La, Somerfield, Throat and Beard bound, and Iu. Tutch. La. S. Bring them
away.


W.S. How now?
My Lawyer pinioned I begin to stink
Already.

La. S. Cheater my daughter.


W.S. She Is mad.


Thr. My wife sir, my wife.


W.S. They Are mad, stark mad,
I am sorry sir you have lost those happy wits
By which you lived so well. The air grows cold,
Therefore I Will take my leave.

La. So. Stay him officers,
Sir it is not your tricks of wit can carry it.
Officers attache him, and this Gentleman,
For stealing away my heir.

W.S. You do me wrong,
Zart I never saw your heir.

Thr. That Is a lie,
You stole her, and by chance I married her.

W, S. God give you joy sir.


Thr. Ask the Butler else,
Therefore widow release me, for by no law,
Statute or book case, of Vicesimo
Edwardi Secundi, nor by the Statute
Of Tricesimo Henrici sexti,
Nor by any book case of decimo
Of the late Queen, am I accessarie,
Part, or party confederate, a better,
Helper, seconder, perswader, forwarder,
Principal or maintainer of this late theft:
But by law, I forward, and she willing,
Clapped up the match, and by a good Statute
Of Decimo tertio Richardi quarti,
She is my leefull lawful, and my true
Married wife, test Liftenant Beard.

W.S. Who lives would think that you could prate so fast,
Your hands being bound behind you, foot a talks
With as much ease as if a were in's shirt.

S. Ol. I am witness thou had the heir.


I. Tu. So am I.


Thr. And so is my man Dash.


Bou. Here me but speak,
Sit you as Judges, undo the Lawyers hands,
That a may freely act, and I Will be bound
That William Smalshanke shall put your Throat to silence,
And ouer-throw him at his own weapon.

I. Tu. Agreed, take each his place, and here the case
Argued betwixt them two.

Om. Agreed, agreed.


I. Tu. Now Throat or never, stretch your self.


Thr. Fear not


W.S. Here stand I for my client, this Gentleman*


Thr. I for the widow.


W.S. Begin.


Thr. Right worshipful
I say that William Small-shanke madman,
Is by a Statute made in Octauo
Of Richard Cordelion guilty to the law
Of felony, for stealing this Ladies heir,
That a stole her, the proof is most pregnant,
He brought her to my house, confessed himself,
A made great means to steal her, I likt her,
(And finding him a nouice) truth to tell,
Married her my self, and as I said,
By a Statute Richardi Quarti,
She is my lawful wife.

W.S. For my client,
I say the wench brought unto your house,
Since all our friends so happily are met,
Here will I choose a husband: this be the man,
Whom since I left your house in shape of Page,
I still have followed.

W.S Foot would I had known so much,
I would have been bold to have lain with your page.

Con. Say am I welcome.


Bou. As is my life and soul,


La.S. Heaven give you joy,
Since all so well succeeds, take my consent,

W.S. Then are we all paired, I and my less,
You and your wife, the lawyer and his wench,
And father fall you aborde of the widow,
But then my brother.

T.S. Faith I am a fool.


W.S. That's all one; If God had not made
Some elder-brothers fools, how should witty
Younger brothers be maintained,
Strike up Music, lets have an old song,
Since all my tricks have found so good success,
We Will sing, dance, dice, and drink down heaviness.

FINIS.
Epilogus.
THus two hours have brought to end,
What many tedious hours have pend,
A dares not glory nor distrust,
But he (as other writers must)
Submits the censures of his pains
To those whose wit and nimble brains,
Are able best to judge: and as for some,
Who filled with malice, hither come
To belch their poison on his labor,
Of them he does entreat no favor,
But bids them hang, or soon amend,
For worth shall still it self defend,
And for our selves we do desire,
You Will breath on us that growing fire,
By which in time we may attain,
Like favors which some others gain:
For be assured our loves shall tend,
To equal theirs, if not transcend.
FINIS.

